THE STRANGE DISCOVERY: A Tragi-Comedy.

Written By J. Gough. Gent.



LONDON, ^rinted by E. G. for William Leake, and are to be sold at his shop in
Chancery Lane, joining to the Roles. 1640.

The Prologue.
How Is this, The strange discovery, may some say,
It Is likely we shall see some glorious Play
Of Christopher Columbus, and his brother,
Whose navigable pa^^^es did first discover
America.
That unknown world, thinking the far fetched scene,
To be Peru, and the Indies, but to w^ane
Your expectations from this golden dream,
Our Author bad me ^ell you, that the scope*
Of his intended travell's Aethiope,
There he begins, there ends, but as he passes
To and again, touches at many places,
As Egypts f^rtile soil and learned Greece,
Yet as heroicke Jason sought the fleece
In diverse coasts, but in the stately I Will
Of Colchos gate it by Medeas guile,
So he in Aethiopia sets down
The period of his plot, which but a frown
Of yours will ruinate, your gracious eyes,
Raise to the height of Jasons enterprise.
The History is candid, crowned with praise,
So let the play be too, our Poet prays.
The persons of the Play.
HYdaspes, King of Aethiopia. Persina, his Queen. Cariclea, their daughter.
Sysimethres, a Gymnosophist Ambassador for the King, Caricles, Apollos Priest.
Calasiris, Isis Priest. Aristippus, a Citizen of Athens. Demeneta, his wife.
Cnemon, Aristippus son. Thisbe, Demenetas maid. Arsinoe, a Courtezan. Nebulo,
Caricles man. Nebulona, hi^ wife. Theagines, a Thessalian Cap*taine. Arsace,
wife to the Deput^ of Egypt. Cibile, her Chamberlain^ nurse, and bawd. Aura,
Cibiles maid. 4 Judges, Magistrates of Persi^
Besides messengers and attendance.

THE STRANGE DISCOVERY, A Trage-Comedie.
Actus primi Scena prima.
Enter Caricles, sometimes Apollos Priest at Delphos in the habit of a Pilgrim.
Caric. WHat course shall aged Carcl^s now take
After his weary travells? shall I here
Resolve to lay my bones, and Egypt make
The final period of my pilgrimage*
No, I must bid Catadupice adieu
So famous for these sluices of fair Nile,
And since the surfeit which I took of sorrow
For my dear daughters sad untimely death,
Is well digested in this breast of mine,
And change of air has wrought a change of mind;
I am resolved to stately Greece to wend
And breath my last breath where I breathed my first,
It Is so determined; -- Enter Nebulo his man.
Honest Nebulo,
My man draw near, I Am in a humor now
To change some words with thee; -- so oftentimes -- aside.
We see wise men for recreations sake,
Consult with Fools, and honest men with Knaves. -- aside
What course does thy fond brain advise me to?

Neb. To no other but to a home course Sir, I must tell you plainly, I like not
these extravagant ones you take of traveling the world thus; I Am sure I have
paid dear for those idle humors of yours, witness my body, brought to a
mere Anatomy by travel and fasting; me thinks, a wise man, as you are,
should not have such wa^^^ing thoughts in his mind: well Master, resolve to
leave this place, and return to Delphos our native habitation, or I shall
soon resolve to leave you, and go there without you. O the smoke of mine
own poor chimney at home, and the beloved smoke of my wife, would both smell
to my nose now so comfortable, as a perfume made of Arabia spices; adieu, I can
stay no longer from pretty Nebulona without the lash of her just displeasure. I
come my chickin, I come, be ready to receive me, I know thou languishest all
this while for want of my company.


Caric. Nay prithee stay a little longer and hear me; will thou leave me now
at last, and frustrate the good opinion I have always had of thy simple
plainness and constant service? have patience awhile, and I will accompany
thee in thy journey; as for thy wife Nebulona (if that trouble thee) I shall
rectify her in the truth of al thy actions. Who knockes there? go see, and
bring me word before you grant entrance Nebulo.

Exit, and redit Nebulo. Who is it now?


Nebul. A very sweet faced Gentleman, so sooty as the Devil himself, I
believe some Ambassador sent from Pluto and the fiends.


Caric. What ever he be ad^it him.
Enter Sisimethres, Legate of Aethiopia.
Sisimet. God save you reverend Father.

Caric. Welcome Sir,
Although I have not seen your face before
That I can well remember.

Sisimet. May be so.
But I have seen you often in this town
Walking the streets, and read the characters
Of gravity and wisdom ciphered in
Your aged face, wherein I think my judgment
Nothing deceives me; and I do suppose
You are an aliene here as well as I,
No natural Egyptian.

Caric. I confess
I am a stranger borne, and should be glad
To know your name, your country and your business.

Sisimet. I shall obey you, for my country, first
It Is Aethiopia underneath the line,
My name Sisimethres employed now
As Legate from my sovereign King Hydaspes,
Unto the Deputy here, to forbid him
To meddle with the mines, out of whose bowell^
The Smaragds dug were, which appertain
To none but to the crown of Aethiopia:
Now Sir you know me, be not scrupulous
To let me understand so much of you,
Something does prompt me strangely, that you have
Some near relation to the gods, or else
My Genius does deceive me.

Carry. Understand then,
You do not err in your imagination,
I am a Grecian borne, and sometimes Priest
Unto Apollo in that sacred City
Of Delphos* which Parnassus lofty tops,
As with a wall, encompasseth about,
And sweet Castalius pleasant springs refresh,
There was I borne and bred, and exercised
The office I was called to by the gods.

Sisimet. Most venerable Priest, and holy Father,
Let me beseech you tell me what mischance
Drove you from thence to these remoter parts?

Caric. The great misfortune that I had at home.

Sisim. I wonder at it, pray relate the manner.

Caric. When you have heard my story to the end,
Your wonder will forsake you.

Sisimet. Then resolve me.

Caric. Upon your better knowledge and acquaintance
I shall, till when excuse me.

Sisim. I Will not press you
Beyond good manners; Sir, I saw you buy
Some herbs and roots that grow in India
And Aethiopia for your use last day;
If so you please, I can produce you such
As never were better.

Caric. Pray Sir let me see them,
Sysimethres take from under his arm a little bag, and shows Caricles
precious stones in stead of roots. You must for these, good Sir, seek other
chapmen,
The Margarits, the Smaragds, Hiacinths,
Are for a Princes use, and not for mine:
Each one alone is ransom for a King,
My whole estate cannot buy one of them.

Sysim. But though you cannot buy them, you can take them
(I trow) if freely given you, can you not?

Caric. It Is true, I can receive them, but I marvel
Why you should mock me thus?

Sysim. I mock you not
By all the Gods, but mean uprightly in it,
I will not only give you there, but if
You will be plea^'d to take it at my hands
Bestow a richer gift, to which compared,
These are but dross and rubbish.

Caric. Ha ha ha.

Sysim. Why laugh you Sir?

Caric. Is It not a matter which
Deserves laughter, when you promise things
Of such a prise, and yet assure me more;
You cannot mean uprightly.

Sysim. Ttrust me, but swear
That you will use this gift as I shall teach you,
And I Will perform my promise of the other.

Nebul. Accept it Sir, if you be wise; it is not good, nor religious to refuse
any man's courtesy.


Caric. You tempt me shrewdly Sir.

Sysim. Let me prevail,
(And bind me still your servant.

Caric. You have won me
To what you would.

Sysim. Then take an oath, and swear
To follow my dire^tions, so confirm it.

Caric. By great Apollo, then whose Minister
I was at Delphos, I shall not digress
From what you shall instruct me touching this.

Sysim. It is sufficient, and I build upon
Your faith, your trust and your religion;
Here fellow, take this bag, and keep it for
Your honored Master.

Nebul. But more honored bag,
Would I might keep thee for my self, I then
Should make an Idol of thee -- aside.

Caric. What Is your pleasure,
That I should do in lieu of this reward?

Sysim. I cannot now acquaint you, for some reasons
Best known unto my self, give me your hand
To meet me without fail to morrow morning
At Isis Temple, thence I shall conduct you
Unto my lodging, and in secret tell
The sum of my request.

Carry. I shall not fail you.

Sysim. Adieu, until we meet -- Exit Sysimethres.

Caric. Apollo keep thee
In his safe custody. I marvel much
Whence this unlooked for kindness should proceed,
I Will see the issue on it, what ever betide me,
It may be that the gods have pre-ordain'd
I shall once more be happy, and in lieu
Of all my passed sorrows, reap the fruit
Of long expected comfort, sure my mind
Is much illuminated with the thought
Of some good fortune, and refreshed as if
The spirit of Pitho were infused into me
By heavenly inspiration; I Will obey
My Genius, for oftentimes the gods by signs
Will have that mortals understand their minds. Exit.

Actus primi Scena secunda.
Enter Demeneta, and young Cnemon her son in Law. Demen. MY pretty boy, how
do thou? where have thou been so long absent from my embraces; come hither,
let me solace my self a little with thee, let me kiss thee my sweet heart,
my heir, my own life.


Cnem. Had ever any one a kinder stepmother -- aside. Mother, you make too much
of me, I am not able to deserve your love in so high a strain, my duty cannot
countervaile it.


Demen. How prettily he speaks, I cannot choose but kiss thee for it.


Cnem. What a close and hot kiss was that? I like not this behavior, would I
were delivered hence, please you give me leave to go about my exercises?


Them. What exercises?


Cnem. My books and studies at the School, I shall be shent else by my Tutor.


Them. Come, thou shall not leave me.


Cnem. Will you have me prove a truant then?


Them. No, but a student in a better art; have thou ever read Ovidde art
amandi, or Ovids amorous Epistles?


Cnem. Never.


Them. O, I would have thee study that book above all other, there are very
good rules, and worth the observation truly, if thou errest in any thing
therein written, I will be thy Mistress to instruct thee, follow my rudiments
good son.


Cnem. But I have heard it is a ribaldrous book, and corrupts youth to all
wantonness.


Them. That is but a fantasy, a mere untruth; it was made by the Poet for
youthful recreation and pastime, none but Stoicall old men will invey against
them, who envio that in others which they cannot enjoy in themselves.


Cnem. I understand not your Philosophy.


Them. Would thou did, and were well entered in my books and science; but where
is thy father and my husband Aristippus?


Enter Aristippus. O, my dear husband, where have you lingered so long; you are
too blame indeed to leave me so solitary, I must chide you for it, truly, had
you tarried never so little longer, I should have died for sorrow.

Arist. My sweet wife Demeneta, I have a jewel of thee, thy extreme love to me
is confirmed in thy affection to my son Cnemon, virtuous woman.


Demen. I love him I must confess, as well as if he were mine own son, or
better.


Arist. I know thou do my love; never was a man happier in his choice, I
think.


Demen. Cnemon, sit on my lap pretty boy.


Cnem. No, I know my duty better.


Demen. I will have it so; the very picture of his father.


Cnem. Pray mother excuse me, this is no fit place for me.


Demen. There is not a prettier or wittier boy in Athens, but it is no wonder,
that old men beget always the finest children, it is most commonly seen.


Arist. I know your virtue, and therefore will dispute with you a little upon
this subject, and ask you this question: how could you, a young woman, affect
me an old man?


Demen. How could I not Sir; your wisdom, stayednesse and understanding were
such motives to my affection, as I would not change my old man for the
youthfull'st cavalere of all Gr e^^; I hope for all your age, to have a
hopeful offspring from you, such another as Cnemon, you can do it in faith,
old Aristippus.


Arist. My girl, how thou do revive my decayed spirits to hear thee talk
thus! I will strain hard for this, but I will answer thy expectation.


Demen. Thanks sweet husband, let me hang upon your neck, pretty gravity, how
well it becomes him, who could choose but love such a man entirely; pox upon
smooth faces, and young lusty gallants, there is more trouble with them a be^
when a gentlewoman would sleep and take her rest; they are always disturbing
of her, when by a man of some years and experience we may lie as quiet as we
will; would all women were of my opinion, we should cut the combs then of
these lusty gamesters.


Arist. Indeed young men are very inconstant in their love, and changing from
one unto another, whereas an old man perseveres to the end in his devotions.


Them. True, true, my love, your words are oracles,
Were I now as I seem, how should I wrong
Youth, beauty, nature, and rebel against them -- aside.

Arist. My dearest love, though loath, I am enforced
To leave you for some hours, the state of Athens
Sent for me, to repair unto the Senate
At ten a clock about affairs of weight,
It Is now about the time; farewell my sweetest.

Them. You shall not go, come, come, you do not love me,
Else could you not be so unkind my dear,
To kill your loving wife with your departure.
I doubt I shall not live till your return.

Arist. Come prithee, leave this off, and be assured
I will not stay two hours.

Them. On that assurance
I do dismiss you, but if you exceed
The time, you're like to find me turned a coarse;
stick to your promise.

Arist. I Will not fail you sweet. -- Exit Aristippus.

Them. Where go you Cnemon?

Cnem. No where, but to wait
Upon my Father to the Senate House,
And instantly return.

Them. See that you do,
And you shall not repent it, Exit Cnemon.
I must gain him
Unto my will by fair and gentle means,
By promises and gifts, by sweet allurements
And strong enticing words, by pleasing him
With what he likes best, this will take his youth
(I make no doubt) and bring me to his bed.
I burn for love of him and must be quenched,
Old Aristippus I have fooled and made
Believe I love him, but it is not so.
I have brought him to my own lure so th^^
He stoops unto my beauty; now if I
Can but enjoy my Cnemon, I am then
Mistress of my design, and a chief Artist
In this sweet trade; let fools burn in their fire
Of modest love, i will on to my desire. Exit.

Actus primi, Scena tertia.
Enter Caricles, Sysimethres and Nebulo. Sysim. Prithee honest friend
Shall I entreat thee to go forth and bid
The pretty girl without in the next room
To come here to me.

Nebul. Yes sir that I shall,
I love to be employed a messenger
To pretty mayds, is she so beautiful?

Sysim. O wondrous fair and beautiful.

Nebul. I Will then
Usher her safely in, and kiss her too.

Exit Nebulo, enters again with Cariclea. Sysim. See here the second gift I
mean to give you*
More precious then the first, you told me sir
You had a daughter once, but raped by death.
Here is another for you, use her well.

Caric. I am amazed to see so rare a beauty.
Such an Angel-like creature.

Sysim. Cease your wonder;
The mother of this beauteous girl which here
Stands before us for a certain cause
Which you shall learn hereafter, laid her forth
Clad in such weeds as commonly is used
For such a purpose, so committing her
To fortunes doubtful chance, but I by hap
Finding her took her up, for it is not lawful
That we neglect a soul when once it has
Entered a humane body, (being a precept
Amongst the wise men with us, to be whose
Unlearned scholar I was once judged worthy)
Beads even in the infants eyes appeared,
Something which bred both wonder and delight.
With her I found this bag of precious stones
Which I gave you of late, and a like cloth
Wrought full with letters in her mother tongue,
Wherein contained was her whole estate;
Her mother as I guess procured the same,
Which after I had read, I knew from whence
and what she was, and therefore carried her
Into the Land far distant from the City
Delivering her to certain honest shepherds
To bring her up, with charge that they should not
Reveal her unto any; for those things
That were found with her I detained with me,
Least for them she might suffer any danger,
And thus at first this matter was kept close.

Caric. But what befell her after pray go one.
In process then of time this princely maid
Growing and as she grew increasing still
More fair then any women else besides
(For beauty sur^lie cannot be conceald
Though under ground but would from thence appear)
I fearing least her fortune should be known
And I brought unto danger, su'd to be
Sent in embassage to the Deputy
Of Egypt and abtained it, therefore come I
And bring her with me, full of zealous care
To set her business right and in good order.

Caric. Leave that to me.

Nebul. But chiefly unto me,
I Will be her guardion too.

Caric. What will you have me do concerning her?
Direct me, and i will punctualle observe it.

Sysim. As touching her, first I commend her to you,
(And to the gods who hitherto have kept her,)
On such conditions as by oath you are bound
To see performed, that is that you will use her
As a free woman ought to be, and give her
In marriage to a free man, as you do
Recevie her at my hand, or rather of
Her mother who has left her to your charge:
I hope you will perform all things according
Unto your oath, and answer the opinion
I have of your good manners, which I find
By some few days experience to be
Greekish indead; this much I had to say
Before I executed my commission
Concerning my embassage, other secre^ts
Belonging to the maid, I Will tell you them
To morrow in more ample manner, if
Yon please to meet me about Isis temple.

Caric. Expect me there then; but I cannot brook
So long a time to see the Virgin ma^k'd
In so obscure a manner.

Sysim. Now I cannot
Stay to discover what I know of her;
The Deputy of Egypt has appointed
This day for hearing of me: farewell both. Exit Sysim.

Caric. Can you speak Greek my pretty sweet heart, can you?

she smiles upon him but says nothing. No, can you speak Egyptian? neither
sweet?


Nebul. I Will undertake to teach her both the tongues
So I may be her tutor. she frowns upon him.

Caric. Nebulo
Thou see I have another daughter now,
She shall be called fair Cariclea
Derived from Caricles which is my name.

Nebul. Would I had such a daughter too, she should not
Have then so course a name, all men should call her.
The pretty Nebuletta; Nebulo,
Then Nebulona, then neat Nebuletta,
A sumptuous pedigree, how sweet it runs!

Caric. Thy house would flourish then, were she thy daughter.

Nebul. Above the clouds, the gods would lodge themselves
Beneath my roof, and power down plenty on me
In golden showers to rest in Danaes lap.

Caric. What grown so high conceited Nebulo?

Nebul. Something inspired my brain, I know not what sir,
But now i am come unto my self again,
'Twas but a toy that took me.

Caric. I believe it,
Many such toys do take thee in the head:
Get me a mask, I must convey this damzell
Muffled home to my house.

Nebul. She need not be
Ashamed to show her face, it may procure her,
A husband by the way for ought you know;
You shall but wrong her much in doing so.

Caric. Sirrah away, dispute no more, but do it,

Exit and redit with a mask, they muffle her. Nebul. It Is pity faith
methinkes to use her thus,
It Is such a pretty thing.

Caric. Come you must go
With me my daughter dear where you shall be
Us*d and respected as my native child:
When I have understood (hark Nebulo
Here Is news for thee) by good Sysim^thres
My daughters further state, we'll hye forthwith
To Greece and Delphos, and put on again
My first religious habit; to your shrines
Ye gods we'll offer sanctified minds. Exeunt.

Actus primi, Scena quarta.
Enter Demeneta and Thisbe her maid. Demen. When saw thou Cnemon, Thisbe?

This. Know you not
That Pallas high feast called Quinquat^ia
This day was celebrated here in Athens,
One with a ship by land, (as is the manner)
Was consecrated, Cnemon was imployd,
Clad in his robes, and on his head a crown,
To sing the usual hymn due to her praise
I saw him busy in the ceremonies.

Them. Is this the day? by Jove I knew it not,
Else had I been spectator of the sight,
Chiefly to see my Cnemon in his office,
Could I be angry with him, I should chide him
For not acquainting me.

This. He did it neatly;
I would not for my maidenhead have missed
So rare a sight, not for ten maiden-heads.

Them. Are all the rites and ceremonies done?
I feign would see yet the conclusion.

This. Mistress, it is to late; see Cnemon there returned in all his robes.


Enter Cnemon in his robes crowned, Demeneta runs to him and takes him in her
arms. Them. My young Hippolitus, and my dear Theseus,
Welcome, O welcome to me.

Cnem. Heavens defend me
From this lewd Phadra -- aside. Mother what dee mean
To burn me thus with kisses?

Them. Burden thee
With blisses too I can, my pretty boy,
If thou will love thy mother.

Cnem. In what nature
Require you that? if as it ought to be,
That children love their Parents, I agree.

Them. As Venus with Anchises sported once
In Ida grove, so let me sport with thee;
Do understand me now?

Cnem. You are too bold,
Too impudent.

Them. Nay, prithee do not frown,
This night I must enjoy thee, and thou me,
Thy fathers absence does invite us to it;
I will maintain thee like a Princes son,
Glittering in gold, and our sweet furtive sports
Keep from the sun and knowledge of the gods,
No one shall know it.

Cnem. Hence incestuous woman,
Think thou to make me wrong my fathers bed,
And to commit an act so foul as incest?
Tempt me no more; by heaven, by earth and all
The Immortal gods, I Will die a thousand deaths
Ere think a thought on it, much less yield unto it,
Your damned wit, nor quaint enticing words
Shall not prevail, my hate exceeds my love.
Exit Cnemon in a rage.
Demen. Am I despised thus, and my hot love
Requited with disdain, as cold as ice,
By such a youngling? he shall know the difference
Between a woman's favors and her frowns,
And curse too late his foolish modesty:
Go Thisbe to the Castle, tell my husband
I am not well, entreat him to come to me
With all the speed he can.

This. I shall sweet Mistress. -- Exit Thisbe.
Demeneta lies down upon the bed, faining her self sick.
Them. What raging fires still burn me? how I am
Divided in my self tweene love and hate,
two mighty passions combatting together?
Love would prevail, if reason might be judge,
But love is too unreasonably harsh:
Hate therefore execute thy proper function,
Inflame my breast with rage and high disdain
Against this brat that gave me the repulse,
Inspire my study in his Tragedy.

Enter Aristippus and Thisbe. Arist. How fares my sweet heart, that she keeps
her bed?

Them. Dear husband, very sick and in ill case.

Arist. The gods forbid, that sound does strike me dead;
What ailes my dearest wife? tell me the cause
Of this your sudden sickness.

Them. Nothing Sir,
I know no cause at all.

Arist. Come, come, you must not
Conceal your grief, but lay it open unto me,
I do beseech my love.

Them. Since you are so
Importunate to know it, understand
The goodly young man, son unto us both
(To you by nature, but to me by love)
Whom I (the gods know) held as dear unto me
As you, when he perceived by certain tokens
I was with child by you (which thing I kept
Hid from your knowledge till I knew my self
The certainty) and waiting for your absence,
When I in wonted manner counseled him
To leave his whores, and to avoid his cups
(Which things I knew he loved, but would not tell you,
Lest I should run into the ill suspicion
Of stepmother) whilst I in gentle manner
Told him these things, I will not speak the worst,
Nor in what sort he did revile us both,
But last of all, he spurned me on the belly,
Which has procured this my disease and pain.

Arist. O villain, I will scurge him even to death;
Thisbe, go call him hither. Exit Thisbe.
Then presently enters Cnemon, Aristippus falls presently a buffetting of him
without speaking a word, then calls his servants and scurgeth him with rods.
Cnem. Dear father, I beseech you let me know
The cause of this your anger and my stripes
So cruelly laid on me.

Arist. Oh cleanly dissembler,
Thou would indeed know thy own fault from me.
He beats him afresh.
Cnem. Yet now at length, Sir, let me understand
What I have done, that thus provokes your wrath,
The gods do know my innocence.

Arist. Base wretch,
Thy innocence; would she belie thee think thou,
That loved thee better than her self? away.
Get out of my sight, I will not hear thee speak. Exit Cnemon.
My dearest Demeneta, cheer your self,
Strive to forget the pain.

Them. I Am in bad plight,
So that I do not only fear the life
O^ that I go^ with, but mine own, besides,
These accidents are dangerous to women;
Yet, Sir, it grieved me that you took so sharp
A punishment of Cnemon, for all this
I cannot choose but love him.

Arist. That Is thy virtue,
But banish him thy thoughts as I will do,
Hence forth as most unworthy of our love;
Come sweet, you shall remove from hence into
A fitter room, I Will send a Doctor to you. Exit Aristippus.

Them. You do mistake my pulse, whose veins do swell
With rage and fury, and shall live in pain,
Until I be revenged.

This. My Mistress knows
How to deceive old Dotards with false shows. Exeunt.

Actus primi Scena quinta.
Enter Nebulo solus, frisking for joy. Nebul. We shall fall down the river
Nile to night, and hoise sail for Greece, brave news, comfortable news, my
heart capers within me for joy, that I shall see my country again; my Master
is sore troubled for black (...) his constrained flight, which has defeited
their appointed meeting and conference touching Caricleas fortunes, but haste
our journey the sooner, there is my comfort. I left him cursing the Deputy, and
invoking the god Apollos wrath to plague him for dismissing the Ambassador so
suddenly, with such deadly threatenings to depart the Kingdom. Alas, poor
maid, I pity thee, that by this means thou shall not be able to know who
begot thee nor who brought thee forth, but all is one, thou will soon learn to
be begotten, and to bring forth by instinct of nature and thy own experience.
Catadupice adieu adieu, adieu gentlemen; when you see us next, twill be in
Delphos; away, away, away, merrylie, merrily.


Exit. Finis actus primi. Actus secundi, Scena prima.
Enter Calasiris Isis priest at Memphis. Am I the goodesse Isis priest, and
burn
In these unlawful fires? shall Rhodopis
With her Venerious charms subdue my heart,
And make me break that temperance of life
Which I have hitherto preserved unspotted?
What shall I do? I cannot stand the push
Of these strong passions, yet I am resolved
Nere to commit the act, nor so to stain
My priesthood with dishonor; Isis temple
And secret places shall not be defiled
By Calasiris, no i will rather bannish
My self from sight of cursed Rodopis,
Least staying here I should beforc'd to do
So vile a deed; I am resolved to leave
This stately City Memphis suddenly,
I Will give it out, my journey is for Thebes
To see my eldest son called Thiamis.
With this pretense I shall unquestioned go,
But there is a City sacred to Apollo
In Greece hight Delphos, there i will bend my course
(For it is a College where wise men resort
Free from the concourse of the common people)
To visit my old friend priest Caricles.
When whorish beauty and vain pride display
Their gaudie colors, wise men shun the way. Exit.
Actus secundi, Scena secunda.
Enter Demeneta and Thisbe. Them. Thisbe my wench, thou must be secret unto all
my commands.


This. As your own heart could wish, as your trusty cabinet.


Them. I am confident of thee; thou know how I loved that proud boy Cnemon,
what proffers I made him, what favors I bestowed upon him, and all to win
him to my embraces, yet how scornfully and scurvily he refused me, with what
disdain he left me; I am now resolved no longer to solicit my love but to
execute my revenge; I have devised a dainty plot against him, which will take
according as I would wish, follow thou my directions.


This. I will not digress a hairs breadth mistress.


Them. Then thus I school thee, make a show that thou love Cnemon
exceedingly, entice him to thee with beckes and amorous glances, he will soon be
caught with these baits, especially having heretofore long nibled upon thy
beauty; frequent his bed often, be not ashamed, it shall be for thy great
advancement, and whereas thou art now a bondmaid, thou shall be made free
forever.


This. I am your creature in all things, especially in matters of this nature.


Them. When thou have done this which I command thee, I will instruct thee
farther.


Exit Demeneta. Manet Thisbe a little. This. I wait your pleasure. I must give
Cnemon good countenance, well, I must entice the young man, well, I must lie
with him too, very well; faith these are no harsh commands, it shall never
grieve me to be imployd in such work, would my mistress had no harder labor
for me, this is a task of pleasure; I have a warrant now for what I shall do;
I durst not yield to Cnemon before when he attempted me, now let him come with
his stoutest artillery, I will stand the charge valiantly. Enter Cnemon.


Cnem. Fair Thisbe are you here? why now I like you,
You smile upon me, and your countenance
Darts amorous glances which before cast frowns,
Now you appear like Venus.

This. Courteous Cnemon,
Although at first I did deny your suit,
Impute it not to want of love, but place
And opportunity, besides the doubt
And danger which the action brings with it
If once discovered, made me to commit
So gross an error.

Cnem. Will you be reformed
Upon mature counsel?

This. You shall see
I will not be refractory to ought
You shall advise me, I do know your mind,

Cnem. Come with me then and learn to kiss and smile,
You know the back way to my chamber sweet.

Cnem. I do, and will attend you, there we will meet. Exeunt.

Actus secundi, Scena tertia.
Enter Caricles and Calasiris. Caric. Welcome to Greece my worthy friend and
brother,
And in the fittest time, because I shall
Need your assistance in the perfecting
A business which concerns me, you are wise
And can persuade, when reason is your theme.

Cala. What I can do, our long acquaintance sir
And brotherhood in travel and vocation,
Wills me to render it unto your service;
Wherein can I be useful to my friend?

Caric. In this, you know last night I did relate
Cariclaes story, how I did receive her
And brought her from your Egypt here to Greece,
where in a short time she has learned our tongue,
And so far passes she all other beauties
That she attracteth all men's eyes to gaze
With admiration on her, as well strangers
As Greeks, so thatwhere ever she be conversant,
Either at home, or in the Temples, or
At public exercises, all men's eyes
Are fixed upon her with as great devotion
As if she were the image of some goddess
Lately created; that which grieves me, is
She loathes to hear of marriage, and resolves
To live a maiden still, and so becoming
Dianas servant, for the most part does
Apply her self to hunting and to shooting;
I had a great desire to marry her
Unto my sisters son, a fine young man,
Well manner'd, and fair spoken; but I cannot,
Either by prayer or promise, or by force
Of argument persuade her thereunto:
In this I crave your help, dear Calasiris,
Use some point of your wisdom to persuade her
To know her nature, that she is a woman,
And that she would not so degenerate
From all those of her sex; this I beseech you
To do for great Apollos sake, and all
Your country gods.

Calas. In this point, Caricles,
I Will do my best endeavor. Enter Nebulo.

Nebul. Master, come
Away for shame, the captain of the Aenians
Embassage stays for you at the gate
For to begin the sacrifice.

Calas. Pray Sir,
What are those Aenians? what their holy message?
What sacrifice make they?

Caric. They are the noblest
Of all Thessalia, this same sacrifice
They send to 'Pirrhus, stout Achilles son,
Every fovrth year (at such time as the feast
Agon is kept unto Apollo here)
For here was P^rrbus massacred before
Apollos altars by enraged Orestes,
This message is more honorably done
Than any of the rest, because they say
The Captain is sprung from Achilles line.
Indeed, such is the beauty of his person
And brave majesticke carriage, as confirms
He is some goddess son.

Calas. I feign would see him.

Caric. You shall, and his brave ordered sacrifice,
Cariclea too, my daughter, must be there
To day by custom, at the funeral pomp
Of Neoptolemus, but you have seen her
Before.

Calas. Yes, and done sacrifice together.

Caricles. Come, you must go unto the Temple with us
To help me in this ceremonious work.

Calas. Lead on, I Will follow, if I Am prompted right,
Strange things will happen after this rare sight Exeunt.

Actus secundi Scena quarta.
Enter Cnemon and Thisbe. Cnem. Thisbe my love, we must act closely, and with
great circumspection, lest we be discovreed by the mischievous Demeneta, who
(as thou say) hates me more now than she loved me before.


This. You talk simply Cnemon, if you count it a dangerous matter for me being
a bond-maid, bought with money, to be taken a bed with you; what punishment
think you her worthy, who is a freewoman, and lawfully married to a husband,
yet plays false, and bears a man too many.


Cnem. I judge her worthy of death, but who is the person, prithee?


This. Your virtuous stepmother, my Mistress Demeneta, now you may be revenged
upon her by discovering it to your father Aristippus.


Cnem. I can scarce believe it.

This. To confirm my report (if you please) I will deliver the adulterer unto
you in the very act.


Cnem. You shall do me a courtesy then.

This. With all my heart, not only for your sake who have been injured by her
before, but for mine own also, who, for that she has me in jealousy, am used
of her very extremely, wherefore if thou be a man apprehend him.


Cnem. Else let me die in scorn and infamy,
I Will kill them both, for never shall it be said,
That Cnemon knew his fathers bed defiled
And durst not be revenged, assist my hand
Infernal furies, Thisbe lead the way
That I may do the deed ere see the day. Exeunt.

Actus Secundi, Scena quinta.
Enter Aristippus and Demeneta. Demen. It Is late 'ith night, sweet husband,
let us to bed,
I cannot have too much of your embraces,
The envious day will interrupt our sport,
Me thinks we married were but yesterday.

Aristip. Conceiv'st thou so, that does proceed from love;
But I am old, and thou a sprightly less.

Demen. You wrong your self, you are a lusty man,
For were you old the dull effects of age
Would then appear, but I have had experience
Of your performance, Cnemon, I believe,
Your son is not so active in his trade.

Aristip. If it be so, then sure the youthful heat
Of thy fair body has infused life
Into my withered veins, more powerful then
Medeas charms, when ^he stirred up fresh blood
In the decayed body of old Aeson.

Enter Cnemon with his sword drawn followed by Thisbe, a candle carried
before, he comes hastily to the bed. Cnem. Where is the villain, the most
worthy lover
Of this chaste dame?

his father leapes out of the bed, and falls on his knees before him. Aristip.
My son, have pity on thy fathers age,
Spaire his white hairs, take not away his life
That gave thee thine, and brought thee up with care,
We do confess we wronged thee, yet the fault
Was not so great that it should merit death;
Assuage thy fury, and put up thy sword,
Imbrue not in thy fathers blood thy hands.

Cnemon in amaze looks round about him for Thisby, who had conveyed her self
away, and being thus astonished, his sword fell out of his hand, which Demeneta
straightwaies took up. Them. Did I not tell you this before, sweet heart,
To look unto this princoks pride and hate
Who would no doubt, if time had served his turn,
Attempt some mischief to destroy us both.

Aristip. You told me so indeed, but I believed not;
Now I do find it true, which to prevent
I Will raise my house and bind him fast, to morrow
I Will carry him before the people to
Be judged for his offense; let nature go
In parents, when sons prove unnatural so. Exeunt.

Actus secundi, Scena sexta.
Enter Nebulo and Nebulona. Nebulo. Nebulona my pretty chickin, how faires thy
body? did thou not think me lost long ago?


Nebulona. I gave you for dead in good faith, and was in the humor once to
marry another man?


Nebulo. Why sure thea were not, thou do but jest I know.

Nebulona. Truly I was, nor could you blame me for it if I had; is it not a
torture, think you, for a woman, to stay seven years without her husbands
company?


Nebulo. Methinkes my brows begin Acteon-like to bud already, they are very
knotty, I pray God thou have not graft something there, I begin to suspect it
shrewdly by diverse signs and tokens, how comes your belly so high wife?


Nebulona. It Is nothing but a timpany I am sometimes troubled with.


Nebulo. I do believe thee, how long is it since you perceived it to grow upon
you?


Nebulona. About two months since, the Doctor tells me I shall be free of it
very speedily.


Nebulo. He is a fool, I am a better Doctor then he, thou shall go with it
this fourteen weeks yet or thereabouts; come you are a whore, and have
abused my honest bed; I Will have you before the Justices to be punished for thy
offense.


Nebulona. Spare me prithee gentle Nebulo, and hearken to my counsel a little,
since thou art a cuckold (as I do not deny it) choose whether thou will wear
the horns in thy forehead, and so all men fee them, or put them into thy
pocket, and no man see them, I leave it to thy own discretion.


Nebulo. Why then I am a cuckold it seems?

Nebulona. I cannot say against it truly, and speak the truth, if I should,
this mark of thy fortune here deeply stamped would bewray me, be not so
foolish now as Vulcan was, to make a proclamation of thy sorked order.


Nebulo. Did Vulcan do so?

Nebulo. Yes, but afterward he repented it for he forged an artificial net,
with which he caught his wife Venus and Mars a bed together in carnal
copulation, then called all the gods and goddesses to be spectators of his own
shame.


Nebul. But what said they when they saw it?

Nebulona. They commended Mars, but condemned Vulcan for being the publisher of
his own disgrace.


Nebul. But it was a shame for Mars to be caught so.

Nebulona. The gods wished every one of them if that were a ^^ame to be shamed
in the same manner.


Nebulo. but how did Venus take this?

Nebulona. In scorn of the smith and in revenge of this trick has made his
head as hard as his anvile.


Nebulo. Thou have devised a pretty story in thy own defense, 1'st best to
follow thy counsel, and say nothing, or stir this bad thing and make it
stink the more?


Nebulona. You may do what you please, but I have told you the best course.


Nebulo. Let it be so then; I have traveled well I trow, and to good purpose,
at my return home to father a child, of which I did not beget so much as the
least finger or the least toe; if this be the fruits of traveling, God keep
me from it hence forward, and all good folks besides; come Nebulona we are
friends, do so no more, and all is forgotten.


Nebulon. Not, if you stay at home and warm my bed,
But if you leave me, then have at your head. Exeunt.

Actus secundi, Scena septima.
Enter the sacrifice to the tomb of Pirrhus in the manner of a Hecatombe led
in by the Thessalians, who had each of them a white garment knit about them,
these were entertained by so many virgins of Thessalia standing in a ring with
their hair loose about their cares; the maids were divided into two
companies, those who were in the first carried flowers and fruit, the other
carried in backets other fine knackes and perfumes, at the sound of music and
a song made fit and agreeable to the music, they danced, the song was made in
praise of Thetis. The Song.
O Nereus god in surging seas,
we praise thy Thetis.
daughter dear,
Whom Peleus at commandment
of Jove did make his pheere:
Thou art the goddess we adore
in Sea a glimpsing star,
Who stout Achilles did bring forth
a very Mars in war,
And Captain good unto the Greeks,
thy glory scales the skies;
To thee did thy red-headed wife
cause Pirrhus rough to rise.
The Trojans utter overthrow,
but stay to Greekish host,
Be thou good Pirrhus unto us
a favorable ghost,
Who here in grave intombed lie
in Phoebus sacred ground,
Bow down thy care to the holy hymns
that we to thee do sound,
And this our City suffer not
in any fear to be,
Of thee and Thetis is our song,
Thetis all hail to thee.
The song ended, enters Theagines Captain of the Thessalians, very richly
apparelled, followed by many gallants, who guarding him as he went, at last
encompassed him round about; the maids overcome with the beauty of Theagines
could not moderate their passions but began to cast flowers and fruit upon him,
with that enters Cariclea most sumptuously adorned according to the manner, her
hair was neither all bound up, nor all loose, but the most part thereof that
grew behind, hanged over her shoulders; that which grew from the crown of her
head down to her forehead, being of a yellow color, was crowned with a
garland of young Laurel; in her left hand she bare a gilded Bow and a Quiver
of arrows hanged on her right shoulder, and in her other hand she bare a taper
burning: after the young men had gone three times about Neoptolemus scpulture
in their bravery, the women cried out pittiously, and the men made a strange
noise, with that Theagines speaks to Caricles. Theag. Most sacred Priest of
this high Deity
We make request unto you to begin
This sacrifice to Neoptolemus.

Caric. The sacrifice indeed belongs to me,
But you sir, as the Captain of this charge,
And sacred message, ought to take the taper
Of her there, who of all those ceremonies
Is presedent, and burn the alter of;
This is the order and our Country fashion.

Theagnes takes the taper with a great deal of reverence from the hand of
Cariclea, and sets fire to the Alter, but first he was in a maze at the
exceeding beauty of Cariclea, and she as much taken with his, then they both
smiled a little and blushed and then became pale again: in conclusion he falls
in love with her, and she with him. Theag. So burns my heart as does this
Alter here,
The taper that did set my heart a fire
Was fair Caricleas beauty. aside.

Cariclea. How my soul
Could sacrifice to fair Theagines. aside.

Caricles. Great god of Delphos in whose sacred temple
We celebrate these funeral obsequies
Of great Achilles son, vouchsafe to send
A happy omen which may crown this work
Of our devotion offered at thy Altar.

The Oracle speaks touching Theagines and Cariclea. Ye men of Delphos sing of
her,
and her rare beauties praise,
Who now in grace begins to grow,
but fame shall and her days,
Who leaving these my temples here,
and sailing surging streams
Shall come at length to contries scorched
with Phoebus burning beams,
Where they as recompenses due
that virtues rare do gain
In time to come ere it be long
White miters shall obtain.
After this answer of the god Apollo, the pomp is broken up, and Exeunt. Actus
secundi, Scena octava.
Enter the judges and people of Athens, then Aristippus And Demeneta with
Cnemon bound. 2 Judge. Cnemon stand forth, who does accuse him here?

Aristippus steps forth, and strewing ashes on his head, s^ith: Aristip. I
brought not up my son, ye men of Athens
To see him come unto this end, but rather
To be a staff to stay my age upon;
As soon as he was borne his education
Was good and civil, when he did attain
To riper years, I set him to our schools
And Academies there to study arts,
And Mathematicke sciences, besides,
According to the laws of this our City,
Made him free denison, yet notwithstanding
He has not only cast behind his back
These favors of my love, but diversely
Both injured me, and beaten this good woman,
Who by our laws is now my second wife;
And not content herewith, one night he came
Unto us with a drawn sword in his hand
(When we in bed suspected no such thing)
In mind to kill us both, and was no farther
From being a paracide but that by chance
His sword by sudden fear fell out his hand,
Which 'Demeneta my good wife took up:
Therefore I flee to you most learned Judges,
And though I might by law of this our Senate
Slay him with my own hands, yet I appeal
Unto your justice, and commit my cause
To your grave censures, counting it more sit
To punish this my son by public law
Then private bloodshed.

With that Aristippus weeps, Demeneta faining tears also. Demen. Cnemon, i am
sorry for thee pretty boy,
In an ill hour were thou brought to the world;
Unhappy creature.

Cnem. Grave and learned senate
Vouchsafe to hear me speak.

2 Judge. We will not hear thee,
But answer to this question we propound,
Came you unto your father with a sword
Drawn in your hand, or no?

Cnem. I not deny
But I came with a drawn sword in my hand,
But I will tell you how, please you to hear me.

3 Judge. He has confessed enough, he ought not speak more for himself.


1 Judge. Let us proceed to sentence.

2 Judge. I judge him worthy to be stoned to death.

3 Judge. I to be hanged.

4 Judge. This is my sentence, fathers,
that he be cast headlong into the dungeon.

Cnem. O cruel stepmother, and most unkind,
^or thy cursed sake am I so ill entreated
against all equity and justice too,
^hou kil'st me contrary to course of Law.

1. Judge. Your sentence is too hard and too severe,
^et him not die, but be for ever banished.

2 Judge. Let him be stoned.

3. Judge. Nay hanged.

4. Judge. nay cast into
^he dungeon.

1. Judge. since we differ conscript fathers,
^n our opinions, I do think it fit
^ be referred unto the peoples voices.

2. Judge. I do assent unto it.

3 Judge. So do I.

4. Judge. And I.

1. Judge. Then people give your voices, shall young Cnemon ^ie or be banished!


The people. banished, banished, banished.

1. Judge. Then Cnemon, this must be thy punishment,
^erpetuall exile from thy native land
^ever to be revoked, which if infringed
^y thy presumption, then expect to have
^o mercy from the senate, but a grave.
^eake up the Court. Exeunt,

Actus secundi, Scena nona.
Enter Caricles, and Calasiris. Caric. Saw you my only joy, and the sole honor
^f Delphos, fair Cariclea my daughter?

Calas. This was not sir the first time that I saw her
^s often as the people made resort
Unto the temple I was present with her,
And more, we have done sacrifice together,
And when she doubted any point depending,
On divine matters, or on humane learning;
She would have me instruct her in the truth.

Caric. How did you like her at the sacrifice?
Did she set forth that brave sight any thing?

Calasiris. You ask me a strange question Caricles,
As if you doubted, whether the bright moon.
Did pass the lesser stars.

Caric. The people praised
Theagnes the young Thessalian captain,
Attributing the second place to him.

Calasires. Yea, and the third too, but they all acknowledge your daughter
carried it away, and was The very eye of the solemnity.


Caric. Come will you go with me to visit her
I doubt the concourse of so great a troop
Has preiudic'd her rest.

Calasir. though my affairs
Call me another way, yet i will dispense
With them how great so ever and important
To wait on you and her exeunt

Actus secundi, Scena decima.
Enter Cariclea love sick, she lies upon her bed Cariclea. O cruel power of
love! why do thou triumph
In lovers rectles pains? what glory can
Be added to thy deity in seeking
The overthrow of thy poor liberty?
Take here this tribute of my tears, these sighs,
Sent from a gentle heart, convaye them hence
That they may meet Theagnies, and flow
With his as from one fountain, from one head.

To her enters Caricles and Calasiris, Caricles embraces her Caric. What ailes
my sweet, my dear Carcilea,
Tell me my daughter.

Carcilea. Nothing but my head
Does ache a little, and I feign would sleep.

Cariclea faines her self asleep. Caric. What should this mean good
Calasiris think you,
What disease has she taken?

Calasir. You need not marvel
At this, for I believe some envious eye
Has over looked her.

Caric. I must laugh at this,
Then you believe as commonly men do,
That there is witch craft

Calasiris. Yes as I believe
That any thing is true, and for this cause,
The empty air that is about us round
On every side, entering in by our eyes,
Our mouth, our ears our nostrills, all our pores,
Carrying such outward qualities with it
As it is indew'd with, does ingraffe a like
Infection in the man who has received it;
As when a man has enviously beheld
Something that is excellen* forthwith the air
Is filled with that poisonous quality,
Which enters into that is near at hand,
This same air being a slender suble thing
Pierces even to the bones and very marrow,
And by that cause has envy been the means
Of that disease, which by a propter name
We call bewitching.

Caric. Your wise reasons bear
Some probility I must confess.

Cala. Consider Caricles how many have
Gotten the plague, although they never touched
Nor saw, nor eat, nor lay with the dese^^'d,
But being with them in the self^same air,
Let love be argument and proof of thi^,
Who takes its beginning from the object
Of what it sees, and so as if it were
Some privy passage by the eyes has entrance
Into the heart, and this is probable,
For seeing of all other pores and senses
The sight is capable of most mutations,
And so the hottest, it must needs receive
Such like infections as are round about it,
And with a hot spirit entertain loves changes,
As for examples sake, I will produce
Out of the holy books some reasons for it
Gathered from natures sole consideration;
You know the bird Charadrius does heal
Those persons whose disease is the kings evil,
Which bird does fly away as soon as any
Diseased with this grief has spied her,
And turns her tail to him, and shuttes her eyes
Not (as some say) because she would not help them
But that by looking on them she by nature
Draws that disease unto her, therefore wisely
Declineth such a sight as present peril,

Caric. You have discussed this doubt right sagelie Sir,
I would my daughter once might feel and find
What love does mean, I would not then conceive
That she were sick, but in her perfect health,
But nothing less then this is to be thought
Has happened to her, who contemnes all love,
But rather seems to be bewitched indeed;
Dear Calasiris for our friendships sake
Show some point of your wisdom to dissolve
This witchchraft, and if possible to bring her
Into a good opinion of my nephew.

Enter Nebulo with a bastinado in his hand. Nebulo. Sirs what dee mean to make
such tarriance? Theagines has made such a feast, and all the good cheer will
be eaten before you come, for shame come away, there are none of the ghestes
wanting but you who are the principal, if you will be such fools to miss it,
you may, but i will not follow your foolish example.


Calasiris. This fellow calls us rather to a battle
Then to a banquet.

Caric. It Is his rusti^ke manner;
O what a lofty fellow Bacchus is
When he is well washed! but come let us go
Least with his cudgel honest Nebulo
Do drive us forward.

Nebulo. Well sirs you may jest,
But I mean earnest if I miss the feast.

Exeunt. Finis actus secundi: Actus tertii, Scena prima.
Enter Aristippus solus in a melancholy humor. Aristip. How have I played the
fool and robbed my self
In hasty passion of my only son;
Repentance when it comes too late does argue
An inconsiderate judgment; O my Cnemon
Would thou had killed me ere I banished thee,
For death is better sure then banishment;
Nere shall I see my boy, well for this fault
I will do penance, penance on my self;
Athens adieu and all the City pleasures
Forsake me quite; my solitary manor
Far in the country where no people comes
Shall be my habitation day and night
Where I will eat my heart out. Exit Aristippus.

Enter Demeneta and Thisbe. Demen. Oh my Cnemon,
My pretty boy, more dear then my own life,
How I lament thy chance and my mishap.

This. Comfort your self dear mistress I beseech you.

Demen. Peace fool, my grief is more then can be cured
^y any words of comfort, no man knows
What a sharp corsive it was to my heart,
^ore fervent is my love now he is absent.

This. Fie, fie, forget him, think upon his pride
And high disdain against you, think he does
^eserve this punishment and greater too.

Demen. How ready thou art Thisbe to do mischief,
Thou art the fire brand that have kindled this
Combustion in my heart, thou have not been
A help unto me* but a hinderance
In the fruition of my love, by thee
And by thy means I have lost my only joy,
And yet for all this thou do still incense me
To run on in this way; most wicked wretch.

This. Well I perceive your mind, she thinks to make me
Support the fury of her frantic sits,
But I shall overreach you sure in wit,
And lay the saddle on the right horse back, aside.
Why do you thus accuse your trusty servant?
You know I did but what I was commanded,
Nor ere did any thing without your warrant,
If this thing happened not as you would have it.
Ascribe it not to any fault in me,
But rather, as you justly may, to fortune;
If you will have me yet devise some way
To remedy your present grief and sorrow,
You shall perceive how ready my good will
Shall be at your commands.

Demen What remedy
Can possibly be found, since he that can
Ease me and none but he, is separated
At such a distance from me? and besides
Th'unhop'd for lenity of those which gave
Sentence against him has destroyed my hopes.
I would he had suffered death, for then in me
Had quenched been the flames of burning love.
Hope that is past removes grief from the heart,
And when despair possesses troubled minds
They intermit all sorrow building on
Th'impossibility of their enjoying;
But as it is methinkes I see and hear
Cnemon complaining of my cruelty,
And how by unjust guiles I did ensnare him;
Sometimes me thinks he comes to me as if
I should enjoy him, othertimes I bend
My course to him where ere he lives remote;
These things inflame me, these things make me mad,
But O ye gods, I have as I deserve;
Why did I not with good will seek to win him
Rather then by deceit and craft compel him?
Why did I not most humbly sue unto him
Rather then wrong him like an enemy?
It may be at the first he did deny me
For maiden modesty, and fear to foul
His fathers sheets, but had I persever'd
Unto the end, he might have been allured
To condescend by fair means to my will;
But O my Thisbe tell me, tell me quickly
What remedy is that thou would devise
For me and say is easy?

This. Mistress this:
All men suppose that Cnemon is departed
The town of Athens and the territory
As he was judged to do, but I know well
(Who have searched all things merely for your sake)
That he remains here still in secret manner
With one Arsinoe whom I think you know,
She plays well on the Virginals, with her
He lies every night, for this fair maid
Won with his love, and pitying his distress
Received him in, and promises as soon
As all things are provided for her journey,
To go away with him.

Demen. O happy wench,
Happy Arsinoe is thy destiny,
Though banishment or death with such a partner;
But what do these things ought advantage me?

This. Much, i will pretend I am in love with Cnemon,
And will desire for old acquaintance sake,
Arsinoe would be pleased to suffer me
In stead of her to lie with him one night,
Which if I can obtain, it shall be yours,
You shall enjoy him in Arsinoes stead,
And i will provide before he go to bed
He shall have wine sufficient, least our plot
Should be discovered; if you have your wish,
Rest then contented to give over your love,
For in most natures it is easily seen
That such love whose beginning's violent
After the first experiment decays
And waxes cold, but grant it burn a fresh
Within your bosom (which ye gods forbid)
It Is but to make a new voyage, and seek out
A new way to atchieve it.

Demen. I approve,
And praise thy rare invention dearest Thisbe;
Farle not to put this plot in execution,
And I shall well reward thee.

This. Fear it not.
I crave but three days to bring this about.

Demen. It Is granted; if thy wit can work my pleasure,
How I shall love my Thisbe beyond measure! Exeunt.

Actus tertii, Scena secunda.
Enter the banquet, after Theag. Caric. and Calasi. with attendance. Theag.
Welcome my honored friends, and holy fathers
To my poor Table here, please you to sit
And eat of what the gods have sent us.

Caric. Sir,
Super abundant are your cates and dainties,
F ire Cleopatra that luxuri^us Queen
Might revell here, and be contented too,
We that are Priests use no such dainty fare
Whose lives are squared by rules of temperance.

Theag. We will not cause you break those rules, nor swerve
From your religious order, but sometimes
A little Wine will much inflame your zeal
To holy duties, reverend Caricles
I must begin to you. drinks to him.

Caric. Theagines, I must return you thanks.

Theagines on a sudden falls into musing, sigh^^, and ^^angeth his countenance
sometimes red, sometimes pa^e, and gapes withal, as if he were not well. What
means this variety? I think
Some envious eye has looked upon him too,
Methinkes Cariclea and Theagenes
Haave one disease. -- softly to Calasires.
Calas. By Isis that they have
One and the same disease, thus it appears:
Since he next to your daughter was the fairest
Of all the show at that brave sacrifice.
Theagenes begins to recollect himself.
Theag. Sirs, pardon my stupidity and dullness,
A little fit of passion did possess me,
But now it is past, here worthy Calasiris,
I drink a health to the fair president
Of our late funeral pomp.

Calas. Excuse me Sir,
I drink no healths, yet thank your courteous proffer.

Theag. Refuse Car cleas health?

Caricles. Sir, be not angry,
This man never drinks wine, nor eats the flesh
Of any living thing.

Theag. That Is strange, how comes it?

Caricles. He Is an Egyptian, borne at holy Memphis,
And Isis Priest, whose custom is t'abstaine
From wine and flesh as things unlawful.

Theag. Then
Bring me some water, wise and reverend man,
Pardon my ignorance which knew it not;
Now Sir to you in your own element,
And let this table make a lasting league
Of amity between us.

Calas. Let it be so,
Worthy Theagenes, for I do much
Desire that combination.

Theag. Ere you go
Please you to see a dance in armor, called
Pyrricha, which we use in Thessalie.

Caricles. What pleases you does please us.

Theag. Sound music then.
The Thessalian youths with Theagenes their Captain, dance Pyrricha in armor,
with a graceful dexterity, which ended, the Priests take their leaves, and bid
Theagenes adieu.
Caricles. Thanks for our worthy entertainment Sir.
Theagenes embraces Calasiris very often, and at parting whispereth him
something in the ear. -- Exeunt all.
Actus tertii Scena tertia.
Enter Calasiris solus. Calas. 'Twas not a dream or such like fantasy,
As oftentimes invades and creepes into
The minds of men, when Morpheus shuts their eyes,
That took me last night napping in my bed:
No, it was no dream, but a true apparition.
I saw Apollo, and Diana both
Appear before me, and with them they brought
Theagenes and fair Cariclea,
Apollo gave me him, Diana her,
With this command, go take these young folks with thee,
And haste thee home unto thy native country,
It Is time, for so the Destinies command,
Love them as if they were thy natural children,
And when thou comst to Egypt, lead them further,
Where it shall please us gods to give direction;
With that they vanished, and a token gave
That it was not a dream, or a false vision:
Immortal powers, your hests I will obey,
If you vouchsafe to point me out the way. one knockes.
Who Is there?

Theag. It Is I, Theagenes your friend.

Calas. Theagenes, the brave Thessalian Captain,
Most welcome Sir, what business was of force
To make you stir so early?

Theag. Reverend Father,
A stirring one which keeps my thoughts awake,
And banisheth sweet slumber from mine eyes,
Has made me break your morning meditations,
And though I suffer beyond thought of man,
Yet blush I to reveal my grief for shame.

Calas. Come, come, I know your grief, although you are
Ashamed to tell it me, I know it well,
For nothing from my wisdom can be hid,
And from the knowledge of the gods my son.
Calasiris casts some account upon his finger, as if he would prophecy.
Young man, thou art in love, nay, start not back,
Thou art in love with fair Cariclea.

Theagines embraces him about the neck. Theag. Thy prophecy is true, I am in
love
With fair Cariclea, save me learned man;
For without help I cannot live a day,
So much this mischief works upon my heart;
I never till now knew the effects of love,
Nor ere saw woman that I thought deserved
To be beloved, before Caricleas beauty
Made me a slave to Cupids cruelty.

Calas. Weep not Theagines, be of good cheer;
For since you have recourse to me for help,
My wisdom shall prevail above her strength,
Although she be perverse, and easily
Will not be drawn to love, I Will try all means
For your sake whom I love, and use all art
I can to break her nature, be but bold,
And do as I shall show you.

Theag. With my soul,
And if you do this, I am yours, and all
I have at your command. -- one knockes.

Calas. Who Is there, be gone
Theagines, to morrow morn I Will meet you
In great Apollos Temple and talk more. -- Exit Theagines.
Enter Nebulo. O, is it you Sir Nebulo, what news
Bringst thou I prithee?

Neb. What dee take me for, a news Carrier? I would you should know it, I am
none such, I have not to do with other men's business nor their wives, I would
they had not to do with mine, but it is no matter for once, there is promised a
reformation, I hope all will be amended, let it pass; but to the point now.


Calas. I, to the point Nebulo by all means.

Neb. And then to the business afterward.

Caricles. Why, did thou not mean the business when thou mention'dst the
point? is it not all one in the sense? I conceive it so, else thou art more
learned than I am.


Neb. No it is not all one, the point is one thing, and the business another, we
must first handle the point, before we come to the business; for your better
understanding, I will make it plainer.


Calas. Thou art a very learned Doctor sure, in matters of this nature.


Neb. I hope so, yet my wife has gone beyond me I Will besworne, by many degrees.


Calas. But Nebulo* prithee what would thou have with me? how does thy
Master, and my good friend Caricles?


Neb. In health, but doggedly out of tune, he will be with you presently, so
much he bid me tell you, and something else, but I have forgotten it, so much
business I have to think of.


Enter Caricles. Calas. My dearest friend and brother, welcome to me,
Why do you look with such a sullen cheer?
Methinks you're very sad and melancholy.

Caricles. I am indeed, and I have reason for it.
I come to crave your counsel what to do,
But first depart and leave us Nebulo.

Neb. Wherefore I pray? well, there will be a sweet counsel now I am excluded,
I should be loath to change heads with either of them for all my horns. -- Exit
Nebulo.


Caricles. My daughter, Sir, since yesterday, the race
Was run in armor tweene Theagenes
And stout Ormenes, has been wondrous sick,
And the last night did never sleep one wink.

Calasiris. Who won the garland Sir?

Caric. Theagines,
Cariclea as the custom is did hold
The prize, and he received it at her hand,
She still grows worse and worse, dear Calasiris,
Employ your skill and wisdom to restore her,
I know it is easy for you if you please
To heal her, who, you say, is but bewitched,
For I believe it is not impossible
For holy Priests to bring to pass strange things.

Calas. Let Us go then if you please unto the maid.
And by recommendation strive to make
Me more familiarlie acquainted with her,
That she the bolder may sustain my cure.

Caric. Content, Apollo grant a good success
Unto thy work, and Aesculapius. Exeunt.

Actus tertii, Scena quarta.
Enter Aristippus and Thisbe. This. Master I doubt not but my sudden coming
Appears strange as being unexpected,
The cause whereof I will relate unto you
Without more circumstance, or vain preambles;
I come here to accuse my self unto you;
And to receive such punishment as your
Discretion shall think sit for my offense;
By me sir you have partly lost your son,
I do confess I was an accessory,
Though much against my will; when I perceived
My mistress lived not well, but wronged your bed,
Not only provident to shun the danger
Might light upon my self for keeping counsel
(If it should come to light by any other)
But chiefly sorrowful for your mis-hap,
Who should in recompense of all your kindness
Unto your wife, reap such disgrace from her,
I came one night to my young master Cnemon,
(My self not daring to acquaint you with it)
And told him there was one who used to play
The lecher with my mistress, he enraged,
Thinking that then they were in bed together,
Took suddenly his sword into his hand,
And notwithstanding that I told them then
They were not at their sport, he would not hear me.
But thinking that I had repented of
Bewraying it, ran like a mad man forth
Unto your bedside with intent to kill
Th'adulterer, what followed sir you know:
Now to confirm that this I say is true,
If so you please, this night i will show your wife
My mistress Demeneta with her friend
A bed together in a neighbors house
Without the City.

Aristip. If thou can do this,
I Will make thee free, and pardon all thy faults,
For I suppose I should revive again
So I revenged were on my enemy;
I had such a suspicion in my head
That she was false, but kept it to my self,
Because I wanted clear proofs to convince her,
But what must I do Thisbe, tell me wench?

This. You know the garden where the monument
Of Epicures does stand, there come a little
Before the night* and stay for me; adieu. Exeunt.

Actus tertii, Scena quinta.
Enter Arsinoe and Thisbe. Ars. My old acquaintance welcome, welcome Thisbe.

This. Thanks good Arsinoe, will you teach me now A lesson on the Virginals?


Ars. You jeere me,
I feign would learn of your but prithee tell me
What business brought thee hither?

This. I will tell thee,
You know Feledemus the dauncer*

Ars. Yes.

This. We too must dance la velta here to night,
Let Us have a chamber and a bed made ready
Sweet sister, for I Have premised him this night
He shall come first, and I will follow after,
As Soon as I to bed have brought my mistress.

Ars. All things shall be according to thy wish,
My better half.

This. But when he comes I pray you
Be out the way, for he is very shame-fac'd
As being a novice in this art.

Ars. Is he
Not entered yet?

This. Not yet I can assure ye,
His flower is yet to spend and strength of youth.

Ars. That flower thou soon wilt crop, and wast the seed.

This. In time I may, at night expect me sister.

Ars. I Will wait you home.

This. If this my plot do hit
Nere was the like devised by woman's wit. Exeunt.

Enter Demeneta, and Thisbe again with a candle. Thisbe. Come mistress, let me
make you unreadie instantly, all that I promised you is done, I will go fetch
young Cnemon unto you who is making merry here by, and return suddenly, lie
down, take your pleasure and say nothing. Exit Thisbe.


Enter Thisbe followed by Aristippus. This. Bind the adulterer fast master.
With that she ran to the door and made it give so great a crash as she could,
crying out in this manner: O wonderful thing, the villain is fled, take heed
sir that you be not again deceived.


Arist. Peace be of good cheer, I have this wicked and mischievous woman which
I most desired.

O thou much hated of the gods, I have thee
And all thy shame about th^e, come thou shall
With me unto the City, to receive
What punishment the laws allot to such
As live unchaste, and wrong their husbands bed,
Which is no less then death.
A^i^t^pp^s dragges her along, but she pulling herself out of (...) m^^s
hands, sell suddenly of purpose into a pit made (...) the stage, and so ended
her life.
Aristip. See Thisbe, is she dead?

This. Oh yes, her neck
Is broaken sir.

Aristip. Then has thy punishment
Prevented what the law should have inflicted;
I Will to the people and declare this matter,
And with my friends consult what means to use
For to call home my son from banishment,
Whose truth and innocence does open lie
By this unheard of strange discovery. Exeunt.

Actus tertii, Scena sexta.
Enter Cariclea, she lies down upon the bed indisposed, her kinsfolks weeping
about her, then enter Caricles and Calasiris. Caric. My child, my daughter
dear, tell me thy father
The cause of thy disease, have a good heart,
This wise man Calasiris is requested
By me to find some remedy to cure thee,
And he can well perform it as a man
Of heavenly knowledge, and a sacred priest.
My most ^ndeered friend, you shall do well
To suffer him to exercise his art
And holy spells for your recovery,
For I perceive thou art ore-look'd my child.

Caric. Sir it is my duty to obey your will
In all things you command me.

Calas. Then depart
Dear Caricles, and all the rest avoid
The room, we must be private here together,
Fetch me a little Laurel and a stool
Having three feet, some fire and frankincense,
And let no man disturb us till I call.
It shall be done forthwith, heavens crown your work.

Exeunt all but Cariclea, and Calasiris. Calasiris begins to burn
frankincense, to mumble with his lips, to lay laurel upon her from top to toe,
to gape and make strange gestures, while Cariclea, wagged her head often and
smiled. Caric. Father you are deceived in my grief,
You cannot guess at it for all your art.

Calas. Nay daughter say not so, but cheer your self,
For what does vex you is a malady
Common, and easy to be cured by me;
Thou west ore-look'd not only at the pomp
Of Pirrhus funeral rites, but at the race
In armor too when you were overseer,
And gave the prize unto the conqueror;
Theagenes was he that overlooked you,
Whose want on eye was always fixed upon
Your splendant beauty object of his sight.

Caric. Whether he daign'd to look on me or no
Apollo have him in his custody;
But whence is he, and what is his pedigree?

Calas. He Is a Thessalian borne, and as you heard
Descended from Achilles, who although
He have bewitched you with an envious eye,
He suffers more than you by the reflex
Of your Sun-burning eyes upon his heart.

Caric. (...) you wrongfully accuse the man
Of witchcraft, ^ho has done no harm at all,
There Is no such matter, it is some other sickness.

Calas. Then tell me daughter, and conceal it not
If you desire to find a remedy,
I am no stranger to you but your friend,
and old acquaintance of your loving father,
I am of your profession too, a priest,
I Will keep your counsel, and be bound by oath
To help you what I can; all griefs are cured
In the beginning, but if left alone
At length they grow incurable; declare
Your mind at full.

Caric. I love Theagines.

Calasiris. I knew so much before, he loves you too,
I Will be your faithful friend and true assistant.

Enter Caricles, with Acestinus a skillful physician. Caric. Dear friend what
have you done? what news have You to tell me that is good?


Calasir. All shall be well

Caricles shall be healed to morrow morn
Of her infirmity, I now will leave you
To prosecute my business for her health.

Caric. Adieu dear friend, the gods reward thy pain.
Here Acestinus, lies the sickly patient Exit Calasiris.
You are well read in physic, feel her pulse
And give your wise opinion.

Acestin. fairest maid
Where does your pain lie most?

She turned her face from him, and repeated with a loud voice this verse of
Homer, Achilles to the bravest man of all the Greekish rout. Acest. Her state
of heart I find Priest Caricles,
My labor is in vain, no physic can
Restore her to her health.

Caric. The gods forbid,
Why say you so, must my dear daughter die
Without all hope of her recovery?

Acest. Peace make not such ado, but here (...) speak.
Our art sir, does extend no further then He draws Caricles aside.
To cure distempered bodies, if the mind
Diseased be without the bodies sickness,
We have no help for that, the maids disease
^^es in the mind, her body's in good state,
No humors do abound there, no headache,
No fever burns her, all is free within.

Caric. What then should be the cause of these her fits,
Utter what you perceive does trouble her,
I do beseech you, skillful Acestinus.

Acestin. It Is love does trouble her, which who knows not
Is an affection and grief of the heart,
Do you not see her eyes swollen in her head
Rouling one every side, her visage pale,
Her half distraction, how she utters
What ere comes in her mind, and sleeps but little;
In brief I do perceive that she has lost
The moisture of her body, and indeed
Just amplitude thereof, my counsel is
You find her out a man and that with speed. Exit Acestinus.

Caric. A man, heavens grant she be inclined that way,
Then Calasiris has played well his part;
How fares my daughter now, what sickness have thou?
Shall I send for more Doctors yet?

Caric. It Is needless,
Send none to me but Calasiris only,
He has the art to ease me, and none else.

Caric. I Will send him to thee, sleep Cariclea,
Until he come: if Alcamenes love
Possess her heart, thanks to the gods above* Exeunt.

Actus tertii, Scena septima.
Enter at one door Theagines, at another Calasiris. Theag. My worthy friend
most opportunely met.

Calasi. What, beautiful Theagines!

Theag. How can he
Be beautiful that pleases not Cariclea?

Calasir. No more, you make me angry thus to doubt
My skill by which she is entrap'd in love.
And longs to see you.

Theag. What is that you say?
Does fair Cariclea wish to see me father?
Why do you then detain me here, and not
Conduct me to her? Theagines offers to run forth, Calasiris catches him by
the cloak, and holds him fast.

Calas. Nay sir stay a while,
Though you are very nimble of your feet,
You must not think this matter must be handled
As if it were a prize for every man
That list to get it, take my counsel first;
Know you not that her father Caricles
Is the chief man in Delphos? that the laws
Give present death to such as st^ale a maid.
Without their friends consent? be wise my son.

Theag. The matter were not great although I died
After I had enjoyed Cariclea,
Death for her sake is life, but Calasiris
If you think good, let us demand her of
Old Caricles her father for my wife,
I do suppose my blood is high enough
To be commixt with his.

Calas. We shall not speed,
Not that he thinks you any way unworthy,
But 'cause she is promised to his sisters son
By him in marriage.

Theag. O ye gods above,
It cannot be, nor shall it by your leaves,
Theagenes, and none but he shall wed
Cariclea, who ere presumes to touch
My goddess but my self, shall sure repent it,
This hand is not benumbed, nor this sword blunt
But it can take revenge.

Calas. It shall not need,
Theagines be patient, be but ruled
By me* and we will bring all things to pass
According to your wish; now leave me here
Alone to project on your good, be careful
You be not seen oft-times to talk with me,
But when you come, come private and alone
To shun suspicion.

Theag. Farewell reverend Father. Exit Theagenes.

Enter Caricles. So efficacious is your wisdom sir,
So forceable our friendship, as it has wrought
That effect I wished upon my daughter,
Cariclea is in love and quite subdued
By strong affection, who before was stubborn^
Unto so sweet a yoke.
Calas. I knew my charms
Were of sufficient force to do the feate,
But can you tell as well what man she loves
As that she is in love?

Caric. No by Apollo,
Would Alcamenes were the man she loved
My sisters son, I have endeavored it
All that I can to make her fancy him.

Calas. It Is best you bring him to her, and so try
The aim of her affection, mutual sight
Of lovers kindles sparks which else would die
Raked up in ashes of forgetfulness.

Caric. I Will take your counsel.

Calas. And return with news
How you have sped.

Caric. I Will give you a relation. Exit Caricles.

Calas. I must convey them hence, this task is laid
Upon me by the gods, but where I know not.
The Oracle is mystical and dark,
I cannot well interpret what it means,
We must begin our voyage by sea it seems,
As may be gathered by the Oracle
Where it is said, and sailing surging streams

Shall come at length to countries scorched with Phoebus burning beams. If I
could by any means get the Fascia now, which was laid out with Cariclea,
wherein Caricles said he heard all the maids estate was notified, I should be
instructed more particularly what I ought to do, and whether the Ladies of
destiny would send us. Enter Caricles.

Now brother what success?
Caric. Oh woeful news,
My daughter seems distracted, such a strange
Infirmity does seize her, when I brought
My nephew Alcamenes to her sight
Freshly apparel'd, as if Gorgons head
Appeared, or some more fearful thing, she cried
With a loud voice, and turned her countenance
From him and me, withal she put her hand
Unto her throat, threatening to kill her self
And bound it with an oath, if we departed
Not suddenly the chamber, which we did
In Less time then she spoke it, least she should
Put that in execution which she said,
Now Cala^i^is once again I come
Most humbly to beseech you that you will not
Suffer the maid to p^^ith, nor her father
Be fr^str^te of his purpose.

Calasiris. Caricles,
It Is true your daughter is distressed in mind,
For she is moved with the multitude.
Which I have burdened her of purpose with,
They are not of the le^st but such as should
Force he^to do what she abhorred most
As Well by nature as decre^ of mind,
But I suppose some god does take in hand
To hinder this (...) and strive to cross
My m^ni^ters, therefore (...)
And time you they me that same Fascia
You said was (...) with fair (...)
Amongst her costly ie^^lls, (...)
Least that it be ench^^nted (...) and wrought
With such things as do now exaspe^ate
Her mind^, by reason that some enemy
As Soon As (...) was borne had this ordained
To keep her from all love and thought of marriage
That the might die (...) behind noc issue.

Cari^. It Is probable; it may be so indeed.
Come go with me, and I will show you all
What in the Fascia is contained and written,
I unde^st^nd it not* character
Is Ae^h^opi^n, and the letters a^^
Not comm^n, but such as the prin^es use
O^ Aegy^t in their holi^ businesses.

C^^^s. understand the Ethiopian tongue,
Which unto th^^ ^ must interpre^ wrong.

Ex^unt. (...). Actus quarti, Scena prima.
Enter Calasiris, Theagines, and Car^cle^. Calas. Come let us away my children,
let us away,
Why do we linger here^ the gods commands
Must be obeyed, all things are ready for
Our secret flight, a ship for Memphis bound
Waits us without, the wind comes gently from
Th'adjoyning shore, and staye^ to swell the sails
With pride till you imbarke, see here the Fascia,
Which by a sly devise from Caricles
I have obtained, nothing does hinder us
To meet this long wished opportunity,
If you have got your jewels, dearest jewel,
From your supposed father.

Caric. Calasiris
I have them all, but how gat you I pray
The Fascia from old Caricles, for when
He had received me from Sysimethres,
Who brought me up, he brought me here to Greece
I know not how, and took the Fascia from me,
Which*in a chest he did preserve and keep.

Calas. How I came by it you shall know hereafter,
But can you tell me what it does contain?

Caric. How should I as being never told by any?
Besides although I oftentimes had seen it,
I could not understand the character,
Pray sir, interpret what it does contain.

Calas. It does declare your parents and your Country,
And all your fortunes, thus I read it to you
Verbatim as it stands, give your attentions.

The Fascia.

Persina Queen of the Aethiopians to her daughter, only in sorrow by what
name* soever she shall be called, (...) wri^^ in haste this la^en^ation
conta^ned ^^rein, as her lust gift. My daughter, the sun being author of our
storke, is ^^^nesse that for no mis-deed, I have cast thee forth, and concealed
thee from thy father Hydaspes sight, yet I would have my self excused to thee,
if thou happen to live, and to him that shall find thee if the gods procure
any, and therefore I declare the cause of thy exposition, after king Hydaspes
had been married to me ten years, and we had never a child, we happened one
time to rest us after dinner in a gallerie where hung rare pictures and images,
amongst which were those of Perseus and Andromeda portrayed as when he first
redeemed her from the rock, at this time your father lay with me, swearing
that by a dream^ he was commanded so to do, and I by and by perceived my self
to be with child: but thou were borne white which color is strange among the
Aethiopians. I k^ewe the reason, because I looked steadfastly upon the picture
of Andromeda naked, and by that means, conceived a thing like to her, yet I
determined to rid my self of shameful death (counting it certain that thy
color would procure me to be accused of adultery, and that none would believe
me when I tol^ them the cause) and to commit thee to the unstablenes of
fortune, which is a great deal rather to be wished for then present death, or
to be called a bastard: and telling my husband that thou were straight dead, I
have privilie laid thee forth with the greatest riches that I had for areward
to him that shall find thee and take thee up: above all things remember that
thou seek among thy jewels for a certain ring, which thy father gave me when
we were first made sure, in the hoope whereof is a princely posie, the stone
is a Pantarbe of secret virtue, consecrated in the place where it is set. The
gods preserve thee my dearest daughter, and grant us a happy meeting.

Theag. A strange but blessed discovery have thou made
Of fair Caricleas royal pedigree
(Right reverend father) which before lay buried
Deep in the obscure vault of ignorance.
Now princely virgin raise thy glorious head
Above the clouds, and give thy conquering beauty
Command to pull the thunderer from his seat
To serve thee here on earth or in Olympus
Where thou shall please to dwell, and rest not here,
Let Mars be fettered, Mercury a slave,
Andbright Apollo dazzled with the sight
Of beams more splendant then his own, fall down
And worship thy appearance, offering thee
His throne to sit upon.

Calas. Theagenes,
Fie, be not such a vain Idolater
The gods may plague you for it.

Theagines. plague me for
Adoring queen Caricles deity?
They are unjust then, for themselves commit
The same Idolatry as well as I.

Calas. That Is but your superstitious jealousy.
Think you the gods will rival you, or love
A mortal Virgin? fie it is blasphemy.

Theag. They have done so, or else the Poets lie,
Witness Europas bull, and Laedas swans
Fair Danaes shower, and Daphnes transformation;
If their poor beauties had that operation
To work such strange effects in heavenly powers,
How much more force, nay violence think you
Has hers, to whose compard, theirs are like glass
To sparkling diamonds.

Caric. My dearest friend,
Forbear these candid raptures of your wit,
Not my desert, and enter into thought
Of what concerns us most.

Theag. Agreed my goddess.

Calas. No more dispute then, but forthwith to sea.
Delphos adieu, the fates call us away. Exeunt.

Actus quarti, Scena secunda.
Enter Arsace and her old baud Cibile. Arsa. So sweet a man as thy description
makes him?

Cib. Nothing inferior Madame, but beyond it;
His body is a Temple stately built,
Where Venus comes and offers turtle doves
To gain his liking.

Arsa. Such a majesty
Accompanying that sweetness too?

Cib. As if
They wedded were together, hand in hand
Walking in so delectable a mansion.

Arsa So active and broad shouldered as thou say,
So tall and portly?

Cib. Every way provided
To satisfy your pleasure.

Arsa. Thou have kindled
A fire within me; but what Country ownes
This wonder of a man? when landed he
At Memphis thore? who brought him, can thou toll?

Cib. He came with Calasiris from some parts
Of Greece, as I am given to understand,
And landed here last night.

Arsa. Where does he lodge?

Cib. In Calasiris house without the Temple.

Arsa. Thou must devise some way to bring him tome,
And lodge him in our palace, for I have
A^ itching humor to enjoy the man.

Cib. Let me alone, I am your Ingineer
To work your pleasure.

Arsa. But who is the maid
Thou say did bear him company, and was
So near his bosom?

Cib. I suppose she is
His sister or his wife.

Arsa. Is she fair as he?

Cib. I never saw one fairer, such a beauty
As would have made love stoop, and shaken off
His Eagles borrowed shape, to force a kiss
From her Nectorious hand.

Arsa. Thou make me jealous
With praises of my rival.

Cib. Let not that
Trouble your thoughts, he cannot be so foolish,
That when so great a happiness shall be
Offered unto him as the love and liking
Of fair Arsace O^omdates wife,
Fgypts great Deputy, but reverently
Kneel down, and worship such a change in love.

Arsa. If thou can bring, dear nurse, this thing to pass*
Thou shall at once cure two diseases in me,
Fell love and jealousy.

Cib. I doubt it not;
What mad man but will be content to change
His Brass for Gold, his Copper for rich pearl?
Both which he shall enjoy, enjoying you.

Arsa. O what a sug^ed time have I to use
My sweet disports now that the Deputy
My husband is employed in the war
Against Hydaspes King of Aethiopia
About the Smaragd mines, pray heaven they end not
Before my pleasures period.

Cib. Never fear it.
You shall have time enough to bathe in bliss.

Arsa. See Cibile who knocks there. one knocks.

Cib. Calasiris
And the fair parties.

Arsa. Heavens! conduct them in.

Enter Calasiris, Theagines and Cariclea. Calas. All hail unto the Palace of
my Prince,
Madame it may seem strange unto your Highness,
That I presume to bring these strangers with me
To kiss your Princely hands; I make no doubt
But when you shall be well informed of
Their bi^^h and breeding, it will plead my pardon.

Arsa. What need this complement? you are welcome sir,
So are your friends, when did you ever know me
Unkind to strangers, or inhospitable
To such as these, whose outward looks declare
Their inward minds, and speak their noble parts?
So elegant a grace and stately beauty,
As shines in their countenances cannot
Proceed but from some Princely pedigree,
Pray sir speak whence you are?

Theag. Most beauteous Lady.
Please you to understand, we are of Greece,
Descended of a Noble family,
Which never produced yet unworthy branches,
Let it suffice (I do beseech your Grace)
We open it no further; we have been
Robbed on the sea by pirates, but redeemed
By Noble Calasiris, and brought here
To Memphis stately City.

Arsa. Is this Lady
Your sister, or your wife?

Theag. My sister Madame,
Tossed equally with me by fortunes blasts.

Arsa. but now those storms are past, and you are in
A quiet harbor: pleasant calmes appear.
Sir, I must rob you of your ghests.

Calas. I durst not
Deny you Madame, though I must confess
I should to any other.

Arsa. Cibile,
Prepare their lodging near our own, and let
No costly furniture be wanting there,

Cib. It shall be done with speed.

Arsa. My noble ghests,
I know not if you would retire alone
Into your private chambers, travel does
Require repose, please you to follow me,
I Will be your glad conductor.

Caric. O I fear
This kindness is some love plot on my dear. Exeunt

Actus quarti, Scena tertia.
Enter Thisbe sola. This. What sly evasion to put off thy guilt
Is left thee now poor Thisbe? what device
To shun the severe justice of the Law?
All will be now discovered, and my plots
Return upon my self, the heavens are just
In sending Cnemon home from banishment
To punish me in cheering of himself,
Can thou behold his face, or speak one word
In thy defense, when he stands forth t'accuse thee
Before the people? O what shame, what curses
Breathed from a general mouth will weigh thee down
Even to Avernus gulf; I feel the weight
Of my offenses poised in the scale
Of sad despair; O thou incendiary
Of all this mischief, says my guilty thoughts,
Thou murtheresse of thy mistress, hie thee hence
To the infernal shades, where never light
Appears, but gloomy darkness covers all
Under her sable mantle, there find out
Medea, Clit^mnestra, Pasiphe,
Long since condemned for murder to this place,
Companions of thy shame; why lingrest thou
Upon the earth? is not thy sin complete.
And ripe for hell? yes, yes, I know it is,
I know it is, my sad despairing thoughts,
I Will follow your suggestions, gentle violl
Reserved for such a use, this kiss from thee
Shall cross the sentence of the Laws decree. She drinks poison.

Enter Aristippus and Cnemon. Arist. Hold, hold thy hand, drink not the poison
down,
Thou desperate woman.

This. Not to gain a crown,
It Is done, and past prevention.

Arist. Thisbe yet
Make thy confession, and subscribe thy hand,
That innocent Cnemon die not.

This. Write it then. Cnemon writes.
I Thisbe do confess young Cnemon was
Unjustly banished, I and Demeneta
Did forge that plot against him, for the which
We have our condign punishment.

Cnem. It Is done, now put your hand to it she signs i^.
Dying Thisbe. she dies.

Arist. Son it is enough to clear thee of all things
Can be objected; i will forthwith declare
This matter to the people, and produce
Thisbes confession, strengthened with her hand,
Come with me Cnemon.

Cnem. See the wretched state
Of (...) accusers, and their poisonous fate. Exeunt.

Actus quarti, Scena quarta.
Enter Theagines and Cariclea to them presently Cibile. Cibile. My children
great Arsace recommends
Her love unto you, who has sent me here
To serve you in all things that you command,
I Am proud to be employed in your service
Who am a (...) too, and borne in Lesbos:
Most beautiful young man cheer up thy self,
I bring th^^ joyful news, Arsace loves thee,
Arsace the who^^ ^avour kings have kneeled for,
Does kn^el^ to th^e petitioning thy love
With (...) oblatio a both of pearl and gold.

Theag. O heavens, my prophecy is too too true,
My ^eal^u^ie foresaw this.

Theag. Tell Arsace
My sister and my self both kiss her hands
And do return her humble thanks for all
Her noble favors, but that she does love me
I think it strange, whose ^^so^nd is a man
So far beyond my rank as put in balance
With worthles me, it would not brook the trial.
We know you are her hands, her eyes, her ears,
Her mind, her all, for countries sake persuade her
(I do beseech you) to remove her thoughts
Upon some worthier person; all that we
De^re is only this, that she would please
To send us back again to (...)
And ^e^er bring strange banished, restless lives
Unto so high and excellent a fortune.

Cib. My son be ruled by me, be not so foolish
To shun this happiness that courts thee now,
Embrace it, least hereafter thou repent
Thy oversight* thou shall have rule and riches,
Dalliance, and all the fruits of flourishing youth,
If thou but condescend unto her will;
But if thou do deny, know that she has
A high and Princely stomach, which nere brooks,
Affronts of such a nature.

Theag. Tempt me not,
But tell your mistress I despise her lust
As much as prize her love, you shall oblige us
Unto you in a bond of love and kindness
To get us leave from her hence to depart
To seek our fortunes.

Cib. Obstinate young man,
That wilt not see thy good, Lady persuade
Your brother to some reason, you may hap
To work upon his nature, and prevail;
I leave you to your selves. Exit Cibile.

Caric. Theagines.
This is no honest dealing, I perceive;
Was it for this she sent us from her table
Such curious viands, and such costly cates?
Was it for this she did adorn our chambers
With stately hangings wrought with sundry colors,
Which came from Sidon and fair Lidia?
Was this her wicked end? would that we were
A hundred leagues from this accursed place,
Or that we never had beheld her face. Exeunt.

Actus quarti, Scena quinta.
Enter Arsace and Cibile. Ars. But will he not be won?

Cib. Not all the art
I have can work him to it.

Ars. Do my favors
Make no impression in him?

Cib. Yes of thanks,
No otherwise, he craves leave to depart,
A sign he does not like his entertainment.

Arsa. Thou make my hot blood cold within my veins
As if an ague ce^z'd me; how depart,
E ^ he get (...) power, I am resolved
To Enjoy him, or destroy him.

Cib. A right course
Your wit has found out mistress, my advise
Is this, that on^e more you solicit him
By fair entreaty and persuasive memes
To win him that way, but if he stand out
And stubbornly refuse to grant your suit,
Let him be ti'd unto cold fare hard lodging,
And give him up unto your Eunuchs hands
To be scourged and tormented, for young men
Regard not when they are entreated fair,
But when enforced, then they stoop and yield.

Arsa. It Is well advised, but how can I endure
To see that body bleed?

Cib. Madame you are
Too pityfull, if that an eyesore be
To see him scourged, you may refrain the sight,
I know twill molli^ie his haughty stomach
To your desire.

Arsa. First try all means, before
You put this last devise in execution;
But Cibile what cause or color have we
To hold them prisoners, or detain them here
Against their wills?

Cib. We Will give it out, they came
As spies from King (...) army hither,
To view the strength of Memphis.

Arsa. Excellent.
How shall we handle fair Cariclea
His beauteous sister?

Cib. Sister, I believe
She is his mistress rather, for such dalliance
As I have seen between them argues love
Of a more fervent nature; I have come,
And found them kissing with such ardency,
As is they feign would have their souls to meet,
And at their mouths salute.

Arse O strange discovery!
If this be true, hence may proceed the cause
Of my repulse and his unkind denial;
Si tout this business further, and observe
Their looks, their gestures* give an ear unto
Their privatest discourse, for this concerns
My business mainely; if Cariclea prove
A bar to my desires, we must remove her.
Go presently and know the young man's mind,
If he will yield yet, but if he refuse,
Let Euphrates the Eunuch punish him
With yrons to pull down his lofty heart.
So far I Am gone, pursuing my desire,
Hell shall not make me now back to retire. Exeunt.

Actus quarti, Scena sexta.
Enter two Judges, then Aristippus and Cnemon. Arist. Although I do not doubt
most learned Judges,
That your grave judgments would acquit my son
Without more proofs then by the sequel of
This business does appear, yet to the end
To make his innocence the more perspicuous
Which has so long strived to break through this cloud
Of falsehood and deceit, I here have brought you
Thisbes confession, and her hand subscribed
For confirmation of it, please you see
What it contains. the Judges read it.

1 Judge. When did she write this?

Arist. Presently upon
Her poisonous draught, her conscience prompting her
Unto so good an action.

2 Judge. Was It voluntarily done without constraint?

Arist. Yes, for what force has power to work upon
The settled resolution of a person
Whom death is ready for to seize upon?
It came free from her, the confession was
Her own invention, and the hand her own.

1 Judge. But will you swear to this?

Aristip. I will* and safely.
By all the gods it is true, else let me be
St^ac^e with their thunder for my perjury.

2 Judge. It is enough, we do acquit your son,
Long may he live the comfort of your age;
(...) di^m^sse the people, it is done.

Arist. Thus innocence shines cleerer then the sun. Exeunt.

Actus quarti, Scena septima.
Enter Arsace and Cibil. Ars. Now will he bend or break, yield or endure
More punishment? how do his setters please him?
How does he bear his stripes?

Cib. With patience
And manly fortitude beyond belief,
Takes glory in his sufferings, and becomes
More unrelenting now then heretofore.

Ars. What a strange nature has this savage man,
Will nothing work upon it? cannot love
Persuade him, nor the force of punishment
Compel him to humanity? some Tigresse
Or she Wolf in the forest was his nurse.
Is there no hope he will relent in time?

Cib. Our labor's lost in the attempting it,
He has Cariclea still before his eyes,
Lodges her in his heart, his mouth expressed it;
I heard him to exclaim thus, dear Cariclea,
My love, my life, my heart, thy only name
Makes me despise my torments, and in (...)
I Am comforted what ever fall to me;
Whereby I Am confident she is his wife,
Or secret mistress, wherefore if you please,
Lets (as the proverb says) cast our last anckor,
And seek some means to ^id her of her life,
For when he knows she is dead, it is very likely
He Will change his mind, when hope of love is gone.

Arsace. Thy counsel pleases me, and i will command
This stop to be removed presently.

Cibile. How, will you do it without course of Law
Or order lie proceeding, who will do
In this point your commandment? for although
All things are subject to you, yet the laws
Are free, and will not let you kill without
The judgment of the Persian magistrates;
Besides we should be careful how we did
Accuse the maid, least we should not be able
To prove what we do lay unto her charge.

Ars. How then shall we contrive it?

Cib. Daintily,
By a more sure and far more safe a way,
By a strong subtle c^ppe of deadly poison,
The plot is laid already, and the potion
Prepared, I stay but only for the patient
T'administer it.

Ars. Is any gone to call her?

Cib. Yes, Aura madame.

Ars. Well i will leave you then,
Strong physick's best for stubborn natured men. Exit Arsace.

Enter Cariclea, with Aura weeping, and servants. Cib. Why do you weep, sweet
heart? 'twill mar your beauty,
Your brother shall not long be kept in prison;
Be not so foolish to consume and pine
Away for sorrow, know Theagines
This night shall be released, and come unto thee,
Therefore be merry; 'twas his foolish fault
And disobedience to my mistress service
Made him to be committed; nicety
Is naught in young folks, but all is forgotten.
(Partly at my request) and liberty
Granted unto him, this was the occasion
I sent for you, that you might be partaker
Of this glad news, therefore rouse up your self,
And now at length eat something; Aura lay
The table, I have made some meat, I hope
Will comfort your weak stomach, sure you are
Too blame to fast so long.

Caric. But is this true
That you have told me? you so often have
Deceived me with untruths as I scarce date
To credit any thing you say unto me.

Cib. By all the gods it is true, which if it be not,
Let me be poisoned at this table here
And be a sad example; more this day
Your business all shall be dispatched, so that
You shall not need to take more care hereafter,
If by refray^ing from your meat you do not
Destroy your health and die, pray eat a little.

Caric. On confidence that this is true I will.

they sit down and eat. Cib. Aura give me some wine, Cariclea health
Remember good Theagines.
Aura mistaks and gives the poisoned cupp to Cibile, she drinks, but powers
half of it on the ground when she tasted what it was, looking cruelly upon
Aura, the poison suddenly works and she begins to fall, Cariclea supportes
her.
Cib. I will not have thy help, false wretch, I will not
thou have poisoned me, bear witness all here present
That see me die, I lay my death on none
But her and this queen Aura, so inform
Arsace that she may revenge my death. she dies.

Caric. See here the justice of the heavens displaid
To mortal view in this strange accident;
This cup, this poisonous cup was meant to me
By wicked Cibile, but yet it fell
By some mistake to her own lot to drink it.

Arsaces servants bind Cariclea and Aura. What do you mean to bind me a
weak maid,
I Will go without constraint where you will lead me
(...) be before Arsace, though I die
I care not so Theagenes be by. Exeunt.
Actus quinti, Scena prima.
Enter Hydaspes and Sysimethres, with attendance. Hydasp. Thus far have we
marched by the banks of Nile,
And conquered Philae, and the Smaragd mines,
Thus far has fortune favored our attempts,
And stern Bellona set our conquering feet
Deep in the bosom of the Egyptian Land;
Are we not now revenged Sysimethres
For thy uncivil barbarous entertainment,
When we employed thee our Ambassador
To Oroondates Deputy of Egypt?
How think you, do they not repent the wrongs
And disrespect they gave thee, contrary
Unto the laws of Nations? do they not
Wish that they had surrendered to our Crown
Those lands we justly challenged for our own?

Sysim. I think they do, and curse their arrogance
That has brought home the wars unto their doors;
It cannot choose but vex their very souls
To see so fruitful and so fair a soil,
Their native Country, over-runne and spoiled
By the incursions of a hostile army.

Hydasp. It Is fit they suffer for their usurpation;
But where lurkes Oroondates since his flight
In our last battle, no news yet of him?

Sysim. Fame gives it out, he is within this town
Of Syene with the remnant of his army.

Hydasp. Will not the Town yet come to composition?
Will it hold out yet longer notwithstanding
Our water-workes to drown them?

Sysim. Royal sir,
As soon as we had cut the banks of Nile
And let the river in upon the town,
The Inhabitants began to see and feel
Their misery, for suddenly the water
Encompassed fair Syene round about
That it became an Island, and by sinking
Into the earth below the walls foundation,
The weight above begin to shake as if
It would have ^allen down in every place;
Then suddenly arose a piteous cry
Amongst the people of the town, imploring
The gods assistance, and the Deputy
It seems by this extremity constrained
First camed letters ^yed to a stone
As messengers to be shot to our camp
Out o^ a sling, and archers from their bows
Sent their swift winged arrows to speak for them,
But both fell short and perished in the water;
At last when we by signs perceived their minds,
As holding up their hands in token of
Submission, and sometimes behind their backs,
In token they were re^ly to receive
Bands ^o they might find me ^ie, we sent out
Some boots to talk with them, who brought us word
They would surrender to your royal hands
The town of Syene, if you would be pleased
To grant some poor conditions.

Hydasp. What are they?

Sysim. First Oroondates makes request that he
And all his soldier without interruption
May march forth as best sinteth their profession,
With all their martial habiliments
And arms about them, next to be convoyed to
Elyphantina with you royal guard;
Else he would rather die then live to be
Condemned as a traitor to his king,
For yielding up the City and betraying
The army, and besides be put to death
With rackes and tortures.

Hydasp. What a fool is he
To make his own conditions, or to argue
Of such a matter? does he not conceive
He is not in his own power, but in ours,
To live or die, why what a madness is it
For conquered men to argue of conditions?
But it is not noble to destroy a number
For one man's folly go Sysimethres,
Take here our seal and sign their articles,
For pity works upon a noble spirit. Exit Sysimethres.

Hydasp. If I could entertain ambitious sparks
Within my royal breast, or never enter
Into examination with my self
Of right or wrong, (as many politicians
And proud usurpers do not) what should let me
From adding this large kingdom to my own,
Stretching my Empire to the mouth of Nile;
But justice sets down limits to my thoughts,
Bounds my ambition in, so that I dare not
Advance one foot beyond it, sacred goddess,
Divine Astrea, though all kings rebel
And pay no reverence to thy deity,
Hydaspes shall adore thee, and his might
shall never be more potent then his right. Exit.

Actus quinti, Scena secunda.
Enter the Persian magistrates as judges with Arsace, then enters Caricles with
Aura bound, they sit. 1 Magist. Is this fair maid the prisoner?

Arsa. Fair without, but foul within.

2 Magist. It Is pity vice should bear
A semblance of fair virtue, or be masked
Under so sweet a veil,
Sure by her looks

3 Magist. I should not judge her guilty.

Arsa. That Is a rule
Deceives us, for the choicest fruits of all
Ofttimes have rotten cores, and underneath
The fairest flowers lurk most the foulest snakes.
That cannot hold,
Bring forth the prisoners;
You are accused for poisoning Cibile,
How do you answer this?

Caric. Who Is my accuser?

Arsa. My self, and these my servants, who were present
When the old woman died, and heard her name
Thee, and that other guilty of her death;
Can thou deny the fact?

Caric. I Will answer thee
Proud dame, if my Theagines live yet,
I say, I am not guilty of this murder,
But if by thy most damnable attempts
His purer soul has left the earthly prison
Of his fair body, I declare my self
Guilty of this and whatsoever else
Thy malice can invent, I was the woman
That poisoned then thy nurse, who trained thee up
To all those goodly virtues of thy mind;
I do desire to suffer, kill me straight
That I may meet my lover, who so stoutly
Resisted thy soul lust, and lewd enticements,
Choosing to die rather then condescend.

Arsa. Base queen, how durst thou take unto thy self
Such liberty of speech? judicious sirs.
And magistrates of Persia, understand
That this she says is false touching my honor;
I take the gods to witness that when first
This woman and her friend came to the Palace,
I entertained them as became the state
Of greater persons, and so long continued
My favors to them till by open proof
I found they came as spies to (...) sent
From King Hydaspes army, then indeed
I did begin to draw back my affection,
Many more things inciting me to do it
Which I forbear to speak of, but in brief
Although I loved this maid so as to make her
My bosom-friend, and my most dear companion,
She has repaid me as you see, and poisoned
My trusty woman, is it not to be doubted
Her purpose stretched yet further, even to me?

Caric. I do confess yet once again, I poisoned
Thy nurse, and would have done so much to thee
Had I not been prevented.

Aura. O Cariclea,
Unhappy maid, why do thou wrongfully
Accuse thy self, and draw on death upon thee?
Hear me right grave and most impartial Judges,
There is no fault in her, I only, I
Gave Cibile the poison by mistake,
Which was prepared for this virtuous maid
By that old beldame, this is true, or else
Ye gods hurl down your thunder on my head.

2 Magi. But how came this mistake? make it more plain.

Aura. Old Cibile my mistress did prepare
This cup for fair Cariclea, I was forced
To have a hand in it too; when I should give
The poisoned cup unto Cariclea,
And Cibile the other, I know not
Whither being troubled with so strange a deed
Or hastily called on by Cibile,
I changed the cups, and poisoned the old woman.

Arsa. This is a forged devise, believe it not,
This woman is a traitor, and conspires
With them in all their plots, as privy to them.

3. If she that calls herself Cariclea.
Be guiltless of this business, what should make her
To cast herself into the jaws of death
By her so free confession of the fact?

Aura. Sir I believe she is weary of her life,
And being in desperation e're to see
Much less to enjoy her husband, without whom
Life seems a burden, hastens on her death.

1. Madame you must produce some witnesses,
Or we shall clear the prisoners.

Arsa. Here are five
Will be deposed they heard Cibile charge
These two here with her death.

2. What say you friends.
Dare you swear this?

All 5. We dare and will, by Isis,
And ^l the gods it is so.

3. Then we must pass
Sentence according to the law, which most
Depends on witnesses, your doom is death,
Carry these two forthwith unto the f^^e,

Caric. O (...) and earth, and all you blessed creatures
That are above or un lerneath this ound
Terrestrial ball, you that do take revenge
On such as work impiety, bear witness
I die an innocent, and willingly
Submit my self to death, for to avoid
Th* intolerable griefs that burden me;
Vouchsafe to take me gently to your hands,
And speedily inflict your punishments
Upon this whore Arsace, who has plotted
This mischief to no other end and purpose
But to take from me my Theagines. Exeunt.

Actus quinti, Scena tertia.
Enter Caricles solus, Nebulo listening. Caric. Cariclea raped, O gods how can
it be;
Where is your justice then? where our reward
For serving at your altars, when you suffer
Your sacred temples to be robbed and spoyld
Of its chief jewel, and my life, Cariclea?
O sacrilege unheard of! can you sleep
And wink at this? or is your anger to me
Implacable, and therefore to torment
My heart the more, you seem not to regard it?
Was It not enough, O cruel powers, to kill
My daughter at her Nuptial, and my wife
For grief thereof, but to augment my sorrow
Beyond the bounds of reason, give consent
Unto Caricleas rape, who was my joy,
My only comfort, heart, yea life and all?
Well I will once more put on pilgrims weeds.

Nebu. Ha, what was that? a dreadful sound me thought
More pilgrimages? stay but listen yet.

Caric. And go in quest of thee throughout the world,
First to Thessalia, where that thief was borne
That stole thee hence, then unto Memphis City
Where Calasiris that false priest remains.

Nebu. I am confirmed in horror, it is too true
He Will travel once again, but soft attend.

Caric. And if I find thee not, i will travel further,
Even to the utmost bounds of Aethiopia,
Where I suppose thy parents live and reign.

Nebu. To Aethiopia, what strange land is that
(I marvel) oh, oh now I do remember
Sysimethres was borne there as he said; Nebulo discovers himself.
We shall be black as devils it we go there.

Caric. What Nebulo, my trusty friend and servant,
Prepare thy self to accompany thy master.

Nebu. Where sir, unto the temple of Apollo?

Caric. Beyond the seas I mean.

Nebu. Beyond the ^eas;
He Is mad I think, or has some worse disease. aside.

Caric. I hear you sir, it seems your grown a Poet
You rhyme so well.

Nebu. I care not who does know it.

Caric. Raptures still flow upon thee more and more,

Nebu. But this bad news of yours does vex me sore,
That you will cross the seas, the bare conceit,
Will keep me seven days without taste of meat.

Caric. Why that is profitable, saves thy purse.

Nebu. But hurts my body si^, and that is worse.

Caric. Why th*art a second Ovid, all he says
Does flow in verse.

Nebu. Then I shall wear the Bays.

Caric. But Nebulo no more of this, you are content to accompany me this
journey, are you not?


Nebu. Good sir, do not urge me to it; you know how willing
I should be to wait upon ye, did not one thing cross it.

Caric. What Is that thy wife?

Nebu. You have hit the mark, it is dangerous (I can tell ye) for me to go
abroad and leave her at home, I had woeful experience on it after our last
peregrination.


Caric. What did she make thee a cuckould in thy absence:

Neb. I know not, but she dubbed me knight of the forked order.

Caric. Why that honor is for term of thy Life man; thy staying at home
cannot take it away, nor thy going abroad add unto it.


Nebu. No, do they not rise by degrees? I suppose yes, as in this manner, from
Knight to Lord, from Lord to Earl, from Earl to Duke of the forked order, and
so forward: but my ambition is not to climb so high, therefore i will stay at
home and prevent that promotion.


Caric. fie, prevent thy honor?

Nebu. My Nebulona will heap enough such honors on my head, If I follow your
counsel, but I tell you again I am not ambitious so to be promoted, yet
notwithstanding, so well I love you, that rather then you shall go alone, i will
once more adventure my fortune.


Caric. Spoken like a right honest man, come let us away then withal expedition.

Delphos and Greece farewell, your priests hard fate
Denies him still t*enjoy a settled state. Exeunt.

Actus quinti, Scena quarta.
Enter Theagines, Cariclea, and Aura. Theag. And have thou escaped the fire my
dearest love?
Miraculous deliverance! let me hear
The manner on it related.

Caric. Thus it was,
After we were condemned to be burnt
By foul Arsaces slanderous report
For poisoning Cibile, a blazing fire
Was made, and we two cast into the same,
And whereas it was thought by every one
The fierceness of the flame would soon consume us,
It proved clean contrary, for we stood in
The middst of it untouched, for every side
It gave us way, and never singed our clothes,
Although Arsace with a threatening voice
Commanded the tormentors to lay on
More wood and reed, yet all prevailed not,
For no hurt would approach us, which the whore
Arsace seeing, presently declared
Before the people with an open voice
That we were witches; though good Calasiris
Did what he could to free us from her hands,
We by her guard were apprehended, and
Brought here again to thee my dear, for which
I Am glad that we may suffer both together.

Theag. I have not heard a stranger miracle,
This does proceed from favor of the gods,
And their unbounded justice.

Caric. It should seem so,
But still to be tossed on the angry seas
Of rigid fortune and never see an end
Of our sad miseries, should rather argue
Their hate and fierce displeasure, if th^^e be not
Some secret and more hidden mystery,
We mortals understand not, which restores us,
After our sufferings when all hope is fled,
Unto a happier state and peaceful being.

Theag. Oh sweet, let not the sense of misery,
Make you offend the gods thus, but be patient.

Caric. It Was rashly spoken, and I do repent it,
My dear Theagines; now I remember
A dream I had last night, but had forgotten
Till now to tell it you, this was the verse.
By virtue of Pantarbe let fear of fire removed be:
An easy thing to Persaeti^, though else right strange to see.

Theag. The gods are good to us, for I likewise
Am made a Poet by remembering now
An answer which last night some spirit gave me
Who seemed to say this,
To morrow shall thou with the maid escape Arsaces hand.
And soon be b^ought with her into the Ethiopian land.

Caric. That Oracle has but a sad constru^tion,
Which thus I dar^ interpret, Aethiopia
Is meant that land that is beneath the ground,
That with the maid is meant with Pros^rpine,
And the escaping of Arsaces band
Does signify the soul and bodies parting.

Theag. Still how you err! calamity has made you
Forget your self, and always doubt the worst,
Turning all things to a sinister sense,
The Oracle is plain, you are the maid
The gods do point at, whom I shall convey
Out of Arsaces power into your Land
Of Aethiopia, but how this shall be
Effected, unto us does not appear,
Yet it is credible the gods can do it;
We must leave that unto their secret workings.
Now what your verse should mean I cannot guess.
Which does contain sumany contra^ieties,
For Pantarbe, in its true signification,
Is taken for all fearful, yet it would not
Have you to fear the (...).

Caric. I do believe
This ring preserved us both from force of fire,
Wherein is set a precious stone called Pantarbe,
And round about some holy letters written;
My Fascia* if you do remember well,
Did mention such a one among my jewels*
And to be brief, I think that stone containce
Some heavenly virtue which withstandeth fire.

Theag. But then, how was it that Aura perished not?
She had no Pantarbe to defend han.

Caric. No
But I still held her always in my hand
Whereon my ring was.

Theag. This is probable;
But now what other Pantarbe have we left
To shun the next days danger, for Arsace
Will not end here, but practice still new mischief.

Aura. Despair not, but rely upon the promise
The gods made you last night.

Caric. Distressed Aura,
What will thou do?

Aur. Run on, in the same fortune
That you do, be it life or be it death.

With that enters an Officer from the Camp of Oroondates, to fetch Theagines
and Cariclea. Officer. Be not afraid, I come not to destroy you
As you suppose, but to deliver you
From hence; my Lord and General Oroondates
Has sent me hither from the camp, to bring you
Unto him, for the fame of your rare beauty
And virtue in resisting his wifes lewdness,
Has wrought so much upon his disposition
As he desires your presence, come with me,
Delay breeds danger* I have fifty horse
Shall safe convoy us to the camp, the way
Is clear.

Theag. Lead on then, we are bound to obey. Exeunt.

Actus quinti, Scena quinta.
Enter Arsace sola. Arsa. Ye stern Eumenides, and direful powers
Of the infernal kingdoms, muster all
Your troops together by a general summon,
For I do cite you to the court of hell,
My grievances beget this invocation;
Have I so long served you, and bent my thoughts
To your low center? have my actions been
As lewd as you would wish them, and as bla^ke
As you your selves, and could you suffer me
To fail in this achievement of my lust?
So much your instigation? is this justice?
Justice that is a word not known in hell;
Is this injustice? no, then are you rebels
To your own laws, I do insist on this:
What other doctrine preach your ministers
But foul injustice, rapes, impieties,
Adulteries, murders, slanders, ignominies,
False accusations and the like, all which
My life has practiced? yet ye punish me
With justice never till now heard in your courts:
You thought it just Cariclea should escape
The poisoned cup, and afterward the fire,
You thought it just Theagines and she
Should escape my hands, and Oroondates know
All my proceedings; cursed fates of mine!
Wretched Arsace, will thou live and feel
Thy punishment augmented by thy shame?
Shall the laws triumph over Arsaces will?
Or Oroondates say he was revenged
Upon the high and royal blood of Persia
For wrong I did him? no, since I have failed
In my desire, these fates I will withstand,
And die by none but by this Persian hand.
She falls upon a sword, and kills her self.
Actus quinti, Scena ultima.
Enter Hydaspes, Persina his Queen, Sysimethres with attendance. Hydasp.
Persina welcome to our camp, how durst
Our fairest Queen adventure forth to see
The angry face of Mars? this is no object
For Ladies eyes, dame Venus sport's more proper.

Pers. Where you are sir, there is my object fixed,
Whether at home or here, all is one to me,
Besides, where Mars is, there will Venus be.

Hydasp. This was a favor we expected not;
I must embrace thee; O Sysimethres,
What is there wanting in the curious model
Of this rare Architecture, built by nature,
That mortal or immortal eye can see
To add more beauty to it then it has?
Nothing, I know you will grant it, then what pity
Think you it is, so beautiful a frame
And building should contain within it is womb
No living creature, no inhabitant
That might support it is ruins, but stand rather
For prospect then for benefit?

Pers. this points
At my unfruitful womb. aside.

Sysim. I grant it sir,
But if the gods have ordered that this house
So stately built by them, this temple rather
Shall be reserved for their immortal uses,
And have forbid that any mortal seed
Shall dwell therein: it argues in you
Sin and impiety so to repine
At their decrees and secret operations. Enter a gentleman attendant.

Gent. Sir the fore-riders of your royal army
Have taken two prisoners the most beautifull'st
That ere were seen, a young man and a maid,
They wait without attending what is your pleasure.

Hydasp. Let them be brought forthwith into our presence,
They may be found a fitting sacrifice
And an oblation to be offered
Unto our gods for this our victory,
Being the first fruits of the wars.
Enter Theagines, Cariclea, Aura and Bogoas the officer of Oroondates lead in
prisoners. Ye gods The king raises himself from his throne, And sits down
again in a study.
Be merciful unto me!

Sysim. What does aile
Your royal majesty, that you remain
In such a studious meditation?

Hydasp. I had a dream last night Sysimethres,
That did present unto my fantasy
A beauteous virgin, such as is this maid
Telling me that she was my natural daughter:
But whence are you, and of what country borne?

Theag. Great King, I am her brother, she my sister.
Both borne in Greece.

Hydas. O noble Greece, that still
Producest what is good, and at this time
Have given us such fair offerings to present
Unto our gods; but O thou beauteous maid,
Why do thou hold thy peace, and answerest not
Unto my question?

Caric. At the sacred altars
Of the immortal gods (to whom we are
Reserved for sacrifices) you shall know
Me and my parents.

Pers. O sir, what a maid
Have you appointed to be sacrificed?
Never have mine eyes beheld a fairer creature;
With what a stout and an undaunted courage
Bears she her fortune? I am moved with pity
At her so flowring age, O had my daughter
I bare unto you lived, she would have been
Almost as old as she, I do beseech you
Spare her, and let her serve me at my table,
For I am prompted strangely by my Genius
Unto commiseration.

Hydas. So am I,
Beyond imagination, but you know
The Law requires the first fruits of the war
Should be the gods oblation, to the Sun
Therefore we'll offer him, she to the Moon,
The gods must be obeyed, the laws fulfilled.
They all offer to rise, Cariclea falls at the feet of Sysimethres.
Caric. Wise, grave, and learned sir, be pleased to stay
A little longer, for I have a cause
Of consequence to plead before the King
And Queen Persina, which concerns them too
As Well as me, this matter does require
A speedy judgment, and I hear that you
Give sentence on such noble personager;
Therefore judge you this plea of life and death,
And know it is not just to offer me
Unto the gods.

Sysim. Vouchsafe to hear, most gracious Sovereign,
This strange appeal, and what this maid requires.

Hydasp. What judgment may this be? or what have I
To do with her? by what means should I come
Into her danger?

Sysim. Ple^se you to attend,
She will declare it.

Hydas. But take heed that this
You do, be no true judgment, but plain wrong,
If I that am a King must stand to plead
My cause with any prisoner whatsoever.

Sysim. Justice and equity never looks into
The person, but the cause, and he speeds best
That brings best reasons.

Hydasp. But the Law permits
You only to determine controversies
Between the King and subjects, not with strangers.

Sysim. Wise and discreet men do not measure things
By the appearance, but by equity.

Hydasp. Well let her speak, since good Sysimethres
Will have it so, but it is manifest,
She will say nothing to the purpose, but
Some forged devise to shun the stroke of death.

Caric. O Sun, thou founder of my ancestro^
High pedigree, and all ye other gods,
Ye noble men that here are met together
Assist me in this place, and be a witness
That what I say is true, and by firm proofs
It shall appear: do you command, O King,
Strangers or your own subjects to be offered?

Hydasp. Strangers.

Caric. Then it is fit and necessary,
You seek out such, I am no stranger borne,
But of this country, and your subject too.

Hydasp. Thou lie.

Caric. You seem to wonder at small thing,
But there are greater undiscovered yet,
I am not only of this Country borne,
But of the royal blood.

Hydasp. This woman's mad,
Away I Will hear no more such lunacie.

Hydaspes turns from her in anger. Caric. My royal father, I beseech you know
Your only daughter and despise her not.

Hydasp. Sysimethres and grave Gymnosophists,
How long shall she abuse my patience?
This mayd's distracted, and the fear of death
Makes her speak any thing how false soever,
How bold and impudent; I know I had
Sometimes a daughter, but she died as soon
As she was borne, this is a false impostor,
Wherefore away with her, and let us delay
The sacrifice no longer.

Caric. none shall dare
To take me hence, unless the judges please
So to command, for you are not to judge
In your own cause although a King, but must
Be subject to the law as well as others
Which priviledgeth you perchance to kill
Strangers, but neither this law, nor the law
Of nature does allow you to destroy
Your natural children, for the gods to day
Shall by a strange discovery make you know
I am your daughter, though you now disclaim me.
All controversies in the law depend
One these two points especially, that is
Firm proof by writings, and sure confirmation
By witnesses, both which I can produce
To prove I am your child, my witness shall not
Be common neither, but the judge himself,
And here is a writing shall declare both mine
And your estate.

She gives the Fascia to the Queen, she knows it and is amazed. Hydasp. What
means this Persina, that thy blood
Thus comes and goes, and that thy countenance
Wears such an alteration? is there ought
Contained in this writing troubles thee?

Pers. O King, my Lord and husband, I have nothing
To say unto it; but take heed, and read it
Your self, the same shall teach you well and truly.

Hydaspes reads it to the end, then gives it to Sysimet: and the rest. Hydasp.
Persina do you own this character
As your own hand, and know the birth to be
Legitimate and true?

Pers. By Sun and Moon I swear it.

Hydasp. Although you told me that my daughter died.
I yet believe she was exposed forth
As here is mentioned but who was the man
That took her up and carried her to Egypt,
How shall I know that he was taken with her,
Of this is she, or whether the exposed
Be dead or no, besides whether some man
When he hap'd to find this might his good luck
Abuse, and make her play this famed pars,
Mocking the great desire we have of issue
By the subor^ing of some changelinge and
Coloring the truth with this devised Fascia.
All these doubts must be cleared ere I believe.

Sysim. I can resolve you in the first, for I
Was he that took her up, and carried her
With me to Egypt, when you sent me thither
Ambassador (you know we may not lie
Who are Gymnosophists) I know this Fascia,
Written with Aethiopias royal letters.
Therefore you need not doubt that it is forged.
Besides it is signed with Persinas hand;
But there are other tokens that I gave
To him that did receive you at my hands
Can you produce them?

Caric. Yes, lo here they are She shows Sisimet: and the queen her jewels.

Hydasp. What are they? do you know them?

Pers. Yes with wonder.

Caric. These jewels were my mothers, but this ringe
Was yours, I think you know the Pantarbe well.

Hydasp. I do and all the rest, but whether you
Come by them as my daughter, that I know not,
You might have got them by some other means,
For to omit all other needles questions,
Your colour's strange and the like never seen
In Aethiopia.

Sysim. She was also white
That I brought up, and with this virgins age
Does correspond the term of years when she
Was forth exposed being seventeen years,
So old seems this fair maid.

Hydasp. Sysimethres
In my opinion you have showed your self
An advocate in this cause, not a judge,
Beware least while you strive to clear this doubt,
I may suspect Persina has been false,
For how is it possible that such a thing
Sold be in nature, we two being black
To have an issue white? this is against
All humane sense, and reason natural.

Sysim. The Fascia tells you how this came to pass,
Persina in the act of generation
Contemplatively eying the fair picture
Of beautiful Andromeda, and firing
A strong imagination thereupon,
Conceived in her womb the very figure
Of Perseus Mistress when she was bound fast
Unto the rock, and he redeemed her thence,
For proof let that same picture be presented,
And then compare them, you shall find the substance
And shadow nothing different but in life.

Enter a Gentleman attendant. Gent. Sir there is a strange priest newly come
from Greece
Desires he may be heard touching this matter,
Who can inform you of the truth of things.

Hydasp. admit him straight. Enter Caricles with the gentleman.
Grave Sir can you declare
Ought of this matter, do you know this maid
And that young man?

Caric. I know them both great King;
That maid which shall be found to be your daughter
I nourished from a child; one of this country
Gave her to me in Egypt, and with her
Rich costly jewels, and a Fascia,
Wherein was written her high pedigree;
With her I went to Greece my native country,
And being priest unto Apollo there,
When I was busy in the rites and customs
Belonging to my office, This Thessalian,
Who vaunts himself borne of Achilles line,
Stole her from Delphos, and I understand
Passed many dangers with her; I forgive him
And crave you would be pleased to do so too;
For since the gods by diverse signs and tokens
Have unto us reveild their sacred wills,
And made it plain by strange discoveries,
Strive not to cross their workings.

Cariclea falls at Caricles feet. Caric. O my Father,
As dear unto me as those that begat me,
Take what revenge you please, lo here I stand
To Abide your sentence.

Caric. O how largely am I Embraces her and weeps for joy.
Rewarded for my travell^tis enough.
I have beheld thy face yet once again.

Sysim. What Caricles, do you not know your friend?
Have you forgot the Ethiopian Legate? salutes him.

Caric. No, no, I have not good Sysimethres,
But do congratulate our happy meeting.

Hydasp. We have heard and seen enough, I Am yet unmoved,
Bring in the picture of Andromeda.

Enter the picture of Andromeda, the King for joy and admiration could not
speak, the people give a great shout. Sysim. One point is wanting yes strip up
your sleeve
Fair maid, there was a black spot above your elbow.
It is no shame to show a naked arm*
Before your parents for to pro^e your birth.
She shows there a mole, the Queen runs and embraces her.
Hydasp. You strive to wish me white an Ethiopian
In hin^ering this sacrifice, you shall
Do one as well as the other, for although
I now believe she is my natural daughter
Sprung from my loins (as I have seen it proved
By many arg^ment,) yet I so much
Fear justice and the gods, and owe such love
Unto my country, as sle lay aside
All natural respects, and all regard
To the succession of my blood, and offer
My daughter to the gods for your behoof,
(As Agamemnon did his I phigene)
Regarding more the public benefit
Then my own private pro^it and respect.

All the people. Save the blood-royall, save her whom the gods
Will have preserved, appease the Sun and Moon
With a more lawful sacrifice.

Hydasp. Well since
You*^ have it (...) th^ugh lo^th I am content;
And now I turn to thee my daughter dear
With a me^als of my love; but what is he
That was taken with thee, whom you called your brother?
I ^row he shall not too be proved my son.

Caric. In that ^^r pardon me, I did abuse you,
He s not my brother, but necessity
Compelled me to dissemble, what he is
Himself can boldly tell you.

Hydasp. Whatsoe re
He b^, he is de^tin'd to be sacrificed,
So^e women too must bear him company.
Th^^ maid that waits on yo^ shall serve the turn.

Caric. If he be sacrificed, I Will be that woman,
Death must not part us two.

Hy^^sp. The gods forbid,
Why say you so?

Ca^i^. Because it is fore*decreed
I must both live and die with that young man.

Hydas. I praise your courtesy and gentle nature
Unto this Grecian stranger, who has been
Companion of your journey, but we cannot
Break ^o the cu^tome of our Country, as
To save his life.

Caric. Then I must perish with him,
For know, O king, (perchance I may not dare
To call you father) it is cruelty
To spare my body, and destroy my heart,
He is my heart, my love, my li^e, and all,
My husband by the destinies appointed,
And it is sin to oppose the gods decrees.

Hydas. What will you counsel me to do herein,
Sysimethres and thou most reverend Priest,
I will be guided by your wisdoms wholly
In this affair,

Sysim. Through the exercise of joy
The wisest men, oft-times we se^ are blinded.
For at the first, great King you might perceive
The gods liked not this sacrifice which was
Ordained, who have every way declared
Cariclea your daughter, and brought hither
Out of the midst of Greece this reverend man,
Who bro^ght her up, to forti^e your faith.
Moreover it is plain by many ^ignes
And secret revelations that the gods
Have fore-decreed this couple man and wife,
And to that end have ^reed them from so many
And imminent dangers, therefore let us suffer
These divine miracles to ^inke into
O^^ understandings, and from this time forward
Do sacrifices more acceptable
Unto the gods, who are not pleased with
Humane oblations, but the blood of beasts.

Hydas. Since things are thus appointed by the will
And pleasure of the gods, since this fair couple
Have been preserved by fate from many dangers
By Land and Sea, and as should seem reserved
For Hymen's instigation, i will no longer
Resist the will of heaven, heavens send you joy, puts their bane togethe^
And a most plenteous offspring to succeed you.
This is our firm decree, which we'll confirm
By sacrifice, and worshipping the gods.
O Sun and Moon, whose sacred deities
We most adore, since it is fallen out thus
By your decrees, that young Theagines
And fair Cariclea are made man and wife,
Accept their offerings, and vouchsafe to take them
Into the order of your holy Priesthood.
Theagines, I do resign unto thee
My office, be thou Priest unto the Sun,
Wear this white Miter. Takes his Miter and puts it (...) Theagines his head.

Pers. And Cariclea thou
Wear this of mine, which consecrateth thee
Priest of the Moon, adore her Deity.

Caric. Now is the god Apollos Oracle
Of Delphos verified, which said of them
That leaving Greece, and sailing surging streams
They should arrive at Countries scorched with Phoebus burni^ beam^
Where they as recompenses due that virtues rare do gain,
In time to come ere it be long white Miters should obtain.

Exeunt omnes. FINIS.
(...) thus puts him in mind of his almighty power, Ier 32. 27.
Behold I am the Lord, the God of all fleshs is there any thing too hard for
me? Mar. 10. 27.
That which with men is impossible, is not so with God: for with God all things
are possible. Though he have set bounds to his creatures, beyond which they
cannot go: yet can none set bounds to him. Psalm. 115. 3.
Our God is in the heavens: He does whatsoever he will. Read more hereof in* 1 Samuel 2. 1, etc
Annahs song: and in Psalm. 113.

Of sundry duties and comforts arising from a due consideration of the foresaid
power of God, See The Guide to go to God,. 213, 214. And of other instructions
arising from the help which God affords in man's extremity, see the next but
one to this.

. 40. Of Gods perfect preservation.
II. GODS succor is salvation. It freeth out of all danger. Thus much intended
Moses, when the Israelites despairing of all help, he thus said to them, Exo.
14. 13.
Fear y^ not, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord. Such was that
salvation, as they had no cause to fear those their enemies any more. The like
may be exemplified in other deliverances which God undertook to give:
especially in the cures which Christ did in the days of his flesh. When his
pleasure was to heal any, he made them Mat. 15. 28.
whole: and for evidence thereof, Luke 17. 14.
he commanded L^pens to show themselves to the Priests, whose office it was to
judge whether a leprosy were perfectly cured or no. Mat. 9. 6. Ioh. 5. 8.
Others that had been very weak and impotent he willed to carry their beds,
that thereby is might be seen that they were perfectly cured. Mar. 5. 41. Luke
7. 14. Ioh. 11 43.
The dead he caused to rise up. Mar. 5. 19, 20.
D^moniacks he charged to preach the Gospel. But the greatest and best evidence
that can be given hereof, is the eternal salvation which is given to Saints,
whereunto the Apostle having relation, says, Heb. 7. 25. (...). id est
perfect. Ita videlice^ ut nihil ad eam sdlut^m possit amplius desiderari. Beza
in annot. major. in hunc loc.
He is able to save to the uttermost.

God will have his works to be manifested to be divine: to be so perfect in
their kind, as nothing need be added thereto, non help sought of any other but
of him: that so by evident demonstrations men may be forced to say, This is the
finger of God.

1. Assuredly they that know and believe this truth, that the Lord ^weth them
whom he undertaketh to help cannot Encouragement to seek help of God. Mar. 5.
20.
him. In such cases as are to men incurable, we use to do much for some present
case: and yet fail oftentimes in that which we seek for, and expect at men's
hands, as that woman which had suffered manythings of many Physicians, and had
spent all that she had, and was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse. If we
could believe as she did, assuredly we should do as she did, and have as good
success as she Disswasion from trusting to any thing but God. 2 Ch^o 16. 12.
Va (...) qui tempore tribulationis atque a^gusti^ non confi^unt in Domino, sed
in Aegy^tiorum, id est secularium ^ominum auxilio. Hier. Comment l. 10. in Isa
31.
had.

2. Let us beware of Asa his fault, who in his disease sought not to the Lord,
but to the Physicians. How much better had it been to have sought not to the
Physicians, but to the Lord. Which I would not have so taken as if Physicians
were not at all in any case to be sought unto; but to show that it is much
better to neglect all means, then to neglect the Lord who gives a blessing to
all the means that are at any time of any use. Warrantable means may lawfully,
must conscionably be used: but used as the hand of Gods providence, whereby he
does whatsoever good thing is done by them. Woe is denounced against them that
trust to means without the Lord, Isa. 30. 1, etc. and 31. 1, etc. Whether
therefore means be used, or not used, let not the Lord be neglected. He saves.

. 41. Of Gods taking occasion to help at a pinch.
III. 38.
MA^^ extrimity is Gods opportunity. Then, even then especially is God ready to
help when men are at the lowest. To pass over those instances which are
mentioned before 39. there are two proverbes asod in scripture which give good
proof to this point. The ^ Gen 22. 14. (...) Hoc apud Hebr^os exivit in
proverbi^m, u^si quando in Angustia constituti sunt, and Domini optant auxilio
sublevari, dicant in monte Dominus vide^it Hier. Quaest* in Genesis
one is this, ^ In the monus will the Lord ^e scene. Knowledge of the just
occasion of this proverb will give light to the true interpretation thereof.
The occasion therefore was this. God gave an express charge to Abraham to take
his only, his beloved son, even him of whom it was said, In Isaac shall thy
s^en be called, and to offer him for a burnt offering on a mountain which the
Lord should show him. Abraham in obedience to the Lords charge went on whither
the Lord appointed him, with a full resolution to do what he was commanded to
do. Three days was he in journying to the place: and at length came to the top
of a mount, where he built an altar, laid the wood in order, bound Isaac, laid
him thereon, took a knife, and stretched out his hand Quantum ad vo l^n^atem
attinet, cruentaverat dextram Patriarcha, etc. Chrysostom. in Gen 22. Hom 47.
to slay his son. Thus in his intent he had slain and sacrificed his son.
In all this time did not God show any mind or means to save Isaac: but even
then, when there was scarce a step betwixt him and death, the Lord showed
himself, and declared his pleasure for preserving Isaac. Now because it was on
a mount where Isaac was thus near unto death, and that on the mount, and not
before, God showed himself for the preservation of Isaac, thence arose this
proverb, In the mount will the Lord be seen. And to be an evidence to all
future ages of Gods wisdom in affording his help at the last cast, the Holy
Ghost prefixeth this clause, as it is said to this day.

2 King. 1^. 3.
The other proverb is this, The children are come to the birth* and there is
no strength to bring forth. By this proverb Jerusalem being so besieged by the
King of Assyria, as there was (in regard of humane helps, little hope of
deliverance, is compared to a woman great with child, in pain of travel: the
Inhabitants of the city are resembled to the children in the mothers womb: the
extremity of distress wherein they were, to the difficulty and danger of
travel. Such then was their case, as the case of a woman, which, having a
weak child not able to help it self, is spent with pain and travel, and
has no midwife, nor any other means of help. Were they not now brought even
to uttermost extremity. In this extremity, when they were so low brought, the
Lord helped them. 2 King 19. 35.


The help that in such extremities is afforded, manifestly appears to be
from God. When the Egyptians observed the succor which was afforded to the
Israelites in the midst of the Red Sea, they said, The Lord fights for them.
Thus Exo 14 25.
is God the more honored by reserving himself to such extremities.

In extremities succor is much more welcome, much better accepted, more highly
prized, and man's heart more affected and enflamed therewith. When the Israelites
were safely Psalm. 106. 9, 12.
led through the depths, then they sang the Lords praises.

Is there not now great and just reason that God should take this opportunity
to help?

1. Wait therefore to the very uttermost of an extremity. Admonition to wait.
meet it is that we should tarry the Lords leisure, and wait for his season.
This the Prophet notes to be a property of true faith, He that believes
makes not haste* He seeks Isa. 28 16.
not to prevent the time appointed of the Lord. If the Lord tarry, the believer
will wait. He well knows that there is Hab. 2. 3.
an appointed time, which cannot be prevented, which shall not be overslipt. For
the Lord will take his opportunity. Direction to pray more earnestly, and
believe more steadfastly in extremity.

Heb. 1^. 5.




2. When thou supposest that the uttermost of an extremity is come, then put
fire to the powder of thy prayer; then stir up thy soul to all feruency:
then be instant and importunate: then give the Lord no rest; then especially
plead these and such like promises, I will never leave thee nor Heb. 10 37. 1
Cor. 10. 13.
forsake thee. He that shall come will come, and will not tarry. God is
faithful who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able: but
will with the temptation also make a way to Isa. 43. 2.
escape. When thou passest through the water I will be with thee, and through the
rivers, they shall not over flow thee: when thou walk through the fire thou
shall not be burnt: neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. Be so far from
fainting by reason of the extremity of distress; as rather with stronger
confidence expect deliverance. This being Gods opportunity, put him in mind of
thine extremity, and thus plead it, Arise, O Lord, have mercy: for the time to
have mercy, yea Confidat qui agit paenitentiam, quum venit tempus salvandi.

Hier. Comment, in Psalm. 101.


the set time is come (Psalm. 102. 13.) O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, O Lord
hearken and do: deserve not for thine own sake, (Dan. 9. 19.) Only let the
truth of confidence be manifested by repentance. He that repents may be
confident when the time to save is come.

. 42. Of applying to our selves Gods dealing with others.
IIII.. 58.
DVe observation of Gods mercy to others makes men in like cases to
acknowledge Gods mercy to them. This was it that moved the Prophet to say, that
when he was brought low, the Lord saved him, because he had duly observed how
the Lord preserved the simple. Well note the forms of praise that are recorded
in Scripture, and you shall find it usual with the Saints to relate Gods
accustomed dealing with others to be such as it was with them. To omit the many
Psalms of David that are pertinent to this purpose, 1 Samuel 2. 1, etc. Luke 1.
46, etc
the two hymns of Annah, and the Virgin Mary give good proof hereof.

Instruction in the benefit of observing Gods dealing with others, and applying
it to our selves.
Men ordinarily behold Gods dealing with others, with a single eye, whereby
they are so convinced of the verity and equity of that which they see, as they
cannot but acknowledge the like, (when the like falls out) in their own case.

Behold here what good we may gain to our selves by taking notice of the
divine properties as they are exercised on others. Few or none can so well
discern the evidences of Gods providence and mercy, or of his justice,
jealousy, and displeasure in themselves as in others. Objects brought too
near to the eye, cannot be distinctly and clearly discerned. Self-love
dimmes men's sight in their own case. When others partake of any good thing, we
can soon say, O how good is God unto them. When judgments are executed on
others, we are ready to ascribe it to the justice of the Lord. Well: seeing we
are so forward to discern Gods dealing in other men's cases, let us make good
use of this our disposition, and do so still, that hereby we may be brought to
the mind of this holy man: and finding the Lord to deal with others, as he
does with us, acknowledge as much: and that as in works of judgment, to be
humbled the more; so in works of mercy, to be provoked to more hearty
thankfulness: as we shall be, when in truth, and on just ground we can say, The
Lord that shows mercy to them that are in misery, was very merciful to me
when I was in misery.

. 43. Of the exposition and resolution of the seventh Verse.
PSALM. CXVI. VII.
Return unto thy rest, O my Soul, for the LORD has dealt bountifully with
thee.
HEre begins the Sea. 2.
second part of this Psalm, which sets out the Prophets Protestation for his
after purpose. This has respect

1. To his Inward disposition.

2. To his Outward conversation.

For his inward disposition he professes a quiet settling of his soul.

(...)
Rest, whereby his inward disposition is here expressed, is opposed to Exo. 23,
12. Genesis 8. 9.
travel and labor, or to Ruth 1. 9. Deuteronomy. 28. 65.
trouble and sorrow, and that both Lam. 5. 5.
outward and Isa. 28. 12.
inward.

Here it is taken in the latter respect, as opposed to inward trouble and
anguish, as is evident by the relation it has to his soul. It imports an
assurance of Gods favor to him, and tranquillity of mind, and peace of
conscience thence arising.

This rest he calls his souls, because it was a rest wherein his soul had
solaced her self before: which the Lord having given, he sweetly and quietly
enjoyed as his own.

But it seems that his bitter affliction had bereaved him of it: and
therefore as to a right lost, and recovered again, he says (...)
Return. For this is the very word which the Angel uses to Hagar, when she
fled from her mistress, Genesis 16 9.
Return. As Hagar through her mistresses rough dealing with her fled from her:
so the soul of this Prophet by reason of affliction fell from her former quiet
confidence in God. As the Angel therefore bids Hagar, return to her
mistress, so the understanding of this Prophet bids his soul return to
her rest.

(...)
Very elegant and emphaticall is this manner of the Prophets directing his
speech to his Soul, as to another person, thus, O my soul. Hereby his
understanding well enlightened, and resolved of Gods favor to him, stirs up
his will, conscience, heart and affections to be quieted, and no longer
perplexed and troubled with doubts and fears about Gods wrath, but to rest
assured of his love and favor.

To show what good ground there was for his soul to repose it self quietly in
the Lord, headdeth, For the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. The first
particle being a causall particle, FOR, shows that this is added as a reason
of that which went before. The reason is taken from the manifestation of Gods
favor to him: and it may thus be framed.

He with whom the Lord deals bountifully may well rest on the Lord.

But the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee O my soul.

Therefore thou O my soul may well rest on the Lord.

(...) Gods repaying.
One Hebrew word is expressed by this circumlocution, has dealt bountifully.
The word properly signifies to repay: it has (in that signification) relation
to some thing done before: and that good or evil: and in both these senses it
is attributed to God and men. God is said to Psalm. 18. 20.
repay, or reward the righteous according to their righteousness: and to the
wicked to Ier. 51. 6.
repay or render a recompense. In these respects he is called -- 56. (...)
a God of recompenses. Men likewise are said to repay or render for Psalm. 116.
12.
good, and -- 137. 8.
for evil. But the word is also simply used without relation to any thing
before, especially being attributed to God, and that in the better sense, for
conferring or bestowing some good. Thus does the Psalmist pray to God to be
Psalm* 119. 17.
recompensed, that is, graciously dealt with by him: and -- 141. 7.
acknowledges that he has so dealt with him. In this simple signification do
Targum. (...) retribuit bonum.
Hebrew Expositors, L X X. (...). bene^ecit.
Greek Translators, and Sic Hier. Aug. alijque.
other Interpreters and Expositors take the word in this place. Thus some of our
English Translators turn the word here, has been beneficial: others, has
dealt graciously. And because the kindness which God shows, is not scanty,
or niggardly, but such as beseems his Majesty to give, others thus translate
it, has dealt bountifully.

To infer any matter of merit on man's part, because a word that sometimes
signifies to repay, is attributed to God in relation to man, is too sandy a
foundation for such a lofty Babel.

To take occasion from hence to set out the bounty of the Lord, would be too
impertinent. The word does indefinitely set down the grace, favor, mercy, or
goodness of the Lord, without any particular or distinct respect to
extraordinary liberality and bounty.

Sum.
The principal point here to be noted is the Alteration of the Prophets
disposition. Where before he was restless, now he returns to rest.

(...) man's polluted nature. He indeed took to himself our true nature, even
the nature of our infirmities, and the infirmities of our nature, but free from
sin: no dreggs of corruption were in his nature. Though he therefore seemed
to be shaken all to pieces, yet no rebellious, no disordered passion was
thereby stirred up in him. These phrases ( Ioh. 12. 27.
Now is my soul troubled. Mat. ^6. 38.
My soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto death. -- 19.
If it be possible let this cup pass from me. -- 27. 46.
My God my God why have thou forsaken me?) manifested a very dolorous agony in
his soul, but no seditious mutiny. Such passion in our soul would stir up
much sedition: yea after we are truly regenerate. For we are but in part
regenerate.

1. Reprehension of such as disquiet the disquieted.
1. This infirmity of our nature is not wisely observed of them, who from the
perplexities and agonies of Saints, especially if thereby they be forced to
manifest any disquietnesse of soul, take occasion to insult over them, and to
trample the more upon them. David was much troubled with such, and often
complains of them. In that respect he says of them, Psalm 60 26.
They talk to the grief of them whom thou have wounded. Thus Jobs friends,
though they came a long journey to comfort him, yet proved Job 16. ^.
miserable comforters. Too many such mis^rable comforters there are, who when a
man has need of some comfortable cordialls, give him (as Ma 27. 34, 48 Psalm.
^9. 21. Vrgere iacent^m est inhumanum. C^^ pro C ^ab. Post.
Christ's and David's enemies did) gall for meat, and vinegar to drink. The
Heathen accounted this a most inhumane part. How ill then does it beseem them
who profess themselves to be Christians?

2. Admonition to do what may be to settle the unsettled.
2. Let such as through Gods mercy have peace and comfort in their souls and
consciences, so bear with those that are unsettled and perplexed, as they may
the better by speaking Isa. 50. 4.
a word in season, quiet and settle their souls. It is an express charge
given to such as are Romans 15. 1.
strong, to bear with the infirmities of the weak: and to such as are Gal. 6.
1.
spiritual, to restore a brother overtaken, with the spirit of meekness: and
that for this reason, lest they also be tempted. What any one is subject unto,
every one is subject unto. Thus shall we show our selves to be as a true
brother, Pro. 17. 17.
even borne for adversity.

3. Instruction for being well settled.
3. From this whereunto Saints are subject, to be sometimes unsettled, all have
need to give diligence to make their calling and election sure: and to be well
instructed how to have Hebr. 13. 9. -- quantum vertice ad our as Aetherias,
tantum radice in Tartara tendit, etc Virg. Georg. l. 2.
the heart established with grace, that therewith the soul may be fast fixed,
as the oak is said to be, whose roots spread as far, and grow as deep into
the earth, as the boughs thereof grow wide and high into the air; whence it
comes to pass that no storm can over-turne an oak: it will sooner be rent
and split clean through then overthrown. So they who are Col. 2. 7.
well rooted and built up in Christ, and established in the faith: Ephesians. 3. 17.
and rooted and grounded in love, will sooner have their bodies and souls rent
asunder, then be over-turned in their faith on Christ. Instance the true
Martyrs of the Church.

To enforce this point the further, note the next note.

. 45. Of the rest of Saints.
II. SAints have a rest. Yea even in this world they have a rest. How else could
the Prophet here say to his soul, Enter into thy rest? Why else should he Psalm
42. 11. -- 43. 5.
blame his soul for being restless. That Ioh. 16. 33. Romans 5. 1. -- 14 17.
peace which as proper to the Saints is expressly mentioned in Scripture,
proves as much.

To embolden, encourage, and hearten them in the sea of this world (that by the
storms of affliction they should not be overwhelmed and drowned before they
come to Heb 4. 9.
the rest which remains for them, and 2 These. 1. 7.
which the Lord Jesus shall give them when he shall be revealed from heaven) here
they have a rest; wherein that we be not deceived, mark the third point.

. 46. Of the spiritual rest of Saints.
III.. 43.
THe rest proper to Saints is spiritual. It is such a rest as may stand with
tribulation in this Bona and tranquilla conscientia est lectus anima* In hoc
requiem capit anima. Bern. S^rm parv. 1.
world. It is a peace which they have in Christ, (Ioh. 16. 33.) a peace with
God, (Romans 5. 1.) a peace of God that passes all understanding, that keeps
men's hearts andminds (Phil. 4. 7.) a peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, opposed
to meat and drink, (Romans 14. 17.) A peace of conscience: For, a good and
quiet conscience is the bed of the soul, in which it sweetly and quietly
rests.

This is the best, truest, and surest rest: a rest that sustaineth a man's
infirmity: See The whole Armor of God* Treat. 2. part. 5. 724.
a rest that not only quieteth the soul when the body is disquieted, but also
moderateth and mitigateth the disquietnesse of the body. This makes us Romans 5.
3.
glory in tribulations. What made Act. 12 6.
Peter to sleep quietly between soldiers, bound with chains? What made Act.
16. 23, 24, 25.
Paul and S^las, having been sorely scourged, cast into prison, and their feet
made fast in the stocks, at midnight to sing? Surely this spiritual rest
wherein their souls were reposed: this peace of God. This being the best rest,
God provideth it for his best-beloved.

Instruction in the true estate of Saints.
1. Take evidence hereby of the true estate of Saints: and be instructed in the
manner of Gods dealing with them. True it is that he puts them to many
trialls: Heb. 12. 6, 8.
The Lord scourges every son that he receives. All are partakers of
chastisement. 2 Timothy 3. 12.
All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution. Yet as true
it is, that the Lord affords Discamus captivos Dei serves non deseri a Domino
sao. Aug. Epist 122 ad Victorian.
sufficient supportance, yea, and comfort also in all their troubles, that we
may learn that Gods captived servants are not forsaken of him. 1 Cor. 10. 13.
God is faithful who will not suffer his to be tempted above that they are
able to hear. As Mar 2. 27.
Christ said of the Sabbath, I may say of the afflictions of Saints.
Afflictions are for the Saints, and not the Saints for afflictions. Therefore
God corrects us Heb 12. 10.
for our profit: and from thence issues -- 11.
the peaceable fruit of righteousness unto them that are exercised thereby.
The assistance, comfort, peace, and joy which God gives even in troubles and
afflictions, ministers just cause for us all to say, 2 Cor. 4. 8, 9.
We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed: we are perplexed, but not
in despair: persecuted, but not forsaken: cast down, but not destroyed. This
is the benefit of spiritual rest, that temporal troubles do not disturb the
same. If any be disquieted, and unsettled (as we heard before some might be) it
is their own weakness. They have a rest to return unto ordained, revealed
by God: whereunto when they recall their spirit, they will return as here the
Prophet does. If thus there be peace and rest to Saints in times of trialls and
troubles, inward peace, spiritual rest in outward trialls, and temporal
troubles, who can doubt of their rest in halcyon, in quiet and peaceable times,
when there is nothing to disturb the same. The world is altogether ignorant of
this peace. If they had a true and due understanding thereof, their mouths
would not be so opened as they are against Saints by reason of their troubles.

Information in the difference betwixt Saints and worldlings.
2. Take notice hereby of the difference betwixt the condition Mat. 8. 20.
as Christ, to be in a worse case then foxes, that have*holes, and birds of the
air that have nests, because they have not where to rest their head: yet have
they a rest for their soul: a rest that refreshes and solaceth both soul and
body. But it is otherwise with the wicked. The wicked are like the troubled
sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. There is no
peace, says my God, to the wicked, Isay. 57. 20, 21. Though they have health
of body, and all outward prosperity, though by reason thereof they say (as the
rich fool did Luke 12. 19.) to their soul, Take thine ease, eat, drinks, and
(...) merry: Yet cannot this be but only to the teeth Videntur habere
tranquillitate^, videntur quietefrui: sed non est quies ub* a^imus inquietus
est: non e^^ tranquillitas mentis ubi animus exagitatur obnoxi^ flimul^
conscienti^. Amb. Comment in Psalm. 112. Sermon 17. verse* 5.
outward. They seem to have rest, and to enjoy quiet. But that is no rest
where the soul is restless. That is no peace of mind, where the mind is
troubled with stings of a guilty conscience. Their conscience is like to the
forementioned troubled sea. If they feel it not, it is because they are
intoxicated, and made senseless, as the drunkard that lies down in the midst
of the sea, or upon the top of a mast, and feels nothing, Prev. 23. 34, 35.
Their conscience is seared with an hot iron, (1 Timothy 4. 2.) When it is roused
it will be as a roaring lion, and aranging bear: or a bear robbed of her
whelps. Pro. 28. 15. and 17. 12.

3. Envy not (O ye Saints) the rest whereof the men of this world so much
boast: return to your own rest: rest Exhortation to rest content in
spiritual rest.
thereon, solace your selves therein. The mariner in hope of coming to a calm
haven, patiently endures all manner of storms while he is on sea. Should not
Saints much more quietly bear all manner of troubles, not only in expectation
Hebr. 4. 9.
of that (...) which remains to the people of God, but also in regard of that
inward spiritual rest which they have in the midst of their greatest
afflictions.

. 47. Of Gods favor the rest of Saints.
IIII. 43.
SEnse of Gods favor is the ground of Saints rest. After* the Prophet had
expostulated with his soul about her unquietness, he gave this advice, Psalm.
42. 11. -- 43. 5.
hope in God, as the only means of settling his soul. Faith is it that
persuades the soul of Gods favor: hence is it that Romans 5. 1.
being justified by faith we have peace with God. Yea because this peace
relieth on Gods favor, it is called Phil. 4. 7.
the peace of God. When David was in one of the most desperate distresses that
ever befell him, it is said, that 1 Samuel 30. 6.
he encouraged himself in the Lord his God. The assurance that he had of Gods
favor, and confidence that the Lord was his God, supported him, and moved him
to rest thereon. Many are the Metaphors which to this end are applied to God,
as Psalm. 18. 2.
Rock, fortress, deliverer, strength, buckler, horn of salvation, high
tower, -- 46. 1.
refuge, -- 16. 5.
portion of inheritance, maintainer of lot, -- 119 114.
hiding place, -- 71. 3.
strong habitation whereunto we may continually resort.

1. Nothing can satisfy the souls of Saints but Gods favor. They find all
other things to be Ecl. 1. and 2.
vanity and vexation of spirit. Whereas therefore others say, Psalm. 4. 6.
Who will show us any good, Saints say LOrd lift thou up the light of thy
countenance upon us.

2. Gods favor is that proper place whither a soul well enlightened and
rectified (as the souls of the Saints are) aspireth. Now nothing rests till
it comes to its proper place. Instance light things that fly upward, and heavy
things that fall downward.

Psalm. 42. 1, 2.
3. The uttermost end, whereunto the Saints refer all their endeavors is to
be accepted of God. All things which advisedly they do, are but as means for
attaining to that end. Now till men attain to that maine end at which they
aim, they cannot think of a perpetual rest. A traveller has no settled rest
till he come to his journeyes end: nor a mariner, nor a soldier, nor any other
that proposes a weighty end to himself.

Instruction in the restless rests of m^n.
1. Let this only true rest be well observed: let us be well instructed
therein: and that the rather because all of all sorts desire rest: but most,
yea and all that are not thoroughly instructed in this true rest, are deceived
thereabout. He that is destitute of the needful things of this world,
supposes that if he had bread to eat and raiment to put on, he should say to
his soul be at rest. He that is in pain conceives that if he had ease he
should rest, and desire no more. So he that is sick, if he had recovery* he
that is in prison, if he had liberty: he that is in any distress, if he had
release. Yet when their desire is accomplished they are as restless as before.
After one thing is obtained, another is desired. Greater contentment is
supposed to be in the things of this world by them that want them, then can be
found to be by them that enjoy them. Hence is it that wealth to the covetous,
honor to the ambitious, pleasure to the voluptuous man, and all things here
below to such as desire them, are as water to him that has Quo plussunt potae,
plu^ s^iun tur aqu^. Ovid Fast. lib. 1. Ecl. 1. 8.
a dropsy, the more is drunk the more is desired. The eye is not satisfied
with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing. No humane knowledge satisfies
the Philosopher: no inventions, no indulgences the superstitious person. All
things out of God are as ice, snow, dew, and other like meteors: ^^pic^
compara^ mari quod nu^quam potest qui ^s^ere^sed e^iam in summa tran
quillitat^, fractis ad li^^ora volvitur s^^ctibus: sinisque cius lutum est, and
conculca tio. Hier Comment l. 16. in Esai. 57. Admonition not to rest till we
attain the true rest.

Genesis 8. 9.


they waste in using; they soon melt or dry away. In consideration hereof
says the Prophet, (Isa. 55. 2.) Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is
not bread? and your labor for that which satisfies not? Will thou set thine
eyes upon that which is not? Pro. 23. 5. As all natural men are unsatisfied in
all their desires and endeavors, so among others, they who most set their
thoughts and hearts on mischief. Fitly does the Prophet (Isa. 57. 20.)
resemble such to the troubled sea when it cannot rest. Yea in the greatest
calm it beats against the shore, and raises waves, which cast up mire and
dirt.

2. Seeing out of God there is no rest, let the Lord and his favor be to thee
as the Arc was to the Dove. While she was out of the Arc she found no rest
for the sole of her foot. Give no sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine
eyelids till thou have found out this rest for thy soul, assurance of Gods
favor. To be restless till we find this rest, Luke 1. 53. Rev. 21. 6.
will be a means to find it. The Lord fills the hungry with good things. He
gives to him that is athirst of the fountain of life freely.

Direction for assurance of Gods favor.

See The Whole Armor of God, Treat. 2. Part. 6 71. 72.


3. For gaining such assurance of Gods favor as may make thee rest securely
therein, observe these rules.

1. Acquaint thy self with Gods promises, which are the only true sure ground
of faith and confidence. For Gods promises are declarations of Gods favor
toward man: what God promises, man may safely rest upon. It Psalm. 119 49.
was Gods promise whereof David thus says, Upon it thou have caused me to hope.

2. Meditate seriously and frequently on Gods properties, as on his grace,
mercy, truth, power, etc. This meditation See The Whole Armor of God Treat. 2.
Part 6. 25, etc.
added to faith in Gods promises, will be as oil put into a lamp, which will
continue the life and light of it. Verse 5.. 26
The forementioned description of God by his divine properties shows that the
faith of this Prophet in Gods favor was nourished thereby.

3. Observe Gods former dealing with thee: and call to mind such evidences of
his favor as he has showed to thee in former times. This will give thee
evidence of his present good will toward thee: for whom he once loves Ioh.
13. 1. Ier. 31. 3. Isa. 49 14, etc
he ever loves; he loves his with an everlasting love. When Zion said, The
Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me, this answer was replied,
Can a woman forget her sucking child, etc? Yea they may forget, yet will not I
forget thee, etc. says the Lord.

4. When thy affections are much prone to heaviness, and thy heart much
misgiveth thee (as we speak) by reason of doubts and fears, let thy judgment
grounded on Gods Word and Promises support thee. A right understanding of Gods
promises are of force to keep an heavy spirit from sinking. A man's judgment
well informed, will convince his affections of folly when they make doubt of
Gods favor, and so bring them to yield to that which it conceives to be truth.

Exhortation to rest in Gods favor.

Psalm. 119. 114. (...)


Having some evidences of Gods favor toward thee, repose thy self therein.
Say to God as the Psalmist does, Thou art my hiding place. The beasts of the
wilderness that have their dens, and hiding places, use on all occasions to
have recourse thereunto. In their dens they sleep securely: to their dens
they carry their prey, and there eat Job 37. 8. -- ^8. 40. Psalm. 104. 22
it: when they are wounded, or any way hurt, they make to their dens* there
they lick themselves whole, if at least they can: but if their hurt be mortal
so as they must needs die, they will die in their dens. Thus ought we to make
the Lord our den, our hiding place, and in all conditions, on all occasions to
repose our selves in him and his favor. If we have cause of joy, to rejoice in
the Lord; if of sorrow, to Inh^rete illi qui secit v^s. State c^^ eo and
stabitis Requiescite in eo, and quieti eri^^s. Aug. Confess l 4 c. 12.
mourn and ^hed our tears in his bosom: while we live, to live in him, when
we die, to die in him: even within the arms of his favor. Thus shall thou be
sure to be safe in all estates; for safe is he whom the Lord does keep. O
cleave to him therefore who has made you. Stand with him, and ye shall stand
safe. Rest in him, and ye shall be in quiet rest.

. 48. Of comforting and quickening ones self.
V.. 43.
MEn must stir up themselves to that which they see to be good for them. As
the Prophet does here stir up his soul to return unto her rest, so in other
places to Psalm. 42. 5.
hope in God, -- 62. 5.
to wait upon God, -- 103. 2.
to remember all his benefits: yea and -- 146. 1.
to praise the Lord. To the proof of this point tend all such exhortations as
in Scripture are made in the first person, as such as these, Heb. 4. 11.
Let us labor to enter in that rest. -- 16.
Let us go boldly to the throne of grace. -- 6. 1.
Let us go on to perfection. -- 10. 22.
Let us draw near with a true heart, etc. By these, men of God stirred up
themselves as well as others.

For even they, who are in place and have any calling, to stir up others,
Act. 14, 15.
are men of like passions with others, and are not only subject, but prone also
to wax dull, cold, backward to holy duties, even to such as tend to their
spiritual comfort. 44.
We have showed that the best may be much disquieted and restless. And
therefore have need to 2 Timothy 1 6.
stir up the gift of God that is in them.

Quest. How can this be?

Ans. 1. By putting difference betwixt the understanding and affections. The
understanding is in man as a mistress, the affections are as hand-maidens. The
mistress may see that to be very meet to be done which the hand-maidens are
loath to do, and thereupon quicken them.

2. By distinguishing betwixt the spirit and flesh. Mat. 26. 41.
The spirit is often willing when the flesh is weak. Yea when Rom 7. 22, 23.
the inward man delights in the law of God, the outward man warreth against
it. Now all these being in man, when the understanding inciteth the affections,
and the spirit drives away the heaviness of the flesh, man is said to stir
up himself.

Direction for counselling ones self.
Learn here how beneficial a man may be to himself: how he may instruct,
direct, encourage, and comfort himself: namely by well using that light of
understanding which God gives him, and by applying that wherein he is well
informed to himself. On this ground when we are tempted to a sin, when we
find passion, pride, lust, or any other corruption beginning to arise in us,
let us make our case to be another case, and by our understanding reason with
our souls as if they were other persons: and what we would in such cases say
to others, let us say to our own souls, as the Psalmist, Why art thou
disquieted O my soul? Psalm. 42 5. Spera in Domine, respondet conturbanti se
animae suae, and quasi rationem reddenti pertur bationis su^ propter mala
quibus abun^at hic mundus.

Aug. Enar. in Psalm 41.


And here, return unto thy rest, O my soul. Many that much doubt, and even
despair themselves, can produce sound grounds to move others to be confident
in God, which if they would press upon their own souls, they might be much
quickened thereby. They can tell others, that when God seems to hide himself,
it is but a cloud that keeps away the brightness of Gods favor, which shall
be driven away, and therefore they ought to hope and wait. They can tell
others, that temptations to sin must be resisted, and that by resisting of
them, they will be vanquished. They can set a catalogue of promises before
others in their conflicts, and be plentiful and powerful in persuading
others to bounden duties, and dissuading them from disgraceful vices. If thus
they would deal with themselves, what good might they do to themselves? Thus
should they never want (no not when they are most retired, most private, even
by themselves alone) an instructor, a directer, a counselor, a comforter. And
no counselor, no comforter can be more powerful with a man's soul, then
himself.

. 49. Of the exposition and resolution of the eight Verse.
PSALM. CXVI. VIII.
For thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears and my feet
from falling.
THe forementioned kindness of God is here particularly exemplified by the
deliverance which God gave him from his distress.

How his soul may be said to be delivered has been before showed on verse.
4.. 24.

Metonymia effecti.
Death is here put for such a desperate distress as threatened death. In the
case wherein he was (to use the Apostles 2 Cor. 1. 8, 9.
phrase) he despaired even of life: he had the sentence of death in himself:
and thus God who raises the dead delivered him from a great death. The words
therefore are not literally to be taken of a miraculous raising from death: but
his distress is In abstracto.
thus by this word, death, set out to aggravate his danger, and to amplify Gods
deliverance. Hereof see more on Verse. 3.. 15.

The tears of his eyes are here mentioned to show how he was affected with
that affliction. Tears are outward effects and signs of inward anguish. When
Jerusalem was carried captive into a strange land, Lam. 1. 2.
She wept sore in the night: her tears were on her cheeks. Yea Christ (who
with the nature of our infirmities, Heb. 4. 15.
assumed the infirmities of our nature, yet without sin) had in his bitter
agony -- 5. 7.
tears forced from his eyes.

Gods delivering of this Prophets eyes from tears, implies a removal of that
distress whereof these tears were^ sign: with which his soul was so
troubled, as his eyes gushed out with tears: so as the Metonymia Effecti vel
Adiuncti.
effect or sign, is here put for the cause.

Falling of his feet, does yet further aggravate the distress. The word
translated (...)
falling, signifies such a violent forcing of one as he cannot stand: as where
it is said Psalm. 118 ^13. (...)
in forcing thou have forced me to fall. Now feet are the supporters of a body:
when they fall, down falls all the body. Hereby is declared, that the violence
of his affliction was such, as like a boisterous storm it was enough in his
best strength to overthrow him: and it also so wasted his strength and weakened
him, as he could not stand, but was ready again and again to fall: it foiled
him exceedingly. By removing that affliction God delivered his feet from
falling. But this is spoken in an Allegory. For, by his feet are meant his
spirit, by falling, the fainting thereof. So as his very soul was preserved
from being overwhelmed.

Eripult anima^ mcam dc morte, oculos mcos a lachrymis, p^des meos a lapsis. De
morte, dando bonam conscientiam; a lachrymis, dando tranquillam and bonam: a
lapsu, dando securam. Bern. Sermon parv. 1.
Some distinguish the three particulars thus, He has delivered my soul from
death, by giving me a good conscience: mine eyes from tears, by giving a quiet
and a good conscience: my feet from sliding, by giving a secure conscience.

This is the Exemplification of the motive mentioned in the latter clause of
the former verse.

Herein note,

1. The Manner of expressing it.

2. The Matter whereof it consists.

The Manner is by (...)
a direct turning of his speech to God, thus, Thou have, etc.

The Matter consists in a particular Enumeration of the deliverances which
God gave him. So as here is expressed

1. The Author of his deliverances. Thou.

2. The Kinds thereof. And these are three.

1. His soul from death.

2. His eyes from tears.

3. His feet from falling.

For the Manner. In the former verse he spoke of the Lord in the third person,
thus, The Lord has dealt bountifully with thee: but here to the Lord in the
second person, thou have delivered: which implies a familiarity. The
apprehension of Gods bounty had quickened his spirit, and made him in a reverend
manner the more bold: so as,

1. By a due consideration of Gods favor to us we are made more familiar with
God.

This Prophets thus speaking to God, Thou have delivered, shows that,

2. Deliverances are to be ascribed to God.

The first kind of deliverance, my soul from death, gives evidence that,

3. God can deliver from the power of death.

The second kind of deliverance, mine eyes from tears, implies two points.
One intended, the other expressed.

4. Saints may be much affected with afflictions.

5. God can remove all matter of mourning.

The third kind of deliverance, My feet from falling, imports also two
points, viz.

6. Great distresses may foil Saints.

7. God establishes such as are ready to fall.

The fit applying of deliverances to the distinct distresses, as soul or life
from death: eyes from tears: feet from falling, demonstrateth that,

8. Gods remedy is answerable to man's necessity.

. 50. Of the means to become familiar with God.
I.. 4 ^.
BY a due consideration of Gods savor to us we are made more familiar with
God. Thus Exo. ^3. 12, 13, (...).
Moses having duly observed how God knew him by name (that is, took especial
notice of him) is emboldened to desire further, to know God, and to see his
glory. And 2 Samuel ^. 27.
David well weighing that gracious message which by Nathan God sent to him
concerning the establishing of his throne, makes this inference, Therefore
has thy servant sound in his heart, (that is, been bold) to pray this prayer
unto thee. So Ifa. 6. ^.
Isaiah, so -- 38. 3.
Hezekiah, so Dan 7. 19. -- 10. 1^.
Daniel, so many others.

Manifestation of Gods favor works faith: the more that the evidences
thereof are pondered, the more strength gathers says. Meditation on Gods
good will to us, is to faith as a seasonable supply of oil to a lamp, which
continues to preserve the light thereof. Now Ephesians. 3. 12.
by faith we have boldness and access with confidence: and the stronger
faith, the more boldness.

O let not any evidence of Gods kindness pass by without due notice taken
thereof. Do in this case with God, as 1 King. 20. 33
the servants of the King of Syria did with the King of Israel, diligently
observe whether any thing come from him, that may demonstrate his good will to
thee. Thus may thou gain assurance that thou art in the number of 2 Chro.
20. 7. Isa. 41. 8. Cant. 5. 1.
Gods friends. I am. 2. 23.
This was it which made Abraham to be accounted the friend of God, because he
believed. Gods kindness to men shows that they are his favorites. As wise
favorites therefore are in a reverend manner familiar with their Sovereign,
so may such as know the Lords mind, be with him, and have free entrance into
his presence, and assurance of gracious acceptance. A great privilege.

. 51. Of ascribing deliverances to God.
II.. 49.
DEliverances are to be ascribed to God. This has constantly been observed by
such as have been guided by the Spirit of God, as by Gen 14. 20.
Melchizedech, -- 3^. 10.
Jacob, Exo. 15. 1, 20.
Moses, Miriam, Judge. 5. 1.
Deborah, Barak, 1 Samuel 12. 11
Samuel, 2 Samuel 23. 1.
David, 2 Chro. 15. 11
Asa, -- 20. 26.
Iehosaphat, Isa. 38. 9.
Hezekiah, Est. 9. 17.
the Jews in captivity, Acts 4. 24.
the Apostles, and many other in all ages, yea and the Rev. 15. 3.
blessed spirits in heaven also.

All deliverances are wrought by God. Whatsoever the isntrumental means be,
he is the principal efficient and author As he is the Creator of all things,
so the Governor, the disposer and orderer of all. And all creatures in the
world are his servants, his instruments used by him, according to his will. If
therefore by any right victory be ascribed, not to the munition, but to the
General: recovery of health, not to the potion, but to the Physician:
good-workmanship, not to the materials or tools, but to the Artificer: by
much more right, victory, recovery, all deliverances, all blessings are to be
ascribed to God, who enableth Generals, Physicians, and all others to do what
they do, and gives all efficacy to the means that are any way effectual. It
is therefore most just and equal that that which is done by God be ascribed to
him. His right it is, and shall he not have his right? Will subjects deal so
unjustly with their King, soldiers with their General, servants with their
master?

Reprehension of such as ascribe deliverances to any but to God.
Fie on them therefore that either take no notice at all of such deliverances
as they have, or else impute them to any other then to God: whether it be to
themselves, to other men, to any secondary causes, to fortune, or to any thing
else. Three sorts of men do especially offend herein. Dan. 5. 22, 23
Idolaters, that ascribe Gods due to Idols. Act 24. 2.
Flatterers, that attribute it to men. Isa. 10 8. etc. Act. 12. 23.
Ambitious persons that take it to themselves. Two great evils are thus
committed. The Creator is robbed of his due. To creatures is given more then
their due. He the only true God is esteemed as no God. They that are Genesis 49.
6.
no Gods are accounted as Gods. O my soul, come not thou into their secret:
unto their assembly mine honor be not thou united.

Exhortation to give God his due.
Be rather of the communion of Saints, whose understanding being rightly
informed in the extent of the divine providence, whereby every good thing that
is wrought, is wrought, they are so in their hearts affected therewith as they
cannot conceal the same, but make their tongues their glory in acknowledging
and making known what God has done to their souls. This, though it be most
due to God, yet he accepts it as a kindness, as an honor done to him. And in
testimony of his gracious acceptance of this grateful remembrance, he will
afterward on other occasions be ready to deliver. Si D^i beneficia commemoremus
ad maiorem il*lum benevolenti. am excitabimus Chrysostom. Hom. 2. in 2 Cor 1.
For he never repents any goodness showed to such as duly acknowledge the
same. If we thankfully commemorate his blessings, we shall excite him to
confer greater blessings upon us. Behold then a ready way to give glory to
God, and to gain good to our selves.

. 52. Of Gods delivering from death.
III. 49. Particular desperate cases out of which God delivers.
GOD can deliver from the power of death. He can deliver

1. In such cases as threaten death: wherein men have cause to fear death; as
the Israelites had when Pharaoh with a mighty host pursued them, and they had
no way to fly but through the sea, (Exodus 14. 2, etc.) and again when they were
besieged by the Syrians, 2 King. 6. 24, etc.

2. When death has begun to lay hold and to ceaze upon them, as 1 Samuel 17. 34.
a lion and a bear did upon the lambs which David kept. Thus it seems that
death had ceazed on 2 Cor. 1. 8.
Paul, and on 2 King. 20. 1.
Hezekiah, who notwithstanding were both delivered.

3. When there is no possibility of avoiding death by any ordinary means. Thus
was Ion 1. 17.
Jonah delivered out of the sea, and Dan. 3. 26.
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego out of the hot fiery furnace. Isa. 43. 2.
God has promised to be with his in fire and water: in most desperate
distresses.

4. When they are in the very power of death, and death actually ceazed upon
them, and deprived them of life. Hereof we have many instances both in the 1
King 17. 22 2 King. 4. 35. -- 13. ^1.
old, and Mat. 9. 25. Luk 7. 15. Ioh. 11. 44. Act. 9. 40. -- ^0. 10. Mat. 27.
52. Romans 1. 4.
New Testament. Ezc. 37. 2, etc
The vision of dry bones that came together, were knit with sinews, covered
with flesh and skin, and had breath of life breathed into them, and lived,
was a visible demonstration hereof. But that evidence which far surpasses
all, is the Ioh. 5. 28.
general resurrection of all at the last day.

Supreme and absolute is the power and sovereignty of God over all, even Rev.
20. 13.
grave and death, and Heb. 2. 14.
him that has the power of death, the Devil. They are all his vassals to hold
or to let go whom he will.

Consolation in all distresses
1. Admirable is the comfort which hence arises to such as being well
instructed in the power of God, can in assurance of faith rest on him, as 1 Samuel 30. 6.
David did, who, when he knew not whither on earth to fly for succor,
encouraged himself in the Lord his God. For, nothing can befall us without the
limits of his power: no danger can happen, out of which he is not able to
deliver us.

How Gods power is to be rested upon.
Quest. May Saints in confidence expect any deliverance that God is able to
give?

Answ. Not simply: but with a willing subjection of themselves to his will: as
they who said, Dan. 3. 17.
Our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace,
and he will deliver us from thine hand, O King: But if not, be it known to
thee, O King, that we will not serve thy gods. Herein then lies the comfort
which arises from Gods power, that our God who is able to deliver us, will
deliver us, if in his wisdom he see deliverance fit for us. Sorites.
For thus we may safely conclude.

What God sees to be good for us, he will do.
What God will do, he can do.
What God can and will do, shall be done.
Admonition in all straits to rest on God.
Therefore, what God sees to be good for us, shall be done.

Just cause is here given unto us of looking to God, when death presents it
self before our eyes: and to say unto him, 2 Chro 20 12
We know not what to do: but our eyes are upon thee. Cast not therefore thine
eyes too much downward. Fixing eyes aright on God, works faith.

. 53. Of Passion in Saints.
IIII. 49.
SAints may be much affected with afflictions. They may Psalm. 6. 6.
weep, as this Prophet did: and Est 4. 1.
cry, yea with a loud and bitter cry: and Psalm. 32. 3.
roar all the day long: and Mic. 1. 8.
wail and houle: and express other symptoms and signs of much anguish and
great grief.

Job 6. 12.
Is their strength the strength of stones? Or is their flesh of brass? Flesh
and blood remaining in the best while they remain in this world, makes them
sensible of smart, of pain, of loss, of disgrace, of other crosses which lie
heavy upon them, and press and pinch them sore.

1. Refutation of Stoicall senslesnesse.
1. Away with the senseless and blockish opinion of Stoics, who say that no
passion beseemes a wise man. The Heathen Philosophers by that light of nature
which they had, have Cic. Tuscul. quest l. 4 Lege Lactant de vero cultu l. 6 c.
14 and Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 14. c. 8, 9* and l. 9. c. 4 and Quaest in Gen l. 1
c. 30 contra Stoicorum (...). 2. Reprehension of rash censures.
sufficiently refuted that paradox. To us that have the light of Gods Word
(which commands expression of passion when there is just occasion, (Joel 1.
13.) and has commended it in such as have rightly done it (2 Chro. 34. 27.)
yea and has expressly recorded the passion of him that is the wisdom of God
(Mar. 3. 5.) and taxed the contrary in obdurate persons (.Isa. 22. 12, 13.) it
cannot but seem a more then Heathenish and brutish conceit.

2. Be not too censorious of others passionate manifestation of their grief:
especially when there is just cause, and a Christian mean is not exceeded. All
that Satan could do against Job did not so deeply pierce to his soul as his
friends unfriendly censure of him.

3 Exhortation to Sympathy.
3. Have compassion of such as (having cause) are in passion. Romans 12 15.
Weep with them that weep. 1 Cor. 12. 26, 27.
Let us show our selves to be fellow members of one and the same body, by a
Christian Sympathy, and fellow feeling of one another sorrows.

4. Taxation of insulters at others sorrows.
4. As for such as take occasion from the signs and effects of others
sorrows, to insult over them, let them well weigh Psalm. 6^. 10, 21, 2^, etc.
the fearful imprecations made against them: and withal know that
prophetical imprecations are divine denounciations of judgment. It much
provokes the righteous Lord to give them just matter of sorrow, who laugh at
others sorrows.

. 54. Of Gods turning sorrow into solace.
V.. 49. (...) oculos eius a lachrymis. Fugit enim dolor, and tristitia and
gemitus. Amb in Orat de Obit. Theod.
. GOD can remove all matter of mourning. He here delivered this Prophets eyes
from tears: he took away all occasion of weeping: in which sense he is said
to wipe away all tears from men's eyes (Isa. 25. 8. Rev. 7. 17.) and to bid them
refrain their voice from weeping, and eyes from tears (Ier. 31. 16. Luke 7.
13.) Pertinent to this purpose are these proverbes, They that sow in tears
shall reap in joy, (Psalm. 126. 5.) weeping may endure for a night, but joy
comes in the morning, (Psalm. 30. 5.) Answerable hereunto have been Saints
prayers, Gods promises and performances. For instance of prayers take these,
Psalm. 51 8.
Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may
rejoice. -- 90. 15.
Make us glad according to the years wherein thou have afflicted us. Of
promises these, Ier. 31. 13.
I will turn their mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and make them
rejoice for their sorrow. Zac. 8 19.
Their fasts shall be joy and gladness, and cheerful feasts. Isa 30. 19.
Thou shall weep no more. Of performances these, Psalm 30 12.
Thou have turned for me my mourning into dancing: thou have put off my
sackcloth, and girded me with gladness. -- 126. 1, 2.
When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion, then was our mouth filled
with laughter, and our tongue with singing. Were not the eyes of that woman,
Luke 7. 38. etc
which so wept as with her tears she washed the feet of Jesus, delivered from
tears, when Christ said to her Thy sins are forgiven? Isa. 38. 1, etc. (...)
E^ stevi^ stetu magn^.
When Hezekiah heard this doom, Thou shall die and not live, he wept with
great weeping. But this second message from the Lord, I have seen thy tears;
behold I will add unto thy days fifteen years, did questionless wipe away
all his tears. Most pregnant for the point in hand is the end of the
commission given to Christ, thus expressed, Isa 61. 1. etc.
The Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings, to comfort all that mourn,
to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment
of praise for the spirit of heaviness.

That which God said to Hezekiah, Isa. 3^. 5.
I have seen thy tears, gives the true and just reason of Gods removing all
matter of mourning. For the Lord being full of pity, 2 Cor 1. 3.
the Father of mercies, and the God of all comfort, his bowels are moved at the
sight of his childrens tears, as it is noted of Christ, Ioh 11. 33, 35
When he saw Mary weeping, and the Jews also weeping, he groaned in the
spirit, and was troubled, and wept. And again Luke 7 13.
when he saw a widow weep, he had compassion on her. Upon that compassion he
took away the occasion of her weeping. When God came to deliver Israel from
the Egyptian bondage, he renders this reason of his purpose, Exo 3. 7.
I have surely seen the affliction of my people which are in Egypt, and have
heard their cry, by reason of their task masters: for I know their sorrows.
Yea further to demonstrate the notice which the Lord takes of his Saints
tears, there is in Scripture mention made of Psalm. 56. 8.
a bottle wherein they are put, as a liquor most precious in Gods account: and
of a book wherein they are registered, as things to be reviewed, and not
forgotten.

Admonition to mederate mourning.
Learn hereby to set a mean to mourning. 1 These. 4. 13.
Sorrow not as others which have no hope. Know that God takes notice of thy
tears: believe that God can and will wipe them away. Believe this when sense
and smart of affliction makes thee weep and wail: but especially when with a
deep apprehension of thy sins against God, and of his displeasure against
thee, thou do, as Mat. 26. 75.
Peter did, weep bitterly. In these and other like cases thou may, and must
pray, as the Psalmist did, and say, Psalm. 39. 12.
O Lord give ear unto my cry, hold not thy peace at my tears. For assuredly
he that puts tears into his bottle and registreth them, will wipe all tears
from thine eyes. What he has done to others, thou being like to them, in like
cases, may expect. For, God ever remains like himself.

. 55. Of Saints fallings by affliction.
VI. 49.
GReat afflictions may (...) Saints. Though they be not utterly overthrown
thereby, they may be (as a man in a quagmire, out of which he has much ado to
come) much foiled. In such a case was he who said, Psalm 7^* 2
My feet were almost gone: my steps had well nigh slipped. -- 91. 18.
My foot slippeth. -- ^8 ^7.
I am ready to halt. -- 73 ^6.
My flesh and my heart fails. -- 7^. 9.
My strength fails. -- 7^. 3.
My spirit was overwhelmed. -- ^1. 10.
My life is spent with grief: and my years with sighing.

How it falls out that this thus befalls the Saints, is showed before on verse.
7. 44.

Exhortation to look to our feet.
The Apostle gives a seasonable exhortation for preventing, or redressing the
danger of this infirmity: which is this, ^ eb. 12 12, 13.
Lift up the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees: and make strait
paths for your feet: lest that which is lame be turned out of the way: but let
it rather be healed. Me^onymia Effecti and Adiuncti.
Hanging hands and feeble knees are the signs of a fainting spirit, and here
put for that whereof they are signs. To lift up these is to rouse up our
spirits, and to quicken them. The danger which otherwise may follow upon
fainting, much enforces the exhortation. For these words, least that which is
lame be turned out of the way, imply that upon fainting may follow a falling
away. A fresh-water-souldier once fainting, soon falls to the enemy. Let us
therefore well look to our standing, and well prepare our selves before hand.
The Apostle gives an excellent direction to this purpose, Ephesians. 6. S^ nequaquam
rect^ suis factis iacta^e audeat, cum videat tantorum virorum and cauendas
tempestates and slenda nausragia. Aug. de Doctr. Chr. l. 3. c. 23.
10, 11, etc.

For particular directions to keep from fainting, read The Whole Armor of
God, Treat. 2. Part. 5. 22.

Is the forementioned weakness of Saints, and pronenesse to fall well weighed
of them, who by reason of some gifts bestowed on them, wax insolent and secure?
Surely this is one use which is to be made of Saints falls, that no man boast
himself of his own good deeds, when he beholds the storms of such men to be
taken heed of, and wrecks to be bewailed.

. 56. Of Gods establishing the weak.
VII.. 49.
GOD est^^lisheth such as are re^die to fall. This he did when he delivered this
Prophets feet from falling. Romans 14. 4.
He that falls (faith the Apostle) shall be holden up: for God is able to make
him stand. Very fitly to the point in hand says the Psalmist, Psalm. 40. 2.
He brought me up out of an horrible pit, out of the miry clay, and set my feet
upon a rock, and established my goings. And again, -- 94. 18.
When I said, my foot slippeth, thy morcie, O Lord, held me up.

As Gods power, so his pity and prudence, are more clearly manifested hereby.
Where the Lord says, 2 Cor. 12. 9.
My strength is made perfect in weakness: he means, that the lower men be
brought, and the more weak, and unable to be established they may seem to be,
the more divine is that power manifested to be, whereby they are established:
and then Sic paratus est Deus suscipere cadentem, and ^ripere fugi^^tem, ut
videri p^ssi^ (...) o^^ ^ous alijs ^i so^i op^ram da re. Ber. in Psalm. Qui
habit. Ser. 2. Disswasion from despair.
does pity and mercy most brightly show it self, when in falling a man is
preserved, so as if then he had not been preserved, he had perished. Thus e
Christ showed his pity in saving Peter, even when he began to sink, (Mat. 14.
30, 31.) This then must needs be a principal part of prudence. In these and
other like respects God is so ready to uphold him that is falling, and to hold
him that is departing, that he may seem to mind such alone, and to leave all
others.

1. Despair not now, though thy foot be slipping, or thou sinking in a sea of
sorrows. God is as near at hand in all out troubles, as Mat. 14. 30, 31
Christ was in that sea where Peter was. As a tender mother, though she suffer
her weak and feeble child to go alone, yet will she not suffer it to be alone
or out of sight. If it slide, or fall, she presently catches it up again. Yea
she will give her servants charge over it to keep it, and to take it up in
case it fall. Thus deals thy heavenly Father with thee, poor, weak, feeble
brat. Psalm. 121. 3.
He will not suffer thy foot to be moved (namely to thy ruin;) He that keeps
thee will not slumber. And lest thou should think that by reason of his
greatness he will not take care of thee, He gives his Angels charge over
thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. They ^^all bear thee up in their hands,
lest thou dash (...) Prom^^sa (...) in Psalm. 101. Exhortation to (...) for hel^
in ^alling.
thy foot against a stone, (Psalm. 9^. 11, 12.) Despair not then. Mercy, grace
and indulgency is promised. Who can despair that knows and believes this?

2. When thou find thy self sinking, and think thy self lost, do as
Mat. 14. (...).
Peter did: Cry out to God, and say, Lord save me. Call to mind his promise,
Isa. 43. 2.
When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee. Plead his dealing
with others, whose feet he has delivered from falling. Persuade thy self that
thy heavenly Father as far surpasses earthly parents in pity and goodness,
as he does in Majesty and greatness. Hereupon ponder with thy self, and
consider if earthly parents can suffer their children, when they are fallen, to
lie and cry, and not come and take them up. Isa 49. 15.
Yea Expedit omni anim^ Deum sempe^ attendere, tanquam proprium non modo
adiu^^rem, sed etiam inspectorem. Ber lcc. citat.
they may. Yet will not I (says the Lord) forget thee. If now being fallen
thou lie still, and cryest not for help, do thou not justly deserve to be
let alone, even for punishment of thy stoutnesse? Surely it becomes every
soul to eye God continually, not only as an helper at a pinch, but also as
one that takes the care and charge of us upon himself.

. 57. Of Gods seasonable kindness.
VIII.. 49.
GODS remedy is answerable to man's necessity. Exo 13* 21.
That which was a cloud in the day to shelter his people from the scorching heat
of the Sun, was a pillar of fire to give them light in the night, that they
might go by day and by night. -- 164.
When they had no bread, he rained down Manna from heaven. -- 17^.
When they had no water, he opened a rock and gave them water to drink. -- 15.
25.
When they had water enough, but it was so bitter as they could not drink of
it, he made it sweet. -- 17. 8. Reddetur populo ^al^citas pris^i^a quam
aliquando habuere in eremo, pr^ceden^e Domino eos per d^em in columna nubis,
and per no ctem in columna ign^s, ut nec in prosperis, nec in adversis aliquan
d^ turbentur.

Hier. Comment. in Isay 4


When their enemies infested them, he overthrew those enemies. According to all
their needs he afforded them fit help. Thus while his people were in the
wilderness, he gave extraordinary, but visible demonstrations of his more
invisible, but ordinary providence toward his in all ages. Hereby is
accomplished that of the Psalmist, (Psalm. 121. 6.) The Sun shall not smit^ thee
by day, nor the Moon by night. Which not unfitly may be applied to men's
several estates of prosperity and adversity.

Remedies answerable to men's necessities are seasonable: seasonable remedies
are profitable: profitable remedies are acceptable: acceptable remedies are
most availeable to provoke men to all gratitude: gratitude makes them diligent
in observing what may most make to the honor of God, and zealous in promoting
the same. Thus the very kind of remedy which God affords, makes most to man's
good, and his own glory.

Learn hence wisdom of this wise God: and that in two especial points.

Directions.

1 Pray for seasonable blessings.


1. Seek of him such things as are seasonable for thee to receive: as they who
in the days of Christ's flesh came to him for succor: The blind, for sight:
the deaf, for hearing; the dumb, for speech: the lame, for sound limbs: and
so others (...) remedy, sit for their particular malady. Answerably, art (...)
danger of death? Seek preservation from death, with a ^^^er^ation to Gods good
pleasure. Does any anguish so wor^^ on thine inward passion, as to force tears
from thine eyes? pray to have those tears wiped away. Do thou find thy ^eet
sliding, thy spirit fainting? Desire God either to keep thee from falling, or
to raise thee again: and to revive thy Spirit. Seek not unnecessaries: seek
not superfluities: seek not to satisfy thy lusts. Well weigh what an Apostle
says in this case, Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye
may consume Iam. 4. 3.
it upon your lusts.

2 Seasonably do good.
2. Let thy kindness be as seasonable as thou can. Give bread to him that is
an hungry, drink to him that is a thirst. Endeavor to allay the passion of
such as are in passion: raise up those that are fallen. Instruct the ignorant:
bring into the way of truth such as wander. Comfort such as are troubled in
conscience. Herein lies a maine difference betwixt a skillful Physician and a
deceitful Emperick. The Physician enquireth after the kind of disease,
constitution of person, temperature of climate, season of year, and answerably
prescribes his remedy. The Empirick gives his remedy without any respect to
the forenamed respects. If it do any good, then its well: if it do none, it was
all that he could do: and by that all, many more receive hurt then good by his
his prescripts. To be an Emperick about the maladies that affect the soul, and
endanger the eternal salvation thereof, is insufferable. Do therefore good: do
it, as David did, According to the integrity of thine heart, by the
skilfulnesse of Psalm. 78. 72.
thine hands. For which end pray for wisdom of him that is wisdom it self:
that so thou may be perfect as he is perfect. Mat. 5. 48.


Hitherto of the Prophets protestation for his inward disposition.

. 58. Of the meaning and parts of the ninth Verse.
PSALM. CXVI. IX.
I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living.
THe Prophets See 2, 43.
protestation for his outward conversation is here generally propounded.

This phrase I will walk, is taken diversely. Some take it for an expression of
his confidence in the continuance of Gods favor toward him: that God who had
freed him out of the jaws of death, would now continue him in the land of the
living, there to remain, and abide before the Lord. Ancient English
Translators enclining to this sense, thus interpret it, I shall walk, in
relation to the divine providence, whereby he should be preserved yet longer to
live on earth: so as, according to this acception, to walk before the Lord, is
to live to advance the glory of God. A pious interpretation this is. But this
phrase of walking before the Lord, is in Scripture most frequently used to set
out a duty on man's part, rather then a kindness on Gods part: for God
requires it of Gen 17. 1.
Abraham as a duty: and commends 2 Chro. 6. 16
David for it, as for a duty performed by him. To this acception do the Kings
Translators incline, and translate it as a promise made on the Prophets part to
God, thus, I will walk. By this manner of expressing his purpose under a
solemn promise, he binds himself to perform the duty promised. This word,
walk, imports a motion, and a proceeding on in that motion step by step,
from place to place. Metaphorically it is taken for a practice of good or
evil. The words joined with it will show what kind of practice it imports. 1
King. 15. 26
To walk in the way of the wicked is to practice evil: Ier 7. 6.
To walk after other Gods is to practice Idolatry. But Psalm. 119. 1.
to walk in the law of the Lord, is to practice what that law requires: Isa.
33. 15.
To walk in righteousness, is to practice and deal righteously. The verb in
the Hebrew is of the Hithpael.
seventh conjugation, which implies a reciprocation or reiteration of an
action. Some learned and judicious Expositors indesinen^^r ambulabo. Trem. and
I^n.

Trip^ex est sig^i ficatio Hithp. ^. 1 Recioroca* 2 Passiva. 3 Frequentativa.


to express the emphasis of the Conjugation, thus translate it, (...)
I will continually walk.

These words (...)
before the LORD (word for word at the face, or in the presence of the Lord) do
determine the kind of walking which he intends: namely such an one, as he
would not be afraid, or ashamed that the Lord should see: but such a walking as
the Lord should well like and approve. In other places to this kind of walking
these phrases are added, Gen ^. 2^. (...)
with God, 2 King. 23 3 (...)
after the Lord, Col 1 10. (...).
worthy of the Lord: all which in effect import one and the same thing. He that
walks with God, so carries himself as knowing God is by him. He that walks
after the Lord, behaveth himself a^ a servant following his master, and is
ever at hand to do what his master requires. He that walks worthy of the
Lord, so demeaneth himself as becomes a servant of the Lord, so as the Lord
may be honored by him. He that walks before the Lord, does all things as in
the sight of the Lord, whom he knows to be Psalm. 139. 7.
every where present, to -- 12.
see in the dark as well as in the light, and to be Ier. 17. 10.
a searcher of the heart: and thereby he is moved in all places open and
secret, at all times, day and night, in deed, in word, in thought to have such
respect to God, as to do nothing, but that he which sees it, may approve it;
nor to make show of more then he intends, but to do the good which he does
sincerely, Col 3. 23. Heb. 11. 5.
heartily, as to the Lord. The Apostle that was guided by the same spirit that
he which penned Henoks history was, having relation to that history, says,
Before his translation he had this testimony that he pleased God. What Moses
styles walking with God, the Apostle expounds pleasing God. The intent
therefore of the Psalmist here is to endeavor to please God.

That this intention of his may not seem to be put off till it be too late,
and he in the grave, where none can walk, where no work can be done, he
adds the place where he would so walk, In the land of the living. On earth
there be diverse divisions for habitation, and therefore he expresses the word
in the plural number thus, (...) in regio^ibus.
in the regions, implying that in what place soever he should be, he would
walk before the Lord.

The living are here opposed to the dead: so as the land of the living, is a
description of the place and time where and while, men live in this world. In
this sense is this phrase frequently used in the Old Testament. In another
Psalm this time of life is styled Psalm. 56. 13.
the light of the living, in opposition to death which is thus described, Job
10. 22.
A land of darkness as darkness it self.

Thus this verse sets out The duty of him that is delivered from a deadly
danger: Concerning which here is expressed,

1 The Matter. I will walk

2 The Manner. Before the Lord

3 The Place and Time. In the land of the living.

This Promise of walking, being inferred upon his former profession of his
affection toward God, and resolution to rest on him, shows that,

I. Man's inward affection to God must be manifested by his outward conversation.

The Metaphor of walking, which is a going on and proceeding forward: and the
conjugation wherein the word is used, which notes a reiteration, gives us to
understand, that,

II. Saints must proceed in their approved practice.

The rule that he prescribes to himself for his walking, which is this,
Before the Lord, teaches that,

III. Eye must be had to God in every action.

The description of the Place in this phrase, The land of the living, declares
that,

IIII. This world is a place and time of life.

The end of describing this Place and Time thus, which is to set out the proper
place and seasonable time of walking before God, imports that,

V. While men live they must endeavor to please God.

The manner of expressing this duty under a solemn promise thus, I will walk,
implies that,

VI. Saints must bind themselves to duty.

The inference of this verse wherein his duty is declared, upon the former
wherein Gods kindness is manifested, demonstrateth that,

VII. Manifestation of Gods good pleasure to man, must make man careful to
please God.

. 59. Of practicing duty.
I. Man's inward affection to God must be manifested by his outward
conversation. It is usual with the Holy Ghost to infer upon fear, and love
of God (which are the two principal affections whereby our high esteem of
God, and due respect to him are manifested) a walking in his ways, and keeping
his commandments, thus, Psalm. 1^8. 1.
Blessed is every one that fears the Lord, that walks in his ways. Eccl
1^. 1^.
Fear God and keep his commandments. Deuteronomy 11. 22. -- 19. 9.
Love the Lord and walk in his ways. 1 Ioh. 5. 3.
This is the love of God that we keep his commandments. The duty comprised
under this Metaphor of walking is often and much pressed thorowout the Scripture,
and that under this very word. It is Genesis 17. 1. Deuteronomy 10. 12.
commanded, Gen 6. 9. Luke 1. 6.
commended, Genesis 5 24.
rewarded, and thereupon conscionably 2 King. 20. 3
it has been, and still must be observed: and that in regard of 1 Gods glory.
2 Others good. 3 Our own good.


1 By practice it is that the virtues or 1 Pet. 2. 9.
praises of him that has called us out of darkness into his marvelous light, are
showed forth. Mat. 5. 16.
Thus men may see our good works and glorify our Father which is in heaven.
Good cause therforehad the Lord to say, Ioh. 15. 8.
Herin is my Father glorified that ye bear much fruit.

2 By practice it is that such as are called are stirred up to an holy Heb. 12.
1.
emulation (for they that walk aright, become 1 These. 17. 2 Cor. 9. ^.
ensamples to others:) and such as are not called may either 1 Pet 3. 1, 2.
be won, or -- 16. Fidem ^u^m dilectio anim^t, pro^ et actio B^r. super Cant.
Sermon 2^. ^^st^monium praesentiae spiri tu^ pr^^ent opera Idem de S. And^* Sermon.
2.
have their mouths stopped.

3 By practice it is, that sincerity of heart, integrity of conscience,
soundness of faith, and truth of all graces are manifested, cherished, and
increased. Yea and the presence of Gods Spirit in us, testified. Hereby inward
assurance is gained, and outward evidence is given of our election before the
world, and of our salvation after the world. Many judgments are by this
walking or prevented, or removed, or mitigated, or sanctified: and everlasting
perdition avoided. If motives may be of force to provoke us to perform a duty,
motives are not wanting to provoke us to this duty of walking, as here it is
professed.

Reprehension of such as practice not what they know and like.

Ne scientiam tibi satisfacer^ putes, propterea adiecit qui ambulant. etc.
Basil. in Psalm. 117.


What may now be thought of such, as having attained to a sufficient measure of
knowledge, and are with that which they know of God, and of his kind dealing
with them inwardly affected, and are thereupon moved to profess as much love
as the Prophet here does, but yet fail in performance, in practice? They walk
not. Their apprehension, affection, profession are all in vain; except to be
as so many evidences against them, to make them the more inexcusable, and to
aggravate their judgment the more. I deny not, but that knowledge of God and
of his favor toward us, a good liking thereof, and a cheerful
acknowledgement and profession of what we know, are very needful and useful.
For walking without knowledge must needs be preposterous and erroneous: without
a good affection, hypocritical and vain: and without a free profession, too
too timorous. So as these three are necessary, though not sufficient. Question
may be made of the truth of them all, where they are not sealed and ratified by
an answerable walking and practice. And adversaries of the truth will take the
more occasion to slander the truth. Our adversaries do much urge against us
and our profession that we walk not: that we practice not: and allege this
against our profession, to impeach the integrity of our religion: which should
make us more conscionable in showing forth our good works for stopping of
their mouths. Our doctrine is even in this point, as in others, sound and
orthodoxe. In Schools, in Churches, by preaching, by printing we teach a
necessity of walking, of practicing, of doing good works, according to this
rule of the Apostle, (Tit. 3. 14.) Let ours learn to maintain good works for
necessary uses, that they be not unfruitful. Or^ ut ad agenda bona op^ro
s^s^inemus. N^q ^nim a^^^er salvari nos p^ssibil^ est. Chrysostom. Hom 47. in Genesis 22
And we acknowledge them to be so necessary, as without them we cannot be saved.

The ground of their cavilling against our doctrine about good works is,
because we do not set too high a prize upon them, and make them meritorious,
which is to make them no good works, but proud, presumptuous, damnable,
diabolical works. There be many forceable reasons for the necessity of good
works, though that vain, frothie, windy, false, arrogant, impious, blasphemous
reason of merit be not pressed. They are expressly commanded of God: therefore
necessary. Though they be not the cause of reigning, yet Via regni non causa
regnandi Bern. de Great. and lib. arbitr.
they are the way to the kingdom, out of which way we cannot attain to the
Kingdom: therefore necessary. Though the faithful are not justified by them,
yet by them is their faith justified (Iam. 2. 22.) therefore necessary. Vt ad
meritum satis est de meritis non praesumere: sic carer^ meritis, satis est ad
iudicium.

Bern. sup. Cant Sermon. 68. Luke 17. 10.


Though the doing of them do not merit eternal life, yet the not doing of them
meriteth everlasting death, (Mat. 25. 41, 42) therefore necessary. Though by
the strict standerd of the Law being found unperfect, they are rejected, yet by
the gracious mitigation of the Gospel being found sincere, they are accepted:
therefore necessary. Though when we shall have done all those things which are
commanded us we are unprofitable servants, yet by doing according to our
ability what we are commanded, we show our selves grateful children: therefore
are good works necessary. This last motive is of more moment with an ingenuous
child, then any merit can be. For when the believer thoroughly pondereth the free
grace and rich mercy of God in giving him Christ, in accepting him in Christ,
in pardoning all his sins, in reserving eternal life for him, his heart is
so inflamed with a desire of testifying all gratefulness, as he is ready with
his uttermost power to do whatsoever he may know to be well-pleasing unto God.
Now Gods Word declaring that to do good is a sacrifice well-pleasing to God,
the forenamed desire does Heb. 13. 16.
more enforce him to do good, then the merit of many heavens could.
Gratefulness more works on an ingenuous spirit then reward can. And that
which in way of gratefulness is wrought, is much more kindly wrought, then
that which is done for recompense. Answerably it is also more acceptable to
God: for it manifests a better respect toward him.

2 Ye that have tasted of the bounty of the Lord, and are well informed in his
good will toward you and thereupon have your hearts inflamed with the heavenly
fire of love, and are stirred up to purpose and promise to approve your selves
to him, have a care of your carriage, and ratify the truth of all by an
answerable walking. Sweet is that melody, and happy is that harmony, where
mind, heart, tongue, life and all consent to make a concent. Say therefore (and
do as ye say) I will walk: and that with such a mind as is set out in the next
doctrine.

. 60. Of persisting in good courses.
II. 57.
SAints must proceed in their approved practice. Persist in duty.
Gal. 6. 9.
They must not be weary in well doing. Phil 3. 17.
Mark them (says the Apostle) which walk so, as they have us for an example.
What kind of walking does he mean? He himself has plainly and fully
expressed it in the verses before. It was this, -- 12.
To follow on, -- 13.
To reach forth unto the things which are before, -- 14.
To press toward the mark. From this his walking, and proceeding on, he
makes this inference, -- 16.
Let us walk by the same rule, or as some not unfitly translate it, let us
proceed. For (...) dicitu^ ordo in acie a front ad extremum agme^ p^^y ^us
Th^^ l. 4
the word which the Apostle uses, properly signifies to go on in order. The
virtue of such as appertain to the kingdom of heaven, is in this proceeding
set out by many metaphors: as Pro 4. 8.
The shining of light more and more unto perfect day: Ezekiel. 47, 2, etc.
The waters of the Sanctuary which increased from anckle deep to knee deep,
from thence up to the loins, and after to such depth as could not be passed
over: Ephesians 2 21.
An edifice that from the foundation rises higher and higher till it be a
complete building: 1 Cor ^. ^4.
Runners in a race, which run on till they come to the goal: Psalm 92. 12.
Plants, Palmetrees, and Cedars which all grow till they come to their full
growth: Mar 4 27.
Corn, and -- 32.
Mustard Seed which grow to ripeness: and Ephesians 4. 16.
a body which grows to the full stature thereof.

To leave all the metaphors but that which is in my text, The way wherein we
must walk is a long way, while here we live we cannot attain to our journeyes
end; we must therefore walk as long as we live, and still go on* ^s we must
not turn back again (If any draw back, my ^oule (says the Lord) shall have
no pleasure in him, Heb. ^0. 38.) so may we not stand at a stay. He that
begins a building, and continues not till it be finished, makes himself
ridiculous to all that see it (Luke 14. 30.) He that begins the Christian
race, and gives over before he come to the end, Vnum necesse est e duobus, aut
proficere ^cilicet, aut prorsus desi^^re. Ber. de 3 Ord. Eccl. Exhortation to
be ever walking
does not only lose the crown, but treasureth up wrath unto himself. This
will assuredly fall out if we proceed not daily in our Christian course. For
one of these two things will fall out: either to go on, or to fall back.

Let all that set foot in the race to heaven, hence learn to take to
themselves an invincible resolution Heb. 1^. 1. (...)
to run the race that is set before them. He says not to run in the race, but
to run the race: which phrase implies an holding out till it be finished. All
that run would willingly obtain. Yea God would have us 1 Cor. 9. 24.
so run as we may obtain. But this cannot be without perseverance, and that to
the end of our life. For the goal is set at the last period of life. Let our
eye be In H^thpael^v^r ba in hac coniugatione significant vehemen tiam aut
frequentiam.

Pagu. Instit. Hebr.


thereupon, more minding what is to come, then what is past. As many as will be
perfect, must be thus minded. A fore-setled resolution is of great force to
make us hold out. And that we may the more fully express that which is implied
in (...)
the very conjugation here used which imortpeth a reiteration of the action, let
us year after year, month after

(...) Benefits of setting God before us.

Thales dixit, homines existimare oportere, Deum omnia cernere, Dei omnia ess^
plena: fore enim homines castiores Cic de leg.


1. We shall be rest^^ined from many sins, whereunto secrecy of place,
solicitation of superiors or other temptations might otherwise allure us. This
restrained righteous Joseph when by his mistress in a secret chamber, they two
alone together, he was tempted to folly. This answer (How can I do this great
wickedness and sin against God?) shows that he set God before him, and
thereby was kept from yielding to that temptation, Genesis 39. 9.

2 We shall be moved to keep our hearts upright. Where Isa. 38. 3.
Hezekiah professes that he walked before God, he adds, in truth, and with a
perfect (or upright) heart. Hereby he implies, that his setting of God before
him made him more watchful over his heart, to keep it upright. No such means
as this to make a man upright. For he that walks before God, knows that God
is a searcher of the heart. As the presence of men makes us careful of our
outward actions, so the presence of God will make us Pro. 4. 23. (...)
Keep our hearts above all keepings.

3 We shall be brought into an holy familiarity with God, so as he will account
us his friends. Genesis 24. 40.
Abraham was a man that walked before God: and God himself gives him this
style, Isa. 41. 8.
my friend. This makes us seek how to please God: and answerably God most
kindly accepts this our mind and endeavor.

4 We shall have much confidence in Gods providence, protection, and in all
manner of divine blessing wrought in us. When Abraham's servant made some
question of success in that business whereabout his master sent him, Abraham
thus resolves the doubt, and setleth the mind of his servant, Genesis 24. 40.
The Lord before whom I walk, will send his Angel with thee, and prosper thy
way. Because he walked before the Lord, he assured himself of success.

5 We shall with much assurance of faith call upon God in our greatest
distresses. Conscience of walking before God added much power to H^zekiahs
prayer and faith, as is evident by his putting God in mind thereof, where he
says, 2 King. 20. 3.
O Lord, remember now how I have walked before thee.

6 We shall be encouraged against the slanders of malicious adversaries. For,
though such as have approved themselves to men, may notwithstanding have cause
to fear that God may have something against them: yet they who have been
careful to approve themselves to God, need not care what man can say against
them. When David's enemies laid many matters unjustly to his charge, Psalm. 26. 1.
he appeals to God: which he durst not have done, if he had not walked before
God.

7 We shall be emboldened against all that man can do against us. This is
rendered as a reason why Moses feared not the wrath of the King, Heb. 11. 27.
For he endured, as seeing him who is invisible. This put life into Iehosaphats
fainting spirit. For, where he says, 2 Chro. 20. 12
We know not what to do, he bewraieth a languishing spirit: but where he
adds, Our eyes are upon thee, he manifests a revived spirit.

8 We shall persevere, and hold out so long as we live. For God before whom we
walk, ever lives, ever remains the same: which men do not. While good
Iehojada lived, 2 Chro. 24. 17
King Ioash maintained true religion: when Iehojada died, he revolted. Because
he walked before a mortal man, with the death of that man he fell away. But
Hezekiah who walked before the immortal God, ever remained faithful.

. 62. Of the land of the living here on earth.
IIII. 58.
THis world is a place and time of life. Thus he that expected succor from the
Lord in this world, says, Psalm. 27. 13.
I believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living: and in
the very same sense said to God, -- 142. 5.
Thou art my portion in the land of the living. And where it is said to the
wicked man whose memory God would destroy in this world, -- ^2. 5.
God shall pluck thee out of thy dwelling place, by way of exaggeration of the
some judgment it is added, and root thee out of the land of the living. When
Hezekiah expected nothing but death, he said, I shall see the Lord no more in
the land of the living, (Isa. 38. 11.) and to A s^^ssus est d^ terra viventium,
ut post vitam quam vixit in terra, mortuus terr^, coelis viv^ret in aeternum
Hier. Comment. l. 14. in Esa. 53.
show what he meant thereby he adds, I shall behold man no more with the
inhabitants of the world. Thus also is Christ's death set out, He was cut off
out of the land of the living, (Isa. 53. 8.) that being dead in earth after
that life which he had there lived, he might for ever live in heaven. In this
sense the time while we live in this world is called the day; and the light of
the living. Ioh. 9. 4. Psalm. 56. 13.

Fitly is this world so called in relation to all kind of lives, natural,
spiritual, eternal.

1 Natural life, which is subject to mortality, corruption, and all manner of
infirmities, is here only in this world lived. After this life, corruptible
must put on incorruption, and mortal must put on immortality, (1 Cor. 15. 53.)
This life was meant, when Hezekiahs departure out of this world was thus
threatened, thou shall not live, Isa. 38. 1.

2 Spiritual life, which is the life of grace, is also lived in this world.
For, the Apostle speaking of it thus says, Gal. 2. 20.
The life which J now live in the flesh, I live by faith, etc.

3 In this world we first 1 Timothy 6. 12.
lay hold on eternal life. They that do not here get a right unto it, shall
not hereafter attain to the possession thereof.

Reprehension of such as living are dead.
How unmeet, how shameful, how odious a thing is it that dead men should be
here on the face of the earth, which is the land of the living? That there are
such, is too true. 1 Timothy 5. 6.
She that lives in pleasure is dead while she lives. Rev. 3. 1.
Sardis had a name that she lived, but was dead. Mat. 8. 22.
The dead bury their dead. Ephesians 2. 1. 2 Cor. 5. 14.
All natural men are dead in sins. Much more they that unto their natural
corruption add profaneness, uncleanness, all manner of riotousnesse. These
are as dead and putrified carions that infect the air round about them. To
prevent noisome savours which might arise from dead corpse, we use to bury them
under the ground. Though Sarah was a dear wife to Abraham, yet when she was
dead, he Genesis 23 4.
took order to bury her corpse o^^ of his sight. Ezekiel. 39. 11, etc.
Note the care that was taken to bury Gog with his multitude, because the
stinking savor was so great, as it caused them that passed by to stop their
noses. Assuredly, if the spiritual sense of our souls were as quick in
spiritual matters, as the senses of our body are in earthly things, we should
feel a more noisome and loathsome savor to arise from such as in relation to
spiritual life, are dead, then from such as are dead in relation to natural
life. God, that is most sensible of this spiritual stanche, is often moved to
sweep the land of the living with the broom of his judgments, and to remove
noisome dead persons, especially when by their multitude they ^ause the stanche
to be too too intolerable. Isa. 14. 23.
I will sweep Babel with the besome of destruction, says the Lord of hosts.
Thus the Lord swept away the stinking carions of Genesis 6. 7.
the old world, and of -- 19. 25.
Sodom and Gomorrah, the rebellious Hebr 3. 17.
carcasses of the Israelites in the wilderness: Lev. 18. 28.
the foul corpse of the nations: yea and the unsavory bodies of all 2 King. 17.
6.
Israel and 2 Chro. 36. 16
Judah. Of Jerusalem in another metaphor thus says the Lord, 2 King. 21. 13
I will wipe it as a man wipeth a dish, wiping it, and turning it up*side
down. There is just cause to fear that the stanche of the sins of this
City, and other places in this Land was so rank in the nostrels of the
Almighty, as thereby he was provoked to sweep away so many as he did with the
broom of the pestilence. If it be said, that many righteous ones were swept
away, who have presented even their bodies as well as their souls, a sacrifice
living, holy, acceptable, and of a sweet smelling savor unto God: and many
wicked ones left; I answer, that God may take away in a common judgment many
righteous ones, the more to aggravate the judgment, and yet therein show mercy
to those righteous ones, by translating them to eternal bliss, and reserve
wicked ones, to bring them by that judgment executed on others, to repentance,
or else to make them the more inexcusable. The day of through cleansing the Lords
floor is not till the day of judgment. Mat. 13. 39, 41, 42.
The harvest is the end of the world. Then shall the Son of man send forth
his Angels, and they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend,
and them which do iniquity: and shall cast them into a furnace of fire. Yet
least the stanch of sin even in this Land of the living should be too great, as
in former ages, so now (...) science void of offense toward God and toward men.

2 The things which God by virtue of the Gospel requires of us, he has
promised to work in us. The sum of his promise is this, Ezekiel. 36. 27.
I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye
shall keep my judgments and do them. Now Saints resting in assurance of
faith on God for accomplishing of this, and Ier. 31. 33, 34. -- 3^. 39. 40.
other like promises, are emboldened to promise that to God which God has
promised to enable them to do.

3 All the promises of obedience which Saints make to God, they make with
reference to the assistance of Gods Spirit, whereof they assure themselves. As
when they promise any temporal civil matter, they do it, either expressly or
implicitly, with relation to Gods will and leave (as they ought, Iam. 4. 15.)
so in holy duties, to the work of Gods Attend quod non dixerit, speravi* aut
spero, sed sperabo. Hoc, inquit, est votum meum, hoc propositum meum, haec
intentio cordis mei. Bern. in Psalm. Qui habit. Ser. 2.
Spirit in them.

Thus in the absolute promises which Saints make, they arrogate nothing to
themselves above their ability, and yet manifest an unfeigned heart, and
unalterable resolution to God wards. So as where they say I will walk, I will
hope, I will do this and that, it is as if they had said, this is my desire,
this is my purpose, this is the intention of my heart.

By these means, as true intention, earnest desire, prudent jealousy, and
holy zeal are manifested, so is a dull spirit much quickened, and the weak,
waiward, revoulting flesh bridled and curbed: yea and bound to her good
behavior.

. 65. Of man's answering Gods mercy with duty.
VII.. 58.
MAnifestation of Gods good pleasure to man must make man careful to please
God. Where God says, Ier. 14. 7.
I will be their God, which is an evident manifestation of Gods good will to
them, this is thereupon inferred: They shall be my people: which as it notes a
dignity (for it is a prerogative to be Gods people) so also a duty: for it is
added, They shall return unto me with their whole heart. Yea in another place
where God is brought in to say to them, Zac. ^3. 9.
It is my people, they are brought in to answer, The Lord is my God. More
plainly, Isa. 38. 20.
Hezekiah having thus expressed Gods good will to him. The Lord was ready to
save me, makes this ^^ference, Therefore will we sing. And the Psalmist yet
more directly to the point in hand, says to the Lord, Psalm. 138. 2.
I will praise thy name for thy loving kindness.

Tanto amplius timere Deum, and magis solicitus esse debuerat, quanto ^ai^ra
tius munera percepit. Bern. in psalm. Qui habit. Ser. 1*
Gratefulness, and all equity requires that they who taste of the sweetness
of Gods kindness and goodness, should so walk before God, as to seek in all
things to please him. Kindness requires kindness: goodness, goodness:
especially such kindness and goodness as the Lord shows and does. But all
the kindness and goodness that we possibly can show, or do to God, is to
please him. Gods good pleasure is the ground of all our hope: the spring from
whence do slow all the good things which in any kind we have or can expect.
Thereby God manifests his mind and respect toward us. Our care to please him
is the best evidence that we can give of our good mind and respect to God. We
can really give nothing to him: wherefore the more and greater good things we
receive from God, the more careful we ought to be to please him.

That this general duty may be the better performed, three or four
particulars are duly to be observed.

Admonition 1 To take notice of Gods kindness.
1 Take due notice of Gods good will to thee, and distinctly observe the
several evidences that he gives thereof. Kindness not observed is as no
kindness. But when thou can in truth say of Gods goodness, as he did who
said, That my soul knows right well, then will thy judgment Psalm. 139. 14.
be convinced of the equity of the duty which thou owe to God: which is a
forceable means to bring the will to yield thereunto. For this end learn to
make See The Whole Armor of God Treat. 3. Part 2. 63, 64, 69.
a catalogue of Gods mercies, and to set them in order.

2 Enquire what can be done by thee, that may be pleasing and acceptable to
him, many are the admonitions of Ephesians. 5. 17. Romans 1^. ^.
Scripture hereunto, as, Understand what the will of the Lord is; Prove what is
the good, acceptable and perfect will of God. This does the holy Scripture
expressly and distinctly declare. Well acquaint thy self with Gods Word, and
thou may be well instructed in Gods will.

3 Being thus instructed, stir up thy sp^^it and whole man to do that which
thou know ought to be done. I 1 These 4. 1.
exhort you (says the Apostle) by the Lord Jesus, that as you have received of
us how to walk and to please God (thus they were sufficiently instructed) so
you would abound more and more: thus he would have them to stir up themselves
to do what they had learned to do.

2 Cor 3 5. Phil. 2. 13.
4 Because We are not sufficient to think any thing as of our selves: but our
sufficiency is of God. It is God which works in us both to will and to do of
his good pleasure: to thine own endeavor add faithful prayer for Gods
assistance. We have for this the pattern of an Apostle, who when he had
declared a great evidence of Gods kindness to the Hebrews, namely their
redemption by the blood of Jesus Christ, he prays that God would work in
them that which Heb. 13. 21.
is well*pleasing in his sight.

If by these and other like means we shall indeed answer Gods mercy with doing
our duty, and so walk worthy of the Col. 1 10.
Lord unto all pleasing, he will never repent him of any kindness showed to
us, but will rather delight in doing more and more goodness.

. 66. Of the meaning and doctrine of the 10 and 11 Verses.
PSALM. CXVI. X, XI.
(I believed: therefore have I spoken. I was greatly afflicted.
I said in my haste, All men are liars.)
THese two verses are a digression from his forementioned profession, which is
prosecuted in the verses immediately after these: so as they may not unfitly be
included in a parenthesis.

The Prophet in penning this Psalm was even ravished with an holy admiration
of the great deliverance which he had, and that beyond his expectation.
Hereupon, as men in such cases use to do, he falls into digressions
concerning the greatness of his distress, the weakness of his flesh, yea and of
his recovery of himself after that weakness: which is here noted in the first
place, thus, J believed, etc.

Lyranus.

Aignanus.

Rickelius.


Some take this of the Prophets too much credulity in the case betwixt 2 Samuel
16. 3, 4
Ziba and Mephibosheth. Or of his too much credulity to Absol^m, Achitophel,
and other flattering courtiers which were the cause of his flying from Absalom.
But that sense can be nothing to the Prophets purpose in this place. Besides
the word thus set alone, I believed, will not well bear that sense. See 5.
As the first word of this Psalm thus set, I love, so this, I believed, has an
especial emphasis. It shows that the greatness of his affliction could not
quell his faith. Saint Paul expressly shows 2 Cor. 4. 13.
that the Prophet here means by this phrase, I believed, a steadfast confidence
in God: such a confidence as by the spirit of God is wrought in Saints hearts.
Therefore some for more perspicuity insert this word, God, thus, I believed
God. This faith so quickened his spirit, and wrought such an holy zeal in his
soul, as he could not contain himself, nor conceal his mind, but was in a
manner forced to express himself, and to utter his thoughts: whereupon he
makes this inference, Therefore have I spoken. Vatabl. in annot. in hunc loc.
Some turn it in the future thus, I will speak. An (...) loquar.
in the Hebrew it is so, simply considered. But its usual in that tongue to
express things past by the future, especially in rendering a reason of that
which is past: as in (...)
the first verse of this Psalm.

Quest. What then was it that his faith made him utter and speak?

Answ. All that is mentioned in this Psalm. His faith made him call upon God
in the midst of his deadly distress. His faith made him acknowledge Gods grace
and mercy. His faith made him promise and vow praise and obedience to God.

This clause I was greatly afflicted, may have a fit relation either to that
which goes before, or that which follows.

In the former respect it is added as an amplification of the great measure of
his faith, which, notwithstanding the greatness of his distress, could not be
extinguished. If a discretive conjunction, although, be prefixed, the emphasis
of this clause will better appear, thus, I spoke although I was greatly
afflicted.

In the latter respect, it is premised as an extenuation of his weakness,
showing that this was a cause thereof, namely, Silu^ sive Soph pasuc est pausa
perfectae sententiae, quae usurpari solet in fine versuum.
his sore affliction. If this causall particle, because, be prefixed, the force
of the reason will be evident thus, Because I was greatly afflicted, I said in my
haste, etc.

I take the former relation to be here especially intended, by reason of that *
note of distinction which is betwixt this clause and the verse following.

Verse. 11. I said (...)
in my haste. The word translated (...)
haste, properly signifies to fly for fear. It is used to set out the
fearful flight and haste of the Assyrians when they thought that the Hittites
and Philistines were suddenly coming upon them, they cast away their garments
a King. 7. 1^. (...)
in their fearful flight. Hebrew Interpreters do sometimes translate it,
Targum (...) cum ^estinarent
to make haste, as in the place quoted: and sometimes to be affrighted, as
where it is said, Psalm. 104. 7. (...)
At the voice of thy thunder they hasted away, they translate it, Targum (...)
terrebuntur.
They shall be terrified. Whereas therefore there seems to be a difference
betwixt interpreters, some translating this clause thus, in my haste; Others
thus, in my fear; Vatab Annot in 2 King. 7. 15. si^ exponit (...) dum trepidan
tes fugerent.

Athanas de Passion. Dom. Gratian. de Poenit.


both interpretations may well stand together, and be thus composed, in my
sudden fear: or in my fearful haste; so as unadvised, rash, sudden fear was
the cause of this conceit and censure, All men are liars.

A difference also there is in the interpretation of this clause. For some
expound it as a speech of faith: opposing men to God, who only is true: as if
he had more largely thus expressed his mind, The Lord is without all question
most true, faithful and constant in all his promises: and where men often make
question thereof, it is by reason of that vanity and weakness which is in
them: for all men are liars. This difference betwixt God and man is most true:
expressly noted by the Apostle in these words, Romans 3. 4.
Let God be true, and every man a liar: but this interpretation in this place
cannot well stand with this clause immediately going before, I said in my
haste. For, to pronounce all men liars in opposition to Gods truth, is no rash,
passionate speech: but a true, advised, Apostolical speech.

Calvinus Comment. in hunc loc.

Sic and Lorinus, aliique Commentat.


Others therefore expound it as a speech of incredulity, and refer this
general particle all, in special to such messengers of God as were sent to
him, to comfort him in his afflictions, and to promise him deliverance and
advancement. Now though at first he might believe them, yet when he was in the
extremity of his perplexity, so as he doubted of all recovery, then he made
question of the truth of their words, and in his sudden fear said to this
purpose, Certainly as the common fort of men, so even these servants and
Prophets of God are liars: all men, not these excepted, all men are liars. Now
where he lays the blame on men, therein, notwithstanding this his great
weakness, he testifies a reverend respect toward God, in that he does not
question the truth of Gods Word, but rather imagines that the Prophets did not
well take their errand, but brought a wrong message: and in that respect
charge not God, but men with falsehood, and says, All men are liars. In the
original the words of this clause are in the singular (...)
number thus, Every man is a liar: but the generality in the singular number is
of as large an extent as in the plural, and for sense truly and fully thus
translated, All men are liars.

Sum.
In this digression there is A mixture of faith and fear.

The parts are two.

1 The evidence of his faith, verse. 10.

2 The instance of his fear, verse. 11.

The former is Propounded. The former is Amplified.


In the proposition we have to note

1 The Expression of his says, I believed

2 The Confirmation thereof, Therefore have I spoken.

The Amplification is taken from the extremity of his distress, I was greatly
afflicted.

The latter, namely his fear, is

1 Implied, by this phrase, In my sudden fear.

2 Exemplified, by this instance, I said, all men are liars.

The Expression of his faith has relation to the time of his trial: for he
says not of the time present wherein he was freed from his troubles, I
believe: but of that time which before he described in the second and third
verses, whereby he gives demonstration that

I. Faith remains firm in troubles.

The Confirmation of the truth of his faith by his acknowledging Gods mercy,
calling upon God, promising to walk before God, which is the speaking here
meant, gives evidence that,

II. Faith makes men freely utter their mind.

The Amplification of the truth of his faith by the fore trouble wherein he
was, thus set out, I was greatly afflicted, gives proof, that

III. No affliction can utterly suppress faith. If not great affliction, what
affliction?

The implication of his hasty, rash passion under this phrase, in my haste, or
in my sudden fear, gives instance that

IIII. Saints are subject to sudden passions.

The uttering of his mind in this his passion, for says he, I said in my
haste, further shows that

V. Distempered passion causes unadvised speech.

The Matter of his speech, which is to account such as brought him promises of
his deliverance, to be liars, implies, that

VI. Extremity of distress causes Saints to account promises of release to be
vain.

The object of his imputation, men, (not God, though those men were sent of
God) men are liars, imports that

VII. Saints in their most disturbed passion bear a reverend respect to God.

Yet withal his unjust blaming of men (which he here acknowledges to be an
effect of his weak flesh, and distempered passion) declares, that

VIII. Man must not unjustly be blamed.

The extent of that object noted by this note of generality, all, intimates,
that

IX. Passion makes men judge all alike.

The Connection of the two parts of this digression, whereof the former is an
evidence of his faith, the latter an evidence of his fear, gives assurance,
that

X. Faith and fear may be mixed together.

The first and third of these doctrines are of near affinity. The third
compriseth the first in it, as a greater the less. Upon the proof of the
third follows the proof of the first. I will therefore put off the first to
the third.

. 67. Of that boldness of speech which faith works.
II. FAith makes men freely utter their mind. To show that this was not proper
to this Prophet only, but is common to other believers also, the Apostle
makes this inference, 2 Cor. 4, 13.
We also believe and therefore speak. Well weigh the ardency, the instancy,
the importunity of the prayers of Genesis 18. 24 etc.
Abraham, -- 32. 26, etc.
Jacob, Exo. 32. 11.
Moses, Isa. 38. 11.
Hezekiah, Dan. 9. 18, 19
Daniel, and others, and you will find this verified in them, that they also
believed and therefore spoke. The like may be noted of the solemn
protestations of Psalm 119. 106
David and 2 Chro 15. 14
of the Jews in Asas and Neh. 5. 13.
Nehemiahs time: and of the Congratulations of Psalm. 57. 7, etc -- 136. -- 148.
David, and of Neh 86.
the people in Ezras time.

Faith works in man assurance of Gods gracious acceptance, and so ministers
unto his soul an holy boldness: according to that of the Apostle, Ephesians. 3. 12.
We have boldness and access with confidence by faith.

Faith is the first of the mighty works of Gods Spirit that are wrought in man.
The mother of all sanctifying graces: that which adds power and efficacy to
all the rest: and therefore must needs in it self be powerfully operative. It
is so spiritually hot as it cannot be smothered, much less extinguished; like
an hot fiery vapor, the more it is suppressed, Per Antiperistasin Vide
Aristot. Meteor. lib. 2. cap. 8. and 9.
the more violent it waxes. Philosophy teaches that hot vapors by a repulsion
of contraries wax violent, whence proceeds the violence of thunder, of
winds, of earthquakes, and such other meteors. And Theology teaches, that
the fervent graces of Gods Spirit, among which faith is most principal, wax
the more spiritually violent by opposition.

1 Demonstration of the truth of says. 1 Cor. 13. 7.
1 Trial is hereby made of the truth and measure of faith. If they that
believe speak, what may be thought of them that speak not? Will charity (that
believes all things, that hops all things) suffer to believe and hope that
^aith is in him, who has no heart to pray, no boldness to profess the name
of God, no spirit to praise him? He that is altogether silent, has assuredly
no faith. He that speaks faintingly and coldly, has but a fainting and cold
faith. This is one of those works whereof we ought every one to say, as we are
taught by an Apostle, I will show thee my faith by my works.

2 Be persuaded now to give this evidence of thy faith. 2 Direction How faith
is to speak.
Speak man, speak if thou believe. Be not tongue-tied: Psalm. 81. 10.
Open thy mouth wide. God has promised to fill it. Speak to God secretly in
thy closet. Speak of him openly before men. Speak to him and of him in thy
family, in assemblies of Saints, at all times, in all places. Speak in the
poores cause. Speak in matters of charity and justice. In supplication 1 Samuel
1. 15.
Pour out thy soul before the Lord. Psalm 38. 9.
Set all thy desire before him. In profession of his name be -- 119. 46.
not ashamed: note for this the Apostles inference. 2 Timothy 1. 12.
I am not ashamed, says he. Why? I know whom I have believed. If thou be
ashamed of Christ here, Mar 8 38.
he will be ashamed of thee when he comes in the glory of his Father. In
gratulation, Luke 17. 15.
With a loud voice glorify God. Herein Psalm. 57. 8.
the tongue of that man, who was Act. 13. 22.
a man after Gods own heart, was his glory. O that Magistrates, Subjects,
Ministers, People, Houshold-governours, Parents, Neighbors, All of all sorts
would do this! That Magistrates who believe would boldly speak in the cause of
God and man! Speak boldly for maintaining truth and purity of religion: speak
freely in executing good justice and righteous judgment! That Subjects would
be bold and free in consenting to the holy covenants and wholesome ordinances
which their pious and good governors make! That Ministers who believe, would
open their mouth Ephesians. 6. 19.
boldly to make known the mystery of the Gospel, and pray and give thanks
zealously, chearefully! That people would testify their faith by manifesting a
joint consent, and saying, Amen, Amen! That parents and householders would
command Neh. 8. 6. Genesis 18. 19.
their children and household to keep the way of the Lord! That neighbors
would admonish, exhort, and (as just occasion by sin is offered) reprove, and
every way edify one another! Had men faith, Gods word would be in their heart
Ier. 20. 9.
2 Cor. 6. 11.
as a burning fire shut up in their bones: they would be weary w^^h
forbearing. Their mouth would be opened: their heart enlarged. Much would Gods
glory be advanced: much good would be done to man, if every one of us in our
places (...). Justin.

Mart. Expos. Fid.


could in truth say, I believed, therefore have I spoken. Yea doubts arising
against that which is meet to be uttered, would be suppressed. Faith would
soon quell them all. He therefore gave a good advice, that said, when
inextricable doubts do trouble thee, let faith be ready to make resolution, and
to give satisfaction.

. 68. Of faiths stability in trialls.
I.. 66.
FAith remains firm in troubles.

III. No affliction can utterly suppress faith. How firm in the uttermost
trial was their faith that said, Job. 13. 15.
Though he slay me yet will I trust in him. Psalm 23. 4.
Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear none
evil. 2 Cor. 4. 8, etc.
We are troubled on every side, yet not distressed: we are perplexed, yet not
in despair, etc. Romans 8. 38, 39
I am persuaded that neither life, etc. That these instances may not be
thought to be so extraordinary as they should not be exemplary, note the
Apostles ample extension thereof, We having the same spirit of faith: (he says
not in the singular number, I, as speaking of himself alone, but in the
plural, we, as speaking of Inexpugnabilem fidem sup^rar^ non potuit saviens
diu plaga repetita. Cypr. Epist. l. 2. ^p 6.
many, and that indefinitely, as excluding none) We also believe and therefore
speak. It is noted of the ancient Christians, that many cruel strokes and
much affliction long raging could not overcome their impregnable faith.

The true faith of all Saints is rooted in Christ, (Col. 2. 7.) who is able to
minister virtue and vigor, and refreshing unto it in the most blustering,
blasting and nipping times that can Ier. 17. 8.
be. If a tree that is planted by the waters, and spreads out her roots by the
river, shall not see when heat comes, but her leaf shall be green, and shall
not be careful in the year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding
fruit: how much more shall Psalm. 92. 13.
they flourish who are planted in the house of the Lord, and rooted in Christ,
who will be in them a well of water springing Ioh 4. 14.
to everlasting life. It is said of hope the daughter of faith, that it enters
within the veil which is above As hope herin Heb 6. 19.
is different from other anchors, which are cast downward, so faith from other
trees which grow downwards. Though they therefore that are planted in the most
fertile soiles, and by the best rivers may wither, yet will not says sail.
Luk 22. 32. Instruction in the benefit of faith.

See The Whole Armor of God Treat 2. Part. 6 69, ^0.




Admirable is the benefit of faith. It shows it self in all seasons: it
serves for all turns. It cheeres us in prosperity, it revives us in adversity.
It ever keeps us in a golden mean, so as we be not too much puffed up with
prosperity, nor too much dejected with adversity. In prosperity it moves us
to 1 Chro. 29. 11* etc.
acknowledge the bounty and magnificence of the Lord. In adversity it makes us
2 Chro. 20. 12
roll our eyes up to God, and to 1 Samuel 30. 6.
sustain and comfort our selves in him: yea when the clouds of crosses hide the
brightness of his favor from us, it makes us Os^. 6. 1, 2.
wait till those clouds be driven away.

Admonition to get, preserve, increase faith.
Among, and above other gifts and graces get faith. Having gotten it, keep it.
In keeping it, nourish it so as it may increase. All these are implied under
this metaphor, Ephesians. 6. 16.
Take the shield of faith: whereof having published a large Treatise, it shall be
sufficient here to have pointed at them. See more in The Whole Armor of God.
Treat. 2. Part. 6.. 16. etc.

. 69. Of sudden passion whereunto Saints are subject.
PSALM. CXVI. XI.
I said in my sudden fear, All men are liars.
IIII.. 6^.
SAints are subject to sudden passions. So much in another place acknowledges
the Psalmist of himself, thus, Psalm. 31. ^^.
I said in my haste I am cut off, etc. (...)
The very same word is here and there used. It was Number. 10. 10.
a sudden and distempered passion that Moses and Aaron manifested at the water
of Meribah: and 1 Samuel 25. 22
David at Nabals churlish answer: and Ion. 4. 1.
Jonah at Gods mercy showed to Nineveh: and Luk 9. 54.
James and John at the Samaritans refusing to receive Christ: and Acts 15-39.
Sancti cum mente sint spirituales, adhuc tamen isto corruptibili corpore quod
aggravat animam rect^ intelliguntur esse carnales. Aug cont Iul. Pelag l 6. c.
11. Reprehension of unjust reprehenders.
Paul and Barnabas about receiving John Mark.

The flesh remains in such as have the spirit in them. By virtue of the
Spirits abode in them they are Saints, true Saints: but by reason of the
mixture of the flesh, they are subject to symptoms, effects and infirmities of
the flesh, among which, sudden passions may well be reckoned. For, passions are
like to lusty pampered horses, which if they be not held in with the bridle of
reason, and curb of discretion, will run with a careere to their own and
riders hazard.

May it not now be thought a most unjust consure, to judge all those to be
carnal, and unregenerate who speak in haste, who bewray sudden passions of
anger, of grief, of fear, of joy or of any the like? Saints having been
proved to be subject to sudden passion, to censure them for men unregenerate,
who on a sudden are in passion, what is it but to Isa. 5. 20.
call good evil, and to make light darkness, and sweet bitter? Surely these
kinds of censures arise from sudden passions. If these then be infallible
signs of an unregenerate estate, such censures are a demonstration that the
authors of them are not regenerate. Yea demonstrations enough may be made
against every one that bears the name of a Saint, that he only bears the
name of a Saint, but is no Saint. Thus shall all be brought into the labyrinth
of despair, out of which they cannot know how to wind themselves. But learn
to distinguish betwixt infirmity and obstinacy, and notwithstanding the
infirmities that in this world thou art subject unto, thou may cheerfully go
on in that course which will Heb. 12. 23.
bring thee to that condition wherein the spirits of just men made perfect, are.

Admonition to keep passion down.
Yet take heed of nourishing and cherishing, of boulstering up, and justifying
passion: but rather do what in thee lies to suppress and keep them down.
For though, so long as we abide in the tabernacle of this body, and are
compassed about with frail flesh, we cannot clean cut off Nos affectus and
perturbationes, quam diu in tabernaculo corporis huius habi^amu^, and fragili
carne circumdamur, moderari and regere possumus, amputare non possumus. Hier.
ad Demetr. de Virg. serve.
all affections and passions, yet we may moderate and rule them: which if we do
not, passions will soon wax violent, and grow unto excess, if with prudence
and diligence they be not kept under. They are like weeds, which grow apace, if
they be suffered. They are like beasts and birds, that being naturally wild, if
they be not narrowly watched, kept in dark, kept awake, kept from light and
sleep, and taught to obey, will ever be wild, never tame. Experience of all
ages has verified this adage (whereof. 4.
before) Passions are bad masters but good servants. If they rule over reason,
they will be as Lords of misrule, outrageous, disturbers of all order. It will be
in man's little polity, consisting of body and soul, as it was in Israel, when
there was no King in Israel, Every man did Judge. 21. 25.
that which was right in his own eyes: whence it came to pass that some
Tribes in Israel were little better then Sodom. There is more need of meaues to
weaken then to strengthen passions, to famish then to cherish them, to curb
them in, then to spur them out, and to hold them back, then to give them
head. Though they be in such as are justified and sanctified, yet may they not
by any means be justified, or countenanced as things lawful. To justify a
sudden distempered passion, is, to call evil good, to put darkness Isa. 5.
20*
for light, and bitter for sweet, against which a woe is denounced. To
countenance them, is to make them violent and irresistible in their rebellion,
as Abs^lom and Adoniah ^ Sam. 15. 10. 1 King. 1. 5.
were. Thus an infirmity is turned into obstinacy. As therefore men are
watchful over powder in their houses to keep fire from it, both because it
soon takes fire, and also being once set on fire, it is suddenly all on flame,
and by that means very violent and pernicious: so on those very grounds we
Passiones habent utilitatem suam, s^ per eas considerantis pervigil currat
intentio. Chrysostom. Hom. 2 in Heb 1.
have need to be as watchful over passions, and to keep them from all occasions
that may stir them up: for they are soon stirred, and being stirred, wax
vehement and violent. Yet I will not deny but that passions may have their use
and commodity, if there be a very watchful heed had over them. But for
instance of their violence, if not well watched, note the next collection.

. 70. Of unadvised speech arising from distempered pas^ion.
V.. 66.
DIstempered passion causes unadvised speech. Instance the speeches recorded
in Scripture to come from the distempered passion of those who were mentioned
in the former. As from Numb. 20 10
Moses and Aaron, 1 Samuel 25* 22
David, Ion. 4 1.
Jonah, Luke 9. 54.
James and John, and others. Psalm 106. 33.
Of him that was provoked in spirit, it is said, that he spoke unadvisedly with
his lips.

Mat. 12. 34.
Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. For the tongue is a most
ready interpreter of a man's inward temper. The mouth is the door of the soul.
If the fire of passion be once kindled therein, the flame thereof will soon
break out at the mouth.

The consideration hereof adds weight to the admonition given in the formers
for watching over our passions: in that the evil arising from thence is not
only inward, such as may be kept close within the bowels and breast of a man:
but also outward, such as will break forth in words especially, to the offense
of others, and to the greater disgrace of Words arising out of passion violent.
our profession, and dishonor of God. Words that proceed out of passion are often
violent, and cause much mischief. Many think they extenuate the matter when
they say, Words are but wind. Let the violence of wind in a man's head, stomach,
belly, veins, guts, or other parts of his body, yea and in the open air, on
sea and land be considered, and it will be found, that enough is said of words
when they are said to be wind. Iam. ^. ^, etc.
Saint James, in regard of the violence of the tongue, resembles it to other
very strong and forceable things, as to the bit of a bridle, whereby the rider
makes Quotidiana sor^ax nostra est humana li^gua. Aug. Consess. l. 10. c. 37.
a lusty horse to turn this way and that way, as he list: to the helm of a
ship, wherewith a Pilot turns an huge vessel on the sea whethersoever he
will: to a fire which kindles a great matter. (Yea it is like a burning
furnace which is most violent.) And the Apostle adds, that it sets on fire
the course of nature, and it is set on fire of hell. Yea he makes it more
fierce then the wild beasts. For every kind of beasts, and of birds, and of
serpents, and things in the sea, is tamed, and has been tamed of mankind: But
the tongue can no man tame, it is an unruly evil, full of deadly poison. What
Orator could more lively have set out the violence of so little a member then
the Apostle has done? No marvel now that where a man has two eyes, two
ears, two nostrills, two arms, two hands, and many other members double, he
has but one tongue (one being enough, if not too much to rule) and that the
fabric of that one tongue is so ordered by nature, or rather by the God of
nature, as it is: that it should be placed in the highest part of the body, the
head, as in a castle on an hill, and be there bound with the roots of it as
with strong bars, and kept within the two leaved gate of the lips, and the
percullis of the teeth: notwithstanding all which, strait charge is given Psalm.
34 12. 13
to him that desires life, and loves many days that he may see good, to keep
his tongue. For, Pro ^8. 21.
Death and life are in the power of the tongue. And -- 21. 23.
who so keeps his mouth and his tongue, keeps his soul from troubles: and
the Psalmist well knowing that he of himself was not able to rule that unruly
evil, thus prays to God, Psalm. 141. 3.
Set a watch, O Lord, before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips. Seeing
passion opens the gate, pulls up the percullis, and makes a passage for
this wild beast, and not only so, but stirs up the rage of it, and sharpneth
the deadly point of it, surely this one effect is motive sufficient to make men
do what possibly they can to moderate passion. For the Lingua non fr^^^^a in
u^^ est, usi qu^a ^a^^le ^^bitur. Aug Enar. in Psalm. 83.
tongue is as slippery as an ^ele. It being placed in moisture, it must needs
soon slip.

Hereby take notice of the corruption of man in soul and body. As the eyes and
ears are windows to let in corruption into the soul: so the mouth is a door
to let it out, whereby it comes to be the more infectious to the damage of
others. For, evil words corrupt good manners in our selves and others. Thus
the tongue that is the pen of a ready Illa quidem gladius, calamus, at hac erat
non secundum propriam naturam, sed secundum utentium electionem. Linguae enim
natura and huius and illius una erat, operatio autemnon una. Chrysostom. ad Pop.
Hom. 4.
writer in one, is a sword in another: not in its own nature, but by the
different use of it. For, the nature of this and that man's tongue is the same:
but the use is not the same. Which should make us the more watchful over our
tongue.

. 71. Of Saints questioning Gods promises in distress.
VI.. 66.
EXtremity of distress makes Saints account promises of release to be vain.
Which that worthy Saint did, 1 Samuel 27. 1.
who said in his heart, I shall now perish one day by the hand of Saul: and
again speaking to God, Psalm. 31. 22.
I am cut off from before thine eyes. After that God had promised to Abraham
that he would Genesis 12. 2.
Make of him a great nation, and -- 13. 16.
make his s^ed as the dust of the earth, he and his wife being both old, he thus
said, -- 15. 2.
Lord God, what will thou give me seeing I go childlesse? Did not this speech
show that he accounted Gods promise to be vain? Yea and this speech also of
Moses, Number. 11. 14, 15.
I am not able to bear all this people alone, because it is too heavy for me.
And if thou deal thus with me, kill me, I pray thee, out of hand. And this, --
12.
Shall the flock and the herds be slain for them to suffice them? Or shall
all the fish of the sea be gathered together to suffice them? Luke 24. 11, 25.
Dicitur infirmitas, non esse solidatum in side, simpliciter neque pers^^tum
esse. Chrysostom. Hom. 28. in 2 Cor. 13
Did not Christ's Disciples, and others that believed in him, account the
promises of his resurrection to be vain? Too evident fruits of the great
weakness of those worthy Saints were these. For, not to be steadfast in faith,
is a great weakness.

Afflictions do often so stir the corrupt humor of the flesh which is in every
Saint, as it sends up such abundance of vapors of infidelity, as they cause
a great mist to spread it self before the eyes of men's understanding, so as
they cannot clearly see the light of Gods promises, whereby they are brought
to make question of the truth thereof: even as children and fools do think
there is no light in the Sun when a thick cloud has overspread the face of
the sky, and hinders the beams of the Sun from shining on the earth. The
best many times, through the violence of temptations, in the things of God show
themselves as children and fools.

Direction to suspect our weakness.
Let us all learn, by such patterns of the weakness of the flesh, even in the
best, to suspect our selves, and to Heb. 4. 1.
sear lest a promise being left us of entering into his rest, any of us seem
to come short of it. Before the time of trial come, let us pray, Luke 22. 32.
as Christ did for Peter, that our says fail not: and, according to the 2 Cor.
12. 9.
promise made to Paul, that Gods grace may be sufficient for us: and that 1 Cor.
10. 13.
the Lord would not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able Above all
take we heed of presumptuous selfe-conceipt, that we be not like him, who in
too much confidence of his own strength said to Christ, Mat. 26. 33.
Though all men should be offended because of thee, yet will I never be
offended: and again, -- 35.
Though I should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee. A worthy profession
and resolution this was, if it had not been uttered upon too great a
confidence of his own ability to stand, and withstand all temptations. But it
being uttered on presumption of his own strength, the issue thereof was most
woeful. Nothing more provokes God to leave men to themselves, and to suffer
Satan to prevail against them, then an high conceit of themselves. It is most
meet that such should know their own weakness. But nothing can give to man a
more evident demonstration of his frailty and weakness, then his slips and
falls when he is brought to the trial. This will make him say, Job 40. 4.
Behold I am vile; what shall I answer thee? -- 42, 6.
I abhor my self, I repent in dust and ashes.

. 72. Of Saints reverend esteem of God in their greatest straits.
VII.. 66.
SAints in their disturbed passion bear a reverend respect to God. So did they
who said to God, Ier. 12. 1.
Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee, etc. Job 40. 5.
I will lay my hand upon my mouth. Once have I spoken, but I will not answer:
yea twice, but I will proceed no further. And he who said of God, Romans 11. 33.
How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out: And
thereupon made this inference, -- 9. 10.
O man, who art thou that reply against God? Though the Apostle were not
disturbed in his passion when he uttered these speeches, yet the occasion which
made him utter them was such, as did amaze many: But his respect to God made
him admire and adore that which others excepted against.

(...). Arist. Analyt. l. 1. c. 1
1 There are certain principles against which men of understanding will not
oppose, or dispute: no nor search after the reason of them. Among and above all
other principles those which concern the infiniteness and perfection of Gods
essence, properties, word, and works are most infallible and undeniable. Saints
therefore, who have a true and right understanding of God, dare not impeach
Gods truth, justice, wisdom, power, mercy, or any thing else in God, though the
works of God, and Gods dealing with them do seem very strange unto them.
Knowledge of Gods perfection works such reverence in them toward God, as they
had rather remain as in a maze, not knowing what to say, then impute any blame
to God. If they lay any blame, it shall be rather on man then on God.

2 The spirit never wholly leaves the Saints. Though the weakness of the
flesh be very great, yet will the spirit keep them from falling from their
God. Mat 26. 41.
The spirit is ready when the flesh is weak. Yea Gal. 5. 17.
The spirit lusts against the flesh, and restrains it from fulfilling the
lusts thereof. So as when the flesh would rise against God, the spirit keeps
Dehortation from undue thoughts of God.

Quisquis Deum cogitat pie caveat quantum potest aliquid de Deo sentire quod
non sit.

Aug de Trin. l. 5. c. 1.


it down.

Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded. Let us testify our
high esteem of the Lord, our reverend respect toward him, by not daring to
entertain a thought, or to suffer a word to slip out of our mouth* which may
any way be derogatory to any of his excellencies: or to think any thing of him
otherwise then indeed he is. Will thou condemn him that is most just? Is it
fit to say to a King, Thou art wicked? Or to Princes, ye are ungodly? How much
less to him that accepts not the persons of Princes, nor regards the rich
more then the poor, (Job 34. 17, etc.) To admire and adore the unsearchable
ways of the Almighty, may well beseem sons of men. But to think a thought,
or to utter a word that may lay any blame upon them, is sensual and
diabolical.

Direction to esteem God aright.
To have thine heart well seasoned with a due respect of God, be well informed
in his excellencies, and often meditate thereon. Ignorance of God is it that
causes many base and unmeet thoughts of him to enter into our hearts. Want of
meditation makes what we know, not to be remembered, or not to be regarded.
Add therefore to the means of information which God affords, serious and
settled meditation: Thus thy mind being filled with divine thoughts, will not
suffer impious and blasphemous thoughts to harbor there.

. 73. Of blaming men unjustly.
VIII.. 66.
MEn must not unjustly be blamed. God made an express law against it, and
said, Exo. 20. 16.
Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor. -- 23. 1. Pro. 24.
28. Mat. 7. 1. Tit. 3. 2.
Many like prohibitions are in the word. Though the wrong be done to man, yet
the fact is Pro. 6 16, 19
abominable to God: who to restrain men from it, has enacted severe Deuteronomy. 19.
19.
laws against such as transgress therein. Yea they are accounted unworthy to
Psalm. 15 3.
dwell in Gods holy hill.

The wrong which by unjust accusing and blaming of men is done, is one of the
greatest wrongs that can be done against man, because thereby that which of all
other things is the most precious to man, his good-name, is impeached. In which
respect this sin, though it be a direct wrong against man, is styled Ephesians. 4.
31. Col. 3. 8.
blasphemy: and they who speak evil of men unjustly, are said to Tit. 3. 2. 1
Pet 4. 4. 2 Pet. 2. 10.
blaspheme them: which is, according to the notation of the Greek word, to
(...). samam ladere.
hurt a man's same: or otherwise, to (...). impo^ere r^moribus.
assault one with tales, to gawle and vex him with rumors and reports. Not
without cause therefore has the Holy Ghost resembled the tongues of such men
to Psalm. 140 3.
the tongue of a Serpent, which is very poisonous: to -- *52. 2.
a rasor, which is very sharp: and to -- 57. 4.
a sharp sword, that pierces deep: their teeth to spears and arrows, which
are mortal instruments: their throat to -- 5. 9.
an open sepulcher, that devoureth much: and their words to -- 140. 3.
the poison of adders, which is a most venomous and pestilent poison.

Admonition to watch over our words.
How watchful now ought we to be over our tongues, whereby so great wrong may
be done to man? The tongue stands in a most slippery place; words are out of
the mouth many times before a man is aware of them: the more watchful
therefore we ought to be. Iam. 3 9.
With the tongue we bless God. Shall we therewith blaspheme men who are made
after the similitude of God? Shall there proceed out of the same mouth blessing
and cursing? My brethren, these things ought not to be so. As we make
conscience of dishonouring God by improus, and profane speeches directly
uttered against his divine Majesty, so let us take heed of collateral
blasphemy against such as bear his image. He that said Thou shall not take the
name of the Lord thy God in vain, said also, Thou shall not bear false
witness against thy neighbor. Now if thou blaspheme not the name of God, yet
if thou belie thy brother, thou art become a transgressor of the law. Let
therefore that reverend respect which thou bear to the name of God, work in
thee a due respect to the name of man, that thou do no wrong thereto.

. 74. Of censuring all alike.
IX.. 66.
PAssion makes men judge all alike. True it is that by reason of that natural
corruption which has infected all mankind, all are alike. Rom 3. 22, 23
There is no difference. For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of
God. Thus Psalm. 14. 3. Romans 3. 10.
a Prophet, and an Apostle also, not in passion, but by immediate instinct of
the Spirit, said, There is none righteous, no not one. Yea, in this sense -- 4.
the Apostle uses the very words, that are here used, Every man is a liar, and
yet no man unjustly blamed. But to judge such as have the Spirit of God in
them, and are in what they speak guided by the Spirit of God, yea and bring
their message from God, to judge them to be as natural unregenerate men are,
liars, this is a most unjust imputation. Yet thus did passion make this Prophet
judge the Prophets of the Lord that came to him in the name of the Lord, with
the word of the Lord, to be. Both passion and hardness of heart made Exo. 7.
11.
Pharaoh judge Moses and Aaron to be like to the sorcerers and magicians of
Egypt. So did 2 King. 19. 11
Sennacherib judge Hezekiah and his people, and kingdom to be no better then
the Kings, people and kingdoms of other nations. Ier. 5. 31. Lam. 2. 14. Zac.
13. 4. Mic. 3. 5.
It is often noted of the Jews, that they gave no more heed to such faithful
Prophets as the Lord sent, then to such false Prophets as ran of themselves,
and were not sent: who spoke a vision of their own heart, and not out of the
mouth of the Lord. Yea many times 1 King. 22. 8. Ier. 18. 18. -- 37. 19*
Passion like colored glass.
more credit was given to such false Prophets, then to true ones.

Passion in the soul is as color in glass. Now by experience we know, that
what a man looks upon through colored glass, appears to him to be of the
same color that the glass is of, though it be in truth of another color. All
objects are presented through such a glass in one and the same color. So to a
man in passion all men seem alike: all liars, all deceitful, all unjust, all
unmercifull, all as one. Hence these or such like speeches often come from them.
I will believe no man. I will trust no man. No man will deal faithfully with
me. None can do me any good.

It is on this ground very requisite that men in passion, or overwhelmed with
affliction learn to suspect themselves, and to suppose that they may be
deceived. We use thus to persuade men that by sickness are distempered in
their taste, and cannot discern any difference betwixt meats, but loath all
alike, to believe others that have both good understanding of what is wholesome
and hurtful, and also a taste well tempered, and accordingly against their
own distempered humor to take and eat that which those others do offer unto
them for their good. Many that in passion have Haec est ver^ dementia, non
cogitare, nec scire quod mendacia non diu fallant: noctemq* tam diu esse, quam
diu illucescat dies. Cypr. Epist l* 1. ep 3. Settled passion blame worthy
had a very ill opinion of their best friends, and been moved to inveigh
against them most bitterly, when the passion has been over, have been very
sorry for that wrong they did, and much repented the same. If such would have
suspected themselves, they might have prevented that occasion of
after-repentance. It is a kind of madness not to think and know that lies
cannot long deceive: and that it is night while the day shines out. Knowledge
of truth does as evidently discover a lie, as the Sun dispells darkness.

If such general censures proceeding from men in passion be blameworthy (for
here the Prophet acknowledges it so to be) what are they when they come from
men in cold blood (as we speak) when there is no affliction to vex and
grievethem, no occasion to anger them, no great cause to stir up any passion in
them, except a malevolent humor in themselves? Too too frequent are such
censures, and that most commonly when such as by function, profession, or any
other like relation have dependence on God. Thus if some Ministers be observed
to be proud, covetous, licentious, or otherwise vicions, a general imputation
shall be laid upon all, All Ministers are thus and thus. So on like grounds, All
professors are hypocrites, All frequenters of sermons are busiebodies. All that
make conscience of swearing are liars, etc. Thus in other cases, All Tradesmen
are cousoners. All citizens are usurers. All Physicians are hard-hearted. All
Lawyers are unconscionable. All officers are bribers. All Patrons are
simoniacall. All courtiers are proud. All Scholars are vain glorious All
husbands are slaves. All wives will be masters. All servants are idle. Yea it is
usual thus to impeach all of a nation: as, All Spaniards are proud. All
Italians are Machevillians. All Frenchmen are false-hearted. All Dutchmen are
drunkards. All Scotch-men are treacherous* All Englishmen are fantastical.
Such general censures cannot be but unjust censures: and yet too too frequent
they are.

. 75. Of the mixture of faith and fear.
X.. 66.
FAith and fear may be mixed together. After Genesis ^5. 6.
Abraham had so believed as his faith was counted to him for righteousness, he
said, -- 20. 11.
They will slay me for my wives sake, which argued much fear. Of faithful
Jacob it is said, -- 3^. 7.
He was greatly afraid. He that said, Psalm. 5^. 5, 16
I will call upon the Lord and he shall save me (an undoubted evidence of faith)
said also in the very same Psalm, Fearfulness and trembling are come upon
me, and horror has overwhelmed me (an apparent sign of fear.) Mat 8. 26. --
14. 31. Luk 24. 37.
Often does Christ upbraid fear even to his believing Disciples. Of Peter it is
noted, after that he was endued with an extraordinary measure of faith and
other gifts, that Gal. 2. 12.
He feared them which were of the circumcision.

1 Cor. 13. 9.
That which the Apostle says of knowledge, is true of faith, and of all other
graces for the time of this life, We believe in part. So much as wants in man
of the perfection of faith, fear fills up: as air fills up so much of a
vessel as wants water or other liquor. Exo. 17. 8, etc.
Fear to the Soul of man is as Amalek to Israel: and Faith as Moses. Fear is
ready on all occasions to invade the Soul. If Faith wax faint, and let down
her hand, Fear prevails. Yea 2 Samuel 3. 1.
as the two houses of David and Saul were together in Israel, and maintained
war one against the other, so do Fear and Faith in the same souls. But as
Faith waxes stronger and stronger, Fear will wax weaker and weaker.

This mixture puts us in mind of sundry duties, as,

1 To bear with the infirmities of Saints, Gal. 6. 1.

2 To be watchful over our selves, Mat. 26. 41.

3 To beware of presumption, Mat. 26. 35.

4 To take heed of grieving the Spirit, Ephesians. 4. 30.

5 To pray for increase of faith, Luke 17. 5.

6 To stir up the gift of God in us, 2 Timothy 1. 6.

7 To check our selves for doubting, Psalm. 42. 5.

Much comfort may hence arise, to such as mislike this Timorem non de malitia,
neque de superbia, vel contemptu praecepti dominici, sed de animi infirmitate
venientem noluit Dominus imputare. Aug Quaest. sup. Ios. l. 6. ^ ult.
fruit of the weakness of the flesh in them, and thereupon use what means
they can, and do their endeavor to cast off this fear. If notwithstanding
their grief for it, and strife against it, they find themselves still subject
thereto, let them not thereupon question the truth of their faith because of
that fear which appears to be in them. Their case in this case is no other
then has been evidenced to be the case of many of Gods ancient worthies. Such
fear coming not from malice, nor from pride, or contempt of any charge given
unto them by the Lord, but from the infirmity of the flesh, God would not
impute it to his people.

. 76. Of the interpretation and resolution of the twelfth Verse.
PSALM. CXVI. XII.
What shall I render unto the Lord: for all his benefits toward me?
HEre the Prophet returns to his Protestation: which being generally
manifested Verse. 9. I will walk, etc. is here more particularly expressed.

. 2.
This is set out

1 By way of Profession in relation to himself, I will, etc.

2 By way of Provocation in relation to others, Verse. 19. Praise ye, etc.

His Profession is Propounded His Profession is Repeated.


In his first propounding of it we may note

1 The Manner. Verse. 12.

2 The Matter. Verse. 13.

3 The Motives. Verse. 14, 15, 16.

The Manner of expressing his profession is very elegant (...).
by a Rhetorical Addubitation, wherein he reasons with himself about the
duty to be performed.

Of this Addubitation and kind of reasoning there be two parts.

Meaning of words.
1 A Question. Verse. 12.

2 An Answer (Verse. 13.) which declares the Matter.

As the English word (render) so (...)
the Hebrew, imports a kind of requital. It is attributed to God and man: and
that in relation to a good thing done, and signifies to reward: or to an
evil, and signifies to revenge.

Where David says of God, Psalm 18. 20.
According to the cleanness of my hands has he recompensed me, he uses (...)
this word: and where he prays to God for vengeance on the wicked, thus -- 28*
4.
Render to them their desert. This word is also used, where the brethren of
Joseph say of him, Genesis ^0. 15. (...) redder. do reddet.
He will certainly requite us all the evil which we have done unto him: and
where the King of Israel gives this charge for the Shunemite, 2 King 8. 6.
(...)
Restore all that was hers. Here it is attributed to man in relation to God,
but not as importing any possibility of satisfaction, but only a forwardness
to do any thing that might be acceptable to God.

The word translated (...)
benefits, is derived of that verb which in the 7th verse is translated, (...)
dealt bountifully. These in relation to God he styles HIS, his benefits, to
testify his acknowledgement of the good things which he had received to come
from God: and to be given by him.

He adds that general particle ALL, to show that from that present benefit
which God had conferred upon him, his heart was extended unto a consideration
of other favors which the Lord from time to time had done him.

(...)
The word translated toward me, properly signifies Over or above me. For it
comes from a verb that signifies to ascend: and to express the emphasis
thereof, some thus (...) Omnia benefits* tua ^aperant m^ Trem. and Iun.
translate it, All thy benefits go over me. But the preposition does often
signify (as our English translateth it) toward me: and it may very fitly be
so taken in this place.

The former part of the verse set out interrogatively by way of question (what
shall I render to the Lord?) manifests both an earnest desire to be truly and
thoroughly informed of whatsoever may be acceptable and pleasing to the Lord: and
also a settled resolution indeed to perform whatsoever he shall be informed of
concerning that point.

The latter part (all his benefits are toward me) are added as a reason of his
resolution. The first particle (for) is not in the Original. It makes the
sense somewhat doubtful. Some set it down as a preposition, without any stop
betwixt the former and this part, making but one entire clause of all, and
setting the interrogative point in the end of all, thus, Genev. interpr.
What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me? Others make
two distinct sentences, and place the interrogative in the end of the first
clause, thus, Trem. and Iun.
What shall I render to the Lord? all his benefits are toward me. The Kings
Translators set a colon betwixt the two parts: which does so distinguish them
as two sentences. This difference is not great: howsoever the sentences be
pointed, it is evident that the latter is added as a reason of the former. He
was inquisitive what to render to God, because God had been beneficial to him.

Sum.
Behold here A grateful disposition: which is manifested,

Parts.
By his Inquisition By his Profession.


In the former there is considerable

1 The Subject, or matter enquired after. What shall I render?

2 The Object, or person concerning whom the inquiry is made, The Lord.

The latter manifests the just occasion of the former, His benefits: which
are set out

1 By an amplification, all

2 By an application, toward me.

These several branches note out sundry properties of a grateful mind.

The Inquisition, (What shall I, etc.) shows that

I. Gratefulness makes men inquisitive.

The thing enquired after being indefinitely set down, (What?) implies that

II. A grateful mind is ready to do any thing.

The person (the Lord) for whose sake this enquiry is made, declares that

III. True gratefulness has especial relation to the Lord.

The reason hereof being His benefits, gives evidence that

IIII. A right understanding of Gods benefits works gratefulness.

The ample mention of Gods benefits in this general particle all, manifests
that

V. Gratefulness raises the mind from some favors to all.

The application of these benefits to himself in this phrase toward me gives
proof that

VI. Sense of Gods kindness to ones self does most enlarge the heart to
thankfulness.

The Prophets profession of Gods benefits, thus, All his benefits are toward
me, demonstrateth that

VII. Gratefulness works acknowledgement of kindness.

. 77. Of the property of gratefulness to make men inquisitive.
I.. 76.
Gratefulness makes men inquisitive. All manner of gratefulness whether to
God or man has this property. When David thought on Ionathans kindness to
him, though Jonathan were dead, yet 2 Samuel 9. 1.
he enquireth whether any were left of the house of Saul, that he might show him
kindness for Ionathans sake. And when he considered how God had established
peace to his people, first 1 Chro. 13. 2.
he enquireth and consulteth about bringing the Arc to the Tabernacle: and then
-- 17. 1.
advises about building a temple for the Lord. Hypocrites had learned this of
the upright: and therefore they from teeth outward are inquisitive, and say,
Mic. 6. 6, etc.
Wherewith shall I come before the Lord? etc.

In grateful persons there is a good and high esteem of the kindness that is
showed to them. With this esteem the heart is affected. True affection of the
heart is of an hot temper: it can no more be suppressed, and kept within the
heart, then an hot vapor, which the more it is suppressed, the more violent it
waxes, till it have got vent. Such an affection therefore will show it self.
And that it may manifest it self in the best manner to the best content of him
to whom they intend their thankfulness, they content not Dabo quidem quicquid
in me primum est: sed nihil dignum dare potero. Hier. Comment. in Mic. 6.
Demonstration of a grateful heart.
themselves with that which may first rise in their mind, or offer it self to
their thought, but diligently enquire what may give best content, and what may
be most acceptable. Which they are the rather moved to do, because they can do
or give nothing worthy of God, and his kindness to them.

By this outward evidence may men give evidence of their inward disposition;
and make others see how they are affected with the kindnesses that are done to
them. They who care not to know what may be acceptable to such as do good to
them, have assuredly an ungrateful heart. How can it be thought that they
would do the things that please, when they care not to know what may please? By
this may grateful subjects, people, children, servants, friends, and
neighbors be known. Yea by this may grateful subjects, people, children and
servants of the great Lord of heaven and earth be known: if, at least, their
enquiring after that which may be acceptable to God, come from an upright and
honest heart: and from a full and faithful purpose to perform what they
shall be rightly informed in, and indeed to render what they shall learn to be
acceptable to the Lord.

Direction for such as are inquisitive.
They who are so minded, have an excellent help to be well informed. That help
is Gods word, which distinctly and sufficiently reveals what is the good,
acceptable, and perfect will of God. Let all such therefore as are entirely
provoked to enquire after that which may be pleasing to God, by the holy
Scriptures Romans 12. 2.
prove, and Ephesians 5. 17.
understand the same. Ioh. 5. 39.
Search the Scriptures, (says our Lord Christ) for they are they which
testify of me. They testify of him, what he is. They testify of him, what he
accepts, what he approves: in what and by what he accounts himself
honored, and sufficiently recompensed for the kindness he shows.

. 78. Of a second property of gratefulness to do any thing.
II. 76.
A Grateful mind is ready to do any thing. The Prophet does not here determine
any set and particular things which he would be willing to render, but without
limitation or exception of any thing, says indefinitely, What? What shall I
render? When Ahashucrosh had heard out of the Chronicles what a great
good-turne Mordecai had done him, in revealing a dangerous treason plotted
against his life, in true desire of thankful requital he says, Est. 6. 6.
What shall be done to the man whom the King delights to honor? He prescribes
not any particular thing, but enquiteth wherein he may make the best requital:
and it appears that he did make that inquiry with a true intent to do any
thing: for though Haman through his ambition (supposing that the honor should
have been done to himself) advised the King to do more then was meet to be
done to a subject, yet the King commanded all to be done to Mordecai. Though
David was not permitted to build a temple for the Lord, yet such was his desire
to testify his grateful mind to God, as 1 Chro. 29. 2.
he prepared what he could, even with all his might, for the building thereof.
Zacchous was so ravished with that favor and honor that Christ did him in
coming to his house, as in way of gratefulness Luke 19. 8.
He gives half of his goods to the poor, and promises to restore fourefold
to all whom he had wronged.

Gratefulness so enamoureth the soul of a man, as it makes him think that he
can never do enough, and therefore he is ready to do any thing that he may and
can do. It will not suffer a man to hold any thing too dear for him, on who^
his thankful mind is set: especially when such a mind is set on God, who every
way infinitely surpasses us, who is so absolutely perfect in himself, as he
needs nothing that we Quis non appetat gaudebundus and laetus in quo aliquid
and ipse Domino s^o retribuat? Cyp Epist. l. ^ ep. 25* Direction how to bring
men to please God in all things.
have or can do, nor can receive any thing but that which is his own, yet
daily ladeth, with all manner of blessings, us who are less then any of his
mercies, most unworthy of the least? Who then would not willingly and gladly
have what he might render to the Lord his God?

Behold here the most ready way that possibly can be prescribed to bring men to
endeavor with the uttermost of their power in all things to please the Lord.
Work in them such an apprehension, a sense of Gods kindness to them, as their
hearts may be stirred up to thankfulness: Then nor hope of reward, nor fear of
revenge can so incite, or quicken them up to any duty, as their own grateful
disposition. An ingenuous and generous mind (as every grateful mind is) will
do much more in thankfulness for a kindness done, then in expectation of a
kindness to come. Persuade men therefore of the goodness and kindness that
God has done for them, as you desire that they should be willing, ready and
forward to do any duty to God.

. 79. Of a third property of right thanksgiving, to render it to God.
III.. 76. Semper habendae gratia, and nemini alteri nisi sold Deo. Chrysostom. Hom
2. in 1 Cor. 1.
TRue gratefulness has especial relation to the Lord. A man that is well
instructed in the right form and due manner of thanksgiving will especially
return all thanks to God, whether it be for such benefits as come immediately
from himself, as all those extraordinary benefits, whereof any that took due
notice, might say, This is the finger of God, or, This is the Lords doing, and
it is mavelous in our eyes. (For such as these, Exodus 15. 1.
Moses and the men of Israel, -- 20.
Miriam and the women of Israel gave solemn thanks to God) or those ordinary
benefits to the conferring whereof man adds no help (as the shining of the
Sun, the courses of the moon, the former and latter rain, the bounds set to
the sea, the sweet springs and rivers of water passing through the earth, and
many other such as are reckoned up in the 104 Psalm, for which praise is there
given to God) or for such benefits as are conferred upon us by the ministry of
man. Thus Melchisedech blessed God for Gen 14. 20.
that victory which Abraham had gotten over his enemies: David blessed God for
that counsel which wise Abigail 1 Samuel 25. 32. 1 Chro. 29. 13
gave him: and for those bountiful gifts which he, his Princes and people
contributed toward the house of God: and 2 Cor. 9. 13.
the Saints give thanks to God, for the liberality of the Christians at
Macedonia. So clear is the point of returning thanks to God for all manner of
benefits, as besides the many simple forms of giving thanks to God set down
thorowout the whole Scripture, but especially in the book of Psalms, when man
comes in any competition with God about this matter, he is utterly excluded:
as where the Psalmist negatively Psalm 115 ^* Totum superna gratia tribuamus.
Chrysostom. Hom 21 in Genesis 5. Psalm. 148. Ephesians 5. 20.
of man, but affirmatively of God says, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but
unto thy name give glory. If ye well observe the precepts of Scripture for
performing this duty of thanksgiving, ye shall find this object, the Lord either
plainly expressed, or necessarily understood. How frequent are these phrases*
Praise the Lord: Give thanks to God. Yea to demonstrate that God is the proper
object of praise, these words, Praise ye the Lords, are so compounded together,
as they (...)
make but one word in hebrew, which is this, Halleluiah.

See The whole armor of God. Treat 3. Part. 2. 60, 61.
All manner of benefits do originally come from God. If we receive any
mediately by the ministry of man, or of any other creature, they are therein
the instruments and hands of God whereby he reaches out unto us, and
conferreth upon us, his benefits. The benefits which we receive from a wise
King, just magistrates, faithful ministers, conscionable lawyers, skillful
physicians, honest tradesmen, industrious husbandmen, or which any receive from
good husbands or wives, provident parents, merciful masters, diligent and
trusty servants, or any other persons, are Gods benefits. It is therefore most
due that we enquire what may be re^dred to the Lord for the^.

Learn we hereby in all manner of benefits to roll up our Exhortation to
render thanks to God.
eyes to God, and as we taste of the sweetness of them, so to lift up a
thankful heart to him that gives them. It is a swinish part to eat the mast
that falls from a tree, and not to lift up an eye to the tree whence it
falls. It is not enough to render any thing to man, or to any other creature
for the benefits we have. The Prophets quaere is, What shall I render to the
Lord? To render any thing to the creature and nothing to the Creator, is to
neglect the principal doner; yea to think more highly of the servant then of
the master, of man then of God, which is no better then idolatry. When
therefore thou have a thought of rendering, enquire what thou may render to
God, what may be pleasing and acceptable to him: for which we had a direction.
77, 78. ^
before.

. 80. Of the consideration of Gods benefits* working gratefulness.
IIII.. 76.
A Right understanding of Gods benefits works gratefulness. On this ground
that Psalm. 139. 14.
the Psalmists soul did right well know Gods works, he makes this inference,
I will praise thee. When -- 106. 1^,
the Israelites had such -- 100. 3, 4.
evidence of Gods providence over them, as they believed his words, then they
sang his praise. To induce men to be thankful unto God, and to bless his
name, the Psalmist advises men to take notice of the kindnesses of God toward
them.

Hereby is man convinced of the equity of the duty; which is an especial
means to work upon the conscience, and provoke him to perform that which in
his judgment he sees to be most just and meet that it should be performed.

Instruction in the cause of ingratitude.
By this take notice of a maine reason of man's ingratitude. The benefits of the
Lord which occasion matter of thanksgiving are either not at all observed, but
passed over without regard; or else soon forgotten. When the Lord by his
Prophet upbraideth to the Israelites their great ingratitude he renders this
reason thereof, Isa. 1. 3.
Israel does not know, my people does not consider. And when the Psalmist
speaks of their like ingratitude, he renders this reason, Psalm. 106. 21.
They sorgat God their Savior, which had done great things in Egypt. Where
there is no knowledge of a benefit there can be no good esteem thereof. What
is not esteemed can not be affected. No man will enquire what he may render
for that which he affects not. Again that which is forgotten is as not known,
as not esteemed, as not affected. They therefore Non dubium quin excitet ad
laudandum beneficiorum recordatio Bern. super Cant. sermon. 10. Direction for
gratitude.
that either take no notice of Gods benefits, or soon forget them after they
have once known them, must needs be ungrateful. But without all doubt,
remembrance of kindness incites gratefulness.

To prevent this crime of ingratitude, (a crime most odious to God and man)

1. Be diligent in observing Gods benefits. Psalm. 85. 8.

2. Often and seriously meditate thereon, that they may not slip out of thy mind
and memory. Psalm. 77. 11, 12.

3. Speak of them to others: as he that said, Come, hear all ye that fear
God, and I will declare what he has done for my soul. Psalm. 66. 16.

This is the way to make thee see and say, Gods benefits are toward me, and
thereupon in testimony of gratefulness heartily to enquire, what shall I
render to the Lord?

. 81. Of a fourth property of gratitude, by one kindness to be put in mind of
many.
V.. 76.
Gratefulness raises the mind from some favors to all. This general
particle, all, is not so strictly to be taken as if no favor or benefit were
to be left out: for so many are the benefits which God from time to time does
bestow upon us, as it is not possible to fasten our mind upon them all: but it
is to be taken of the several kinds of Gods benefits, (as General,
Particular, Public, Private, Temporal, Spiritual, etc.) and of as many
several and distinct branches of these as we can. Thus when David was settled
in his Kingdom, and thereupon took occasion to praise God, Compare 1 Chro.
16. 8* etc* with Psalm. 10^. 1. etc. Read Psalm 78. to the end.
in his Psalm of praise he reckons up all those kindnesses which God had done
to his people from the time of their firstfathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob:
yea he gives this express charge, Psalm. 105. 2.
Talk ye of All his wondrous works. So 2 Chro. 20* 21
Iehosophat, when he consulted upon the promise of victory which God by his
Prophet had given him, to praise the Lord, the 136. Psalm, which contains a
catalogue of all Gods mercies, was appointed to be sung. That sweet singer of
Israel, who well knew how to order his forms of praise to God as affirmatively
he promises to Psalm 9. 1.
show forth All c -- 103 2. A (...) per tran. sp^si ^one^ ^ and
transmutationem in (...) fit ullus.
Gods marveilous works: so he gives a negative charge to his soul, not to
forget all (or any of) his benefits.

As more fuel added to fire makes the flame the greater, so more benefits
brought to an heart set on fire to praise the Lord, enlarges it the more, and
enflameth it with an holy zeal.

Direction to rouse up our spirits in thanksgiving
This pattern is worthy our imitation, and affords an excellent rule, to
stir us up heartily, cheerfully, and zealously to praise the Lord. The rule is
this, to be so acquainted with the several kinds of Gods benefits, as on all
occasions they may be presented to our minds. Without all question the Prophets
mind was upon many and sundry sorts of benefits, when he said, all his benefits
are toward me. He did not confusedly use this general particle all, as many
do when they profess to thank God for all his benefits, and yet have none at
all in their minds. His spirit was otherwise disposed, then to content it self
with such a general, indefinite, cold, loose, formal form of acknowledging
Gods benefits. If we would accustom our selves to make diaries of Gods
blessings on us, and when we are before God, recompt them in order, and often
Psalm 22. 10.
call to mind how from our mothers womb he has bone our God, how in every
estate and degree of our age he has blessed us, and that with all manner of
blessings temporal and spiritual, See in the whole armor of God, Treat. 3.
part. 2 64, 6^. etc. a catalogue of benefits.
privative and positive, conferred on our selves and those that belong unto us,
yea on the nation, city, parish, or family where we live, then would not such a
general clause as this, all his benefits are toward me, be an idle clause:
but the mind which is large in apprehension, where it is well informed, would
comprise much matter on it, even so much as would set the heart on fire with
zeal.

. 82. Of particular sense of kindness whereby the heart is stirred up to
thankfulness.
VI.. 76.
Sense of Gods kindness to ones self does most enlarge the heart to
thankfulness. Words of particular relation betwixt God that is praised, and
the persons that praise him, used in forms of praise, give good proof to this
point. Such are these, Psalm. 30 12.
O Lord, my God: -- 59. 17.
my strength, my defense, the God of my mercy, -- 18. 2.
my rock, my fortress, my deliverer, my buckler, the horn of my salvation,
mine high tower, etc. That which here is generally implied under this clause,
all his benefits toward me, is in sundry particulars exemplified thorowout the
whole book of Psalms. Take a few instances for many. -- 9. 4.
Thou have maintained my right, and my cause. -- 18. 16. 17.
He took me, he drew me out of many waters, he delivered me, he was my stay,
etc. In particular, let the five first verses of the 103. Psalm be well
observed for this purpose.

Men are most sensible of kindnesses done to themselves, the sweetness whereof
their own souls do taste. Now according to the taste and sense of a
kindness, is the heart quickened and stirred up to thankfulness. Though it be
an effect of natural selfe*loue, to affect the heart with such good things as
a man himself is made partaker of, yet is it not against spiritual love to
make an advantage thereof, and to use that affection of the heart to kindle and
inflame our zeal unto a more fervent manner of praising God.

Admonition to observe Gods dealing with ourselves Psalm. 66. 16. Psalm. 78. 70.
Among other mercies take especial notice of such as in particular concern
thy self: as he that said, I will declare what God has done for my soul. In
this consideration first mark such as are most proper and peculiar to thy
self, whereof thou may say, He has not dealt so with others. So did he who
said, He chose David his servant, etc. Then observe what part thou have in such
as are common with others. And here consider what relation there is betwixt
thee and those others: whether they be such as are committed to thy charge,
nearly united to thee, of the same family, or alliance, or parish, or
incorporation, or nation, or profession. Near relations will affect our hearts
for benefits bestowed on them to whom we are united, as if they were bestowed
on our selves. Instance that affection which was wrought Genesis 24. 27.
in the heart of Abraham's servant for the good success of his masters
business: and the praise which he gave to God for the same. If in common
blessings we find our selves to have a share, we shall be the more quickened to
give thanks 1. Kin 1 40.
for the same: as the people that rejoiced at the coronation of Solomon.

Who are they that are now best settled to give praise to God for this
admirable decrease of the sickness? Not they who thought it not infectious:
nor they who thought they had such antidotes as the plague could not seize on
their vital Vnum hoc obsecro, singulis dicbus and horis supputemus nobiscum,
non communia tantum beneficia, quae toti naturae omnium opisex contulit, sed
and privata and quotidiana, etc. Chrysostom. Hom. 26. in Genesis 8. and Hom. y2. ad Pop.
parts: nor they who thought themselves safe enough in the country. But they who
conceiving themselves to be in as great danger as others, perceived a special
care of God over them in preserving them. That benefit which a man knows
himself to receive from the light of the sun, influence of the heavens,
sweetness of the air, and other like common blessings, will make him heartily
to bless God for them. Search therefore narrowly wherein Gods benefits have
been toward thee in special. Do this daily and hourly, not only about
common benefits which the maker of all conferreth on all, but about private and
daily blessings, and thou will diligently enquire what thou may render to him.

. 83. Of a fifth property of gratitude, to be provoked thereby to make
profession of benefits.
VII.. 76.
Gratefulness works acknowledgement of kindness. All the acknowledgements
which in Scripture are recorded to be made by any of the Saints, of Gods
benefits and mercies toward them* are demonstrations hereof: as of Gen 8. 20.
Noah; -- 12. 7.
Abraham, -- 14. 20.
Melchisedech. -- 21. 6.
Sarah, -- 24 27.
Abraham's servant, -- 26. 22, 25.
Isaac, -- 32. 10.
Jacob, and many others.

Acknowledgement of kindness makes much to the honor of him that has done
the kindness. But he that indeed has a grateful mind desires to do all the
honor that he Dominus in sermonibus gratiarum actionem exigit, non quod ea
ipse opus habe at, sed vt nos d^^ ceat gratos esse, and agnoscere tantorum
bonorum suppeditatorem.

Chrysostom Hom. 2^ in Genesis 8. Discovery of ingratitude by concealing kindness.


can to the author of the kindness, wherewith he is affected. We heard before
(. 77.) how he requires what he may render. Will not then that mind which
makes him so inquisitiue to be further instructed in what he may do more,
provoke him to do that which he can not be ignorant to be acceptable? As for
the Lord, he requires thanksgiving in our words, not that he has any need
thereof, but that he may teach us to be thankful, and to acknowledge the doner
of so great good things as he bestows,

Can we now imagine that they who conceal all kindnesses done to them, are
grateful persons? were the nine lepers that being cured of their leprosy,
made no profession thereof, thankful? If they were, wherein consisted the
difference betwixt them, and that one, of whom Christ thus says, were there
not ten cleansed, but where are the nine? There are not found that returned
to give glory to God, save this stranger. (Luk 17. 17, 18.) As great an
evidence of ingratitude it is, to keep close, not to make known, not to
acknowledge benefits, as can be given.

Exhortation to acknowledge benefits.
Show me then thy gratitude by the effect thereof. Out of the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaks. Even to men are these benefits to be acknowledged.
Thus Judge. 5. 24.
Deborah acknowledged Iaells kindness: 1 Samuel 25. 33
David, Abigails: -- ^4. 19.
Saul, David's, and many other, other men's. Much more to God must his benefits
be acknowledged, in regard of the multitude, greatness, freeness,
needfulnesse, profitablenesse, and continuance of them, together with many
other circumstances whereby they are much amplified. And so much the rather,
because acknowledgement is all that we can render to God: and it is all that
God does expect, which yet he does most graciously accept. Make this holy
profession therefore of the Lords benefits to God himself and to men: make it
to God in secret and in public: make it at all times, in all places: make it
while the benefits are fresh before thee: lay up his benefits in thy memory,
that thou may in future times again, and again make it. Acknowledge the
benefits which thou have received, and thou shall be sure to receive more. The
tenth leper which returned to give glory to God, received thereby another, and
a greater benefit, which was the cleansing of his soul from the leprosy of
sin; as this Luke 17. 19.
phrase imports, Thy faith has saved thee. He was cleansed of his bodily
leprosy before he returned. There was then somewhat more intended, by the
pronouncing of this after his returning to glorify God. The other nine that
returned were cleansed in their bodies. This was said to him as an evidence of
a greater benefit, then that which they received. For Gods sake therefore who
is thereby honored, and for thine own sake who gainest thereby more benefits,
acknowledge Gods benefits, and say, His benefits are toward me.

84. Of the interpretation and resolution of the thirteenth verse.
PSALM. CXVI. XIII.
I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the LORD.
. 76.
THe second part of the Prophets Rhetorical addubitation is here expressed,
which is an answer to his former question: whereby he shows that he made not
the question simply on ignorance, as if he knew not what to render, but
purposely to set out the great desire he had, and the forwardness that was in
him to do, what he saw most meet to be done.

This was one John Lodwicke, a Spaniard by nation, a Monk by profession, who
lived ten years together in England, lodging in an house by Bishops gate,
London, who day after day went forth in a beggars attire, and as occasion was
offered, belched forth most impious blasphemies against the blessed Trinity,
especially against the sacred person of our blessed Savior Jesus Christ (whom
he ordinarily called Devil) and against the holy Scripture, for which he was
convented before authority, and being convicted by witnesses and by his own
confession was sent over to Spain* there to be proceeded against, in the year
of our Lord 1618. This blasphemous Heretic accounting the things that were
written by the Prophets and Apostles to be mere dotages, said that David was
one of the worst, and that in penning this Psalm he showed himself to be a
drunkard and a liar, by reason of this, and the tenth verse. As if by taking
the cup of salvation, he had intended the drinking of an health, as drunkards
use to do. Whereby we see how dangerous it may be to take that literally, which
is meant metaphorically.
This phrase, cup of salvatition, is the most difficult and doubtful phrase of
all the Psalm. Its here figuratively used, and in that respect more subject to
various interpretations. According to the diverse significations of this word *
cup, some take it one way; (...)
some another.

1. It is taken for a part or portion: for in a cup, uses to be such a set
portion of beer or wine, or physical potion, or such like thing, as may be
thought fit for him to whom its given; as where the Psalmist a Psalm. 23. 5. Per
calicem me^sura intelligitur, etc. Hier. Comment. in hunc loc.
says, My cup runs over, his meaning is, the portion which thou have given
me is an abundant potion, even like a cup that runs over. On this ground
Trevet. Genebrad.
some expound this place thus, I will Isa. ^1. 17, 22. Mat. 20. 22.
thankefully take that portion which the Lord allots me, and use it to my
salvation, calling on his name and worshipping him.

2. A cup is put for affliction. Sollicitoque bibas veluti doctissimus olim, in
perturbato quod bibit ore reus. Ovid in Ibid.
For of old they were wont to put poison into cups, and make such as were
adjudged to death, to drink thereof. After this manner were Socrates, Herod.
l. 3. Cic Tusc. l. 1. ^ Pluta. in vit. Phoc.
Psammonitus, Ph^cion*, Theramenes, I and others put to death. Bitter things
also are put into cups for medicines: and because afflictions are bitter, and
as it were given to us by our wise and heavenly Father to drink, they are set
out by a cup. Origin. Hieron. Augustine. Plac. Parm.
Some therefore according to that signification thus expound this Text, I will
willingly drink the cup of affliction which the Lord shall be pleased to give
me, yea though it be death, which will assuredly turn to my salvation.

3. Mat. 26. 39.
The passion of Christ is styled a cup: whereupon Lorinus aliique Papist.
many imagine that the Prophet has here relation thereunto. Hier. comment in
hunc. loc. In Hebraeo ita habet, calicem Jesus accipiam, etc
An ancient Father says that the Hebrew thus has it, I will take the cup of
Jesus: which an Angel thus interprets, thou shall call his name Jesus: for he
shall save his people. Indeed (...)
the Hebrew name translated Jesus, is derived from a root that signifies to
(...)
save: But (...)
the word here used is of the feminine gender and plural number. Yet by that
which follows it may be gathered that by this very Hebrew word, the same thing
is meant as by the name Jesus, namely salvation. They who apply the cup of
salvation to Christ's passion, take it passively for martyrdom, or suffering
for Christ, and so it little differs from the former interpretation. They who
in these senses expound this text, say, that thereby is rendered the greatest
thing that can be rendered by man, even his life.

4. In holy Scripture there is mention made of Genesis 35. 14. Lev. 23. 13. Number.
15. 5.
drink offerings, which were a certain quantity of wine that used to be powered
out before the Lord: as the very notation of the word imports, coming from
(...) effudit.
a root that signifies to power out. As the meat offerings, so the
drinke-offerings were brought to the Lord in way of gratulation and
thanksgiving. Cajetan. Genebr.
Some therefore in allusion hereunto so expound this text, as a promise and vow
of the Psalmist, to testify his public gratitude by such an external and
solemn rite as in the law was prescribed. This he terms a cup, because that
drinke-offering was contained in a cup, and powered out thereof: and he adds
this epithete Salvation, because that rite was an acknowledgement of salvation,
preservation and deliverance from the Lord.

5. After their solemn gratulatory sacrifices they were wont to have a feast.
When David had brought the Ark of God into the Tabernacle, they offered
burnt-offerings and 1 Chro 16. 3.
peace offerings, which being finished, He dealt to every one of Israel both man
and woman, to every one a loaf of bread, and a good piece of flesh, and a
flaggon of wine. Hereby is employed that he made so bountiful a feast, as he
had to give thereof to all the people there assembled. In mensa laticum libavit
honorem, etc. Virg Aen. 1. Turneb. l. 12. c. 13. Athe l. 11. c 11.
In this feast the master thereof was wont to take a great cup, and in lifting
it up to declare the occasion of that feast, and then in testimony of
thankfulness to drink thereof to the guests, that they in order might pledge
him. This was called a cup of salvation, or deliverance, because they
acknowledged by that use thereof that God had saved and delivered them. Almost
in a like sense the Apostle styles the Sacramental cup, (...). 1 Cor. 10. 17.
the cup of blessing.

Here the Prophet uses the plural number thus, (...)
cup of salvations, whereby after the Hebrew elegancy, he means Calicem
salutum Vatab. Omnis salutis. Tremel.
many deliverances one after another: or some great and extraordinary
deliverance which was in stead of many, or which comprised many under it. (...)
The word translated take properly signifies to lift up, and in that respect
may the more fitly be applied to the forementioned taking of the festival cup,
and lifting it up before the guests. Calvin. Vatab. Muscul. Moller. Montan.
Aliique.
Most of our later Expositors of this Psalm apply this phrase, I will take the
cup of salvation, to the forenamed gratulatory drinke-offering, or to the
taking and lifting up of the cup of blessing in the feast, after the solemn
sacrifice. Both of these import one and the same thing, which is, that Saints
of old were wont to testify their gratefulnes for great deliverances with some
outward solemn rite.

The former interpretations of this phrase, cup of salvation, applied to a
portion, or affliction, or martyrdom, or the passion of Christ, though simply
considered in themselves, they be truths, yet they are not so pertinent to this
Text, as the two later of a gratulatory drinke-offering, or a festival cup.
For without question a solemn thanksgiving is here intended, as is afterward
in the 17. verse plainly expressed.

The other clause that is added, and call upon the name of the Lord, is the
same that was verse 4.
before used, and expounded. Here again it is repeated, partly to show that in
the forementioned gratulatory rite he would Nomen Dei colam. Vatabl.
worship God. (He would do it piously and religiously. For prayer is an
especial part of Gods worship) partly to show that though by Gods delivering
him he were now safe, and so had just occasion to praise God: yet would he not
cease to pray unto God for continuance of his favor and blessing. He would
both praise God, and also pray unto him. Thus is the phrase of calling upon the
name of the Lord most properly taken.

This very duty of calling upon the name of the Lord, is again promised, and
that as an appurtenance to thanksgiving being added thereto in the 17. verse,
See. 112.
where I purpose to handle it in the general acception, as it signifies
worship done to God. Here I consider it in the particular and most proper
signification, which is Petition.

This verse being added as an answer to this clause, What Sum.
shall I render to the Lord? sets out, Man's recompense to God.

It consists of two parts.

1. Gratulation.

2. Invocation.

The former is set out by a most solemn rite of rejoicing.

The latter is expressed by the Action, (I will call) and by the Object (upon
the name of the Lord)

The two maine parts are joined together by a copulative particle AND.

Of the substance of solemn Gratulation, or thanksgiving, sufficient has
been See sect; 76, etc. to this.
before delivered.

The inference of this profession upon the former inquisition, this being an
answer thereto shows that,

I. Gratitude is the best recompense that man can render to God.

The manner of expressing it by a public rite of rejoicing teaches that

II. Our inward motion of praising God must be manifested by some outward
action of rejoicing

Of the substance of Invocation, even as it is here expressed, sufficient has
been delivered on the 4. verse.

The connection of these two points, Gratulation AND Invocation, imports that

III. With gratulation invocation must be joined.

The different manner of expressing invocation from that which was in the
fourth verse, (For there it was set down as a thing performed in his trouble,
then called I, etc. Here it is noted as a duty to come, which he promises to
perform, I will call, etc, and that after his deliverance) implies that

IIII. Prayer to God is to be continued after the thing prayed for is granted.

. 85. Of praise the best that man can render unto God.
I. 83. Ante omnia Deo gratias agamus, cui nibil gratius, nibil acceptius est
Chrysostom. Hom 2. in 1 Cor. 1.
GRatitude is the best recompense that man can render unto God. Surely this
Prophet that made such enquiry of what he might render unto God, if he had
known a better, would have here mentioned it. Where bulls, goats, and such
like sacrifices are refused, it is said, Offer unto God thanksgiving. (Psalm.
50. 13, 14.) Praise is one of the sacrifices with which God is well pleased,
(Hebr. 13. 15. 16.) Expressly it is said of praising God, that it pleases the
Lord better then an ox or bullock, (Psalm. 69* 30, 31.) yet were those
ordained for solemn sacrifices under the Law. Praise therefore is it which the
Psalmist does especial vow to God, (verse. 17.)

Deus alic nius nostri non eget, ^ed nos omnium quae illius sunt i^digemus.
Siquidem gratiarum actio illi quidem nihil omnino addit, nos autem illi magis
familiores ponit.

Chrysostom. Hom. 26 in Mat, 8.


God stands in need of nothing that we can do, or bestow. But we stand in
need of all that is his. Our thanks which we give him adds nothing to him,
but makes him the more to respect us. By it (if it be rightly performed) God is
acknowledged to be what he is, to give what he gives, and to do what he does.
More then this the creature cannot do: more then this the Creator nor exacteth
nor expects, provided that it be not a mere lippe-labour, but come from an
heart thoroughly affected with his excellencies and kindnesses, and be ratified
by an answerable carriage toward him.

(...) spirit and truth. Yet this hinders not but that he may and must be also
worshipped in body, and in outward actions. He must ever be worshipped in
spirit, whether with the body, or without the body. Spiritual worship may be
without bodily worship, and also stand with bodily worship: but bodily worship
cannot stand without spiritual worship.

2 The Spirits of others are stirred up to join with us in congratulation, and
mutual thanksgiving. Neh. 8. 6.
When the people saw and heard Ezra bless the Lord, they answered, Amen, Amen,
with lifting up their hands. When 2 Chro. 30. 5. etc.
Hezekiah made it known that he meant to celebrate a solemn passover, many
of Ephraim, Manasseh, Ishaker and Zebulon came thereto. This is one principal
end of external rites of gratulation, mutually to stir up one another
spirit.

3 Our own spirits are much roused and quickened hereby. Outward gratulatory
actions, as they manifest an inward grateful affection, so they are means, as
it were by a reflection, to increase the heat of gratitude, and inflame our
zealous affection the more. Now our dullness and coldness in all pious duties
gives evidence that all means that can be used for quickening our spirits,
are little enough.

Reprehension of indiscreet reprehenders.
Too austere and severe are they, who censure as unlawful, and condemn all
cheerful rites, and actions of gratulation. Their maine ground is the evil
consequence which follows from thence. But that follows not from a lawful
use of warrantable rites, but from an abuse of them, which is indeed unlawful.
If abuse of a thing were sufficient to prohibit the use of it, the use of the
most necessary and bounden duties which the word commands, should be
prohibited. It is an especial point of wisdom to discern whence every evil
arises, and accordingly to be so circumspect in avoiding the evil, as a
warrantable, commendable, needful, useful duty be not forborne thereby. The
wise farmer neglects not to sow his ground because weeds use to grow among
the corn. No wise man will forbid the drinking of wine because some by
intemperancy are made drunk. Evil consequences arising from good things, give
just occasion to be watchful over our selves in the doing of those good
things, that by our carelessness they prove not pernicious. So as, it is not a
sufficient plea for intemperancy, to say, the thing that we do is lawful. He
that has warranted a thing to be done, has prescribed rules for the manner of
doing it, by a due observation whereof good things will be well done.

In general, outward gratulatory actions must be

1 Such as are approved by God himself, as those were which we noted in the
proof of the point. For, how can we think that those things which he
approves not, will please him?

2 Such as may beseem the occasion: even such cheerful actions as may revive
men's spirits: such also were those that are before mentioned. As outward rites
of humiliation must be such as may humble the soul: so of gratulation, such as
may quicken it, Psalm. 81. 1, etc.

3 Such as are not offensive: nor occasions to any corruption: As are drinking
healths, especially on bare knees, and in measure above that which sober men
are able to bear: lascivious dancing: revelling on the Lords Days, and other
the like.

Among other external rites of gratulation, that which is here intended
(feasting) is a principal one. Thereof See The Whole Armor of God, Treat. 3.
Part. 2.. 73.

. 87. Of joining prayer with praise.
III.. 84. Vide Hippocrat. de Not* pueri. Sect 44. de Gemellorum partu. Item
lib. 1 de Di^ta Sect. 23. ubi tres reddit rations ob quas Gemelli fiunt
similes inter se.
With gratulation, invocation must be joined. As with our petitions we must
join praises: so, with these, those. Prayer and praise are like two twins,
which though they have each of them their several and distinct members, yet by
the navell are from their birth knit together, and so grow together, as if you
force them asunder, you kill them both: one without the other cannot live. They
are therefore in sacred Scripture often joined together: sometimes one, sometimes
another set in the former place, thus, Phil 4. 6.
In every thing by prayer and supplication with thankesgiving let your request
be made known to God. 1 These 5. 17, 18.
Pray without ceasing: in every thing give thanks. Psalm 105* 1.
Give thanks unto the Lord: call upon his name. Isa. 12. 4.
Praise the Lord: call upon his name. Observe the forms of praises, and of
prayers noted in Scripture, and you shall find, where the principal occasion
has been gratulation, supplication to be added: and also where the principal
occasion has been supplication, gratulation to be added.

Such is our estate here in this world, and such is Gods dealing with us, as
there never wants occasion of both. Never was any Saint brought into so
desperate a distress* but that through the mist of his misery sweet beams of
Gods mercy have shined upon him. Nor ever was there any set in so bright and
clear a sunshine of Gods favor, but that some clouds have let fall showers
of sorrows* if not in outward troubles, yet in regard of inward corruptions,
yea and in the thought or fear of some eclipses of that sunshine. Thus in
greatest occasion of hearty thanksgiving, there is just occasion of humble
petition. And where there is most cause of humiliation, there is also much
cause of exultation.

Herein lies a maine difference betwixt men's estates here and hereafter.
Hereafter in Heaven is nothing but matter of gratulation: in Hell is nothing
but matter of exclamation and ejulation. On Earth there is a mixture of both.

As for adding invocation to gratulation, which is the particular here
expressed, thereby our sacrifice of praise is 1 Timothy 4. 5.
sanctified. As every creature of God is sanctified by the word and prayer, so
the actions that we perform, not pious and religious duties, and among them
not the most principal, praising of God, excepted. The Word shows it to be a
warrantable duty. Prayer presented to God in the name of Christ, makes it an
acceptable duty. And whereas every thing that passes from us, is not only
imperfect through the defect thereof, but also polluted by that sink of
corruption Gratias Deo ag^mus propter tentationum resolutionem and horum
^^nquam obliviscamur* crat^^nibus vaccmus, supplication: bus continu^^, ^i^tat^
multae. Chrysostom. Hom. 17. ad Pop.
which is in us, by faithful prayer the defect is supplied, the pollution is
purged away.

What therefore God has joined together, let no man put asunder, Matthew. 19. 6.
Let us for removing evils, or for conferring any good thing, give all due
thanks, and never forget the one or the other: but withal give our selves to
prayer, to continual supplications and much piety.

. 88. Of praying after God has heard our prayer.
IIII. 84.
PRayer to God is to be continued after the thing prayed for is granted. After
that the Psalmist in testimony of Gods hearing him had said, Psa. 118 21, 2^
I will praise thee, for thou have heard me, and art become my salvation, he
adds, Save now, I beseech thee, O Lord: O Lord, I beseech thee, send now
prosperity. Many such passages there be, as in the Psalms, so in other books
of Scripture. Indefinite exhortations to pray Ephesians. 6. 18. (...).
in every season, Luke 18. 1. (...).
always, 1 These. 5. 17. (...).
without ceasing, give good evidence to the truth of the doctrine. For, if
after God has heard us, we cease to pray, how can we pray without ceasing,
always, in every season? None can doubt but that God heard the prayers of his
faithful servants in all ages: yet never did any faithful servant of God
thereupon cease calling upon God so long as he lived. It is 1 Cor. 1. 2. Acts
9. 14.
the style of a true Saint to call upon God. If they should cease to call upon
God, they would show themselves most 2 Timothy 2. 19.
unworthy of that dignity.

Why prayer is to be continued after prayer is heard.
1 Some things there be, which though on Gods part they be granted, yet are we
not so settled and satisfied in the grant of them, but that we may waver and
doubt in our faith about them: as, Remission of sins, Reconciliation with
God, Justification in his sight, Conquest over our corruptions, Sanctifying
graces, and such like. Other things there be whereof we stand in daily need, as
food, sleep, apparel, and other bodily necessities: means of spiritual
edification: and the assistance of Gods Spirit. And many evils there be
wherinto we may fall again and again after we are delivered from them, as
sickness, pain, imprisonment, captivity, etc. Yea, and all manner of sins,
and temptations to sins. In these respects, for the settling of our faith in
that which God has granted, for the continual supply of such things as we
continually stand in need of, for keeping us from falling again into such
evils as we have been delivered from, it is needful, it is useful to call
upon God again and again even after he has heard our prayer.

Of these motives, See The Whole Armor of God. Treat. 3. Part. 1.. 15, 16, etc.
2 All those general motives that are of force to incite us to call on God
before he has heard us, as Gods command, Gods worship, Gods honor, the
Necessity, utility, Efficacy, and Dignity of prayer, are also of force to
provoke us to call on him after he has heard us: yea as long as we live.

3 Gods hearing our prayers is so far from making us cease to pray, as among
other motives, it is a very forcible one to draw us to God again. For, it
gives special evidence of Gods readiness to hear, and ablenes to help, yea
and of his mind and good will to us in particular whom he has heard.

Reprehension of such as being helped neglect God.
How many are of a far other mind then this Prophet was? If God have once
heard them, and delivered them from a distress, they have no care to call on
God again: especially when they find and feel themselves safe. What? Do they
think that there is but one thing wherein God can do them good? Do they
imagine themselves so secure, as they cannot again fall into such need of Gods
help as they were in before? or can God be, as man, weary of doing good? Are
many supplications and petitions troublesome to God? Fie of all such
atheistical conceits. If any that have better understanding of God, and of
their own frailty, do notwithstanding fail in this duty, having had good
success in their former performing it, they are either as beasts, which are
affected only with that which is present, or worse then beasts, using God,
only for their own turns* and so care not to call on him but when they
sensibly discern an absolute necessity for their own need and good.

For Gods sake, for our own sake let us in season, and out of season, in
distress and out of distress, to remove and prevent evils, to obtain and
retain the things that are good for us, before and after God has heard us,
call upon his name. Let us that have called upon him, say, We will call upon
the name of the Lord. Let this purpose be in our hearts, let this profession be
in our mouths, let an answerable performance be in our deeds, and that so long
as we shall abide in the land of the living where the Lord is called upon, that
so we may indeed be in the number, and of the number of those that call upon
the name of the Lord.

. 89. Of the sense and parts of the foureteenth Verse.
PSALM. CXVI. XIIII.
I will pay my vows unto the LORD, now i^ the presence of all his people.
(...) 2.
THe first motive which the Prophet uses to quicken him the more to perform
the forementioned duty of solemn praise is laid down in this verse. It is
taken from that bond whereby he had voluntarily tied himself, his Vow.

The argument may be thus framed.
That which by vow I am bound to pay, I will pay.
But by vow I am bound to take the cup of salvation, etc.
Therefore I will take the cup of salvation, etc.
It appears by the manner of expressing this point, that in his distress he
had vowed a solemn, public sacrifice of praise unto the Lord, if the Lord
would be pleased to release him. For he says not, I vow to pay this and that,
but, I will pay what I have vowed.

The word thus translated (...)
I will pay, signifies to finish and perfect a thing: and is here fitly used,
to show, that a vow till it be performed, is as an imperfect thing: performing
of it, is the perfecting of it: if at least it be rightly made, and rightly
accomplished.

He mentions (...)
vows in the plural number for emphasis sake: either because he often vowed one
and the same thing: or because he vowed many things: or one solemn thing
accompanied with many circumstances about the manner of performing it. Neither
of these do so cross the other, but but that all of them or many of them may
stand together.

By a kind of property he applies them to himself, (my vows) because he
himself was the author of them: they were not imposed upon him, but he
voluntarily bound himself thereto: and thereby he made them his own proper
debt, which he himself stood bound to pay.

These vows were for performing of divine services, such as appertained only
to the true God. Wherefore, as they were made, so he promises to perform them
to the only true God, the LORD.

The latter clause sets out the manner of performing the said vows. Wherein

1 He implies the time, when he would do it, now. This signifies the present
time, and is opposed to all procrastination and delay.

2 He intimates the place, in the presence of people, in such places where
people meet, which are public assemblies: and those not the least, but the
greatest and solemnest assemblies, where not a few, but all the people meet.
And that it might not be thought that he intended any profane assemblies, he
adds this particle of limitation, his, which has relation to the LORD: so as
he means all Gods people who were wont all to meet together at the
Tabernacle, where God was most solemnly worshipped.

Sum.
In this pattern we have The disposition of a Saint delivered out of a
distress.

His disposition is manifested two ways.

1 While he was in distress.

2 When he was delivered out of it.

The former is implied under the mention of vows. For, from thence we may well
infer that in his distress he made vows.

Here observe,

1 What was done* Vows

2 To whom, To the LORD.

The latter is expressed. In which expression is noted

1 The Matter or thing to be done. I will pay my vows.

2 The Manner of doing it: and that in three branches.

1 The time. Without delay, speedily, Now.

2 The Place. In a most public place. In the presence of all the people.

3 The persons; Saints, whom he styles HIS people.

The thing implied, and taken for grant to be done, imports, that

I. Vows may be made.

The Object to whom they are directed, The Lord, declares, that

II. Sacred vows must be made to God.

The promise of performing them, I will pay, shows, that

III. Vows made must be paid.

The time here set down being the present, Now, implies that

IIII. The first opportunity to pay a vow must be taken.

The place where he professes to perform this duty is in the presence of all
people; It is very probable that his vows were made in secret betwixt God and
himself. This promise then to perform them openly, and publicly intimates,
that

V. Vows seceetly made may be openly performed.

The limitation of the persons with this particle of relation, HIS, which has
reference to God, does us to wit, that

VI. Saints are fittest witnesses of sacred duties.

. 90. Of making vows to God.
I. Vows may be made.

II. Sacred vows must be made to God.

Though these be two distinct points (for vows are made to others then to
Jehovah, the true God. Ier. 44. 2^.
Idolaters make vows to their idols: and men make vows one to another, and
that not only impiously, but piously and justly also, as husband and wife one
to another, and subjects to their governors, servants to their masters, and
other to others) yet the vow which is here mentioned, and which thorowout the
Scripture (for the most part) is approved, being a sacred vow, which has
direct respect unto God, I will not sever these two doctrines, but handle them
as one. For, all that I shall speak of vows, shall be of sacred vows to the
Lord: for proof whereof we have both Psalm 76. 11. Isa. 19 21.
divine precept and approved Genesis 28. 20, 21 Psalm 61. 8
practice.

According to the words of the second doctrine (under which the first is
comprised as Genus sub specie.
the general nature of a thing under every species and particular kind thereof)
I intend to touch upon these two points.

The nature of a vow.
1 The nature of a vow. 2 The directing of it to God.

1 To a vow properly so called, two things are especially requisite. 1
Intention. 2 Obtestation. Or to speak more plainly, a deliberate Purpose, and
an absolute Promise. The former first brings on the latter. The latter fast
binds the former. A true intention and deliberate purpose must of necessity
go before, because otherwise a promise will not be made (for who will promise
that which he intends not) or if it be made, there is little hope it will be
performed: or if it should be performed, yet the very making of it without an
intention and purpose, is a plain mocking of him who is a Acts 1. 24.
searcher of the heart, and Psalm 139. 2.
understands our thoughts afar off. This therefore is necessary, but not
sufficient. For, a vow binds, as we shall hereafter show: but every purpose
binds not. 2 Cor. 1. 15, etc.
After Saint Paul was minded to come to Corinth, he altered his purpose upon
just occasions. Many purposes come into men's minds time after time. If they had
the force of a binding vow, who should be loose? Nay with how many bounds would
every Saint be bound? Their case would be inextricable. They would have so many
fetters, and manicles, and chains on them, as they could not tell how to shake
them off: how to rid themselves. Many weak Christians that take every purpose
for a vow, are exceedingly perplexed, partly through their care to perform
those purposes, and partly through their grief at their failings in those
performances: supposing that they have broken so many vows. But to the essence
of a vow must be added an absolute promise. Absolute, I say, in relation to
man's Vows absolute.
faithful endeavor with his uttermost power to perform it: not in relation
(or rather opposition) to Gods purpose or providence, to his will or leave.
For, so can no man make an absolute promise. God can cross and hinder him.
Iam. 4. 13, etc
Saint James does justly tax such as in this case make absolute, or rather
peremptory promises. This absolute promise I expressed under this word,
obtestation, which is a fit word to express the nature of a vow. It signifies
a taking of God to witness, and that in particular for performing his purpose.
This obtestation, makes it indeed a vow.

Object. Many vows recorded in Scripture are conditional: as Jacobs, Genesis 28.
20.
If God will be with me, etc. And Hannahs, 1 Samuel 1. 11.
If thou will indeed, etc. and others.

Answ. A conditional sentence does not necessarily importa doubtful matter,
but is often used as a ground of an absolute and undeniable conclusion. As where
Eliah says, 1 King. 18. 21
If the Lord be God, follow him. Does he here make any question of the Lords
being God? Far be such a thought. But hereby he brings them the more
evidently to see their folly, and draws them from Baal, to follow the Lord: as
will clearly appear if we bring it into the form of a syllogism, thus, If
the Lord be God, follow him. But the Lord is God. Therefore follow him. A
condition or supposition respects the manner, rather then the matter of a
vow. When in making a vow a necessary supposition is used, the vow is never a
whit the less absolute, but the more discreet. As when I thus vow, If the Lord
assist me, I will every morning pray before I go out of doors. Such a vow was
Jacobs.

2 Annah and Jacob and others like to them might have by special and divine
instinct, some assurance of that which they expressed in form of supposition,
and in that respect their vow be absolute. Questionless Hannah had assurance
that the Lord would give her a man-child, which made her in such particular and
express terms vow to give him to 1 Samuel 1. ^1.
the Lord all the days of his life, and that there should ne rasor come upon
his head.

3 When a vow is made upon a condition, if the condition hold and be, as it is
supposed, accomplished, then the vow remains as absolute, as if there were no
condition. And the maker of the vow is as much bound in this case to perform
it, as if it had been made in the most absolute terms that can be. Yea the
condition may be such, as it will more bind a man to his vow, then if there had
been no condition: as when the condition is a kind of consideration or a
benefit in consideration whereof the vow is made. Thus if in a storm on sea, a
man vow to give so much to the poor, if he be brought in safety to his
country: This providence of God in keeping him safe, and bringing him home,
more binds him to that work of charity, then the most absolute vow that he
could have made. Gen 28. 20.
Jacob having made such a vow, neglects to perform it in due season. -- 35.
1. Sicut homo imperando ordinat quodammodo quid sibi ab alijs fiat ita
promit^^n lo ordinat quid ipse pro alio ^acere deheat.

Thom. Sum. 2* ^. q 88 art. 1. Sacred vows to be directed only to God.


God therefore comes to him, and puts him in mind thereof, that so he
might not over long li^ drenched in that sea of ungrateful oblivion.

Thus then it is evident that a vow is an absolute promise of a deliberate
purpose. Such a promise on such a ground does as much order and bind the
promise-maker, as the command of one in authority does order and bind him that
is under authority.

2 Such promises of sacred duties are to be directed unto God, to whom vows
are most properly due. The charge of making vows mentioned in Scripture
directs us to God only. Psalm. 76. 11.
Vow and pay unto the Lord your God. Isa. 19. 21.
They shall vow a vow unto the Lord. Ecl. 5 4.
When thou vowest a vow to God. To God are all the approved vows in Scripture
directed. In this respect are vows entitled Gods vows. Psalm. 56. 12.
Thy vows, says the Psalmist to God, are upon me.

We heard that a vow arises from a true intention. Who can discern that, but
he who searches the heart? To whom do we owe such absolute homage, as to bind
our selves in such a sacred and inviolable band, as a vow is, but only to God,
especially in such divine duties as are proper to a vow.

Vows may inwardly be made.

In te est quod voveas and reddas Aug. Enar in Psalm. 55.


In regard of this object to whom our vows are to be directed, it is not
necessary that they be uttered with words, or manifested by signs. When Hannah
vowed her solemn vow unto God, it is said, She spoke in her heart, (1 Samuel 1.
13.) Indeed the earnestness of her affection, made her move her lips, and use
such outward motions as Elie discerned her to be in some passion: but those
were no signs of a vow. No creature could certainly have known thereby that
she vowed a vow. As true and full a resolution, yea, and obtestation and
promise too, may proceed from the soul by the very thoughts thereof, and be as
well known to God, and as strongly bind a man, as by words or signs.

Words and signs are of good use to testify to man such vows as we make to
God, that thereby we may be held somewhat the closer to them: yea and to
quicken our own spirits the more, words are of use. But to the being Volum est
testificatio quadam promissionis spontanea quae Deo, etc. Magist. Sent l. 4.
Distinc 38. Popish vows to Saints.
of a vow they are not necessary. He that defined a vow, to be A testification
of a willing promise which ought to be made to God, etc. came nigh the mark in
directing a vow to God, but fell short in restraining a vow to an outward
testification, if he meant only an outward testification.

But to return to the point, God being the proper object to whom sacred vows
are to be directed, what may be thought of those vows which Papists (not
unlike to the idolatrous Israelites who vowed vows to the Queen of heaven,
Ier. 44. 25.) vow to her whom they style the B. Maria Reginae appellationem
singulariter meretur. Bellar. de bon oper. l. 1. c. 15.
Queen of heaven, and to other Saints, and that in the same manner as they vow
to God, namely thus, Vove^ Deo and B. Mariae and omnibus sanctis, etc. Bellar.
de cult. Sanct. l. 3. c. 9.
I vow to God, and to blessed Mary, and to all the Saints that I will obey such
and such a Prelate. Hereof they give this reason, that glorified Saints are
mediators and intercessors by whom we receive good things from God: Yea they
are Gods by participation. Thus they add blasphemy to blasphemy: ratifying a
blasphemous position by a more blasphemous confirmation.

Concerning the position it self of making vows to Saints,

1 The holy Scriptures give no intimation of any such matter; but where it
makes any mention of vows, it directs them to God: whereof the Papists are
not ignorant. For, they who write of this controversy, bring no show of any
proof out of Gods Word for making sacred vows to creatures.

2 All both ancient and later divines, both Protestants and Papists that treat
of vows, define it to be a promise whereby he that makes it, binds himself in
a sacred and solemn manner to God.

3 None deny but that a sacred vow is a religious act, and a part of divine
worship, and in that respect due only to God. To make it to any other is
plain and palpable idolatry: yet ordinarily their vows use to be made to this
Saint and that Saint.

Exhortation to vow.
For our parts, let us so wisely avoid their detestable excess in making vows
to whom they ought not, as we fall not into a careless neglect of the duty, by
making no vows Dum vitant stulti vitia, in contraria currunt. Hor. Sat. 2. l.
1.
at all. It is a fools part so far to fly from one extreme as to fall into
another. As occasion is offered, and as we find any need, let us among other
evidences of that respect which we owe and bear unto God, give this, of vowing
and voluntarily binding our selves to do that which we see meet and behoofull
to be done for the honor of his name, and our well pleasing of him. Especially
if we have just cause to suspect our selves, that if we be left loose and at
liberty, we shall (through the temptations whereunto we are subject, or through
our own indisposition and backwardness to the duties which in our judgments
we conceive to be most behoofull) fail to perform them. In such cases to bind
our selves by a sacred vow to a bounden duty, as it testifies a wise jealousy
and holy fear that we have of the pronesse of our flesh to start back from
good intentions, and motions of the Spirit, so it manifests our true and
earnest desire of doing that which we are persuaded will be pleasing and
acceptable to the Lord: yea so true and earnest a desire, as we will not have
it left to our liberty to do it, or not to do it: least any thing might fall
out to alter our mind. Zealous Martyrs, upon a settled resolution not to start
in show from that profession which they are about to seal with their blood,
being jealous of their weak flesh, and sensiblenesse of pain, have desired to
be fast bound to the stake. A sacred vow is as an iron gin to a tender and
good conscience. Per votum immobiliter voluntas firmatur in bonum. Thom. Sum.
2. 2: q. 88 art. 6.
By it the will is unmoveably set and fastened upon that which is good: which
questionless is a very commendable resolution. (...). Arist Hill* l. 2. c. 4.
The Philosopher through that light of natural reason whereunto by diligent
study and experimental observance he had attained, discerned the equity
hereof. He that so binds himself to that which he knows to be pleasing
and acceptable unto God, as he will not leave a show of liberty to his unruly
flesh to start from it, thereby fortifieth himself against the temptations of
Satan, and frailties of his weak and wavering flesh. In which respect he Non
te vovisse paniteat, immo gaude iam tibi sic non licere, quod cum tuo
detrimento licuisset. Aug Epist. 45. ad Arment.
that has so tied himself, has no cause to repent himself thereof: but he
has cause rather to rejoice that he is so restrained from that, which through
supposed freedom, might prove very dangerous and dammageable.

. 91. Of paying vows to God.
III.. 89.
Vows made must be paid. This is true of all manner of lawful vows: even
such as are made to mortal men; much more of such as are made to the living
God. Where in Scripture a charge is given for making a vow, there for the most
part a charge also for paying it, is annexed. Vow and pay (Psalm. 76. 11.) Pay
that which thou have vowed, (Eccles. 5. 4.) They shall vow a vow and perform
it, (Isa. 29. 21.) Yea there are more strict Quia iam vovis^e, iam le.
obstrinxisti Aug. Epist. 45* ad Arment.

Deuteronomy. 23. 21. Eccl. 5. 4, 5.


charges for paying then for making vows. So as, when thou vowest, thou
bindest thy self, namely to performance. We read not of any penalty threatened
for not making vows. But for not paying vows it is said, The Lord thy God
will surely require it of thee: and it would be sin in thee. They who vow and
pay not, are counted such fools, as God has no pleasure in. It is therefore
better that thou should not vow, then that thou should vow and not pay.
Frequent are the professions which the Psalmist makes of paying his Psalm. 22.
25. -- 66. 13. -- ^6. 12. -- 61. 8.
vows, in these and such like protestations, I will pay my vows. Thy vows are
upon me O God, I will render praises unto thee. I will sing praise unto thy
name for ever, that I may daily perform my vows. Among other instances take
notice of the solemn vow he made for bringing the Ark of the Lord into a
settled place, (Psalm. 132. 2, 3, 4, 5.) and withal take notice of his care to
perform it (1 Chro. 13. 2, etc. and 15. 1, etc. and 17. 1, etc.) Annah having
vowed to give her son unto the Lord when she had wained him, she brought him
and gave him to the Lord, 1 Samuel 1. 11, 24, etc.

1 Sacred vows have immediate respect to God: they are or ought to be made to
him, as we showed in the former. But Gal. 6. 7.
God is not mocked. His Sovereignty, his Dignity, his Majesty, his Omnipotency,
his Integrity, his Jealousy, and other like infinite Excellencies in him, are
forceable motives to press performance of promises to him. The Wiseman, where
he is earnest in urging this point, renders this reason, God is in heaven and
thou art upon earth, Eccl. 5. 2.

2 Solemn vows consist of many bonds. There is in them, 1 The bond of a good
intention, yea and motion of the Holy Ghost. Such intentions and motions must
not be suffered to vanish away in vain. 2 The bond of a single Melius suerat
to non vovisse and sacere, quam vovere and non sacere Amb. lib ad virg. de vot.
^ ^. Humiliation for breach of vows.
promise, which binds the conscience to performance. 3 The bond of an
obtestation, and taking God to witness. Now a three fold cord is not quickly
broken, (Eccles. 4. 1^.) Better were it not to vow what thou do, then not to
do what thou vowest.

^ What matter of humiliation is here ministered unto us for breaking this
strong cord, for mocking God by our too much carelessness in keeping our vows,
yea and impious profanesse in breaking them? Who has not cause to be much
humbled in this respect? Some (it may be) will say, we never made any vows:
and therefore cannot be guilty of breaking vows. Let such consider that most
sacred vow which every of us made in Baptism. Let them consider the like
sacred vows made and renewed so often as we have celebrated the Lords Supper.
Let them consider the solemn vows that we have made in days of humiliation
and fast. Let them also consider the public vows which in the assembly of
Saints have week after week been made. And as for Surrexi, reditis^ Deo
quotidianis votis ire caper amus, etc. Aug. de Ord. l. 1. c. ^.
others which are more conscionable in their duty, let us consider the private
vows which in our daily prayers we make, especially those which upon some
heinous sins lying heavy upon our conscience, in sickness or any other
distress, in earnest desire of some special blessing, we have vowed. Consider
these and other vows whereby we have fast bound our selves to the Lord, and we
shall see that the (...) absq, ^ugo.
Lord has cause enough to account us all sons of Beliall, refractary
children, that will be kept under no yoke, no not under those yokes that we have
voluntarily put upon our own necks. We come in this respect too near to them,
who say, against the Lord and against his Anointed, Let us break Psalm. 2. 2,
3.
their bonds asunder, and cast away their cords from us. Thus do we justly
deserve that God should disanull his promise and covenant of mercy and grace
with us. Let these things be laid close to our consciences, that the wounds
thereof may humble us, and being penitently humbled, we may earnestly crave
mercy and pardon for this sin especially. Sins against the third
commandment, as blasphemy, perjury, and breach of vows, pierce deep into a
sensible conscience. But though they make deep wounds, yet is there sufficient
virtue in the blood of Christ to heal them: The 1 Ioh. 1. 7.
blood of Christ cleanses from all sin. Apply that precious blood to the
wounds of thy soul. Seeing that which is past and done, cannot be recalled and
undone, it is not meet that the wounds of thy conscience should continually be
kept open, till all the life thereof be clean wasted. Therefore in craving
pardon for this sin, believe that it is pardoned: and then be more watchful
over thy self, that thou fall not again and again into that sin.

Direction for keeping vows
2 To redress for the time to come, what has been heretofore amiss, let
these following rules be carefully observed.

1 On those vows whereunto by virtue of thy Christian profession thou art
bound, being solemnly made at thy Baptism, at receiving the Lords Supper, and
in public prayer, often and seriously meditate, day and night, when thou lie
down, and when thou risest up, when thou tariest at home, and when thou go
abroad, especially when thou undertakest any duty of piety, and art about in
prayer to present thy self before God; but most of all when thou art present
at others Baptism, and hear the very vow which thou thy self made before
God. Frequent meditation on vows, is an especial means to keep them fresh in
memory: a fresh remembrance of them puts life into the conscience, and
makes it sensible: a quick and sensible conscience is afraid of wounds. Fear
of wounds makes careful in avoiding the things which make wounds: as breach of
vows does. This therefore must needs be a good help for keeping vows, and
performing them.

2 Often renew thy vows, and so bind thy self again and again thereto. A vow
renewed is as new made. Men use to be very tender of their vows, when they are
new made, or while they remain fresh: as they are of a new suit of apparel,
or of their linen while it is clean and neat.

This direction of renewing vows is to be applied to vows of necessary and
bounden duties. But if vows made be of such circumstances as are not
necessary, yet very difficult, and cannot easily be performed, and much trouble
and Si praepropere sa ct^^ fuerit, magis est corrigenda ^emeritus, quam
persolvenda promissio. Aug. Epist. 45. ad Arment.
entangle the conscience, then, they being through weakness broken, the wisest
and safest course is earnestly to crave pardon (as we heard before) for that
which is past, and to take heed of the like folly, in ensnaring our selves for
the time to come. If a thing be preposterously done, rashness is rather to be
redressed then the promise performed.

3 When thou art tempted to a sin, bring that sin to the touchstone of thy
vows, and try whether it be not against them. This trial will be a means to
make thee think of thy vows, and to be more careful in keeping them, and in
resisting temptations against them. When the Rechabites Ier. 3. 56. etc.
were tempted to drink wine, they considered that it was against an ancient
vow, and thereupon were restrained from doing it. They were not ignorant of the
damage of breaking vows.

Danger in breaking vows no sufficient cause to keep from making vows Pro.
28. 9.
Object. If there be such danger in breaking vows, it will be a man's safest
course not to vow at all.

An. This is no good consequence: For, a good thing is not therefore to be
wholly omitted, because there is danger in an ill performing of it, or in a
careless neglect of prosecuting that which is begun. He that turns away his
care from hearing the law, even his prayer shall be abomination. Is it therefore
the safest not to pray at all? Fie upon such a consequence. The just
consequence to be thereupon inferred is this, Therefore turn thine care to the
law and so pray. Such a consequence from such a ground does the Apostle make:
for where he had said, Whosoever, shall eat the bread, and 1 Cor. 11. 27, 28.
drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of
the Lord, He adds as a just consequence following thereupon, Let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup. He
says not, let him forbear to come to the Lords Table. In like manner the
danger and damage of breaking vows ought not to restrain us from making
needful and useful vows: but it ought to make us careful and conscionable
in performing them.

4 Concerning voluntary vows, that thou may with comfort, confidence, and
good conscience perform them; be very wary and* well advised in making them.
Be not rash Eccl. 5. 2.
with thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before
God. In nothing does rashness sooner cause repentance then in this. Wherefore
for an advised making of vows,

Direction for making vows
1 Consider what moves thee to vow: what is the ground and occasion thereof.
As an oath must not be taken without a just and weighty cause: so nor a vow
made. A vow is a matter of much moment.

Quae possunt and de^ent voveri docet. Aug. Enar. in Psalm. 75.
2 Take a view of thy condition, whether thou art in place, and have power to
make the vow which thou inte^dest: and whether thou art not under such
authority as may keep thee from performing it: If thou be in such subjection,
how can thou say, I will pay my vows.

3 Examine the matter which thou art about to vow, and be sure that it be such
a thing as thou may lawfully, and can^^ comfortably perform. Otherwise thou
bring thy self into a laborinth. For, the making of a vow binds a man to
performance: performance of an evil vow binds a man to judgment. Thus he
that voweth an evil thing, is as he that holds a dog by the ears. He
knows not whether to turn.

4 Search thy heart, and see how that stands affected: whether there be in thee
a single, simple, full, resolved purpose to perform what thou vowest. An
invincible resolution is an especial means to make good what is vowed.

5 Make thy vow with confidence on the assistance of Gods Spirit to enable thee
to keep it* suspecting thine own Mat. 26. 33, 35.
weakness. Peter's purpose was questionless sincere: and his resolution was
good. But selfe-confidence was his fault. Viribus vestris non implebitis:
deficietis si de vobis praesumitis. Si autem de illo cui vovetis, vovete:
securi reddeti^. Aug loc. citat.
He presumed too much upon his own ability: which that he might the better
discern, he was left to himself. Ye cannot accomplish such matters by your
own strength. Ye will fail if ye presume of your selves. But if ye rest on
him to whom you vow, vow in the name of God, and ye shall assuredly perform it.

6 In making thy vow, pray for ability to keep it. Yea time after time, till
it be performed, pray for this grace. So often as thou make a solemn prayer
betwixt God and thy self, let one petition be for keeping thy vow. And if thy
vow be of some duty to be in performing all thy life*long, all thy life long
pray for this in particular.

On these grounds go on in doing thy uttermost for making good thy vows; and
that as thou desire to have the covenant of grace in Christ made good to
thee. Perform what thou have vowed: perform it to the full. Of all sacrifices
that which was brought for accomplishment of a vow Lev. 22. 21, 23.
must be most perfect. Such defective sacrifices as might be offered for a
free will offering, would not be accepted for a vow.

. 92. Of speed in paying vows.
IIII.. 89.
THe first opportunity to pay a vow must be taken. The Law says, Deuteronomy. 23. 21
Thou shall not slack to pay it. Eccl. 5 4.
Defer not to pay it, says the Wiseman.

By delay the occasion that moved a man to make a vow may be forgotten. The
occasion that set the heart on fire to make it, being forgotten, zeal will
soon wax cold, as water when fire is taken from the vessel in which it is,
or iron taken out of the fire. Nor iron, nor water, nor any other thing
naturally cold, is more inclinable to coldness if the cause of heating be
removed, then man's heart is to wax heavy and dull, when the occasions of
quickening them are Instruction i^ a maine cause of breaking vows.
either removed, or, which is all one, out of mind and memory.

This then questionless is an especial occasion of not performing many vows,
that they are not performed in their season: but opportunity is let slip. Had
not God himself Genesis 35. 1.
prevented Jacob, it is very likely that he would have failed herein. For he let
slip his opportunity. We may observe it in all men's affairs, that by
procrastination their resolution waxes more and more slake. In nothing is this
more verified then in matters of piety, matters wherein we have to do with God:
and that both by reason of Satan's subtilty and sedulity, endeavoring with
might and maine to hinder us in all pious courses, and to weaken all the helps
we have therein (among which, vows are none of the sleightiest) and also by
reason of our own backwardnes and dulnes thereunto. Satan by time gains great
advantage: and we by time loose as much, in that our zeal is prone to slake in
the heat of it.

Exhortation to be speedy in paying vows. Libenter voveat. and celeriter
reddat, and in hoc quod votum reddit meliori semper conatu proficiat. Aug. de
Fide ad P. Diac. c* 3.
Strike the iron therefore, as it is in the proverb, strike it while it is
hot. It is then fit to be wrought upon for any thing. Take the first
opportunity, which is the fittest season. If in any thing thou will make speed,
and manifest forwardness, do it in performing thy vows. Have thou made a vow
whilst thou art at sea? pay it so soon as thou come to land: if thou can
pay it so soon. Have thou vowed in sickness? let the payment of it, be the
first thing thou do upon thy recovery. So on other like occasions. Have thou
by vow bound thy self to read the word and pray every morning? Let this be the
first work thou do being up. If thou have any weighty business to do
betimes, rise the sooner, that thy vow may be first done. Let all things give
place to it: it, to nothing. A man that is able and willing to pay a debt,
accounts no money his own, till the debt be paid. He will keep in mind and
memory the day of payment, he will watch for it: his money (as we say) burns
in his baggs, till it be paid. Account thy vow a debt. No debt can be more due.
No bond more binding. A man of his word had as leave forfeit a bond, as fail
of his word. Be thou a man of thy word with God. Pay thy debt: perform thy
vow, and that on the day of payment, in due time; even now, if the now be come,
Defer not to pay thy vows. Very pertinent to this purpose, and emphaticall
is this phrase of the Psalmist, Thy vows are upon me O God. Though he Psalm
56. 12.
made the vows, yet he styles them Gods vows; because being made to God, they
were as a debt due to him, as a bond made by a debtor to a creditor, is not now
the debtors, but the creditors. Thus then he accounts his vow as a due debt
unto God; Thereupon he adds, Thy vows are upon me, Vows are debts.
whereby he shows, that as a faithful debtor, who has a mind to discharge his
bond, often thinks of the time of payment; and in that respect his debt lies as
a burden upon him, neither can he be quiet, till it be paid (As a porter that
has a burden on him, is not at rest till he be freed from it) so this Psalmist
had the vow which he had made to God, as a debt, as a burden, upon him,
whereby he shows, that his mind and desire was, with the first opportunity to
be eased thereof, which could not be, but by performing the same. Such respect
let us have to the vows that we make to God, such let our care be in
performing of the same, and that with all speed, so as we may truly use these
words, Thy vows are upon me O God.

. 93. Of performing vows openly.
V.. 89.
Vows secretly made may be openly performed. This is to be limited according
to the nature of the vow. Such things may be vowed, as in the performance of
them, it is not meet that Mat. 6. 3.
the left hand know what the right hand does. The doctrine therefore says not,
must be, but may be openly performed. So were most (if not all) of the approved
vows in Scripture. Psalm. 22. 25.
I will praise thee in the great congregation (says the Psalmist) and pay my
vows before them that fear thee: and again, -- 66. 13.
I will go into thine house with burnt offerings: I will pay thee my vows. 1 Samuel 1. 24, etc.
Hannah brought her son which she vowed to the Lord, unto the Tabernacle at
a festival time when all the people assembled thither. Genesis 35. 7.
Jacob built an altar, a visible and open memorial of his vow. Number. 21. 2, 3.
the Israelites gave a name (as a public proof of the performance of their
vow) to the place where their vow was performed.

1 Hereby God is more glorified. An open testification of that respect which
Saints bear to God, and of that care they have to bind themselves to do
service to him, makes much to his honor.

2 The Church is hereby much edified. Instances of Saints standing to their
holy resolutions, and performing their pious purposes, cheer the strong,
strengthen the weak: and thus is the Church built up.

3 They that make the vows, by this open manner of making them good, cannot
but be much more cheered in spirit, when they see their good intentions so
much to tend to the advancement of Gods glory, and others good.

Instruction in the best kind of vows.
They who in testimony of their due respect to God, and in way of gratitude are
moved to make vows to the Lord, let them here learn what are the best kind of
vows, and by what vows they may give most honor to God, and do most good to
themselves and others: even such as may be openly performed in public
assemblies. For a Prince, a Nobleman, a Magistrate, or any other of great
esteem, of high place, of good note and name, to vow to join himself with
assemblies that use to worship God together, to vow to maintain truth and
purity of religion in the places where he lives, is a worthy vow. For
Ministers to vow to preach the word where people are gathered together
diligently and faithfully, a worthy vow. For such as are taken captives, in
danger on the fea, imprisoned, visited with sickness, or any other way so
distressed, as they are restrained from the public places of Gods worship, to
vow when they are delivered openly, publicly to give thanks to God, a worthy
vow. In common judgments, especially of plague, of famine, of sword, such
vows of public gratitude are to be made, and publicly to be performed. It
is not enough to vow secret duties betwixt God and our selves, nor yet private
duties in our families, but by this pattern we have direction and incitation
for more open, common, and public duties; which are more honorable kinds of
vows. Yet that herein is a limitation, the next doctrine will show.

. 94. Of performing holy duties in holy assemblies.
VI. 89.
SAints are fittest witnesses of sacred duties. That which in this verse is
implied under this particle of restraint HIS, (in the presence of all HIS
people) is other where more expressly noted, by a more apparent description,
thus, Psalm. 2^ 25. Consiteor non tanti^m coram te, D^mine, etc. sed etiam in
auribus credentium, filiorum hominum, soci^rum gaudij mei, etc Aug. Confess. l.
10 c. 4. Mat* 76.
I will pay my vows before them that fear him. None but true Saints do truly
fear God.

1 This property of Gods people, that they fear the Lord, shows that they
will make the best use of such sacred, solemn duties performed in their
presence. They will glorify God for this your zeal. They will join their
spirits with your spirits in this open performance of duty. They will become
followers of you, and learn of you to vow and pay unto the Lord, and that
openly, publicly.

2 As for others, they are no better then such hogs and dogs, as are not
meet to have such precious pearls, and holy things cast before them: lest they
trample them under their feet.

Direction for persons among whom vows are paid.
Be wise now ye that are moved to give open and public testification of your
inward and private resolution. Be wise in making choice of your company. You
that have escaped sundry dangers on sea and land, that have had victory over
enemies, that have been eased and recovered of any maladies, that have been
preserved from the plague, that have had any other evidence of Gods special
providence and favor, let not play houses, let not tavernes, alehouses, and
tobacco-houses, let not assemblies of profane persons, of swearers, of
drunkards, of riotous and licentious persons, be the places whither you resort
to recount the deliverances which God has given you. This rather beseems
such as have vowed vows to Bacchus, to Ceres, to Priapus, to Venus, yea and to
Devils, then to the great Lord of heaven and earth. Associate your selves with
the Saints, with such as fear God, with such as may encourage you in that
which you do well, and instruct and direct you in that whereof you are
ignorant, and wherein you do amiss. Go to that place where that God who has
preserved, delivered, or any way blessed you, delights to be, where he most
manifests his presence, where he expects that your vow should be paid to
him. Let your heart be set upon that place, while by Psalm 84. 1, etc.
force you are kept from it, as David's was. So soon as possibly you can, come
to it. You Captains, Soldiers, Merchants, Mariners, Travelers, or others
that come from the sea, or other dangerous places; you women that are safely
delivered in childbed, you that have been sick and are recovered, you that
have been cut of the stone, or cured of any other malady, you that are loosed
out of prison, you that after any restraint have liberty, Let this be the first
public place that you come unto. So soon as you can say, say it in truth, say
it and do it, I will pay my vows unto the Lord now in the presence of all his
people.

Amen.
. 95. Of the meaning and method of the fifteenth Verse.
PSALM. CXVI. XV.
Precious in the sight of the LORD is the death of his Saints.
THe 2.
second reason to enforce the equity of the duty before mentioned, to praise the
Lord, is here expressed: being taken from the high account which God had of his
(...).
life. This is here indefinitely set down in the third person, without any
express application thereof to himself: yet so as by the precedent and
subsequent matter it may evidently be gathered that he meant himself as well as
others. For in the verses before and after, he uses the first person, and
expressly speaks of himself, thus, I will pay, etc. I am thy servant, etc. To
good purpose is this tender care of God thus indefinitely set down, as,

1 To show that his case was no other then the case of others. Others, and
those Saints too, might be brought even to death, as well as he.

2 To declare the impartial respect of God to all* to others as well as to
him: to him as well as to others.

3 To intimate the ground of that care God had of him, even because he was a
Saint: and yet not himself to give that title to himself, least he might
seem to do it on vainglory. (...) b


consecravit. benefecit.
Thus we see how this change of person from the first, (verse. 14.) to the third
(verse. 15) from the third (verse. 15.) to the first (verse. 16.) as it has an
elegancy in it, so also an Ciconia* Avi^ benefica, and grata. Quantum temporis
Ciconia suis ^oetibus educandis clargiuntur, tantum and ipse a pullis suis
invicem aluntur. So. linus.

Petronius appellat Ciconiam pietatis cultricem.


especial emphasis.

The persons among whom implicitly he reckons himself, styled Saints, are in
the original set out by a word that imports an especial respect of God
toward them. (...)
The root whence that word issues signifies mercy. Whereupon the Hebrews have
given such (...)
a name to a storke, which kind among fowls is the most merciful: and that not
only the old to their young ones, as most are, but also the young ones to the
old, which they use to feed and carry, when through age they are not able to
help themselves. This title is attributed to men in a double respect. 1
Passively, in regard of Gods mind and affection to them. 2 Actively, in regard
of their mind and affection to others. Gods mercy and kindness is great
toward them: and their mercy and kindness is great toward their brethren.
They are therefore by a kind of excellency, and property styled Isa. 57. 1.
(...) homines benignitatis.
men of mercy. In regard of this double acceptance of the word, some translate
it, Psalm. 18. 25. Cum benigno benignum te exhibes.
merciful, tender, or courteous. Others with a periphrase, with many words,
because they have not one fit word to express the full sense, thus, Quos ipse
benignitate prosequitur. Tremel and Iun.
Those whom God follows with bounty, or to whom God extends his bounty.
This latter I take to be the most proper to this place: for the word being
passively taken for such as are made partakers of Gods kindness, it shows
the reason of that high account wherein God has them, even his own grace and
favor. We have a word in English that in this passive signification fitly
answers the Hebrew, which is this, favorite.

By death, he means their soul, or life, which is subject to death. For, in
another place he says, Psalm. 72* 14.
Precious shall be their blood in his sight. What here he calls death, there he
calls blood. And in Scripture phrase Genesis 9. 4. Lev. 17. 14.
blood is said to be the life of living creatures. Very fitly is this
privative, death, mentioned in setting forth Gods care over their life, because
by their death it is manifested, partly by preserving them from death, and
partly by providing for them in death. A Trope not much unlike to this is used,
where God says, I Heb. 8. 12.
will be merciful to their unrighteousness: that is, to them in freeing them
from their unrighteousness.

The word translated, (...)
precious, is in Scripture attributed to things

1 Samuel 3. 1. Hebr. (...) Targum (...) occul^um.
Rare, or scarce (The Word of God was precious.)

Sweet (A good name is better then precious ointment.) The preciousnesse of an
ointment is in the savor of it, Eccl. 7. 1.

Pure or holy (Take forth the precious from the vile) Ierem. 15. 19.

Honorable (Kings daughters among thine honorable, word for word, precious
women) Psalm. 45. 9.

Ier 31. 20. LXX. (...).
Dear or beloved (Ephraim my dear, word for word, precious son.)

Much set by, or of great account (His name was much set by, word for word,
precious.) 1 Samuel 18. 30.

Of great value or worth (Such were the stones which the Queen of Sheba
brought to Solomon, Precious stones) 1 King. 10. 10.

The souls of Saints are every way precious to God: especially in the three
latter respects, as they are dear, much set by, of great worth, being redeemed
by the precious blood of Christ. For, he deals with them as men do with
things dear, much set by, of great value.

Men use to keep precious jewels safe. They make more esteem of them then of
all other things. They will not be prodigal of them. They will see good cause
why they should part with them, or else they will not part with them. This is
Gods mind toward the souls of his favorites. Saul acknowledges that his
soul was precious in David's 1 Samuel 26. 21.
eyes, because he did not take it away when he had opportunity. Surely then
their souls must needs be precious to God, who does not only not take them
away when he may, but also preserve them, when they are in great hazard of
death. On the contrary, when S. Paul esteemed not his life, in comparison of
the Gospel, but was rather prodigal thereof, he says, I count not my life
precious (or dear) to my self. Act. 20. 24.


This phrase in the sight (word for word (...)
in the eyes) of the Lord, is used by way of resemblance, to show that God
takes notice of our life and death: and is watchful over the same, as men
take notice of the things which are before them, and by fixing their eyes on
things do manifest a watchfulness: or otherwise it may indefinitely be used,
as a note of application only; and so, in the sight of the Lord, imports no
more but to the Lord: as if it had been thus said, Precious to the LORD is the
death of his favorites.

Sum.
In this verse is set out, Gods esteem of men.

More particularly here is noted

1 What these men be. His favorites.

2 Wherein that esteem consists. Their death is precious in his sight.

These two parts give evidence of these two points.

I. God has favorites.

II. God is tender of his favorites death.

. 96. Of Gods favorites.
I. GOD has favorites. Without all question they were his favorites that had
these testimonies following. Gen 44.
The Lord had respect to Abel and to his offering. Heb. 11. 5.
Enoch was translated that he should not see death, for before his translation
he had this testimony that he pleased God. Genesis 6. 8.
Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord. Iam. 2. 23.
Abraham was called the friend of God. Exo. 33. 11.
The Lord spoke to Moses face to face, as a man speaks to his friend. Ios. 1.
5.
The Lord said to Ioshuah, I will be with thee; I will not fail thee nor forsake
thee. Act. 13 2^.
And dil^ctum Deo. Componitur ex (...) and (...) nomine Dei.
to David, I have found David a man after mine own heart. ^ Sam. 12. 25.
Solomon was called (...)
Iedidiah because of the Lord: the Lord loved him. Dan. 10. 11.
Daniel a man greatly beloved. Hag 2. 23.
Zerubbabel as a signet. Ioh. 21. 7.
John, the disciple whom Jesus loved. Ioh 15. 15.
The rest of the Disciples he called friends. And Acts 9. 15.
Paul a chosen vessel. Yea to the whole communion of Saints these titles are
given, Exo. 19. 5.
A peculiar treasure above all people: 1 Pet. 2. 9.
A chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy nation: Zac* 2. 8.
the apple of Gods eye: Ephesians 5 1. (...).
dearly, or only beloved children: Heb. 12. 23.
first borne: Rom 8. 17.
heirs of God, joynt-heires with Christ: 1 Pet. 1. 4.
Begotten again to an inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades
not away, reserved in heaven. If they that are made partakers of such
prerogatives, be not compassed about, and followed with mercies, if they be not
favorites, and that in regard of the favor of the great Lord and King of
heaven and earth, surely there can be no favorites at all.

These, and other like to these being Ephesians. 1. 4.
chosen in Christ, are Ioh. 6. 39.
given of the Father to him and by him are Ephesians. 1. 7.
redeemed, -- 2. 16.
reconciled, -- 5. 26, 27.
sanctified, cleansed, made holy and without blemish, -- 1. 6*
and made accepted. The beloved one of God has taken these for 2 Cor. 11* 2.
Rev. 21. 9.
his wife, and made them Ephesians 5. 30.
members of his body: by virtue of which mystical and real union, Ioh. 17. 23.
God loves them with that love he bears unto Christ, and so makes them his
favorites. The very word of this text, Psalm. 16* 10. Acts 2. 27, etc. -- 13.
35.
is primarily attributed to Christ: and in and through him to others.

Instruction in the prerogative of Saints.
Good and great ground of comfort have Saints by reason of this prerogative,
that they are the favorites of the great King. What needful thing do they
want that they may not confidently expect from this their Liege? What hurtful
thing need they fear? Is not the King who favors them able to supply all
their necessities? Is he not able to protect them from all enmities? If he be,
what doubt can be made of the one, or of the other? Consider what mortal
Monarchs do for their favorites. Est. 6. 3, etc.
They invent, they consult how to do them honor. Though it often fall out that
they have unworthy favorites, instance Haman, yet a King can deny his
favorite nothing. Let a favorite ask Honors, Mannours, Offices, Immunities,
for himself, or for his friends, he soon obtains what he asks. Pro* 16.
15.
In the light of the kings countenance is life: and his favor is as a cloud of
the later rain: and as -- 19. 1^.
the dew upon the grass. He is therefore counted an happy man that may come to
be a Kings favorite. Such an one scorneth the envy, the disdain, the
backbiting, and all that the vulgar can do against him. As for all his
enemies, he puffs at them. If it be thought an happiness to be a mortal
Kings favorite, what is it then to be a favorite of the King of Kings? Kings
on earth are not always able to do what they will. Their favorites may
desire, and they may be willing to grant, more then they can. They have not
always understanding to know what is best for their favorites. Their
favorites may beg, and they give that which is pernicious. They do not
always retain the same mind. Their favor may be clean alienated from their
old favorites, and cast upon new. They do not always live. They may die
before their favorites, and their favorites then be the worse dealt withal
even for that favor sake which by the deceased King was showed unto them. Most
of these may be exemplified in Ahashucrosh and his favorite Haman. But the
Lord our God is subject to none of these. He is able to do what he will: and
what his favorites can justly ask. He knows what is good, what not good to
be granted to his favorites. He is alwais of the same mind. His favor is
stable, and perpetual. He ever lives. It never did, it never shall, it cannot
repent any, to have been this Kings favorite. As Christ himself that high,
and chief favorite said, so may every one that is in him accepted for a
favorite, say, The Psalm. 16. 5, 6. Si vis verum agnoscere, Deus est dilitiae
tuae, requies tua* sanitas tua, gaudium tuum, foelicitas tua, refrigerium tuum,
amoenitas tua, and quicquid sau^te possit desiderare anima tua, totum tibi Deus
erit. Aug. ad Frat in Erem. Ser 55. Information in favors conferred on Gods
favorites.

In all the places following (...) the word used in this text is expressed:
though translators do diversely turn it.


Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cup: thou maintainest my
lot. The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places: yea I have a goodly
heritage. If thou will acknowledge the truth, God is thy delight, thy rest, thy
health, thy joy, thy happiness, thy refreshing, thy glory, and whatsoever thy
soul may piously desire, God will be all that to thee.

Boldly and safely may we also on this ground encourage our selves against all
the envy, malice, ill language, and evil entreating of the men of this world.
What if the world account us forsaken, desolate, so long as God says to us,
Hephzibam, my delight in them, Isa. 62. 4.

That we may the more soundly and safely comfort and encourage our selves in
this great prerogative of being Gods favorites, let us distinctly note what
evidences of Gods favor toward his favorites the Holy Ghost does expressly
set down, and that in one book, the book of Psalms.

1 The Lord sets apart him that is a favorite to himself, Psalm. 4. 3.

2 Every favorite shall pray unto God in a time when he may be found, Psalm.
32. 6.

3 Gods praise is in the congregation of favorites, Psalm. 149. 1. They are
incited to sing to the Lord: and to bless him, Psalm. 30. 4. and 145. 10.

4 The Lord will speak peace to his favorites, Psalm. 85. 8.

5 He preserves the souls of his favorites, Psalm. 97. 10.

6 He exalts the praise of his favorites, Psalm. 148. 14.

7 Favorites shall shout aloud for joy, Psalm. 132. 16.

8 This honor have all his favorites, Psalm. 149. 9.

Direction to favorites
That we be not puffed up with this prerogative, but rather provoked to Col. 1.
10.
walk worthy of the Lord, Ephesians. 4. 1.
worthy of the vocation wherewith we are called, our care must be

1 To understand his will, Ephesians. 5. 17.

2 To love him with all our soul, Deuteronomy. 6. 5. Psalm. 31. 23.

3 To cleave to him, ^os. 23 8.

4 To give thanks to him, Psalm. 30. 4.

5 To do that which is well pleasing in his sight, Heb. 13. 21.

6 To be followers of his ancient favorites, Heb. 6. 12.

Si voluntatem Dei nosse quisquam desideret* fiat amicus Dei Non autem quis
quam ^^^citur amicus Dei, nisi purgatissimis moribus. Aug. cont, Manich. l. 2.
God has been pleased to choose us in their room, they being translated, he
bears such a mind to us, as he did to them. Is it not then most just and
equal that the same mind should be in us, that was in them toward God, that
the faith of Abel, conversation of Enoch, uprightness of Noah, obedience of
Abraham, meekness of Moses, courage of Ioshuah, devotion of David, repentance
of Solomon, constancy of Daniel, love of John, such readiness to follow Christ
as was in the Disciples, and other like properties in other favorites of God,
may be in us, that so it may never repent the Lord that he has cast his favor
upon us, and made us his favorites. God still remains the same: the same in
his essence, the same in his mind and affection to such as are so minded and
affected toward him as his ancient favorites were. Wherefore though Abel,
Henoch, Noah, Abraham, and other favorites be dead and gone, yet let their
spirit appear to live in us: that, while we live, God may not want favorites
on earth: but that we for the present may show that we have so set before us
the life of our predecessors, as we become examples and patterns to our
successors.

. 97. Of Gods account of Saints death.
II. 96.
GOD is tender of his favorites death. Their Psalm. 7^. 14.
blood he accounts precious. If he have -- 56. 8.
a bottle for their tears, what has he for their blood? Christ does forcibly
infer his Fathers care of the life and death of his favorites, by arguments
from the less: as first from one of the meanest of creatures, thus, Mat. 10.
29, 30, 31.
One sparrow shall not fall on the ground without your father: Then from the
meanest accident that is inherent in man, his hairs (which are no (...)
forcible then death? Assuredly their name, estate, liberty and every thing else
is precious to him, to whom their life and death is precious.

Comfort in death.
2 Admirable is the comfort which on the forenamed ground Gods favorites have
or may have in their death. Natural men account death the most terrible thing
that can (...). Arist. Ethic lib. 3. cap 6.
befall a man, because they conceive it to be the period of a man's happiness.
But they whose death is precious in Gods sight, cannot conceive it to be so
terrible, much less such a period. For then would God keep them from death.
In that their death is precious, Blessed are they that die in the Lord, (Rev.
14. 13.) When they die, there is good cause they should die. The wise God will
not let go a precious thing without cause. Yea he will not let it go without
advantage. Their death is advantageable to God, to themselves, to others.

This may surviving friends apply to the death of such as Oc^a^^o non est danda
Gentibus, ut nos merito reprehendant, quod quos vivere apud Deum dicimus, ut
exti^ctos ac perditos lugeamus etc. Cypr. Ser. 4. de Mortal.

Incitation to be a favorite.


are taken away, be they Magistrates, Ministers, Husband, Wife, Parent, Child,
Neighbor, Kinsman, or any other, especially if they have left any evidence of
Gods favor toward them. Such are but gone before us, not clean gone away
from us. Missed they may be: they may not be lamented as lost. Occasion is not
to be given to Pagans of just reproof in that we lament those as perished and
lost, whom we avouch to live with God, and so by (...) expression of our inward
affection disanull that faith which by word we profess.

3 This high account which God makes of his favorites death, is a forceable
motive to stir us up to give all diligence to be of the number of these
favorites, that so our tears may be kept in Gods bottle, our complaints in
his bosom, our cries in his ears, our bodies within the guard, even
Preciosior est unius Sancti anima, quam insi ^it^ mu^utudin^s (...) Hier. Com
in Psalm. 143.
in the hands of his angels, our souls bound in the bundle of life, our life
and death in the treasure of his jewels, as a precious thing. For, Precious in
the sight of the Lord is the death of his favorites. Yea the soul of one
Saint is more precious to him, then infinite multitudes of sinners. Let us
covet therefore, and with our utmost power endeavor to be of this blessed
Society of Saints, and not consorts of sinners.

. 98. Of the exposition and resolution of part of the sixteenth Verse.
PSALM. CXVI. XVI.
O LORD, truly I am thy servant, I am thy servant, and the son of thine
handmaid.
The Sea. 2.
third reason whereby the Prophet was the rather induced to render solemn
praise to God, is here laid down. And it is taken from the constant favor of
God toward him. God of old had taken him even from his mothers womb to be his
servant, and still continued that grace to him. Therefore he would praise him.
The argument may be brought to this brief form.

(...)
Godsancient servants must praise him.

(...)
But I am Gods ancient servant.

(...)
Therefore I must praise him.

I deny not, but that this acknowledgement of Gods ancient kindness to
himself in particular may be referred to the argument indefinitely set down in
the former verse, and here added as an application thereof. For, having
indefinitely noted how the death of Gods favorites was precious in his sight:
here he gives instance thereof in himself, and says, I am Gods servant: and
my death was precious to him: for he loosed my bands. This reference is not
impertinent. But I take this for another distinct argument, rather then for an
application, or confirmation of the former.

There is in the original a (...) and (...) est particula incitantis: affe
ctum significat and impetum Est semper in initio sententiae. Per Aphae resin
(...) quae semper postpo (...).
word premised which is diversely expounded, because in Scripture it is diversely
used, namely as a note of attention, or obsecration, or demonstration, or
asseveration: and translated, Behold, Truly, I beseech thee* But in all the
acceptions thereof it has an emphasis: and here questionless it is used for
emphasis sake, as every of the other clauses are. For first, here is an
apostrophe to God, O Lord. 2 A note of asseveration, truly. 3 An

(...) The Asseveration is a note of confidence. So as,

II. Saints may confidently profess that relation which God is pleased shall
pass betwixt him and them.

The Ingemination imports an earnestness in that which he professes, and
gives instance that

III. Confidence in the interest which Saints have in God makes them earnest
in pressing it.

The continuance of the mutual relation betwixt God and him, even from his
birth is added as a prop to his faith. Therefore

IIII. Faith is much strengthened by constant evidences of Gods favor.

The express mention of his mother, which is for honor sake, shows that,

V. It is an honor to children to descend from pious parents.

. 99. Of Saints being Gods servants.
I. SAints are Gods servants. As this Prophet here so styles himself, so are
Exo. 32 13.
the three great Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Israel: so also Number. 12. 7.
Moses, Job 1. 8.
Job, Ier. 7. 25.
all the true Prophets, the Apostles, as Rom 1. 1*
Paul, 2 Pet. 1. 1.
Peter, Iud. 1.
Jude, yea and Isa. 42. 1.
Christ himself, styled.

Sundry are the respects wherein Saints may truly and properly be termed Gods
servants.

1 As Psalm. 119. 91.
all creatures are: being made, sustained, ordered and governed by the Lord.

2 As Ier. 25. 9.
many natural men; being deputed by the Lord to special functions and services.

3 As Mal. 1* 6. Isa. 4^. 19.
many in the Church, making profession of God to be their Lord.

4 As true, faithful professors, who do indeed take God for their Lord. In
the three former respects, (as Gods creatures, as deputed to select functions
by God, as professors of the name of God) others are servants of God as well as
Saints: but the fourth respect, which is the most honorable, profitable, and
comfortable respect is proper and peculiar to Saints: and that two ways,

1 By reason of Gods affection to them.

2 By reason of their disposition to God.

1 God accounts them members of his house, and answerably affects them as of
his household. In regard of such an affection he thus says of Moses. Number. 12. 7.
My servant Moses is faithful in all my house. Yea as united unto Christ, and
in him adopted and accepted, he says to Saints, as Isa. 42. 1.
to Christ, Behold my servants, whom I uphold, mine elect, in whom my soul
delights.

2 They are affected to the Lord as dutiful, faithful, grateful servants. An
heathen Monarch observed thus much, and thereupon says, Dan. 6. ^0.
O Daniel, servant of the living God, whom thou servest continually.
Gratulation for this dignity to be Gods servants.

Nobilis servitus de qua and David ad Deum loquitur, Ego servus tuus, etc. and
beata Maria ad Angelum, Ecee ancilla Domini. Hanc servitutem hab^it and Moses,
etc. Nec mirum quamvis sanctos homines tamen Deiservos nobiliter appella ^i,
cum per Esaias am Pater loquatur ad Filium, Magnum tibi est vocari te puerum
meum. Hier. Com. in Tit. 1.




This relation thus taken affords matter of gratulation and direction to such
as can truly and justly apply it to themselves.

Gratulation, by reason of the dignity of it.

Direction, by reason of the duties that are thereupon expected.

1 It is here as a dignity expressed, and made the ground of gratulation. And
that not without cause. For though this title, servant, be in it self a mean
title, yet in relation to God it is an high, an honorable title. The greatest
nobleman in a kingdom thinks himself honored with this title, The Kings
servant. But what are mortal Monarchs to the immortal and incomprehensible
King of kings? Not only Patriarchs, Kings, Prophets, and Apostles, but Christ
the Son of God, thought himself dignified with this title servant, in
relation to God. It is therefore a noble service whereof David here says to
God, I am thy servant, etc. and blessed Mary to the angel, Behold the handmaid
of the Lord. Moses also and other Saints were such servants. Neither is it any
marvel that holy men were dignified with this title, whereas the Father thus
speaks to his Son, It is a great thing for thee to be called my servant.
Such is the Majesty, Omnipotency, Immutability, Perpetuity, Integrity,
Clemency, Mercy, Bounty, and Excellency every way of this Lord, as it nor will
nor can repent any one to have any relation to him, or dependence upon him:
which the royal Prophet well understood, when he said to this Lord, A day in
thy courts is better then a thousand. I had rather be a doore-keepein the house
of my God, then to dwell in the tents of wickedness, Psalm. 84. 10.

Particular prerogatives of Gods servants.
The particular dignities and prerogatives of the Lords servants, are such as
these.

1 They are all free, 1 Cor. 7. 22.

2 All the services which the Lord enjoyneth are fair services, Psalm. 19. 7,
etc. 1 Ioh. 5. 3.

3 The Lord gives ability to do the work which he expects and exacts of us,
Joel. 2. 29. Phil. 2. 13.

4 He accepts and approves what he enableth his servants to do, Mat. 25.
21. Job. 1. 8, 9.

5 He bountifully rewards every good thing. His wages are good and great,
Mat. 10. 42. and 19. 29. and 25. 21.

6 Gods servants get favors even for others also, Job 42. 8.

7 They are sure of safe protection from all hurtful things, and of sufficient
provision of all needful good things, Isa. 65. 13, 14.

8 The Lord takes care of his servants seed, Psalm. 69. 36.

Direction to duties of servants.
2 This relation directs us unto such duties as here follow.

1 To honor our Lord, Mal. 1. 6.

2 To obey him, Mat. 8. 9. Col. 3. 22.

3 To fear him with an holy trembling, Ephesians. 6. 5.

4 To be faithful to him, Number. 12. 7.

5 To do all that we do on duty, Luke 17. 10.

6 To be no men-pleasers, Gal. 1. 10.

7 To serve him only: not to serve Mammon or any other master, save the Lord,
Mat. 6. 24.

. 100. Of Saints confidence in Gods mind to them and theirs to God.
II.. 98.
SAints may confidently profess that relation which God is pleased shall pass
betwixt him and them. This confidence is manifested sometimes in the
acknowledgement of that part of the relation which is on man's part: and other
times that which is on Gods part. In this text, that on man's part is professed,
truly I am thy servant. So where he says, Psalm. 95. 7.
We are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hands, People and
sheep are notes of relation on man's part. So are clay, and work of Gods
hands, where the Prophet says, Isa. 64. 8.
We are the clay, and the work of thy hands. On Gods part, he says, O Lord,
thou art our father, and thou our potter. To like purpose are other like notes
of relation on Gods part, with confidence professed, thus, Psalm. 89. (...).
Thou art my father, my God, and the rock of my salvation. -- 44 4.
Thou art my King, O God. -- 3. ^.
Thou, O Lord, art my glory. In these, and other like places, though the note
of asseveration, (...)
truly, is not expressed, yet the manner of expressing the notes of relation on
the one, and the other part, import much confidence.

These and such other relations betwixt God and man, give assurance of Gods
gracious acceptance and favor. If God meant not to deal with us, as a Father
with children, as an Husband with his wife, as a King with Subjects, as a
Master with servants, as a Shepherd with sheep, as a Potter with pots (for
all these, and other like notes of relation betwixt God and us, are expressed
in Scripture) would God have suffered such relations to be betwixt him and us?
They are not complementall, and mere titular phrases, but expressions of true,
real unions and communions.

Instruction in a ground of confidence.
Take notice here, of the ground of true, holy boldness and confidence. Wisely
and diligently observe how God offers himself unto thee, what bond of relation
he suffers to pass betwixt him and thee. As Saints in former times have
done, do thou in thy time. Plead them before God. Confidently plead them, to
sharpen thy prayer, to strengthen thy faith. Say to God, Thou, art O Lord,
truly thou art my God, my King, my Father, my Master, my Maker, my Shepherd,
Respicias populum tuum, qui quondam tuus est appellatus populus. Hier. Comment.
l 17 in Isa. 64. How Gods mind to us may be known.
etc. And on the other side, I am of thy people, and of thy flock, thy child,
thy servant, the work of thy hands. Behold thy people, which have of old been
called thy people. These sure grounds of faith will enlarge thine heart, and
open thy mouth, and embolden thee both to pray to God, and to expect from God
what thou prayest for.

That thou may do this with the more steadfastness of faith, search thine
heart, examine thy disposition, try how thou stand affected toward God. If
thou have the mind of a child, a servant, a creature, a sheep toward God,
thou may rest upon it, God has an answerable mind to thee. Yea because God
has the mind of a father and master to thee, thou have an answerable mind to
him. The reflection of his respect to thee on thy heart, works respect in
thee toward him.

. 101. Of Saints earnestness in pressing their interest in God.
III. 98.
COnfidence in the interest which Saints have in God, makes them earnest in
pressing it. It makes them again and again to press the same thing, which
is an undoubted evidence of great ardency. Did not the fire of a zealous spirit
even flame out of the mouth of him that does thus redouble a like relation
before God, Isa. 63* 16:
Doubtless thou art our father, though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel
acknowledge us not: thou, O Lord, art our Father, our Redeemer. The like is
manifested by the multiplication of several words to the same sense, thus,
Psa. 80. 14 15
Behold and visit this vine: and the vineyard which thy right hand has
planted: and the branch which thou made strong for thy self. Vine, vineyard,
branch, import one and the same thing.

Such confidence as is rightly grounded on an assured interest in God,
persuades a man's heart that God cannot suffer him to call and cry upon him,
and not hear him. Therefore if God at first hear not, he will not presently
give over, but rather cry the more earnestly and instantly till the Lord do
hear him. Indeed they that know no title that they can make to God, nor
believe any interest they have in him, may soon be driven away: as 1 Samuel 28.
6, 7
Saul, who, when the Lord answered him not, presently enquired after a witch.
But they that well knew their interest in God, took another course. Psalm. 80
4, etc
When God seemed to be angry against their prayer, they humbly expostulate the
case with God: they press the former favors that God showed to them, and that
title which they had in him, and thereupon once and again most earnestly they
pray that God would cause his face to shine upon them, resting on this, that
they shall be saved.

By that ground of faith (whereof in the former.) labor Exhortation to
manifest confidence by earnestness.
to be strengthened in faith. Get confidence in God; and that by considering,
as what he is in himself, a potent, prudent, faithful, merciful God: so what
he is to thee, Thy God, thy King, thy Father, etc. And give evidence of this
thy confidence, by stirring up thy spirit to depend on him, who gives so just
cause to make thee depend on him. Often and seriously meditate on those grounds,
and when thou art before God, whether it be in humiliation or gratulation, call
them to mind, press them again and again. Imitate the worthy patterns that
in this case are prescribed unto us in Gods Word. If thus with understanding we
do inwardly in our souls, or outwardly with our tongues inculcate our right,
title and interest in Gods Word, urging the same again Acceperunt
repromissiones expectando atque confidendo quod acciperent. Si igitur considere
sit accipere, possumus sic accipere Chrysostom. Hom. 23 in Hebr. 11
and again, thereby our dull spirits (...) much quickened, our blunt prayers
much sharpened, and our weak faith much strengthened: especially if with
patience we can rest upon God. Saints of old by their patient expectation and
steadfast confidence attained what was promised. If therefore to trust
confidently be the way to receive, we also may so receive.

. 102. Of the vigor which is preserved in faith by the constancy of Gods
favor.
IIII. 98.
FAith is much strengthened by constant evidences of Gods favor. Herewith did
he support his faith that said to God, Psalm. 2^. 9, 10*
Thou art he that took me out of the womb: thou did make me hope when I was
upon my mothers breast: I was cast upon thee from the womb: thou art my God
from my mothers belly. -- 7^. 5, 6.
Thou art my trust from my youth: by thee have I been holden up from the womb:
thou art he that took me ont from my mothers bowels. It was not only the
disposition of Obadiah toward God, but also the evidence that thereby he had
of Gods affection toward him, that made him with confidence say to Eliah, 1
King. 18. 12.
I fear the Lord from my youth.

By long continuance of ancient favor many demonstrations are given of a fast,
fixed, and unremoveable affection. So as if by reason of temptations one or
more evidences should be questioned, yet others would remain to uphold faith,
and to keep it from an utter languishing, and a total falling away. As when an
house is supported by many pillars, though some be taken away, yet by the
support of them which remain, the house will stand.

Admonition to parents betimes to dedicate their children to God. Of parents
duty in this kind, See Domestical Duties. Treat. ^. 4, 17, 37.
1 Be admonished hereby, O Parents, to initiate your children betimes* and from
the cradle, yea from the womb to dedicate them to the Lord, and to bring them
up in the nurtuoe and admonition of the Lord, so soon as they are capable of
instruction, that when they are grown even unto manhood, th^^ may on all
occasions with much comfort and strong confidence say in the same sense that
the Prophet here does, I am the son of thine hand maid; being borne under the
covenant, and having in their infancy received the seal of the covenant, and
from their childhood known the holy Scriptures, being taught when they were
tender, and thereby brought from their youth to fear the Lord. It is a
glorious and blessed prerogative to be (...) Verna.
borne a servant in Gods house. This is no slavish condition: but the best
freedom, and most happy immunity that possibly can be. Such Qui hominis servus
est, liber est D^^, and qui h^minibus liber ^st, servus est Christi: Ambo ^r go
unum sunt. Hier. Com. 1 Cor. 7. Exhortation to children.
as are borne servants in Gods house, are by virtue of that their birth sons,
and free, from the instant of that their birth. Christ's servant, and the Lords
freeman, are reciprocal terms: either may be said of the other. Christ's
servant is the Lords freeman: and the Lords freeman is Christ's servant, (1 Cor.
7. 22.) A good inducement this is to provoke parents to suffer this word of
exhortation.

2 Be ye also, O Children, exhorted and persuaded, to yield your selves pliable
(from the time that you have any capacity) to the good instruction of your
parents: that by your continuing to grow in grace, answerably to the means
which by the divine providence have been afforded you, you may with the greater
comfort, and stronger confidence, both in time of humiliation when for
preventing or averting some judgment, or obtaining or regaining some blessing,
you power forth your souls to God, or in time of gratulation for some
judgment removed, or some blessing bestowed, you enlarge your hearts, and open
your mouths, you may say to God, I am the son of thine handmaid: and thou
have been my God from my mothers womb. Take heed that being borne in Gods
house, and by your parent, the son of his handmaid, you become not a bond*
slave, and have the flesh, a bondwoman for your mother. They that serve the
flesh in the lusts thereof are such: What can such expect but the doom
denounced against the bond*woman and her son, which was this, Gal. 4. 30.
Lij^e ancillam hinc and si^ium eius. D^sca^, iuquit, iam quod nihil commune
habebit filius ancillae cum filio m^o Isaac. Chrysostom Hom. 46. in Genesis 21
Cast out the bondwoman and her son: for the son of the bondwoman shall
not be heir with the son of the free*woman. A woeful doom for such as are
borne in Gods house, to be so cast out. Thereby they may know that they have
nothing common with the true sons of God. Nothing, I say, in regard of those
spiritual privileges which belong to Gods freeborn children. So walk
therefore, O children, that are borne in the Church, so carry your selves all
your days, as you may on all occasions say to the Lord, I am the son of
thine hand maid.

. 103. Of childrens honor by pious parents.
V.. 98.
IT is an honor to children to descend from pious parents. This is true in
relation to ancient progenitors. For it was a greater honor to the Jews in
all succeeding ages, that they descended from the pious Patriarchs. But the
nearer such parents are, the more honorable it is to children. Most of all
honorable, when their immediate parents, from whose loins, and out of whose
womb they proceed, are pious. Of such an one the Prophet here speaks, I am
the son of thine handmaid. For questionless he here calls his mother Gods
handmaid, as he called himself Gods servant: in a spiritual respect, in
regard of Gods grace to her, and in her. Such were Salomons parents, of whom,
for honor sake, he makes Prove 4 3. -- 31. 1. 1 King 8. 17.
frequent mention. 2 Timothy 1. 5. Summa apud Deum est nobilitas, clarum esse
virtutibus, Quid apud Deum in viris nobilius Petro, qui piscator and pauper
suit? Quid in soeminis beata Maria illustrius, quae spon^a fabri describitur?
Hier. ad Celant. de Iustit. Matris fam.

Direction, for parents how to leave an honorable memorial.


Such was as Lois the grandmother, so Eunice the mother of Timothy.

Nothing in truth can make any more honorable then piety. Whatsoever men's
outward condition be in this world, though never so mean, yet if they excel
in virtue, they are most honorable in Gods eye. What man before God more noble
then Peter, who was but a poor fisherman? What woman more illustrious then
blessed Mary, who is set out to be a carpenters wife? Pious persons for birth,
are borne of God: For dignities they are Gods favorites, of Gods Court, the
most honorable therein: they are the spouse of his son. For revenewes, the
exchequer of Gods treasures is always open for them to have out of it his most
precious jewels: yea they are the true heirs of this world, and of the world
to come.

1 Such parents as desire that their children should all their days make an
honorable mention of them, let them here take notice of the only right course
to have their desire accomplished. Let them so walk before their children, as
they may have sure evidences that they are Gods servants: that when children
make mention of their father before the Lord, they may have cause to say of him
as Solomon did of his father, 1 King. 8. 25.
Thy servant my father: and of their mother, Psalm. 86. 16.
Thy handmaid. For a child to style himself the son of a Duke and Duchess,
Earl and Countess, Lord and Lady, or any other like, is not in truth such an
honor as this, Son of Gods servant and handmaid. By this, poor, mean,
despised parents in this world may make their children honorable: and may make
their own names honorable to their children. Direction to children in what
parents to glory.


2 Such children as would have just cause not vaine-gloriously to brag, but
divinely to glory in their parents, let them here know what kind of parents do
give that just cause. If indeed their father be Gods servant, and their mother
Gods handmaid, let them not be ashamed of them, because they be poor, of
mean condition, not esteemed in this world, but heartily thank God that they
are borne of such parents as may give them occasion to say, I am the child of
Gods servant, and of Gods handmaid. It is an hard task to persuade most
children hereunto. But they that know God, and the dignities and immunities of
his servants, will without all question yield to the truth and equity hereof.

. 104. Of the resolution and instructions of the last clause of the 16. Verse.
PSALM. CXVI. XVI.
Thou have loosed my bonds.
THe. 2.
fourth reason which stirred up the Prophet to give public thanks to God, was
the kindness which God had done to him. That kindness was a gracious
deliverance from a grievous distress, thus expressed.

Thou have loosed my bonds. The argument may be thus framed.

They whose bonds thou O Lord have loosed, are bound to praise thee.

But Thou have loosed my bonds.

Therefore I am bound to praise thee.

Thus these words have a relation to the principal duty promised in this
Psalm.

They may also have an immediate reference to the other part of this verse, and
that as an effect following from the cause. The Lord accounted him his servant,
and therefore loosed his bonds. To make this reference the better discerned,
some join this part of the verse with the former in one entire sentence, which
they express in form of a petition thus, Obsccro, Ieho va, cum ego sim*servus
tuus, simservus tuus, filius ancilla tua, solveris vincula mea. Tremel. and Iun.
I beseech thee, O Lord, seeing I am thy servant, I am thy servant, the son
of thine handmaid, loose my bonds. But the mood and (...)
tense whereby this last clause is expressed, admits not the form of
petition.

And the very matter whereabout he now is, namely gratulation, shows it
rather to be a profession of a former, then a supplication for a future
deliverance.

Indicat. praeterperfect. solvi^i.
Besides the inference of the 17 verse immediately on this clause does
demonstrate that he speaks of a thing past, a favor done, and succor
received. And that mention is here made thereof as of the cause of praising
God. For, if the question should be asked, why mention is here made of loosing
his bonds, The 17. verse gives a ready answer, I will offer, etc. As if it had
been more fully expressed, Because the Lord has loosed my bonds, therefore I
will offer a sacrifice of praise.

Wherefore to take the words as our English has truly and properly translated
them, thus, Thou have loosed my bonds, (...)
The word translated, loosed, does properly signifio, to open; and thus it is
diversely applied, as to the parts of ones body, Ezekiel 33. 22.
mouth, 1 King. 8. 29.
eyes, Isa. 50. 5.
ears, etc. To the earth (and that when -- 45. 8.
ordinarily it opens it self to receive rain, or seed, or extraordinarily,
Psalm 105. 17.
aswhen it opened it self to devour Dathan and his associates.) To the Exo. 28
9.
engraving of stones, 1 King. 7. 36.
metals, or any like thing. To Isa. 2^. 2.
doors, 2 King. 15. 16
gates, Deuteronomy. 28. 12. Genesis 41. ^6.
treasures, and such like. To Psalm. ^7 14.
the drawing out of a sword: and to the undoing, opening, and loosing of such
things as are bound. Thus this word is used to express Isa. 5. 27.
the undoing of a girdle wherewith a man is girt: the Genesis 44. 11.
opening of a sack that is tied: and the Job 30. 11.
loosing of cords and chains wherewith one is bound. Where Nebuzaraden says to
Jeremiah, Ier. 40. 4.
I loose thee from the chains, etc. this word is used. In this sense is it
here used. Afflictions and calamities are as bonds, cords, and chains, which
fast tie and bind men, which girt and gall, pinch and pain them, yea and often
strangle and kill them: and in these respects called bonds, as in this and
Psalm. 107. 14. Eccl 7. 26. Isa. 28* 22. -- 52. 2. Ier. 2. 20. -- 30. 8* Nah. 1.
13.
many other places, where the very word, that is here, is used in the same
sense. Yea because death holds men down, as fast bound, so as they cannot
stir, it is said to have cords (as was before noted on verse. 3.. 15.) and
when one is delivered from death* the grave is said, in the word of this text,
to be Ezekiel. 37. 13.
loosed, or opened.

This phrase then (thou have loosed my bonds) is metaphorical. It implies two
things.

1 That he was in sore and grievous afflictions, wherewith he was as it were
bound, as a man that is taken by robbers and pirates, or by enemies, and fast
bound by ropes, chains, or other like bonds. Thus Ier. 40. 1.
Jeremiah among other Jews that were taken captives by the Babylonians, was
bound.

2 That the Lord delivered him from those afflictions, which deliverance was a
kind of loosing those bonds, so as they continued not to bind him as before.
Thus Nebuzaraden said to Jeremiah, -- 4*
I loose thee this day from the chains which were upon thine hand.

The occasion of mentioning this deliverance, is to convince his soul of the
equity of that which he was now in doing, to praise the Lord.

Sum.
Thus we have A profession of a great deliverance.

This may be considered two ways.

1 Simply, in and by it self.

2 Relatively, in and with reference to the occasion thereof.

In the former consideration, One thing is implied. Another expressed.

1 The thing implied is, that he was in great distress. The mention of bonds,
together with the loosing of them, imports, that bonds were on him: he was
bound with them.

2 The thing expressed points at

1 The Author, or Deliverer, Thou.

2 The Kind of deliverance, have loosed.

The Reference hereof is partly immediate to the very next words, partly remote
to the words further off.

The immediate reference sets it down as an effect of that relation which was
betwixt God and him. He was Gods servant, therefore God loosed his bonds.

The remote reference expresses it as a cause of his praising God. God loosed
his bonds, therefore he would praise God.

So also does the immediate inference of the 17 verse: Because thou, O Lord,
have loosed my bonds, I will offer praise to thee.

The thin^ implied, bonds, intimates that

I. Saints may fall into inextricable perplexities: Even such as they fall into
who are bound with cords and chains, and know not how to unloose them. Hereof
before on verse 3.. 16.

The Author acknowledged to be his deliverer, (Thou) gives proof that,

II. God is a deliverer from distress.

III. Deliverances are to be ascribed to God. Of both these before. Of the
former on verse. 6.. 35, 36. Of the latter. ver. 8.. 51.

The Kind of deliverance, have loosed, gives evidence, that,

IIII. God can deliver out of inextricable straits. Hereof before on ver. 6..
39. 41. and on verse. 8.. 52.

The immediate reference, imports that,

V. God takes especial care of his servants.

This Prophet was Gods servant: and God loosed his bonds. Yea the inference
imports that therefore, even because he was his servant, he loosed them.

The remote reference and immediate inference, implie, that

VI. They that are delivered from distress are especially bound to praise the
Lord.

. 105. Of Gods respect to his servants.
V.. 104.
GOD takes especial care of his servants. As here under a metaphor he is said
to loose his bonds, so other where his care is in other phrases set down, thus.

Psalm. 34. 22.
The Lord redeemeth the soul of his servants.

-- 144. 10.
He delivers his servants from the hurtful sword.

-- 79. 10.
He revengeth the blood of his servants.

-- 105* ^5, etc.
He sent plagues among them that dealt craftily with his servants.

-- 35. ^7:
He has pleasure in the prosperity of his servants.

As the affection and respect which he bears to them, which moves him to
make them his. 96.
favorites: so the honor which he brings to himself thereby, moves him so
and so to deal with his servants. This reason God himself thus expresses and
presses, Isa. 48. 9, 11. Eze. 39. 25, etc
For my name sake will I defer mine anger, and for my praise will I refrain,
etc. For mine own sake, even for mine own sake will I do it. For how should
my name be polluted?

They who have assured evidence that they are Gods servants, have good ground
to 1 Pet. 5. 7.
cast their care on him who cares for them. And in their distress to remember
this their condition, and with the remembrance thereof to support their faith,
and that by pleading it before God, as he who said, Psalm* 31. 16.
Make thy face to shine upon thy servant: save me for thy mercies sake. -- 14^
2*
Enter not into judgment with thy servant. -- 119. 17.
Deal bountifully with thy servant, that I may live and keep thy word. --
143. 12.
Destroy all them that afflict my soul: for I am thy servant. Believe Gods
Word, and then say to God, -- 119. 49.
Remember the word unto thy servant. See more hereof before,. 96.

. 106. Of their forwardness to praise God who have been succored by God.
VI.. 104.
THey that are delivered from distress are especially bound to praise the
Lord. This duty is in special Psalm. 107* 2, etc.
enjoined to them: and where it is enjoined, this patheticall exclamation of
desire is as the staff of a divine hymn four several times repeated, Oh
that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wondrous works
to the children of men. -- 103: 1, etc:
On this ground does the Psalmist vehemently incite his soul to this duty. And
it has been the constant practice of Gods servants after God has delivered
them from danger, and loosed their bonds to praise him: as Exo* 15. 1, etc
Moses and Miriam, Judge. 5. 1, etc*
Barak and Deborah, 2 Samuel 22. 1, etc.
David, 2 Chro 20. 26
Iehosaphat, Isa 38. 9.
Hezekiah, and many others.

1 Praise is that which God expects for his kindness in delivering us: for
says he, Psalm 50. 15. Propheta dicit, immola Deo sacrificium laudis. Et cur
hac faciat adiecit, quoniam eripuit animam meam de morte. Hier. Comment. in
Psalm. 55.
I will deliver thee and thou shall glorify me: so as if any just occasion can
be given for performing this duty, this is especially a most just occasion. Yea
this being the end why God delivers thee, it lies on thee as a debt, a most
due debt which thou art to pay. The Psalmist therefore where he speaks of
praising God, gives this reason thereof, Thou have delivered my soul from
death, Psalm. 56. 12, 13.

2 Distress makes men to call upon God. If upon deliverance from distress
they are not careful to praise God, they show that they perform duties of
piety for their own advantage: and give just cause to suspect, that if it were
not to reap benefit to themselves thereby, they would perform no duty at all
to God.

Exhortation to all that are loosed to be free in praising God.
To satisfy Gods expectation, and to testify that respect you owe* him, and
bear to him, O ye Kingdoms and nations that have had those bonds loosed,
whereby you have been bound by your enemies, render that unto the Lord which
is most due, solemn, hearty thanks and praise. Do so ye countries and people
that have been bound and pinched with the bonds of dearth and famine. And ye O
cities and societies that have had the deadly bonds of the plague, and other
contagious sicknesses (wherewith multitudes lie still bound) loosed. Ye also
that have been in prison, but are now loosed, praise the Lord. Ye that have
gone forth against your enemies, and having been compassed about by them
before and behind (as Abijah and his armies were) are loosed 2 Chro. 13. 13.
and freed, be forward to perform your bounden duty, praise the Lord. Praise
the Lord ye that go down to the sea in ships, and have there been bound with
vehement and violent storms, and in great hazard of death, but are loosed:
Especially if ye have been taken by pirates, made bondslaves, bound to
galleys, or bound in dungeons, and are loosed. Yea and ye principal debtors,
or sureties, that have been fast bound to hard and cruel creditors, whereby
your whole estate has been in hazard, and you have feared your own, your
wives, and childrens utter undoing, but are loosed from those bonds, offer to
the Lord your sacrifice of thanksgiving. And ye O women who have been bound
with the strait and painful bonds of travel, which are loosed, and whereof
you are eased. All ye also that have been hard girt with the bonds of the
stone, the strangurie, the gout, the cholick, or any other painful malady:
or have been fast tied to your beds with the cords of any sickness, and are
loosed, give thanks unto the Lord. Whosoever ye be that have with any manner of
bonds been bound, say unto the Lord, Thou have loosed my bonds: and as you say
it, Vausquisque nostrum excitet and ex^or^c^ur animam suam, and dicat ^i,
benedi^ anima mea Domium, etc. Aug. Enar. in Psalm. 102.
so know the end why ye ought to say it, namely to convince your souls of the
equity of giving thanks to God, and to provoke them to do it the more readily
and cheerfully. When you are about to render solemn praise to God, do as
this Prophet did, think of your bonds which God has loosed. Meditation
thereon will much enslame* your holy zeal of praising God. When the thought of
your bonds which God has loosed comes to your mind, then withal enquire (as
Ahashuerosh did when he heard of the kindness done to him by Mordecai) what
has been rendered unto the Lord, what is to be rendered to him. This will make
thee with such a mind as the Prophet did, use these words to the Lord, Thou
have loosed my bond. I will offer to thee a sacrifice of thankesgiving.

. 107. Of the resolution of the three last Verses.
PSALM. CXVI.
VER. 17. I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thankesgiving: and will call
upon the name of the LORD. VER. 18. I will pay my vows unto the LORD, now in
the presence of all his people. VER. 19. In the Courts of the LORDS house, in
the midst of thee, O Jerusalem. Praise ye the LORD. IN these three last
verses of this Psalm the Prophet returns to his profession of rendering
praise unto the Lord: wherein some things, that were before set down, are
repeated: and other things are added thereto. For the better discerning whereof
take notice of two maine points expressed therein.

1 A Protestation to praise the Lord himself.

2 A Provocation to others, so to do.

In his Protestation we have,

1 The Matter thereof.

2 The Motive thereto.

The Matter consists of two duties.

1 Giving thanks to God. I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thankesgiving.

2 Calling upon God. And will call upon the name of the LORD.

The motive is taken from his vow: where we have to consider

1 The general Matter thereof, I will pay my vows unto the LORD.

2 The particular Manner of performing it.

The Manner is set out by two circumstances.

1 The Time. Now.

2 The Place; which is largely described, and that

1 Indefinitely. In the presence of his people.

2 Determinately, by a description of the place where Gods people met. This is
here described

1 By the Relation it had to God, In the courts of the Lords house.

2 By the Situation of it. In the midst of thee O Jerusalem.

The Provocation to others, is in the very last clause of all, thus expressed,
Praise ye the LORD.

The first duty in the Protestation was before set down, verse 13. I will take
the cup of salvation. Here it is in other words repeated, thus, I will offer to
thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving.

The second duty is here repeated in the very same words wherein it was
expressed before verse 13. thus, And I will call upon the name of the Lord.

The Matter of the motive, and the amplification thereof by the Time, and by
the place, as it is indefinitely set down, are all, word for word, repeated in
this 18th verse, as they were before expressed in the 14th verse, thus, I will
pay my vows unto the LORD, now in the presence of all his people.

The determinate description of the place in the 19th verse. by the relation it
has to God, and by the situation of it, thus, In the courts of the LORDS
house, in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem, is for substance the same that was
noted before, in the latter end of the 14th and 18th verses. Bonorum repetitio
doctrinam in animabus b^ne slabilit. Chrysostom. Sermon de fide and lege.


Concerning these repetitions, we may not think that he which used them, used
them in vain. He was guided by that divine spirit which would not suffer the
least title to be in vain. By repetitions good doctrines are fast fixed in
men's minds. Besides other ends 98.
before noted for repeating of one and the same thing, whether in the same, or
in Repetitions import deep affection.
differing words and phrases, this is a principal one, to testify, and
express the more lively, how deeply the soul is affected with such and such a
thing. Fit and not affected repetitions are clear expressions of deep
affections: yea they are also forcible incitations to incense holy passion in
him that uses them, and in them that hear or read them so used. These are the
ends why Rhetoricians have invented figures of all manner of repetitions, as,

1 (...)
By repeating the same words immediately together in the same sentence, as in
the verse before* I am thy servant, I am thy servant: and in the Psalm before
this, Psalm. 115. 1.
Not unto us O Lord* not unto us, etc.

2 (...)
By repeating the same in the end of one sentence, and beginning of the next,
thus, Psalm. 9^. 5.
Sing unto the LORD with the harp: with the harp, and the voice of a Psalm.

3 By (...)
repeating the same in the beginnings of several sentences thus, Psalm. 135.
19, 20.
Bless the Lord O house of Israel. Bless the Lord O house of Aaron, etc.

4 By (...)
repeating the same in the ends of several sentences, as Psalm ^36.
where every verse of a Psalm ends with this clause, His mercy endures for
ever.

5 By (...)
repeating the same in the beginning and in the end, as Psalm. 8. ^, 9.
where the same Psalm begins and ends with this clause, O Lord our Lord,
how excellent is thy name in all the earth?

6 By (...)
repeating the same in the beginning, midst, and end, thus, Psalm. 47. 6.
Sing praises to God, sing praises, sing praises unto our King, sing praises.

. 108. Of a soul so ravished with Gods praises, as it cannot be satisfied in
setting them out.
BY the repetitions noted in the close of this Psalm, the Prophet manifests
a divine (...) affectus concitatus.
passion, through a deep apprehension of Gods favor, and succor showed unto
him; wherewith he was so ravished, as he could not be satisfied in setting it
out: nor thought that he could ever say enough thereabouts. Wherefore he loves
to speak of it again and again; and often to declare his purpose thereabouts,
sometimes in some other words, and sometimes in the very same. Hereby he gives
instance, that,

A deep and due apprehension of Gods mercies makes a soul unsatisfied in
setting forth Gods praises. The divine hymns that were penned by such as did
indeed deeply ponder on Gods mercies, are evident demonstrations thereof.
Among other the book of Psalms: and in that book the 47, 103, 107, 135, 136,
148, 149, and 150 Psalms.

Gods mercies, the more they are pondered, are the more admired: especially
when the greatness, freeness, seasonablenesse of them, and other like
circumstances, together with our unworthiness, and therewithal the need that
we have thereof, the sweetness that we taste, and benefit that we reap
thereby, are duly and deeply weighed. They are like a bottomless sea, which,
the farther it is sounded, the deeper it appears to be: or like to the bright
Sun, which, the more it is gazed upon, the more it dazleth the eye. Yea
further, Gods mercies are so linked together, as when we have occasion to
meditate on one, many of them instantly present themselves to the view of our
mind: as he that in a clear night lifts up his eyes to see one star, has
millions on a sudden in his sight: or as he that in the bank of a deep river
makes a gut for a little water to pass through, makes way for a flood to
follow after. Thus was this

(...) believe that God hears their prayers, cannot but hold themselves much
bound to testify all possible thankfulness.

4 He Verse. 3.
keeps his distress in mind and memory. So long as a man's mind is fixed on
his danger and distress, his heart remains on fire with desire of gratitude.

5 He was well instructed in Gods Verse. 5.
goodness, which does most of all enlarge a man's heart unto all gratefulness.

6 He acknowledged God to be his Verse. 6, 7, 8*
deliverer* whereby he saw himself so engaged to God, as he could not but
acknowledge all thanks to be most due unto him.

7 His Verse* 1.
love was settled on God. Nothing can more inflame zeal then love.

8 He sets God always Verse 9.
before him. The presence of him that does a kindness, does more and more egg
a man on to praise him.

9 He remembered his own Verse. 10, 11.
weakness in making question of Gods promises: whereby he is moved the more
to bless God for bringing that to pass, whereof he doubted.

10 He observed that his Verse. 15.
death was precious in Gods sight, and is enduced thereby to have Gods name in
high esteem, and to praise him with the uttermost of his power.

11 He was assured of the Verse 16.
mutual relation betwixt God and himself, which obliged him the more to God,
and made him the more fervent in praising God.

12 By this benefit Verse. 12.
all Gods benefits came to his mind, which much increased the heavenly fire of
zeal in him.

13 Verse. 12.
He knew nothing to render by way of satisfaction to God: therefore he is the
more stirred up to praise him.

14 He uses Verse. 13.
outward rites to quicken his spirit the more. No marvel then that he is so
full of life in performing this duty.

15 Verse. 19.
He goes to the courts of the Lords house, where Gods people were assembled
together: An especial means to quicken his spirit.

16 Ibid.
He provokes others to praise God: and thereby incites himself the more to that
duty.

. 109. Of expressing the same thing in differing phrases.
THe first branch of the Repetition of the Prophets protestation concerns the
principal duty here promised, thus expressed, I will offer to thee the
sacrifice of thanksgiving.


Though the Prophet for substance of matter intends no more here then he did
before, verse. 13. yet the different manner of expressing the same, affords
some other useful instructions: which that we may the better discern, let us
take a view of the different phrases.

1 What he styled before, cup of salvations, here he terms, sacrifice of
thanksgiving.

2 Where, before he said, I will take, or lift up, here he says, I will offer
up.

This latter manner of expressing his mind, is the more plain and perspicuous:
and serves as a commentary to the former: in which respect it is not in vain,
but to very good purpose, added.

In and by this pattern a useful rule for repeating one and the same thing in
different words, is set out, which is, In the latter place to use such words
and phrases as are in themselves more easy, and better known then the former,
and which may give some light for a better understanding of the Debet id, quod
illustranda alte riu^ rei gratia assumitur, ipsum esse clarius ^o* quod
illuminat. Quintil lib. 8. cap 3*
former: For, why are phrases added to phrases in and about the same thing, but
for illustration sake, to make the point the more perspicuous? That therefore
which is added for this end, must be more clear and evident: otherwise
multiplication of words and phrases is idle and absurd.

. 110. Of offering a sacrifice of praise.
WHere the Ptophet says (...)
I will offer, he uses a word that signifies to flay, but is most usually
applied to the slaying of beasts or birds for feasts or sacrifices: a nowne
therefore derived from that verb is here and in many other places put for a
sacrifice. Our English, as well as other tongues, can well express this
derivation thus, (...)
I will sacrifice the sacrifice of thanks. The express relation of this
oblation to God, in this phrase (...)
to thee, imports a kind of donation, that thereby something was given to
God. The attribute of thanksgiving, distinguishes the kind of sacrifice. The
(...)
word signifies confession, and it is applied sometimes to man's sins, and
sometimes to Gods properties and works. Joshua uses this word where he says
to A. chan, Ios. 7. 19. (...)
Make confession to God, meaning confession of sin. And the Psalmist uses
this very word where he says to God, Psalm. 26. 7. (...)
I will publish with the voice of confession, (or thankesgiving) and tell of
all thy wondrous works. In this sense this word is often used. That staff of
the Psalm of praise which is four several times repeated, by this word, does
set out praise and thanksgiving to God, thus, Psalm. 107. 8, 15, 21, 31. (...)
Consiteantur Domino, etc. vet. transl.
Let men confess before the Lord his goodness. Hereupon that sacrifice which
was offered up when men recounted and acknowledged Gods mercies toward them,
was called a Lev. 7. 1^. (...)
sacrifice of confession: which phrase is here used in this text, and
translated* sacrifice of thanksgiving, or sacrifice of praise. The
signification of the Hebrew word, is the rather to be observed, because it does
excellently set out the nature of thanksgiving, or praise, as it has reference
to God, which is, See The Guide to go to God, on the conclusion of the Lords
Prayer.. 239.
to confess and acknowledge God to be what he is, to do what he does, and to
give what he gives. To offer a sacrifice at such a confession, or
thanksgiving, added much to the solemnity thereof: and made it more honorable
in it self, and more acceptable to God: which that we may somewhat the more
distinctly discern, let us take a brief view of the several sacrifices which
were appointed by the law to be offered.

. 111. Of the several sacrifices of the Law.
What a sacrifice is.
A Sacrifice (as the word is usually taken in the Law) was A pious rite whereby
something was offered to God. I term it, a rite, because it was one of those
external ceremonies which God ordained to be used in his Church till the
fullness of time should come. I add this attribute, pious, unto it, to show
that it was an action of piety, a part of divine worship. In every sacrifice
something either with, or without life, was brought, and by the Priest, in the
name of him that brought it, offered to the Lord. Herein lies a maine
difference betwixt this, and other rites, and in special betwixt a sacrifice
and a sacrament. The essential action of a Wherein a sacrifice differs from
a sacrament.
sacrament is a receiving from God; of a sacrifice, an offering to God. They
which entered into the arc, and abode therein, they which passed through the red
sea, and they which were under the cloud ( 1 Pet. 3 21. 1 Cor. 10 2.
all which were sacramental rites, answerable to our sacrament of Baptism)
received thereby preservation, protection, and direction from the Lord. So they
which were circumcised received the seal of remission of sins. They which
celebrated the Passover received the scale of deliverance from bondage. They
also which eat Manna, and drank the water that flowed out of the rock ( 1
Cor. 10. 3, 4
which answered to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper) apparently received both
spiritual and temporal blessings from the Lord. But in all manner of
sacrifices something was brought and offered to the Lord, as will more
evidently appear by a particular enumeration of the several sacrifices: which
may thus be distinguished.

Two ends there were of sacrifices.

Ends of sacrifices.
One to pacify the wrath of God provoked against man for his sin. On which
ground David gives this advise to Saul, 1 Samuel 26. 19.
If the Lord have stirred thee up against me, let him smell an offering.

Another to gratify God for some favor received. Thus 2 Chro. 15. 11
Asa and his people having gotten victory over the Ethiopians, that came
against him with an army of ten hundred thousand, offered of the spoil to the
Lord.

Kinds of sacrifices.
According to these ends sacrifices were,

1 Expiatory, for expiation of sin.

2 Gratulatory, for testification of thanks.

Expiatory sacrifices were express types of the sacrifice of Christ, by which
only sin could be taken away. Under this head are comprised Lev. 16. 6, etc
Whole burnt offerings for atonement, -- 4. 3, etc.
several sorts of sacrifices for the sins of several persons, as of Priests,
whole assemblies, Princes and private persons, and all kinds of sacrifices for
-- 14 4, etc. -- 15. 14, etc.
cleansing such as were legally unclean, as lepers, those that had running
issues, or had touched a dead corpse, or any unclean thing, with the like.

Gratulatory sacrifices were visible representations of that Heb. 13. 15.
praise, Romans 12. 1.
obedience, and Phil 4. 18. Heb. 13. 16.
benevolence which all Gods people are bound unto. Of these there were two sorts.

1 Such things as had life, and were slain.

2 Such as had no life, and were offered to God.

Many peace offerings, free-offerings, vow-offerings, and first-lings of living
creatures, were slain for gratulatory sacrifices: and that to show, that even
in gratulation expiation must be made, and that by the blood and sacrifice of
Christ all things are made acceptable to God. Lev 22. 21. (...) Heb 13 15. (...)
The word therefore that imports, slaying, is attributed to gratulatory
sacrifices.

Their Lev. 2. 1, etc.
meat offerings, and Exo. 29. 40.
drink offerings* many free-offerings and vow-offerings, first fruits, tithes,
and such like, were of things without life. These are usually expressed by Lev.
2. 1. (...) Heb. 5. 1. (...)
a word that properly signifies a gift, which we translate offering, because in
way of gratitude they were given to the Lord, and offered up to him.

Gratulatory offerings were ordinary, or extraordinary.

Ordinary were those which were Exo. 29. 40, etc.
constantly offered every morning and evening, and at other times in their
seasons were brought as first fruits, tithes, etc.

Extraordinary, were such as for 2 Samuel 24. 25.
removing some great and imminent judgment, or 2 Chro. 15. 11
conferring some special blessing were brought and offered unto the Lord.

1 The offering up of these extraordinary sacrifices set out a most solemn and
extraordinary manner of praising Offerimus Deo non quasi indige^tes, sed
gratias agentes donations eius, and sanctificantes creatura^. Iren. advers.
Haer. l. 4. c 34.
God. And this is the substance of that which the Prophet here intends under
this phrase, I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving. For, they
offered to God, not in regard of any need that God had, but as giving thanks
for what he gave: and as sanctifying the creature.

Of an extraordinary manner of praising God for extraordinary favors,
sufficient has been before delivered,. 3.

2 The testifying of his gratitude by an outward warrantable rite, was before
expressed, Verse 13.. 86.

3 The kind of sacrifice whereby the Prophet would testify his thanksgiving,
was a duty of piety, an especial part of Gods worship, prescribed by God, and
of force in those days: from which particular we may safely infer this
general.

I. True gratitude to God is to be testified by performing due worship to him.

4 This rite being such an one as in and by it, that which God by his law
required, was given to him, it gives instance that*

II. What is warrantable must in gratitude be given to God.

. 121. Of testifying gratitude by piety.
I. TRue gratitude to God is to be testified by performing due worship to him.
As this is implied under offering of sacrifices, (whereby the Jews were wont
to testify their gratefulness when they had more then ordinary occasion to do
so) so is it in other places more plainly and expressly set down: as where the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 5. 7.
I will come into thine house in the multitude of thy mercies, and in thy fear
will I worship toward thy holy temple. -- 138. 1, 2.
I will sing praise unto thee: I will worship toward thy holy temple, and
praise thy name for thy loving kindness. As he promises for himself, so he
stirs up others after the same manner to testify their gratitude, saying,
-- 29 2. -- 95. 2, 6. -- 96. 8, 9.
Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name: worship the Lord. Where Jacob
in his vow of thanksgiving uses this phrase, Genesis 28. 22. Locus dignus qui
consecratur precibus sundendis Deo. Trem. and Iun in Scholijs
This stone shall be Gods house, what else does he mean, but that that place
should be consecrated to duties of piety, for worshipping of God. Thus Abraham's
servant in testimony of his thankfulness to God for the good success which
he gave him, Gen 24. 26.
Worshipped the Lord: so did the Exodus 4 ^1. -- 12* 27.
Israelites after Moses had brought them news of their deliverance from Egypt.
So Ios. 5. 14.
Joshua, Iud. 7. 1^.
Gedeon, 2 Chr. 20. 18
Iehosaphat with his people, -- 29. 29.
Hezekiah with his also, and many others. Yea the Rev 4. 10. -- 5. 14. -- 7.
11. -- 11. 16. -- 19 4*
celestial spirits do use in praising God to worship him.

1 A maine end of praising is to glorify God. For, says the Lord himself,
Who so offers praise, glorifieth me, (Psalm. 50 23.) But there is nothing
wherein and whereby we may more glorify God then by worshipping him. Witness
the practice, not only of them who on earth are instructed by the spirit of
illumination in the good acceptable, and perfect will of God, but also of them
in heaven, who are made perfect in all knowledge and understanding thereof.

etc.
2 Works of piety, wherein the worship of God consists, are the works
wherein God most delights, and which he best accepts. The spouse therefore
of the Lord, that the King might greatly delight in her, has this advice given
to her, Worship thou him, Psalm. 45. 11.

3 By works of piety all other actions of rejoicing are seasoned, and
sanctified. This moved the pious Jews to begin their weighty affairs with
sacrifices, (which were then, as we have heard, principal parts of piety, and
of divine worship) and therewith to end the same, compare 1 Samuel 10. 8. with 1
Chro. 16. 1.

Continuam gratiarum actionem Domino exhibete. Hoc maximum est sacrificium:
haec oblatio perfecta. Hoc si ducia nobis fiet occasio: Chrysostom. Hom. 72. ad Pop.

Direction.

Learn wherein Gods worship consists.


4 By giving thanks in and by such duties as are prescribed for Gods worship,
we show that our hearts are set on God, and prepared to do service to him, who
has done kindness to us. Yea the duties wherein service is done to God will
raise our minds unto God, and fix them the more steadfastly on him. So as this
kind of sacrifice is questionless the best and greatest that we can offer up:
a perfect oblation in the kind of it. And this will prove an occasion of much
confidence to us.

As occasions of thankfulness are offered unto us, and as by Gods Spirit we
are moved to take those occasions for giving thanks, let us here learn how to
order, how to sanctify, how to make the same acceptable to God. Though the
particular ceremony of worshipping God by sacrifices be now abrogated, yet the
general equity of performing due worship to God, does still, and ever shall
remain in force. Take notice therefore of that manner of worshipping God which
now under the Gospel is warrantable. The parts of divine worship are prayer,
singing of Psalms, reading, preaching, hearing the Word, and celebrating the
Sacraments. These are as sacrifices of bullocks and calves, goats and kids,
sheep and lambs, turtles, pigeons, spartowes: and all manner of meat and
drink offerings. By a pious, devout, reverend, Hoc est sacrificium acceptabile:
hoc est holocaustum pingue, us laudetur Deus, etc Hier.

Comment. in Psalm. 49.


and upright manner of performing these, thou testifiest, and sanctifiest thy
thanksgiving to God. When these holy duties of piety are performed for
gratitude sake, when in, with, and by them thanks is given to God, then are
they for substance in a spiritual respect sacrifices of thanksgiving: and the
Lord will accept them as sacrifices of thanksgiving.

. 113. Of giving to God.
II. WHat is warrantable must be given to God. The sacrifices, whereof mention
is here made, were by the Law prescribed: and in all manner of sacrifices by
the Law prescribed, something was given to God. They therefore that appeared
before the Lord without a sacrifice, are said to appear Deuteronomy. 16. 16. (...)
empty: which was expressly forbidden. The many Deuteronomy 12. 11. Exo. 2^. 29. Neh.
10. 32, etc
precepts of bringing oblations, vow-offerings, free will offerings,
first fruits, tithes, and other gifts unto the Lord, and 2 Chr. 31. 5, 10
Gods gracious acceptance thereof: yea and the many Mal. 3. 8, 9.
threatenings against those who brought not those gifts unto the Lord, and
judgments executed upon them, give sufficient proof to the forementioned
must. The zeal of Jews in giving to God.
What is warrantable must be given to God. The pious Jews manifested herein
much zeal to the Lord. When the Tabernacle was first to be made, the people
were so free-hearted and bountiful in bringing rams skins, badgers skins,
Shittim wood, oil, spices, sweet incense, fine linen, blue, purple and
scarlet, brass, silver, gold, and all manner of precious stones, as they
brought Ezo. 36. 5, 6.
more then enough: a proclamation was made to restrain them. Wonderful great
and precious were the treasures which 1 Chro. 29. 1, etc.
David and his Princes prepared for the Lord toward the building of his house.
At that time -- 21.
they offered burnt offerings to the Lord, a thousand bullocks, a thousand
rams, and a thousand sheep, with their drink offerings and sacrifices in
abundance. 2 Chro. 15. 11
4sa and his people offered seven hundred oxen, and seven thousand sheep. --
30. 24.
Hezekiah and his people, two thousand bullocks and seventeen thousand sheep.
-- 35. 7* etc
Josiah and his people three thousand and eight hundred bullocks, and thirty
seven thousand six hundred small cattle. -- 7, 5.
Solomon went beyond all these, and offered a sacrifice of two and twenty
thousand oxen, and an hundred and twenty thousand sheep. Behold here what
testimonies of gratitude were given to the Lord.

Object. To what end were such oblations, when as God required them not, nor
cared for them, Psalm. 40. 6.

How oblations were not accepted, and how accepted
Answ. 1 Singly and simply in themselves, as external and earthly things, God
took no delight in them, Psalm. 50. 8.

2 As mere ceremonies separated from the substance and truth which they
tipified, God neither enjoined nor required them, Psalm. 40. 6.

3 As clokes for hypocrites to cover and color their impieties and iniquities,
God detested them, Isa. 1. 10, etc. Isa. 66. 3.

But as external evidences of true piety, as types of Heavenly Truths, as
parts of that outward worship and service which God prescribed, as visible
demonstrations of gratitude, he was well pleased with these sacrifices: they
caused a sweet savor to enter Oblations testimonies of our service.

Dedit populo praeceptum saciendarum oblationum, quamvis non indigcret eis, ut
disceret Deo servire. Iren. advers. Haer. l. 4 c. ^4. What the poorest may give
to God.

Quisquis been cogitat quid vo vcat Domino, quae vola reddat, seipsum voveat,
seipsum reddal: hoc exigitur, hoc debetur. Aug. Enar. in Psalm. 115.


into his nostrills, Genes. 8. 21. Exodus 29. 18. Levit. 1. 9.

Though God the Creator of all things stand in need of nothing that the
creature has, or can offer to him, yet by giving to him the things which in
his Word we find to be acceptable to him, we manifest a willing and ready mind
to do what lies in our power: and give evidence that if any thing which we
had, could stand the Lord in any stead, or do him any good, we would with all
our hearts gratify him therewith: which mind God does as kindly and graciously
accept, as if indeed he were profited by that which we offer unto him.

Be liberal and bountiful to the Lord, whosoever ye be that have any thing to
give to the Lord. And who is it that has not something, yea that has not much
to give, if he be no niggard of what he has? The poorest that be, have as
many calves, as Solomon had, to offer to the Lord: calves of their lips, (Hos.
14. 2.) These are sacrifices which may be offered up to God, (Heb. 13. 15.)
The poorest that be, have a body, which they may present as a living sacrifice
holy and acceptable to God, (Romans 12. 1.) The poorest that be may every day
morning and evening and at other times also direct their prayer to God as
incense, (Psalm. 141. 2.) Yea they may mix therewith the sweetest incense of
the intercession of Christ, and offer all up upon the golden altar which is
before the throne, (Rev. 8. 3.) The poorest that be may bring to God a broken
heart and a contrite spirit, which is a sacrifice that God will not despise,
(Psalm. 51. 17.) The poorest that be may do justly, love mercy, and walk humbly
before God, which the Lord prefers before burnt offerings, and calves of a
year old: yea before thousands of rams, or ten thousand rivers of oil,
(Mic. 6. 8.) These and other like offerings have all of all sorts (not the
poorest excepted) now under the Gospel to bring and give unto the Hoc vos
sacrificium Deo offertis: hoc sacrificium sine intermissione die ac nocte
celebratis: hostiae facti, etc. Cypr. Epist. l. 3. Ep. 23. Apta Deo sacrificit
sunt opera virtutis. Amb. de Came. and Abel c. 6. What rich men may give to God.

Oblationes and il. lie: oblationes and hic. Sacrificia in populo: sacrificia
and in ecclesia^sed est specie. immutata tantum. Iren. advers.

Haer. l. 4. c. 34.


Lord. These sacrifices Saints offer to God. These sacrifices they solemnize
without intermission day and night, especially that of giving themselves to
God. All good works are sacrifices fit for God, and acceptable to him. There
are also several talents given to several persons, though not to all alike,
(for to one are given five, to another two, to another but one) yet to him that
has the least so much is given, as by a good improvement thereof, he may
bring some increase and advantage to the Lord, and that so acceptably, as the
Lord thereby will be moved to say, Well done thou good and faithful servant,
thou have been faithful over a few things, I will make thee ruler over many
things, etc. (Mat. 25. 21.) As for rich men, they may yet further honor God
with their substance, (Prove. 3. 9.) They may do good and distribute: for with
such sacrifices God is well pleased, (Heb. 13. 16.) They may so communicate to
the necessities, not only of the poorest Saints, but also of the Ministers of
Gods Word, as what they do in this kind may be an odor of a sweet smell, a
sacrifice acceptable and well pleasing to God. (Phil. 4. 18.) Thus as there
were sacrifices of old, there are sacrifices still: as oblations of old, so
oblations still. Only the kind of them is altered.

These sacrifices allowed, approved, accepted under the Gospel, Psalm. 69. 31.
Please the Lord much better then oxen and bullocks that have horns and
hoofes: yet to us are they nothing so chargeable, as the oblations, and
sacrifices were to the Jews. Why then do we return so little to the Lord? Are
his mercies fewer in number, or less in worth to us under the Gospel, then
they were to his people under the Law? If the difference betwixt the old and
new covenant, betwixt Gods dealing with his Church before, and since Christ was
exhibited, were thoroughly discerned, we should find just cause to say, He has
not dealt so with the Jews, as he has dealt with Christians. We want those
zealous affections which the pious Jews had. Were our inward disposition
answerable to theirs, we would not, we could not come so short as we do of
outward expressions of gratefulness. Let us by due meditation of Gods
surpassing kindness to us, be stirred up willingly and chearefully to give
what we Deo datori omnia tribuenda. Chrysostom. Hom. 10 in 1 Cor. 3.
shall understand to be acceptable to him. God gives all: to God again let all
be returned.

. 114. Of vowing praise to God.
PSALM. CXVI. XVIII.
I will pay my vows unto the LORD, now in the presence of all his people.
THe immediate inference of this verse upon the former, shows the principal
matter of the Prophets vow. For he makes mention of his vow, as of a motive,
the more See Verse. 14.. 89.
to provoke him to offer up a sacrifice of thanksgiving. But if he had not vowed
such a sacrifice, what motive could his vow have been thereto? This approved
pattern of the Prophet gives evidence, that, Praise to God is a meet matter
to be vowed.


Where mention is made of performing vows, express mention uses there to be
of this very matter, and that where directions are given for vows, thus, Psalm.
50. 14.
Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows: and where performance is
promised, thus, -- 22. 25.
My praise shall be of thee, I will pay my vows. -- 56. 12.
Thy vows are upon me, O God: I will render praises unto thee. -- ^1. 8. Haec
sunt vo^a Prophetae ut laudem dominicam celebret. Hier. Comment. in Psalm. 5^.
I will sing praise to thy name for ever, that I may daily perform my vows,
The praises which he sang to the Lord tending to this end, that he might
perform his vow, evidently prove that he had vowed so to do. Where Jacob
vowed that Genesis 28. 22.
the stone which he set for a pillar, should be Gods house, what intended he
thereby, but that public and solemn praise should be given to God? This was
the maine substance of Judge. 11. 31.
Iepthahs vow, that in way of thanks he would give something to the Lord. If
his vow had not too far extended it self, even to such things as might not
be offered to the Lord, it had been a warrantable and commendable vow.

One end of a vow to give evidence of man's respect to God.
1 A vow rightly made is of something to be done for the Lords sake, and to
testify our respect to him. If a vow be made against any sin, or against
temptations or occasions that lead thereto, it is because by sin God is
offended and dishonored. Now to vow against that whereby God is offended and
dishonored, is implicitly to please and to honor God. If a vow be made for
performing any duty, that is made somewhat the more directly to the honor and
praise of God: for, all good duties tend thereunto. Now, because there is
nothing wherein and whereby we can more honor God, or better testify our
respect to God, then by giving praise to him, to praise God must needs be a
very fit subject for a vow: yea the best that can be.

Another end of a vow is gratitude.
2 In making a vow something is aimed at, either as received, or as expected
from the Lord, which occasioneth the making thereof. When in distress a vow is
made, it is in expectation of deliverance from that distress. When to avoid
sin, a vow is made, it is to gain assurance of pardon for that sin before
committed, and assistance against it for the time to come. Though in these and
other like cases a vow be made before the kindness, for which it is made, be
received, yet it is to bind us unto gratitude for the kindness which we
desire and expect. If after a kindness conferred a vow be made, then it is an
apparent testimony of gratefulness. But what duty more proper to gratitude
then praise of God? Wherefore, to praise God is a matter most meet to be vowed.

A third end of a vow to tie us more firmly to that whereunto we are otherwise
bound.
3 Those duties whereunto we are most bound, from performance whereof, no
superior power on earth may hinder us, which by the gift of grace, that God
uses to give to his children, we are able to do, we ought especially to
vow. But in the uppermost rank of all such duties, praising of God, is most
justly to be placed. So as, if any be meet to be vowed, this is of all most
meet.

A vow of praise in prayer quickens it.
4 A vow must always be joined with prayer. Commonly when men earnestly
desire the removal of some evil, or the obtaining of some good thing, in
opening their desire to God, they will vow something to him. At least when a
vow is made, prayer must then be made for grace to keep it. Now when in making
any petition to God, the mind is fixed on rendering something to God, and is
thereby brought to vow praise unto him, this vowing of praise will much enlarge
the desire of a man's heart, and settle his soul in assurance of obtaining what
he desires.

A vow of praising God in craving any blessing from God, is like to this
protestation, As we forgive them that trespass Exhortation to vow praise in
praying for any special blessing.

Quid voveatis, quid reddatis? An forte anima lia illa quae ^fferebantur ad
aras aliquando? Nibil tale offeras.

In to est quod voveas and reddas* De cordis arca profer laudis incensum. Aug.
Enar. in Psalm. 55.


against us, annexed to the fifth petition, whereby we are stirred up more
earnestly to crave, and more steadfastly to believe, pardon of our sins. The
thought of praising God, especially when it is ratified by a vow, works much
confidence in Gods favor toward him, that is in truth resolved to perform
that vow. Is not this then a very meet matter to be vowed?

Do ye now enquire, what ye may vow, what ye may render? Whether such creatures
as were sometimes offered on altars? Thou need offer no such thing. There is
in thee what thou may vow and render. From the arc of thy heart bring forth
the incense of praise. Now therefore ye who are well informed in the
lawfulness, meetnesse, excellency and utility of this duty of making vows to
God, (whereof before) and are thereupon moved to put the duty in practice, here
take notice of this maine matter of a vow, and be forward in vowing praise to
God. When for themselves men crave in sickness, recovery of health; in penury,
supply of their necessities; in restraint, liberty; in sterility, children; in
oppression, protection; in their labors, success; in any danger, safety; or
in any other case, any needful blessing; yea when they pray in the behalf of
others, whether for the Church in general, or such parts thereof as are in
distress, or for their own nation, city, town, parish, family, children, or
any others: when they pray for any more then ordinary blessing, and favor from
the Lord, let them in making that prayer vow to render praise unto the Lord:
that when the Lord gives any evidence of hearing their prayer, they may say, I
will praise thee, O Lord, that I may perform my vow.

See more of this verse, before, on verse 14.

. 115. Of the meaning and method of the last Verse.
PSALM. CXVI. XIX.
In the courts of the LORDS honse, in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem.
IN these words the Prophet See. 107.
determinately and expressly sets down the place where he vowed to praise the
Lord. In the former verse, and before that in the 14th verse, he generally
professed to do it, in the presence of all Gods people. Here he describes the
place of the presence of Gods people, where they assembled together: and that

1 By the Relation thereof to God.

2 By the Situation of it.

What Gods house is.
The place in relation to God is styled the LORDS house. This title is in
Scripture used to express a select place, or an elect people.

As it has reference to a place, it is taken indefinitely or determinately.

1 In an indefinite acception any place where God is pleased to afford an
especial representation of his presence, may be named Gods house. Thus Genesis
28. 17.
that place where Jacob in his journey lay and slept, is called The house of
God, because of that divine vision wherein the Lord there appeared to him. The
reason of this name given to that place, is expressly rendered in these words, --
16.
Surely the LORD is in this place. On a like ground the places where the Lord
appeared to Exo. 3. 5.
Moses, and to Ios. 5. 15.
Joshua, are called holy ground.

Determinately, this title, Gods house, is attributed to places on earth, or in
heaven.

On earth it was given to two places, the Judge 18. ^1. -- 20. 26. 1 Samuel 1. 24*
-- 3. 15.
Tabernacle and the Temple, both 1 King. 6. 37* 38.
that which was built in Salomons time, and Ezr. 6. 7. Hag. 1. 14.
that also which was built after the captivity. These in their several times
were places where were especial representations of Gods presence, and whither
Gods people by Gods appointment assembled to worship him, and in those respects
were called Gods house.

2 The Tabernacle continued to be Gods house the space of 487 years, from the
first making of it in Moses his time, till the Temple which Solomon built was
finished. 1 King 8. 4.
Then was the Tabernacle carried into the Templ^ and after that remained no more
to be of use for an (...) God.

3 The Temple which Solomon (...) continued to be Gods house for the space of
four hundred ^^ares, from the time when it was first built 2 King. 25. 9.
till the burning of it down in Zedekiahs time.

4 The Temple built after the ^aptivity continued for the space almost of five
hundred years, Ezr. 3. 8.
from the time of Zorobabel, till it was Mat. 24. 2.
utterly ruinated by the Romans.

5 The Ioh. 14. ^.
highest heaven is called Gods house, most properly, because the most
perspicuous manifestation of Gods presence, that can be given, is there given.

6 The elect people who are styled, The house of God, are those that are
comprised under this title, Church, which is the communion of Saints. In this
communion, 1 Cor. 1. 2. 1 Pet. 1. 2.
all that profess the true Christian Religion, and subject themselves to the
ordinances thereof, are, in the judgment of charity, reputed. To these 1 Timothy
3. 15.
S. Paul having given this title, house of God, to show whom he meant thereby,
he adds, which is the Church of the living God. These Saint Peter means
where he says, Judgment must begin at the house of God, (1 Pet 4. 17.) For as
the whole Church jointly considered in Domum Dei spiritualem seips^m qu^sque
agnoscat, qui tamen non in carne ambulet, sed in spiritu. Bern. sup. Cant. Ser.
46.
it self, so also every particular member is counted and called Gods house.
Thus is this phrase taken where the Apostle, in relation to the Lord, says,
Whose house we are, (Heb. 3. 6.) and again, Ye are the temple of the living
God, as God has said, I will dwell in them, (2 Cor. 6. 16.) So as every one
may account himself to be a spiritual house of God, so he walk not in the
flesh, but in the spirit.

Concerning the particular house of God, which is here in this Psalm
mentioned, it can hardly be determined for certain which it should be, because
the Author, and Time of penning this Psalm are not expressed. If the Psalm
were penned by any Prophet after David's time, then questionless he means the
Temple. If David (as it is most probable) were the penman of it, then can it
not be meant of the Temple, which was not then built: but rather of the
Tabernacle.

But hence arises another doubt. In David's time there were two sacred
Tabernacles. 1 Chro. ^1. 29 2 Chro. 1. 3.
One made by Moses, called the Tabernacle of the Lord, which was in the high
place at Gibeon. 1 Chro. 15. 1. -- 16. 1. 2 Samuel 6. 17.
The other made by David for the Ark of God. 1 Chr. 16. 37, 38, 39, etc.
In both these Tabernacles there were Ministers appointed to perform daily
services to the Lord. Which then of these Tabernacles is here meant?

They were in several places. Ios. 18 25. -- 21. 17.
Gibeon was one of the cities of Benjamin allotted to the Priests. There was
the Tabernacle. But the Arc was in the city of David, which was ^ Sam. 5. 6,
7, 9
Zion in Jerusalem.

The title, house of God, and the courts applied to that house, give some
evidence, that he means the Tabernacle made by Moses. For Judge. 19. 18. 2 Samuel
12. 20.
that is usually styled the house of God, the Numb. 17 13 -- 19. 13. Ios 2^. 19.
1 King. 2. 28, 29 1 Chro. 16. 39
Tabernacle of the Lord. But the Tabernacle that David made is never so called.
Besides we read of a Exo. 27. 9, etc Lev. 6. 26.
spacious court appertaining to the Tabernacle made by Moses. For, that
Tabernacle (as afterward the Temple after the pattern thereof) was divided
into three parts.

1 Exo. 26. 33.
The innermost, called the Sanctum Sanctorum, the most holy place, whereinto
Lev. 16. 2.
the High Priest only was to enter, and that but once a year.

2 The Middlemost, called the Exo. 39. 1.
holy place, wherein the Priests performed their daily services, in which
respect it was called the 2 Chro. 4. 9.
court of Priests.

3 The outermost; called the Exo, 27. 9.
court of the Tabernacle. 2 Chro. 23. 5.
Into this came all the people: in which respect it was called -- 4 9.
the great court. Lev. 17. 5.
Hither they brought their sacrifices; here they stood and beheld the Priests
offering them: for Exo. 40. 6.
the great altar whereon the ordinary sacrifices were offered stood at the
partition betwixt this court and the holy place. Hence was it, that the people
are said to Psalm 26. 6.
compass the altar: and to 1 King. 1. 50. -- 2. 28.
lay hold on the horns of the altar. But we read not of any such courts
appertaining to the Tabernacle which David made. Yea after David had made a
Tabernacle for the Arc, 1 Chro. 16. 40 2 Chro. 1. 3.
the most solemn assemblies were notwithstanding at the other Tabernacle. It is
therefore most probable, that by the Courts of the Lords house he here means
that public and solemn place of assembling at the Tabernacle of the Lord.

Object. That Tabernacle was in David's time 1 Chro. 16. 39 2 Chro. 1. 3.
at Gibeon, how can that stand with the situation of the place here mentioned,
In the midst of Jerusalem.

Answ. It is not necessary that both those clauses be applied to one and the
same place. But as he mentions two duties, so he notes two places fit for
each duty. The first duty is to offer sacrifice of thanksgiving. This was most
fit to be done in the Tabernacle at Gibeon, which was the court of the Lords
house. The other was to call upon the name of the Lord. This was most fit to be
done before the Arc which was in the Tabernacle that David had made for it, 1
Chr. 15. 29
in his own city, even in the midst of Jerusalem.

Jerusalem was the most famous city that ever appertained to the Jews. It was
the place where Melchizedek the first, most ancient, and best King that we read
of after the flood, Of Jerusalem.
even that King, who by reason of his integrity was called Heb. 7. 2.
a King of righteousness; and by reason of the peace which he preserved, the
place where he reigned was called Genesis 14. 18.
Salem. That Jerusalem was this Salem, both the notation thereof, and also the
title Psalm. 76. 2^.
Salem (after it was called Jerusalem) given to it, do give sufficient proof.
The Genesis 14. 18. (...) Targum (...) Item Psalm 76. 2
Hebrews do use the name Jerusalem where this Salem is mentioned. This title
Jerusalem is compounded of two words. One is taken from that proverbiall name
which Abraham gave to the place where he was about to sacrifice his son, Genesis
22. 14. (...) Jehovah providebit. Jerusalem est visio pacis. Ber. in Dedic.
Eccles. Ser. 5. (...)
Iehovah-jireh, the Lord will provide. The other is taken from the name of the
place where Melchizedech was King, which was Salem, peace. So as the meaning of
the name of Jerusalem is, He will provide peace, or the vision of peace. The
Hebrew word is often set down in the f duall number, a number that signifies
two, because of the two places whereon it was built, which were Salem before
mentioned, and Moriah, the place whither God sent Abraham to sacrifice his
son. This place being the chiefest of all the cities that were among the
Jews, the only people of God under the Law, wherein the Arc then was,
wherein the Temple was to be built, was an especial type of the Church of God:
and as Psalm. 51. 18. -- 128. 5. Isa. 24 23. -- 40. ^. -- 62. 1, 7* Ier. 3. 17*
in the Old Testament the militant Church is often set out by that name, Rev. 3.
12. -- 21. 2, 10.
so in the New, the triumphant Church. Though therefore I cannot but think, that
the Prophet here means literally the city which was called Jerusalem, yet I
doubt not but that under this title may also typically be meant the In atrijs,
etc. id est, in Ecclesia Trem. and Iun. in Annot. in hunc loc.
Church of God.

The substance of that which he intends by this description of the place is
to show that he would perform the forenamed duties in public and populous
places, such were the courts of the Lords house, where all the people of the
Lord met together. Such also was Jerusalem the metropolis, and chief city of
the Kingdom, where the Kings court was, and whither all of all sorts resorted.
And that he might not be thought to intend to do it in a private corner of the
city, closely and secretly, he adds, in the midst, in the most open and
populous part of that ample and populous place: which implies an holy
boldness: he would not be ashamed to bind himself publicly to perform such
bounden, public duties. Yea further to show how his heart was set on that
place where the Ark of the Lord was, by a most elegant and familiar kind of
turning his speech to that place, as (...).
speaking to a most familiar friend in whom he delighted, he says, thee, O
Jerusalem. In the midst of thee.

In this pattern of the Prophet is declared

A fit place for solemn and public duties. Sum.


Of this Description both the Matter and the Manner are distinctly expressed.

The Matter points at two places.

1 That which was consecrated to sacred duties.

2 That where the most glorious representation of Gods presence was set.

The former is set out

1 Generally, by the use of it. In the courts. Courts are places for assemblies.

2 Particularly by the quality of it. House of God. Gods house is a sacred
house, where sacred duties of piety are performed to him.

The latter is expressed by the name of it, Jerusalem: and amplified by that
part thereof where he would perform the fore*mentioned duty, the midst.

The Manner of setting out this latter is by an Apostrophe, turning his speech
to the place it self, and speaking to it as to an intelligible creature, thee
O Jerusalem.

(...) 3 There are times of founding new Churches, and edifying settled
Churches. Planters and Founders may have more liberty then such as find
Churches planted, and settled in good order.

4 There are places of persecution where no liberty is granted for public
assemblies: and places of peace, where Churches have much rest, and great
liberty. In places of persecution bounden duties must rather be performed in
private, then omitted. For matter of circumstance must give place to matters of
substance: matters of convenience to matters of necessity.

Wherefore to leave extraordinary persons to their extraordinary warrant, we
that live in well settled Churches, where through the diviue providence we have
public places for divine services set apart, whereunto we have much liberty on
all occasions to resort, ought to be of his mind, who Psalm. 12^. 1.
Was glad when they said, let us go into the house of the Lord: and was -- 84.
1, etc.
exceedingly perplexed when by force he was kept from thence. It was of old
foretold that this should be the disposition of Saints under the Gospel in
the kingdom of Christ: to say, Isa. 2. 3.
Come ye, let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, etc. Christ and his
Apostles, though they had just cause and good warrant to perform many public
duties in private places, yet did they much frequent those public places,
where public duties were in their time performed. Of Christ it is expressly
recorded that, Luk 4. 16.
as his custom was, he went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day. Of the
Apostles also, and of them that continued in their doctrine and fellowship, it
is said, Act. 2. 46.
They continued daily with one accord in the Temple praising God. Herein lies
a maine difference betwixt such, as like Christ, do all to edifying ( Ioh. 18.
20.
He ever taught in the Synagogue and in the Temple, whither the Jews always
resort) and such as do all for their own ends, seeking to beguile others. ( 2 Timothy 3. 6*
They creep into houses, and lead captive silly women.) Wherefore to manifest
a mind that aims at Gods glory, the edification of the Church, the quickening
of our own spirits, let us take the occasions that are offered, to go into the
courts of the Lords house, and perform duties of piety according to their
kind, public duties publicly, solemn duties solemnly. This is a good
Christian decorum, agreeable to that Apostolical In medio credentium populorum
laudabo t^, pr^dicab^ te. Hier. Comment. in Psalm. 21.
rule, Let all things be done decently and in order, (1 Cor. 14. 40.) Let us
therefore be every one of his mind who said, in the midst of the faithful
people I will praise thee, I will publish thee, O Lord.

. 117. Of Gods houses.
II.. 115.
PLaces set apart for Gods worship are Gods houses. More then five hundred
times is this title house of God, or house of the Lord, in holy Scripture
attributed to places deputed unto divine service. And because worship is done
to God, not only in material Temples, but also in the communion of Saints,
yea and in the bodies and souls of particular Christians, they also are called
Heb. 10 21. -- 3. 6. Gods special presence in places where he is worshipped.
Gods houses.

1 Though the Lord in his infinite essence be every where present, Ier. 23. 23,
24.
filling heaven and earth: and have Pro. 15. 3.
the eyes of his providence in every place beholding the evil and the good:
yet 1 King. 9. 3. Mat. 18. 20.
the special presence of his grace and favor abides in the places where he is
truly and and duly worshipped. These places therefore are to him as Kings
palaces and houses: which most properly they account their own. God provides
for the places of his worship


2 Gods greatest care is over these places. He brings light into them by his
word: he beautifieth them by his ordinances: he continually repaireth them, and
keeps them from ruin by holy discipline. In them are the treasures of his
graces. Orders, Offices, All needful provision, The bread of life, The wine of
spiritual consolation and other like blessings of an house are there. There
God dines and suppes with his people. All things fit for an house are there;
which, whosoever observes, cannot but say of such a place, it is the house of
God.

3 God is very jealous over such places. He cannot endure to have them defiled,
profaned. It was one cause of the 2 Chro 36* 14. Admiration at Gods houses on
earth. Psalm. 81. 1, etc.
Jews captivity, that they polluted the house of the Lord.

O how enamoured should we be with such places! If we be where we cannot come
to them, nor join with Gods Saints in worshipping the Lord, how should it
grieve us? No place in the world, were it every way as fair, as fertile, as
pleasant, as profitable in all earthly commodities, as Eden, or Paradise was,
should give us content, if Gods Quidni moxtium mons ubi tam m^l iplex omnium
delectabilium copio, ubi copiarum omnium plenitudo? Erit enim mons pacis, mons
gau dij, mons vitae, mons gloriae, etc. Ber. Sermon. de verb. Psalm. 23
house be not there: if no place be there for Saints to assemble together to
worship God. In nothing is any part of the earth made more like to heaven, then
in having Gods house situate on it. The Prophet foretold that the mountain
of the Lords house should be established in the top of the mountains, and
exalted above the hills. Why should it not be accounted the hill of hills, where
there is such plenty of all delectable things: where there is such a plenitude
of plenty? It is an hill of peace, an hill of joy, and hill of life, an hill of
glory. We count cities and towns that have Kings and Noblemens houses in them,
happy, by reason of the great provision, and all manner of commodities that are
brought to them. Much more happy may we account those cities and towns where
are many houses of God: if indeed they be true houses of God. External
buildings made with stone or brick, timber, lead, iron, and other such
materials, though never so pompous and glorious without and within, can not
justly be accounted Gods houses, if Gods people assemble not in them to worship
God, if Gods ordinances be not there duly observed, if there be no prayers made
to God, no Word of God preached, no Sacraments administered, no divine
discipline exercised in them. But where these are, there are Gods houses. And
happy are the places where Gods houses are.

Exhortation to dwell where Gods house is.
Ye that desire to dwell in cities or towns, be sure that Gods houses be in
those cities or towns. What are best ordered companies without the communion
of Saints? What the best merchandises without such as are brought from the
celestial Canaan? What all sort of wares without such as the wisdom of God
sets out?

And ye that desire to have your houses stand by themselves in the open air,
be sure that an house of God be so near them, as on all occasions ye may
resort to them. What is the sweetest air without the breath of Gods Spirit?
What the most fertile soil without the fruitful word of God? What the
clearest springs and brooks without the current of grace? What the best grown
woods without Gods plants? What the most melodious singing of birds without
Saints singing hymns and spiritual songs, making melody to the Lord in their
hearts? What all country or city commodities without divine ordinances? But in
Gods houses (rightly and justly so called) are all these to be had. There is a
kind of fatness of Gods house, that is a fullness and sweetness, whereby all
that duly frequent the same, shall be satisfied. Be therefore, if possibly ye
can, where Gods house Psalm. 36. 8. Psalm. 84. 4.
is. Blessed are they that dwell there. The Psalmist in a rhetorical
amplification of this point seems to envy the sparrowes and swallows which
roosted and built their nests about -- 3*
the house of God whereunto he could not come, though his soul longed and even
fainted for it. -- 2:


Direction to such as enjoy a free liberty of Gods house.
Finally, ye that have that favor and honor to dwell where Gods house is,
esteem it as a great favor and high honor: and testify as much by your
answerable carriage.

1 Frequent Gods house on all occasions. The Christians of the purer primitive
times of the Church, continued daily Act. 2. 46.
with one accord in the Temple. This one thing did the Man Psalm. 27. 4.
after Gods own heart desire, and professes more and more to seek after it,
even to dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of his life: that is, as
an inhabitant to have recourse unto it on all occasions. For, says he to the
Lord, I have Psalm. 26. 8.
loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where thine honor dwells.

Eccl. 5. 1.
2 Keep thy foot when thou go to the house of God: that is, keep thine
heart, which is to thy soul as thy foot to thy body, to carry it this way and
that way. Go therefore to Gods house with a well prepared heart. There is he
present, who searches and tries the heart.

3 At the very entering into Gods house, let an holy trembling and awful fear
possess thy soul. The great God, the Gen 28. 16, 17
King of glory is there. When Jacob by a divine vision, which was showed him in
a place where he slept, perceived that the Lord was in that place, he was
afraid and said, How dreadful is this place? This is none other but the house
of God.

4 When thou art there, keep thy thoughts from wandering. Let not thy soul be
fixed on any other thing then on God, and his holy ordinances which thou
performest, least Isa. 29 13
thou be reckoned in the number of them, Who draw near to God with their mouth,
and with their lips do honor him, but have removed their heart far from him:
and so thy service be rejected of God.

Ioh. 2* 14, etc
5 Profane not Gods house with Merchandises, for which Christ's indignation was
so incensed against the Jews in his time, as with a scourge he drove them out.
Profane it not with worldly communications, or actions: much less with any
impious or unrighteous words or deeds.

6 Pervert not Gods house by making it a pretext for any impiety or iniquity.
As if having Gods house by thee, thou should thereby be justified, or
bolstered up against evil. Ier. 7. 9, 10.
Will ye steal, commit adultery, swear falsely, and walk after other gods, and
come stand before me in this house (says the Lord) which is called by my name,
and say, we are delivered to do all these abominations?

. 118. Of holy boldness in praising God.
III.. 115.
GOds praises must be boldly set forth. We may not be daunted, or ashamed
therein, as men which do things secretly in a corner, but by doing this duty in
the midst of populous places, manifest holy boldness, as he that said, Psalm.
10^. 30.
I will praise him among the multitude. -- 119. 46.
I will speak of thy testimonies also before Kings, and will not be ashamed.
-- 138. 1*
Before the Gods will I sing praise unto thee. Thus Saint Paul, though as a
malefactor he was brought before Act. 25. 23.
King Agrippa and Bernice sitting in great pomp, with Festus, the chief
captains, and principal men of the city, where were great multitudes of
people, yet in declaring the admirable work of God in his conversion, says,
-- 26. 26:
I speak freely. Herein has the Lord Christ made himself a worthy pattern:
for in this case thus he says, Psalm. 22. 2^, 25 Heb 2. 12.
In the midst of the congregation will I praise thee. My praise shall be of
thee in the great congregation.

The things which make men ashamed, of no moment
1 Such is the excellency, such the necessity of praising God, so honorable,
so acceptable unto God, so useful and beneficial is it to us, by so many
bonds are we bound thereunto, as if all the things in the world which can be
pretended to make any ashamed or afraid thereof, whether reputation, promotion,
riches, friends, liberty, life, or any thing else, were put into one balance,
and the inducements to move us boldly to perform it, put into another, they
would be found beyond all comparison too light.

Benefits of boldness.
2 By Saints boldness in praising God, as they who are like minded, are much
affected and stirred up to bless God, so the weak and faint-hearted are
strengthened and encouraged, and gaine-sayers, scorners, and all sorts of
adversaries daunted and put to silence.

Reprehension of men's timorousness in praising God.
Great cause of just complaint may hence be taken, not only against impious
and profane persons, who care not to give any praise at all to God, either in
private corners, or in the midst of assemblies, but also against such as in
their judgments are convinced of the equity of the duty, and in their
consciences persuaded of the necessity thereof: and thereupon are moved
inwardly in their hearts, or secretly in their closets, or other like places to
praise the Lord: but to do it in assemblies, in the midst of populous places,
they are ashamed. What is this but to prefer man to God, and applause of men
to Gods approbation? May it not be Mat. 6. 2.
said of such, They have their reward? Surely their own judgment and
conscience are terrible witnesses against Mar. 8. 38. Si ante reges and
praesides propter Dominum stemus, non consusi, sed constantes esse debemus.
Hier. Comment* in Psalm. 118. Exhortation to boldness.
them. Fearful is the doom which Christ has denonnced against them; For,
says he, Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words in this adulterous
and sinful generation, of him also shall the fonne of man be ashamed, when he
comes in the glory of his father with the holy Angels. If therefore we stand
before Kings and Governors for the Lord, we ought not to be ashamed, but
resolute and constant.

Be bold, be bold, ye servants of the Lord, in sounding forth the praises of
your God. Go into presses of people: and in the midst of them praise the
Lord. Wicked men are over-bold in belching forth their blasphemies to the
dishonor of God: they care not who hear them. They stick not to do it in the
midst of cities. Shall they be more audacious to dishonor God, then ye
zeelous to honor him? Mat. 10. 32.
Assuredly Christ will show himself as forward to confess you, as you are, or
can be to confess him. This holy boldness is the ready way to glory. To add
an edge to this exhortation, well observe these few rules following.

Rules for boldness in praising God.

Dan. 3. 16, 17.


1 Duly consider the difference betwixt God and man. It is dis-respect of God,
and too much respect of man, that makes many ashamed and afraid to declare
before men that duty which they owe to God.

2 Take an invincible resolution to do what you see just Acts 21. 13, 14
cause to do. Want of a settled resolution makes men when they meet with any
discouragements, to turn back, and to cease prosecuting that, which in their
conceit causes fear and shame.

3 Pass not for praise or dispraise of men: but 2 Cor. 6. 8.
By honor and dishonor, by evil report and good report, approve your selves
to be Gods servants, bound with the uttermost of your power to set forth his
honor. He that said, Heb. 2. 12.
In the midst of the Church will I praise thee, said also, Ioh. 5. 41.
I receive not honor from men. But -- 1^. 42, 43
they which loved the praise of men more then of God, though inwardly they
believed in Christ, yet openly durst not confess him.

4 Contemn the world. Love of the world quenches the heat of the love of God.
The world is an enticing bait. Many are driven back thereby. 2 Timothy 4. 10.
Demas, that old Disciple Demas, having set his heart on the world, which he
loved too much, grew ashamed, and afraid to confess Christ.

5 Give not reins to licentiousness. Turn not the grace of God into
wantonness. Such unworthy walking of the Jude verse. 4.
profession of the Gospel cannot but make ashamed to appear in the midst of
such congregations as are fit to have Gods praises sounded forth among them.

Ephesians. 5. 7.
6 Be not companions with impious and profane persons. They will keep thee out
of the midst of the forementioned congregations.

Psalm. 122. 1.
7 Associate your selves with them that are pious and zealous: That are not
ashamed themselves in the most solemn manner that they can to praise God. Such
companions will put life into you, and provoke you to do as they do. In them
especially are these proverbes verified, As iron sharpeneth iron, so a man
sharpeneth tho countenance of his Prove. 27. 17, 19
friend. As in water face answers to face, so the heart of man to man.

. 119. Of delighting in Gods house.
IIII.. 115:
Our delight must be in Gods Church. It was usual with the Prophets familiarly
with much delight to direct their speeches to Jerusalem, and to Zion as types
of Gods Church, after this manner, Psalm. 122. 2.
Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem: -- 9.
I will seek thy good. -- 137. 5, 6:
If I forget thee O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning. If I do not
remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth: If I prefer not
Jerusalem above my chief joy. Then especially did they cheerfully manifest
their mind to her, when they had good tidings to tell her, thus, Isa. 52. 1.
Awake, awake, put on thy strength, O Zion: put on thy beautiful garments O
Jerusalem, the holy city, etc. Zac. 9. 9.
Rejoice greatly, O daughter Zion, shout O daughter of Jerusalem: behold thy
King comes unto thee, etc. In her misery they could not refrain tears: for
thus they say, Psalm. 137. 1.
We wept when we remembered Zion. Lam. 2. 11.
Mine eyes do fail with tears, my bowels are troubled, my liver is powered upon
the earth, for the destruction of the daughter of my people. This compassion in
misery is a great evidence of much love and delight: whereupon it is said,
Psalm. 102. 14.
Thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust thereof. Yet a
greater evidence thereof are the many passionate words which are used in
reference to her, as -- 26. 8.
love of her, -- 27. 4.
desiring and -- 84. ^:
longing after her, -- ibid:
fainting for her, -- 106. 5.
rejoicing and glorying in her.

All things that may work true delight are in the Church. Therefore the Holy
Ghost has set her forth by most amiable titles and ornaments, as Psalm. 45. 9,
13
Queen, Kings daughter, Ier. 31. 4.
Virgin, Rev. 21. 2.
Bride adorned for her husband, Cant. 4 8.
Spouse, Rev. 19. 8.
Wife, Cant. 1. 8.
Fairest of women, Psalm. 45. 13. Intrinsecus sui viri dignitate ornata est
Ecclesia: Aug. advers. Iud. l. 1. c. 22.
All glorious within, her clothing also of wrought gold. Within the Church is
adorned with the dignity of her husband.

In the Temple which was a type of the Church, typically were prefigured such
things as are of force to draw a man's mind, and heart thereunto.

Prerogatives of the Church typified in the Temple.
1 God did there in a most gracious manner represent himself sitting on a Exo.
25. 22.
mercy-seat. So as in the Church is Heb 4. 16.
a throne of grace whereunto we may go boldly, that we may obtain mercy, and
find grace to help in time of need.

2 Under this mercy-seat was an Exo. 25. 21.
Arc, which, being a kind of chest, prefigured that in the Church are all Gods
treasures to be had. Christ is this Arc. Col 2. 3.
In him are hid all Gods treasures.

3 There was an High Priest, who appeared before that mercy-seat, Exo. 28. 29.
to bear the names of the children of Israel for a memorial before the Lord
continually, and Lev. 16. 17.
to make an atonement for all the Congregation of Israel. Christ Jesus is that
true High Priest, who continually Heb 9. 24.
appears in the presence of God for us: and 1 Ioh. 2. ^.
is the true propitiation for our sins.

4 There was an Exo. 38. 1, etc.
altar for all manner of offerings; and -- 30. 1, etc.
for sweet incense: prefiguring that God who accepts the sacrifice of his
Son for our sins, accepts our freewill offerings, and by the sweet savor
of the incense of Christ's intercession, is well pleased therewith.

5 There was a Exo. 25. 23.
table to prefigure an holy communion Luke 22. 30.
betwixt the Lord and his people.

6 There were Exo. 25. 37.
lights, -- 30.
bread, -- 30. 18, etc.
water, to show that in the Church there are means to enlighten us, to feed
us, to cleanse us, and to do all things requisite for us.

7 Exo. 26.
Out of the outward court there was passege into the holy place, and c^t of it
into the Sanctum Sanctorum the most holy place, to show that first we must be
in the Church in the number of those who profess the true Religion, so may we
come by the grace of effectual calling to be Priests unto God, and having
served our time to enter into the true heavenly holy place.

Non sufficit dicere, locus habitationis Dei* sed locus habitationis gloria
Dei. Aug. Enar. in Psalm. 25.
Not without cause therefore does the Psalmist style the Church (Psalm. 26. 8.)
The place where Gods honor dwells. He thought it not enough to say, The
place where God dwells, but where his honor dwells, which makes much to
the glory of the Church.

Do not these things make the Church worthy to be sought after to be loved,
to be delighted in? Many, many more are the prerogatives thereof which make it
most amiable; but these may be sufficient to such as are not of a Stoicall
disposition, very blocks, sensible of no delightsome object.

The affection of our Prophet toward Jerusalem, the Church of God, is even for
imitation worthy of all due observation: that our hearts also may be so
enamoured with her, as not to think or speak of her, but with delight.

For this purpose two points shall briefly be declared.

1 How such a delight may be wrought.

2 How it may be manifested.

To work it,

How delight in the Church may be wrought.
I Be well instructed in those privileges and prerogatives which make the
Church worthy to be delighted in. Thus will thy delight be more solid and
stable.

2 Often meditate thereon, so will thy delight be the more inflamed: Serious
meditation on that which works affection, is as bellows to a fire, it
enkindles it, and makes it flame out.

3 Withdraw thy heart from other contrary objects which work a corrupt
delight therein. As the heart of him that is set on strange women, will thereby
be alienated from his wife: So delight in the world and the vanities thereof
will dim, yea clean put out our delight in the Church.

Evidences of delight in the Church.
II. To manifest thy delight in the Church,

1 Be Psalm. 122* 2.
a member of that blessed communion.

2 Be -- 1.
a companion of the other members thereof.

3 -- 5.
Let her praises be ever in thy mouth.

4 -- 6.
Pray for her peace.

5 -- 9:
Seek her good.

6 Act. ^. 8.
Rejoice in her prosperity.

7 Psalm. 137. 1.
Mourn for her misery.

. 120. Of provoking others to praise God.
PSALM. CXVI. XIX.
Praise ye the Lord.
THe Prophet having abundantly testified his own readiness and forwardness
to praise the Lord; contenteth not himself therewith, but that the more praise
might redound to God, in the close of his hymn he stirs up others, even all
of all sorts without any limitation or exception of any to do the like, in this
compound word, Of this word See The Whole Armor of God. Treat. 3. Part. 2..
72. Exhortamur vos, sratres, ut laud^tis Deum, and hoc est quod vobis omnibus
dicimus, quando dicimus Alleluiab, etc Aug. Ehar in Psalm. 148. Provoke others
to praise God.
Praise ye the Lord.

Of the duty implied in this phrase, which is to praise the Lord, sufficient
has been spoken before. It remains here to speak of the means of
spreading abroad and propagating the praise of God, by inciting others to
praise him. This cohortation being added to his profession, two useful
observations hence arise.

I. We must provoke others to praise God.

II. We must our selves practice what we provoke others unto.

1 For the first, the duty of provoking others is in Scripture applied to all
points of piety, justice, and charity. For, what we find behoofull for our
selves to do, we must thereunto incite others. In general therefore its said,
Hebr. 10. 24.
Consider one another to provoke unto love and to good works. -- 3. 13.
Exhort one another. 1 These. 5. ^1.
Edify one another. But more particularly for inciting others to praise God,
as other books of Scripture, so especially the book of Psalms does abound
with incitations thereto: stirring up Psalm. 148. -- 135. 19, etc. -- 149* --
150.
Angels, Kings, Princes, Judges, Priests, Levites, old, young, male, female,
all of all sorts: yea by a Rhetorical Apostrophe he turns his speech unto
unreasonable and senseless creatures, and calls on them to praise the Lord,
thereby the more to quicken sensible and reasonable creatures thereunto. The
136 Psalm was purposely penned and appointed to be sung time after time, both
daily in the 1 Chro. 16. 41 2 Chro. ^. 13. -- 7. 3, 6.
temple, and -- ^0. ^1. Ezr. 3. 11. Cum ab hominibus beneficium accepimus, alios
quoque provocamus ad communem gratiarum actionem, multo magis ad Deum invitandi
sunt, qui pro nobis gratias agant. Chrysostom. Hom. ^. in 2 Cor. 1.
on extraordinary occasions, to incense the spirits mutually of one another to
praise God. The celestial spirits (though they be every one most forward to
praise the Lord, and need no incitation, yet) to show their earnest and
unsatiable desire to have it continually done by all, they cry one to another,
Hallelu-jah praise ye the Lord, Rev. 19. ^, 3, 4, 6. When we receive a good
turn from man, we use to stir up others, to thank him in our behalf. Much
more ought we to invite and incite others to praise God with us and for us.

The zeal we ought to bear to Gods glory: The love we owe to our brethren;
The comfort that we may reap to our own souls, by provoking others to praise
the Lord, are as a threefold twisted cord to hold us fast to the performance
of this duty.

1 The more persons are brought to praise the Lord, the more is Gods name
hallowed. Now it is an evidence of a great zeal of Gods glory, not only with
the uttermost of our own power to praise him our selves, but also to be a
means to draw on others so to do: as he that said, I will Psalm. 45. 17.
make thy name to be remembered in all generations: therefore shall the people
praise thee for ever and ever.

2 It is an evidence of much love to our brethren to incite them to praise the
Lord, both in regard of the great need wherein they stand thereof, and also in
regard of the great benefit they may reap thereby. All have great need to be
daily stirred up to this duty, by reason of their natural backwardness
thereunto. The more excellent any duty is, the more backward we are by nature
thereunto: but of all duties, none more excellent, none more divine, none
wherein we come nearer unto the celestial spirits, then this of praising God:
which makes our earthly, perverse disposition to be so dull to it, as it is,
Can heavy things of the earth be forward to ascend upward? but in praising God
our spirits ascend to heaven where God is. Hence also is it, that, though we
are at some times quick and forward thereunto, yet we soon wax dull therein,
and as it were fall downward, as heavy weights, which though they be pulled up,
by their own heaviness fall down again: or as water, which though with fire
it be heated, of its own nature waxes cold again. Therefore as weights are
often to be pulled up, as fire is of^ to be put under water, and blown up, so
our spirits are often to be quickened and stirred up by mutual cohortations. The
benefit whereof is very great, by reason of the true virtue and efficacy of
incitations. As soldiers, even fresh water soldiers, and all that strive for
masteries by running, riding, rowing, shooting, wrestling, etc. are much
animated and whetted on by acclamations, and incitations, so Christians by holy
exhortations are much quickened to praise the Lord.

Quid beatius nobis soret, si glo rificemus non solum linguis nostris bonum
Deum, sed si proximos quoque ut nostro nomine cum glorificent, incitemus.

Chrysostom. Hom. 27. in Genesis 8.


3 We give evidence to others, and gain assurance to our selves of the spirit
of grace abiding and bearing rule in us, by drawing on others with us to praise
the Lord. This spirit is called the anointing, (1 Ioh. 2. 20. 27.) It is as an
ointment powered forth, (Cant. 1. 3.) which so diffuseth the sweetness of the
favor that is in it, as all that are near it, carry away some of the
sweetness of it. And is it not a great comfort to have assurance of such a
spirit? What now can be more blessed, then not only to glorify the good God
with our own tongues, but also to stir up others by our means to glorify
him.

Certainly these, with other like motives, were of force with him, who said to
God, I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart: I have declared thy
faithfulness, and thy salvation: I have not concealed thy loving kindness and
thy truth from the great congregation, (Psalm. 40. 10.) And again, I will
declare thy name unto my brethren: in the midst of the congregation will I
praise thee. I will give thee thanks in the great congregation: I will praise
thee among much people, Psalm. 22. 22.

Psalm. 135. 2, 3, 19, 20. 2 Chro. 7. 6.
The application of this point concerns all of all sorts. Especially it
concerns Ministers to whom are committed in a peculiar manner the words of
exhortation. The Priests and Levites were of all most of all bound, as to
praise the Lord themselves, so in the midst of great assemblies to incite
others, and to sing and say, Praise ye the Lord. Next to Ministers,
Magistrates, who are as Generals and Captains in the Lords army, are bound by
virtue of their authority over others to provoke them to praise the Lord. Thus
Moses Exo. 15. 1.
and the children of Israel, not he alone, but he with them, he directing and
inciting them, sang unto the Lord. So Deborah Judge. 5. 1.
and Barak said to the people, Praise ye the Lord. The like I might instance in
David, Solomon, Asa, Iehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, Nehemiah, and other pious
Magistrates. And because Governors of families, whether husbands, parents, or
masters, are in their houses as Kings and Priests, to them also it belongs to
see that such as are under their 1 Samuel 1. 7.
charge do praise the Lord. Thus Elkanah for this very end took his wives along
with him when he went to the Temple. Genesis 35. 2.
Thus, for this very end also, Jacob calls upon his whole household, wives,
children, servants, and all that were with him, to prepare themselves solemnly
to praise the Ios. 24. 15.
Lord. And Ioshuah undertaketh for himself and his household to serve the Lord.
Finally it appertains to neighbors, friends, and all sorts even of private
Christians by virtue of the common bond of nature, whereby all are one Isa. 58.
7.
flesh, and that nearer bond of spiritual union whereby all are 1 Cor. 12. 12.
one body. For these mutual duties of exhorting one another, of provoking one
another, of edifying one another (before mentioned) are not restrained to any
particular sorts or kinds of people, but extended to all of all sorts. This was
wont to be the Saints phrase, O come, let us sing unto the Ista est clarissima
Dei magnificatio quando per innumeras linguas glorificationem offerimus. Chr.
Hom. 26. in Genesis 8. Isa. ^6. 12.
Lord, (Psalm. 95. 1.) And as a property of all that are of the Christian
Church, it was of old foretold, that many people shall go and say, Come ye, and
let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, etc. (Isa. 2. 3.) This is an
especial means of promoting and advancing Gods glory to do it by many
tongues. They which are guided by Satan's spirit have their Come: their mutual
cohortations and provocations. They use to say one to another, Come ye, we will
fill our selves with strong drink. Come with us, let us all have one purse.
Come, Pro. 1. 11, 14. -- 7. 18.
let us take our fill of love. Hence is it that the number of wicked ones so
increases, that they are so audacious and impudent in their courses, and that
they carry all before them as a violent stream occasioned by the gathering
together of many waters. They do without all question aggravate their
condemnation hereby: yet do they hereby become witnesses against many that
profess themselves to be the servants of God, in that the spirit of Satan
which rules in them, is more effectual in them to advance Satan's throne, then
the spirit of grace in many of them which profess themselves to be the
servants of God, to promote the glory of God.

But as for such as are willing and forward to give evidence of their zeal of
Gods glory, of their love to their brethren, and of that assurance they have of
the reign of the Spirit of grace in them, by inciting others to praise the
Lord, let them well note the next doctrine.

. 121. Of practicing our selves what we provoke others unto.
Obsecremus sanctos ut pro nobis gratias agant, and ipsi pro nobis hoc agamus
mntuo. Chrysostom. Hom. 2 in 2 Cor. 1.
II. WE must our selves practice what we provoke others unto. We may and must
(as we heard in the former) desire Saints to give thanks for us, but withal we
may not fail our selves mutually to give thanks for our selves, and praise the
Lord. So did this Prophet, as we have seen at large from the beginning of the
12 verse to this last clause of this Psalm. Observe the patterns of such as
in Scripture are approved for their zeal in stirring up others, and you shall
find them forward to do themselves what they incited others unto. We will
arise and go to Bethel, etc. says Jacob, (Genesis 35. 3.) As for me and my house,
says Joshua, (Ios. 24. 15.) we will serve the Lord. It is an usual phrase of
such as heartily desire to advance the glory of God, to express their desire
in the first person of the plural number, whereby they show that they intend
themselves to do what they require of others, and therefore incite themselves
as Heb. 13. 15. Psalm. 95. 1. Isa 2. 3. Psalm. 44. 8. -- 79. 13. -- 75. 1.
well as others, thus, Let us offer to God the sacrifice of praise continually.
Let us sing unto the Lord. Let us go up to the mountain of the Lord. We will
praise thy name O God for ever. We will give thee thanks for ever. We will show
forth thy praise. Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks, do we give thanks.

1 Thus our care to stir up others to praise God, will indeed appear to
arise from a true zeal of Gods glory, from true Christian love, and from the
spirit of grace dwelling in us, when we our selves do what we persuade others
unto.

2 Thus shall we add an edge to the exhortations we give others, when they see
us leading the way before them. If soldiers see their captains forward to
those enterprises whereunto they incite them, they will be much more encouraged
and heartned thereunto. Wherewith can a Physician better persuade a patient to
observe the diet which he prescribes, then by observing it himself?

3 Refusing to practice our selves what we exhort others to do, makes our
exhortations to be profitable nor to others, nor to our selves.

Not to others, because the edge of our exhortations must needs be much blunted
thereby. For people will be ready to Luk 4. 23.
say, Physician heal thy self. Hardly will they be brought to think, that we
speak to them from our hearts, or that we our selves are well persuaded of the
equity, excellency, necessity and benefit of that whereunto we persuade them.

Not to our selves, because thus they are made evidences against us, witnessing
that we knew the right course which we refused to take; whereby we make our
selves worthy of Luk 12 47.
more stripes, and aggravate our damnation.

4 This great mischief (beside many others) arises from not practicing what
we persuade others to, that impious men's mouths are opened to disgrace our
profession, and blaspheme the name of our God. Thou that teach another, Romans
2. 21, 24.
teach thou not thy self? The name of God is blasphemed through you,

Ye therefore that desire to manifest a true intention of heart in advancing
the glory of God after the best manner that you can, and to give proof that an
holy zeal of Gods glory possesses your soul, and sets you on work to do
what you do in inciting others to praise the Lord: ye that desire to have your
pious endeavors therein to be of good use, not to prove frustrate and vain,
but to be effectual to the end you aim at: ye that would not pull down with
one hand what you seem to build up with another: nor afford occasion to them
whom you stir up to so weighty and bounden a duty, to think that
by-respects moove you to incite them, in that wherein ye your selves are so
cold and careless: ye that would have comfort in performing so warrantable
and profitable a duty, Take due notice of the direction here prescribed. Upon
your own performance (as the Psalmist here does) provoke others to be
followers of you, and to do as you do. First say, and say it from the heart
to him that searches the heart, in truth to him that desires truth in the
inward parts, say unto the Lord, I will offer to thee the sacrifice of
thanksgiving: and then say unto others, Praise ye the Lord.

Oh that Ministers, Magistrates, Governors of families, and all that have
either function, or disposition to call upon others to praise the Lord, would
first take notice of the many, just, and weighty occasions that themselves have
to praise him, and answerably bind themselves so to do, and be careful to
perform what they are bound to perform, having their own hearts filled with
matter of praises, and their mouths wide opened to utter the same: so might
they with much courage and confidence speak to others and say, PRAISE YE THE
LORD.

. 122. Of Gods present mercies to England.
FOr a particular application of the general sum and scope of the Psalm,
and of the two last mentioned duties of praising God our selves, and of
provoking others so to do, let us take a view of the special occasions which
the Lord does now, even at this present time give us to quicken our own and
others spirits to render all possible thanks unto him for his unspeakable
blessings on our own, and other nations.

1 We here in England do still enjoy the great blessing of peace, together
with that far greater blessing the Gospel of peace, and a free use of all
Gods holy ordinances requisite for our spiritual edification and eternal
salvation.

At this time this blessing ought to be the more highly esteemed, because it is
in a manner proper to us. For most of the parts of Christendom are now, or
lately have been exceedingly annoyed with bloody war.

Of this blessing, Scotland, Ireland, and all the parts of His most excellent
Majesty our Sovereign Lord King CHARLES, do partake.

See The Churches Conquest.. ^6.
Of the benefit of this blessing I have else where treated. So as here I need no
longer to insist upon it.

2 The last year there was great scarcity of corn every where in this land.
Corn rose to a greater price then has been known in our memories. And where
in former times supply in like cases has been made by the plenty of other
countries, All the nations round about us were pinched with penury: so as there
was too great cause of fearing a famine.

But the Lord was pleased to hear the heavens, whereupon the heavens heard the
earth, and the earth heard the corn, the grass, and all manner of fruits, and
they heard England, and the cry of the poor therein.

Thus by the divine providence our land brought forth such a plentiful
harvest, and the heavens afforded so fair a season for gathering it in, as
scarcity is turned into plenty, dearness into cheapenesse. Our floores are
now full of wheat: we eat in plenty and are satisfied.

The misery of famine gives sufficient proof of the great benefit of plenty.

3 There was also the last year great fear of much sickness: and that of the
infectious, pestilentious sickness, which some few years before had month
after month, week after week, day after day destroyed such multitudes, as
the fear of the return thereof was the more terrible.

Physicians gave up their opinion, that the air was infected.

The famous University of Cambridge was so smitten therewith, as for the space
of half a year and more, Colleges were dissolved, Students dispersed,
Readings and Acts intermitted, that populous place made desolate, and the poor
that remained much pinched with poverty.

Other great market towns round about in the country were also the last year
much infected with the plague: and many people were thereby destroyed, or
brought into great exigences.

But now has the Lord healed our land. Sickness is removed, and health
restored to our borders.

If the miserable desolation that the plague makes in many places, taking away
Magistrates from their subjects, Ministers from their people, husbands and
wives one from another, parents from children, children from parents, dear
friends, helpful neighbors one from another; and then especially depriving
persons of the comfort of their best friends, when they stand in most need of
them. If (I say) the miserable condition occasioned by the plague be well
weighed, we shall find our deliverance and freedom from the same to be a great
blessing.

To amplify this blessing the more, Gods more then ordinary providence, not
only in abating the violence of that extraordinary sickness which in the
year 1625 so fiercely but also in his speedy suppressing, and utter removing
it, is frequently and seriously to be considered. A distinct narration thereof
is 3^
before set down.

The more terrible the three evil arrows of war, famine and plague are, the
more remarkable are the blessings of peace, plenty, and health.

4 The birth of Prince CHARLES.
4 We in our days have such a blessing conferred upon us, as has not fallen
out in England fourscore and thirteen years before: which is the Birth of a
Prince, heir to the crown. Blessed in this respect be the nine and twentieth
day of May 1630. On that day was Prince CHARLES borne.

From the twelfth of October 1537. whereon Prince Edward (who was Edward 6.
King of England) was borne, to the said 29 of May 1630, England was not
honored with such a blessing. This is an incomparable blessing to this present
age, and to future ages also, as we steadfastly hope, and from our hearts with
the most humble devotion, and the most earnest affection that we can, we daily
pray.

. 123. Of the present liberty of the reformed Churches in France.
CHristian charity requires that we be affected with the blessings conferred
on others: especially such as are of the same faith and profession that we are.
Let us therefore cast our eyes on other Churches, and their present condition:
which if we duly observe, we shall find Gods gracious providence to be more
then ordinarily extended toward them in these our days.

We will begin with the reformed Churches in France.

When Henry 4 styled the great, deceased, by that favor he had showed, and
peace he had given to those of the reformed religion in his kingdom, they were
made so safe and secure in man's opinion, as it was supposed that no power was
able to wrest their liberty from them.

They had above two hundred walled and fenced towns for their refuge and
safety.

Many of the greatest nobility in France were their partisans, and seemed most
affectionate to the religion.

They had troops and armies of men well disciplined in arms, with many brave
Commanders, and old-beaten soldiers.

They were well provided with all store of ammunition. Nothing requisite for
defense and safety was wanting in man's imagination.

It is to be feared that they were too confident in the arm of flesh: which
that they might the more thoroughly discern, the Lord withdrew his protection,
and left them to defend themselves against the power of their own Sovereign,
which at first they too much slighted.

Soon after that their now Sovereign had raised and brought his forces
against them, many of their chiefest Commanders revoulted, their soldiers were
slain, their treasures exhausted, their cities and towns of defense were
violently wrested from them, or treacherously given up: many bloody massacres
were made among them: and the miserable effects of war so depopulated their
country, and destroyed their persons, as they were left destitute without all
succor, or hope of relief: And since the last taking in of Rochel, the King,
who was of a contrary religion to them, became an absolute Master of them.

What now in man's eye could be looked for, but that utterly they should be
deprived of the liberty of their religion, and by little and little be enforced
to the idolatrous superstition of the Romish Church: or at least be bred up in
blindness and ignorance, being left without the light of the Gospel to guide,
and comfort them in that their miserable condition?

Yet now in these happy days of deliverances, behold how in their greatest
extremity, when all humane means failed them, the Lord of hosts has beyond
all hope afforded them much peace and quietness; and provided for them new
Churches, built with their Kings good leave, yea and at his cost and charges,
because they had been demolished by the fury of impious soldiers, and by the
outrage of superstitious people.

Through that liberty which now they enjoy, their Churches are diligently
frequented, and all Gods ordinances duly observed, and their religion with
less scorn and derision professed, then formerly.

Their peace and security is now greater then when they had the forementioned
means to embolden them to stand upon their own guard.

This is the Lords doing. It is mavelous in our eyes.

They had no Moses, no Joshua to work for them.

As they had no power within to defend them from the might and malice of their
enemy, so they could expect no aid from abroad to encourage them to stand out
against their enemies. All the aid that from abroad was afforded unto them,
proved altogether in vain.

Isa. 11. 6. etc.
God is all in all to them. He that said, The wolf shall dwell with the lamb,
and the leopard shall lie down with the kid: and the calfe and the lion, and
the fatling together, and a little child shall lead them: and the sucking child
shall play on the hole of the aspe, and the weined child shall put his hand on
the cockatrice den, has wrought this concord betwixt them and the adversaries
of their religion.

Pro. 21. 1.
The Kings heart is in the hand of the Lord as the rivers of water: he turns
it whether soever he will. To his Churches therefore has the Lord turned the
heart of that King for their good.

What the inward affection of the King to those of the reformed religion is, is
a secret. Whether the peace that those Churches enjoy be occasioned by reason
of that supreme power which now he has obtained over them, or by reason of his
embroilements at home, and undertakings abroad, little skilleth for the matter
in hand. Sure it is that the Lord has ordered all things that have fallen out
in France for the good and peace of his Churches there.

Should not due notice be taken hereof?

. 124. Of Gods late mercies to the Low Countries.
FRom reformed Churches in France we will pass to the Low Countries who are of
the same profession.

In recounting Gods late mercies to them (which is the task that we have
undertaken: thereby to show what great cause we now have to set out the praises
of the Lord) it would be too far a digression to begin with those
extraordinary deliverances which they had when first they recovered their
liberty against the cruelty and tyranny of Duke D' Alva.

Later mercies are these that follow.

1 A strong faction of Arminians being raised up and dispersed thorowout all
their provinces, whereby the truth and purity of religion was much corrupted,
and the tranquillity and security of their State put into great hazard, a
National Synod, not without the counsel and consent of our royal Defender of
the Faith, King JAMES, was assembled at Dort, whereunto most grave, learned,
and judicious Divines out of all the reformed Churches in Christendom came;
who all with one unanimous consent determined sundry fundamental points of our
Christian Religion against the contrary errors of the Adversaries of Gods free
grace. A mercy not to be forgotten.

2 The enemy having gathered such an army as made him master of the field
whereby he so strongly besieged Breda, (a frontier town, of great command every
way round about) as no succor could be afforded it, but it was forced to
yield, at which time also Grave Maurice, Prince of Orange, their brave
General, died, great fear there was of much mischief, if not of utter ruin,
to befall that State. But by Gods Providence, their great enemy Spinola was
called into another country, and a supply made of the loss of their former
General, by substituting in his room his own brother, whose prudence and
prowess success has crowned: so as they are now better secured then they
were before.

3 Spain provided an exceeding great treasure for the foresaid States, which
it never intended to them. The whole fleet of gold, silver, and other rich
merchandises which the Spaniards by the help of the West-Indians had been
sundry years gathering together, the Nether-landers took on a sudden: whereby
their enemies were much disfurnished, and they themselves so plentifully
furnished, as they were the better enabled, not only to defend themselves, but
also to offend their enemies.

4 The States being now well prepared, they quickly become masters of the
field, and with much resolution attempt that which the enemy little feared they
should attain: namely to take in the Bosche, a very strong frontier town:
well fenced, well manned, and every way well prepared and provided for. But
they so besiege it, as no relief can be afforded to it: they so assault it, as
there is no standing out against them. They take it, and keep it.

5 While they lay at this siege, another booty falls into their hands. Wesell
the magazin of their enemy, wherein all warlike provision was in great
abundance stoared up, sending out some of their garrisons abroad, notice
thereof comes to the army of the States in siege at the Bosche. They forthwith
send some troops to surprise Wesell on a sudden. They come to it unexpected,
and quickly take it. Thus are the States again furnished with their enemies
provision. They take a strong town of great consequence, which is as an inlett
for them into the Palatinate. And by this means an enemy that with a great
army was entered into their country, and burnt and spoiled all before him, was
forced back again.

6 This last year while the army of the States is quiet at home, the enemy
having plotted some mischievous design against them, unexpectedly sends an
army by water into their territories, which (like a flock of foolish birds)
flew into nets that were not laid for them: and were taken.

What can we think, but that the finger of God has been in the ordering of
these successful matters for the better security of them who profess and
maintain the true religion against the professed enemies thereof.

. 125. Of the seasonable succor afforded to oppressed Germany.
AMong other evidences of the divine Providence toward the reformed Churches,
the late seasonable succor afforded to the Churches in Germany is most
remarkable.

Many years together has Germany been sore vexed with intestine and civil
war.

Who can without a melting heart, think on the much blood that has been
spilt: the ruins of many fair Cities, Towns, Castles, Churches and other
edifices that have been made: the distresses that many exiles of all sorts,
Princes and Subjects, Noble and Mean, Clergy and Laiety, Male and Female, Old
and Young have been brought unto: the miserable bondage under which such as
have remained in their own territories and habitations, have groaned: the
heavy and undue taxes that have been laid on such as have not had their
titles, dignities, inheritances, callings and liberties by violence wrested
from them: who can without much compunction and compassion hear of or think
on those and many other pressures and oppressions? See the Narration of the
Protestants Diet at Leipsich. Feb. 8. 1631.


The Princes of the reformed Churches in Germany were forced to put up a joint
complaint, and remonstrance of their grievances, and to consult about means, at
least of some ease (for their burdens were intolerable) if not of full
redress.

But their complaints proved like to the complaints of the Israelites put up to
Pharaoh for easing their heavy burdens. Their savor thereby came to be
abhorred in the eyes of Exo. 5. 21.
Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants. They were in a worse case then
before.

So proud was the enemy by reason of the great armies that he had gathered
together, and so flesht he was in the conquests that he had made, as he
regarded no complaints, he feared no revenge. He deemed his power to be
invincible.

When thus the reformed Churches in Germany were brought to the lowest ebb,
and so near to the pits brink, as they were upon tumbling down to their utter
ruin, that man's extremity might appear to be Gods opportunity, in a most
seasonable time the Lord raised up, and sent unto them a Deliverer, Gustavus of
Sued, in whose title is couched Augustus and Deus: Gustavus, importing by
transposition of letters, Augustus: and Sued read backward, Deus.

If the small army with which he came into Germany, and the great things which
he has done since he came thither, be duly weighed, we shall see cause to
acknowledge that the Lord of hosts was with him.

That which is by experience noted of the snow, that by being tumbled up and
down, of a little ball it comes to be a great heap that can hardly be
stirred, is likewise by experience found verified in his army.

Judge. 7. 13, etc.
We read of a dream which a soldier of the huge host of the Midianites that
for multitude was as the sand by the seaside, thus related to his fellow, I
dreamed a dream, and lo, a cake of barley bread tumbled unto the host of
Midian, and came unto it, and smote it, that it fell and overturned it, that
the tent lay along. The interpretation, which in the event proved most true,
was this, This is nothing else save the sword of Gideon the son of Ioash, a
man of Israel: for into his hand has God delivered Midian, and all the host.

A fit allusion thereunto, which has likewise in the event proved to be most
true, may be this, The sword of the King of Sued, a Defender of the true
Religion, has smitten the armies of the enemies of the Gospel: and into his
hand has the Lord delivered his Churches enemies.

Isa. 45. 1. -- 44. 28.
This King proves to be as another Cyrus, the Lords Anointed, whose right hand
the Lord has holden to subdue nations before him. He shall perform the Lords
pleasure.

Cyrus, the Persian Monarch, though he were to admiration victorious, yet did
he not with such expedition gain in and bring under his power, so many Forts,
Castles, Walled Towns and Cities, every way well manned, fenced and fortified
(no nor that hammer of the world great Alexander) ^s this Anointed of the Lord
has done in so short a time.

The Enemy spent more years in subduing Cities and Towns in Germany, then
this Deliverer has spent months in reducing them.

Conquering Caesar came even into this Country whereinto victorious Gustavus is
come: and with such celerity subdued one principality after another, as the
Orator is bold to say that he passed over places by victories more speedily Nec
citiu^ (...) quam (...) qua (...) etc Cic. Orat. pro M. Ma^^el Plut. in vit.
Caes.
then another could have done by paces. This is indeed an hyperbolicall speech:
but yet thereby exceeding great celerity is set out: which also is implied by
another hyperbolicall phrase used by Caesar himself in a letter to his friend,
in these three words, Veni, Vidi, Vici, I came, I saw, I overcame: meaning
thereby that so soon as he came to a place, and took a view of it, he
forthwith took it.

Yet in much shorter time has Gustavus subdued and taken in more towns and
cities then Caesar did: and that after another manner then Caesar did.

Had Caesar when he came into Germany such an adversary as Tilly?

Were there raised such armies of men and horse against Caesar, as against
Gustavus?

Were there such garrisons, such ammunition, such provision of all things
requisite to repel an enemy, in the places which Caesar subdued, as in those
which Gustavus took?

Never did Caesar at least for the time that he was in Germany meet with so
strong opposition as Gustavus has met withal.

Never was that General brought unto such hazards as this King has been
brought unto.

In no part of Germany did Caesar ever meet with such a pitched held, or such a
set battle, as Gustavus did on Gods-Aker near Liepsich. Nor ever was a
battle maintained with such prudence and providence, with such courage and
constancy, against an enemy that was so strong and stout, so seldom foiled, so
much prevailing: against an army supposed invincible by reason of former
successes and present preparations: against all the advantages that an enemy
could desire, as the battle at Leipsich by valorous Gustavus* And all this
after a great, if not the greater part, of his own army was put to rout, and
the Enemy thereupon made so confident, as he cried Victory, Victory, Follow,
Follow: but with such success, as the Benjamites had, when in the beginning of
the battle they had smitten the Israelites, and Judge 20. 32, etc
thereupon cried, They are smitten down before us.

On the seventh day of September (the Birthday of victorious Queen ELIZABETH)
was this never to be forgotten victory obtained. And on the seventeenth day of
November (the Coronation day of the said puissant Princess) was the high and
mighty King of Sued entertained in the Imperial city of Frank-ford on Main,
the city where the Germane Emperor uses to be elected.

Since the forenamed incomparable victory at Leipsich all things with very
good success have fallen cut.

. 126. Of the causes of the Suedish Kings entering into Germany.
THe conquests made by the victorious King of Sued, are in their kind very
glorious; but much more glorious in the cause of undertaking them.

Causa non p^^^a facit martyrem. Aug. Epist. 61.
All confess that it is not so much the punishment that makes martyrdom
glorious, as the cause.

So is it in war. The cause rather then the event makes it warrantable and
praiseworthy. Good success in just war brings much glory to the undertakers
thereof.

In this respect victorious Gustavus carries away more glory then Sennacherib,
Nebuchadnezar, Darius, Cyrus, Alexander, Caesar, or other the great Conquerers
among the heathen.

Of those Conquerors who are commended by the Holy Ghost, it is said that they
subdued kingdoms and wrought righteousness.

Might and Right must go together. Right without might may be much wronged.
Might without right may do much wrong.

Take we therefore a brief view of the causes of sundry other conquerours, and
we shall find might without right.

Take we a view of the causes which moved the conquering King of Sued to
undertake his wars, and we shall find might regulated by right.

The cause which moved conquering Monarchs in former times to enter into other
men's dominions, and to subdue nations, was especially the pride of their heart,
and their ambition to have the supreme sovereignty over the whole world, if
possibly they could atchieve it.

It is said of Alexander the great, that when he heard the Philosophers
conclusion concerning the unity of the world, he wept because there were no
more worlds for him to overcome. Behold the ambition of men's minds, how
boundless, how unsatiable it is.

The forementioned Caesar invaded Germany, France, England and other nations,
to enlarge the dominion of the Roman Empire. So did other Roman Generals
before and after Caesar.

True it is that God in his unsearchable wisdom stirred up many of them to be
his instruments to punish peoples rebellions against God. In which respect they
are called the Isa 10. 5. Ier. 12. 1^. Ezekiel. 30. 24. Isa. 45. 1. Ier. 25. 9.
Isa. 44. 28.
Rod of the Lord, his staff, his sword. Yea God is said to put his sword into
their hands: and because the Lord uses them as his instruments, they are in
that respect styled The Lords Anointed, his servants, his Shepherds. Yet
notwithstanding this secret intent of the Lord which he by their Ministry
brought to pass, they were stirred up by pride and ambition to do what they
did. So says the Lord of Ashur: O Isa 10. 5, 7, 13.
Assyrian, the rod of mine anger, etc. I will send him against an hypocritical
nation, etc. I will give him a charge to take the spoil, etc. Howbeit he
means not so, etc. For, he says by the strength of my hand I have done it,
and by my wisdom, etc. And further to show that they by their inward wicked
disposition were set on work, it is said, that when God gave Isa. 47. 6. Z^c
1. 15.
people into their hands, they showed them no mercy: and again, when the Lord
was a little displeased, they helped forward the affliction.

But the pious and righteous King of Sued has made it manifest to all the
world, that no ambitious thoughts, no desire of enlarging his own Dominions,
by forcing away other men's rights from them, has embroiled him in these
Germane-warres.

Great wrongs were done to him by the Enemy, and fear given of greater, if he
looked not the better to himself. So as he was forced to take up arms to
secure his own dominions, and his neighbors bordering upon him.

2 Samuel 5 17.
It is noted of the Philistimes that they came up to seek David. Whereby is
implied that they first provoked him to war: and his setting upon them, and
destroying them is thereby justified.

2 Samuel 10. 4, etc.
It is also recorded of the Syrians, that they helped the Ammonites who had
most despitefully used David's Ambassadors; Thereby David's warring against the
Ammonites and Syrians is justified. Against the Ammonites for wrong done to
David: against the Syrians for aiding David's enemies.

Such provocations had King Gustavus to enter upon these later wars. He was
first sought by the Enemy. His Ambassadors were basely used. This later Enemy
sent armies under his own Ensigns in aid of the Pole his former enemy, with
whom he was then in war.

Besides these wrongs done to himself, Complaints and invitations were made to
him by sundry oppressed Princes and States, and particularly of those, to whom
he was engaged by ancient allyances and confederacies. By these also he was
drawn into these wars, wherein the divine providence has given him so good
success, and so great glory.

Genesis 14. 14.
Abraham on such a ground as this later is, was moved to take up arms against
those that spoiled Sodom where his brother Lot was: wherein the Lord gave him
good success.

Ios. 10. 6, etc.
Joshua also on such a ground made war against the five Kings of the Amorites
who encamped against Gibcon. The Gibconites were at that time in league with
the Israelites: Thereupon Gibeon being invaded by the Amorites, sends unto
Joshua to the camp, saying, Slake not thy hand from thy servants, come up to us
quickly, and save us and help us.

Thus Gustavus in affording succor to such as were oppressed and craved his
aid (they being also his confederates) has done that which such as were guided
by Gods Spirit have done before him: and that as well for securing his own
dominions, as for relieving others. For, had that flood of war, which over
flowed and in a manner ruinated the greater part of Germany, been suffered to
swell and run longer and further, it might have made an irrecoverable breach
even unto the very Kingdom of Sued.

Where that flood of war had a current, it carried away the true Religion
before it: it bare away Princes out of their principalities, other Governors
out of their jurisdictions, Ministers of Gods Word from their charges, Owners
from their possessions, and others from their places, and callings: it deprived
free cities of their immunities and privileges: and brought many mischiefs
and inconveniences to many others.

Wherefore to preserve true Religion where it was in great hazard to be
suppressed: to re-establish it where it was removed: to restore Princes, other
Governors, Ministers, Owners, and others to their own rights: to recover to
free people their privileges: to bring home the banished: to take off the
heavy yoke of bondage and intolerable burdens from their necks on whom they
were unjustly laid: and finally to prevent cruel massacres and persecutions
for the Gospel sake, has this contrary stream of war been opposed; so as
violence by violence (as necessity required) has been resisted: and a strong
stream of sweet waters has beaten back a great flood of salt waters.

. 127. Of the effects of the Suedish Kings wars.
THe blessed events that have followed upon the King of Sued his wars in
Germany do give evident proof to the truth of the ends and intents before
mentioned. For, thereby true Religion is in many places re-established, and a
free liberty for exercise thereof procured to the professors of it: Ancient
immunities and privileges are recovered: Princes, other Governors, Ministers
of the Gospel, States, Polities, private Lords and Owners are restored to
their dominions, dignities, charges, callings, inheritances, and possessions:
Many people are eased of their heavy burdens and grievances.

There has also hereupon followed a great abatement of the greatness of the
house of Austria, and such a diminution of the power thereof, as that they who
have been the chief pillars of the Church of Rome, are by these late
victories got against them, disabled (as we hope) from helping forward the
Popes design of reducing the Christian world to an absolute obedience unto his
chair; yea and from further promoting their own ambitions desires of the
Monarchy of Europe.

By the forenamed success there is also procured much addition and great
strength to the Protestant parties, by digesting all Germany into their body:
and a great means effected for facilitating the unions betwixt those that to
the great scandal of the Profession, and dishonor of those worthy lights of
the Church, Luther and Calvin, have been distinguished by these factious
titles, Lutherans and Calvinists.

Great security is hereby further brought to the reformed Churches in France:
who could never be reduced to the terms wherein they now are, so long as the
Protestant Princes in Germany retained freedom and power in their own
dominions.

A way is also hereby opened to the very gates of Rome: whereby the threatenings
against the seven-headed beast may in the Lords appointed time be accomplished.

Finally, there is great hope given of establishing much peace and security to
all the true Churches of God: and many other blessings are expected, which the
Lord grant to his people.

. 128. Of praising God for the foresaid mercies.
TO make a brief recapitulation, and to gather up the Sum of all, for the
better application of the maine point intended.

The Lord having secured our Peace, and removed from us his judgments of
Plague and Famine:

The Lord having restored to the reformed Churches in France a gracious liberty
for exercising their Religion:

The Lord having with more then ordinary success prospered the affairs of our
nearest Neighbors, the States general of the united Provinces in the
Netherlands:

The Lord having succored his oppressed Churches in Germany, and given to
their Deliverer victories beyond expectation, unto admiration:

The Lord having given very many clear evidences of his fatherly care over his
Churches every where, and of his gracious providence toward them, even now in
these our days:

Should not our souls be affected with all and every of these mercies? Should
they not be incensed with an ardent zeal of setting forth the honor of his
name?

We and others of the same profession, of the same religion enjoy the comfort
and benefit of the forementioned mercies, and of many other mercies flowing
from the divine Providence: and shall not the Lord who so orders his
Providence for our good, have the praise and glory thereof?

Who can give su^^icient thanks? Nay, whose soul can be satisfied in rendering
praises to so good and gracious a God for so many and so great blessings, so
seasonably and so freely conferred on his Churches?

Should not all Ministers of the Gospel make their Churches to ring again
with sounding forth Gods praises?

Should not publishers of books make mention of these mighty works of the Lord
to the further publishing of his name?

Should not the wits of all divine Poets be set on work to indite due forms
of praises for the better magnifying of his name, who has done so glorious
things for us?

Should not every Christian soul in the best manner that it can, add
something to the magnifying of Gods name: as every one brought something to the
building of the Tabernacle?

Did we not while the Lord was time after time shooting out against us and
others his three deadly arrows of plague, famine, and sword, humble our souls
before him, and call upon him instantly, continually, to spare his people, to
remove his wrath, to take away his judgments?

Should we not now, the Lord having graciously heard our prayers for our selves
and others be hearty and zealous, instant and constant in rendering all possible
praise and thanks unto him?

It has been before declared. 51 79.
how true gratefulness has especial relation to God, and ascribes the glory
of all deliverances to him: and that. 85.
Praise is the best gift that can be given him: and that thereupon. 108.
Saints are never satisfied in setting forth Gods praises: They content not
themselves with an inward affection of praising God in their own souls, or
secretly betwixt God and themselves, but they must needs break forth into
praises of God, and. 86.
manifest their inward gratitude by outward gratulation* and that. 116. 118
publicly, boldly, among much people, in the midst of great assemblies:. 120.
exhorting and inciting others to praise God with thee: and. 121.
themselves conscionably practicing what they incite others unto.

Now we have so great and just grounds at this time to praise God, let us take
the occasions of stirring up our own and others spirits to do it heartily and
zealously: that God finding his blessings conferred on a grateful people may
never repent any kindness done: but may go on to add victory to victory,
success to success, blessing to blessing, till he have finished the good
work done for his Churches, and accomplished the promises which he has made
for destroying the kingdom of Antichrist, calling the Jews, bringing in the
fullness of the Gentiles, and consummating all things by his last, and most
glorious coming.

Wherefore, Bless the Lord, O my soul: and all that is within me bless his
holy name. Bless the Lord, O my soul: and forget not all his benefits. My
heart is fixed O God, my heart is fixed: I will sing and give praise. Awake up
my glory: I my self will awake early. My tongue shall speak of thy
righteousness, and of thy praise all the day long.

Behold, bless ye the Lord, all ye servants of the Lord. Give unto the Lord
glory and strength: give unto the Lord the glory due to his name.

O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy endures for ever.
Let the redeemed of the Lord say so: whom he has redeemed from the hand of
the enemy. Let them that were exiled say so, whom he has brought to the place
of their habitation. Let them that were oppressed say so, whom he has eased
of their heavy burdens. Let them that are freed from the infectious plague:
and from pinching famine, say so. So let them say, who are restored to a free
exercise of their religion. Praise ye the Lord, who quietly sit on your
thrones of judgment, to execute righteous justice and

(...) (...) Chance. See Fortune. 31. Children to be dedicated to God betimes.
220. Children, so soon as capable attend to instruction. 221. Childrens honor
to have pious parents. 222. Church. See House of God. Confidence whence it
arises. 217 Confidence which Saints have of their interest in God, makes them
bold to press it. 217. Confidence manifested by earnestness. 218. Counsel
how one may himself. 97. Courts of Gods house. 253.
D
DAnger. See Distress. Death may be praid against. 50. From Death God can
deliver. 103 Death of Saints precious. 202. Death of Saints ever seasonable.
208. Death not to be feared by Saints. 209 Delight in Gods house. 266. Delight
therein how wrought* 268 Evidences of that Delight. 268. Deliver. See Preserve.
Despair not. 109. Distress whereto Saints brought. 22. 34. Distress no ground
of censure. 35. Distress in the extremity of it to be acknowledged after
deliverance. 37 Directions how to do it. 38. Distress requires enquiry after a
remedy. 40. Distress requires prayer. 42. Distresses particular in which
prayer is to be made. 43. 44. Distress moves God. 60. Distress none so
extreme as to exceed* Gods ability. 77. Distress in extremity is Gods
opportunity to help. 802. Distress may soil Saints. 107. Distress procures
answerable remedy. 110. Distress cannot suppress faith. 140 Distress make
question Gods promises. 146. Distres makes not forget God. 157 Distress
removed binds to praise God. 228. Draw near to God in faith. 47. 51 Dulnes in
praising God. 263. 264. Duty to be practiced. 115. To Duty bind thy self. 129.
With Duty answer mercy* 130.
E
Earnestness with God. 218. Earth the land of the living. 114. 123.
Ejaculations not sufficient. 21. Englands mercies. 120. Esteem God aright.
147. 148. Expiatory sacrifices. 240. Extenuate not distress. 37. Extraordinary
praise. 6. Extremity of distress to be acknowledged after deliverance. 37.
Extremity none exceeds Gods ability. 77. Extremity of man Gods opportunity. 80.
F
FAith in Gods goodness an encouragement to call on him 68. Faith works
boldness of speech. 138 Faith how it makes to speak. 139 Faiths stability in
trials. 140. Faith may be with fear. 153. In Faith draw near to God. 47, 51
Faith nourished by continued evidences of Gods favor. 220. Faith justified by
works. 116. Faithfulness of God in promises. 58 Faithfulness of God ground of
faith. 59. Familiarity of Saints with God. 46. 47. Familiarity with God, how
wrought. 100. Favor of God ground of Saints rest. 92. Favor of God how
obtained. 94. Favor of God well weighed works familiarity with God. 100.
Favorites of God. 202. Favorites favors. 205. Favorites duties. 206.
Favorites death precious. 207. Favorites seek to be. 210. Fear and faith
may be together. 153. Fervent must be our love of God. 15 Fervency of prayer.
48. Fervency, a note of confidence. 49. Fervent prayer in extremity. 81.
Fortune an enemy to providence. 31
G
GIve to God man may. 245. Give to God much by Jews. 244 Give to God the
poorest may. 245. Give to God what the rich must. 246. God hears prayer. 19.
23. God forward to hear prayer. 23. God as known by name to be called upon.
45. God affords familiar access to Saints. 46. Gods attributes of goodness.
52. Gods righteousness or faithfulness 53. 58. Gods gratiousnesse. 53. 56.
Gods mercifulness. 54. 60. Gods goodness from himself. 56. God worthy of all
praise. 58. Gods faithfulness. 58. God moved with man's misery. 60 Gods
greatness. See Greatness. Gods goodness. See Goodness. God to Saints has a
particular relation. 64. God most cares for such as wholly depend on him. 73*
God able to help in all extremities. 77. God perfectly saves. 78. God only
to be trusted to. 79. God helps at a pinch. 80. Gods favor ground of Saints
rest* 92. God can deliver from death. 103. Gods power how rest on. 104. God to
be set before us. 120. God rightly to be esteemed. 149. God especially to be
praised. 160. God has favorites. 203. God receives of man. 244. Goodness of
God from himself. 56. Goodness of God agreeing with his greatness. 62.
Goodness of God mixed with greatness to be meditated on. 63. Goodness of God
especially to Saints. 67. Goodness of God an encouragement to call on him. 68.
Goodness moves God to deliver his people. 69. Gratefulness. See Praise.
Gratefulness makes inquisitive. 157. Gratefulness makes ready to do any
thing. 159. Gratefulness has especial relation to God. 160. Gratefulness is
wrought by right understanding Gods benefits. 162. Gratefulness, from one
kindness raises the mind to all. 163. Gratefulness is most stirred up by
sense of kindness to ones self. 165 Gratefulness works acknowledgment of
kindness. 166. Gratefulness manifested by gratulation. 174. Gratefulness
joined with invocation. 177. Gratefulness to God testified by duties of piety.
242. Gratiousnesse as in God. 53. 56. Gratulatory actions. 177. Gratulatory
sacrifices. 240. Greatness of God agreeing with his goodness. 62. Greatness
of God as mixed with his goodness to be meditated on. 63.
H
HAters of God. 14. Hear. See Prayer. Heart with voice in prayer. 21. House of
God, what it is. 251. House of God diversely taken. 251. Houses of God are all
places set apart for Gods worship. 259. House of God to be delighted in. 261,
266. House of God had prerogatives prefigured in the Temple. 267. Hypocrites.
121.
I
Jerusalem described. 254. Ingratitude. 174. Causes of it. 162. Ingratitude
conceales kindnesses. 167. Judge. See Censure.
K
Kindness of God seasonable. 110. Kindness of God to be observed. 131.
Kindness apprehended works a care to please. 160. Kindness applied to ones
self makes grateful. 165. Kindnesses to be acknowledged. 166. 167. Know God
by name. 46. Knowledge of Gods goodness an encouragement to call on him. 68.
Knowledge without practice vain. 116.
L
LAnd of living earth. 114. 123. Land of living how to be used. 126. Life time
to please God. 126. 128. Lifetime let slip prejudicial. ^27 Life of Saints
how many ways preserved. 208. Living many are dead. 124. Love, what it is,
when good. 9, 11. Love due to God. 13. Love must be servent. 15. Love nothing
as God. 16. Love enflamed by apprehension of kindness. 17.
M
MErcy to be sought of God. 61. Mercy how it may be found. 61 Mercy of God to
be answered with duty. 130. 131. Mercifulness as in God. 54. Misery. See
Distress. Mourning to be moderated. 107. Mustles five in man's eye. 51.
N
NAme of God. 45. Necessity of man moves God to afford an answerable remedy.
110.
O
OBlations how accepted. 245. Observation of Gods mercy to others works
acknowledgement of his mercy to us. 8^. Observe kindness to thy self. 165.
Opportunity of life. 118. Oppressors of oppressed inhumane. 88.
P
PArents to dedicate children betimes to God. 220. Parents pious an honor to
children. 222. Passion in Saint. 104. 141. Passions to be k^ept down. 142.
Passions distempered cause unadvised speech. 144. Passion judges all alike.
151. Passion settled blameworthy. 152. Persevere in good. 118. Plague how great
with us. 7. Of a Plague a wonderful decrease. 8. Please God here. 126. Power
of God how rested on. 104. Pray boldly. 138. 2^9. Prayer heard of God. 19. 23.
Prayer heard, a great kindness. 26 Duties hereon inferred. 26. Prayer heard, a
motive again to pray. 28. Prayer heard to be observed. 30. Prayer how known to
be heard. ib. Prayer in affliction. 42. Prayer to God as known. 45. Prayer
servent. 48. Prayer in danger of death. 50. Prayer and praise together. 177.
Pray after prayers heard. 179. Prayer quickened by vows of praise. 249.
Praise. See Gratefulness. Praise the best gift. 173. Praise solemn for great
deliverances. 6. Praise to God for all. 160. Praise outwardly to be manifested.
174. Praise and prayer together. 177. Praise deliverer from distress. 101.
Praise never sufficient by soul affected with Gods mercies. 233. Praises cold
not acceptable. 234. Praise must be with zeal. 235. Praise fit to be vowed.
247. Praise vowed quickneth prayer. 249. Praise to be boldly published. 263.
Rules for that end. 264. To praise God others must be provoked. 269. Practice
duty. 115. In practice persevere. 118. Practice our selves we must what we
incite others to. 273. Preservation to be prayed for. 50. Preservation which
from God, perfect. 71. 72. 78. Preservation to be ascribed. to God. 101.
Preservation out of distress binds to praise God 228. Precious how taken. 202.
Precious the death of Saints. 207. Promises to God how made. 129. Promises of
God questioned in distress. 146. Prosperity of world not to be envied. 67.
Providence empaired by fortune. 31. Provoke others to praise God. 269. Public
duties in public assemblies. 199. 256. Public assemblies have many benefits.
257. Public duties distinguished from private. 257. 258.
Q
QVestion made of Gods promises in distress. 146. Quicken themselves men may.
96. Quickened how men may be in praising God. 271.
R
RElations betwixt God and us may boldly be acknowledged. 64 217. Remedy to be
sought in misery. 40. Remedies which God, answerable to necessities. 110. Repay
how God does. 85. Repetitions why used. 212. 232. Repetitions of the same in
different phrases. 237. Rest of Saints spiritual. 89. 90. Rest of Saints in
Gods favor. 92. Rest of worldlings restless. 93. Rest not till true rest
attained. 94 Righteousness of God. 54. Righteousness of God how pleaded. 60.
S
SAcrifice what it is. 239. Sacrifice and sacrament differenced. 239.
Sacrifices, their ends 239. Sacrifices, their distinct kinds. 240 Saints
brought to deadly danger. 34. Saints must not misjudge themselves. 35. Saints
familiarity with God. 46, 47. Saints particular relation to God. 64. Duties
thereon arising. 66. Saints especially partake of Gods goodness. 67. Saints
often unsettled. 87. Saints have a rest. 89. Saints rest spiritual. 90. Saints
condition different from worldlings. 91. Saints rest on Gods favor. 92. Saints
quicken themselves. 96. Saints subject to passion. 104. 141. Saints failed by
distress. 107. Saints due respect to God in their greatest straits. 147.
Saints fit witnesses of sacred duties. 199. Saints Gods favorites. 204. Saints
favors. 205. Saints death precious. 207. Saints death seasonable. 208. Saints
need not fear death. ^09. Saints servants of God. 214. Saints may profess
interest in God. 217. Scorn of men not to be regarded. 123. Seasonable
kindness. 110. 111. Bind thy self to duty. 129. How one may counsel him
self. 97 Sense of kindness to ones self stirs up gratitude. 165. Kindness
to ones self especially to be regarded. 165. Practice thy self what thou
provokest others to. 273. Men may quicken them selves. 96. Weakness to be
suspected in our selves. 147. Servant, what it signifies. 212. Servants of God
Saints are. 214. Servants of God a dignity. 215. Servants of God, their duty.
216. Servants of God much respected by him. 227. Simple who. 71. Simple cared
for by God. 73. Simple to be pitied by men. 75. Sorrow turned into solace. 105.
Soul how delivered. 49. Speech of faith. 139. Stoics condemn^ all passion.
104. Stupid persons. 41. Straits. See Distress.
Sudden passions in Saints. 141. Sympathy. 105.
T
TAbernacle Gods house. 252. Tears effect of sorrow. 98. Temple house of God.
251. Temple typified Churches prerogatives. 267. Thanks. See Praise.
Thankfulness. See Gratefulness. Thoughts undue of God. 148. Tongue unruly.
145. Trialls establish faith. 140.
V
Ungrateful after deliverance neglect God. 162. 167. Unworthiness keeps not
from God. 57. Voice in prayer. 20. Voice and heart together. 21. Vow, what it
is. 182. 184. Vows must be absolute. 185. Vows sacred only to God. 187.
Vows may inwardly be made. 187. Vows to be made. 184. Vows made must be
paid. 190. Vows broken to be lamented. 191. Vows broken how made up. 192.
Vows, how they may be kept. 193. Vows with speed to be performed. 195.
Vows broken by delay. 196. Vows are debts. 197. Vows secret openly paid.
197. Vows, which are best. 197. Vows to be paid before Saints. 199. Vows to
praise God. 247. Vows evidence of respect to God. 248. Vows to testify
gratitude. 243. Vows to bind to duty. 249. Vows of praise quicken prayer. 249.
W
WAit to the uttermost. 81. Walk, what it imports. 112. Walk continually.
119. Walk before God. 120. Weak established by God. 108. Weakness to be
suspected in our selves. 147. Works to be done. 116. Worldlings condition
different from Saints. 91. Worldlings rest restless. 93. Words o^^ of passion
violent. 144. Worship of God a testimony of gratitude. 242. Worship of God,
wherein it consists. 243.
Z
Zeal in praising God. 235. Directions thereto. 235.
FINIS.

