A Godly Book wherein is contained certain fruitful, godly, and necessary
Rules, to be exercised and put in practice by all Christ's Soldiers living
in the camp of this world. 1561

Cum priuilegio ad Imprimendum solum.

JOHN GOVVGHE PASTOR to the Paryshe of Sayncte Peter's in Cornebull of London,
to the Christian Reader.
GRace mercy and peace, from God the father, and from our lord Jesus christ
his son, be with thee good Christian reder, and with all those that love the
lord unfeignedly Amen. Calling to remembrance the saying of Jesus the Son of
Syrache in Ecclesiasticus the 20. Chapter. Wisdom that is hyd, and Treasour
that is whordyd up, what profit is in them both? Thought it no less, then
my bounden duty (after I had perused this work) to do my endeavor, that the
same might be put in printe, whereby others might be part takers with me
therein. For after I had red the same, and fyndyng therein, so heavenly
doctrine, so consonant and agreynge with gods book, and so mete for thuse of
all estates, and sorts of people (being christians) thought I should do
injury to god, and wrong to my Christen brethren, if I should any longer
deteigne the same from them. And as I know not the author thereof, no more
found I any title or name given unto the book. But for that the author took
(as it were for his theme) the beginning of the 7. Chapter of Job where he
says. The life of man is a warfare upon the earth and his days like the
days of an hired servant. Whereupon he has most lyuelye set before our
eyes, as well how we are incessantlye assauited and assailed, by the
continual flatteringe promyses of the world, the carnal allurementes and
entycementes of our domestical enemy the flesh, and craftye temptatyons, and
prouocations, of our old enemy the dyuell (with three ferce and cruel
enemies, never cease day nor night to invade us, and what they can to provoke
us, to fall from God) as also our duties both in the resistance of sin, and
of cleaving to our Capytaine, and head Christ, and also by certain rules
instructinge us, as it were with a certain armure and weapon, both how to
bear of the sodein invasions of those our enemies, and also to repulse them,
when they shall assail us.

Wherefore that the name of the book might agree with the work, I thought it
good to attribute to the same such a name, as the work desired: (that is to
say) godly and necessary rules to be exercised and put in practyse, by all
Christ's souldyers, living in the camp of this world. And in the diligent
readinge of this work, and disgestinge of the same: thou shalt well perceive
(dear reder) that the life of a very christian (of what estate or degree so
ever he be) to exceade and far pass, the counterfayte lives of cloyning
cloysterars, of mummynge monks, fond friars, or of hypochrytical heremytes,
and that we need not run to seek a strayte life among the Chart^rhouse
monks, for the parfection of a christian life, but as ye same is most perfitly
set forth in God his book (I mean the sacred Scriptures) so it is to be
followed of al Christians (if we will be christians in deed) for it is not the
name of a Chrystyan, that makes us Christians before God, unless we have also
the deeds of Christyans, as Christ says in Mathewe the 7. Not whosoever
sayethe unto me Lord Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he
that does the will of my father. And in the 6. of Luke he says. Why call ye
me, master and Lord, and do not that I bid ye. And Saint John says in his
first Epistle and 2. Chapyter. He that says I know him, and kepethe not his
commandments is a liar, and the truth is not in him. So that as the name of
a Jew makes not a Jew. Romans 2. No More does the name of a Christian make a
christian except we also show forth ye works of a christian. That our
christian lives might shine in puryty, in clennes, in sobryet^, in pacyence, in
charity, in long sufferyng, that the enemies of the ghospel, saying our
godly conversation, might be won by the same to the gospel. As Christ
says in Matthew the 5. Let your light so shine before men, that they seeing
your good works may glorify your father which is in heaven. And that they have
no cause iustlye to report evil of us, following the counsel of Seneca in his
book de mor^bus, where he has this pithy saying. Have peace with all men,
but be at defyaunce with syn, (God grant that this Heathen philosopher rise
not at the Judgment, to condemn a number of us Christians for our
negligence.) So that now I hope) it is apparent to all eyes that will not
wilfully be blind: that it is the duty of al christians to live so straightlye
in this world, and so earnestlye to wrestle against vice, and sin, as the
weakness of our flesh shall or can bear in our minds detestynge and
abhorrynge sin, and from the bottom of our hearts to wyshe that we could
not sin. For it is our parts to wrestle against the same, and therein has
the holy ghost by his elect vessel Saynct Paul comforted us saying in the 1.
Epistle to the Corinth. 10. God is faithful which shall not suffer you to be
tempted above your strength, but shall in the myddest of temptacion, make a way
that ye may be able to bear it. And what we are not able to do, by reason of
our weakness, that has christ fulfilled for us, as ye same apostle says also
to the Romans the. 8. For what the law could not do in as much as it was
weak, because of the flesh, that performed God, and sent his son in the
similytude of sinful flesh. etc. And in the beginning of the same Chapter he
says. There is then now no dampnacion to them that are graffed in Christ
Jesus. What? to do what they list? and to run carelessly hedlonge into sin?
Nay he adds: Which walk not after the flesh but after the sprite. As God
himself says in lenit. 15. Be ye holy for I am holy. So that the life of
every true Christian, ought to be such as no man worthily can rebuke: which
thing is most pientifully, and at the full, set forth in this godly work.
And this I write, only to stop the mouths of such, as slanderously
report and say that these new preachers (for so it pleases them to term,
such as most syncerlye preach Gods truth) would have no good works, but
preach lyberty, liberty. Who (in deed) mean nothing less: but because they
seek to pluck the^ from their fond trust in their vayn meritor^us works,
taught them by the papists (thereby making Christ but half a Savior) and
set forth the perfection of a true faith which is most plainly taught
us, in the. 17. of Luke by Christ himself, by the parable of the servant
coming from the ploughe, which parable he concludes with this saying. So
ye also when ye have done all that are commanded you, say we are unprofitable
servants, we have done y^ which was our duty to do. And therefore says S.
Paul in the 2. to the Ephesians. For by grace are ye saved, through faith,
and that not of your selves. For it is the guyfte of God, and not of works,
least any man should boaste. And because, that we should not mystake S. Paul,
and think that the opinyon of faith were enough and therefore we might be idle,
and live careleslye, without desire or regard of virtue, he immediatlye adds
saying. For we are his workma^ship (says he) created in christ Jesus unto
good works, which God has prepared, that we should walk in them. So that
it is most manifest, what impudent and unshamefast liars and slaunderers, the
papists and their ad herentes are upon god his preachers and his mynysters,
for neither they, nor none other at any time, hard any other doctrine out of
any of those preachers mouths (whom it has pleased them to call new
preachers) but they and their doctrine (I mean the papists) may be called
this days bakinge in comparyson of the auncienty of y^ doctrine which is
taught by those new fellows, then this that I have above written. Which in
deed most abundantly, and plentifully is setts forth in this little book:
both godlyly, and learnedly. Where by it may well be perceived, that though
the time of darkness has been much in the world, by reason the same has been
so obfuscated and over whe^ed with the dyrtye tradicions of wicked men, that
the light, and puryty of god his ghospel could not shine: yet was it not hid
from all men but at al times, and in all ages, there ever have been some, that
saw and knew the truth, and left the same in writing to their posterity, as
appears by this little work, which came to my hands written, and when I
had red the same, considering the antiquytye thereof, I remembered the answer
of God made to Elyas the Prophet 3. Reg. 19. I have left me (says God)
7000. men in Israel whose knees, never vowed before Baall nor kyssed him with
his mouth. So that god always as appears (though they be not taken of the
worldlynges) has his church and people in the world, though (in deed they
be very few, and so have always been (in respect of the contrary part) and
oftentimes exercised under the Cross, and afflyeted by the world. For if we
should consider the estate and condition of gods church from the beginning of
the world, eue^ until our time, we shall perceive ye same, always to be very
few in comparison of the residue of the world and that for the most part
afflyeted) for anon after that Adam and Eve were cast out of paradise, Genes.
3. Did not wicked Caine kill just Abel, Genes. 4. And after as the world
increased, so did wickedness habounde and sin wared rife, and God so put in
oblyuion that. 1556. years after the creatyon of the world (in the which the
deluge or universal floode came whereby all the world was drowned) there was
no more found God his people, and God his church, in all the world, but eight
persons that is to say Noy, his wife, his 3. sons, and their wives which
were saved and skaped the floode. As appears in Genes. the 7. And after the
floode was passed and Noy and his household come out of the arc, the world
being divided among his three sons, Sem, Cham, and Iaphethe, and that the
people began eftsoon to multiplye and increase, the world was so forgrowe^ in
wickedness, that there was none found, that truly worshipped god, but Phare
Abraham's father, and his household, as may appear to the diligent reader from
the. 9. to the. 12. of Genes. and after the death of Phare, god called Abraham
from among the chaldeis least he should have him plucked from the true
worshipping of god to idolatry which then was ryfe, among the Chaldeyans, and
flowed also over all the world. Abraham obeyed god his calling took with him
his wife Sara, and al his household and Lot his brothers son, and so departed
from Haram where Abraham's father dyed, into the land of Canaan, which
afterward his posterity enjoyed (after much tribulacion) as from the 12. of
Genes. and so the 5. books of Moses and Iosue, is plainlye set forth, and at
large dyscribed. And so to see the whole course of the bible, from Abraham's
coming from among the Chaldeys, unto Moses departure ^ute of Egypt, with the
people of Israel, his rule of them in the wilderness, what travail and
rebellyon he had among them, and so to Joshua who was there guide to the
promised land (in whose time the true and pure religion of god flourished
emo^gst them) and from Iosues time the manner of the governance of their commonwealth under Judges, and from Judges unto kings, and from kings unto priests,
after the captiuytye of Babylon, even until Christ's time. And it shall be
well perceived that even among the Jews being gods peculyar people (all the
world besides, being altogether given to ydolatry, and knowing not god) that
God his people were always the least in number, and the true worshippinge of
God was in very few. And that always the greater sort, and more in number
were such, as following their own dreams and inuencyons, forsook the true
worshippinge of God, and with most cruelty put to death the professors thereof,
and slew the prophets, which told them Gods will, and rebuked their sins
and ydolatry as in the sacred Scriptures is most plentifully described. As for
ensample. Of syx hundredth thousand which came out of Egipte under Moses,
there entered but two, namely Iosue and Caleb, into the land of promis. And when
that Moses (by the commandment of god, sent forth 12. of ye people of Israel
(out of each tribe one) to view the promised land. After they had been out
40. days and returned: of the 12. which were sent two parsons only (that is
to say Iosue and caleb) told the truth and ten of the twelve were liars,
and persuaded the people, from going into the land, which god had promised.
Ye and such hurly burly was amongste them, that not only Moses and Aaron, but
also Iosue and Caleb, the true messengers were like to be stoned, and would
have made themselves capitaines, and so have returned back into Egypt. What
plague followed them? read the place, Nume. 13. Not one of them entered the
land (no more any rebellours against God his truth and his true preachers
which are signified by Iosue and caleb shall enter into our promised land, which
is the king dom of heaven, purchased by y^ precious death and bloudshedding, of
y^ immaculate lamb Jesus christ our only savior and advocate) again was not
Micke as ye prophet of god against 400. false prophets of Baall which promised
Achab victory i his affairs: but Micheas told him of his destruction. Was not
here 400. against one? read the place. 3. book of kings. 22. and you shall see
manyfestlye, the bragginge lies of the false prophets, against the simple true
tale of Mycheas the prophere of God: and not only thus in the old testamente,
but also Christ himself witnesses the same in the new testament, saying in
Matthew the. 7. Strayte is the gate and narow is the way which leads unto
life, and few there be that find it. And in the. 20. Many are called, but
few are chosen. And christ calls them his little flock, saying in the. 12.
of Luke. Fear not little flock, for it is your fathers pleasure to give you a
kingdom. And saint Paul in the 10. to the Romans he says. But all have
not obeyed the gospel. And in the second Epistle to the thessolonians and
(...), chapter ^e says. For all men have not faith. And therefore when Esdras
asked the Angel, whether many or few should be saved he made him this
answer. The most highest has made this world for many, and the world to
come for few. 4. book of Esdras. 8. Thus much have I written to answer such
as have this reason in their mouths, will god suffer so many to perish? and to
be led blind so many hundred years. What shall I speak of hundrethes of
years? Was not the world from the beginning thereof until after christ's
ascencion (setting the Jews aparte, which were but a handful in comparison of
the whole world besides) altogether, not only without the knowledge of god,
but also worshipped dyuels and creatures, every manne after his own fantesy,
some the Sun, some the moon, some the stars, some the fire, and some the
similitude of beasts, and some of men, and as they received benefytes of men,
so after their deaths, they worshipped them for gods, as because Bacchus
first found emongst them the mean to make wine: therefore after his death they
made him a god (if creatures may make gods as the pope may saints) and
called him the god of wine. Mars first found out armure and weapon, when he was
dead, they made him a God, and called him the god of war. Ceres a woman she
first found the mean, to plowe the ground and to so we corn, and so to make
bread (where before they eat accorns) and when she was dead they. y^ made her
a gods, and called her the gods of corn. And so of other, as they received
benefits by them when they lived, so gave there the names of gods unto them
after their deaths, and gave them godly honors. As Neptune was the God of y^
mariners for the Sea. Pan was y^ god of the wood, Apollo was the god of
wisdom, Juno was y^ gods for women that were with child or in travel. So
that they had for every thing a sundry god, whose images they worshipped, and
their blyndenes ran so far that they worshypped d^uylles which were in
Images and ^ake and gave them aunswers. As the Image of Apollo in the ys^e of
Delphos. Yea, they killed their own children, and offered them up to their
Images, this wickedness, and detestable ydololatrye endured I say until after
Christ's assencyon (which was the space of four thousand years or there
aboutes) until Saint Paul and other the Appostles preached the ghospel over
all the world. So that we must not take hold of our faith by continuance of
years, neither prescryptyon of time makes the thing good, if it be
contrary to Gods sacred Scryptures, have it never so fair a show. And now
ye see, how far those fond reasons of worldly wisdom, is from God, and
how quyte it is overthrown. And I pray you how far dyssented our
Christyanitie from their gentilitye? They had for every thing a sundry God, we
had for every thing a sundry Saynct, we had S. Uncomber for ill husbands. S.
Job for the pore. S. Roke for the plage. Saynct Barbara for thunder, Sayncte
Sith, for our keys, Saynct Anthony, for our pigs, Saynct Loye for our
horse, Saint Agatha for the to the ache, Saynct Leonards was good master to
thieves, our Lady for women with child, and a number of such abominable,
and stynkynge ydololatrye yea and because we would be nothing inferior unto
them, we would have for their dro^ken Bacchus, a dro^nken martin. So that we
had nothing but the names of Christians, for in our rytes and Ceremonies, we
were altogether heathenish. They had for every thing a god, we had for every
thing a patron. They worshipped images: so did we. Their images spoke: ours were
not dumb, and the craft of y^ devil often times working blasphemous miracles
by them. But now me thinks I hear some say, sir it was then a merry world and
all things were then plentye, but since this new ghospelling came up, all
things have been very dear and scarce, and we have had a very hard world,
forsothe h^rein ye are the right children of your forefathers the idololatrus
Jews, for even the same answer made they to Jeremy the prophet when he had
rebuked them for their ydololatry in the 44. chapter of his prophecy saying.
We will not hear the word, which thou have spoken unto us in the name of the
Lord, but we will do whatsoever goes out of our own mouths, that we may
sacrifice to the Queen of heaven, and bake cakes unto her as we our selves,
our forfathers, our kings and Princes have done, in the Cities of Iudae, and
in the streates of Jerusalem, and had our bellyes full of bread, and then went
it well with us and saw no misfortune. And why would they not hear the prophet
speaking un to them? It follows. But sithence we left to do sacrifice to the
queen of heaven, we have had scarsenes of all things, and are consumed with
the sword and hunger. The Gospel is not the cause of y^ wickedness y^ now
reigns in the world (far be it from every christen heart to think so
irreverently of that most precious Jewel the word of god) but our own sins
and wickedness, our exceeding pride, our bottomless covetousness, our abominable
whoredom, our terrible swearing, our wicked blasphemye, our neglectyng of god
his gospel, our despisinge of his true prophets and preachers, my pen is not
able to write and describe the exceeding wickedness, which now reigns and
flows in England (Godde for his mercy amend it, and grant us hartye
repentance for the same) for the devil now so rages, for that he sees his
kyngedome, and his eldeste son (Antechriste of Rome) like to be overthrown,
therefore I say, he now rages according to the saying of sain^t Peter in his
first Epistle. 5. For your aduersarye the dyuell walks about like a
rorynge Lion, seekynge whom he may devour. And for that he sees his dominyon
and power to be now at the point of overthrowing because the last day is at
hand after the which time he shall never more trouble Gods people, and
therefore whilst he may, he best^rreth him, and sows his wicked seed amongst
men with all his dylygence, he leaves no corner vnsoughte, no ground
untried, nor heart unproven. And therefore (I say) it is no maruayle that the
world is wicked. But as I said before, so say I again, God grant us
better hearts, and more feruente zeal both to repent our former lives
amendyng the same, and also to embrace with most willing minds his holy
gospel, and the true Preachers thereof, least that be verified upon us
which is spoken by the wisdom of God, in the first Chapter of the
Proverbs of Salamen, saying. For I have called (says the wisdom of God)
and ye refused it, I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded it, but
all my counsayles have ye despised and set my corrections at no^ghte Have not
we played even the same parts, how haboundantlye has God set forth his
truth amongste us, how freelye and sincerelye, is it contynuallye preached
amongst us? But what carnal ghospeller amendeth his life, what papyste
believes his truth, or what heretic repents his error, do not we all
(whilst every man looks on at others faults, no man amendinge his own)
continue still in our wickedness and errors. What will come of it? H^rke what
the wisdom of God says, even in the next words following. Therefore shall I
also laughe in your destruction, and mock you, when that thing that you
fear, comes upon you. When sodeyn miserye shall come upon you, and
destruction shall suddenly oppress you as a storm, when trouble and heauynes
comes upon you, then shall they call upon me, but I will not hear, they shall
seek me earlye, but they shall not find me. etc. Can we therefore saying we
thus stubbernlye resist god his truth? disobey his ghospel? repent not our
euyls? nor amend or reform our lives? look for any other at his most
righteous hand, but worthy punishmente and utter destruction? unless we
repent. I therefore (in the bowelles of our Lord Jesus christ) most earnestlye
desire all such, as love god his truth, desire the preferment of his glory,
and do long after the perfection of his most holy and sincere religion, and
the flourishing thereof, with the utter overthrow of antechrist, and all his
dirtye dregs, and sink of deuelishe dreams, and filthye ceremonies. As many
(I say) as wish the continual health, prosperitye, and long life, of our most
worthy and gracious soueraign lady queen Elizabeth (w^o^ god long preserve
amongst us) earnestly and with speed, to repent their former deeds, and
become new men, both in life, and word, that God may bless us, and increase
that his goodness toward us, which he has begone, that his enemies seeing
our just conversation, may be won unto god, and that we may be one flock, as
there is one true shepeherde, and this shall we be, if ghospellers would follow,
the good lessons they read in god his holy ghospel, and if such as do cleave
to prescryption of time, and number of people, would relynquyshe the fond
reasons of carnal wisdom, and cleave unto god his truth, wherein is
contained the wisdom of God, and in which also is largely and sufficiently
set forth, both how god would have us to honor him, and also what offends
him. Alack why should this term of forefathers, so much stycke in our
hearts, and so stubbor^ely cause us to resists the manifest truth of god his
most sacred Scryptures, and as I have somewhat said before, to stop the
mouths of such as cleaued to number of years, and multitudes of people*

So I think it good to writ somewhat also of forefathers to answer those
fond people which have these reasons in their mouths, we will do as our
forefathers have done, and what I pray you (say they) are we wyser then they,
were there not as great learned men, as wise men, as good men in times
passed, as now, and why then should we not credit them, and do as they did? I
pray you let me also ask you this questyon, if the Apostles should have
made christ that answer when he called them, if the Romans, Corinthia^s,
Thessolonians, Ephesians, galathia^s, and all the whole world besides, should
have made the apostles and gods messengers that answer (which they might more
justly have done, if either contynuance of years might have served, for they
had been nose^ed in their gentilitye, above four thousand years, or else if
worldly wise and learned heads, for they had within that space risen amongst
them, Plato, Aristotle, Seneca, and a number of other wise, witty, and learned
Philosophers) when they preached christ unto them? O Lord, when should the
apostles or we have come to the knowledge of Christ. So that now ye see how
strong a foundation you stand on, which will needs stick to forefathers, that
is so sone overthrown and blown up, even from the foundation. But because I
will not follow the steps of your forefathers (which ground themselves
altogether upon human reason, without gods word) I will also allege some
scriptures against ye. So that if ye may by any means be plucked from
antechrist (ye Pope I mean and al popishnes) I will do my best, both now and
at all times (god willing) to ye uttermost of my power, according to y^ small
talent which god has lent me, and yet herein nothing but my duty. And as S.
Paul said to the Corinthians 2. Epistle and 12. chap. I seek not yours, but
you. So (I take god to record) do I write this only because I would (what in
me lay) keep you from our enemy the devil, and to bring you to God. Well
harken what god himself says in ^euit. the. 18. Do not ye as they which were
before you, and be ye not defy^ed in them, I am the Lord your god* keep my
commandments. And in the 2. of Amos the prophet he says. Thus says the
lord, for three and four wickednesses of Judah I will not spare him: because he
has cast aside the law of the lord, and not kept his commandments, for
their idolles have disceyued them, after whom their forefathers went. And
therefore says god in Deutronomie. 12. Whatsoever that I command you, that
take heed ye do, only unto the lord, and put thou nothing thereto, nor take
ought there from, and therefore says Solomon in the. 30. of the proverbs.
The word of god is a fiery shield, unto al them that put their trust in him,
put thou nothing unto his words, least he reprove thee, and thou be found a
liar. So that now we see, that this reason of forefathers is clean
overthrown, and nothing left unto us to follow, but the sacred scriptures. If
this will not avail, nor profit such as have that fond and vain toye in
their heads, I know not what to say unto them. but I may well allege the
saying of O see the prophet against them in the 8. Though I show them my law
never so much, they acco^pte it but strange doctrine. In deed such is the
blyndnesse of the world, and of man's nature that they can not see the verity
without the special gift of god, which is bound neither to Doctors hoode, nor
yet to busshops myter, for the holy ghost sayethe in the first chapter of the
book of wisdom. Wisdom shall not e^ter into a froward soul, nor dwell in the
body that is subdued unto sin, and therefore he says a little before in the
same chapter. For he will be found of them that tempt him not, and appear to
the^ that put their trust in him, and therefore says god by y^ prophet I say
in the. 66. chapter. Upon whom shall my spirit rest? but upon the humble and
contrite spirit, and such a one as stands in awe of my words. With whom
agrees S. Peter in the 2. Epistle 1. saying. And hereunto give all diligence,
in your faith, minister virtue, in virtue, knowledge etc. And then he
concludes, saying: If these things be with you, and be plenteous, they will
make you that ye neither shall be idle nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our
lord Jesus christ, but he y^ has not these things, he is blind, groping the
way with his hand, has forgotten himself, to have been pourged from his old
sins. And hereunto agrees S. Paul in the 1. chapter and 1. Epistle to the
Corynthians, read the place. So that where those virtues be, there does god in
deed open his secre tes by his holy sprite. I write not this that I mean
thereby to dyscourage any from learning, but rather I exhort all men to set
their children thereunto, and specially to the universities, whereby good
litterature may be maynteyned in the youth, which are the sede of the common
wealth of this realm, and god his truth syncerly preached. But I only
inuaye against those papists, which say that such learned men, as maintain
their errors, are learned, they are Bushoppes: they have studied the
scriptures, so many years and so many years, and how can it be, but that
these must needs understand the scriptures? Ye, and some say, it is not
possible for any man to understand the scryptures, unless he were a graduate
of the vnyuersytie, but whether this impossibilytye be true or no, both the
scryptures above recyted and also experyence in these our days (thanks be to
God) does prove the contrary, for that there be diverse which never came in
the universities, yea, and some such as have no more but their mothers tongue,
do understand the scryptures, and able to teach good and sound doctrine.
But how those men understand the scriptures (which brag so much of their
doctrine, and contynuance of their study) by their doctrine is apparaunte, for
seek they ought in all their preachynges and doings other then their own
praysynges, and stablishment of their own tradicions, yea, and extolling and
preferringe the same above gods commandments, as when papistrye raygned,
how little was the terrible swearinge and tearinge of god spoken against, how
was whoredom wynked at, which are utterly against gods commandementes, and
by god his law punished by death. But yet so little regarded with them, that
rather it was winked at then spoken against. If a man had sworn never so
great an oath in tearing of God, ye should have had that mark (the popes
shauelynges I mean) sit by and say never a word. But if one had sworn by
their stynking and idololatrus mass, by and by Sir John would have been
busye, for so misusing his occupacyon. Again, if one of their vowed priests
(repenting his errors and minding to live in gods laws) had chaunsed to
have married a wife (leauinge the taking of other men's wives and daughters
forsakinge their liberty. (...)) or if a man had chanced to eat a piece of
rustye bacon for lack of other meat (though perchance M. person had fed
himself and well filled his belly, with pyke, Carpe, tenche, and such small
fish, and perchance with a piece of a custarde, and tarte and such hard and
unsavory meats, upon a fridaye or upon any other their forbidden days
(...). to Timathey the 4. If this gear had come to their knowledge would they
have winked at it, or looked through the fyngers ^ro ye? As they did at
whhrdome, swearinge, and such like offenses? No I warraunt you. Marye out on
him heretic f^e upon him he is not worthy to live. To the fire with the
heretic knave. So straitlye looked they to their dirty dreams, preferring
and extollyng, the same (as much as in them lay) before gods commandments,
So preposterous was and is their Judgments. God said to Moses Erod. 3. (At
such time as he sat keeping his sheep in madian, when he saw the bushe burn,
and as he was goinge toward it) Come not hither (says he) put thy shoes
of thy fete, for the place wherein thou stand is holy ground. Hear says
god, the place is holy, put of thy sh^s. The chaly^ is holy (say they) put on
thy gloves, put of says god, put on say^ the papists, God ^ed Moises bare
fieshe, better then his lether shoes. The papystes esteemed a shepes skin, above
the flesh of man, redeemed with the death and blood of Christ, for if thy
gloves were on, the matter was well enough were the thing never so holy. But
if he happeyned to touch the same with his bare hand, Marry fie, what a sin
was it, it was marvel if his hand had not ^otted of for it. If this
judgment be not preposterous, and extollynge their own tradicions, above God
his commandments what is preposterus? What is or can be more plainelye*
against the manifest truth, yet all is done with a godly show to the eyes
of worldlynges, with golden Copes, golden crosses, silver sewsers, fra^kinsence
burning before their idolles, with many other gay goodly things, surely the
saying of christ in Matthew the^* might well be veryfied upon them, where he
says* Ye hypocrites ryghtly did Esaias prophecy of you, saying: this people
draw nigh me with their mouths, and honor me with their lyppes, but their
heart is far from me, teaching the doctrine and precepts of men.

Therefore S. Paul wills (as many as be desirous to be very christians) by
most manifest words, to eschew and fly from such doctrine as is so
infected, with superfluous ceremonies, without the word of God, saying in
the. 2. Chapter of his Epistle to the Co^oss. If ye be dead with christ from
the ordinances of the world, why as though ye lived in the world, are ye led
with tradicions? touch not, taste not, handle not, which all perish through
the very abuse, after the commandments and doctrines of men, which things
outwardly have the similitude of wisdom, by supersticion and dumblenesse of
mind. And by hurtinge of the body, and in that they do the flesh no worship
to the need thereof. Thus does S. Paul by most euyde^t words pluck hs from the
superstycyous rytes of the papystes, whose religion (in deed) is altogether in
outward show and worldly pomp. And therefore thapostle preuentinge the
question which might be asked him by some worldly wiseman, which would
say. Why Sir what manner of life would you have us to lead? after what sort
would you have us Christians to do and use? he answers even in the
beginning of the ne^t Chapyter of the same Epistle saying. If ye be then risen
again with Christ, seek those things which are above, where christ sits on
the right hand of god set your affections on heavenly things and not of
earthly things, for year dead and your life is hid with Christ in God. Thus
is it euydente, that the right life of a christian consysteth not, either in
multitude of people, prescriptio^ of time, forefathers, nor outward Ceremonies,
but only in vertuousnes of life, leauinge our own dreams and inue^cions, and
in following the sacred and holy scriptures setting the same always before
our eyes as our only lodes star to follow, and touch stone to try all
doctrine by. For whatsoever is not contained in god his book (I mean the holy
bible) no Christian is bound of necessity to do. Neither (as I said before)
need we to run in to any cloister to seek a perfect life, saying it is the
duty of all Christians (of what estate or degree soever he be) to live in the
fear of God, and in such sort, as in this godly work following is most
lively and Christenly set forth. So that in that matter I shall not need any
thing to entreat of. Thus seking to end my prologue, least I be to tedyous, I
send thee (good reader) to this book. Prayinge God of his mercy so to open
our hearts to receive his truth and follow the same in our lyuinge, that he
may (saying our repentance) pour his blessing upon us, that his true and
sincere religion, now beginnynge (as it were) to spring up (but wonderfully
hyndred in the growinge thereof, by gods enemies the papists, and carnal
ghospellers, who have the gospel in their mouths, but not in their
conuersatyons) that it may come to a perfect rypenes, that god (...) be
gloryfyed in this world by our christenly conversation. And that we (after this
transitorye life once finyshed) may contynallye praise him, in the heavenly
habytacion with his holy aungelles world without end, by the merits, death,
and passion, of the immaculate lamb, our only Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ: to whom with the father and the holy ghost be al honor praise and
glory now and evermore world with out end. Amen.

God preserve the Queen. Fare well in the Lord. I. C.

Certain wholesome, godly, and necessary Rules.
THE holy man Iobe, as apereth in the. vii. chapter of his book mouethe and
provoke every good man, dylygently to remember that the The life of man a
continual conflicte.
life of man in this world is nothing but continual battle and conflyct. And
that the most part of how the world is ^e celued and wherein.
the people are greatly dysceaued, which so busely follow the flattering
prauities and pleasures of this world, and so live in idleness, as though al
ieoperdy were passed, all things quiet and in sure and substanciall peace. It
is marvel to see how quyetly, how with out all fear, they sleep continually:
Sith man is environed on all parts with so great a multitude of ennemies, so
crafty, so subtle, and full of disceites. Behold The contynuall ennemies of
man kind.
man, on every side thou art in great ieopardie and danger of death, over thy
head, the spirits of the air Spirits of the air
with many crafty and subtle ways busely waits thye destructyon, which
diligently labor, mortal ly to wound thy soul, with flaming darts, with
deadly poison infected. On thy right hand, and the world
on thy left, before the, and also behind the, this disceyuable world subtelly
assaulteth thee, (the which as S. John says, is utterly set on myschiefe and
viciousenes, and for that hated and envied of god.) This ^ering world in his
assaults, craftily, and polytiquely uses him self. For sometime he fu
riously rages, and in open battle inuadeth man, by much and great adversity,
prouinge the strength of his soul. Sumtime by blandishinge and fair promise
he moves to yeldinge, and often times he comes secretly upon man to take him
unprovided and out of armure. Beneath the, that slipper and dysceitful serpent,
the breaker of our the serpent.
quietness, by many diverse ingins lies in wait to cause the sensual apetite
to fall to sin, which is that Eve by who^ this most false serpent first allured
man to commit deadly sin. And yet as though this The flesh a domestycal and
famili ar enemy*
were not sufficient so to be compa sed on every side with deadly ennemies: Man
bears also about him a familyar and a domestical adversary, then the which
as no thing can be more adioyninge or nighe, so nothing can be more
dangerous, that is, that old and earthly flesh, by long and coutinuall
acquayntance very familyare: but by mischeuous intent an utter ennemy, of whom
man can by no means be in sufficient suertie ne avoid the same. Then sith
The great occasions man has to watch and pra^e, and yet behold our (...)
man is thus wrapped in so fearful and perilous battle and has to meddle
with so many enemies, so ready, so sworn in his destruction, so armed, so
watching, so false and accustomed in battle: is not he very folishe which
armeth not him self against the assaults, keeps not sure and good watch, has
not al things suspected, but so lives as if al things were in quiet, and in
good tranquylitie, nothing regardinge, but the belly and the skin, much
like as if this life were a feast or a banquetinge. Suerly who so has peace He
that so at peace with sin so the enne (...) of god
with vice, has broken the truice which he took with god at his baptism.
And yet thou mad christian man think all things in quiet, and criest peace,
peace, when thou have god which is only peace and the author of peace, thy
extreme ennemie. And when he by the mouth of his prophet says, there is no
peace among these vicious people. Truly there is no when we (...) at peace
with god,
other condition of peace with god but when man deadly hates vice and strongly
(by the help of god) fyghteth against it. For in case there be amity and
frendshyp between man and vice, then is god principal enemy to man, both for
that he adioyneth him self to vice, which in no wise may agree with god (for
how may light and darkness agree) and for that also he performs not his promise
made to god, but falsely breaks his fidelity, so faithefully promised.
Remember o christian man what time Our profes sion at bap tisme.
thou were baptized, thou promised to be the true and unfeigned ser uaunte of
Ihesus Christ, in whose quarrel thou art twyse bound to we are dou ble bound
to spend our lines in chri stes quarrel
spend thy life. First for that he gave the thy life. Second, that where
thou were bond and dead in sin he of his goodness restored the life.
remembrest thou not, what time thou first professed thy self to his religion,
what vengeance, what maledictions thou desired to fall upon the, and that by
express words with good delive ration, and aduisement conceived. In case thou
fulfilled not thy promise with him, did not thou there promise to fight
under his baner, and to have perpetual enemitye with sin. Consider what
shame and rebuke commonly suffer they The shame of cowar* dise.
in the world which trayterousely forsake their natural lord, and captain.
And yet thou christian man, fear not to dysceaue thye We music* fear (...)
fo sake Christ
captain Christ, neither retained with him for fear, seeing he is God, ne yet
for love, when he for thy cause descended from heaven, and became man, whose
name also thou bear. And that should ad monishe the of thy promise made to
him, and being false of thy promise, folowest thine ennemie, from whose
captyuitye this loving Christ once redeemed the with the ransom of his
precious bludde. O double traytoure, why doeste Forsakers of Christ double
(...) tours.
thou fight under the standerde of thy adversary, how dare thou for shame keep
battle so unkindly against thy natural captain and loving master Christ,
which spared not to spend his life for thy re demption. For as he says in the
gospel of Luke, who fights not on his part is against him, and he that
gathers not with him, disparkeleth. Alas christian man that thus fightest
against Christ, the title of thy battle is not only naught, but thy title also
most un graciouse. Will thou know what Their reward that forsake Christ*
reward they shall have that thus forsake Christ and follow the world? Behold
S. Paul declares say inge, the final reward of sin is death. What
creature living is half so mad to enter into battle be it never so
beutifull and honorable in kind, perfectly suer that he should not escape,
but be slain in the field: and yet thou christian soldier regardest nothing
to disseuer thy self from Christ, and cleue to thy enemies, surely know inge
that thou shalt have none other reward but only death, and that of thy soul.
Consider how If vain re wards make car-
in this world, battles (which men keep against men) the soldyoures nal
soldyours fight well, how much more ought we to fight. etc.
valiantly, and freshly defend their capytaine and fight in his quarrel. How
little they regard the loss of their goods and lives, some for hope of lucre,
and temporal reward, some for fear they fall not in danger and the hands of
their enemies, some because they would not be counted cowards and faint hearted
or dastardes, some to have name and co^mendatio^ of the world, and yet what
reward have these miserable people, for their so great labors, peynes, and
misery.

Shuerly nothing but vain laud of their capytayne, increase of pos sessions
and worldly richesse. And (...) unto ward* nesto good.
we contrary, another for shame, ne for reward can be moved half so valiauntly
to fight in the quarrel of Christ, which not only beholds us in what manner
we fight: but also will plentifully reward us, above our deseruynge. And The
reward of Christ's true soldyours.
what reward has he provided for them that manfully fight on his part, not
vain ne transytory but such as neither the eye can se, ear perceive, ne the
capacity of man comprehend, and after this life joy without end. And truly
as he has promised and prouidid great and glorious reward for the^ that
stoutly stand on his side: So to such as forsake him he has also provided
like pain and punishment. Heaven is promised to them that fight in Christ's qua
our (...) is great
rell, and yet (marvel it is to see) how our courages be abated and nothing
quickened with so high promyses, specially when we be sure that he that
promised us the reward can not disceyue, no more then he can not be. All
things be done in the sight of him, which also sees the inwardes of our
stomakes and hearts, and yet can no shame provoke us to forsake our enemies.
If we boldly withstand The highest felycty is to be co^mendyd of Christ.
our ennemies, he shall com mend our virtue and constancye, of whom it is the
highest felicitye to be commended: Why do we not then ieoperde our lives to
obteiue this honor? He is very slouthful which can be provoked by no
rewards, when fear and peril oftentimes causes cowardes and dastards to be
bold. Furthermore The difference of the force of the worldli and spirytuall
battles.
in this world, battle is the most cruel ennemie, and he that most intends
mischief, can do no farther displeasure then take away the riches, and
destroy the bodies of them which he over comes. But in this spirytuall
battle the soul is utterly destroyed and cast down to hell. The body is
naturally how much we fear more the death of the body then of the soul
ordained to die, and yet how diligent we are to avoid the wou^des of our body,
how busely seek we help for the^, and yet nothing regardinge the wounds of
the soul. Blessed god how greatly fear we the death of the body, for that
we perceive it with our bodily eyes, but for that we perceive not the death of
our sowles we think plainly it can not perish and regard it nothing. And
yet the death of the soul, is much more to be lamented then the death of the
body, for the soul is more precious then the body. Will you Tokens whereby ^o
know wh^ there the soul ve (...) dead or (...).
that I declare you certain coniec tures whereby you may perceive the sickness
and death of the soul, when the stomach can not well dis gest ne contain the
meat, then you well perceue the body is sick. As the material bread is food of
the body, so is the word of god, food of the soul, which when it waxes
bitter and unsavory to the soul, then stedfastlye believe the soul is
infected, and if the soul contein not, ne perfectly disgeste the word of god,
then is it a plain and evident argument that the soul is syck. When the knees
waxes weak and the other memberes painful and unquiet then you know well the
body is diseased: and do you not perceive the sycknes of the soul when yt is
slothful and disdainyng toward the works of mercy and can not bear a little
infamy or rebuke of the world, and is sore vexed with the loss of vain
substance of temperal riches, when the eyes leseth their sight the ears be
destitute of their hearing, the other senses lackinge their due operation, no
man douteth but that the soul is departed from the body. And yet when the
eyes of the soul be so ob scured with darkness, that they can not perceive
the perfyt light which is verity (the ears so stop ped by sensualytie) that
they give none aduertence to the voice of almighty god, the other parts
destitute of their godly felinge, beleuest thou then that thy soul is alive?
Thou see thy neighbor in The soul of man is dead that has no co^ passion
on his neighbors necessytie.
great wreatchednes and myserye and have no compassion on his heuines and
trouble, so that thou be quiet and out of busynes, why do not thou perceive
and feel his vexation, truly because thy soul is dead, for that the very
life of the soul which is god is not there for if god were in the soul, there
should be charytie, for god is charity, and thou should have compassion and
pytie on thy neighbor. for if thou be a lively and quycke membre of Jesus
Christ (sithe we be all one body in him) how can it be that any part of the
body be diseased and payned, and thou not only perceive but sorrow it also.
Farther another evident and sure token to know whether thy soul be lively or
dead: Thou have desceiued and falsely begiled thy brother in god, now has thy
soul a deadly wound, and yet thou art nothing sorye for it, but reioysest at
it as though thou had won great advantage or lucre: Know for truth that in
this case thy soul is dead, the body is not alive, when it can not feel a little
pricking, and thynkest thou that thy soul is a live when it perceueth not so
great a wound. When you here a man customably blasphemig the name of god,
hautely and proudely dysdayning the deeds and behavior of other, vsinge
unclean and fylthy communication, misiudginge and hindering the name of his
brother. Know for troth that his soul is dead. The rotten and stinkyng carrion
lies buried in the bo tome of his breast, fro whense such stinkinge and
poisoned savors a rise, that they infecte and poison all the hearers. Christ
in the gospel Why the phariseis are pain^d sepulchers
calls the pharise is painted sepulcres: because they carried in their fresh
and colored bodies stynking and dead souls. The bodies wickid^s bodies
sepulchers of carions.
of good and virtuous men be the temples of the holy ghost. The bodies of
vicious people, be the sepulcres of caryons. As David witnesses in the psalm:
Their bo dies are great and open sepulcres for that they have deceived their
brethren and lied with their tounges. And surely there is nothing so dead as
is the soul when it fallith from Christ. Ne no carrion so stinking in the
noses of me^ as a dead soul is abominable in the syghte of god. Then when As
disspysynge the gospel and the true preachers thereof (...) ^nge blasphemy fyl
thy talk and such like. God is the life of the soul,
dedly words procedyth from the soul, the soul must needs be carry on and
dead. For Christ says as the heart thinks: so the mouth speaks. And
surely if the very life of the soul which is god were in the soul then should
the mouth speak godly and lively words. The disciples of Christ as it
ap^rethe in the gospel, said upon a time to him, lord thy words ben all
lively, and the words of christ were all lively because they procedid fro that
soul, from the whi che the godhed never depart^. If the body be sick it is by
physic sone restored to his old health, and often times dead bodies by the
instance and prayer of holy and virtuous men, be restoryd again to life. But
if the soul be once dead, The soul departing from the body in sin, is past
recouerye.
nothing can revive it but only the loving and merciful goodness of our
savior Jesus Christ, which helps not ne restores the soul to life, if it in
sin depart from the body. Furthermore the death of the body is shortly
fynyshed, but the death of the soul is ever lasting, and when it is in manner
more than deadde, yet in feeling of death it is immortal. Then sithe our
battle is thus dangerous, what dullness, what Idleness, what pokishenes of
mind is this, nothing to regard ne fear so many ieoperdies and fearful
perils. And though we be thus on every (...) co^ forte to enter the feld
against (...).
side with enemies grievously compassid, yet is there no cause why, that other
the greatness of peril, the multitude of enemies, their mighty and much
strength or dysceyuable doblenes, should to much impalle or abashe our courage:
for though our adversaries be very strong and myscheuous, yet is our louinge
aid and dyligent capytayne Christ more strong and mighty than they all. For as
Saint Paul says, if Christ be of our part who can prevail against us: If he
assist and help us who shall overcome us, conceive then a suere hope of
victory, and diligently remember that thine enemies has in time past bin sore
beaten, confoundyd, spoiled, and plainly overthrown of us. But by the might
of our captain christ, of whom no dought (if we be faith full) he shall be
overcome again in us: enforce and labor that thou be of the body. and in
virtue and pow By christ we may do all things
er of thy head, thou shall and may do all thigs. Thou art in thy self very
weak and feeble, but in thy head very mighty and strong, and therefore the end
of our battle is not doubtful and uncertain. For as much as the victory
depends ^he use^y of a christia an his battle depends not on tortu^.
not on fortun but is utterly in the hand and power of god, and by hi in our
power and might also. He that effectually myndethe and desires victory shall
ouercom. The gentelnes and redynes of our cartaine never fails: make not thy
self then unworthy of his goodness and favor, and thou shall overcome. He shall
fight for the and accept his liberality for thy merit, yet reason would that
thou refer the victory wholly receiuyd of him. Which first and only pure from
all sin, oppressed the tyrany of sin. But this victory can Christy^ may not
be idle,
not be obtained without thine own diligence. For he that says trust in me
I have overcome the world, will that thou be coragious and nothing slothful,
and so through his help thou shall have victory if thou fight, according as he
has given ensample. And A measure to be vsid^ in this battle.
therefore between too extreme ieoperdyes thou must observe and keep the mean
course, that thou to much trust not to the mercy of god and do nothing, ne
to sone give over, overcome with hardenes of battle.

Of the armor fyt for a christian soldier.
ANd for as much as no batel can be maynteined without conuenyent armoure, I
think it we must know our ^r and have it in a redines.
necessari that we first know what kind of armoure, is most fyt for every
christian soldier. Then our armoure known that it be always in a redines and at
hand, least our disceytful ennemie (which continually lyethe in a wait) take
us vnprouidyd, and so overcome us. In this wordely battelles men often times be
at rest and quietness, the batel not parfectly endid. But In the spiritual bat
tell is no rest, but co^ tinu^ fight as long as we be in this life.
in this spiritual battles is perpetual fight, no rest ne quietenes so long as
the soul is in the body. And therefore we must alwaie be in readenes, always
wakinge and in armoure. For our enemies never rests, but when he is most
quiet The crafty nes of our enemy the devil in his fight.
and fayneth truce, and she with as he would fly, then is he most busy to do
most mischief, therefore the chief and special care must be that the soul be
never vnarined, you see daily how deligently we arm and defend the body, what
time we have busynes or Journey to be done, that we may be more able to
withstand all such ennemies and troubles as may fortune by the way, shall
we not then much more provide that our sowles be in saftye, our enemies
always be armed and ready to destroy us, and shall we by negligence, for slothe
not be suere that we peryshe not? but as concerning the armure most nedeful
for every chrystian soldier I shall more specially speak in his peculyar and
proper place. And in the mean season, some what generally to talk of them.
there be. ii. kinds of armours or Two (...) of armoure meet for (...)
Christian.
weapons most requisite for every man that shall fight with the mischeuous
company, or army of sine, which as S. Paul says is prayer and knowledge or
lerning, with the which he advises us always with out intermyssyon to be
suerlye armed. Puer and unfeigned prayer The virtue and effect of prayer.
bryngythe and lyftethe up the inward affection to heaven, to the which our
enemies can in no wise have entrance. Knowledge the opera^ of true knowledge.
and good lerning armyth and defendyth the understanding of man with wholesome
doctrines and good opynyons and so neither prayer ne knowledge may be lacked,
the one so necessarily requires the other, and they agree so frendfully.
Faithful and unfeigned prayer, obteineth of god our peticion, knoledge and good
lerninge teaches us how and in what manner we shall pray. And what things we
shall desyer in our petycyons, which as. S. James says be only such as be
profitable and holsom for the soul, prayer is the thing more commonly to be
required which is famy liar co^municatyon with god, but knowledge and good
lerninge is no less profitable holsom or neces ry. For I cannot immagine how
We cannot walk our long and dangerous Iorneye to heaven with out our two
capitains (...) ron (...) woy ses that is prayer and knowledge.
a man intending to forsake the common course of the world, can surely and
without peril walk so long and dangerous a journey, unless he have the
company and fellowship of the two most valiant capitaynes Moses and Aaron.
Aaron for that he was the chief preeste of the temple fygurethe in scripture
prayer. Moses signyfiethe knowledge of the law. And as knowledge and lerning
without operacion little or nothing avails, so prayer without know ledge is
of small virtue and efficacy. Some men when they pray only consider how long
and prolyx want of knowledge is the occa syon that prayer is abused,
their prayer is, how many oriso^s and psalms they have said, thiking plainly
the virtue and strength of prayer only to consyste in long and much
communication, and this fault is specially among them which yet as babies
cleue in the letter and carnal ceremonies and have not the rypenes of the
spirit. But here what manner of prayer Christ in Mathewe teaches us, what manner
of prai er Christ te cheth us.
use not says he, much and tedious bablinge in your prayer, as infidels does,
which earnestly believe that by long and by much spech they shall obtain
their peticion. Covet not in this thing to be like ned to them, for your father
in hea uen knows what is necessary and behouable for you, before you make
peticion. And Paul in the xiiii. chapter to the Corinthyans the ii. Epistel.
Much more estemeth five words well understand with pure and clean mind
spoken, then ten thousand not understand, and spoken with the mouth only.
Moses in his peticion vsyd no words, and yet he It is not the noise or voice
that cawserhe god to hear us.
was heard. It is not the noise and moving of the lyppes that deferrith our
peticion and prayer to the hearing of almightye god. But only the inward and
fervent desire of the soul. Let this then be thy familiar usage and custom,
what we ought to do when we are en^d to sin.
that when thine enemies move the to vice, thou straight and immediately lift
up thy heart unto heaven with sure and faithful hope, from whence all help
cummyth, but thither also lift up thy hands. The sureste way to avoid the
danger of thy enemies, is always buselye to be occupied in

ly Manna wax not unsavory. And if you thus with pure and what infynitt
treasures shall be fo^d in the holy scriptuers by hi which com meth w^ a pure mid
clean mind with reverence and humility study the scripture, you shall
perceive your selves maruelously ravished and transformed: and shall se in them
the most pleasante deinties of your most pleasante spouse: The haboundant
richesse of the enryched Salamon, the secret treasures of everlasting wisdom.
Heaven and earth may peryshe, but the word of god is e uerlasting and shall
not peryshe. Men may lie and be deceived: but the truth which is god, neither
can lie ne be disceiued. And as for what expo syteres of the scriptu res are me
test to be red.
the expositours of the scripture, if you covet to be more lively in spirit
then ready to contention, if you intend the fatnes of the soul, rather then
the quyckenesse of the wit: labor such ancient doctors whose good and
virtuous living has been well known, whose lerninge more plentiful and full of
fruit, whose speech neither leude ne unsavory, and their exposition furthest
fro the carnal understanding and most fyt to the holy mysteries: The holy
scripture of god The ma^e^ of the (...) ^his of the holy scryptures.
has his peculyar language and proper figures, which must diligently be
known. Sometime she stutteth and as a loving mother after our infancy she
forms her speech. To littel babes and infantes in Christ she gives milk: to
them that be sick and weak suppinges and brothes. To the^ that be strong
more solyde, norishing and strong meats. Haste you to come from childhode and
sycknes we must indeuer our selves to (...) from milk to strong meats.
that you may eat strong and norishinge meats. She boweth and enclineth her
self after our humility and febelnes. But enforce you to arise and be strong
according to her sublimitye, it is very monstrous always to be chyldysshe,
and to much dastardnes always to be lowest. One verse well understand with
faithful and good intent spoken, is more sauery and noryshing then the whole
psalter not understand and idelly read. And of this I more often admonish
you for that I know this error not only among the common people, but also
among them which count them selves learned. They here not what Christ says in
the gospel of John the. x. chapter: The fleshely understanding nothing
profits: The spiritual only gives life: They regard not the saying of
Paul. The flesh destroieth: the spirit quickens. We know that the law
of God is spiritual not carnal, and to spiritual things spiritual
understanding most be had and given. In time past the pleasure of god was to
be worshipped in the mou^tain. Now he will be worshypped in truth and spirit.
If god has given how we ought to be stowe our wits.
you a pregnaunt and florishinge wit, continue not always in the barreine
letter, but have you to the high secret mysteries, and dilige^tlye call upon
god that it may please him to open you the book clasped with the. vii
claspes, of the which S. John in the apocalips mencionethe. The which book
none can open but he that declarethe the secrets of his father, which never
man knew but the son, and such as it pleased him to declare them unto. Then
if you The profit ^t comes of the knowledge of holy scri ptures.
dylygently apply the knowledge of scripture, and busily have remembrance of
the laws of Christ you shall be sufficiently armed and defendid against all
assaults and invasion of your ennemies. But he that entendeth profitablye to
use this godly armor must first cast what armo ure must be cast away if we al
have the armoure of a very Chrisan.
away the armor of proud Saul that is to sai, the affections of this world,
which be more onerous then profitable, more hinderethe then furdereth him that
shall fight with our great Golias. And after with pure and humble mind gather
out of holy scripture five sonns which I think be the five words which Paul
desires to be spoken in good understanding, and then arm thy right hand
with the slynge, for by these weapons only is our aduersarye the father of al
pride and mischefe overthrown. Whom our Capytayne Our enemy the deue^ is to be
ouerthrows and resisted by the scripture.
christ by thi^ armor vanquished and ouercam, what time the devil mouid him
first to glotony, since to avarice, third to Idolytrye: did he not with words
of the said scripture abashe his proud courage and utterly repel hi^? David
also out of the holy scripture took al his or namentes of battle, wherewith he
overcame the vncircumsised Philistyns. Thus you may see that holy scripture
ministers to every Christian soldier sufficient armature and defense to
withstand the might and subtell ingines of their ennemies. which armor as
which be the perticu lar armoures of a christian.
Esaias says is justice, equity, humilite, charity, faith, and such other. Of
the which Paul also speaks in diverse places of his Epistels. As in the first
to the Corinthyans the. x. chapyter, where he callyth this armoure not carnal
but spiritual, mighty and strong in god, to the dystructyon of our enemies,
subduing filthy and idle cogitacions, and al pride and pre sumption against the
knowledge of god. Pawle armyd with this The (...) of this armoure and comfort
to him that wears it.
armoure as it apperithe in the. x. chapter of the epistel to the Rhomains
with an high courage said, what shall divide or separate us from the love and
charytie of allmightye god. Ueration, hunger, lack of clothes, Ieoperdy,
persecution, prison, death, as who says nay. See how grievous enemies how
ferefull he utterly dispysith. And in a another place with great courage he
says, we shall ouercom and have the better through his help which has so
faithfully louid us. For I am certain and suer that neither death ne life,
angels n^ archaungels, things* present ne to com heaven ne hell ne other crea
ture may divide me from the charity of god, which is in Christ Ihesu. O how
much trust and confidence, how happy and blessed auda city ministered this
armoure of light to Paul, which called him self the abject and outcast of
this world. Such might and strength The strength holy scryptuere geuethe to
such as de light there in.
such sure hardines shall holy scriptur give you if you continually and
substancially labor them, and for your such labor and pain our capitain
christ shall transfer you like a valiant warrior into his glorious City called
Iherusalem. In the which is no mocion ne noise of battle but immortal peace
profyt and sure tranquilitye and quietness.

The hedde of all wisdom is to know your self, and of the two manner of
wisdoms heavenly and worldly, the one true and the other immagined.
PEace is that high and great The vncer tayntye of the peac of this world is
(...).
goodness whereunto the lovers and folowars of this world refer all their study
and labor, as to the most perfect suer and quiet end, but the peace of this
world is not substancial and sure, but much deceyuable. The philosophers to
much assurid of them selves, promised this peace to the foloweres of their
lerning, which they might in no wise perform, for only christ may give this
eternal peace. And to obtain this godly peace this The only way to ob tayne
the parfecte and true peace
is the only way to fight boldly with vice, and to hate your self carnally,
for between these capytall ennemies and our captain Christ is continual
enmitye and hatred. For as much as god of his nature is very virtue, and
beginner of all virtue. The very filt^ nes The (...) between true wisdom and
folishenes
gathered of all kind of v^ is of philosophers caled folishnes and in holy
scripture caled malis or frowardenes. Contrary parfyte discresion, and
sobernes, is both of philosophers and in holy scriptur called wisdom. But has
not this folish frowardnes overcome wisdom and sobernes? The capitain The
devil the Capita ine of myschefe, the fountayn of wisdom Christ.
and father of mischefe and frowardnes, is the prince of eternal darkness. And
who so folowethe him, hastethe to eternal dampnation. Contrary the beginner
and fountain of wisdom is Christ, which is the very light expelling all
darkness of worldly wisdom, the beauty of his fathers glory. The which as he
has made him self our redemption and justification, Christ our redempcio^
justification and wisdom
so as Paul witnesses he is made our very wisdom. We preach to you says
Paul, Christ which for our redemption was

fied, whom the Iues had in derisyo^ the gentiles reputed as a fool. But to us
whom of his goodness he has called to his favor. He is the very might and
power of god the eternal wisdom of god, by who^ we shall easily ouercom the
malice of our ennemies. Follow you this that wisdom we ought to fo low.
godly and eternal wisdom, and little regard the wisdom and policy of this
world. Which to folyshe earthely people so vainly and deceitfully bostethe
her self, when as Saint Pawl says there is no more folyshenes in the sight of
god, then this worldelie wisdom utterly to be forsaken of the^ which
intendith truly to be wise: and in a another place he says it is written, I
shall dystroie the wisdom of this worldly people, and reiectc the prudencie of
these carnal prudents, where shall then be these wise men, these men of aucto
ryte and busy laborers for profit of this world? has not god distroyed the
wysdom of this world and plainly declared it to be very folyshenes? I doubt not
but of these ^here Chr iste is folowede the world is strayghte way angry.
folyshe wise men and blind leders of blind men, many shall rebuke you for
that you fall from their conditions and worldly appetytes, and follow Christ.
But they that thus rebuke you, be in name only christian men, in manners and
conditions the very destroyers of Christ's religion. But take heed be not
deceived by their false glosinges, whose miserable blindness is to be wayled
rather then followed. For what extreme folishnes The folish nes of worl delye
wise dom descri bid.
or madness is this, in things very transitory and of no value to be counted
craftye and wise. And in such things wherein consysteth only our wealth and
health to be more folishe then brute beasts. Paul desire the that we may be
wise in such things as be good and profitable. And folishe in such as be
hurtful and unprofitable. Many be wise he says to do ungraciously: but they
cannot do well. And Hesiodus that pleasant poet judges al such persons very
vile and nothing profitable, which neither be wise ne will obey to such as
give them sober and wise counsel. But what shall we then say to them, which
when they be to shamefully folishe, always continuynge in myschiefe and evil,
mock and delude such as have risen from the dark blindenes, and evil
behavior of this world and amend their life. David says the skorneful parsons
shall be skorned, he that dwells in heaven shall delude them and god shall
laughe at them. It is red also in the book of sapience. The company of heaven
shall behold and despise them. And god shall mock them. It is It is
commendable to be disp^ sed of the wicked.
much commendable to be discommended of fools, and them that be malicious and
enuyous, And much horrible to be mocked of god. This beastely and deuely she
wisdom says saint James is worldly wis dome worthily ha^ of god and why.
utterly hated of god, whose end is nothing but death. For this worldly
wisdom as a handmaide follows pestilent pride and arro gancy, after arrogance
follows blindenes of reason, when reason is blindid then rules carnal
delectacion and worldely concupyscence. Then follows the company of sin and
redynes to sin. This propencenes to sin follow ethe custom in Sin, and
after comes dullness of mind in the soul. So that the soul perceives not
how great danger and peril she is in, and when the soul is thus astonished and
destitute of al godly felinge. Then suddenly preuenteth death of the body, and
consequently death of the soul: for that he dies impenite^t. Here you may
perceive and euidentely see that the mother and rote of al mis chief is wordely
and carnal wisdom. But of the wisdom of what the wisdom of Christ is and
the (...) ^e thereof.
Christ which the world reputeth as folishenes. It is red in the xi.
chapter of Esaias, where he says in the person of those to whom this godly
wisdom has hapened, all goodness has hapened to me with her, and by her
help great virtue and honesty, and I have rejoiced in all my acts. For as much
as this wisdom was ever my guide and captain, upon this wisdom waits
continually humili ty^ and sobernes. Humility makes us apt and mete vessels
to receive the spyryte of god. For upon lowly and meke parso^s his pleasure is
to rest. And after that of his infinite goodness, he has dis stylled in our
souls his. vii. special gyfts. Suddenly rootith and buddethe in us the pleasant
and ripe corn of al virtue, with their blessed and joyful fruits. Of the
which A qu^et co^^ a prin cipall fruit of (...) life.
the chief is a quiet and peacified concience with god which is called inward
joy, The secret joy, the joy unknown, but to such as has assayed and
tasted it. The joy which vanishyth not ne can be taken away, as the joy of
this world, but grows and in creasythe to eternal joy. This where god ly
wisdom (...) to be sought,
wisdom according to the aduisement of S. James, must by conti nual and
fervent prayer be desired of god, and delygentlye laborid for* in the secret
veins of holy scripture. The head and beginning of To know our selves is the
begi ninge of godly wise dome*
this wisdom is suerely and substancially to know your self. The which
proverb our ancient and forefathers has honored and taken as the voice of
god, decsendi^g from heaven, and good authors delyted so much in it that they
extemed the hole some and efficacye of wisdom to be contained in it. But the
saienges of Infedels and Pagans may be of small authority among christen men,
unless they agree with holy scripture. Here therefore what the heavenly lover
in the book of cantycles says to his spowse, threteninge and commanding her
to avoid his house onles she knew her self. O most bewtifull of all women,
go from me and walk the ways of your flesh or kynsefolke, in case you
know not your self, it is no trifle a man to know him self, I cannot well
think that any man in this world can sufficiently be assured of the
knoweledge of his body. How showld man then parfytly know the qualites and
behauiors of the soul. Saint Paul whom it pleasyd god to rauishe into the
third heaven and teach the secret misteris thereof, durst not presume to judge
him self, which he would have done no dought thereof, if he perfetlye had
known him self. If so godly and perfect a man durst not affirm, that he
parfitly knew him self, shall we carnalmen assure our selves so boldly to the
knowledge of our selves. He is thought a very unprofitable, and unwise
soldiour, which neither knows his own power and strength, ne the might and
company of his enemies. But man has not batel one ly with other men, but also
with him self. And suerelye the most danger of our battle is contained in
our selves. And oftyn times there is so small dyfference be twene our friends
and our fooes. That it is to be feared, lest we by necligence defend our foe
for our friend, and hurt our friend for our foo. Then forasmuch as this
spiritual battle is most with our selves, and the first hope of victory is
to know our selves: I shall breuely as in battle depeinte and (...) to you, an
Image of your (...) by the which you may the (...) attain the knowledge of
(...).

Of the exterior man and the interior.
MAn therefore is a certain monstrous Wanne a monstruou^ beast.
beast compact or formyd of. ii. or. iii. parts much diverse and contrary,
that is to say of the soul which is spiritual and the image of god. And of
the The body of man a brute and ^be beast.
body which is in manner a brute and domme beast: for in the bodily part we
do not excel the other kind of beasts but are in all the gifts and
conditions thereof, much inferyoure and worse then they. But by the soul and
spyrituall part we be partakers of the high godhed and diuinytie, and in that
behalf not only excel the angelical creatures, but also are adjoined and
made one with god. If the body had not been addyd The great dyffer^nce betw^
the soul and the body.
and anexyd to the soul, man had been all spiritual and godly. And if the
soul had not ben given to the body, man had been al beastely. These two natures
so contrary and disagreinge, the high workman and maker of all things joined
and knytte together, in joyful and quiet amity and concord. But the false
deceiuable and crafty serpent. utter and extreme enemy to our quietness, by
mischeuous and unhappy subtilti, set such enmity and discord betwne them that
they can not be divided or departed with out great vexation and pain, ne
continue and dwell together with out continual strife and battle. The body as
it is it self visible, whearein the body (...): (...).
deliteth in things that be visible, as it is mortal and tra^sytory and of no
goodness, so it follows vain and transitory things, as it is he ^ye and
ponderous, so it synkethe and slydyth always downewarde. Contrary the soul as
it is in The delight of the soul.
kind heavenly, so it always enforsyth upward, and contendyth always with
this earthely part, dispiseth these visible things, for that it knowith them
transitorye and of no goodness. As she is immortal, so she loves things that
be everlasting (for like has always pleasure in things that be like (onles
she be utterly drouned in the filthynes and poison of the body, and by them
grievously infec ted, do declyne from her natural gentilnes and clenes. It was
not Sin sows the discord between the soul end body.
the first state and condicyon where in man was created, that caused this
deuisyon. But that which was formid and created good and puer, was by sin
corrupted and defiled. And sin did sow this dyscorde and discentyon between
them which were in quietness and agreed as one. For before man was by sin
infected, the soul without business commaundid the body, and the body gladly
and willing obeyed the imperye and commandment of the soul. Now that this
good order and quyetenes is distroubled, it is contrary: for the carnal
affection striuethe and enfor^the to have preminence above reason. And often
reason by ^an com^arid to a factious and sedycious City, and the manner of the
government of the same
blyndenesse obeythe sensualytie, wherefore man may well be compared to a
faccious or sedicious city, which for as much as it consistethe of diverse
kinds of men, diversely mindid and disposed must needs be troublid with diverse
mo cions and sedicions, onles the hole rule and empiere be in one, and that he
be such as will nothing command, but that shall be very profitable and holsom
for the com mon wealth and safty of the same. And therefore it is very
necessary^ in every region and communialte, that they rule which be most wise
and discrete, and the other obey. The common people for the most part be of
small courage and dastardes, and therefore they may bear no rule, but must be
obedient to their rulers, and such as be nobles and ancient in years, in all
assembles and counsels must patiently be herd. But the aucto rity and power
to determine all things must remain in one which is called their king, and he
must as time requires, be admonished and advertised but not compelled* ne have
in his realm superior. For the king ought to obey none but the law, the law
presentyth the image of virtue and honesty. But if so be this order be inuerted
and ^dyt^one and disobe dience the utter ruin of any com (...)
the wild commons and troublesome dregs of the City in the commonwealth,
rebel again their ruler, and the nobles disdain the commandment of the king,
the peri lous sedicion and grudge growing, and if it be not helped by deuyne
policy, it fallethe to utter decay and ruin. Now for our purpose, Reason
(...) king (...) and who the noble^ and ancientes.
reason in man is a king and Emperor. Nobles and auncientes be certain
corporal affections or apetites, but such as be not beast ly. As in example,
natural reverence toward your parents, love and charity toward your
brethren, and benevolence toward your friends and such other, and such other
affections as must descend from the obeisance of reason. And in behavior are
beastly such Riot, envy, and such like be the (...) mo^.
be the commons and dragges of the city. As ryote envy and such other
sickness and disseases of the mind, wh^ihe as bond and vile servants, must
be kept under, that they keep dew obedience to their king, and in no wise
hurt him, and surely if the affections and apetites sensual do dew
obeisance and be orderid by reason. Then shall man at no time commit any
thing that is evil, or that after may repent him. And that knew well Plato
that divine philosopher, when he said that they which oppress and subdewe
these carnal appetites, live well and justly, and they that be overcome of them
liuethe evil and un justly. Then the only parfitte The one (...) perfect
way to felicity is first to know our selves* next to subdue our (...) ^tes,
way and pathe to felicity, is first suerely and substancially to know your
self, next to subdewe the carnal apetites and to be orderid one ly by
reason. And this reason must be vpryght, hole, wise, not infertyd. That is that
she only regard virtue and honesty. Parauenture it shall be thought very hard to
so low that I have taught. But diligently Excelent and commenda ble things
^llwayes dangerous to be prose ^d.
remember that excelente and commendable things be all way dangerous and
difficile.

There can be no more valyant act the^ to ouercom thy self ne no greater reward
than eternal beatitude and felicite. And that wytnessyth saint Iherom saying.
Nothing is more happy then a true crystian man: to whom as a reward, the
kingdom of heaven is provided and promised. If man only consider (...) of his
own pow er can not subdue his own (...) but is over come by Christ and bow.
his own power and ablitie no thing is more hard then to subdue the flesh. But
if he delygently remember that Christ is his capytayne and helper: to whom
nothing is impossible ne uneasy, it shall be very light in your concience and
mind, a purpose or intent of perfect life, and after busylye labor to bring it
to effect. the mind of man can not imagine so high and noble a matter: but by
fervent lalabour it may be brought to pass. And that thing which in the
beginning shall be thought invincible and much hard to be done, shall in
continuance be made soft, by usage easy, and by custom pleasant. The way of
virtue, says Hesi odus is in the beginning straight and dangerous, but if you
crepe to the top nothing is more suer ne in sa^ty. There is no beast so cruel
ne outrage, but by man's diligence and labor may be tamed and made meke. Shall
man think then that no means may be found to bridle the affections and
apitites sensual. What pain does man take to be delivered from sycknes and
diseases of the body. And shall he take no pain to be delyueryd from eternal
dampnation, both of body and soul? Suerly it is to be Many christians bond^
seruaun tes to sin.
lamented that many which bearith the name of Christ, like brute and dome
beasts follow in their li uing the beastly and sensual appetites, and are in
manner bound and servants to them. So little exercised in this spyrytuall
battle that they know no difference betwixt reason and sensuality. They
exsteme that only to be man which they see, perceive, and feel. And that
nothing is but such as is sensible. What so ever they mind they think it
lawful. This call they peace and safty although it is most miserable bondage.
When reason resists not the carnal mocions: But persuaded and blinded by
their intisings follows them. This is that miserable peace whi The peace
Christ ca^ to break (...) to set healthefull ^tell.
che Christ author of true and parfite peace came to dissolve and set
healtheful battle between the father and the son, the wife and the huseband.
And brefly betwixt al such things as the unsure amity of this world has
joined and knyt together. Let the authority of philosophersbe of small
estimation unless the same sentence (though in other words) be expreslye
spoken in holy scripture. That philosophers calls reason. The difference
between ^au les doctri^ and the philo sopher^.
Paul sometime the spirit, some time the inward man, sometime the law of
the mind. That they call the affections, he calls sometime the flesh,
sometime the body, sometime the exterior man and the law of the members.
Saying in one place walk after the spirit and ye shall not commit the
desires of the flesh: For the flesh desires against the spyrite, and the
spirit against the flesh. Therefore do not those things which you carnally
desire. And in an other place. If you live after the flesh ye shall die: but if
you mortify and subdue the deeds of the flesh you shall live. Suerly it is a
strange thing and a new (...) contrary to ma^s reason, gods wo^king to our
(...) i^.
alteration, that peace should be sought in battle: and battle in peace,
life in death, and death in life, liberty and fredome in servitude and
bondage: And bondage and servitude in liberty and freedom. Of bondage Paul
speaks this. I chastise my body and bring it in servitude. And of liberty
in an other place, if we follow the leading of the spirit, we are not under the
bondage and yoke of the law. And again he says. I perceive a law in my
members re^tynge the law of my mind, and about to bring me in thraldom
under the law which is in my members. It is red also of the exterior and
interior man. Plato The contra^es of plato and paul's d^ trine.
put two souls in one man: And Paul in the same manne puts two men, so
annexed and joined together, that the one can not be without the other, neither
in joy ne in pain. And again they be so disceuered and divided, that the
death to the one is life to the other. And to this also may be referred The
difference between the body and soul.
that he writes to the Corynthyans, saying. The first man was made a living
soul, the second a quickeninge or geuinge life. The spiritual part was not
first made, but the beastely: The first manne was of the earth earthely, the
second of heaven heavenly. Earthly men follow the condycions of the earthly.
And heavenly the conditions of the first heavenly. And this I speak welbelouyd,
for that neither the flesh ne the blood shall possess the kingedome of heaven,
neither things corruptible or incorruption. Here you may euydently se that
what Paul in one place called the exteriourman and the flesh which is
corruptyble: In another place he calls it the earthely Adam. And suerlye this
is the same flesh, the same body of death, where with he was troubled when he
said. O unhappy creature, who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
And of the fruits both of the spirit Of the frui tes of the spirit and the
flesh.
and of the flesh, which be much diverse, he writes saying. He that sows
in the flesh shall gather corruption of the flesh. And he that sows of
the spirit shall of the spirit gather everlasting life. O happy and fortunate
manne in whom this earthelie Adam is so mortified and subdewed that it in no
wise resysteth the spirit. But whether this perfect quietenesse and
tranquillity may fortune to any man in this world I will not affirm.
Peradventure it is not necessary to be. For Paul in this S. Paul could clear
lie be ridd of fleshly mocions
life not withstandinge his high perfection and grace, had a mocion of the
flesh to vex and dystrou ble him. And when he thryse desired god to be
delivered from the said mocion. He only had this answer. Paul my grace is
suf ficient, for virtue is made perfect by vexation. Paul was vexed by pride,
that he should not be proud. To be perfect and strong in god, he he that will be
strong in god must first be weke in the flesh.
was caused to be weak and feeble. For he carried the treasure of heavenly
revelation in a frail and bryckell vessel. that the honor and victory
should only be in the power and might of God, not in him self. This one
exaumple of Sin to be driven away by prayer*
Paul is erudition and learning to us in many things. First when we be moved
and tised to syn, that we diligently call to almighty god by prayer. Furthermore
that to Temptacion profitable to chris tians*
true christian men temptations be not only profitable, but also necessary for
the preservation of ver tue. Finally that when all the other Pride and vain
glory assaulteth the good*
motions be subdued, then the mocions of pride and vayneglorye are most to be
feared, which in the mids of virtue, priuelye awayteth us. After that man
has ^hoo shall see god and trust in him
mortifyed the flesh and subdued the concupicence of the same. The^ shall he
se god and taste god that he is sweet. God is not seen in the No^,
fierce and boisteous wind of temtacion, but after man has resisted and
valiantlye oppressyd the suggestions of his ennemies: Then follows a
delectable small blaste of ghostly comfort and consolacion. Which when you
shall perceue, then quikly awayt with your inward eyes, and you shall se god
and well know that he has made safe for you.

Of the three parts in man the spirit, the soul, and the flesh.
These might be thought more then sufficient: but that you may the more
plainly know, what man is. I shall brieflye declare unto you, what division
Oxygen makes of man. And to be The division origin makes of man by. iii.
parts. whereof the first is the flesh.
short he makes three parts in man. The body or the flesh as the lowest
part of man, in the which by the offense of the first parente Adam, the
cruel and subtle serpente the devil sowed the law of sin into the soul
of man. By the which he is prouokid to sin, overcome by the devil and bond
in sin. The spirit by the which The second part is the sprite.
man does express the very similitude of the nature of god. In the which also
the high creator and maker of al things out of the inward secrets of his
mind with his own finger, that is to say his spirit, did write the eternal
law of virtue and honesty. By this portion also Man is adjoined, and made one
with god. After these he puts the third part as a The third part is the
^le.
middle or a mean between the. ii other, which is a receiuour of the natural
meuinges or felynges.

This part as in a factious or sedicious city, is moved and intysed of both
parts, and is at liberty to whether it will incline. If it forsake the flesh
and follow the spirit, then shall it be spiritual: But if it follow the
desires and ^upidities of the flesh it shall be al so fleshely. And that meant
sayncte Paul, when he said. Know you for truth, that he that cleaves to an
harlotte is made oone body with her: and he that cleaves to god is made one
spirit with him. This harlot is the slipper and un steadfast part of man,
which is the The fesh^ an (...).
flesh. Of whom it is spoken of in the second book of Proverbs, withdraw
the from the strange woman which makes her words soft, and forsakes the
capytayne of her youth, and has forgotten the couenaunte she made with god.
Her house is al deadly, her paths brings to hell. They that follow her shall
not obtain the pathe of life. And he that forsakes her shall be saved. Then the
The diverse workinges of the sprite, the soul and the flesh.
spirit makes manne godly, the flesh makes beastely: The soul makes man
living, the spirit good and virtuous, the flesh evil and ungracious: the
soul ma keth neither good ne evil: the spirit seeks heavenly things, the
flesh sweet and pleasant. The soul necessary: the spirit lyfteth to
heaven, the flesh depresseth to hell. The soul of the spirit or flesh takes
merit or demerite, what so ever is fleshely is vicious, that which is
spiritual is parfite, that which is of the soul is mean and indifferent, will
you that I more plainly discriue to you the difference betwixt these parts.

You honor and fear your parents, you love your children what works we do
of nature.
and friends, it is not so much ver tuous to do these things as it is sin
not to do them. For why should not you being a christian man do those
things which infidels and beasts do, only by instinct of nature. That which
man does of nature is not worthy reward. But it so chauncith that other you
must not regard the reave The battle between the soul and the flesh.
rence toward your parents, neglecte and dispyse the love of your children,
or else displease god. In this case what is to be done, the soul is in dought,
the flesh mouithe in the one side, the spirit in the other. The spirit
persuades that god is better then thy father, and more to be regardid, the
flesh contrary makes suggestion. You owe your parents your natural being?
And in case you obey them not you shall be disheritid and com mo^ly called
unnatural and unkind, lose not your goods, disteyne not your name, and as for
god other he seethe not or he will not see, and at the least he will sone be
pleased. Now the soul is in doubt and standethe amasyd: if it inclyne to the
flesh and despise the spirit it is one body with it. And if it follow the
spyryte it is transmutyd in to the spirit. It is great error to An error to
esteem that on absolute virtue which proceeds of nature.
exteme that absolute virtue, which is of nature. Some of nature, are little
moved or intised to the pleasures of the body. Let them not judge the^ selves
verteous for that which is indifferent. For the laud Wherein the lawde of virtue
con sistethe.
of virtue consistith not in lacking of this pleasure: but in subduinge the
mocions thereto. Certain affections outward, and in kind good and honest, cloked
and coueryd with countenance of virtue. Disceiuith and illudyth simple and
innocente parsons. Some have pleasure in Prayer and fasti^g how to be used.
fasting, some in many prayers, and many such like. But let these be done in
simple and pure spyryte, for if they be used for name, vaynglory, or any profit
of y^ body, they smell of the flesh. Let no man for using of these mean things
think him self better then other ne condemn them that use the^ not, but
diligently in him self consider whether the usage of these things be carnal
or no. Your brother in god The carn^ using of prayer.
is in necessety and needs your help and comfort, you contineu in your
prayers and mumble your beads and mattins and will not know his necessity
and trouble. These prayers god shall despise, for how shall god give aduertence
to thy prayers, when thou being man, re gardest not the peticion of man.

Here also a another example. You ^we we ought to love our children.
love your children. This deed is of no merit. For so does vnchriste^ men also,
or else you love them for their beuty or contentacio^ of your mind: Now is your
love carnal. But if you love them for that you perceue in the^ the image of
christ, as piety, sobernes, constancy and such other virtues. Now you love
them not in them selves but in Christ, and so your love is spiritual, but of
these things I shall speak more in a another place.

Certain general rules of true christianitye.
Now for as much as I have Rules whereby we may learn earelye t^ crepe owe
from the blind errors of the world too the puer^ light of spi ritual life.
declared and opened a certain plain and gross way to virtue. I shall briefly
write you certain rules, by whose conduct you may with more ease crepe out from
the bli^d errors of this world to the pure light of the spritual life: in
manner as Dedalus did out of the dangerous laborinth, by the conducte of a
thread. And to al those that diligently Note here
use and exercise them self in this lerninge of virtue. That spyrite which
prouithe all godly purposys and intentes, shall send aid and comfort. But
such as say go from us we will not of thy lerninge. The mercy of god shall
reiecte because they reject his lerning and knowledge. These rules which I
intend to write shall be taken partly of the personages of god, the devil,
and the flesh, partelye of virtue and vice. And such things as be annexyd to
the^ partly of the matter of virtue and vice, for these shall be most necessary
against the three principal euylles, the remanent of origynall sin. For
though the virtue of baptism has washed away the The virtue of baptim.
poison and infection of sin: yet there remains a certain thing of the
old dissease, which is aptnes and readiness to sin left in us, both for the
save guard of humylitie, and more increase of virtue. These three principal
euylles be Three princi pal evils in man.
blindness, the flesh, and infyrmitie. Blyndenesse with the darcke Blindenes
the (...).
cloud of Ignorance, obscureth the judgment of reason: for that most pure
light of the visage of God, which the offense of our first father did make
much darcke, corrupt education, outrageous com pany, froward affections,
custom of sin, has so overcome with ruste and canker, that ^kante any law
of god by deuyne power gra uen in the soul of Man, does appear. Then as I
began blindness causes that in choice of things we greatly be disceiued,
following such things as be worst, instead of them that be best: less
regardyng things of great profit the^ utterly unprofitable. The flesh The
second evil the flesh.
soliciteth the affection or appetite sensual. That in case man parceiue what
thing is best, yet he shall love the contrary. Infirmitee or The third evil
is ^firmitie,
weakness causes man to leave the way of virtue, overcome other by werynesse,
or by temptacion. Blindness hurts the iugdement of reason, the flesh
corruptith the will, infirmity breaks consta^cye and steadfast intent.
Therefore the first remedy is to know difference The first remedy to know good
from evil.
betwixt good and evil, and in this blyndnesse must be taken away, that Man
stumble not in choice of things. Secondly that he distinctely knows good
from evil. And in this the flesh must be subdued, that contrary to the
judgment of Reason, he love not the pleasant things more then holsom. Third
that after he has begun a way to virtue, he shall The third remedy to
contynewe in virtue, after the same known.
continue, and in this the infirmity must be underset and vpholden, that he
forsake not the way of ver tue, with more rebuke then if he had not entryd
into it, ignorance must be helped, that man may see which way to goo: the
flesh must be mortified and tamid, that it carye not man out of the known
way. The wekenesse or infirmity of man must be coragyd and boldid, that after
man has euteryd into the strait and narrow way of virtue, he waver not, ne
fiyppe back, but ioyfullye go forward unto the time that he obtain the wager
and crown promised to them, which sredfastly continue in this iorneye, and to
these three I shall appoynte certayde rules as hereafter foloueth.

The first rule of Faith.
ANd for as much as faith Faith the one^e ga^e and e^nce to Christ.
is only gate and entrance to Christ. The first rule shall be that you always
think and judge the best both of Christ, and his holy spcripture. And that
you believe not with the The estim^ cyone we ought too have of chri ste and
the holy scriptures.
mouth only, fayntely and faynedly as many does, but with all thy heart,
suerly and steadfastly knowing, that there is no prick ne title in holy
scripture, which does not greatly parteine to your health. And be not
abashed for The more part not to be followed.
that you se the most part of men live so as though heaven and hell were
triflinges, invented and im magined only to fear or please children: but
surely persuade to your self, that god can not lie, and that all things shall
happen, as he has said. Consider how mar ue^lous things and far above the
capacity of man, the Prophets prophesied of Christ, and they be all fulfilled
and come to effect. Blessed god what madness is it to think that he which
has not deceived in these prophesies, shall deceive in other things. The ^ow
faith (...) tobe (...) ^ed.
prophets have not lied, and shall Christ the lord of al prophets lie* If
you would with these and such other cogitacions, sometime excyte and styr the
flame of Faith, and then desirouslye pray god to increase his faith, I marvel
if he can long continewe in evil. For who in this world so mischeuous and
ungracious, will not desist from vice, if he perfitely believe that by usage and
custom of sin, not only trouble and vexacion of concience: but also eternal
dampnacion is gotten. Contrary that virtuous and good men for temporal pain
and punishment, shall have in this world puer and quiet conscience and after
this life joy immortal.

The second Rule not to enter the way of salvation sloth fully or fearfully.
LEt this therefore be first and principal, that you nothing dought of the
promises of god. Next that you enter not the way of salvation slothfully or
fearefullye. But with a steadfast purpose, we must be ready both with body and
mind to lose all for the gos pell.
with all your heart, with bold and coragious mind, ready to lose both goods
and life in Christ's cause. He chat is slothefull now will and will not. They
shall not possess the kingdom of heaven, but such as valiantlye fight and
^uffer for Christ's sake, shall obtain it.

Suffer not the affection toward what impe dimentes man's nature has to
pluck him from god.
kinsefolke, hinder you in this journey. Let not the flatteringe mocions of this
world, revoke and call you back. Ne household business tarry or let you. The
chain of worldely business must be cut asonder, for it is so knottyd that it
is very hard to be undone. This confused Egipte must utterly be forsaken,
that we in no wise turn our mind and soul to the pottes of flesh which be
the carnal affections, and pleasurs. The prophet we must fly from (...) bilon.
cries fle from the mids of babylon, and that with hasty speed, onles you
will peryshe, but many slowely does fle from vices, and find many causes to
tarry, saying, that after I have performyd and endyd such and such busynes, and
wax somewhat more in age, then I shall apply to virtue and intend it busyly. O
folyshe man what if thy soul this night be taken from the? Know thou not,
that one business brengith a another, and vice growithe of vice? Follow therefore
virtue quyckly, and in convenient season. In other things take good good ad^
uysement^ ought to be taken in woildely afayres. But to (...) no de^ught to be
made
auiseme^t, but here make al speed. Count not ne ponder not in your mind,
what and how much ye have forsaken for Christ, being well assured that he
shall suffycyently satisfy and recompense for all. Be bold utterly and holy
to commit your self to christ, mystrust yourselfe, and fullye trust in him, and
he shall receive you, cast all your care and thought to god and he shall
norishe you. And then you shall say with the prophet, god has been my
guide, and I have wantyd nothing, he has set me in plentiful pasture, and has
refresshed me with the water of refectio^ and converted my soul. Divide
Against such as wol de please both god (...) the world
not your self in two parts to god and to the devil, for no man may serve.
ii. masters of so contrary ap petytes. There is none agreement between god and
Belial. God disdaineth them which halt on both legs that is, which would live
after the world, and please god also. He hates them which be neither hot ^e
cold, but fainte and mean. He is in great ielosie over our souls he will
possess all that him self, which he has redeemyd with his blood. He will
have no feloshipe with the devil, whom by his death he once ouercam. There be
only two ways. One which Then pur^ ga^ (...) gonne
by following the carnal and sensu all appetites, brings to death. The other
which by mortification of the flesh, leadith to lif. There is no third way.
Who so ever intendith he that w^ live with Christ must dye with Christ.
to inheryt life, must walk the narrow and strait way which Christ walkid, and
all that fro the beginning of the world pleasyd god. He that will live with
christ, must be crucified in this world with Christ. But many folyshely The
fond^ (...) of flesh.
flatter them selves, and fondly in so weighty a matter deceive them selves by
lewd and unwise opinyons. Some says I am no priest, I am a lay man, and a
man of the world, and therefore I must needs occupye the wordle. Other say
again, though I be a priest I am no man of religion, this ma ner of perfection
is fit for them. The religious man also has sum what to flatter him self,
saying, though I be in religion, yet I am not of so strayghte religion, as
other be. Some also say I am young, a gentylman borne, I am rich, I am a
courtier, a noble man or a prince. The sayings of the a postelles partain not
to me. O mi It is every christen ma n^ duty to know the scripturs (...) to
confess Christ.
serable creature and blind man, pertainethe it not to thee to live with
Christ? If thou be of this world, thou art not of Christ. If thou call the
world heaven and earth, the air and the sea, then every creature is of the
world. ^ow (...) lord (...) ought to be taken.


But if thou call the world ambycion, voluptuousnes, auerice, malice, pleasures
of the body. Then I say to thee, if thou be of this world, thou art no
christen man. Christ said indiffrently to al men, The cross what it is.
he that takyth not upon him his cross in this world, that is to say he that
subduethe not the flesh and follows not me, shall not enter in to heaven. If
you desire not to live we may not desire to reign with the ^ed, i^ we will take
no pains with the ^ed.
with Christ, then the mortefying of the flesh pertains not to you: To be
crucified in this world par teyneth not to you, if to live with God parteyneth
not to you. To be buried with Christ pertain not to you. If you desire not to
reign with him in his glory Christ's humility, poverty, tribulation, re
bukes, labors, words, and pas sion pertayneth not to you. If his kingdom
pertayne not to you, what fondness is this to desire re ward commonly with
other: and will take no pains ne labors with other? What blyndenesse is it,
to desire to reign and to have joy with the head, and will take no pain with
the head. Regard not my good friend what other do, we may not hang our faith on
other men.
and deceue not your self by compa rison with them, it is a hard matter and
few people knew, what it is to be dead to sin, to be dead to the carnal
appetites, to be dead to the world. And yet it is the The straight life al
Christyans are bound unto, no estate excep^ed.
thing whereunto al christian men, has professyd, and bound them selves
solempnely, at their baptism. Other we must dye with out exceptyon, or else
walk the way of virtue, whether we be of high or low degree. And though we
must endeavor our selves to follow our ^dde Christ.
all men can not attayn the perfyt imitacion of the head that is christ, yet
every man must do what he can to attayn it. He has obtained a great part of
chrystianity, which with steadfast mind purposyth to be a true and perfect
christen man.

The third Rule prouethe that the way of Christ is most profitable, besides
that it only leads to felicity.
BUt that the way of virtue Though the way to saluatyon seems sha rpe, yet
it ought not to be feared*
do not fear you, for that it semith sharp, bitter, troubelous, lackinge the
commodities of this world, and full of battle and strife with the three
principal enemies, the flesh the devil and the world, this shall be the third
rule, by the which you shall well know that the way of Christ besides that
it leads only to felicite, is of all other most commodious and profitable,
the reward not spoken of. For what kind of living after No kind of life in
this world with out troble.
this world may man chouse, in the which he shall not suffer many sharp and
bitter storms. The life of courtiers every man knoweethe The misera ble life
of courtyers
is full of wretchedness, unless he be very folish and of no experience.
Immortal god how long and miserable servitude suffer they which live in the
court, what pain and trouble have they in obtaininge their lords and Princes
favor, what business in keeping the same? They must flatter and please al the^,
which may hurt or do good. And after the appetites of their master, their
countenau^ces must be counterfeyted, injuries of their betters must not be
spoken of. Finally what kind of vices and mi sery aboundyth not in the Court.
Farthermore what pain and labor The travel some life of the marchaunte.
takes the merchant, what pain and ieoberdy suffers he both by land and
water, to aduoide poverty. In marriage how great vexacion and business. In
common offices, Trobles in marriage
what pain and pensiuenes. Whether soever you look you shall perceive a great
company of incommodites. The life of man is al Dysommodyties in this life
indifferent to good and bad
full of wretchedness, Indifferently comen, both to good and evil, and shall be
meritorious to them which walk the way of christ. They The travel some life of
th^se that follow the world.
that follow the world, first how many years labor they, and sweet they, for
transitory things, and of no value, then what doutful things have they,
furthermore how unsure end have they of their labors. The more they labor,
the more grievously are they troubled. And to conclude the end of their labor
is eternal death. Go^ now and compare this worldly The way to eternal life
compa red to the travel some life of the world^ man i^ exceeding (...)
life with the way of virtue, which after man has enteryd, wereth
delectable and pleasant, and the end of this way is eternal life. What
extreme madness is it then to desire to get by equal labor, rather
eternal death than immortal life. And in case that the way of virtue were more
laborous, then the way of the world, yet the sharpenes of the labor is
eased by the hope of the reward, and the inspiration and comfort of god is
ever ready, whi che causethe that all bitterness is turned into sweetness. In
the world, business commithe of business, Comparisones between the life of a
true christian and a worldling*
and sorrow commith of sorrow. Outward labor and vexation, inward grudge and
disquietnes of concience. And where the concience is unquiet, there lackith no
misery. The bondage and yocke of sin, is intolerable and painful in the
end. The yoke of christ is plesaunt and delectable. And therefore Christ says
in Matthew. Take upon you my yoke, and you shall find rest to your sowles.
But now shall not that lord and that ^uste cause we have to (...) ^yse the
world and to embrace Christ.
captain, with all might and diligence be forsakyn and despised, which is
not only deformid and foul, but most false and deceytfull? which desires
so unjust labors, promysith so vayn and unprofitable rewards, and yet decey
^ith for most part these miserable wretches of them? Or if he perform them, he
pull them away again at his pleasure? and so vexythe his servants with more
pain in lesyng of them, then they had in the getting. None with suer and
steadfast mind purposith to virtue, but he obtaynethe.

Farthermore when you forsake Note this for thy com forte,
the world and follow Christ, remember dylygentelie that you lose not the
commodities and plea sures of this world (if theie be plesures.) But permute
and change things of small value, for much better. What man in this world
would not gladly change a little silver for much gold, shales and husks for
precious stones. Peraduentur sum will say your riches by this means, shall be
dimynyshed, but those riches again shall increase, which neither mothes can
waste ne thieves take away. You shall cease to be in repu ^e that follows chr
iste must not look for reputacion of the world,
tacion and regard of this world, but Christ shall reward you and have you in
reputacion, you please the fewer but the better, your body waxes lean, but
the soul fat, the beuti of your skin decaieth but the bewty of your soul
increa seth. And brefely, there shall be no commodity of this world forsakin,
which shall not be recompensyd with much better. And as for such what prais
follows such as live a virtuous life.
things which can not be desired without sin, and yet possessid and had
without sin, as laud and praise of the people, favor, love, honor and
such other commonly unlooked for, happen to such as seek the kingdom of
heaven. Praise for the most part folowethe them which regards her not, and
flies from them which seeks her. Suerlye what so ever happen to what so ever
^happe ^eth to the righteouse can no^ ^e but plesa^t*
them which loves it, can not be but pleasant. To whom love is tur ned to
profyt, punishment to comfort, infamy and rebuke to glory, pain into
pleasure, bitter into sweet, evil into good.

The fowrth Rule is that in all our acts and order of our living, we prefyxe
Christ as the only marcke whereat we shote.
BUt that you may keep a more dyrecte way and suere course to the path of
eternal felici tie, the fourth rule shall be that in all the acts and order of
your lyuinge you prfixe Christ, as the only marck and end, to the which you
may apply all your acts study labor and diligence. Inforsinge what christ is*
and faithfully believing that Christ is no idle ne vain word or voice, but
planely singnifieth, and is charity, mekenes, patience, clennesse, and all
things that he taught. The devil contrary what the deuell is*
sygnifyethe and is all, that calls and moves from Christ. He goith toward
christ that follow eth virtue. And he that seruythe sin* makith him self
bond to the devil. Let the inward affection The eye, that is the intent*
which is called the eye or intent be clean, and all the bodi which is the
work, shall be clean and bewtiful. In tend christ, and look alwai to him, as to
the only and special god. what we ought to love and what to ^b horre


So that you love nothing, desire nothing but for virtues sake. Ab horre
nothing, fle nothing, but on ly syn, and for sin. Thus doing what so ever
you do, whether you sleep, wake, eat, drink, pray, or labor shall be
profitable to you and turn you to merit and reward. what so ever is with out
Christ* is sin*
But if your affection be dark, un pure, unclean, and other way inteding then
to Christ, what so ever you do shall be unprofitable and pestilent. For it is
offense to do a good thing not well. Brefely all things as they hinder or
further the journey of virtue, must be foloed and forsaken. And of such things
there is three fold order. Some be Things (...) ^at can not be ver tuouse*
so vicious, that they cannot be ver teous. As to will evil to any man, to
revenge iniurye and such other. And these be always to be despised, what
profytte or loss so ever they pretend to have, for nothing can hurt a good
man but only sin.

Some things again be so good, Things good that can not be evil
that they can in no wise be evil, as to will well to every creature, to
prefer and help your friends in all honesty, to hate vice, and to have
pleasure in virtuous communication. Some be mean and of Things of them sell
ues neither good nor evil.
the^ selfs neither good ne evil, as learning, friendship, health, bewetye,
strength, riches and such other, which as they most further our to Christ,
so be they most iourneyto be

desired and as they hinder our iorneye, so be they most to be despised.
Learning helpyth more to Learning better then richesse.
virtue then richesse, bewtye, or strength of the body: and though all
learning may be referred to Christ, yet one more nere then an other* From this
end that is christ measure the profit and disprofite To wh^ end we ought to
be learned.
of all such things as be mean, you wish and desire learning of gentls,
that by the help and con ducte thereof, you may attain the knowledge of god,
privily hid in holy scripture, and after duelye love him, and so communicate him
to other, and s^t your mind and purpose, only upon him. Spare not, love and
follow such lerning, but ^o (...) as you shall think necessary for the
contyn^unce of your good purpose. If you feel your self substantially^
strong, and hope by this lerninge to have great lucre in god, be bold then
to wade further in all such learning, and turn the riches of Egypt to the
making fresh and gaie the temple of god, that is to the de claration of holy
scripture. But if you perceive feebleness in your self, and fear you shall
have more hinderance by them then profitte, return to your first rule know
your self and mesure your self wise ly, with your own mesure. That is to say,
consider diligently your power and strength, and ieoperde not farther then you
may well sustain. it is better to have little knowleged the learning of man and
feruentelie to love, then great knoweledge and love coldelye.

Then learning among things that be mean, is of most excelen Things
indifferente must be regarded ^s they most help to ver tue. We ought to
despise al things that draw us from Christ*
cie. Next friendship of the body, strength, beauty, dignity, birthe, kindred,
riches and such other. As they most help to virtue, so they must be regarded
and followed. We may not for these mean things, leave our principal course,
which is Christ, ne to busily desire them, but be content as god will and
sends them. Fortune sends abundaunce ^ow we ought to esteem richesse.
of riches, if they hinder not your good purpose, dyspose them, and make
friends with the food of iniquity. But if you fear hind raunce of your good
purpose, by reason of this riches, despise then this hurtful lucre. And as
Crato the philosopher did. Throw this grievous burden into the sea: that is to
say, leave it to the world, rather then it should let or hinder your journey
from christ. Remember Richesse an occasion, to exercise virtue.
always that abundance of ry ^hes is a plentiful matter ministered of god to
exercise virtue, but ve ry perilous and full of ieoperdy. And therefore put no
great affiance in it. For they that exteme money and How money is made a god.
possessions of this world as a pre cious thing and of much value, setting in
it their most assurance and trust as the chief anchor and suertie of their
living, judging them blessed and happy, which have plenty and aboundau^ce
of riches, contrary miserable and unhappy when they be taken from them, be
false idolators and worship many gods. For if money can make man happy or
unhappy, thou ^ualest thy money to god, and as I have said of money, so I may
say of honor, bewty, health of the body, and such other. We must so seruently
intend How fa^ (...) ^e ought to love christ.
our only marcke Christ, that we greatly regard no such things, whether
they be given us or taken from us, for as the apostell saint Paul says, the
time in this world is but short, and therefore we must use it, as they that use
it not. I know well the people of The blindness of the world here in,
this world exteme this saying as very folishe and unreasonable, but by such
folishnes, Christ has saved such as believe in god. And that folyshnes of god
is much more wise then that wisdom which semethe more wise to men of this
world. Therefore what To what end we ought to do al th^ges.
soever you shall occupy or do prove it by this rule: you use occupacion or
handicraft and you do well, if you use it without dysseyt or subtyltie. But
whether refer you the end of your craft, to nory she your household and wyn
them to Christ? Now you do well. You A ^rew ^ast describid.
fast, suerly you do a good work in a^de: but wherefore fast you, to spare
your money, to be countyd more holy? Now your intent is naught, you eat and
drink to be strong in your body, to the intent, you may be more able to
serve god, and use a more godly work. Now you hit the prick. But if you
desire strength to preserve your body or to be more able to full fill the
pleasures of this world: Now have you fallen from that marck, which every
good christian man must have fyxed in his re membraunee. Many desyer god that
they may live long in this that we ought to de sier of god.
world, but let them rather desire of god a good and virtuous mind, and that
hatred of vice and love of virtue may dailye increase, that when so ever death
shall com, they be not unprovided, and as for time to live or dye put that to
Christ. And say with Paul, whether we live or dye, we live and dye to Christ.
O fond man which haste no devotion what they de^er which pray for long life.
of the changing of thy life, and prayest thou may not dye, what desyrest
thou of god? True lie to have leisure continually to offend god. Thou desire
riches and can not use them, doeste thou not desire thyn own dystruction?
Thou desire health, and misusest thy health, is not this devotion very
ungracious? The devotion how our^ devotion is perfect.
shall be perfyt if we desire to dye and be with Christ, and if we put our glory
and joy in sickness, loss of goods and other incommodities of this world,
glad that we may be by such vexacion and tr^uble, conformate and made like to
our head and capitain Christ.

The fyfte Rule to know perfyt and true devotion from vain and feigned.
ANd somewhat to aid and fortesye that we have said, this shall be the (...)
rule: that you exteme and think perfect and true devotion, to assend by just
labor from those things which be visible, mean, and imperfect to the
knowledge of those, which be invisible and p^rfyte. This rule is so necessary,
The neces sarynes of this rule.
that for dyspysing of it, and lack of knowledge of the same, ma ny y^ bearyth
the name of Christ, ^or perfyt d^uocion and true religion, be very
superstycyous and much differ^th not from the usage o^ the g^ntylles. Let us
therefore Two wo^ (...) on^ (...) ^he other ^ble*
immagin and co^s^ tu^ two words the o^* intellectable, the other visyble or
sensyble. The intellectab^e may be called also the angelical in the which god
is contained and his blessed saints, the vysible is the h^uenlye spyres, and
all that is contained within the^. And ^an the third world*
for our purpose let us also immagin man as a third world pertaker of both the
other worlds. Of the visible, by the body, and of the intellectual by the
soul. And for what we ought to do for that we are pilgrymes in this world*
as much as we be pilgrims in this visyble world, we may not ^esse but such
as we shall perceive by our wits or censes e^teriour, diligently refer and
apply to the intellectual world, by conueniente and mete collacion, or ^ls
to the part of man, which is like and respondent to the said world. The son
in this sensible world A co^ary sone of the soune the (...) and man*
resembles in the ang^lical world the godly mind and d^uine sprit, and in man
the soul or the spryt. The mon^ in this sen^ble world, representyth in the
angelycall the company of a^gels and holy saints, and in man the sensual
parts or the sensis. What soever this inferioure world does upon the earth,
that same does god in thy soul. When you perceue that the A godly instruct
you what we ought to think when we see the son shie.
bodily eyes be delyghted and com forted, what time the son clerly shyneth
and resplendantly shedith her beams upon the earth, think by and by what
pleasure have they in heaven, to whom the eternal son is ever shinynge, ever
rising and never goith down. What joy and felicity has that pure soul, whom
the godly light does thus illumine. And thus admonyshed by this visible
creature, pray god with Paul, that he that caused light to shine out of
darkness, so illumine your soul, that you may have the clear knowledge of god,
in the face of Ihesu Christ. If you what we lern by the darkness of the night.
think the night dark and painful, remember the sowles destytute of the
godly light, and obfuscate with darkness of vice. And if you perceive any
condition of night in your soul, pray god that the son of justice may
spring in your heart: and plainly coniec ture, that these visible things be
but shadows and slender images of things invisible. The corporal what we may
learn by beauty.
eye delyghtethe in good shape and bewtye of the body. Remember how goodly a
thing is the beutie of thy soul. Deformity is odious and displesaunte to the
eye, consider how odious is thy soul defiled with sin. And this use of all
other corporal matters. For whatsoever things may sensibly be felt in the
body may be also vnderstand^d in the soul.
the soul has a certain proper and peculier beauty and deformity by the
which it pleasythe or displeasyth god or the devil. And has also a certain
youth, age, sickness, health, death, life, pouertye, riches, pleasure, sorrow,
peace, battle, cold, heat, thyrste, drink, hunger, meat, and brefelye all
things that be perceived by the senses in the body, may well be un derstande
and immagyned, in the soul. Therefore in these things To wythdra^e our minds
from ea^y thy ges to hea uenli is the perfect life
specially consists the (...) to the spyritual and perfitelife, that we
soberly and easily wihtdrawe our minds from these frail and sensible
things, and utterly set them upon such things as be eternal, incommutable,
puer, and not deceuable. And this Socrates I fear this he athen philosopher
shall (...) ^n the judgment day (...) condemn a number of christians
(not only in language, but al so in his lyuinge a very philosopher) well
consid^d, when he said that then the soul happily depart^th from the body, if
it dewly before has remembryd death, and by dispysing of corporal things,
love of things that be spiritual, and perfyte immagynation of the same, has
acustomed in manner to be absent from the body. And suerlye this is the ver^
cross, to the which Christ callyth us when he says, he that takythe not
upon him his cross in this world and follow me, shall not enter into the
kingdom of heaven. And this is we ough^e to hau^ no pleas^e in any w^ldly
thing.
the self same death by the which sayncte Paul wills us to dye with our
captain Christ. And when he said regard not these earthlye things, ne seek
you for the^, but seek you for things that be above, and be you wise in them.
He mente only that to these corporal things, we should be in manner insensyble
and astonyed, that the less pleasure we had outwardlye in corporal and worldly
matters, the more pleasure inwardlye we should have in spiritual and heavenly
matters. And the more kno ledge we had of things which be eternal, the less
we should be mo ued with such things as be vayn and transitory. Then let this
rule we should not be in love with worldelye things,
be ever at hand that you continue not in love of things, which be but frail
and caduke, but dilligent ly ascend to the love of the^ which be eternal, and
in comparyson of themdispise these things visible. The bodily disease shall be
more ea how sickness maybe tolerable to a christian.
sye and tolerable, if you consider it is a medecin for the soul. And you
shall less regard the health of your body. If you set al your mind and
diligence in sauegarde of the soul. You abhore and dedly hate, we ought to
abhor sin as a deadly poy son.
venyme that you see, because that you know well, that it destroys the body:
much more then is that poison to be hated, which infectith the soul. Ciente is
a venom and Pleasure of this worcester lde is poison to the soul A terrible and
ferefull thunder.
poison perelous to the body: but pleasure and fond pastime is more pestilent
poison to the soul. The natural thonder, and lyghtning of the Elements,
fearithe and abashith the heart of man, but much more that terrible thonder of
the mouth of christ our savior ought to be fearyd. Go you cursed people in to
the eternal fire of hell. And such like comparisons man ought diligently to
remember in all thin ges sensyble which after the dyuersite of there kind,
diversely move the mind and heart of man. Some with hope, some with fear, some
with love, some with hatred, some with heuines, some contrari with gladness.
And this man must also observe in all his acts, and operaci ons which
consists of the intent and inward mind, as of the spirit and soul: and of
the outward doing, as of the body or flesh. So that he pryncipally regard the
mind If the intent be notpuer all othere works be ^e they ne uer so good
^uaile not*
and intencyon, for the outward act be it never so bewetyfull in sight, little
or nothing avails if the intent be not puer and clean. And that witnesses
our savior in the gospel of John, saying the flesh nothing profits, the
spirit only quicknith and edyfieth. And therefore man ought not to rejoice we
ought not to trust in a^ worl dely or sere^onie all thing.
or put his affiaunce and trust in things sensyble or cerymoniall, which
Paul callyth the flesh and out ward husk or shale, specially when perfyt
devotion and true christianity does not consyste in them* ne they be
sufficient for the salvation of man. I do not con dempne these corporal
ceremonies and outward operacyons* which be a mean and help to devotion. So
they be laufully used. But I advertise and monysh you, Cerem^es make not a true
christ tian.
that in them consistyth not the very perfection of a true chrystian man, nor
the usage of the^ makyth a man truly religious and devout. And therefore
thapostel Paul reuokyng the Colocenses from the confidens of these ceremonies
and outward acts. And prescrybing As we be risen with Christ. so let us seek
heavenly things.
unto them the true rules and precepts of the spiritual life, says. For as
much as you have risen with Christ, seek those things which be invisible and
heavenly, and desire understanding of them, not of earthly things, that is to
say visible and temporal, which aperith beutiful in man's sight. Mortefy and
subdewe the carnal we ought to mo^fy (...) in us.
and earthly affections, which be as aperyth in Paul to the Galathians,
fornicacion, uncleanness, riote, aueryce, envy, anger, grudge, debate,
contencion, division, pride, slouthe, ipocrisye, man slaughter, drunckennes,
ingurgitacion, dissimulacion, flatery, and such other. And above al things be
charitable Every chris tyan man ought to seek his brothers wealth*
one to the other. And as our sa uiour Ihesu christ was not borne for him self,
lived not to him self, dyed not for him self, but in all acts and things
applied him to our helthes and commodities. So each deligently intend and mind
the profyt of other, nothing regarding his own private profit.

The syxte Rule that we ought only to follow the doctrine of Christ, and not
to cleue to the more number.
ANd for as much as in this my hasty writing unto you one thing brings an
other to remembrance. I shall annexe the vi. Rule much agreeable with the other
above said: as much neces This neces sarye rule received of few.
sary to the health and salvation of every man, as little regarded of few,
that is, that the mind truly and dilygently desirynge to be conformate unto
Christ, disceuer it self both from the deeds and opinions of the
comminaltie, and most part of the people. And only Christ the only exam ple
of true and perfect devotion.
take and learn of Christ the very exaumple of true and perfyte devotion: For
he is only the true light and exaumple, from whom who so ever (be it never so
little) departs, he mysseth the right pathe, and erreth from the high
way. And therefore the principal The chief care of a christian to bring up his
child from the cradle in virtue.
care and chief labor of every christen man should be, diligently to take heed that the infantes and chil dren from their cradles and tender age, as well
with their nurces as their parents and masters, learn such opinious and
conditions as be mete and agreeable with the acts and precepts of Christ,
specially when those things most depely remains in remembrance, and nerest
sinketh in the stomach, which be taken and learned in youth. Suffer not good
christen men the Whatought to be kept from the ears of children*
tender ears of your infantes to be infected with folishe and fond songs of
love, which commonly be song both at home and without forth, more impure
and unclean then the heathen and vnchrysten men well can suffer and abide.

Let them not here the miserable lamentacions and bewaylynges of their
parents, for loss of gods temporal: neither the vain commendacions of
them which unlawfully increases and gathers the goods and possession of
this world. For the nature and appetite of man is very frail, prone, and
ready to vice, redelye and quickly taking occasion to cuyll. As the dry towe
quyckely takes fire if it be adjoined. The^ such common errors and fond
opinions, as commonly be used among the people, be utterly to be pulled out of
the stomach and remembrance of men. And in their The bringynge of youth up
in virtue (...) occation of the (...) in foloweeinge the same in age
places wholesome opinions and true doctrine must be ingraffed and so rooted in
the heart, that no contrary exaumple or teaching may pulle them away. And so
doing man wilfully without labor or business, shall follow virtue: and
judge them that does contrary, worthy rather to be pitied and helped, then
followed. And that The mind of socrates concern^ virtue
meant Socrates, when he said, that virtue is the parfyte and true knowledge of
things to be desired, and things to be avoided and exschu^d. And the same
Socrates disputing with Pithagoras by evident arguments proves, that true
and perfyte knowledge is of so great a power and effecacy in all kind of
virtue, that sin and Sin procedethe of the want of knowledge.
offense only proceeds of false opinions, and lack of knowledge. For both
they that loves almigh ty god, and they that loves pleasures, money and the
false disceyuable honor of this world, follow and ensue that thing which
semyth unto them pleasante good and bewtifull. But these which They that set
their minds on worldly thi^ ges be disceiued, by the want of true knowledge.
thus fondly set their mind upon pleasures, money, and honors of this world,
be deceived for lack of true knowledge, following that thing which is most
displesaunt, for that which is most pleasant, And of their won de^ful igno
rance*
reputyng and iudgyng that most profitable which is most hurtful and that to
be hinderance, wherein is most lucre and advantage, thynkyng also that thing
most lawful, which is most vile and filthy, and that thing most shameful
which is most honorable.

But he that perfytly knowith in The commodyties that follow where true knowledge
is graffed.
whose stomach and mind this per swasion is substauncially rotyd, that only
virtue is the thing most good, most plesaunt, most bewtiful, most
commendable, and most profitable. And contrary that vice only is the thing
which is most evil dysplesaunt shamful and hurtful, and judges not virtue and
vice after the common opinion of men but of their private and peculier natures,
cannot be so long as this perswasyon remaynethe in his remembrance, that he
long continewe in sin. The common hauiour and fa^ion of me^ is the worste
example and author, both of living and also of knowledge. For from the fall
of Adam The worst things please the most part of the world,
unto this time, continually those things in this world, which has been
worste has pleased the most part. Have not therefore this fantasy or
imaginacion in thy se^f. This is the common facyon and The more part and
forfathers are not to be followed in matters of religion.
manner of men, this is commonly vsid in all men, these be the stepps of mine
auncetors, this is the opinion of such a great doctor and divine, after this
manner commonly al noble men live, thus the great bishops and prelates of the
holy church does, these be not the common sort, why should not I do as they
do? Let not good christian man these great tytells and glorious names deceive
thee. I measure not at this time the commons who is a common man.
of their low estate condition or birthe, but of their mind and affection
toward god, for I call all them indifferently commons, which be drowned in
carnal affections, live after the appetites and desyers of the fleshse,
regarding and folowinge the deceiuable ima ges and shadows of things, for the
very true things. That mason greatly does misorder him self which formyth
not the stone after the rule but fashionethe the rule after the stone. How
much more then misusyth they them selves which apply not their livings and
manners after the rules and commandments of Christ, but inuert and turn the
commandments of Christ after their lyuinge and appetyte. Think not All
things (...) not good and vertuus which the great capitaines of the chur che
do.
that thing good and virtuous which the great capitaines and rulers of the
church doethe, or that the most part of men does. But exteme, that only
good and virtuous, which is agreeable to the teachinge and rules of Christ. And
have that thing greatly suspectid It is to be suspected that pleasethe the
most part The flock of christ a small company but yet blessid.
which commonly pleasith the most part. The flock or company of true
Christians is very little or small in comparison, but hap py and blessid, to whom
only the kingedom of heaven is promisyd. The wai of virtue is very straight
The way of virtue ve ry straight.
and narrow, and vsid and occupi ed of very few, and yet none can enter to
eternal life but by that way only. A prudent and wise builder, seeks not
in his building The point of a wise buylder.
example of the most vsid and com mon work, but of the best. And one expert
and crafty paynter folo weth in his paintinge, the most crafty and best
tables. Christ is Christ only our example who^ we ought to follow.
only our exaumple, in whom always of good and virtuous living does consist,
and him without excepcion man may in all his works follow. But of men
(reputed how far men are to be folowid.
virtuous and good) exaumple is to be taken, as far as their acts be
confyrmable to our headde and chife exaumple Christ. The To rewe (...) to be
lamen tld,
common sort and greatest part of them which have professed Christ and are
called christian, live so fylthely and corruptly, as towching their manners and
outward behauiours, that among the infydelles was never more corrupt and
abominable living. But of their faith I will not judge. ^ow true and
unfeigned faith is known*


Notwithstanding this is undoubted, that true and unfeigned faith is prouid, by
outward operations. Read over the old cronicles, and ancient histories of our
forefathers, and you shall find that sober discretion, honest conversation,
and good manners were never so much despised and less regarded. When was
ryotous wan tonnesse more liberally used? when were fylthy fornication, and dam
nable aduoutry either so greatly occupied, or less punisshed and in rebuke?
The great pryncis and The great abuse in courty^ge life.
rulers of the people, so ^auoure in other men their own vices and fautes,
that now a days nothing is honesty or good hauyoure, but such as commonly is
used among the courtiares, when nothing is more abominable. And that cau seth
the misbehauyour of princes and great men, of whom other men commonly take
example. If a man now should live contrary lamentable to be hard amo^^
christians.
to the common hauiour and usage of men, he should anon be deludid and
scorned, reputed as an i would otte, dotard, and ipocrite. Thus we christen have in
remembrance we are christyanes in name but we deny him in our ly uinges.
the doctrine of Christ, and so express it in our living, that nothig is now
counted among us more vile, more folishe, more shameful then to live truly
after the laws of Christ, as who says, Christ vaynely and without cause
was conuersante here in earth, orelles that true christianity is not the same
it was wont to be, or that it indifferently parteyneth not to all men. From
this fond and folyshe opynion of men, I council every good christen man, that
he utterly withdraw his mind, and that he measure all things only as they
be agreeable with Christ. Who commonly now does what is true nobylitie.
not hyghely txteeme and repute it great felicity in this world, to be borne
of noble parents and aunci ente stock, which men call nobility. Of the
which many so glory and rejoice, that in comparison of them, they think other
no men. But a good christen man shall repute that only to be highest and true
Nobylitie, to be renewed in Christ, to be graffed or planted in his body, to
be one body and spyrite with God. Let other have pleasures to be conuersaunt
in the courts and houses of great prin cys. But thou christen man chose what
a chrystiane ought to chouse.
with Dauyd to be counted an abiecte in this world, so thou be of the house of
God. Behold and see what men Christ has chosen to be his discyples, poor
men, and no men of reputacion as to this world. In Adam we were all men of
equal birth, and in Christ we be all one and equal. True Nobility is to
despise this vain Nobility, and to be the servants of God. Hear what
Christ says in the gospel of John unto the Jews, which semith gloried that
they discendyd from the stock of Abraham. You are says he the ^ull doers ar
the children of the deuel.
children of the devil, and execute and fulfill the work of your father, as
who says, look whose steps you follow, and their children you are to be
counted. Saint Paul al so in his epistle to the Romans, exteminge nobility,
after the rule of his master Christ, says. All that be circumcised be not
true Israelites, neither all those that descended of Abraham, be not the
children and sons of Abraham. It is a shameful nobililitie to be Shameful
nobility.
servant to vice, and disceuer from Christ. The highest nobility is to be
the son of God, and coheire with Christ. The common people The difference in
judgment between the world the gospel concerning true felicity.
judge and repute him very hap py, wise and fortunate, which has gathered
great richesse and posses sions: But judge thou him only blessed who has
possessid Christ, and purchased the precious jewel of pure and clean
concience, and found the high treasure of eternal wisdom, more precious then
all the riches in this world. What wordelye treasure thorns and brambles.
shall I call then richesse, jewels, and possessions, which men of this world
have so greatly in admira ^ion and honor* trewely they be as thorns and
brambles, which hinder the word of God, of his (...) and growyng in the soul
of man. And as it apereth in the gospel of Mathewe, a gr^uouse burden, with
the which men laden, can not well pass the straight way of virtue, ne enter
the low and narowe gate of the kingdom of heaven. Rejoice not therefore* in we
ought not to account our selves the better because we are rich (...) who
bau^ (...).
thy riches, ne for thy abundance, repute thy self better then other; but more
in bondage, more burdened and laden. He has plenty and abundantly enough,
which is content with a little. He is sufficiently prouidid for, to whom our
savior Ihesu Christ has promised that nothing shall lack. He can not hunger
which has pleasure who can not hunger o^ want clo thing.
in the sweet refreshing of the word of Ihesu Christ. He can not lack
clothing, whom Christ with him self clotheth. Exteme that only loss and
damage when what we ought to es teme loss and advantage.
true religion and virtue decays, and vice in the soul increases. Judge
that also only lucre and advantage when thy soul is made better by increase
of virtue. Thou canste lack nothing when thou have possession of him, in who^
all things be contained. Further more what thing is that which The blind
judgment of the worl de concerning pleasure.
these miserable blind people call pleasure, suerly extreme madness, plesaunte
venom and flatteringe mischief. The very perfyte and true pleasure is the
reioysynge and joy of a quiet and puer concience, the deintiest meats be
study and intelligence of holy scripture. The most plesaunt songs be psalm mes
of the holy ghost. The most merry company, be the feloshyppe of all saints.
The most sweet daynties is the fruition of God. he that once tast^th of chri
ste perfect ly, al world (...) things shall ^me (...).


Purge then thine eyes, thy ears thy pallet or thy tasting, and christ shall
wax plesaunt. Which when thou have perfectly tasted, al these worldely
pleasures if they were put in one, shall seem but carrion.

That thing is not utterly to be iudgid sweet and pleasant, which commonly
sauouryd in the mouth of every man. But that which sauoureth to a hole man and
a man of good judgment: if water to a man disseased with an axes did sauer all
wine, no man would judge that pleasure. Thou art deceived The troble of thy^
world more pleasant to the righteous, then pleasures of the worl de to the
worldelinge^.
if thou believe that vexacion and trouble of this world is not more pleasant
and sweet unto a good and virtuous man, than these fond pastimes, disportes and
laughinges, unto a vicious manne: unto whom also fasting and abstinence is as
much acceptable as to the other dainty disshes, and delicate bankets.
Conclude therefore, that what is true and perfect ple sure.
very true and perfect pleasure, is only to delyghte in the love of god, and
not to regard the vain pastimes, and fained pleasures of this world. And sum
what to The true difference of love and hatred* (...) how they are abu^d.
speak of Love and Hatred, how greatly does the common sort of this world
abuse these two voca bles and names* when a young man fondely disposyd,
mouethe a young woman to fleshelye lust, and uncleanness of the body, the
common sort calls it love, when there can be no greater hatred, then to
dispoyle a young woman, by gifts or fair speech of that, which is her
chief jewel and treasure, The chief ^ewels of a ^irgin.
that is to say, her virginity, sham fastnes, clennes, good mind and fame.
When the father and mother The fond love of pa^.
to much dotynge upon their children, correct not sharply their outrageous
wantonness, and abominable vices, but by their suf feraunce mainteyne and
supporte them therein. The common people extemith it high love, and often
times says. Consider how ten derlye they love their children, when they
should rather say, se how cruelly they hurt their chil dren, which while
they follow their wanton apetites, and suffer the^ unpunished, regard not
their health, ne their salvation. For what this pleasethe the deuell best.
what thing can be more pleasante unto our ghostely ennemy the devil, then that
we here freely offend unpunished, and be punished eternally in hell. The common
people The blind judgment of the worl de, concerning the pu nishement of sin
by princ^,
also callith him a gentle master and merciful prince, which will not se the
sins of his subjects, and in that g^uith them occasion to sin more
freely, because they be unpunished. But what does almightye A great sign of
gods wrath when he (...) heth no^*
god threaten by his prophet, unto such as he reputith unworthy his mercy. I
shall not visit by my correction, says almighty god, the fornicacion of your
dau ghters, ^e punysshe your daughters in law, when they do aduou try. But
unto Dauyd and other his elect and chosen children he says. I shall correct
sharply with a rod your iniquities, and with grievous beatinges punish your
offenses, and yet I will not with draw from you my mercy. Here you may see
how all things be renewed in Christ, and the manner of things changed. He
that fondly he that louethe him self hates him self,
loves him self, hates him self deadly, and he that is folishe pitiful upon
him self is most cruel to christ. To hate well, is to despise: to hurt well, is
to do good, and to destroy well, is to preserve. Then shall when we best
cherishe our selves.
you best noryshe your selves, when you most despise the appetites of the
flesh* when you most sharply correct the offense and sin of man, then
shall you be most beneficial to man. When you have by (...) ser ued by kyl*
ling of (...).
correction killed the sinner, then shall you preserve man. And when you have
dystroyed that, which man has committed, then shall you preserve that which
god created. And furthermore what does the The blind judgment of the worl de
upon the words of might (...) strength.
common error of people call pow er or might and strength of the bo die? Do they
not commonly call him a mighty man, and of great power which at his pleasure
may hurt when he will. And yet truly A dangerous might too have power to hurt*
this is a very odious and dangerous might, to have power to hurt, or to can
or may hurt, whi che is common unto them with adders and scorpions, and other
venomous and hurtful beasts.

And with the devil also, whose nature and property is only to do hurt and
dyspleasure. Only god ^od only is trewely mighty.
is trewly and verily to be counted mighty and of great power, whi che neither
can hurt if he would, ne would if he might, whose na ture is only to do
good. But this worldly mighty man, commonly The hurt one man ca^ do to a
another is but finale, and turnethe to good of (...) that is hurt and hurt of
the hurter,
called a man of great power, how can he hurt man, and after what manner? he
may violently take from man his money or possessions, beat or wound his body,
take away his corporal life. If he do this to a good and virtuous man he does
him a good turn, in the stead of an evil, and if he do it to a vicious and
evil disposed man, yet at the least he has ministered unto him an occasion of
good, that is to be pacient, and has only hurted him self, for no man can
have hurt but of him self. And he that intends in any wise to hurt a
another, he that intends to ^urt a another first hurts (...) self.
can not but grievously first hurt him self. As shall be declared more openly by
example, you intend to rob and dispoyle me of my money, now have you
offended charity, and indamaged your soul, you can not beat or wound mye
body, except you first wound your soul: ^e take from me the life of my
body except you kylle and destroy your soul. The common The blind judgment
of the worl de in the very cora giousenes which ought to be in man,
people calls him a valiant courageous, and a strong manne, which is so
cruel, fierce, and yet so very impotent of mind, that he can nothing suffer,
but for every light trifell and displeasure is fumous, angry, geuinge check
for check, and displeasure for displeasure, and contrary him that patiently
sufferith injury and dyspleasure, and holdith his peace, when he is rebukyd,
they call childishe, dastard and of no courage. And yet nothing can be more
different and diverse from true strength and high courage of the mind, then
for a light word or displeasure to be disquyeted, furyous and angrye, and not
to have power patiently to suffer the folyshe lightness of other, and to think
him self no man except he be reuengyd, and for one shrewde turn do two or
three. But how much more coragious The true force and strength what it is,
and strong is he to be coun ted, which does not only pacient ly suffer
i^uries and displeasurs, but also does good against evil. I call him not
strong, ne of audacitie, which fiers^y inuadyth his enemy, valiantly
assauteth or sca lyth the walls of his enemies, and dispising his life,
puts him self to all perils: which thing is common to all quarellers
and sedicious parsons. But he that can manfully withstand the beastely
appetytes, and subdewe his ir^ful mind, desiring weal to him which would him
hurt, and do them good, which are his enemies, praying for the^ which speak
him evil. Him repute I very strong, and of high courage. Let us discuss also
what thing this world callith joy, honor, and worship, ignomy and shame.
Thou art com what is trewlie to be comme^did.
mendyd, but for what thing and of whom. If thou be praised of vicyous for
thy mysha^your and vicious acts it is false commenda cion, and true opprobry
and shame. Thou art dyspraised, scorned, and The rebukes of the world upon a
good man is most high honor.
rebukyd for thy profyt, devotion, and true christianity and simple nes, and
that of vicious and evil disposed persons, this is no rebuke, but most high
honor, and commendation, and though all the world in this case would skorne
and disdain thee, yet it cannot be but glorious and honorable, which christ
commendith and aloweth. And contrary, if all men universally that so uer
displea sethe christ is dishonorable, thou ghe it plea se the worl de never so
much. The folish nes of worcester dely poleci and wisdom.
would praise and allow the acts and operacions, it can not be but shamfull,
that dyspleasyth Christ. Prudency, wisdom and polecy, is commo^lye called of
men of this world, stoutlye and diligently to gather goods and possessions of
this world, to stablishe and make suer that, that is gotten, and to provide for
all the posterity, for after this manner we may hear the common sort
earnestlye speak of such as in short time have increasyd their riches and
worldly possessions, he is a profy table man, wise and ware, a man of great
policy, and good provision. This the world speaks and worldlings the
children of the deuell*
worldly people which befalse and deceitful, as is their father the de uyll.
But what says Ueritie, which is Christ. Thou folishe and unwise man that thus
have gathered the goods of this world, this night thy soul shall be deuydyd
from thy body. A certain man re membryd in the gospel fyllyd up pon a time,
all his barnes, with diverse kind of corn, and plentifully stuffed all his
store howses with al manner of vyttailes, and gathered and hurdyd up store of
money, thynking nothing to remain, but only to use and occupy his goods so
gatherid, and yet the gospel callith him fool. For what The follye of the worl
delynges which embrace the shadows of things for the very things.
may be callid more folishe or more dasterdnes than to delight in shadows of
things for the very thin ges, and so carefully to provide for this frail,
uncertain, and vnsta ble life, continually decaying, and nothing provide, for
the life to come: which must needs be miserable, except it be substancially
prouidid for in this world. Here An othere fond error of the common people
also a another error of the common people, they call him prudent and a man of
good knoweledge which desirous of tidinges, kno weth commonly, what is done,
throughout the world, what for tune and luck merchants has had, what the
Emperor intendythe to do, what newelties at Rome, what business in France,
how the Daues live, and to be brief, can clatter of al matters, and speak
all languagys. But what may be more folish or more how folish a thing it is to
self what^se a far of ^o neglect thethinges of moore wayghte within our own
breasts.
indiscreetly done, than so much to desire the knowledge of things done so
far of, and which partay neth nothing to thee, and to have no remembrance
of such things as be done within thy stomach, and pertayn only to the. Thou
tell list what trouble, busynes and dis quietness is in strange places: but tell
rather how anger, envy, voluptuous pleasure, and ambicion, vex and distrouble
thy soul, rebel linge against reason, how nere they be subduyd, what hope of
vic tory, how stoutly reason is armid against them. If thou be in these things
waking, light earyd, and quick eyed, circumspect, and ware. Then shall I call
thee prudent, and of good knoweledge. Be not conformate to this world and
world lie parsons in evil, but be reformyd in thy understanding that thou
may allow not those things which commonly these worldly men follow, but
approve the good will of god and follow those things which be pleasant unto
his goodness.

Opynions mete and convenient for a christen man.
Every good and parfyte Christen manne most depely has roted in his
remembrance those brief and compendiouse rules of true christianity. First
that he No m^n born to him self only.
perfectely know and believe that he is not borne unto him felfe only, nor
ought to will or desyer to live as to him self. And that he ex All good
things to com of god
teme not other his being in this world, or any other good thing which he
has obtained, to come of him self. But that he exteme all such things,
received of allmyghty god only, most heartily thanking him, for his such
great goodness and benefytes receyuyd without his deserving. And plain ly repute
all such good and profitable things as he has common to all men. For
christian charity knowith no property. He must Christyan charity kno wethe no
property. how we ought to love al me^.
unfeignedly love all good and virtuous men in Christ, and all vici ous and
evil men for Christ, which so vehemently and first, as an example louyd us
when we were his ennemies, that he disdained not, willingly to give him self
for our redemption. And therefore every true and good christen man must
charitably love all men indif ferentlye, the good for their good nes and
virtue, the other that by his kind and charitable behauyoure, he may reduce
and bring them to virtue: and as the faithful and discrete phisician, hatyth
not his pacient because he is sick. So a good christen man must hate no man,
but be enemy only unto vice. And the more grievous and ieoper dous the sickness
or disease is, the more deligence and labor shall pure and parfect charity
give, to help and remedy him that is diseased. As in example, thy neighbor or
brother how we ought to hate an evil man.
is an aduouterar, a sacrilege, a turk, thou must hate the aduou trar not the
man, dyspise the sacrilege not the man, distroy the turk not the man. And
dilygentlye labor that by thy cure and industry, the vicious man may perish
whi che made him self, but that the man may be saved, which almightye god did
create. He must also hartelye Christians ought to will well to al men, and to
lamente the hurt or loss of all (...).
without color or collusion, will well to al men, pray for the^ and do them
good, not hurting them which have deserved hurt, and doing them good which
have not deseruid it, as much glad and reioysinge, of the commodities and
profytes of al men, as of his own, and equally sorrofull and displeasant, for
their incommodities and disprofites, as for his own. And that mente the
apostell S. Paul when he said. Mourn ye and wail ye with them that be sorrow
full, and be glade and reioysynge, with them that be merry. Amongst christen men
a another man's loss and hinderance is more heuely to be taken, then his own,
and more to be reioysed of a another man's prosperity then of his own. And
These thou ghts ought not to be in a christian heart.
therefore good christen man thou may not have these cogitacions and
thoughts in thy self, what have* I to do with yonder man, I know not whether
he be good or evil, he is a stranger and unknown to me, and a man that never
did me benefyt or pleasure, he has done me hurt and dysprofyt in time
paste, but never profyt. But what a christyan ought to re member.
only thou must remember and have in thought, by what merit or desarte our
savior Christ, solouing lie and benefycially has dealte with thee, which
desires not his benifycence, and goodness so plentyfullye mynystred to man, to
be requyted and renderyd toward his hyghnes, but in our neygheboure. And
only consider, what thing thy neighbor nedyth, and what thou maiste do.
Remember this only good christin man in all things concerning thy neighbor he
is thy brother, and creatoure of almighty god, coheredytour with Christ, a
member of the body that thou art, redemyd with the same blood, fellow and
partaker of the same faith, called and ordained to the same grace and felicity
of the eternal life to come. As the apostel A good argument.
Saint Paul witnesses, saying. Ye be one body and one spirit, called in
one hope of the same vocation, having one god, one faith, and one baptime. How
can he than be a stranger unto the which in so many things is one with the.
Among gentiles these rethoricall Opiniones mete for heathen but not for
christyans,
circumstaunces, which follow did greatly help, either to frendshyp, or
enmytie, love or ha tred, he is of the same city or cite zen with me, mine
alie or kinsema^ of my familiar aquaintance, my fa there is friend, he has been
kind and benefycyal to me, he is borne of a worshypfull stock and in honest
place or country, in Christ al these things be nothing, or else after the
mind of Saint Paul, they be all one, and the same thing. And what we
ought to think of a christyan what soever country he be of, what so ever is
done to a christian is done to god.
to a christen man, only this reme^ braunce shall be sufficient, he is my flesh
and brother in Christ. That thing that is charitably done to the member, does
it not redownd unto the hole body, and to the head also? We be all members of
one bo die each in his proper and peculier place, and the head of our body is
Ihesus Christ. The head of Christ is god the father omnipotent.

Then all things good or evil, done to the least of the members be done to
every Crystian man, to Christ and to god also, for all these be but one. And
therefore these old proverbs and common sayings among men of this world, be
not to beregarded among christian men, like commonly rejoice in like.

And inequality is mother of all Inequality the mother of all hatred,
hatred. To what intent should the name of hatred be spoken of among The name
of hatrede not to be spoken of a mong chris tians. Christyanitie remainethe
not where disdain is placed.
christen men, when betwne them is so great unity, and they so many ways
agree in one. It sauoryth no true christianity that the courtiar commonly,
disdeineth the crafts man, the husband man, the citizen, the gentill man the
yeman, the rich man the poor man, the english man the french man, the married
man the bacheler, the gramarian the divine, the seculer priest, the lay man.
Where is true and perfyt charity, which faithfully and heartily louyth the
ennemie, when the alteration of their name, contrary and such other like
causith among them so great hatred, discord, and envy. But let we are all
the members of on body christ being our head.
this pass, and let us accustom our self in remembrance of that which
saint Paul counsailith. that is that al christen men in our head Christ, be
the members of one body quyckened and anymatid with one spirit. In case we
live with The duty of a very christian in case he will be of the body where of
Christ is the head.
Christ, and that we envy not those members, which have not received so
plentifully gyfts. And glad ly help them which be in lower condition, and of
less abilite than we. And that certainly meant S. Paul when he said to the
Coryn thyans. As the corporal body being one has many members, and all the
members though they be diverse and many be but one body. So all we in Christ
certainly in one spirit, be baptized into one bo die what so ever nation,
condition, or degree we be of. And unto the Romans in like manner he wry tith
saying. As in one body natural, we have many members, and every member has
his several and dystinct act and operacion.

So all good christian men be one, and the same body in Christ, each the members
of other, having distinct and separate gifts according to the gifts which be
given them. And in a another place he commaundith that each bear and sustain
the burden of others, because we be members of one body. Consider The words of
a disseuered nom bre,
therefore good christen man, whether those persons parteyne to the body which
commonly say, my richesse and possessions be descended unto me as to the right
heir, and I possess them laufully, why may I not use or abuse them at my
pleasure, why should I give any part of them unto such as I owe nothing
unto? I waste and consume them: and that that is consumyd is my nown, what has
other men to do therewith. It is no man's disprofyt or loss but mine. Alas good
Christen man, thy brother how the ri che man misuse the his goods or riches
given him
and member with the in Christ for hunger and lack of meat is like to
perish, and thou wastfully and gluttonously consumest thy money in riot, and
banquetynge. Thy brother in Christ is nakyd and shakyth for cold, and thou
sufferyst thy garments to be eten with mothes. Thou fondly castyst thy money
at dyse, and seyst so many young women for lack of help, and in manner
inforcid through nececessitie, fall to uncleanness, and fill thinesse of the
body, and sufferyst the soul which Christ died for, so miserably to perish,
and yet say what have I to do therewith?

That which is mine, I order at my pleasure. And having this ungracious mind,
think thy self a good Christen man, when thou art not to be countyd aman.
Thou hearist the name of thy neighbor that is to be done when we hear our
neighbor slaundered
in company, defamyd, and holdyst thy peace or haste delectacyon or pleasure in
hearing this infamy, and slanderous communicacion, and say I would have
rebukyd them if their communycation pertayned to me, but for as much as it
touchyd not me, let them speak therein, which feel them self greuyd. Alas
christyn man, if thou be of the body all things that towchith any of the
members, towchith the also, and if thou be not of the body thou belongist not
to the head which is Christ, nor art not to be countyd a christen man.
Furthermore the common people say A christian ought not to revenge or
recompense evil with evil.
it is laufull to be reuengyd of violence and injuries, done toward them. I
force not what the civil or imperial laws permit or suffer. But I marvel
greatly how these common sayings, entryd in to christen men's stomakes or
condycyons, I did hurt him, but I was prouokyd by former displea sure, I had
rather do displeasure then to suffer it, in case man's law do not punish that
which they permytte and suffer. Thynkeste thou that thy capytayne Christ shall
suffer the unpunished, if thou offend and break his laws? which is recyted
in Mathewe, where he says. I will and command you that you violently re syst
not injuries and displeasures, ne covet you not to be revenged of your
ennemies, but love you them unfeignedly, And be you benefyciall and well doing
toward them which hate you: And pray you heartily for them which persecute and
slander you, that you may be the very faythefull and true children of your
father in heaven, which causethe the son to shine both upon the good and the
evil, and causethe the rain to dyscend as well upon the just as unjust men.
Parauenture some men will If we will be the chil dren of god and inheritours of
he auen* the perfection of life perteinethe to us as well as to themi nister.
here obiecte and say. Christ commands not these things unto us that be
lay men, but to the apo stelles and such as be religious and perfect. Alack
christen man did thou not hear in the commandment of Christ: that he
wylled these things to be done and used of his people, to the intent they
should be known the children of their father in heaven? If thou desyrest not
to be the child of god, this law parteineth nothing to thee. And yet I ensure
thee, he he cannot be good which des^ erethe not to be perfect.
can not be good, which coueteth not to be parfyte. And if thou desire not the
reward which is pro mysed to these, which keep and observe the law and
command meant of god, the law nothing par teyneth to thee. For it folowethe
said Matthew. If you love only such as love you, what reward To love our
lovers is worthy no praise.
shall you have? as who says none. For this act is worthy no thank. But the
contrary is synful and ab hominable, where a thing is requyted and recompensed
by an other equivalent, and of like value there is no det ne duty remaynyng.
Here also what S. Paul says in his epystel to the Romans, expounding the
foresaid law. Say you well by those which The duty of a cristia^ toward
his ennemies.
parsecute you, and not only to say well, but covet you not to myssay them,
rendrynge to no man dyspleasure for displeasure: and as much as shall lie in
you, be you in peace and quyetenesse with all men, not violently defending your
self in withstandyng the injuries and wrongs of other: but rather give place
to their fury and anger and withdraw your self, for it is virtue. Leave the
reuengynge to me and I shall revenge the says almighty god, but if thy enemy
hunger, give him meat, and if he thirst give him drink. And so do inge, thou
shalt cast burning coals Coals upon his head what signifies,
upon his head. That is to say thou shalt cause him to knoweledge him self
more culpable and worthy to be rebukyd, and shalt do that is in thee, to
reconsyle and wyn him. Desire not to overcome thine enemy in evil, but overcome
his malice and frowardnes in good. That is to say by thy gentelnesse and
benificence. But here some fro ward parson will say. If I by my gentelnes and
patience norish the frowardnes and malice of my ennemie, and in suffering his
former injury, mynyster occasion to him to do farther displeasure or hurt,
what end shall be of his malicious and froward mind? unto whom I make this
answer. If you may without offendynge and breakinge the laws of God, (which
I call your hurt and only diplesure) avoid and withstand the maliceof your
enemy, I think it very lawful, and otherwise I think more convenient and
neces sary for a christen man to suffer in jury then to do it. And to provoke
his ennemie to amendment, other by benefytes and well doing orels by patience.
And in case you can not I^ is better to please Christ by patience then to
revenge our wrongs and become evil with our enemy.
win him, it is better yc one perish then both, and that you content and
please your captain Christ, by your patience, then by reuenginge displease
him and be made evil with your ennemie, then let this be a law and decre
among Christen men, that they contend and labor to overcome each other in
love, ge^ tylnes, and benyficence, not in con tencion, hatred, obloquy, contume
ly, and injury. And the greater or more excellent they are, somuche more
submytte and humble them self that they may in all things observe and keep
charity. Thou how the christian noble man (...) behave hi^ self,
art decendyd of noble lynage and ancient stock, manners conuenyent and cumely
for a christen man, shall not distayne or impair thy birthe, but make it more
honorable. If thou be learned thou must the more discretely bear and
patiently The christi an learned.
correct, the lewdenesse of the unlearned. The more thou have received, the
more thou art ^det tid, and owe thy neighbor. If thou be rich and have
aboundau^ce what the rich man must do.
of worldly goods and possessions, remember that thou art a distribu tour and
disposer of them, and not the Lord or owner of them. And so much more
diligentely take heed how thou handelyst or orde ryst that thing which is
common to many with the, and put in thy hands to order and dyspose, thou art
dysceyuyd, if thou believe that propriety was only forbidden to the
spyritualtye, for that equally pertayne to all christen men. The Note the
difference between god and man's law.
common law punyshethe thee, if thou violently take any thing from a another,
and the same law punyshethe not, if thou refreshe not thy neighbor in his
necessity, but with holdist from him, that which thou call thine, but Christ
shall correct and punyshe the for both. If The duty of a christian officer.
thou be an officer let not the office make the more cruel, but consider the
burden and dewty, which dependyth upon thy office, and let that make the more
circumspecte and ware in executing thy office. But hear, some man will say I
Every man is or ought to be of the church of god.
bear no office of the church, I am no curat, I am no bishop. Alack my friend,
if thou be not of the chur che thou pertaynest not to Christ. For the church is
nothing else but the congregation or company of faithful people. But now a
days, how Christ is despised among word lie christian (...)
Christ is so in contempt, among these worldly people, that they exteme it
very glorious and honora ble to be an aliene and a stranger from Christ. In
somuche that he is most despised which neryst folowyth Christ. There is one
lord Christian vi cars,
only both of bishopes and temporal officers whose vicares they both be here
in Earth, and shall make straight acounte unto him, of the administracion of
their offices. If thou have other respect the^ ^ho is a simoniacke.
unto him other in receiving thine offices, or in the admynystracion and
occupying of the same, though the world repute the not as a Si moniake he shall
punish the as a si moniacke. If thou desire or covet To what end a com mon
office i^ to be desired,
a common office, not for the common weal and profit, but for thy private
lucre and advantage, and to be reuengid, and do displeasure to such as thou
bearyste no good mind, the administracion of thy office, is theft before God.
If thou persecute thieves, not to the intent such how to per secute the^es,
as has been spoiled ^oulde receive again their goods, but that thou may
convert the robbry unto thy private use. I pray the what difference is betwne
the thieves and the, but that they have robbyd the marchantes, and thou thieves.
And to conclude, if thou administer not thy office to this in tente, only that
thou be prompte and ready not only to lose thy goods but also thy life, in
maintenance and defense of right and equitye, Christ shalnot commend ne allow
thy administracion and execution of thy offices. If thou be a Prince how a
chris tian prince or a ruler ought too use him self.
and captain of the people, suffer not these poisoned vices of flatterers to
infect thy ears. Thou art a king and lord over other, thou art free and
above the laws, all things that thou mindist be just and honest, it is
lawful to the to do what the pleasith, it forsith not what these prestes and
preachers commonly precheth, they pertain nothing to the, but to other
pryuate and inferior persons. But have thou in remembrance that Every king is
Christ's vicar.
which is true, that Ihesus Christ is the only lord and mas ter of all men,
unto whom (for as much as thou art here his vicar and officer) it behouyth
the to be like and not to differ, whose doctrine is of no man more justly to
be obseruid then of thee, of whom he shall require more straight account then
of other. Think not utterly that lawful that thou min dest, but mind and
intend thou no thing but that which is lawful. Think not that verteous and
ho That is not vertuus in a prince which is vice in a co^ mon man.
nest in the, which is culpaple and sinful in other. But that which is but a
small vice in other manner parsones, think in thy self, abho minable and
greuouse. Suffer no thing to reign in the, which thou dailye punishyst in
other. Let not thy riches purchase the honor, co^ what ough te to purchase a
pri ce ^nowm and ^ame.
mendation, dignity, favor, and autorytie, among the people. But thy excelent
virtue, and noble con ditions, in the which thou must excel incomparable,
above the commons. Let the people learn of the to dispyse riot, wantonness, and
avarice, and to follow virtue, rejoice in temperaunce, honesty and measure. Thou
shall very well dystroy the appetites and affections of the commons toward
mischefe and evil doing, if they shall perceive that thou nothing regardeste
riches and pleasure, matter and occasion of vice and inniquite. Dyspise we
ought not to dispyse the si^ plest man.
no man be he neuerso simple, plain ly reme^bryng that ye be redeemed with
equal and one price, the blood of Ihesu christ. Let not auctority, what ough
te to keep a prince from hatred of his subjects.
fiersenes armore, or thy guard defend the from hatred, but y^ puernes of thy
living, virtuous conversation, vndefylyd manners, and honest conditions. Thou
may right Right principalite.
well in mainteining thy regality, keep thy high estate, and be equal with
other in charity. think this principalitye, (not to excel other in riches)
but to profit many. Remember thou art a common person, and therefore al thy
cogitation must be, of the common wealth. A Christen prince may not desire, to
exercise his power and authori ty upon his subjects, but his charity. And
among christen me^, he that is greatist and highest in auc toritie, must think
him self a minister, not a lord or master. And Titels of worldly auctorytye
ought not to be among spiryt^all men,
therefore I marvel greatly how these ambiciouse names and titles of worldly
auctorytie, were first brought in to popes and bishops, when Christ forbade
his dyscisples, that they should suffer them telues to be called lords or
masters, for there is but one lord and master, which is the head of all
Christen men Jesus Christ. A preacher, a curate, a Bishop, be A preche^,
Bishop. (...) be not names of worldelye power or authority but of cha ritie.
names of charity, not of power, or worldely authority. But wherefore should I
wade further in this troublouse sea of common errors There is no kind of men
in the which a very spirytuall man shall not perceive many things to be
bewailed and lamented: And ma ny corrupt opynions among chri Many corrupt and
carnal opinyons grown among cristians whi che greatly differ from true christi
anitie, and the cause thereof,
sten men, which greatly dyffer from the true doctrine and learning of
Ihesu Christ, which for the most part, proceeds of this only: That we have
immagined and brought in a certain world into christianytie, or among chri
sten men. And that (which is red in ancient auctours of diuinitye) men easily
learned only to refer to such as be called relygiouse.

The world in the gospel, in the that is meant by this word world.
wrytinges of the Apostels, saint Austine and saint Iherome, is called
unfaithful people, or infidelles, the ennemies of the cross of christ, and
blasphemars of god. And such, for as mutche as they how the worldelye mindid
behave them selves.
mistrust Christ, and have no confidence in his promyses, busely care for the
worldely lyuinge, fearing that they shall lack, and never have sufficient,
and carefully labor and strive for the increase and obteynynge of richesse and
possessions of this world, and follow voluptuousness and pleasures of this
world, blinded with the disceytfulnes of sencyble things, co uetyng feined
good for true good. This world has no acqueintance The world has non a
quaintance with Christ
with Christ, the very and true light, and as saynct John says, is al set in
vice, and sin, loving it self only, living to it self only, and carynge
for it self only.

And from this world Christ divided The world and christianity cannot agree.
his apostels, and all such as he thought mete and conuenyente for him. Why do
we then min gle and conioyne this world so utterly condemned in holy
scripture, with christianity? And by a fained vocable or fained name of the
world, color our vycious and lewd living. This pestilent what great hurt
comes among christians through false flatteringe preachers.
error is greatly maintained, by such flatteryng preachers, which as saint
Paul says, pervert the word of god, and apply holy scripture to the manners
and condicio^s of men, when it were most convenient, that the condition and
behauioure of men, were correctid and amended, according to the rule of holy
scripture. There can be no more pestylent kind of flattery, then to mysuse
the interpretacion of scripture, and by words of the gospel or of the holy
prophets, to meinteine our vices, and not correct them. A king or a prince
herith how a ki^ or a prince oughtto un derstande the scripture,
in scripture, that all power and regalytie cummeth of god, and anon he
begins to excel and ma gnifie him felf. But why does not this scripture
cause h^ to be more careful in mind, then proud and haughty. Thou remembrest
that God has given thee a realm or empire to govern, but thou remembrest not
that thou shall render unto him account of thy governance. A nygarde or
covetous how the covetous man under sta^deththe scriptures for his pur pose,
man, heryth in scripture that it is not lawefull to have two cotes or
garments, the which the masters of divinity do thus interpret: That the
second cote or garment is that, which is superfluous or not necessary to
nature, and that parteineth to the vice of covetous whereat this nigarde
greatly rejoices and says. I have not yet sufficient, I lack many things,
and therefore I shall gather and increase my richesse. This beastly man and
cold in charytie, hereth that Charity begynnethe at our self, and that this
is the order of Charytie. That a man prefer his own riches before other
men's: more regard his own life then other men's: sets more by his own
fame then by other men's, and says I will give nothing, I lack my self, I
will not defend his name least I hurt my nowne. I will leave my brother or
neighbor in ieoperdy, lest I come my self in ieoperdie, and brefely, I will
live all to my self, least by meddling with other men's business, disprofyte or
inco^moditie may chance to my self. We have how peruersly the wicked construe
the scriptures to maintain their wickedness with
also learned now a days to take that only into example of our lyuinge of
holy saynctes and virtuous men, which they did contrary to the doctrine and
teaching of Christ. Aduouterars and homicides, flatter them self by the
exaumple of David. Covetous and gredy men of the world, obiecte unto us rich
Abraham, pryncys and great men, which count it but a tryfle or dysporte to
defyle maidens, number unto us the con cubines of Salamon. Gluttons, excuse
them by the drunkenness of Noe. Incestes, in excuse of their fylthynesse,
pretend the act of Loath. But why do we withdraw our respect in these men from
christ? I dare boldly affirm, that neither in the prophets, neither in the
apostels, is any thing to be fo lowed, which they did contrary to the doctrine
of Christ. But if men have so great pleasure to follow saynctes in that they
offended: let them follow wholly and not in part. Thou haste followed how we
oughtto fol low good men in repentance.
Dauyd in aduoutrye, follow him the rather in doing repentance. Thou have
expressed in thy living the vice of Mary Magdalene, ex press also her tears,
love, and hu militie. Thou have persecuted the church of Christ, as Paul
did. Thou have forsworn thy self with Peter, spend thy life again with Pawle,
in defense of Christ's faith, suffer wilfully persecution with Peter.
Almightye god our ^hye god permitted good men sometime to fall.
comfort, suffers sometime holy men to sin, that we when we have offended
despair not, and as we have followed them in doing offense, so we should
follow them in maky^ge amends for our offenses. But we commonly take The
perverseness of manne^ na ture,
in example that thing which is not to be followed, and oftentimes deprave
that they did well, much after the manner of spiders, sucking that thing only
which is venomouse and poisoned or else by our poisoned stomakes turnynge
wholesome and good things into venim and poison. Thou greedy and covetous A
lesson to the covetous man,
man, unto whom money is a god, how do thou follow the rich Abraham,
because he by increase of his cattle (almyghtie God prosperynge his
substance) was made rich, and that in the law of nature. Thinkeste thou it
leful for the (being a christin man) vnlawefully to gather riches and goods of
this world? and other vainly to mispende them, or else more vainly to keep
them? How little he regardyd his goods and possessions, it plainly apereth,
in that he anonne at the voice of almighty God, brought his only son to be
sacryfied and killed.

How little think thou he set by his riches, which so little regarded his
son? And yet thou nothing desyringe, but lucre and advantage, nothing
regarding but money and riches, ready for a little lucre to deceive thy brother,
and forsake Christ, thynkest thy self in condition like to Abraham. The
Aga^st the where^ ger,
simple daughters of Loath, saying they saw the universal or hole world
perceiving (of so great a multitude) none remaining but their father and them
self, fearing least the kind of man should utter lie have peryshed and decaie:
of a v^hemente love and zeal to the countenance of mankind, secretly lay with
their father, and at that time, when this commandemente was fresh, and in
remembrance. Increase you, and multiplye the world. And dare thou with the
fact or deed of these maidens, compare thy monstrous pleasures and lecherous
acts? David also after so many virtuous examples and noble acts, once
committed aduoutrey: and think thou it laufull to the to continue all thy
life in fill thy pleasure and voluptuous nes of the flesh? Peter (for fear
against the swearar,
of death) once denied Christ, shall thou therefore for every trifle forswere
thy self? Mathewe once Mathewe once commanded left his occupation, but no
calling will serve the couetous^ man,
co^maundid by almighty god, forsook his occupacion and office, the suerty of
his living, and followed Christ. And yet so many exaumples of holy Saynctes,
the commandments of the gospel so often rehearsed, so many sermons, and
wholesome predications can not revoke thy gredy appetite, and coue tousnes of the
world. Uertuous behauyoure and honesty, has con tinually decayed, since we
have colored our vices with thename of virtue. And have been more quick More
ready to defend our evil then to amend it,
to defend our abomination, then diligent to amend it. And meinteined our
froward opinions, with feigned and false defense of holy scripture. And
therefore good christen man follow not the common fashions and opinions of men,
but follow Christ, the only auctour and example of virtuous living: and as
for thy outward behauyour concerning manners, apply thy self to all men, so
that thy intent and purpose be steadfast and suer toward god and his truth,
to the intent thou may win all men to Christ.

The. vii. Rule how to labor to obtain that which is nerest to a spiritual
life.
BUt if our weakness of nature, and infancy of Faith can not attain to the
very parfect and spiritual life, we must at the least labor and enforce to
obtain that which is nerest to the said parfecte and spiritual life. The
very The true way tocter nal fclicite
true and compendiouse way to eternal felycitie, is utterly to con uerte
our hole mind and intent to the love and desire of heavenly things. That as
the body naturally has adioined and associated As the bodi has his shadow so
has the loueof crist
unto it, his shadow, so the love of christ, the love of virtue and heavenly
things, may acompanye and bring with the^ hatred vice and disdain of worldly
things frail and uncertain. The one of these, necessarylye follows the other
and where the loueof crist is, there ne cessarily fo lowith he hate of syn and
the world,
increases or discreaseth with the other. For the more you profyt in the love
of Christ, the more shall you hate the world: And the more you desire things
which be invisible, the less pleasure shall you have in things that be
visible, un stable and unsure. And therefore The council of Qui tilian,
that thing which Quintilian counsayleth to be followed in learning, we must
also follow in virtuous living: that is, that we from the beginning,
enforce and intend to the best. The which if The next way to obtain virtue
isto ab steyn from sins,
by weakness of nature we can not obteyn, the next is, that we ware ly and
wisely absteyne from notable and open vices and sins, as much as shall lie in
your power. For as the body most weak and brought low (but ryd and clean
from hurtful humors) is most nere the natural health, so the soul not
defiled with great and notable vices, is more ready to receive the gifts of god,
although it lack, yet the power and perfyt virtue. If we be weak and not
able to follow what sha^e is to us cristians that the hethe^ should excede us
in virtuous living,
in our living, the holy Apostells, Marters, and Uirgins, let us at the least
not commit that, that heathen and unchristian men, may be seen to excel and
pass us in virtue. Of the which diverse, when they neither knew god who^ they
should love, ne believed that hell was, which they should fear. Thought and
decreyd that vice and sin, was utterly for it self to be left and auoidyd,
insomuch, that they had leather leese their name, riches, and life, then to
disceuer from moral virtue. If sin of him self, be The abomination of sin,
so abominable and of that nature, that infidells for no profyt or disprofyt,
would commit it. Trewly though neither the justice of god might fear him, ne
the godnes of god dissuade and exhort him, another the hope of eternal life, ne
fear of eternal pain revoke him, another the natural fylthynes of sin withdraw
him, which only did withdraw diverse gentylls: at the least the diverse and many
incommodyties, what should fear a cry stian from synnynge,
which commonly follow a sinner in this world, should fear a christen man
from commission of sin, that is to say infamy, wast and consumption of his
goods and possessions, poverty contempt, and hatred of all good men, trouble
and dtsquietnes of mind, finally that miserable grudge and vexation of
concience, the which though many men perceive not ne feel forth with, other
obscured by dullness of age, (or drowned in pleasure of ^n yet they shall feel
and perceive it at length, and the later, the more dangerous and more to their
pain. And young me^ to be admo nyshed,
therefore young men ar diligently to be admonished, that they rather believe by
informacion of others that this is the nature and condition of sin, the^ to
learn and prove it by experience in the^ selves. And that by sin they defile
not their life, before they know plainelye, what thing the life is. If thou
regardest we should abstent from sin though not for chri ste, yet for our own
sake,
not Christ, which boughte the so derelye, abstain yet from vice for thy
nowne sake, and though it be very dangerous to co^tinew long in this mean
way, which is only to absteyne from notable and common vices, yet to them
which cannot ascend to the high perfec tion, it is much more commenda ble,
to consist in the polyticall and moral virtue. Then headling to run through
all kind of vices. In this concisteth not the parfect felicity, and in this
state almighty god is diligentely to be called upon by prayer, that it may
please him to help, and further us in higher perfection.

The eight Rule how to resist temptacions.
IF thou perceive that the storm of te^ptacion does To be tem ted is a sign
of god des good will,
very often and grievously assaute the, dysmaye not therefore thy self, ne be
displesed with thy self, as though almighty god nothing regarded thee, but
rather thank him that he instructethe and teaches thee, as one to be his
eyer, that he punishes and corrects thee as his most dear son: that he
prouith and assayeth the, as his well beloved friend. It is a manyfeste and he
that fe leth no te^p tation it is a token of a reprobate
great token that man is reject from the mercy and favor of god when he is
troubled with no temptacion. In thy temptacion remember what we should
remember when we be tempted,
the holy apostell S. Paul, which rapte to the mysteries of the third heaven,
was troubled and vexyd with the angel of Satan, reme^ ber the temptacion and
trouble of the holy man Job, Saint Ierom and other Saints, which were
grievously troubled with their offenses. Sith this thing, which thou sufferyst
is common to thee, with so many holy men, why should thou be dismayed or
discoraged. Labor deligently, to we must la bour to overcome our temptacions,
overcome thy temptatyons with them, and almighty god shall not leave thee
without remedy, but shall increase thy strength and make the able to sustain
and overcome thy temptacion.

The. ix. Rule to give deli gent head to the assault of our enemies.
BUt for as much as our enemies be very craftye and subtle, it is conuenyent
and necessary that we give suer and diligente watch, having our mind always
ready and circumspecte, against the assaute of our ennemies. For they continual
Our ennemies at co^ tinually occupied to seek our destruction,
ly compass and labor to distroye us. And therefore we must ever be in a
readiness, that when they shall assaute us, we may repel them. And break the
head, that is the sug The head of the serpent what it is,
gestion of the pestilent serpent the devil, for that is the most parfyt and
easy way to ouercom him, to withstand his suggestions and first mocions
before they grow or take root in our sowles.

The. x. rule is to hate those our ennemies.
THe ghostly ennemy shall by this means specially be repellyd, if thou with
all thy heart, hate how and by what menes the devil is to be ouerco^e
him or manfully withstand his sug gestions, or continually occupy thy mind in
holy prayers and virtuous occupations, or answer him in his temptation with
words of ho ly scripture as I before have taught you. And in this thing it
shall To what end we ought to ^e de the scri ptures,
greatly profyt against all kind of temptacion, to gather certain sen tenses
out of holy scripture, and have them in memory. But such specially as you
shall perceive your mind to delighte and have pleasure in, and by the which
it is most commonly mouyd to deuoci on.

The. xi. rule is what we should do in the time of temptacion, and what after
the temp tacion overcome.
BUt of two things specially thou must beware, the one is that thou fainte not
in temptation we must no there faint in temptation no: tomuche rejoice when we
have o uercom our temptation
and give over to thy enemy, the other that after thou have manfully withstand
him and had the vic torye, thou to much rejoice not, and be proud and
insolent. And therefore to be sure, look that when By what menes we may overcome
thassaultes of our enemy the devil,
thy ennemie intiseth thee to sin, thou have not respect only to thyn own
imbesilitie and weakness, but remember that in Christ, thou may do all
things, which said not only to his apostels, but to all his members
indifferently, trust in me I have ouercom the world. And after thou have
ouercom temp The honor of our vyc tory ou r si is only due unto god,
tacion, and perceinyst thy mind de lyghted, and comforted rejoice in virtuous
operacions. Beware di ligently that thou repute not this victory or good deed
to thin own merytes or power but only to the gentilnes and goodness of almigh
tie god, repressyng thy self with the words of saint Paul, what thing have
thou, that thou have not receiuyd, and if thou have received it, why reioysist
thou as though it were done by thine own power, and therefore against these two
euylles these shallbe remedies, if thou in temptacion mystrust thine own power
and strength and cleue only to Christ, puttyng in his be neuolence and mercy,
all hope of victory. And after the victory and overthrow of thine enemy, in thy
spyrituall reioysynge thank all mighty god of his benefyt, humbly knowlegyng
thy imbesylytie and unworthiness.

The. xii. rule how to overcome our spyrituall enemy with his own weapon.
WHen thou fightest with thine enemy, think not this sufficient to repel or
withstand his first suggestion and mocyon, but manfully conceive the occasyon
of his suggestion and return it again thine enemy with his own weapen or
sword distroying him, and so doing when thou art mouid and intisid to sin,
thou shall not only not offend but of his mocion, take occasion of virtue:
and as the poe tes properly feign yc Herculus the more perils and teoperdies
that Iund displeased, obiectid against him and incombred him, the more his
courage increas^d, and the more valiant he waxyd. So give thou diligence, that
by instigation and mocion of thy enemies thou be not made worse, but increase
in virtue and valiantues. Thou art pro how to resist the deuel in temp tation
and the next way to we ry him god graunnt us to follow this good council.
uoked to voluptuousnes and plea sures of the body, consider thy imbesilitie,
and withdraw thy mind the more from unlawful pleasurs and delectations,
occupyinge thy self in virtuous operations and chaste meditacions. Thou art mo
ued to couetouse: increase thy cha ritie and alms toward thy poor neibour.
Thou art intisid to pride and vain glory, humble and sub mit thy self more
lowly in all thin ges. And so every temptacion shall be unto the a revenging of
a godly purpose, and increase of virtue and true devotion. And trewly there is
none so good and ready away to destroy and repel thy enemy as this. For so
doing he shall be aferde to provoke the again to sin, lest he which reioisith to
be auctor of iniquity, minyster occasion of virtue and goodness.

The. xiii. Rule how we ought both to fight manfully, and the feld ouercom
always ready to resist the next onset of our enemy.
IN thy conflict and battle we must so ^ghte as though eve rye battle should
be the last con flycte.
with thine enemies, thou must so fight, as though this should be the last bat
tell, if thou ouercom, and have the better of thy enemy. For it may so be,
that almightye God of his goodness shall give this reward unto thy virtue and
nobleness, that thine enemy once ouercom and con foundid, shall no more
assail the, which we have read to have been granted to diverse Saints and
virtuous men. Orygyn says that when we ouercom, the power and strength of our
enemies decaieth. And he that is once decayed and manfullye confoundyd, shall
no more be suffered to intyse man to sin. And therefore in thy battle be
bold to hope for parpetuall peace. And when thou have overthrown what wec
ought todo when we ^couerco^,
thine enemy, so order and use thy self, as though thou should straight enter
again into battle. After one temptation look for an other, and depart not
from thine armoure, forsake not thy array or standing, keep good and suer
watch as long as thou feyghteste in the Castle of this body, having ever in
thy remembrance the saiinge of the Prophet. I shall stand upon my word or
watch and shall be always in readiness for mine enemies.

The. xiiii. Rule how we ought to hate al sins seem it never so small.
YEt must thou delygently No sin to be counted as light,
beware that thou dis pise no vice as light, and not to be regardyd, for no
enemy has more often ouercom, then he that has been dispisid and nothing
regardyd. And in how men deceive the^ selves in sin, in est emyng the^ but
small of fences in them, over other sins,
this thing diverse men marvelous lie deceive them self, which fauo ryng in
them self one or two vices which each (after his manner) thinkith venial or
light, hate the resydewe. A great part of them which are callid virtuous and
ho lie, abhors greatly, and hates theft, rape, homycide, aduoutry, and
inceste. But the same little or nothing regard simple fornicacion, and
immoderate use of sonde pleasures. Some man puer and clean from other vices, is
common ly dronken, and accustometh riot. A another to lyberall, and free of
spech. Some to hauty and proud of mind, but if we thus favor our own vices
and delight in the same, how shall vice be extincte and banished from man? It
is a to ken that such as have pleasure in Such as have pleasure in any one
sin, possess ra there the shadows of virtue, then virtue it self,
any one vice, trewlye possess not the other kind of virtues, but rather
shadows and images of virtue. But he that perfetlye hatyth one vice, hates all
kind of vice, and reputyth no vice as light or small, least from the least, he
fall to the greatest. And every good christen how and good christ tian ought
to be myndid,
man must thus be minded and affectionatyd in him self, that though he can not
utterly and at once expel the hole company of vices, that he diligently
labor daily to withdraw somewhat of his viciousnes and filthy appetite and
increase in verteousnes and good behavior.

The. xv. rule is how we should behave our selves, if we chance in this
fight be ouercom of the devil.
ANd if it fortune you in we must not be discoraged, if it be our chance
to be ouerco^ in this fight,
temptacyon to be dedly woundyd of your ennemy, be not therefore disco raged nor
cast away your armor and yield you to your enemy, as many does which be
weak and feeble of stomach, which once overthrown, fear again to ieopard
them self in battle, and still conty new in bondage and captivity of their
enemies, having no remem. braunce to recover again theirly berty. This
ferefullnes and pusillanimitie is very perylous, which Desperacy o^ follows
fearfulnes
commonly bringyth aman to that which is worst of all vices, that is to say,
fynal desperacion, and therefore against such weak and feeble stomakes and
courage, this shall be the remidy and rule. That when thou have fallen into
sin, what is to be done if we fall.
thou dyspayre not, but follow dylygent and courageous soldiers, whom many
times, shame of igmominy and pain of the wound does not cause fle. But
quyckneth and causyth them fight more feirs ly, so thou after thou have commit
tyd a dedly sin delygently haste to return again to thy courage and strength
of mind and amend the rebuke and shame of thy fawle, with new quicknes and
courage of virtue. Thou shall sooner remedy The sin long accust tomed is hard
to be reformed or amendid
and help one wound then many, and a fresh and a new wound, then a old and
putryfyed stomach, and encorage thy self with this common proverb, which
Demosthenes, as is commonly red, did use and accustom. A man flying, and he
shall fight again, that is to say that man in whom any courage or stomach
remains, shall not for a little rebuke of his enemy utterly be dysmayed, but
rather gether strength unto him, and be reuengyd of his enemy. Remember The
best men have fallen and whatis our du^ye to learn there by,
that David the prophet, King Solomon, Peter, and Paul, the apostels. Not
withstanding they were great lyghtes and exaumples of holiness: yet they fell
into grievous and great sins, whom almighty god paraue^ture suffered to fall
for this cause, specially that thou should not despair, Lift up thy self
therefore upon thy fete and with high courage and bold stomoke, return again
into battle against thy enemies, not only more fierce and bold, but also more
ware and diligent.

The. xvi. ruleis of sundry reme dies against temptacions.
BUt against the diverse suggestions and assaults of our enemy, diverse
remedies be prouidid and had as they shall be most necessary and expedient, not
withstanding A general remedy against all kinds of temptatyons.
the general remidye and of most effecacy and virtue against all kind of
adversity and temptation, is the perfect and diligent remembrance of the
passion or cross of Christ, which is also a refreshing to them that can not
labor, an example to them that wander from the right way, and sufficient
armor, to them that fight, which is specially to be obiectyd against all
the suggestyons and mocions of the deceitful enemy. And therefore it is
necessary that man be substanciallye exercised in this remembrance, of the
passion and punishments of Ihesu Christ. Some commonly does reverence how some
abuse the Cross of Christ and how it is ryghtely to be vsid,
to the image of the cross, and cross their bodies over every part with
thousand tokens or crosses, or reserve and keep at home a gobet or a piece of
the holy tree, and so at certain and appointed hours call to remembrance the
passion and pu nishment of Christ, having petye and compassion upon him as
upon a just and rightwise man, wrong fullye punished. In this consists not
any true fruitie of the cross of Christ, but rather norisheth supersticion
and idolatrye. But rather labor thou good christen man and diligently
enforce thy self to ascend to the high and top of this tree, or cross, and
to obtain the true fruit thereof which specially consists in subdewing and
mortefying the worldly affections. And thereby to desyer to be confyrmate and
made like to the head and capytayne, which is Christ. And we should desierto
be made like unto christ
this is utterly to be desired of all men, in whom the spirit of god is quycke
and lyuinge. For he that The migh ty working of love,
perfectly and faithfully louyth a another desyryth in all things to be like
unto him, whom he louith. But that you may more fruictfully how fr^fully to use
the remem braunce of Christsde^ the.
remember, and to your health record the mystery of the cross of Christ, you
must dilygentlye prepare a certain manner and devout art to fight with your
enemy, and in the same diligently exercise your self, that when oportunytie
and time shall requyer you may be sufficiently preparyd and in redynes to
withstand the invasions and mocions of your enemies, that is to say, that to
every singu ler affection and pleasure of this world to be mortified and
oppressed, thou apply that part or portion of the cross, which is most
respondente. For there is no temp tacion or adversity, which has not his
peculier and proper remedy in the said cross or punishmente of Christ. As
in example, when thou art inflamyd to ambicion or How to resist pride.
pride of this world, and art asha myd to be in contempt and dispysyd of
other, remember thou vile and low member of Christ, how great and excellent in
comparison to the, thy head and captayn was, and how lowly he submitted and
humblyd him self for thy sake.

When thou art prouokid and mo How to resist e^e.
uyd to envy, remember how lovingly and gentelly thy capitayn Christ wholly
gave him self to our use, and how good he was to the^ that were worste and
most vicious When thou art mouid and in tised to gluttonye, remember that How
to resist the mo^ions of glo ^ome.
he in his thyrste had given him to drink Eizell and gaul. When thou art
temptid of lechery and volup To re^iste lechery,
tuous pleasures of the body, remember how pure and clean all his life was,
from fylthynesse of the body and other voluptuousenes. When thou art intysed
to the How to re^ist anger.
sin of wrath and anger, remember how mekely and like a la^be, he held his
peace, when he was rebuked, and how patiently he suffered the obloquy of his
adversaries. If poverty trouble and dis A consolati on in pouer tie.
quiet thee, and the sin of couetouse move and provoke the, reme^ ber that
the lord and maker of al things, was for thy sake made so pore and nedy, that
he had no place ne cottage, which he challenged as his own, wherein he might
dwell or continue. And if in other temptations, ye use and exercise your self
after this manner: It shall not much be peyneful unto you to resist themotions
of your ennemies, but also you shall perceive great fruit and pleasure: For
as much as by this wholesome remembrance, you shall understand that you be
conformate to your head, and shall so recompense him his great pains and
punishmente which he suffered for your sake.

The. xvii. Rule how great a help to resyste sin, is to remember how
detestable a thing sin is.
And though this be the most ready and present remedy against all kind of
temptation: yet it shall greatly pro fyte to such as be weak and infyrme, if
they diligentely remember when they are moved and inti sed to sin: How
fylthy, how pestilente, how abhomynable a thing syn is. And contrary how
noble and excelent the dignytie of man is. In trifles and matters of How
circo^s^ecte we be in vain things, (...) negligence in most ear neste matters*
small valewe, we council and take good aduisemente with our self. And in
so weighty a matter, shall we not diligently remember with our self, before
we bind us to the devil, by our consent: as by our writing and
obligations? How marueilouselie we were created, in how excelent condition
The marue^ous worcester ke of god in creating of man.
and degree, set above other creatures. How preciousely we are redeemed from
captivity and tiranie of sin: and to how great joy and felicity we be
called and ordained. Shall we not also remember and record in our minds that
man is that gentle and honorable beast, for whose cause almighty god created
and made this universal world, and that man is the citizen of angels, the son
of god, the heir of immortality, a member of Christ. And that the body The
excellency of man is descrybed.
of a christen man is the temple of the holy ghost: and the soul or mind of
man, is the similitude and image of almighty god, the secret chamber of the
deuinitie. And contrary that sin is the miserable Sin the pestilent in
fec^ton of the soul,
destruction, and pestilent infection both of the body and soul, the deadly
poison of our most cruel ennemie: the bayte of the devil, and the erneste
and pledge of our most miserable and beastely servitude and bondage: and
after you have thus diligently remembryd with your self, then take good ad
uiseme^t, whether it be co^uenyente or profitable, for so disceitful poisoned,
and short delectation of syn, to fall from so great dignity and noblenes unto
such indygnitie and mysery, from the which thou canste not at thy pleasure
deliver thy self.

The. xviii. Rule to avoid sin, by and by, comparing the. ii. heads together,
videlicet God and the devil.
ANd after ye have this substa^ cially aduysed and counsayled with your self,
it shall be necessary that you compare and confer together the two disagreyng and
far unlike heads and capitaynes, god and the devil, by sin thou make
the one thine ennemie and the A compa^ son of the benifi^es which fol low
them that live (...)* and the eui les that fol low the wicked,
other thy lord and master. By innocence and grace of god^ (...) art ascrybed
into the number and ^lender of the friends of god* and adopted unto the right
and h^ytage of the children of god. But by sin thou art made and constituted
the servant and son of the devil. The one is that eternal spring and
fountain, very image of the highest beauty, gretest pleasure and most
excellent goodness, coming and deuyding him self to all men. The other is
father and auctour to al vices, extreme myschiefe, and greatest infe licitie.
Remember the goodness and benefits of god toward the, remember also the
malice and mis chief of the devil. Consider by Beholdthe mercy of god
towwards us.
how great goodness almighty god did create thee. How mercyfully he redeemed
thee. how lyberally he has endued thee: How gentyl ly he ^ereth and
susteyneth thee daily ^ffendynge and displeasyng his goodness, how joyfully he
rec^ueth the, amending thine offen ces. Contrary call diligently to thy mark
tho envy of the deuell.
remembrance, how enuiously the dyuyll hatyth thy health, in what misery and
wretchedness, he has in time past dejected the, and how he dailye labourith to
bring man to eternal dampnation. And after thou haste diligently ponderyd and
comparyd these things in thy remembrance think farther with thy self after
this manner. Shall A mete co* gitacion for all christians to acustom them selves
in.
I unkindly and unnaturally, forgetful of my beginning, forgetful of so great
benefits toward me, for so little and vain pleasure, for sake so noble, so
louinge, so beneficial a father, and give my self in bondage to so envious,
and cruel a master? shall I not render unto my maker and creatoure almighty god
that thing, which shame binds me to render unto a man, being good and
beneficial unto me? Shall I not abhor and fiye the devil, which naturally
does fly a man, being hurtful and evil unto me.

The. xix. Rule for the absteining from sin is to have in our remembrance
the myseryes of this world.
FUrthermore have dilygently in your remembrance, how full of trouble and
wretchedness, how frail and uncertain this present life is. And how subtillye
death, on every side awaiteth man. And diverse times suddenly and unware
oppresses man, and when no man is suer to live one moment or instant of an
hour how peryllous and ieoperdous it is to defer or prolonge that life (that
is to say to continue in sin) in the which if sudden death (as it many
times happens) apprehend or take thee, thou die eternally.

The. xx. Rule to beware of Impenytencye.
FInally Impenitencie is greatly to be feared. For as much as of so great a
company very few Few with all their hearts rise from sin* specially such
as pro long repe^ taunce,
trewly, and with all their heart, rise again from sin. Specially such as
prolonge and defer their contynuance in sin, to the later end of their lif.
The discence and It is easy to fall into sin but hard to get out,
fall unto syn is very slipper and easy, but it is hard and great difficulty
to ascend again from sin. And therefore it shall be very necessary to every
christen man, before he descend unto the deep pit and dungion of syn. That he
diligently remember that the return again from sin is very hard and
laborous. And that he cannot without speci al grace rise again at pleasure.

Here folowith certain special remedies, against certain special vices and
sins, and first against Lechery.
Hitherto after my sim ple and gross manner, I have declared unto you certain
general remedies against all kind of vice commonly. Now af ter my capacity
and lernyng, I shall also prescrybe unto you certain special remedies by the
which you may be the more able to with stand the. vii. pryncipall or dedly
sins. And first against the syn ^etcherse assau^ethe man most sharply and
is a most common sin.
of lechery, for as much as this syn of al other so much inuadith man, most
sharply assautith him, and is most common and bryngith most men to dystruccyon
and myschefe. And therefore if this fylthy pleasure The mean to resist and a
uoid whor^ dome.
prycke or inflame thy soul, remember continuallye to arm thy self with this
armoure, and to re sist it. First call to thy remembrance how impuer, how
beastly and how The vylenes of the sin of who^ dome.
greatly vnbeseming and uncomely unto man, this fond pleasure and voluptuousnes
is, which equalith us the creature and unage of allmighty god, unto the vilest
of the brute and unreasonable beasts, as swine, dogs, gotes and such other,
and not only equallethe us unto them, but brings and deiecteth us far under
their condicyon and degree, which be preordinate to the company of angels, and
fruition of divinity. Remember also how short and deceitful this pleasure
is, having always, much more bitterness then delectacion and pleasuer. Contrary
consider how precious a thing the soul is, and how excellent the body of man
is, accor ding as I have showed you in the general rules. What fondnes is it
then, for so fylthy delectacion of so unsure and unstable pleasure, so
vngoodlely to polute, both body and soul, and to defyle that temple or
suspende it: the which our savior Jesus christ did consecrate to him self with
his most precious blood. Consider also, what company The disco^modities and the
euelles that follow eth whoredomc.
of grievous inco^moditys and displeasures, follows this flattering pestilence,
and covert poison. First it takes away from a man, his good name and fame, for
be thou assuryd the rumor of Lechery is much more abominable, then of any
other vice. It consumes also and wastes the substance and patrimony of man's
body: it kylleth and destroieth both strength and bewty of the body. It
hurts and hinders the health of the body, and ingendreth diverse sycknes
and lothely soores, it hastneth age before a due time, and debateth the flower
and lustines of youth: It dulleth the quicknes and felicity of the wit: it
withdraws the mind of man from al virtuous and honest occupacions or
studies: and drowneth him so in dirt and filthi nesse, that he has no pleasure
to think or remember any thing, but such as is filthy beastly and vile. Finally
it takithaway that thing whoredom makethe (...) man worse the^ a beast and
depryueth him of reason.
which is the very properte of man, and by the which only man is man, that is
to say, the use of reason. It pulls out or extirpeth the godly mind, and
infundeth a beastly mind, it causith youth to be infamous, wyld, and unruly,
age to be suspectyd, miserable and lothelye. Beware therefore and refrayn thy
self from this fond voluptuousnes, by the exaumple of other whom thou have
known or hard, by such lewd nes, to have fallen into sycknesse, poverty, and
misery. And courage or stomach thy self to the virtue we ought to incor^ge
our selves to well doing by the example of of others.
of chastity, by the exaumple of so many young women and lusty men which thou
shall read in histories very tenderly brought up and delicately norished, to
have kept cha stitie. Why should thou not do that thing which they did, and
no doubt thou shalt do as they did. Remember with thy self how flo The
commodities that follow chas titie,
rishing, how pleasant, and honest a thing the chastity and cleannes of mind
and of the body is, which makes us familiar with the angels, and pleasant
vessels of the holy ghost. Be thou insured the de uine spirit and holy ghost,
most faithful lover of chastity and clen nes, fleith no vice so greatly, as
the vice of uncleanness, ne delights or rests any where so gladly, as in
puer and virginal members. Consider how uncomely, how folishe and beastly it
is to love The folish nes of carnal love,
fondely, to wax pale, to be lean, to weep and lament, to flatter and speak
fair, to be lowly and plyante to a stinking harlot: to singe all night at her
gates or doors, and to depend at the commandment of your fond mystres, to
be under the governance of a light and leude woman, to complain to be angry,
and suddenly to be agree ed again, to suffer thy self wylfully to be deluded,
to be beaten, to be spoiled and utterly to kill thy soul for the co^tentacion
of a leude woman. Where is among these things the name of a man? where the
remembrance of the berd? where that honest and ientil mind, borne and
predestinate to noble acts and goodly matters? Consider also what flock and
company of vices follows this beastelye pleasure committed and vsid. If it seem
but The sin of whoredom ought not lightlye to be regar did, if the euelles be
marked that follow the same.
light to follow this wantonness and pleasure of the body, yet reme^ ber with
thy self how great and grievous an offense it is to be disobedient to thy
parents, to despise the holsom admonitions and cou^celles of thy friends: to
consume prodigally and dispend thy substance and heritage, to take di^ceitfully
other men's goods, to forswere thy self wyllingly, to drink all riotousely,
to chide and braule, to be a quareller, to fight, to commit homicide, to
blaspheme and slander. Into the which and worse, this filthy and beastly
pleasure shall deiecte thee, if she once overcome the, and thou become her
servant. Consider furthermore, how frail The vncer tenty of our life should
cause us to eschew ^nne.
and uncertain this present life is, and how diverse ways death lies in wait,
from whose violence no time, no place, may defend thee. Remember the suertie
and ryghtuosnes Calling to remembrance the judgment will fear us from sin.
of the last judgment, and that fearful sentence never to be revoked, go you
cursed people into the eternal fire of hell. And how this little short and vain
pleasure, shall undoubtedly be punished with eternal punishment. Remember Our
good angel is a wytnes of our doings ye and god him self which also should
stay us from do inge evil,
that thy good angel deputed to be thy keeper is always present, beholdinge and
testifyenge all that thou think or do. Remember that almighty god also
beholds the, unto whose sight, all things be open. And shalt thou not be
ashamed to do yc thing in the sight note.
of almighty god, and all the company of heaven, which thou art ashamed to do
in the sight of man. Believe plainly that if thou had a thousand eyes, and
were as quick of sight as the Egle, yet could thou not more clearly se
that thing which man does in thy presence, then almighty god plainly sees
the secrets and inwardes of thye mind and heart. And to be brief the
speciallest and surest remedy These were remedies against temp^ons,
against the te^ptacions of the flesh, be these. First diligently to avoid and
fly all such occasion and company, as soliciteth and moves to the said vice.
Second moderate diet, and mesurable sleep. Third temperaunce and abstinence
from temptacion and pleasures permit ted and suffered. Finally the remembrance
of death and contemplacion of the pashion, and punishment of Christ. It shall
also greatly profyt thee against the said temptacion, Company kepi^g does
much,
to live and keep company with such as be chaste, virtuous, and honest. And to
fle and avoid corrupt and unchaste communicacion: to fle idelnes and trifling
occupacions, and to occupy thy mind busely with honest studies and meditacion
of heavenly matters. Specially, to redinge of holy scriptures (...) pra er
remedes to withstand sin,
exercise and use thy self in reding of holy scripture. And to be often in
puer and devout prayer.

A remedy against the mocion of Avarice.
IF thou perceue that thou art either of nature propence and disposed to the
sin of couetouse, or else intised and moved to the same, of the ennemy the
devil, remember the noblenes and dignity of thy condi ^ion, and that thou art
only created and redemyd to this use, to have the possessyon of the joy
celestial, and eternal fruycion of almyghtye god: And that he created and
formyd all this world to thy use and commodity. How uncomely is it the^ and
how filthi, not to use and dispose these earthely dounge and vile things: but
so greatly to love and keep them. Take away ^olde and ^uer but read and white
earth, Christians ought to be more perfect then heathen,
the erroneous opinion of men, and what shall gold and silver be, but red and
white earth* Shall not thou being the disciple and member of Christ, chosen
and elect to so great possession and heritage, despise that thing* which
commonly all the gen^ and unchristian philosophers, did despise and set at
naught. It is not honorable to It is more honorable ^o ^ispise ri ches the^
to have them
have richesse, but to despise them. But here the most part of them which be
called christen, most sub The vain excuses christians make to ga there riche^
telly and craftily disceiuing them self, obiecteth and says, necessity
co^pelleth and causes us to gather possessions and richesse: and when we have
gotten the^ to keep them dilygentely: For in case we have nothing we can not
live, and if our substance be but small: our life shall be more incommodiouse
and full of displeasures: but if we have abundance and plenty of riches, then
may we live quietlye and more commodiously, having wherewith to preserve our
health, and remedy our sickness: to provide for our children, to help our
friends. Finally so shall we cease to be in contempt, and be in reputacion and
fame among other.

But unto these which by pretense A confusion of such vain obiec tions,
of necessity, excuse their covetous: I shall obiecte the parable of the
Lillies, and birds mentioned in the gospel: which only live with that, which
they find ready, unto whose Imitacion our savior moves and exhorts us. I
shall also obiecte unto them, that our said savior above all things
commands us to get the kingdom of heaven, promisinge that so doing all
things necessary shall be plentifullye ministered unto us.

When have they lacked necessaries, The vertuus man never lacked necessares
which with all their hearts has followed virtue? How littell is it that
nature desires of us?

But thou mad man, doeste not measure the necessity of the use of nature,
but of the satisfyinge and end of thy insaciable and covetous mind. To
virtuous and good me^ A little ser^ the virtuous,
that little which cont^nteth nature is sufficient. But he which ^e that is
(...)* (...) be called (...) good (...) ^an.
consumes the gretest part of his life in gatherynge of riches, and hordeth
and keeps them as the anchor and suertie of his living: paradu^nture he may
be calleda good and a wise marchante. But I can not think him a good chri sten
man, which only trusts to him self: and mistrusteth the promises of our
savior Christ, which when he of his goodness, so louingely fedeth, and
clotheth sparrowes and birds of the air: shall he leave man destitute and
unprovided for, which trusts in his goodness* But let us now expend The co^m^
d^es (...) com^ ^f (...) by the ^efy (...) of ^e (...)*
and consider the profits and commodyties, which these riches be thought of
diverse to bring unto man. First by the common assente of all philosophers,
riches among wordely things counted profitable, be set in the last place. And
when all things after the division of the philosopher named Epictet, except
virtue only: be with out man, nothing is so much to be counted without Man as
money: ne nothing so little commodiouse and profitable. For in case one man
did possess, all the riches and jewels of the world: should he therefore be more
virtuous, more wise, or more learned? Should his mind or soul thereby any
thing, be the better: should the health of his body be more prospe rous? Can
his money make him more bewtiful, stronger, or younger? But here some worldly
parsonne money pur chasethe false honor,
will say, money causes a man to be regarded, and purchases honor. But
what honor is that, which money causes, truly false and deceiuable, and
such they only give, which honor is nothing but trifles, and vanities, of
whom to be commendid, is plainly discommendable, and to be rebuked: true
honor is to be laweded and praised of such as be laudable. And the highest
honor The highest honor is to please Christ,
is to please Christ. True honor and commendation is the reward of virtue,
not of richesse. And when the people do honor a man for his riches and
apparel, The miserable honor that commethe of riches,
they honor the riches and the ap parell, not the manne. And if they might, as
well perceive the miserable poverty and nakydnesse of the soul, as they
perceive and see the outward aparell and substance, they would then judge
him as wretchid and unfortunate as they now call him happy and blessed in this
world, and as much despise him, as they now do him reverence and honor.
And as for the frendshyppe and amity Deceytfull frendeship which mo ney
obtey* neth*
which men of this world thynkethe that money obteynethe and gets, trewly
it is false and deceitful: for money purchases fren des to it self, not to
him that possesses the mon^y, so that they which love a man for his money, be
friends not to the man. And therefore I think them which be richest in this
case most unhappy: that they cannot discern ne know their friends from their
foes: For of them which pretend love and frendshippe, toward the rich man:
Some privily hates him, The disco^modyties that follow eth the rich man,
as to gredy and covetous, some en uieth him, because he is more rich, and of
more substance then they, And some regarding their own profytte and lucre,
flatter^th him and vpholdeth his doings and sayings, to the intent they may
get somewhat of him: and he that most pretends frendshippe before his face,
would fainest have him dead. And again, the rich man commonly has all men
suspected.

Iudginge them as vultures, gapinge for their pray, and thinking that they
resort unto him only, for their own lu^re and ad uauntage, not for his love
and friend ship. And therefore, if thou dilygently (...) gethe with it more
disco^modities then comdities.
po^der and advise with thy self, the manner of getting and kepinge of this
money, thou shalt plainly perceue, that abundaunce and plenty of riches,
brings unto man much more incommodyties and disprofites, then profits and
commodities. How great labor and pain sufferethe man in getting of this
richesse. How great fear and disquietnes, has he in kepinge of them. What
heaviness and sorrow, in lesing of the^? Trewly man can not well express it. And
therefore our savior in the why Christ (in the gospel) calls riches thor nes.
gospel calls them thorns, because they take from manne, that thing which
is most pleasant, that is to say, quietness and tranquillity of the mind:
and vex and distrouble man with diverse crakes and dysquietnesse. And the more
they are possessed and obtained, the more they inflame and move manne to gather
and keep them. And this insaciable and gredy desire casts man hedlinge into
diverse kind of vices, and into much mischefe. Disceaue not thy self good
Christin man, fondely beleuynge, No man may be easily rich (...) deuou^e also,
that thou may easily be both rich and parfectly devout. Remember that
Christ says, in the gospel. It is much more easy and light that a Camel
should pass through the eye of a nedle, then a rich man to come into the
kingdom of heaven. Remember Abonndaunce of riches cannot be both gatherd and
kept with out sin, he that delights in riches or money can not love virtue.
the saying of saint Iherome, great abundance and plenty of riches can not be
both gathered and kept without sin. Remember also, that riches and substance
of this world, robbythe and dyspoyleth the of much better riches. For he that
has pleasure and felicity in money, can not but hate virtue and honest
occupations. Finally remember that saint Paul in his Couetousenes is
^dolatrie,
Eepistels calls the sin of avarice plainly Idolatrye, and that thou can
not both serve god, and intend to thy riches. And that as thou, nakyd did
come into this world, so shall thou hence depart again nakyd. Have also
always in thy remembrance the folyshe rich man spoken of in the gospel, unto
who^ it was said, this night thou shall dye, and who shall then have this
substance and richesse, which thou have gathered? Withdraw thy mind
diligently from where upon we ou ghteto thik and to eschew Covetousness,
the corrupt manners and behauioure of the common people, unto the
contemplacion of the pouertye of the blessed vyrgin Marye, the apostells, the
marters, and of thy capytayn Christ, and ever remem ber, that fearful
intermina^ion, which almighty god threatens in scripture to the rich me^ of
this world, and it shall cease and slake thy gredy apetite of covetousness.

A remedy against the sin Ambicion, and desire of honor.
ANd if the sin of Ambycion with his inchauntementes and charms, move and
attempt thye soul, arm and defend thy self with these remedys.

First dilygently remember, accordyngly True honor proce death only of virtue,
as I have showed you before, that perfyt and true honor only proceeds of
virtue, and is only lawde and commendation, for virtuous behauioure and
manners. And yet this honor is not to be desired, as our savior Ihesu Christ
has taught us, both by exaumple of his living, and also by his doctrine and
teaching. For the very true honor Treweste commenda cione is to be comme^did
of Chri ste,
and commendation to be desired of a christen manne, is to be commended and
honouryd of almighty god, and not of men. As saint Paul witnesses in his
pistell to the Hebrews, saying. He is only commendable whom Christ
commends and prayseth. This honor and reverence which It is di^ n^ure to be
praised for evil ^ooinge.
men commonly give unto man, if it be given for a thing dishonest and vicious, it
is not to be counted honor, but great rebuke, and if it be given for things
which be mean, and of them self another virtuous ne vicoius, as bewtye,
strength, riches, kynred, and such other, yet is it not to be counted true
honor: For no man can deserve honor by that thing: for the which he is not
worthy to be commendid. But if man be had in what is true honor
reverence and honor for his ver tuouse behavior and honesty: Then is it to
be counted true honor. And yet he that deserves Nothing more vain then a
man to stand in his own conceyt, up on the prai se of men.
this honor shall not utterly desire and covet it, but be contentyd with his
virtuous demeanoure and concyence, or knowledge of his good deed. For what
thing can be more fond, then a man to esteame him self upon the opinion and
fantasy of men: which have at pleasure, and at their own lyberty to take away
that honor and reverence which they gave, and to dishonest them which they
have reuerencyd before. And therefore nothing may be more folishe then to
rejoice or be proud of such honors, when they be given. Or to be troubled or
dysquyeted, when they be taken away. Which honors you shall by this
argument honors in this worcester lde for the most part is given to worste before
the be^ ter.
specially perceive to be false, that they commonly happen to such as be
worste, and most vicious. Remember how gracious and blessed the quietness and
tranquillity of mean private life is, which is not incombrid with am bicion
of honor. Remember how careful and full of troubles, how dangerous, and full
of ieoperdies the life of great men, and men called honorable is. How great
weltheand honor cau seth a man to forgit hi^ self*
diffyculte is it in prosperity and wealth, a man not to forget his
imbesilitie and weakness, how hard and laborous is it for a man to stand
in a flypper and flydynge way, and not to fall* how ieoper dous and deadly the
fall is, from great height. Finally remember that to all honor and worldely
authority is annexed and conjoined great bourden and bondage. Remember also
how rightewise ^he meke and lowely in the judgment shall be preferred before the
proud and ambicious.
and just the last judgment of almighty god shall be, upon them which are
desirous of honors and reverence of this world, exteme them selves here,
high above other. For it is written, he that submits and hu^bleth him
self, like as the infant and vn^urtefull child does, shall obtain mercy and
favor of almyghtye god. And he that ambiciouslye desires honor, and
pre-eminence above all other, shall be secluded from the grace and favor of
god. Have diligentely in thye remembrance the example of thy master Christ
ought to be unto us an example of al our doings
and captain Christ, then the whi che nothing was more despised, ne less
honored, and counted vile as to this world: Which when he was far above all
dygnities, and worldly auctorities, refused reverence and honor of this
world. Remember how little he regarded the pomp and honor of this Christ
despised the pomp of this world
world, which entered the most noble and regal city of the Iues, syttinge
upon a poor and simple ass, not gorgeouselye decked, ne pompeousely arrayed,
and that he couerid with a pore and vile pall, and crouned with a crown of
sharp thorns, utterly condemned the pomp of this world. Remember how vile
and ignominus a death he did elect and choose. But him that the world
despised, the father omnipotente did glorefye and honor. Let thy honor and
glory, Our honor ought too stand in the death and cross of Christ,
good christen man, be in the cross and passion of Christ, in the which also
thy health and salvation is contained: for what shall it profit the to be
honored of men, and rejected and despised of almighty God.

A Remedy against the sin of Pride and Disdain.
YOu shall cease to be proud and disdainful in mind, if you according to the
old and ancient proverb, labor diligentely to have perfyt and substancial
know ledge of your selue. That is to say The (...) way to a* uoyde pride is for
a man to know hi^ self.
if you exteeme all such things as you shall perceive in your self
excellent, virtuous, good, and commendable, received only of almyghtye god,
as his free gift and reward: And contrary all that is vile, evil, and
vicious, to come of thy self and to be thine: and you remember, in how great
wretchedness you were conceived and borne, how naked, how nedy, how destitute
of knowledge, and how miserable, you entered into this world, how apt and
disposed the body is to sycknesse, how greuousely incombred with chances and
troubles, and how little adversity may debate and distroie this pride and
hautinesse. It shall profit you also to call to ^o cause should mo^ us to pride
if we way^ ed it well*
remembrance what thing that is, whereof you so highely rejoice in your self.
And if it be but mean not vicious, ne virtuous, then it is great folishenes to
be proud of that thing, whereof thou have no suertie: if it be vicious, then
is it extreme madness, to rejoice of that which is very odious. And if it be
virtuous, yet is it unkindness, not to thank god of that, which he has given
thee. But to repute it as thine own, and to be proud of that thing which thou
have not deserved. Finally remember that Prid^ most evident token of folishnes.
Pride and Disdain is the most euidente and suer token of folishenes, and the
thing most hated, and envied both of god and man. And therefore when you
feel your self moved or inflamyd to pride, remember dilygentely, what you are
in your self, a thing corruptible in the beginning, variable and inconstante
in all your life, and after your life, worms meat and dust. Remember also what
Christ was made for your sake, and it shall I doubt not, repress your Pride.

A remedy against the sin of Anger and desire of reuengeaunce.
WHEN vehement displeasure of the mind moves and exytethe you to be revenged,
re member substauncially that anger is nothing less, the^ that thing which
she counterfayteth, that is to say, strength and fortitude. Remember also,
that anger Anger a fe me^ne of* fectione*
is a femynine affection, ^urye ^seming the constancy of man. and that it is a
plain evident to^ of a childishe and feeble stomach, to rejoice of uengeaunce.
Thou thynkeste to be counted bold and Anger a point of chyldisshenes and not
of manhod,
coragious, if thou suffer not injury unrevenged, but by this mea nes thou
do declare thy weak nes and chyldyshenes, that thou have nopower to
moderate or temper thy mind or appetite, which is the very property and token
of a man. How much more commendable It is mad^es to be re ^nged of a
nothere man's lewd nes.
and manly is it to despise the lightenes or folishenes of other, then to
follow it, the more hurtefull, the more cruel and seeking of quarrels, thou
shalt perceive thy enemy to be the more dyligentely labor that thou be not
made equal and like vntohim. For what maddenesse is it to revenge thee of a
another man's lewdenes, and to make thye self thereby more lewd and vicious.
Not to be ^ued with a ma^^ enemies contumely* proves hi^ guiltles,
If you despise the injury and con tumely of your ennemie, and be not moved
and distroubled therewith, then shall it plainly appear that you have not
deserved it: but if you be angrye and moved therewith, then make you his cause
the better which did the iniurye.

Remember also, that iniurye and Uengeans is not quieted with the like.
displeasure is not quenched ne cea sed, by reuengeaunce: but rather new
kindeled and increased, and what conclusion or end shall be of displeasures,
if every man should covet to be revenged. By desire of By the desire of ven*
geance anger increases.
reuengeaunce and continuance in anger, ennemies increaceth in both parties,
and the dyspleasure, continuallye renews in the stomach, the which the more
old it is, the more it is incurable. But The co^mo dities that comm^e of
suffer (...)
by sufferaunce and patience, he is often times won which has done
displeasure, and by remembrance of him self of an ennemie made a suer and
steadfast friend.

Furthermore it shall greatly quen A godly les son to auoy de desyer of revenge
meant.
che and slake your a^ger if in other men's offenses and displeasures toward
you ye diligently remember, how greuousely and how often, you have offended
god, and in how great danger you are unto his goodness. As you remytte the
offenses and dyspleasures of other men toward you, so shall almightye god,
pardon you your offenses toward him. Forgive therefore your neighbor his
light and small offenses toward you (For it is but light that man can
commit against man) and almightye god shall pardone you the great multitude
of your sins. He will not refuse the law that he has made and ordained. And
if you think it hard and of great difficulty, to repress thye furiouse and
angrye mind. Remember that Christ suffered much more hardenes and pain for
your sake. What were you when he renderyd and paid his precious life for your
offenses? were you not his ennemy? how pacientely does he suffer you daily
offending and renewing your old sins. If you desire or covet to be the
member of Christ, you must follow the patience and charity of Christ. You can
not have Christ The marci full finde^h marcie.
merciful unto you, if you use cruelty and extreme justice toward your
neighbor. Therefore when you shall feel your selves mouyd to anger, if you
can not utterly op press and subdewe this affection, at the least, so
moderate and refrain your self, that you may have remembrance, that you be
not in perfect and good memory. Believe not your felfe, when you we ought not
too believe our sell ues when we be angrye
be angrye, but have all things suspected, unto the which, the irefull
affection, shall move and intise you, although they be honest. Remember, how
many things, Things sometime co^ mitted in an ger that is repented after. The
difference between fren c^e and anger.
you have said, or done in anger, of the which you after repented you and
willed to amend them. Remember that between Anger and frenzy is no
dyfference, but that the oone is a perpetual furor and maddenes, the other
temporal, and but for a season. And if you further desire by experience to
have knowledge how vnbecomely and vnseeminge unto man it is to be ouercom of
anger, when you be well advised and quiet. Behold The manner of an ^eful man
bla^d
the countenance and gesture of him that is angrye, or behold your self in
your anger at a glass, and when you shall perceive the eyes flamynge as fire,
the cheeks pale and wanne, the lyppes fomynge like a Bore, the face dystorted
and out of facyon, the other members trymblynge and quakinge, the voice
furyouse, the gesture inconstante and out of order, you shall plainly
confess that it is more like a cruel and a savage beast, then like a man.
And if you be of Nature propence and disposed to this vice, you shall the more
diligently use and accustom your self not to be angry, and to do and say
nothing when you be disquietid. And as I have showed you in one or two vices
for an example, how too withstand all vices.
so shall you do in all other, specially in such as you shall know your self
inclined unto either of nature or custom, and against their assaults, write
certain rules, in the secreates of your mind and often renew them, least by
disuse they be forgotten. And in* struct and prepare your mind with prayer,
fasting reding of holy scrip ture, exaumple of holy and virtuous men, and
specially of your Captain Christ, and so doing you shall be more able to
withstand vice, and more ready to fulfill the commandments of Christ, To whom
be eternal laud and commendation.

Amen.
Imprynted at London by VVyllyam Seres dvvellynge at the vveste end of Paul's
Church, at the sign of the Hedgehogge. ANNO. 1561, Cum priuilegio ad
imprimendum solum.


