THE FAMOVS HISTORY OF the Renouned and Valiant Prince ROBERT surnamed the
BRVCE King of SCOTLAND cand. and of Sundry Other valiant knights both Scots
and English.

Enlarged with an addition of the Scottishe Kings lineallie descended from him
to Charles now Prince, together with a note of the beginninges of the most
part of the antie^t and famous Nobility of Scotland.

A Historye both pleasant and profitable set forth and done in heroik verse by
PATRICK GORDON Gentleman.

At Dort Printed by George Waters. 1615.

At Adenburgh the twenty thrie day of december 1613.
This book seen and alloued and therefore may be published and put to the
press.

Sanctandrous.

DIEV. ET. MON DROIT
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE.
royal blazon or coat of arms

THeit is sindrie Errors askepd both in the Orthographe and want of single
letters. But inspetiall their is two falts to my knowledge in the vears the
first in the 2. cap. the 5. Line of the last vears to wit.

Reed shours of blood in sindrie pearts had been

The 2. is in the third cap the 3. verse and the 2. line to wit.

VVheir was the wounted Loyalty now gone

This with sindrie other salts as but, whear it is teaine for without, (and
other Scots words which I have rather chusd to pas, then loise a sound running
line) I dout not but the reader will excuse in respect that this book was
Printed in ane other country wheir the setters did not understand the Langage.

To the most Honorable and most Accomplished Earls, William Earl of Angus, and
William Earl of Morton.
RIght honorable and noble Lords presuming on the accustomed myldnes and
affabelitie for the which your L. L. have not been a little famous, It has
imboldned me to lay the barren field of my Vnfructfull brain before the
powerful Sune, of your Perfections, whoes beams may Illuminat the dark
sheddowes, Dispers the gros Vapores, and ripe the enrypened Ears, that so you
may receive the increas of this my second Harvest, nether deserves such a rare
and excellent Fruer. any les then such a fair and confortable Summer, being
the glorious actiones of that Illustrus and generus Bruce, which haueing bred
in so sweet and ferteill a Soyll, has made me ambitiouslie greeddie therewith
to enrich my barren field, hoping that my insuffitiencie (if once supported by
the vnremouable pillars of your Virtues) shall be able to resist the stormy
Tempests of wind-blasting Sicophants, and beat bak the swerms of Poisone,
sucking Wasps, so that the Seed preserved by your means only, shall yield all
aeges the tymlie Harvest of your L. L. Eternal glory, I being bound by such
admirable worth and undeserved courtessie for ever to Rest.

Your L. L. most affectioned and humble servand Patrick Gordon.

The preface or rather an aduertisment to the Reader before he read this Poem
of some spetiail points to be observed in the whole work with the use of some
parts seeming Fabolus therein.
FEaring to be taxt of ambitious arragance for daring to middle with so rare a
work I am only armd with the natural dewtie which I owe to my country the
vant of good will in the more excellent Spreits but above all the never enough
praised verteus of that most admirable Prince Robert Bruce ambitiously desiring
to immitat him, whose vnquensable love and burning zeal toward his Country
was such, as he being a Prince Roialy descended delicately brought up, beloved
and honored of all men, of larlge and great reueneues both in England and
scotland: so that it was thought he had more contentment of mind and more
blisings-heaped on him by heavens then any liveing in his days: Yet such was
his love to the liberty of his country, as forseaking his reveneues, leaveing
his wife and cheldren, abandoning al his royel delicasies, plesurs, and
delights, he betook him self to arms wherein when fortune hade crosd him so
far as it is sead he lost thertin Battles before he wan one, so that heavens
seemd to threattin wengence for the wilful refusal of thees former blisings
and first was he crosd with mis-fortun in war, the lose of his brotheren, his
wife and daughter being taken presoners, at which time his brotheren was
cruallie execute his friends become al his enameis and being persueit both of
scots and English was forsd in great misery and powertie the speace of thrie
year to keip the montains where herbs was his dentiest meaits and watter his
strongest wine not withstanding that he might still have been restored to al
his former digniteis and much more, if he could have suffered to behold his
countries misery, as they saw his, but such was his meachles love to them
although they hatted him that still he lamented their cause more then his owin,
and in his many soroufull discourses would always repeat these wersses
following.

Ni me Scotorum Libertas prisca moveret
Non mala tot paterer orbis ob Imperium
Robertus Brusius.

These verses written and subscribed with his owin hand in his Manual book
which he always careed about with him was extent within these feew years, but
to set down all his works and fortitude of mind ware to redious, seeing you
shall find many of them in the history following and although the old printid
book besyds the owtworne barborous speiches was so evil composd that I culd
bring it to no good method till my loveing friend Donald farchersone (a worthy
gentil man whoes name I am not ashamed to expres for that he was a restles
suter to me to taik this work in hand) brought me a book of virgin parchement
which he hade found amongst the rest of his books is was old and torn almost
inlegeable in many places vanting leaves yet hade it the beginning and hade
bein set down by a monk in the abey of melros called Piter fenton in the year
of god (one thousand th^ie hundredth sixty nine, which was a year before the
death of King David Bruce, it was in old ryme like to Chaucer but vanting in
many parts and in special from the field of Bannochburne fourth It wanted all
the rest almost, so that it could not be gotten to the pres, yet such as I
could reid thereof hade many remarkable taillis worthy to be noted, and al so
probable agreing with the truth of the history as I have foloued it alsweil
as the other theris only two parts seeming sabolous the first is the Baliols
Visioune which as it is of small consequence and does no evil, The balio his
vision not vnnecessare for the History,
so does it chek and forbid a base mind to aspire showing that a mighty and
generous sperit only ought to be ambitious the secound is the history of the
Kingis which after I hade fully accomplisd with the rest of the book, fearing
it should be too tedius for the reader I have taken it out and in the place
thereof insert thoes princes descended of the Bruce nether would I be offenceive
for the adding of these fragments for I know that sum curious heads will alege
I wrong the union but far be it from me to think, The History of the Kings
preceding the Bruce cheanged for thoes succeding after him. This History not
offe^ sieve to any
much les to do any thing that may offend his Royal majesty or seem to
hinder so blessed a pace of the which it seameth that the heauins has called
him to be the happy instrument, my intensione is only to eternize his
predicessors and his own glory being bound both by natural love and dewtie to
employ my whole Endeavors theirto: nether do I their in wrong the English but
rather to my power exstolle their valor and with more ^mildnes modifie that
which our writers most sharply have wretin Thereby to extinguish (if it be
posibill) the evil opinion that has bein so long ingreftid in the hearts of
many by reading of thoes old historeis hoping yat this my work may happily make
thois that tretith of the sam matter to be forgotin by time being only desirous
to steir up every manes mind to the following of glorious actions: with that
most praise worthy and admirable wonder of mankind that heaven ordeaned Sidnie
who says that the hearing of the Martial feats of arms betuixt the Perfie
and the Douglas stierd up his spierit to the search of glorious actionis: and
as for the Kings discendit of the Bruce, Sir Phillip Sidnie his saying.
comparing them with the constellations I have foloued Bartas who cheangeth not
only these portraits names, from names of Gentiles given them by old
Philosophers to names of holy men in the Scripture, Why the Kings descended of
the Bruce are Compard to the constellations.
but also concludes with a liberty to any christian to name them after sum
good christian princes and yet that I should not seem without reasone to
aluede to these princes more then to any other I have sundry good arguments
moveing me theirto. First then I say if thoes portraits must neids be designed
by their names, without the which Astronomers can not proceid in the course of
Astronomy, Resones why they at so compared.
it is les fault that they be named after such christian princes as have leiued
in the light of the Gospel, acknowligeing the creator of all things Trinity
in Unity, then after these Gentiles to whom god did not reveil him self and
from whom the mystery of Saluatioune was hid; secoundlie the height of their
royal station, the blessedness of their calling the excellency of their
actions yea and cuin their werie form seems too have a correspondence with
them Simpathesing them so neirlie, as they seemd to be the very same Whom the
eternal Majesty has meand by these portraits Thirdly their is but the
portraits of eleuin men and one woman and the twelf man some Astrologsans
afermith to be an the schipe Argus this agreeable with the number of the Kings
discendit from the Bruce, for counting him the first and prince Charles the
last their is lust twelf and one woman Queen Marie: As for any other poetik
flowers I have presumde on Aristotill his opinioune, who says that how true
soever the history be, it ought not to be formed in Poesi^ without invention,
wharin that excellent and wise Philosopher has said must true for with
invention the Poet must bew^isie his work of invention he frammeth the curious
winding knots of his Garding of invention he composeth his colors: of
invention buddeth his diversity of odo^iferous flouris, as the only ornaments
of his whole framm, of invention he forgeth links to make as it were a chain of
his work, theirby making every part to depend and hang upon other, and so
winding the reader in his laborinth delights the mind without pain, which
vtherwaises should be a vallaie full of diches wheer the traveller should be
forceed to leap from on banck to an other heaveing no bridges to go over at his
pleasiur and those are the things whereof thou courtous reader should be
aduertest; wishing the always to reed my work to an end before thou take
offense and the if nether the willingness to pleas nor onwillingnes to displeas
can satisfy let my first fault be forginen for Ign^rance sake and I never
shall intend a second, So shall I ever rest.

Thy silent Friend P. G.

To the Author.
THy sugared wearses, and thy sacred song
Shall make thy neame (O Gordon) glorius
Thou maks ^orgottin Bruce obs^urd so long
Reuieud to ryise again victorious
Thou crownis him with a laurel in thy story
Thou greaces him, and he augments thy Glory.
Thy greaue heroik Muse disdanis to treat
Of bass^and seruill love, or fond afectione
But of a Kingdom, and a Contries staet
Of naturs chiefest worth, and her perfectione
Of Fortuns Champione, whom the world renounis
For conquering Kingdoms, cities, touris, and tounis.
Those are the first fruets of thy rair ingine
The brave beginning of a virtous mind
Presaging plainly what thou'l prove in fine
Whose lamp skarsse fird does many lights outshine
Long may thou lieue whose lins brave Bruce adorn
And let Bruce Ghost be glaid that thou was borne.
A. Gordone.

In prais of the prais worthy Author.
WIse Virgill wreat Aeneades long to prais
Anchisis sone whom he did not behold
Octauian lykd his heigh and lofty phrais
And gave the Mantuan money myone gold
The prais of Bruce (no questione) thou proclamee
To pleas and prais the faithes defender James.
If Maroes figments leiue in fresh request
Which he of Stiks Cocitus Serber pend
Of Charon hell Elisium and the rest
Thy story true shall with the world tak end
And to thy prais I darbe bold to say
No lins prophaine can leiue a longer day.
To his dear friend the restorer of the famous Bruce his story.
Unto this age while thou of new restoirs
The ruined story of this famus King
Thy noble spreet: in emulation gloirs
Eu'ne in his praise thy proper worth to sing
For like as he did re-erect his croun
By Longeshankd Edwards subtlety brought down
Right so (thy song) from dark obliuions grave
Has now restoird the glory of his name
Ingrauing it upon this column brave
Which thou has sacred to eternal fame
And placed heir till time begone to shine
As monument of his heigh worth, and thine.
Io. Wrrey

To the Author.
IF Allexander wished, (yet sighd') to see,
That famous tomb, where fierce Achilles lay
Thou worthy chiftain, ever blesd quod he,
Had Homers penn, thy praises to display,
And if Eneas danger, night and day
And long some labors, both by sea and land,
Are recompensd, and more: and he for ay,
Famos'd, be Maroes martial pen do stand.
Make Allexander judge, fame shall avow
Bruce has his guerdone of a Gordon now.
M. Th. Michell.

The first Book of THE FAMOVS HISTORY OF THE Excellent and most valiant
Prince ROBERT Surnamed the BRVCE King of SCOTLAND corrected and enlarged by
Patrik Gordon Gentleman.
The Argument.
THe Douglas hears his Countries shame her fall
And back returns from France with woeful Heart
Vewing herw^es her ruin wrak and all
He much laments her lose in eurie part,
When (...) a Kinght from dumps does him recall
With whom he fights with valor strength and art
When each of life dispaires and death attends
They ^ther knoe, the fight in friendship ends.
Caput. 1.
OF Martial deeds of dreadful wars I sing
Of Potentates, firce Knights, and Champions bold
Who to mantaine, over threw a valiant King
Most brave atchieuments well performed of old
What flamming swords, blood, terror, death can bring
Love, time, and fortuns wheel that still is rold.
My vrigine Muse does labor to bring forth
Crowned with the golden stars which grace the North
Those Heroese old whose glory seems obscure,
Of which in Fames steel tables naught remains,
I offer on your sacred shrines most pure,
whose strength labors weighty swey sustains,
Those ancients worth in you does live secure,
which once may be the subject of my pains,
wherewith my lays adornd shall fly a long
And make the earth enamored of my song.
Why heavens powrd out such a deludge of woes
which to the world my weeping muse does sing,
And how those sad tumultuous broiles arose,
O who can tell since heavens eternal King
After his will earths Empires does dispoese,
And fatal periods to all Rengs does bring,
Who shakes the earth assunder in his wrath,
And melts the heavens with his consuming breath
But o what wast involu'd those days in wars?
Was It not that age by force governing al?
Which now is reuld by art, or was it the stars?
From whose conjunctions these mishaps might fall,
Or was it helbred envy that al things marres?
Forcing themselves destruction forth to call
No no it seems eternal heavens decree,
That sines own weight, by sine ouer'throwne should be
But soft my homebred muse sore not too high
Least thou or'epas what erst thou did intend,
Send passion hence, be modest fly envy,
With pow're divine bring this great work to end
Thou eu'erie verse, each line, each word, must try
In my frail breast thy sacred fury send,
That who so reads these lines for those respects,
May praise thy deeds, and pardon my defectts
In that faier Land where flows al delight
That heaven on earth whose paradisian plains
Had drawn the Douglas far from Fathers sight
Where he both arts and elloquence obtaines
He stayed till dreidful war with thundering might, To wit France

Soundes forth his countries ruin, woes and pains
Then fortune, fate, revenge and glories spoil
Inuites him home unto his native soil.
And once ariuing hereehe might behold,
The murnfull monuments of death and fear,
It seemed that heaven and fortune had controld
The Fates, and Joue by hoaried Stix did swear,
Those days in vengeance books should be enrold
Those worthles times, al worthy time should tear
From memory, as monuments of shame,
The blotts of age and only stains of Fame.
As one within a Garden fair in may
Seis flora decked in bewtis brauest pride
Sweet smelling Roses fragrant, fresh and gaie,
Pincks, Violets, and thousand flowers beside
That parradice there only seems to stay.
Yet Pisces coolling once fair Phoebus side,
That fruitful place by frost and hailes disgraced,
So seemd this pleasant land now quite defaced.
For lo a stranger nation does he sie
Inh^bit all the country round about,
And al his native country men did she,
Yealding to fear fate, fortun, chance and dout
Waste ruinde walls, tours, touns and hamlets be
The meids and pleasant valleis in and out,
Vntild' like deserts void and quite forsaken.
Abandoned of their own of strangers taken
And where he goes the ground did seem to moorne
Planing for lose of her deir natural Brood
The floodes their sweetest murmuring streams did turn
From fair cleir cristall dropes to crimsone blood
From Forests home the whisling winds Retoorne
Dwlce sounds of sorrows Melancholique Mood
Thus in his Ears, Earth, water, winds, and Tieis,
Sad Music make of sadder, Tragedeis.
To see so fair a kingdom desolate
And snche a mighty Nation thus forlorn
His Friends all lost him self disconsolate
Tears, sighs, and grons made speiche Long time forborne
At last, those Doolfull words thus Intricat
With sorrows deip his woeful heart has torn
Ah was I borne and must I leive to sie
The Sone to shine on this Thy Infamy?
Ah now Poor Country woeful is thy fall
But ah moire woeful is thy wretched State
Thy Blis to Bail the heavens to soon did call
But far too swift now comes thy helples fate
For ^re undone and no remede at all.
Ah no remede, said I? yea though too late.
Can heavens thy Croun of glory from thy brow
So soon tear of so famous still til now?
Where was treue valor found if not in thee?
In thee was virtue neu'r by time outworne
The source of Love the Nursse of Unity
Where Faith and Treuth were bred brought forth and borne
Wits habitation Fortuns Constancy,
But now al these even these are quite forlorn.
And in a dolful den thy Genius lies
Howling for Blood and vengeance to the Skies.
Hence cursed time more would the knight have said
But he beheld a warrior at hand,
His furniture and Armor sanguin red,
A bunch of feathers, on his Crest did stand.
Him would this fearce, sad, angry Eatle invade.
And in the other like desire he fand,
Each other with tempestuous fury greet,
So in the aer the bolting thunder meet.
Loath was each sp^ar to wond his enemy,
Their wrathful masters message while they go
Al shiuered, moorning through the aer they fly,
Complaining of unkindly discord so,
While that the Champions chaft with anger be
For each disdaines, a match in arms to know,
Each takes the other for an English Knight,
And seeks revenge with force, hate, rage, dispight
Even as two aged strong and sturdy Oaks
Against a thundering tempest firmly stand,
Or as two raggid Clifs of mighty Rocks
Bear of the wafting surges from the land.
So each abides the others pondrous strokes,
These only two, true valor did command.
Yea who so eu'r had sien that warrlike fight,
Fear would have bred, both terror and delight.
By thrusts and foins their bloes seconded be,
Each waits occation, each advantage spying.
Each on the other has a watchful Eye,
Each shuns the fents, for open wards still prying,
Where pla^s were iyond, and buckles tied they sie,
Yeat eithers foresight, others flight denying.
Still fretting in themselves, with rage and ire,
That neither could, their conquest wished aspire.
Sometime their Swords, forth from their helm and shield
Send fiery sparkles, spangling all the Aier.
Even so the Meteors fighting lightning yeald,
Beneath the Northern Pole, that do prepare,
To clear the starrie firmamental field.
With cold extreme, pure, subtle, sherp, and raire.
That else would geall, the cloustred clouds aloft,
And make a bad confusion strange and often.
As fast as hail, in sharp and Iscie balls,
Upon the tiled housses does alight,
So thik, fo fast each speedy blow down falls,
batring their helms, and shields with furious might,
They fighting, wish each others funerals:
Four hours it was, since they began the fight
Some little wonds, had each of others won,
Yeat both as fresh as when they first begun.
Now was the Sun, declining to the West,
When both did seem of Conquest to dlspait.
And yet, the Knight unknown, was lustiest,
His Curage, and his strength, did still repair
For as, a loytring Slave, in Lasie rest,
Has spent the day, that for his Task should care
And tho, to lait, at last to work does stand
Repenting, that he took, so much, in hand.
Ev'ne so, the stranger Knight, did ferslie fly,
Against his Foe, with Vn-resisted Might,
And though indeed, he, some what Stronger be
His Breath, enduring, Longer, yet in fight,
The Douglas, did that want with art supply
For, holding forth, his Suord, and Shield, outright,
He geuards him self, and bears, the others, Blo's,
Now, Out now in, now heir, now their, he goes,
Both breathles now, both forced a while to stay,
Botth lean upon their swords a while to rest:
The vnknow'ne knight, thus to himself did say,
Ah, foolish man with madness thus possessed,
Thy labor's great, great pains, great works, to day.
With sorrows new, new woes, new cares increast,
Heated by heavin by faits, Long Coorst, ere borne,
Proud Fortune holds, Thy heighe attempts in skorne
Thy foil, thy shame, and thy disgrace received,
Not only thou, but all the world does know
Fond man, of non but of thy self deceu'd,
What valor can thou boast, what strength can show
O thou, eu'ne thou, who once a kingdom craved
Ah folly great, ^h great presumtion, lo,
Ah shame, thate're thou shold'st be sien or known,
Vanquished by one, ou'rcom, and overthrown.
But so the Fates, and so, the heavin prouids
That thou, thy strength, and weakness, might perceave
To Errors gross, Thy foolish Mind, Thee guids
Which to abait, what does Remain, to Crave
Lost is thy Crown, lost be thy friends, besides
Chaisd from thy kingdom, hunted, like a Slave.
And savadge-like, thou live on herbs, and Root's
In Deserts wild, those of thy panis, at fruits.
Then, fertile Scotland, fair, Adieu, for Ay
Good was my will, and great, was my Desire
On thy blacks Hemispheare to bring the day
And to Restore, Thy Friedome, Crown, Impire
But to my fond Attempts, the heavins said nay
Whill You Are counsumd, by Jov's wraith, hot as feire
Now, woe is Me, (for my own wois, I say not)
Bot O Thee fain, I would remeid, and may not,
The Douglas, also, was perplexed so
For still him self, Condem's him self, of folly
Art thou returned from France, (quod he) to sho
Thou vowed thy Syrs revenge, A vow most holy
This migh^ie Task when thou should undergo
Thy first Attemp, Thy sh^me returns sollie
Why then, fond man if thou be oue^rthrowne
Yield not, but Die: and keip, thy vow on-knowne.
And if the heavins decree, Thy Overthrow
And that thy vow must still be unperfected,
Yeat who the Victor is, feign would I know,
If but a private man, then I dispit it,
But if his praise, Fame, every where does blow
Then on my grave, these lines shall be ind tit,
Though chance, and fortune made him loose the filled,
He merits praise, whose courage scorns to yealde.
Where are my Predecessors deeds of old,
Which like a wal^ impregnable did stand,
And did like Pillars, firm, and strong uphold,
The w^ale, the peace, and saftie of the land?
Though non of those I boast, yet am I bold
The worthy name of Scot, for ^o demand,
Whereof so many Worthies still proceeds,
As makes their Country famous by their deeds.
Yea and this present Age, augments our Fame,
With warrlik knights, that all the world admires,
As machles Wallace, and the ualiant Grhame,
The worthy Bruce, most glorious that appears,
If one of those it were, less were my shame,
My credit more, and more my fortune cleers.
Therefore to clear this doubt he thought it bent
His speech should thus be, to the knight addressed.
Stout, hardy, valliant man at arms quod he,
Before our combar end, I pray thee show,
Whom I ou'rcom, or who ou'rcommeth me,
Since non of us, the quarrel yet does know,
No quod the other, Sir, that may not be,
For that you made the challenge first, and so,
As challenger, your cause must first be known,
The Douglas answered that shall soon be shown
Unless I err, you are an English knight,
I am a Scot, and in defense will stand
Of Scots free liberty, and ancient Right,
So long as I can bear a sword in hand,
It may be so, quod he, but in my sight
You are too weak alone for to withstand,
So great a task, craves more then one I fear,
Against great Edward, if you mind to war.
Quod, Douglas, tho I be alone yousie
I were enough, for to Revenge, Our harms,
If I had Edward heir, as I have Thee,
Al tho the Matchles Bruce, with Conquering Arms,
Has thousands Mo, whoes valors, worth, shall fly,
For dreed Revenge, with Trumpets, Loud, alar'ms
Through all the Regions, of the English soill,
And havok make, with Rewin, blood, and spoill.
Yet know an other Querrell, for Our fight,
And my just Cause, which lust revenge requiers:
My Sire, that sometime, Erel, of Douglas hight,
In Edwards prisson, spent, his Aged, years
And their he deid, by wrong, without all Right,
Whoes guietles blood, Blood-guiltie Edward, beers
For whoes sad Death, eu'ne Th'ou, thy life, must lois
And with these words, he thunders on the Blo's.
Hold, hold, quod he, stay thy revenge, for schame,
I am thy friend, no foe, nor English I,
I am that Lukles Bruce, whose haples Name,
Thou dus so much Exalt, and magnify
Whose froward Fortun, fate, and far-knowne fame,
Is turned disgrace, to all eternity,
At these sad words, the Douglas stood, and gazed
Blushing, astonished, speichles, and amazed:
At last he falls, before the warlik Prince,
And says, my gracious Soveragne thou may
Pardon, my hasty fault, my Rude offense,
Or, my, Death-worthie Crime, with death Repay,
That Durst offend Thy worth, thy excellence
Ah cursed Time, Ah black, and dismal, Day,
No no sweit friend, quod he, Thy peace enjoy,
Long may Thou live, in spite of fates anoy,
And thus, when he had R aisd him from the Ground,
He in his Arms, him Lovinglie, embraced
Whoes Love and Favor: always, did abound,
And always did Endure, whill life did left,
Now both their horse, agane, at last they found
And both, theme self, at last, from thence addressed,
Both, vows, their Cuntries wo's for to Revenge,
Both, to Indur, cahe others, fortuns, strange.
Together then they rid^ a plate throughout,
Til in a forest faier, themselves they fand,
While night with sable curtens, Round about,
Breaths darkness out, or'shaddowing all the land,
Upon her lowering brows sat fear and dobt:
And round about, in horror trembling stand,
The duskie clouds, that threts a second flood,
Such Seas there swelling clusters does includ.
Cap. 2.
The Argument.
THe Douglass courteslye Requirs the King
For to unfold the cause of al his Grief
Whereby he taks Occassions for to bring
To outward view the ground of this mischief
He schews the worthles Bate'^ls haples Reign
That heapt new woes on woes without releif
Brave barwick, Lost Scots fall at ods and yield,
Losing Their fredome, in a bloody field.
Those machles champions throw the forest go^
At last allight, and then themselves adrest,
Til cheirful days bright golden lamp should
within a arbor faier, to take their rest. (shone,
But as ambitious minds, ar never alone,
Til they have honor, glory, Fame possessed,
So they no rest at all, cold here attain,
Such high confusion in their breasts remain.
At last, the Douglas thus began, brave Prince,
And my most gracious Souerainge quod he,
Long may thou live in Natures excelence,
Iou's love, Fates favor, fortunes constancy,
Thy worth exalted, by heavens influence,
And thy brave self, long have I wsht to sie,
God grant thy shining son with golden Rays,
Our darkest nights may change to brightest days.
Let not my bold presumtion thee offend
If I require to know the woeful birth,
Of sorrows which thy countenance forth send,
For lo swift Fame, did sound thy praise, thy worth
In France, while careless, I on court attend,
Which cleers my clouds of care, with lamps of mirth,
And did my sad, unsettled, Thoughts, destroy
Thy sweit report, so filled, my Ears, with Joy
Then I returned in hope of blessed relief,
Which I foresawe, thy worth would soon afford,
And thou, eu'ne thou, would ease thy contreis grief,
Whose glory great, must be by the restord,
Senc to Revenge our blood, woe, wrake, mischief
By lustest Heavens, thou only art implord,
Do then brave Prince, what heaven for thee ordains
Thy Knight I am, in war, peace, Joy, or pains.
The gallant Bruce, sat long time much amazd,
Loath to unfold his strange misfortunes, rare,
In wrath he star'd, he looked, about he gazed,
He sighed, he grond, as One, Into Despair
His rolling Eyes, at last, from Earth, he Ras'ed
And Cleird with heavenly smylls, the clouds, of cair
Whill as the Douglas, long did him, behold
This sadd, and woeful, Tragedy, he told.
Sad may if seem and sorrowful, to Thee
Thois woeful news Thou does Requeir' to hear
but much more cair, and grief, it breids, to Me
Who must not only hear and lend my ear,
But must relate even what my eyes did siee,
Yea what myself did act, yet I Will forbear
Those fond complaints, and make a true narration,
What most offends me, and afflicts my Nation.
And to unfold this tragic story so
To know the motive, first it does requier
And every truest circumstance to sho,
Whereof is much that will delight the ear,
Than to th'intentall may mor clearly know
The ground of this, so firce and crwel war,
Our various speech let us devert and view,
The dreidfull, horreid horrors, that ensew
Thrie Alexanders, thrice waere Scotlands, King
The first, for valiant deids, surnamed, the fierce
Was Malcolm, Canmoirs, sone, the second, Rings
Was after, good, king Will'iame, did, deceas
Who is brave, undaunted, Deids, made fame, to sing
The Lion-king, as histories Rehers
The third that did Our, Crown, and scepter wear
Henre, the third, of Englands, dogther, fair.
In marriage took which haple he devynd
Should then conclud, A full, and final Peace
That both these Ancient kingdoms, thus Combind
Those great and Mighty Nations, might Embrace
A Freindlie League, and Concordance, in mind
An happy Time to their Ensewing race,
By ending all the wars, the broyls, the steir's,
That had remained, full, thryse five hinders eirs.
But heavens decreed it, should not so Remain
For the appointed Time, was not foretold
Man's subtle plots, and wits ar, all in vain
In vain their wais, in vain this work, they would,
In vain they go about, for to obtain
What Jove as secret to himself did hold,
In uaine was al these fond devises thought,
Since heaujn decred, that al should turn to noght.
For lo betwixt burnt Illion and Kingorne,
King Alexander di'd by fall of horse,
When thirtiefoure years of, his Reign was worn,
He no succesion had, and which was wors,
Blood-thristie-warr by wings, of vengeance borne,
Did tear Our kingdom's bouwells but Remors,
Waikining by often Diminishings, at Lenght,
The vains, the Nerv's the sin us, of our strenght,
Six years the land governed was in Peace,
By Regents fix, at last some broiles arose,
Whereby so strange gouernament did cease
Such bloody factions, did themselves oppose,
Who from that boundage would the land release,
And of annot her King would make a chose,
For well they knew what trains they should imbark
To set this headstrong Nations once awarke
A council then of all, they call to choose
The nearest of the Royal blood for king,
The Baliol there his right did well peruse,
From the first female his descent to spring,
And from the first borne Male, I not refuse
My lineall and just descent to bring
Thus plead we both, nor can we once accord,
No peace our haughty stomaks cold afford.
And thus our hate grew greater day by day,
Both thirsting for a Princely Diadem,
Nor cold the meanest thought of wise delaie,
Pre^ons our woe, our wrack, our countries shame,
On (...), on wrack, on ruin and decaie,
Ambition can not look, nor think, nor dream,
But for the Croun, while wee're a spyring thus
We robbed of what should make it Glorious,
For with us two, two mighty armies rose,
To winn the Croun or lose our self and all,
Scotlands great Primat did himself oppose
Betwixt us then a treat of peace to call,
Who did so much, at last we made a choice,
Thus to accord and to agreement fall,
To judge our right by Englands mighty King,
Who should decerne, which of us both should reign.
Wherefore in haste to Englands King we send,
Requesting him to take the cause in hand,
Who then prepared his conquest to defend,
In fertile France, with many warlike band,
And their his large Dominions to extend
By force of arms, and by his valiant hand,
Yet for to put our Kingdom to a rest,
He turned, and bake to York himself adrest.
Of learned men he twentifour there brought,
Whose grave advise in this great work he used,
But lo my proud competeitor bethought
Him thus, If I and my just right were chusd
Than were he all undone, and threfore soght
By some lewd mean to get me quite refusd,
At last resolved to buie a Diadem
With foul dishonor, and eternal shame.
Wherefore he dealt in secret with the King,
If him he would prefer the Croune to wear,
By charter, Seal, by Oath and every thing,
He bound himself of him the Croune to bear,
And for the same his homage to resign,
To whose base mind, at first he gave noe Ear
The most part of the Lawiers parted thence
All judging me just heir and Righteous Prince.
But counsel caused this mighty King to err,
Counsel of these that by dissension live
Still urging him the Bailiol to prefert,
That for his guerdon would a Kindom give,
But he that knew my right far worthier
Even from my foes proud offer did derive
His argument, and unto me presents
The Croune, if I fullfild the same contents.
Which offer base I plainly did refuse,
Wherefore King Edward in his wrathful Ire,
With Baliol decreits, and did abuse
My right, enstalling him whose blind desire
Led him for honor, Infamy to choose
And for a crovne to slave a free Empire,
For lo in him two contraries agree,
Base Avarice, and Prodigality.
Thus he returned with pomp and Majesty
Whom all the Lords and Princes of Estate
Conuaied to Skoene with royal dignity,
Where stood the Ancient Marble cheir of late,
There was he cround with Kingly Roialty,
In Robs whose worth were longsum to repeat,
Imbroadred al with stons, with pearl, with gold,
Gorgious to wear, and glorious to behold.
But little knew the Princes of the Land,
That he to Englands King should homage pay,
The croune that sixtien hundredth years did stand,
Against endless war and cruel Arms Essay,
Nor Romans, Danes, nor Saxons cold command,
Unconquered still, nor conquered would obaie,
Was now betrayed by him whose haples name
Became his countries skorne and Kingdoms shame.
But when report had shown the haples loss,
The commons began to murmur here and there,
Against the Nobles, vowing that their choice
Should be with arms, their freedom to repaiere,
And all the Princes of Estate by those
Were schandalizd with shame, reproach and fear,
Thus civil descord brought a fearful fall
On King, on country, Kingdom, croune and all.
For now the king in heigh contempt was brought
With all the Lords and Princes of Estate
The Lords in hait and great disgrace were thought
With all the commoun Multitude of Late
When al with wit and valor should have wrought
Thus Raise a fearful strange and new debaite
That hardest A damantine hearts would move
But for Their sin so heavens decreed above
Of these ensewing sorrows now the King
For seis forthinks and Meditats and Moins
A Thousand greifs did in his bosom spring
Assailing all his woeful heart at ons
One day he would be secret forth to bring
The woeful birth of tears of sighs and grons
Throune on his bed with Rageing Discontents
At la^t he thus burst forth in heighe complaints
Ah haples wretch Cursed be the Fatal hour.
Wherein I did Obtain a Diadem
By false conceat by strong entysing Power
Not cairing for Disgrace for loss for shame
While avarice and ambition did devour
Treuth, Knowledge, wit, discretion praise and fame,
Ah Avarice, inchaunter of the wise,
The blind devouror of fair honors prize.
O bloody stars why did you thus agree,
To make a bad conjunction at my birth?
Why did you al power down mischief from hie?
To make vile me, the abject of the earth,
What shall al times and ages say of me?
To buie a croune, that sold a Kingdoms worth,
The reuenews I sold to buie the Name,
Exchaunging honor for eternal shame.
What woe or grief but time can make it old,
Yet Infamy time never can svppresse,
The meaner sort their faults will pas untold,
But faults of Kings by Fame do still increase,
Such spotts are in my leaprous soul enrold,
As still accuse me of my guiltines,
And while my wronged people me do vewe,
Me thinks their eyes to death do me pursue,
In midst of this his sorrowful complaint,
His eyes grew heavy dround with floods of tears,
His tongue, his throt no more their found forth-sent
Thus slummerd he full fraght with greifes and fears
At last this fearful vision did present
A dreadful founding noice that pearst his ears,
He thought he saw before him all at once,
Were nintie Kings, and two on golden Throns.
Each bore a close rich couerd glorious Croune,
In form like an Imperial Diadem,
With ribs of gold o'rthwart above and down,
All round about each bowing like a beam,
In the fore front were made of Iacinths broune
Fair letters, showing eurie Prince his Name,
Beneath their feet an iron throne was made,
Whereon of lead au Open croune was laid.
He thought they set him on the iron Throne,
And cround him with that leaden croune in scorn,
Whereon was written this Inscription,
This non but bastard Baliol has borne,
Then said the first and grauest all alone
Whose aged hairs had many years outworne
Thou wreched catiue most accursed of all
Thy place is great but, greater far thy fall.
This Diadem Pointing his Ow'ne by Me
Erected was with honor strength and Might
And from my Aged loins discendit be
By Just descent these Nyntye two in sight
Each bure this Crown with Royal dignity
Adding as much by Conquiest to there Right
Defending It against Romans saxons Dains
For witness famous victories Remains.
But vn-compeld un sought or on requierd
By words by war by Conquest or by gane
Thou Randert up what we aloft had Reard
And what we keipt with travel cair and Pane
The thretning trompet that all Nati'ons feared
Which worlds of Armeis newer could obtain
Yet this thou could not do without consent
Of all the Thrie Estates of Parl'ament.
But for thy fault, thy shame, thy loss, thy wrong,
This just and heavy Judgment shall correct thee,
The Kingdom shall be reft from thee e're long
And thy own subjects shamefully rejecte thee,
In blinded darkness woes shall be thy song,
For want of day, yet no man shall affect thee,
And to all ages thy Infamous name,
Shall Be a proverb of eternal shame.
For lo Thou shall be called in littill space
Thy countries ruin and thy Nations woe
Much harmles Blood shall pay for thy disgrace
Theas yet onborne thy Doom shall feill and kno
A mighty Nation shall thy land Deface
Beneth whois havie yok She grons, but lo
She Viper-like brings forth un natural Brood
That most shall waist her, wond her, drink her Blood.
At last her tears her Cry's her sad Complaint
Shall Pearce the heavins and Jove to Mercy move
Who pitis sinners when they first repent
And looking Meeklie dounward from above
Shall Raise Them up that shall her wrak prevent
Whose manly Valors shall her woes Remove
And bring to end the war Thou wroght with shame
But neu'r an end to Thy Infamous Name.
Therefore this leaden croune, base, worthles, poor,
Thou have as one unworthy to put on,
The croune which I the famous Fergus boore
And al these warrlike Princes One, by one,
And while this mighty Nation shall endure,
Having a Prince to sit upon my Throne,
Thou of a Princes name shall be refused
Because my croune vn-conqu'erd thou abu'sd.
At these last words he waked with sudden fear,
But nothing saw while in his brain was tossed,
These woeful warnings buzing in his ear,
That threatened was by great King Fergus ghost,
Which burden great his soul could skarsly bear
Till moueing, fieling, speech and all was lost,
His vital powers hernd in with thousand cares,
At last burst forth in these or like dispaires.
O Sad and wearied Soull quod he depairt
And leave the lothed Lodge thou do posse
Stop up my breath within my lothed heart
My life make les if shame may not be les
Hev'ne from above thy vengence at me Daiert
Heel from below thy Torment still Incres
Devouring Earth my damned body smoother
Heav'ne, Earth and hell destroy me altogether.
Thus swallowed up of mankind most abhord
If any should Inquire for worthles Me
Say that some Rav'ning monster me Devoir'd
And let my Name, O? fame forgotten be
Let al my day's t'obliu'on be Restoir'd
Lest thou O time theirwith dishonor thee
Thus Rol'd in clouds of smook let it be said
That such a One was neu'r framed nor made,
Thus while he lay half dead for grief and woe
A herald came from Englands mighty king
And straitle charged him haistelie to go
To york and all his princes their to bring
And homage dew for Scotlands kingdom sho:
Which brought the Nobill's secret murmuring
To light at last, and thus they work with all
To make him sie his Error, shame and fall.
Saltons great Lord that Abirnethie hicht
he had vniustle wronged (A huinows thing)
Wherefore from him in all his Princes sight
He did Apeall unto the English king:
This heigh disgrace he took in great dispight
For in Contempt with all it did him bring
At last he casts about to right the wrongs
That to his Endless Infamy belong's.
A message to the English King he send
For to discharge that base infamous Band
Since he without consent could not pretend
Thus for to Slave a frie-vn-conquerd land
But too too late Repentance Coms in End
Thus shallow with deip Judgment does with stand
So children use for to repent their Error
When nocht Remains but Punishment and Terror
The mighty English rise in dreadful arms,
Still threatening Blood, wrake, ruin, vengeance, sorrow
Performing still their vow's with griefs and harms
That from their fiery wraths new woes did borrow,
Fair Fortune towks their Droms with loud allarm's,
And waits on bloody Mars, from day to morrow,
Whose dreadful Trumpet blow's a deadly blast,
And rowls our day in doulful night at last.
First Barwick taken was by a subtle train
Wherein seau'n thousand men of Arms were lost,
Women and children pitiles were slain,
None left alive of Scottish blood cold boast,
Now at Dunbar four Princes did remain,
That had conueind of Scots a mighty host,
But h^te of Baliol such dissension brings,
In his dispight they love their foes design's.
Which caused a strange vn-lookt-for long decay
For English Edward Marcheing there in haist
Encountered them Impatient of Delay
Amongst them selfs in woeful factions plast
Now Edward Causd me in his camp to stay
For to my love were most of them addressed
So when the armies, joining did abyd
Twelf thousand turned upon the English syd.
This was full sore against my will God knows
Nor was I ever privy to this treasson
My Deids on Edwards side was but in shows
Nor could I disobey him in that Season
On no les pain then huntington to lose
But ah these foolish Scots had no such Reason
Who by their new discord struk blind with wrath
Would make me cloak unto their brokin faith.
For they unworthy of the Scottish name
Against their Cuntreis friedome Rudlie stand
Onworthie also of their Elders fame
That against them selfs dars lift their conquering hand
When foraigne force could not their stomaks tame
Them selfs against them selfs opposd they fand
The Sone the father, father kills the sone
Each kills his friend and help's his foe to win:
Such things were wrought by heaunes feirce destanye
Because the land with sin did overflow
Evne as a stately ship with sails on hie
If justly poysd with balance fears no blow
Of winds, but if over chargd with weight she be
Her speed is staiy'd impaird her glorious show
Then angry Neptunes foemeing surges beat-her
And with decay the thundering tempests threat her
Ev'ne so whill as in Scotland did remain
The sword of justice fear of god above
The love of virtue hate of vice profane
And whill the sptituall state the treuth did love
We saild in seas of peace and did obtain
Wealth, honor, all which lands most blisd do prove
But once borne down with pride, lust blindness error
Our calmes of peace heavnes tempests shook with terror
For mighty God that sittes upon the throne
Of justice grace and mercy from that hight
Did view our sins in burning rage anon
His countenance with fyrie flammes grew bright
That heavnes did quaek for fear and Angels moan
For men poor men at that astonieing sight
Days glorious lamp, nights Queen, heavens tapers stayed
Wrapped up in clouds at his dread looks affray'd.
Within his wattrie palace Neptun quaekes
The roating streams were quiet whist and still
His azurd crown from crisped looks he taekes
His monsters all the lower Regions fill
His forked scepter then for fear he breaks
And to obey his lord and makers will
He myldlie falls before his mercies throne
Whoes glory made the heavnes with lightnings shone
The solid earth did quak with trembling fear
And downward seemd to change her wonted rowme
Such grevous weight and burdene did she bear
Of hynous sin, whose punishment to come
She did forsee as when throw subtel aer
Dame Thetis foull with Alabastre Down
Fleis down with woeful plaintes and mutufull cries
Before a dreadful tempest does arise,
The hellishe feindes that scatterd were abroad
Through all the earth and for mischief still soght
Reann headlonges down unto their greislie god
And was through these infernal kingdoms brought
Where Proserpin with Pluto grimme abode
Whoes rustie scepters were of iron wrought
On thrones they sat bout which ferce feinds did rore
Two heavy crowns of burning brase they bore.
Prodigious signs and wounders then were seen
Which did presage what after might befall
From the cold North did in our climat shine
A bright and blazing Comet and with all
Reid showers of blood in sundry had been
The last the latest warning of our fall
Yet dreadful signs and fearful wonders sent
Sin made not less but judgment did augment.
The Argument.
Grief haueing some what interrupt the Prince
He shows at last his cause of discontent
And follows forth with eurie tragic chance
Wheir with proud Fortun erst did him present
The witty Count conforteth him and thence
Desires him go where Fergus ghost him sent
Whereon they both conclude and with a dream
Sleep drownes discourse at last in silence stream,
Cap. 3.
O Subject sad o sad vnsolid Muse
In Cypres wreathd in murning blak attire
Blott confort out and in your lays refuse
All mirth yea in your woeful task desire
Sad tragic tuns the which while you peruse
In Nights dark Inn's her dreadful cave retite
Tears serve for ink and if you aim at mirth
O sighs let all be smotherd in their brith,
But wailing Muse Ay me why do you sho
To outward view the only stain of Time?
Why in rememb'raunce of such horredwo
Do you not weip to wash your woeful Rhyme?
O thry's Infamous! Tims Inglorious! O
That this their shame had ended with their Crime,
But hev'n and Time, fate, Fortun, chance and all
Had with Them selfs decreed them selfs to fall
Where was the Conquering Arm's the valiant heart's.
Where was wonted Loyltie now gone
When for their faith their valor their deserts
Our Elders mounted up to honors Throne
When Rudely They Opposd their Arm's and Arts
In Belgia fair, against this foe alone,
Such prais they wan beneth those temp'red Clim's
As maks them famous to Eternal Tim's.
Indeed such praise and Glory great they wan
As these whoes grevous wrong's they came to right
Ingratelie and Vnnat'rallie began
T'Invy their greatness and to fear their might
How soon their Suord freed them of fo's eu'ne then
Of them they make a, Massacre by night
And as a sad Remembr'aunce of this Acti'on
Scots only gwards their king for satisfaction.
O had you foght your contreies honor still,
As those for honor from theier country came.
Your golden praise had gilt my rusty quill,
And with perfumes, had fired my sacred flames,
But now my woeful song kind Eyes may fiil
With teates, and hearts with sorrow for the same,
For had the Scots true to themselves rem aind,
Long-shanks had not so great a glory gained.
But O why am I thus with passion led?
For pardon courteous Reader must I sue,
Earths brauest Prince we left within a shade,
Who having made a period, did renew
His woeful history and thus he said,
Now does our endless tragedy ensue.
The Scots we left still fighting at Dunbarr,
Themselves against themselves: O curel war!
The rest of woeful Scoots that did remain,
Perceauing this new loss and sudden change,
They fainted, yet they fought for to obtain
That honor which their fellows did infringe,
Each one thus by his second self was slain,
While as the English smils at such revenge,
And thus whem naught but death to Scots ensue
They yeald to Fortune, not to Valor true.
Now only English Edward was Renownd
all yields to him and to his fortuns Rare
He with our Ancient Diadem was Crowned
To him the Princes of the land Repair
Whill Baleoll in seas of sorrows Drowned
By english Scots was brought in blak despair
Before great Edward when he did deny
All title, Right and soveraguitie,
Thus Edward made a conquest of our crown
And homage did Require of all the land
Which sundry Lords and Princes of Renown
Refused nor would they yield to his demand
And while the wrathful heavins looked mildly dous
They for a space would fly his vengfull hand
Wheirfore two hundredth yeowths he with him le^
These were the first borne son'^ of those that fled,
Th'Imperiale Treassour hence he did convoy
With all the Jewels of our Diadem
Our ancient monuement's he did distroy
And from all time to blot the Scottish name
He burnt with fyit what ere we did enjoy
Wreits, Books and works and to augment our shame
The marbill cheer our oldest Monument
He reft away wheiron these lyns were pent
Ni fallat fatum Scoti, quacunque Locatum
Invenient lapidem, Regnare tenentur Ibidem.
If fatal des^eines be true the scots shall find this stone
And wheirsoew'r They find the same their they shall Regne allow*
King Edward thus of all our wealth possessed
And all wheir to we did good Right pretend
To cur^e town a garesone addressed
And to each Strength his captains did he send
And english lords did in the land invest
Of those that to his Scepter would not bend
Thus long we leu'd in care in woe and sorrow
that always did augment from day to morrow,
In this time lewd a worthy valiant knight
Most fortun at who Wallas heght to name
Wallas by wit, by valor, fate and might
Who Scotland thrice from Bondage did Recleame
His coadherent in that cause of right
Was that brave Mare of men the val'aunt grham^
Both fortunat and famous both wheirby
Tho dead They Live to all Eternitye.
Scotland the fourth time was in thraldom brought
After good Wallas had relev'd it thrice
When him betrayde by that accursed thought
Of falls Monteith the English did surprise
Eu'ne cursed manteith by heauin's for vengence wroght
By fortun, fate and cruel, Desteneis
His Nations shame lyns blot and Cuntreis scorn
By furies brought from hell or he was borne.
Whoes lawles act, whoeis lewd and haetfull name
Polluts my virgin vn-polluted ryms
Yet these so called As faultles I reclaim
Thought I unfold his neu'r concealed cryms
Let them not greive at me nor at his shame
If they leiue spotles to Eternal tims
I blame the Man but not the line discendit
The deide but not the name is reprehendit
Poor Scotland thus in all calametie
While Bondage like ane Earth-quaik Rents the state
Assunder quyte, and still our Infamy
Incressing by the Means of private hate
Our selfs amongst, our selfs divided be
Which maks this uncouth strange and new debait
Comfussion thus cast down from heavins above
Does still Increase and can not yet remove.
Much I lamented this my cuntries woe
And often desird to remedy the same
Till fortun, heavens and fate at last did sho
A mean to blaze abroad my secret flame
To make the variows wondering world to kno
My great desire my Countries will to frame
Yet fortuns frowns on mydesigne sattendid
And hevi'ne was with my rash attempts offend^^
The cumin ever Infamous for that crime
Of me a secret Parle did require
And thus he said now fortun fits the Time
wh^irin thy right may to the crown aspyr
The variws mine l^ beneth this variws clime
Do now more steadfastly them selfs Retire
Wissing their cursed allegaince now were broke
Yet groan they still beneth the English yoke
What glory great the warrlike Scots have won,
From age, to age, all time can witness bear,
Scots only keeps a free unconquered croune,
Scots only gave the mighty Romans war,
At whom begged peace the Romans of renoune?
Was It not the valiant Corbred they did fear?
Who but the Scots the valiant Pichts subdued,
And warrlike Danes whose force seau'n times reneud?
But we, eu'ne we degenerat and bare,
Do challenge yet from them our blood, our being
Tho prostitute to infamy and care,
Our selves eu'ne with our selves still disagreeing,
For courage, fear, for worth and wit despair,
To vice inclining still, from virtue flying,
Thus have we made our selves a woeful pray
Unto our Foe (never siene before this day)
Where is become our Elders vallerous hearts?
Their deeds, their virtue, and their conquering sword,
Their dignities, their office, place and parts,
Their victories with Monuments decoird,
Their ancient Arms woone by their brave deserts?
Can these noe good, noe strength, noe wit afford?
No no I sie we faint, we fear, we fall,
From honor, Greatness Liberty and all.
Yet that we may at their deserts but aim,
As those who should inherit them by right,
Rise thou in Arms, thy right for to reclaim,
My self, my power, my strength and all my might,
Shall follow thee my race and all my name,
Shall with Victorious Arms maintane the fight,
Give me thy land, but when the Crown is thine
Or for thy right thereof Receive thou mine.
Soon to these sugared words I did accord
And then betuixt us two a band was made
That when I to the Crown should be restord
Assisted theirto by the Cumins Aid
The Cumin then of Carrik should be Lord
This don we both Reioisd and both seimd glad
But lo, the Cumin traitrouslie repented
Ew'n to his endeles Infamy lamented.
To Englands mighty King the band he send
Declairing how that I him would betray
Who gravelie did advise their with in end
I soon was chairg'd to court without delay
At me the King requird if that I kend
That band and seall yet did I not dismay
But framd my countenance more bold and stout
Offe'ring on morrow nixt to cleir the dout
My Patrimony for a pledge I left
And after to my Innis reteird Anon
Our Hemisphere of day was then bereft
Whill night spread fourth her sabel wings alone
Such fearful darkness over the Earth she wef't
As seimd to say in friendschip now begone
Thus secreitlie alone I took my flight
Helped by Joue and by the freindlie night.
Five Tyms had Hesper Titan warned away
Five tyms agane did Lucifer Apeir
Wiueing the glorious standerd of the Day
On tops of Touring clouds reid, whit and ^ei^
And cheng'd their sabel hew to silver gray
When fire Ste^ds the golden carr drew neir
Whill sullen night in towny suits addressed
Did schrink abak and shrewd her in the west.
When as I then Arrived like Fortuns knight
Within the confins of our kingdom old
Then presently appeard unto my sight
Two valiant knights stout, hardy, fearce and bold
The one where of my brother Edward hight
The vt her fleiming unto those I told
Cumins deceat and how by heavens revenger
I had escaip'd so imminent a danger.
Thus tallked we and thus along we pas
Till by good hap a Messinger we met
Who after streat Inquerie did confess
He was vpone a secreat Message set
To Englands King for Cumins business
Whose letters did require the King to let
Me soon by death from my revolting Mind
Else Scots to me should shorthie be enclind.
Wheir Cumin was we vrgd him to declair
Within the Cloister of Drumfreice quod h^
Thither with restles speid we did repair
And in the Church he seimd devotiuslie
To kneile, for as he sat, we killed him their
The which I fear his caused my misery
For that Jov's sacred house we thus defild
Rashly with his sin gultie blood so wild.
Then was I soon received of alas King
And on my head I weere the Crown alone
I did a great and mighty Army bring
To raise my state cast down from honors Throne
In whose brave strength good hope I had to wring
The reull from Edwards hand and Marching on
With dreadful Terror on the trembling Earth
I pitched my Tenis before the Wall's of Pearth.
Whill thus I did my rightful Claim beginn
With wars stern shok and Trumpets dreidfull blast
My kingdom by victorious Arm's to winn
True Scots with my Imperial standart past
The Lion fierce a field of Gold within
Which seimd throw the air agrumling Noise to cast
Whose Chain thus brok made mighty Edward quake
Fearing much blood would not his Fuerie slake The Scots arms a lion.

But then eu'ne then began my Endless caire
My sorrou's great my woe my wrack and all
Proud fortun then did all Her frouns prepair
Wheirwith she ever siince my hairt do'th gall
For then she brought me with a wondrous snair
My Jnfamie my wrak my los and fall
A Period long heir made the woeful king
Sob's from his Breist send secreit Murmwring
Yet in the sad confussioun of his mind
This too too sad a Tragedy he told
Within the town of Perth then did we find
The English army with their Captane bold
My Sold'ours hearts to Battle all inclind
Often darr'd them forth with bravads from their hold
But they nor we in war more wys and warrie
Knew by what means to make us all miscarie,
The General who Sir aymer Vallangs hight
A herold send and thus he do'th direct him
That day the Sabbath was he would not fight
But on the Morrow nixt we should expect him
And he would soon abait My pride my might
That was so bold thus fondly to neglect him
Yet I not cairing those his vanting words
Would answer him with noght but spears and suord'^* Other ways odomer de (...)
walenc e^il of pe^^bro^.

Then choosing forth advantage of the Ground
Neu'r doubting that he would his word infrenge
Made all my Camp that eirst no rest had found
Refresh them selfs in hope of blessed revenge
Thus all at rest when each was sleiping sound
No reest I got (and which was yet more strainge
A kind of uncouth fear assaild my heart
I neids would ryis and forth I walked aparte,
Now was it about the dead hour of the night
While as the Watch in heavy sleip didly
When noys of neighing horssis hear I might
And through the Air men's voices found neir by
I stood amazd till Phebe with her light
Piteit my cause and made me to discry
A mighty Army Marching hard at hand
As many thryse as those I did command.
I caused sound all arum presently
Which made them with a showt to have their pace
And with their Drums and Trumpets roaring cry
They make a sadd and dreadful noise allas
Fyve hundredth of my Camp no more had I
Yea those half armed with saintnes fear Embrase
The rest were sleiping killed some fled along
For lo our foes were tuentie thousand strong.
And natural Scots the greatest part of those
Natural said I no most vnnatrall rather
For these ew'ne these were still our greatest foes
Most Viper-like and worsh then Vipers either
For us at last They forced, Much ground to lose
Friend against his friend the Sone against the father
I stayed behind their fury to gainestand
Till softly thence reteir'd my mangled band.
As Hunters keen that douth a park enclose
To take or slay the staige Deir, hynd or heart
So were we now en compast by our foes
Six and my self the rest were fled a heart
All which were taken thought honor none did lose
Each hardy bold each bare a valiant part
Yet I escaped out through these Squadron's strong
So del't my fate to work my greater wrong, The randell was an of the six.

Nor was proud fortune thus suffeisd at al
With those misluks and these my grievous mo'ns
Triumphing on my shame my fate my fall
And heaping on a thousand wo's at onc'e
But when my brok'ne force I did recall
Uniting them for new Invasions
I fand seven tyms as many mo had left me
As my fearce foes revenging sword bereft me.
And yet with those all hopeles hartles faint
I forced was to the Montans for to fly
Wheir nothing else but penury did hant
Much travel pain and sorrow suffered we
Yet none at all did pity this our want
Tho we abode for them this misery
And which was wors this Terror did enseue
Ev'ne native Scots did most our liu's pursue
Ev'ne native Scots my life persew'd indeid
Although for them this task I undergo
Their wealth to winn brought all my want my neid
Yet for my Love, dispight, and hate they sho
And this my love did so all bounds exceid
I made my friend my foe; because their foe
Yet whill I seik Their honor wealth and ease
They seik my death my fall this (...) with Edward King of Eugland.
foe to pleas,
Like to that fish the mighty Whale does gu'ide
From craggie Rocks and shallows throw the Dein
In the waist bosom of the Occeane wide
The Whale her brood would fain devour to keip
Her self alive, and yet she stealls aside
When she espy's the Monster rest or sleip
Brings forth her brood with care to keip them fry
But they do her devour Immediately
So fair's with me that cair's to keip alive
My Natioun fry from mighty Edwards Iaw's
The greater pairt of my own subjects strive
Who shall devoit me first with tearing Paw's
For lo when to the Montain's I arive
Left of my own and left without a cause
The lord of Lorne a mighty army bring's
To bring my self to end with my design's. The Lord of lo^^ne his army was
abowe fyve thousand.

Of all my Army was five hundredth left
That took a pairt with me in weile and woe
Which Number few of strength was clean bereft
For pining Famein had oppressed them so
In their paill Face was pailler death ingraft
Upon their wereid lims they fanting go
Yet curage did their weikned strength renew
And willingly they wish the fight t'insew,
Thrice they their fo'es with woundrous strength assaild
And thrice agane their deing forces spent
Thrie tyms with matchles valor they prevaild
Thrie tyms their foes their Number did augment
Yea which is most of all to be bewaild
Our foes tho ten too one did still prevent
Our victory with fresh and new suppleis,
For one cum's in still, as one other deis.
At last their forces did so much abound
That we are encompasd in on every side
Whill as dark night over shaddow't all the ground
As piteing us whill she our lose espyde
Thrie hundredth lost of my best Knights I found
The rest sore wounded fighting still abide
Nor would they once be taken or yield or fly
But would their blood revenge and fighting die.
Yet when I causd to sound a sad Retreat
They hewd a passage throw these Squadrons strong
Still fighting they Reteir and still their date
With valors endless praise they do prolong
At last they entered all a narrow streat
On each side streatch'd a mounting rock a long
When I by Fortun last of all did stand
Them to restrain that would our lyves demand.
Thrie Knights was their me by my armor knew
And were suborned before my life to take
Who seeing me allone did fast persew
Two lights theirby advantage for to make
The th^^d befoir me did the fight renew
Whill they mount up the crags and wins my bak
Thus was I sore assaild on ew'rie side
But mighty Jove my saiftie did provide.
I did of Victory almost despair
But Jove, hev'ne fate and fortun wild not so
To end my wrack my misery my care
Preserving me to greater shame and woe
To fight whill as the formest did prepair
It was my luke to kill him with a blo
The one a foot essayed with mighty force
By my one leg to pull me from my horse.
And in the Stirro'p thrust all his arm weel ny^
The third leapt up vpone my horse behind
And thrust his dagger in my side awry
Whill as the other draw's me to the ground
But in the Stir'p his arm so bruzed I
And with his heills my horse such way has found
That he the use of feit had quyte bereft him
Then I cut of his arm and so I left him.
But now the third that all this time allone
Was siurlie set behind me on my horse
Did wound me thrice although not mortal one
Whom in my arms at last I straind by force
And on my horse befoir I laid him on
The dagger then wheirwith he wroght my loss
I made to digg a passage throw his heart
And thence his Cursed Soult did sone depart.
Thus fred of all my soes and fry from danger
For all the rest did long before reteir
I wandered through the Desert like a stranger
And of my mangled Band no news could heir
So dois a Shipheard sad and woeful rainger
That holds the Wolf in chase till night draw neir
Then to his flleecie flock returns back
But of their fearful flight has lost the tracke.
At last when I a forest did espy
Grim night looked forth with greislie countenance
Her smookie breath in duskie clouds does fly
From her paill lip's, and darkened heavins bright glance
Over vailling all the earth and azur Sea
With shaddow's dim that dreadful sights advance
I strayed a fortnight in this wood un sterv'd
Roots herbs and water still my life preserved.
Weary at last with feantnes all possessed
Amongst the Flowrs I laid me down to prove
If my sore wearid Soull could find some rest
Since daeth did scorn my wois for to remove
Neir wheir I lay from mighty Roks increst
A silver Brook down tumbling from above
With cheirling Murmurs sweit and dulceit sounds
Whose Echo from a hollow Pit redounds.
The treis about me Arbor like did grow
With busshie topps and tender twists aloft
Whilst Zephyres mild sweit gentle breath did blow
The leav's with muttring made a murmor often
That with the bubling of the stream below
Had Rocked my senses in a slumber soft
Whill as my Spreit was trubled from above
Strange Aparitions in my Soull did move.
Me thought great Fergus did before me stand
With ghostly looks with fearce and angry cheir
I hard his voice like thunder to demand
A count most sharp of all my labors heir
So great a taskas thou has taine in hand
With greater pains quod he thy Ioys must cleir
Up then arise this life would blot thy fame
And should redound to thy Eternal shame,
In the waiste bosom of the western laike
Of Albion neir Irish montains hoar
Neptune a pene Insula does make
Stretching his azure arms along the shore
Their must thou all thy sorrows quite forsaik
And comfort find for all thy greifs of yore
Up then with speid I say and thither go
Wheir thou Jov's will and Mercy both shall kno.
This said through Shaiples air he went away
I suddantlie awak't and was aghast
Yet weyghing weill the sentence he did say
I soght my horse in haste and thence I past
When as I traveld had but half a day
Within that Valey I arrived at last
Wheir you I fand thus may you sie with all
How great misfortuns works my greater fall.
Then quod the Douglass Sir I you desire
Forget these passions strange, too straung alace
Since Fortune now shall change her sad attire
And ever after look with cheirfull face
An hard beginning to an end aspire
Of ewerlasting happiness and grace
The mighty minds to honor still repare
Throw rare difficulties and dangers rare.
Wheir Fergus Ghost directs their must you go
Winter draws neir heir must you noght abids
Their havin's your fortune fait shall to you sho
Eu'ne unto you and all the world beside
In these and such like speeches past these two
The longsome night till Morpheus provide
For drowsy flight, who over the Earth soon past
And lights on them with lazy wings at last.
When nights swift course with silence was outworns
She givs a kind fairweill unto the day
The winged Musicians which awake the morn
With hollow throts and horned bills did play
The Nightingale whose Musik Match does scorn
The Maues that throw Forest Echois ay
The lark that warns the craftsmen of their pains
And laborers that daily toyll for gain.
Even as a Man in sleip that seems to hear
Of Instruments and song a hevn'lie sound
To them in sleep such sounds did now appear
Their Soulls transported were when Ioys abound
They hard the Aengells heav'nlie Music cleir
In Paradise it seemd them selfs they found
Cloyed whill they walk throw groves of all delight
Sweit to the smell and pleasant to the sight.
And in this pleasant Slumber whill they lay
This fetherd Crew with their enchanting sound
Above them on the tender twists do play
Wheir Musicks weilset descant did abound
When in the east arois the glorious day
His crisped loks in silver Cisterns drowned
Waueing his golden vaill bright pour and cleir
Wheir throw the clouds like crimsone flams apeir.
The Argument.
The Bruce dispersed host their Lord does know
Who to Kintyre reteirs and their does sie
An aged Sire that unto him does show
The heaven lie constable ullations curtouseie
And his blesd race and princely stemm does dra^
From these rair purtrates in the heavens that be
He shows each Prince and does the line advance
To that fair matchles Douager of France.
Caput. 4.
SOft now my Muse and do not sore to hye
Waed not in curious questiones too deep
Let thy pure ground be truth and verity
And learn the cheifest pointe's and heads to keep
Although thou sometime wantonize awry
To recreat thy self yet softly creep
So neir the treuth as none may hear nor se
To taint the chastest care nor sharpest eye.
The child does learn his lessone every day
Yet play does oftin recreat his Sprite
play sharpes thingyne makes pregnant witt's they say
After long study honest mirth is meet
The purest truth does harshslie rune away
But sau'ed with Parnass streams it sounds more sweet
The strengthes stomak waek and wanting power
With sugar sweet accepts a portion sover.
Whill Bruce and Douglas sleeps and dreams of toys
That in their moystned brain impression makes
Evne as the Day comes in they hear a noyes
A noyes that suddanelye them both awakes
Yet makes them both thereafter to rejoice
And greif's sad vale from their sharp eyes it shaekes
For heaune blissd Bruce was so with patience cround
Adversity his mind could never wound.
Although he gravelie did unfold his ill
Unto the valiant Count his woes bewaeling
Yet with a constant mind he acts them still
His cheerful looks and words so much prevailling
As in their heattes all thought of fear did kill
And winnes their love their curage still appealling
Who were his followers in each woeful fight
And could no danger fear if in his sight.
Which made them all way up and down to rainge
Throw deserts Montains plains and Ferrests hoar
Bewailling their hard lots and fortuns strainge
Their want of food, but want of him much more
They did lament and in this woeful chainge
They swear to venge his death or die theirfore
For sure they thought he by mishap did stray
Amongst his foes when night did part the fray
Now were they come neir to the grove wheir he
And Douglas slumberd soundly in a dreme
Who both awaekt rushed furt he and straight they sie
An armed man the King knew weill his name
whom when he called the rest did quickly fly
forth through the groves; some fears, and some thinks shame
Yet love and joy recald them all at last
Before his feit them selfs they humbly cast.
So have I fiene a moore-hen in the spring
Missing her tender Brood throw desearts straying
She in her throat some chirping nots does sing
Which when they hear with natural love repaying
Her kyndlie cair in haist them selfs they bring
And floks about her all her will obeying
She seims right glad to sie her yung ones so
Escaped from the Danger of their rawning foe
When he vnlac'd his burnishd helm of gold
His mild, Sueit, manly countenance they knew
Virtue and Grace divine they might behold
Like Phoebus beams from his fair looks t'ensew
As Phoebus draw's the dew up from the mold
His eyes their hearts so from their bosoms drew
Before him still vpone their kneis they fall
To gracious hea'uens they render thanks for all
He thanks them for their says their truth their love
And to each man did several favores sho
Soon after they from thence did all remove
And westward to Dumberton glaedlie go
From thence great Neptunes freindship would they prove
And the Oceans watrie force they neids would kno
Shipd for Kyntire fleing the wind before
Ere morrow nixt they saiflie came to shore.
The king his men in through the cuntrie sent
With them the Errl of lennox for their Lord
An other way he with the Douglas went
To sie what favor fortuon would afford
They trawelling allong with this Intent
At last their way them to a wod restord
Wheir half a myill at most they had not riddin
When both to ryd one way were thus forbiddin.
Two ugly monstrous wolfs they might espy
Had killed a heart and on the same was feiding
Each choosd a wolf his horse swist Paise to try
For Boare-spears serud their lance in this proceeding
Each wolf his follower leads a sundry way
Their eger chase and there persuit deriding
What fortun hevins for Douglas had appointed
We'll after show, now to the Lords anointed
I mean the Bruce that brave and valiant Prince
Who with an egger mind perseu'd the chase
The wolf had left the wood and for defense
Unto a might Rock he rins a pace
Breathles he seimd so slowly running thence
As made the Prince hope weill to win the race
He cuyts his horse rins up the Rock in haiste
But soon he lost the sight of whom he chaist
His trevell lost he would return over night
Yet any where to ryid he does not knoe
The Rock he seis of such a wondrous hight
As all the country round about would show
Up then he goes to view so fair a sight
Whill he ascends the sone discendet low
But e're he could unto the top attain
Night spreds her painted veil over all the plain.
In heavens heighe court the lamps all lighted shynes
Which him constraind to search some place of rest
The montaines top was decked with oaks and pynes
Where nature hade a garden rairlie dressed
With fontanes walks and groves without ingynes
Of art: yet seemd of arts best skill poseest
But sad it seemd to Nights sad shad inclyning
Shown to the Prince by Phaebes feeble shyning.
At last arryving by a fontane syid
Beneath a leavie aged oak he lies
A hearty draught of the cold stream he tried
Which for a dainty maill did him suffice
And now his cogitation deeply weighed
Earthes glory vane and wordlie fantasies
Compairing all beneath heavens silver boures.
To clouds of smook to shadows dreams of flowers
Thus raped with admiration whill he lies
He vewes the stars and all the heavenly lights
When as he hears a sound pas through the skies
Lyik to the noyes of floodes impetuous flightes
Or as when fearful doves in numbers fleis
Aer and their wings with noyes them selfs affrightes
Such was this noyes yet nothing he perceaves
Nor was there wind to move the trembling leaves.
A dark gray cloud past furthe over all the air
But nights pale Qveene cleird all the heavens at last
When to him did an old grave man repair
Whoes head and beard had youths fresh cullor past
A cristal glob his trembling hand vpbeare
Where heavne over earth did move from east to west
Their stars and planets shynd most bright and cle^^
Which by a sprit was moved as might appear.
A Spherik glob within hung lyk a ball
That figurdrairlie forth the earth and sea
Which round about was fry from heavens cleir wall
Whose restles course round over this glob did fly
The glassie sea now calm then seemd to swell
Where wind-tost shipes with tides and tempests be
Whill Neptunes azurd arms the earth embraces
That cirquits yles and shore from shore vnlaceth.
Thus with a curious Pinsell the earth was drawn
Heir meidds, their flood^s, heir wodes their mo^tanes were
Heir tounes, their towers, with flowrie gardenes showen
Heir vines, their figs, pomgranates Cydrons fair
Heir plowemen teill, their herds and flokes at known
Heir Bowres does proyne their vines with wo^drowes care
Their sicklee cutts the corn heir sythes the Hay
Heir peace, their warrelyke armeis in array.
Unto the Prince this aged Sire drew neir
Whill chaste Diana shynd more fair and bright
Cled in a horye mantle white and cleir
He seemd devote in prayers to spend the night
Lean flesh^d, his wattrie blood sweld veins appeir
His ghostly looks still offered death his right
Who pausing long with steadfast staering eyes
This salutation did at last devyse.
Peace be to thee my Lord and Prince said he
Whom great and mighty Jove has her her sent
That thou might know his mercies great by me
And of thy bad and by past life repent
The shame the foil the loss that falls to thee
Is Jove's just doom because thou gave consent.
Unto thy will wrath vengeance and defyld
His sacred house with sinful blood so vyld.
Thy Nationes foil their wrak and their distres
Thy countries shame her woe her desolation
Thy subjects lose in care all confortles
Whom mighty Jove has hade in detestation
For their great sins their faults their cairlesnes
Of his soul feidding word o wicked Nation
That still with folly blindness pride abuse
Did sacred things apply to sinful use.
Their filthy life their lewd lascivious lust
Their walloweing in sensual delight
Threattens a dreadful storm e're long that must
Swellow them up in their own sins dispight
But leave we them and their affliction just
And now behold this day succeding night
These burning balls to thee and thine shall prove
Heavens for sight wisdom mercy grace and love
This counterfite of those bright orbs behold
The earth and sea but heavens of greatest wounder
Whose restles course about the poles is rold
With contrare motiones their first mobill under
The firmament with fixed stars untold
Whoes various shapes and rare effects we pondre
Lines tropickes circles Zones and Zodiac
Wherein Sol does the yeirs four seasones make
Almighty Joue who made heavens wondrous frame
Has made manes wit so rairlie excellent
That he can vivelie counterfite the same
And his great makers work can represent
With heavnlie fury: raped with sacred flamme
Of artles arts invention, noght content
Of his all working wonders heir below
But e'vne the heaunlie mansiones heir must show.
Lo where the Planets each his sphere within
Keeps time and course with heavnes true planets all The ^iu^nall motion of the
sphers. Their natural motion is snaued lyikwayes beginning at the Move.

Forcd by their Primomobill for to rinn
In twice twelf hours about this earthlyk ball
And their own course they end and they begin
With heauns bright lamps for thus they rise and fall
Chaste Phebes course just in a month goes right
Now poor then wealthy of her Brothers light.
Mercure and Venus follows Phoebus Teame
His tender wings her dows on him depend
Whose lead of light and life-reuiuing beam
About a year his natural course does end
And Marae in twice twelf months resums his game
Saturns mild Sone in twelf twelf months rescend (...)

Cold horie Saturus leaden coach that rins
In threttie years leau's aff where he begins.
All these heavens azure cannabie surrounds
Sprinkled with eyes spekled with tapers bright
Spangled with spangs throw all his boundles Bounds
Sowin all with glistring sparks of glansing light
Set with gilt stoods and golden skowchand grounds
Powdered with twinkling stars whoes kapring flight
Glanseth down right and with their myld aspects
Works in th'inferior bodies strainge effects.
Those sparking Diamonds this ritche vaill contains
Whoes number numberles ar past account
Has twalf that biasway's overthwart her lains
With pourfull virtue decks her gloriousfront
And those at signs wheirin the Planets reigns
Whill they descend or rise or fall or mount
For they partake in their swift revolution
From echo of those strenth, virtue, force and motion.
Beside all those about the Polls you sre
Figurs of what almost in earth is found
For the all-knawing-minde of majesty
Before he framed this ritche embrowdred round
The plot in his Idea seemd to be
And form of all his future works profound
Thus wirking in his spreit divin'lie rare
Long ere the world was made the world was their.
Unfolding then that ritche and glorious Tent
He portrayed with a Pinsell most divine
Upon the all enlightening firmament
Those tabr's of his future works in fine
Wheir lo behold thy brave most brave descent
That Sollie in the letter aige sall shine
Bearing Christ's standerd and his Church defending
Bounding their Empire with the worlds ending.
Eathniks not knowing God al provident
Have names of eathniks to these forms assigned
But let it thee suffice and be content
That I heirin unfold what Jove designed
By these bright Pontraits portreyd in the Tent
Of azur gilded heavins Pavilion signed
By his own hand, and for him self their mark it
Forew'r Immortaleisd for heavin Imbark-it,
Great Architector of this wondrous frame
Raise up my Spreit to thy celestial Throne The Prophets Pray.

Let my poor soul contemplat in the flame
Of thy all dazzling beauty wheir allone
Thy glorious beams reflecting may over quhelme
My waikned sight and more then Sun-like shone
On my poor souls all darkened Cinthi'as eyes
Make her to earth ecclipst, cleir toward skies,
Wheir with the Prophets face began to Shine
He suddanlie with Sacred fury glows
His Soul cleiv's throw the ten fold orbs in fine
And from sole Maiesteis bright Glory drow's
Her all celestial Sacred food divine
A Sun like brightness on his forehead grow's
A schining luster from his eyes forth sent
A fiery glance of goldlyke Blandishment. Heir follous the constel ^ations
about the Polls allooding to the Kings discendit of the Bruce.

First thou, said he, the Rampand Lion tyis Constellatio^ Hercules holds a
Lion bound in chayns ^lluding to King Robert Bruce holding the Scots arms.

Wha wandering from his Den goes far a stray
Intrap'd in snaires and foraigne subtilteis
Who erst subdew'd all prays becums a pray
To crafty subtle Foes yet does arise
With glorious Triumph to their great decay
And he who scornd a strainger sold command
Now yields his Neck to thy victorious hand. Constellatio Jason in the schip
argus. David Bruce that sailit to France wheir he stayit nine eirs Enduring the
wars against the Baleoll aided by england but when hereturnit he brought home
peace allu-Constellatio^ auriga draueth a cotch full of gale^t youths Robert
steuart the 1 of whom the Kingis of that name descended Constellatio^ Zepheus a
Weiping for Andromada swane and a eagils one either hand of him alluding to
Robart the 3.

Heir saillis the Schip wheirin thy young Sone sitts
Slyceing the vaus of Azur trembling plains
And wafts into a foreign land that fitts
For greennish youth (wheir all delight Remains)
Whill heir stern wars remorsles fury fretts
And tears our Bowels a shunder, strip's our vaint
Yet this blist bark our Jason brings from Greece
And of sweit Peace brings home the Golden Fleece
But lo heir cums the lofty coachman down
That after him draw's forth such lamps of light
Such Jems such Pearels and Jewels for the crune
Such Ornaments such only rare delight
That Sun like schyns with evir blessed renown
And all from Po to Gangis feiris their might
Yea and him self his chairge so weil discharges
Earths sole Impire Joue for his Seed enlarges.
Then cums that holy Prince Grave wise and old
That for his children murning still laments
Whoes spotles life heirby the Swans foretold
His thoghts and looks the Eagill still presents
For lo his Eyes bent upwards still behold
Fixed on his Phoebus the one trine Essence
He for his children plains to Jove abowe
Who shall regaird his looks his life his love.
Heir cums that Prince of wrongful Boundage fry Constellations Perseus
releiues the vergin Andromadoe luding Imee the first who institute the college
of justice.

Who that myld Virgin justice did releace
From that wild Monster raiging Tirannie
And set her fry to all his happy race
He rewels the land with laues and equity
In Whoes blist regue flous knawlege wealth and Grace
Of Justice in his hand he holds the Medusas hend constellatione chiro^ the
centaur with a lance holds a wolf by the nek alooding to lames the 2. a Zealous
reformer of finne and wyce.
heid
Whois splender striks all malefactors deid
Heir monted does that valiant Prince advance
Whoes heavin-wrocht lance his enemies ov'rthrouis
In whom shall schine pure virtues radiance
Raised up on hie by Jove against all his foes
The ravening wolf he foilles with Temperance
And the true Path to treew Religion shois
Moueing his subjects hearts their minds and all
Great Jove to fear and on his name to call.
Now in thy time quod he shall heir arrive
A worthy knight that from his native land
Shall fly because he bravely shall deprive
In glorius fight a knight that shall with stand
Thy Praises deu whill he does thee descriue
Yea ewin this knight shall with victorious hand
Come heir whoes name his Seid shill eternize
And still they virteus line shall sympathize Heir the Prophet taks occasion to
Entreat a litel of the beginning of the hammiltou^s

From this great man shall one far greater spring
Whom fortune fair and fate shall still attend
Bellona fearce and Venus myld shall bring
Laurells from Mars but to great love shill send
A Garland ritche sprung from this worrthie King
Whose royal Stem unto the endless end
Of his great line their Tempels sall adorn Sir James hamiltoun that marcie
King James the 2. his doghter.

With never setting ever rising morn. K. James, (...)

For lo the Daughter of this worthy * Prince
Sall wed this knight thts Lord of heigh renown
Whose hight whose greatness and whose excellence
Whose Schulders seims ane Atlas to the crown
Of him shall come that mighty Lord who thence
Shall go and proud rebellious Danes beat down
He to obey his Princes great commaud
Shall tak this bold and wightie chairge in hand. King James the 4. send
hammilton Erll of Arran with ane Armje with the Danish King whom he reastablist
in hjs kingdom and after returned to his country with great glory.

An Army and a Navy he shall bring
ou're thetis glassie montans groundles Deip
Under his wings that disin throned King
Shall go: whose crown rebellious Danes still keip
Ou're all these northern worlds his name sall ring
Terror in Eurie Ear: whill he does steip
His sword in their most valiant Princes blood
Whose might his all-commanding will gane stood.
And to his wounted height that King shall raise
And Inthroneize him in dispight of foes
With fame With glory and with endless praise
He shall return unto his land but lose
When he has spent in honors height his days
Fauord by heau'ne fred from vntimlie Woes
Of him discending shall a Greater ryise
And lift his Glory far above the Skyis.
He shall this land Govern Protect defend
from forangne force from homebred Civil broille
And the Imperial swey shall swet lie bend
Whill the right heir is Yung in these great toille
Eune the most christian king sall seu in end
For his great freindschip and his favor whills
To Dignity aloft he shall him rear
Thus sall his greatness schyn both heir and their. The Erll of Arran protector
of Scotland in Quee^e Mar^is mi (...) who^ the King of France maid duge of cha^
(...).

Nor yet this Prince allone shall be the last
That shall surmount his Predicessors far
But this great famelie shall spread so fast
As England shall in'uy that such a Starr
Schot from their sphere has their cleir lichts surpast
And like a comet blazing blood and war
Streams forth their beams that each wheir purge from error
And warmis their friends but burns their foes with terr^^
This famous line shall floorish more and more
Great Columns fair rare Pillars of the crown
Ritche ornaments that shall the land decore
Sune-glistring-lights with ever blisd renown
Heaune*blazing lamps whoes flame from virtues stor^
Brings oill wheirin they hell-bred Hydras drown
But leave we them, and of thy royal race,
Show heavins-rare blessings, greatness, hight^, and grace.
Then comes that Serpent berar forth in view
In base borne venamous blood to much delighted
Our all the land their poisoned goir they spew
And all his weill borne subjects much affrighted
Wheirof great harm great vengance does ensew
For those foull Beasts of each so much dispighted
Shall be the cause of this great Princes fall
Their Poison so infects heart mind and all: Constellaio^ A Serpent in either
hand of Serpentatius alloding to James the 3. Reuld by (...) and the dasie who
(...) ^erpents poisoned the land with vice the cause of his fall.

And Archer like the nixt does martche on foot
Amidst his army rashly to persew
His crafty fo'es whill his brave mind to stout
Shall scorn the Counsal of his subjects true
Their shall vnwars this warlike Prince no dout
Be lost whoes want thou Scotland long shall rue
For lo too soon his sone of glory Bright
Is chok'd with mists of feats untimely Night. Constellatione Indue ane archer
marching to fight on fut James the (...) who flighting on fut was sleane in
flouden ^eild.

And heir behold that Magnanimious King
Most just in peace most valorus in war
his royal Scepter bravely managing
Whoes glorious fame shall pears all Europs ear
From him fair Beuteis faerest flower shill spring
Whom heir you sie set in a royal cheer
And their her dangling golden locks intreyld
Much these have blist her but much more her child. Constellatione Boots is a
man strong and pouerful James the 5. Constellatione Cassiopea is a quein
setting in a chy^e quein marie douager of France. Berinicis crinis or
cel^^es-cald the ga^land of hear.

The Argument.
The south and North crowns joined by that great King
Who of all Kings hea'uns blissinges most embrace
His works his wit heavens care him sa^f to bring
To happy and: his two rair impes of grace
In whom hess bles'd more then in any thing
By war the youngest reules the earth in peace
The Prophet leaves the Prince amaizd at last
He foyles six Knights then to his army past. Const^^latione the north and
south crowns on either side of Polop^ i^ax before him an alter Allading to
James the 6. who ioyud the North and south crounes of Britans.

Caput. 5.
But heir o Sc^tland heir begins thy spring
of honor wealth fame glory praise and bliss
Eune now and not til nou high hea'uns does bring
Thy happiness thy good thy all wish
Thy fame thy name for e're eternizing
If sinful pride bear not thy ways amiss
Hence shall thy glory and thy greatness grow
Swelling over seas and o'ra all lands shall flow.
Their over the glob of Sea and earth he stands
Which to the North ioynes sowthes fair Diadem
And Boreas spacious impire all commands
And all wheir Titan coolls his fiery team
If thou can number forth the Ocean sands
Or all those spangled golden wonders name
In radiant coache that course heauns lists a pace
Then may thou count his blisd and frutfull race The north and south crou^s
Corona Borealis Gorona australi^

This, this, is he, eu'ne he, whom havin propoines
Great Jou's eternal motto for to bear
whoes Soul refyning sighs heart-scolding groans
shall on this Altar of Devotion rear
True zeall true faith and true repenting moin'^
From whence ascends the sueit perfums of Pra're
To the one-trin who from his merceis Throne
Shall rain down plenteus showrs of Grease anon.
From so great Dangers shall the Lord him save
And to such hight of happiness him bring
That tho nogth else could each ones ears bereave
Yet this shall be ane eue^lasting Sign
For each to sing, his mild Sweit virtues grave
Without correction bent to each design
His Bounty clemency and equity
His constant mind and his stabilitie. Gods wonderful love showin to him in
his so many and notabile delyveries from treson.

The least of nothing can my Muse record
Whoes wings is lag'd with vapors gros and fatt
but this I know that his imperial sword
shall Slyce down sin and scheild the desolat
But should I thus with seiming scheuis debord
His praise so Infinite so in tricat
No no deir muse search not wheir is no end
Only him self him self can comprehend
For all the Muses at his Birth desending
Throu the cleir Welkin of our western clyme
As when a fiery flashe of lightning Bending
With twinkling rays glids dounward often time
A mid the tufted plains so they attending
On his blist Birth, infuse their sacred rims
His spreit within, and with Ambrosiall kisses
In his blisd soul, they breath a heau'ne of blisses.
This done they with a wreath of stars haif cround
His Tempills which a Tripill croune adorn
With dowble Bayis and Laurel much renound
They give two glorious titles new'r outworne
And maks his voice diuinlie to resound
Our all the earth on wings of fame still borne
O miracle his voice lyik lightning darte
The golden schowrs of poleist wit and art. Sol monarch of ye north and
Prince of Poets.

His Muse shall fly with sweitest eloquence
In learned lays to charm all spreits all senses
And like a Queen in pomps magnificence
Sche's richest still when lairgest in expenses
In Scarlot heir in crimsone their and thence
In purple robs adorning royal prences
More ritche then golden Tesseu's swelling cost His eloquence sompaird to 1
Queen.

With rairest Jems and precious stones imbost, His Book to the Prince.

And then anon in Arm's addressed for war
A steill bright sword she' is bravely brandishing
Heir dois she place the thundering connons their
To Mars she bids the roiring trumpets sing
The victor getts her laurel for his schare
That bring him more then Cresus gold could bring
But now in sabel blak her self she suits His wark called the Battall of lepa^to.

And Magic spells diuinlie she refuits. His book against Magik.

Then Sanct like sits she in a secret Cell
And sacred phraises sent from heavin above
Forth from her pen in plenty does distell
Confounding all that quest'ouns vain would prove
And from her wits deip tressour springs a well
Whoes source from Gods celestial throne does move
On golden channel slyds this silver stream
And drouns her foes in groundles Gulfs of shame, His ansu^^ no that book set
forth in the nam of Bellasmin*

Yea how soew'r her self she list t'adorne
With Diadems or coats of warlick steill
Or wisdoms grauer suits she list have borne
Yet eurie thing becums her schaip so weill
That still her self she seims whoes rising morn
Shall have no night whoes mighty flowing Nile
Our flows all lands and with her swelling wawe
Holds hirs in peace and vthers all in awe,
This Prince more wealth peace honor greatness brings
Then all that swey'd his Scepter ewer before
But heir since heaune him by his worth desings
That to all times and aige shall him restore
Since all and ewrie thing his praises sings
I can but lessen what all tyms maks more
But in his seid rare blessings shall attend him
Which it sall pleas almighty Joue to send him
In midst of famous Scotland does their ly
A valey graced with Nature airt and care
As fertile as the soill of Araby
As plesaunt as Thessalian Tempe fair
On which from heaune no blustering Tempests fly
Nor Zephire blou's but sweit and wholesome air
A long whoes side the Ocheli montans rise
And lifts their swelling topps above the skyis. The description of Stirling
the birth place of Prince Henry.

Down through the midst of this fair valey glids
The crystal Forth with glansing silver hew
Whoes roaring stream on golden channel slids
With murmur sweit in Thetis bosume blew
Of brooks supply'id with lib'rall store besides
Which tops of towering montans still renew
Whoes springs the dry insatiat meids suppleis
And moister lends to herbs to fructs and treis,
In midst of this fair valey does arise
A mighty mounting roche of wondrous height
On whoes ambitious bak as in the skyis
A City stands impregnabile to sight
A Castle on his lofty crest espyis
The valeys rownd about the montans hight
Below the roch the glanncing River glids
In whoes cold streams he coolls his horte sids
When Titan does up to the sowth aspire
Ascending through heavens vaults of brightest azure
These lofty turrets seim to have desire
To view their beauteis pride whill they have leisure
Then set they all the rolling flood on fire
Whoes trembling billous show their golden Treasur
The smilling flood Illustrats them with beams
Whill as their beauty beautifeis her streams.
Within this Paradise of all delight
Thus graced with airts proud wealth and Naturs care
Shall to the world be borne that lamp of light
Whoes schyning shaip you at beholding their
But ah too soon snatched up from humane sight
Whoes lose shall make the western-world despair
That heauins can raise them to their former blis Constellatio^

Since they have reft so great a Good as this. Antinous a must ^^^ar and
beutifull outh a looding to Prince Hendre.

O could he leiue he were a worthy Prence
By nature in her richest wealth enrold
And fraught with all the gifts of excellence
That either Man could wisch or heauins unfold
But o too wise and too too sone taine hence
Heauin scorns that earth so great a good should hold
Albions be war least heauins upon the lowr
Who thus untimely cutts thy fairest flowr.
Then shall arise a Prince of his own kind
Borne of his dame and of his sire begot
Whoes matchles haughty and heroic mind
Shous heavens assigns great empires for his lot
Heir does he march in arms to war Inclind
Over Danub Neill Euphrates Ganges hot
And treds on all as on that fearful here constellatio^

Against his victorious Arms that dars prepare. Or on Merching in arms (...) a
river and a heir under his foot a alouding to charlis Prince of waills acording
to the propheseis.

Heat his royal fathers heigh command
This great and weghtie chairge shall under go
For dred revenge with warts hot burning brand
Send from that angry Monarchs bre^st shall through
A thundering tempest our all sea and land
With schame lose foil blood ruin wrak and woe
For why his waiting slaves ar war and death
T'unbind his brows knit up in clouds of wrath. He as gennerall (...) his
father.

To whoes brave sone thus sent the lord has granted
If he his thoghts hoord in that heavenly place
With him and his he sure hes couenanted
To pour ane Ocean of his plenteous grace
Nor his great Syrs dominions shall be wanted
But all from fertile Jnde to Occades
All shall be his and his victorious hand The v^ar^^ following ar translated out
o^ the Propheseis*

Over sea and earth all nations shall command. (...) with the Propheseis.

And lo that dreadful Serpent scourge of earth
Whoes pride aloft him to the heavens does rear
Shall yield to his all-conquering arm whoes worth^
From his proud head this Diadem shall tear
And Join it to his oune by right of Birth Hiedra alluding to the great Turk.

Then to his saviors sacred tomb shall bear Corona australis

This glorious standart this triumphant Sign Corona Borealis

Of sin of death of hells great tameing King. Cru^.

Nature and all her train on him attend
Putting the golden key Into his hand
Of earth and seas ritche treasure to the end
That all obey and he may all command
Ceare wisdom foirsicht virtue to him send
Fortun fast bound with many thousand band
Love Beauty youth strive to adorn him more
Then virtue grace and wisdoms plenteous store.
The tuelf great Labors of that antic Lord
Was Justly praisd and magnifeit allone
Yet much more worth to him sall be restord
Then Men beasts monsters conquered one by one
Wheir only strength noght wit did aid afford
Over murdered beasts his glory shall not shone
But Kings subdew't and mighty nations strong
Shall to his fame and endless praise belong. Hercules ^welf laboris.

This Prince shall always feill heauins gracious love
And happy fortuns shall consort him still
Proud conquering Mars still by his side shall move
Fair victory shall eu'r obey his will
His infancy she nwrsing shall remove
To noble hoppes and his strong years furthfill
With statlie Trophes and his aige with balms
With crouns with Lawrells and triumphant palm.
The boundles sea shall seem to him a brook
Heaun threatening Alps shall seime ane easy way
Two horned Po shall his proud streams rebook
Beholding his victorious army stay
His glassie Cave he leaus and cums to look
Wheir as a thousand cisterns every day
To pay their endless silver tribute hyis
whichtil that time did newer view the skyis. A digression discriuing the River
^o.

The aiged flood cums gravely from his cell
Down from his head hings dangling silver tressis
From every hair a crystal spring does fall
Ay when he sweats a roaring Steams foorrh praissis
Each sigh raise up a wane each groan foretell
A fearful inundation following passes
His vrinkled Brou's a pearly dew distelleth
His greennishe eis with endless tears still fills.
The Nimphs with daunsing round about him trips
Aganes the Son their azure mantils shone
From vaue to vaue the wanton faries skips
Whole scoolls of fish heir swims their leaps anon
Their watrie Lord with Ice cold schivering lips
Thus chyds his streams you foolish streams allone
Ah will you thus heauns champion ganestand
When sea and Earth obeis his conquiring hand.
Proud brook be calm abate thy raging torrent
Against him whom Jove has loud lift not thy horn
Roll smothe you waves lash not your swelling current
Forth at his glorious fleet, which should be borne
On your smooth back but dance an easy current
With me your aged flood with years not worn
Till his victorious army march before
Their glistring ensing's; on our eastern shore
His feared renoune like thundering cannons roars
In each man's ears through all lands touns and tours
And tempest like it beitts the baltike shoars
Clouds of his wrath in haills scharp stormy shours
Tumbling through mighty winds aloft still soar's
At whoes dreid sound all nat'ions sadly lour's
And over all lands it fleis at last it falls
And beats down bulwarks touns tours gates and walls.
This valorous Prince wise cumlie fair and nea^
In eurie thing him self shall bravely bear
His Enemeis he shall no sooner threat
Than he shall over throw with schame and fear
The terror of his name sall tyrannes beat
Down from their throns who yields before he war
For Joue noght geu's him sparingly good hap
But always pours down plenty in his lap.
Thus thy great house thy race thy of spring fair
Vnbred unborn all those and mor's enrold
On heavens brass leafes by the almighteis cair
For all ensuing aiges to behold
Be thankful serve love Praise his merce is rare
That in heauins birth did frost their Births unfold*
So thy blisd race shall be more blessed still
Nor time nor age thy blesse'd Seid shall kill.
And thou deir Country with all Grace contented
That heau'ne on fertile Earth can thee afford
Let not thy mind with pride be once atteinted
For those great blessings of thy greatious Lord.
Let not fair ^ates approach be so prevented
And Blise Once geuin with shame soon bak restoerd*
But O allace heir my poor Soul does faint
O then I fear a thankful mind thou's want.
Which if thou do th'almighte's smyles shall turn
To hot consumeing wrath and coals of fire
That shall thy intrealls all thy bouells burn Propheceis.

Thou's feill his just sad wrath and dreadful ire
For which thy maids and hearmles babes shall murns
Nor shall thy Plagues watre famien death retire
^ill thou be wallouing in a crimsone flood
And dround almost in thy oune guilty blood.
Great Jove shall send strange Nations far and neir
Within thy native land thee to distroy
Earths farrest ends thy widows plaints shall hear Glaide (...).

Wheir weiping aer thy mornings shall convoy
From Pole to Pole beneath heavins volts so cleir
Echo shall sadly soond thy sad annoy
Annoy cuts his discourse, thus woeful hearted
Wheir with the Prophetizing spreit departed.
Long time he silent stood at last again
He thus began brave Prince in time bewarr
Lest when the croune thou freilie shall obtain
Thou let not sin and vice creip in so far
That Joue his endless Blessings he refrain
And thee and thine with endless vengeance mars
Which if thou do not than thou heir have seen
What has for thee and thine prepared been.
Thus said the Prophet whill the Prince reioisd He deit on performd this vow
what for he send his heart to the holy grove.

Those of his royal of spring thus to sie
In heauins so framde by Jove so weill disposede
And rendering thanks to his great majesty
Eune then a vow he on him self impoisd
His Kingdom once at peace his crown made fry
He with ane army great Christ's tomb would view
And with stern wars would Sarasens Persew,
Then said he to that grave and ancient Sire
Wise holy father let me once be bold
Thy blisd and happy name for to require
Of whom my very souls content I hold.
Great Prince quod he I yield to your desire
Rimour I hight your slave and seruand old
My love and my last dueue to discharge
I hither came as you shall know at large. This (...) Thomas Rymour ane old
Prophet who died abunt Sir months (...)

For the appointed time is drawing neir
When my poor soul must leave this ruind toure
Know then an Angel did to me appeir
And of these revel ationes gave me power
Only for thee, because the Lord does hear
The woeful plaintes and groninges eurie hour
Of thy still torterd land which hea'uns surmonted
And mercy begd where mercy never wanted.
That only thou selected for relief
By the one-trine eternal majesty
Crossed with misfortune sorrow pain and grief
For that vilde slaughter sacrale grouslie
In Joues sole sacred house but that mischief
Has thy vnfaind repentance freed from thee
Should heir by me heavens endless bounty know
For to remove thy cares, and confort show.
Persist thou still then in thy just desire
For mighty Joue stands Armed against thy foe'^
Now all thy Bad misfortuns shall retire
Hence shall thou ever winn and never lose
Thou frielie shall Posses a fry Empire
And such renoune such fame and glory goes
Of thy great name that thou shall have more praise
Then ever had a Prince before thy days.
Now quod the Prince old father I wald know
If these great kings shall beutifie my name
No no quod he but from thy loynis shall grow
One try whois fruict shall flurishe still with fame
And one the bankis of silver forth shall show
Tuo branches fair for to adorn that stream
Who turnis and bous his crooked schoris about
To keip such heaune blessed treasur eon got out. King Robert hade a base soon
that was erll of Ros of who^ is discrended the tuo famous families of clak
mannan and earth both surnemid (...)

And so fairweill this said throu schaples air
He went away, a light cleir bright and schining
Enlightened all the Place so cleir and fair
As Phoebus seimd but Phebe thence refining
His paill old Beauty spent with aige and cair
The Prince his kneis and dasled eyes inclining
Down falls he straight life seemd to leave his statione
Stroke blind with light and dumb with admitatione.
When he recouerd of this brain-sicke trance
He looked, about but could no wheir behold
The cause of such a golden rediance
Nor any wheir sie that grave Prophet old
Which chang't and altered much his countenance
T^^xt dout and fear yet neids from thence he would
Finding a beaten Path down to the plane
That leids him wheir his horse does yet remane.
He taks him straight and does from thence depart
Revoluing often into his Princely mind
If by Illusioun visioun dream or airt
Or if he reft in Spreit such things dewynd
But weying weil each things with joyful heart
He nothing think impossible to find
By might Jove although man's shallow wit
Can hardly be induced to credet it
Thus whill he thinks thus whill he musing ride
Six knights all armed weill monted he espyis
Cum toward him he for defense provyds
Yield yield thy self or die the formest cryis
He noght replyid but boldie them abyds
Drauing his noble brand them all defyis
And in schorttyme so quaild them with rebook
That thrie he killed two chased and one he took.
Then foreward on his Iournay does he hold
And of his prisoner desirs to know
Who reul'd that land he thus unto him told
To day this cuntrie did me homage ow
But I too rasche my fond attempts to bold
Hearing of strangers landet heir below
Would with these few my cuntries-wrong prevent
But you allone has marred my fond Intent.
And If you to King Eduard does pertain
Or to our Prince I pray you schow to me
Or with theas lait cum troops if you remane
Whom I but forsight thus would go to sie
I hold of Eduard said the Prince agane
Theirof I Am sorry said the knight pardie
Great pity war't in such vnlaughfnll war
So excellent a Knight should armor bear.
Thus Jest they thus they talk till they have gone
Far on the way at last they might discry
A warlick troup in glistring armor schone
Whom by their arms the Prince knew presently
They knowing him with heigh applause each one
Made know'ne how weill they lyk't his company
He to his prisoner him self revield
Who pardon begd and thanks to heaune did eild.
Whill days great Lord over heauns giult roof far past
Beholding Thetis beauty where she lyis
Redarting bak his amors til at last
Her love fird smills seimd to Inflame the skyis
He hurlls his golden Quhells down in the wast
Breathles for haist he blushed yet down he hyis
Where on the trembling silver waves she stood
Than diue they both down through the christell flood,
Eune then the Knight the King and all his trane
Entreats that night beneth his rooff to rest
Wheir too the King does yield thus bak agane
Right to his Palace they them self addressed
But this brave Prince not long did heir remane
For why a Joyful hope his heart possessed
Wheirfore he schipt in haist and took the Sea
Hoping on his proud foe reuengd to be,
The Argument.
By Fortune Valor and aduentrous chance
The Douglas does releive three Scottish Dames
In Arrans I Will and does from thence advance
Whill he is brunt with loves Insulting flames
Yet shoues he that on Mars not Cupides lance
Glory prouids to hing triumphand Palms
He finds his Lord to Scotland who returns
And Turnberrie he sacks distroys and burns.
Caput. 6.
NOw may you think that I have lost the sight
Of Douglas and forgot his warlick deids
Who still persues his chaise till Sable night
To saiue her friend and end his game futth speids
Then from his weill spurd horse he does alight
To rest till heauns smyld on Apollos steids
But long he rests not when he hears a noise
Confus'dlie Iarring with a weiping voice.
He taks his horse and their in haist does ride
Wheir as him thought he hard the woeful sound
By Pheboes sight at last he hes espi'de
On horse some fifty knights who led fast bound
Five knights thrie Ladeis all behind them tied
Upon their horse the knights from many a wound
Dyit the grein grase in reid that seemd to call
For dread revenge showing the way with all.
He follous still but lo they ride so fast
That they by this had gottin to the shore
And in a Tall schip soon from thence they past
He seis Sextein in arms their him before
That them persew'd with those he gois at last
Unto a Bairge often wissing to restore
To liberty those poor distressed wights
The woeful Ladeis and the woundit knights, These war his fr^nds.

Now these were led he met upon the shore
By one Sir Robert Boyd a val' aunt knight
They from the Army strayed not long before
When on thrie Gentlemen they hap't to light
Who them be soght to aid them to restore
Thrie Ladeis rane by crewell English might
And comeing nei^ to Arren they conclude
With Douglas only for to spend their blood. These englishmen whom they
folowit was keipers of the castle of breithwick in arran.

Wheitfore he causd them presently to land
In haist to get betuixt them and their hold
Which straight was down o happy they that fand
So brave a Guide Wise hardy fearles Bold
In whoes myld look in whoes all conquering hand
They Victory alreddie might be hold
Now were they to the Castle neir hand by
Wheir all in secreit they did cloislie ly
By then the English to the shore had brought
Their Prisoners but all their wealth and store
Within their Schip they left which all for noght
From merchands schips they had bereft of yore
And now straight to the Castle when they sought
The Douglas gius the sign and steps before
His warlick rout and with his sword and shield
He cuts a bloody way out through the field.
Thus in a raige forth through his foes he dreue
Whoes virtu^s valor thrists for gloreis croune
With eurie blow a soull bids earth adieu
Their new array he breaks their ranks beat down
So many sheilds he cleif't and knights our threw
That too much Valor hindered much renoune
For lo a wall of bodeis deid he layid
Wheirof the rest in neid a Rampere made.
Transported thus with heat with wraeth and Ire
Now heir now their he woeful Slaughter's wroght
Astonished then some did with fear retire
Yet some for shame stikx to it amazde in thoghe
Vthers that scornd such wounders to admire
Vou's dread revenge and on him still they soght
Yet those that foolls were thought did wisely fly
And those that wisely stays like fools they die.
Whill he not weried thus with killing fights
Their Captane stout that Hastings heght to name
Forth from the Castle cums with twenty knights
Whoes fresh supplies with fury most extreme
Beats down their foes and stays eu'ne in their sights
Fair Victory with glory prais and fame
That cround was cum and smyld on them before
But now (...) her bak and threats (...)
Which when the noble Douglas had espied
Viewing their fierce and val'aunt captane bold
He leaves his task and forth with thither hyit
Whoes cheirfull sight his manglid band did hold
From present flight whill he so weill applyit
His matchles strength that his kene blaid groune cold*
In their warm blood his heat so often renewed
That now they first did fly who first persew'd.
Thus rairlie changed the fortune of the broyll
Hastings with threats manace them still that fly
And now in equal balance stood the toyll
Ah heauins you feeble Soldiors said he
Shall you almost a hundredth have the foyll
Of but few more, then half a scoir you sie
Ah shame you ever hence the name to bear
Of English so victorious in wear.
This said he gaizd and staring round about
At last he flees with fierce and angry look
Forth throw the throng against the douglas stout
A stiff steill pointed dairt he strongly schook
And as an bow an arrow swift schoots out
Singing throghe air such sounding air it took
Whill as the hardy fearles knight opposd.
His shield against all dangers on disclosd.
This strange and mighty throw peirst douglas scheild
And in his armor stayed which queiklie done
The warlick douglas does the wapin weild
And gave his foe no leisure for to schune
Against whoes strong arm his arms could be no beild
Quyte through his right side past it too too soon
For at his heart he aymd yet forcd him fall
Which does abate the curage of them all.
Love sorrow fear threu forth confution fast
Yet quickly they resolve and in their fray
Taks up their wounded Lord and thence they past
Yea soorlie this had bein their laitest day
But nights dark schaids between them slipped at last
And forced them both a syd their arms to lay
For if heauns cheirful lamph^d biddin in
The val'a unt douglase force the tower had winn.
Now they the woeful Prisoners vntye'd
Who fell with humble reverence on the ground
Praising almighty Joue who did provide
The douglas that their way to saftie found
When he the ladeis Beauteis weill espied
He wondered what wyld sauge would have bound
Their ming^^d bodies with their dainty hands
Fitter for arms embrace then iron bands.
For their neat bodies-daintie sweit and rare
Was exquiseit and excellent he thought
That eune almost his martial mind, all care
Of Arms forgot and loves delight he soght
The youngest beutie did his thoghtes Ensnare
Her face, Eyes, hair, her all, by nature wroght,
Was in the rarest and the finest Mold
That heart could wish, hand touch or eye behold,
But now because the Night was waxing dark
He did from thence unto the shore reteir
Wheir they at anchor fand the English bark
Which they of all resistants soon did cleir
And lancing from the shore they did remark
What store of wins they had what dainty cheir
And as there former task great Praise obtaind
So by the last a woundrous wealth they gaind.
With dainteis cloi'd at last they go to rest
And setts their weatch but lo no rest at all
The Douglas finds love did him so molest
Now he is become enchanting beauteis thrall
Loath was he that his love should be possessed
By one to whom he was a debtor small
And by her changeing passiouns sore it seimde
That she of late sum knight had much aste^md.
But that you may the treuth more cleirlie kno
Thrie sisters borne were these fair ladeis thrie
Their noble syir of children had no mo
Great was his wealth his house and linnage hie
His reueneus he wholly did bestow
On those thrie ladeis yet did thus forsie
To give the youngest whom he most afected
The better half whoes worth he most respected.
All thrie to their old Syir such reverence boore
And each to other had such mutual love
As still his pleasure was their pleasure sure
His will they did with willing minds approve
A brave yung knight the yungest would procure
In mareage and still his soote did move
Whom she did nather love nor hait out right
Sir Andrew Murray heght this valiant knight
Those ladeis chanced one day abroad to go
To Neptuns sandy shore for their delight
With whom this knight went forth and tuentie mo
No Armor but a sword had eurie knight
It chanced eune then hard by a crag belo
Those English came a shore whoes suddant sight
Putts those poor ladeis in so great a fray
That they obtaind a rich yet esie pray.
Murray long time the ladeis did defend
With cheirfull words encuraging the rest
But lo their was no saiftie for in end
Fiftein their dyit the remander, possessed
As presoners they hold and then extend
Their wreth which in that land their walth increst
At last they fled with shame and with rebook
These folloud them whom Donglas overtook.
And only by this warlick Erlls brave hand
War they repaid of all their former wrong
Amongst the rest of Prisoners he fand
This Murray who had looud this lady long
All this the valiant erll did understand
Informd by conferrence the rest among
And thought indeid he loved that gallant knight
Yet in the lady was his chief delight.
Now on the seas they stray a certane space
Till on a night the count that silent lay
Vpone his bed did hear one cry allace
Will thus my lady all my hope betray
is my long love rewardit with disgrace
Ah grief allace what will the world now say
On wings of hope I mount above my might
And now am forced with Phaeton to light.
Ah who so feids on wemens double words
Runs with a straingeling Toue to meit dispare
Who kyndnes to their wantoun looks affoords
Heaps on them self a hell of endless care
Who to her smills applies Loves sweit concords
With scorn and shame they shall their thoghts ensnare
Yea who vpone a Woman's voues shall dream
Can neu'r be red of woe, grief, cair and shame
But I must love her I must love her still
And loueing her eune loving I must die
Or shall I leiue my freindly foe to kill
That thus deprius my hops, O no not I,
I will my very soul in tears distill,
In sighs consume my heart, with groans Iyll ty,
On willing death unto my torterd mind,
And with all pains, end to one pain shall find.
Though this disdaind disgrat'd and quyte forlorn
Yet her poor soul eu'ne her I can not blame
But fortune proud that to this knight has sworn
Over all the Earth she will extol his name
And nature that did weip when he was borne
For all her wealth hangs at his virteus beam
Yea she in him her self excells so fare
Compaerd with him all vthers she douth mar.
Ah thrice unhappy I that eu'r did yield
As Prisoner unto the english foe
Thrice happy I, if slain into the field
Then had she piteid if not loved I kno
But o this knight did with his sword and scheild
Fry me from bands and yet he fred me so
As giving life and saving this my Breath,
He sends to me a far more cruel death
Heir sorrow cuts his sad discourse at last
With many grievous groans, with sighs and tear's
Whereat this warlick Lord was much aghast
When as this woeful song had perst his Ears
His ladeis love all other caer's surpast
Her divine shape graft in his mind he bear's
And yet he thinks he wrongs that worthy knight
Whoes faithful love long since made known his right.
Wheirfore in time he would command these fiets
And loves fond flammig passiouns would remove
But o commanding in his heart she sitts
Ruelling the motionis of his soul above
It would him kill or neir destraught of wits
If he the meanest thought of lose shuold prove
Yet streght he thinks with reasone man's Indeut
That by him self his lusts might be subduet
Thus tossing thousand, Passions in his mind
At last he vouis him self for to command
Now Phoebus had his golden locks vntwind
And them in Thetis cristall glass vpband
When cuttinge Neptouns back a fare they find
Thrie warlike ships come toward them from land
Wheirfore in Arms each one them self addressed
And at their Lords devotion then they rest.
Now all of them did in his presence stand
And forth he cau'sd the ladeis to be brought
And thus said he fair Dames you understand
What I and these most valiant men have wroght
By Jove his only, aid we took in hand
Your honors saftie your relief we soght
Tho Heauins did favor this our interprise
You know it was more desperate then wise.
And though all knights indeid should Armor bear
For ladeis and in their defense to feght
Yet I more shameless then the rest I fear
Of you fair Eve for so the yungest heght
Would crave reward which you may weill forbear
Yea I would have your oath in all their sight
That what I charge you with you will obey
Nor what I seik may you offend I pray.
The modest Baishfull dame in silent mood
Her mild swit looks she bent upon the ground
Through sone bright beauty shind her crimsone blood
Which sudden Tempest past she quiklie found
This answer (whill the Gallant trembling stood
Expecting that which his poor Soul should wound)
Cursed be the child his Dame ganesay is in Oght,
Who his deir life with her life's hasard boght.
Glade was she for to grant what eu'r he would
Who would to him have geu'ne her self and all
Wheirfore again she made this answer bold,
Brave knight your will I promise and I shall
(Mine honor saiff) perform so shall you hold
My fate cume life or death or what you call
To which my grant I heir the heauns attest,
Let me be plagd if I refuse the rest.
A shiuring cold through all his Vains, forth-went
Stopping the Organe of his speech a space
To what he would he should nocht give consent
And what he should he would noght that embrace
Proud Cupid from her fiery looks foorth-sent
Love burning dairts that more and more incres
His thoghts at last he thinks his oune he will make her
Her heart fleis through her eyes and prays him take her*
And whill he goes within hes arms to catch her
Casting his Ete aside he their espyis
Her faithful knight who all this time did watch her
Love, A stryffe betuix the passions of the mind and resson^,
Fury, Wrath, Disdain, a combat tries
In his sad looks and Rage bids still dispatch her
But blak Despair did thus to him deuis
More honor is it thy selt to Saccrefies
And tell disloyal her thou loyal dies.
So shall thou end thy else eu'r endless pain
And die with honor to her endless shame
No take his life quod Jelosie again
Quod reasone why he does not bear her blame
Quod Curage shall he vn-reprou'd obtain
Then thou no man much les a knight by name
Quod Reasone if he die she hate thee shall
Then quod Despair kill Him, her thee and all.
But reasone says and Pity taks her part
O will thou kill thy Natiouns lamp of light
No rather go to him with all thy heart
And give him all thy intrest all thy right
So shall thou winn great praise and heighe desert
Quod Beauty first deprive thine Eyes of sight
No then quod Love thy heart first must thou tear
Forth from thy breist for her Idea's their.
Which is the starr that reulls thy life thou knois
Whill he thus reuld with Iaring passions stands
Sad pity moved this brave yung earl make chois
Beauty to fly and brak loves mighty bands
And thus he said if heau'ne will that we lose
And that those pirates get ws in their hands
No torment shall sufficiently assuage
Their cruel will their fury and their rage
So gladly would they wish revenge to tak
Of forty which we last of theirs did kill
Wounding their Lord tho we but few did laik
But so Eternal Majesty did will
Now theirfoir first I wish you to forsake
Our company let hap ws good or Ill
And tak those knights which heir on you attend
Those shall with you home to your counttie wend.
And in the light swift sailling Bairge you may
Be out of reach or these our foes cum neir
But this is it I will you to obey
Which of your heauins sworn oath sall make you clei^
That presently you tak without delay
Brave murray for your Knight and husband deit
Tho I my self you to my self could wish
If to my taste were tied no other dish.
Let him your chest and spotles heart receive
Him self and his true love deserus no les
And so your sisters he and you shall leave
Ws to our fate whill his great worthiness
With these your knights shall you from danger save
God grant in wealth ease honor you incres
Wheir with good Murray after thanks replied
Not so brave sit I will with you abyd.
Till this sharp threatening storm be our bloune
Orels I surly were to much to blame
Yea and the like goodwill the rest has shoune
But none would he accept nor none would name
Except brave Boyd in fates of arms weill known
And with him ten bold fearles full of fame
But eve thus gone proud love must neids obey
She deis for grief brave Murray murnes for ay.
Our gallant Earli the sight abids by sea
And very long in fearful hazard stands
At last he winns and Sinks one of the thrie
And mightelie the other two demands
To yield, till both in end at forced to fly
By the approache forth from the western lands
Of one new fleit eu'ne quikle riggid forth
By Bruce that famous Prince and full of worth
Who glad was Douglas thus again to find
Whose lose with wondrous care he often lamented
All what the Prophet had to him divind
He told him there who thereof much contented
Praisis almighty Jove with thankful mind
Now that their foes might quickly be prevented
The King his army their would set on shore
Wheir persie reul't and he was Lord before. (...)

Two tyms heauns glorious golden Post had past
Mesuring the boundles bounds of all the sky
When Auster to the shore their fleit had chaste
With cheirfull shoutes each one a land did fly
With thundering founds of Trumpets inter^aist
They rear aloft the royal standart hy
Wheir as the princely Lion in his Iaus
Would fo's intombe assunder torn with Paus.
Their Tents they Pitch down in a pleasant plain
Whill their glade rumor through the land aroise
Fresh troops from each pairt to them fleis amain
All wishd to shak ye yok of their proud foes
Brave Eduard hear's his brother's come again
To him he with a gallant troup forth goes
This dantles Prince so fearce was and so bold
He thretning Fortun by the hair did hold.
Now our great King a Nece had neir hand by
A Lady full of wisdom wealth and worth
Who marchis to the Camp Maiestiklie
To view her Royal Cusing came she forth
And with her brought a gallant company
In Arms, dreid Mars the Lord was of their birth
Into his Wars those knights she did conuoy
He thanks her, her he intertains with Joy,
She unto him those sad misfortouns told
That by mischance had chanced since he departed
How his fair Queen to his proud foe was sold
His brother Neill and Mares great Earll had smarted
Kindrimme also won, and how that hold
By filthy treasone brint was, she imparted
And how his greatest foe King Eduart dyit
Whoes sone young Eduard now his place supplyit
Through all the Camp these rumors sadly goes
Of these misfortouns that each one abased
For all does ade these new mislucks to thoes
That had so much before their fames defaced
Their Prince that seis their curage now they lose
And for true worth hade frantik fear embraced
Causd bring them all before his royal throne
And wisely thus encorag'd eurie one.
Brave gallant friends with me that have remaind
Against so many fearful dangers past,
So many painful trauells that sustaind
Nor from your necks my yock for want would caft
Of hunger thrist and lose you neu'r complaind
Nor nothing could your noble mynds aghast
Though fortune thus has smyld upon our foes
Shall we of fear and not of fame make chois?
No no the Lord forbid we should refuse
This war so just wheirto we all ar borne
Tho conquest with our foes so long does use
And our poor woeful cuntrie seimes forlorn
It is not destenie but Sins abuse
Not man but God that has our cuntrie torn
That we may evil and sin and pride reject
And with repentance murne for our defecte.
Yea if we do with sad repentance murne
No doubt but his sweit merceis he'el extend
His love and favor bak he will return
So hard beginings have an happy end
Our foes he will consume distroy and burn
To cruel them he this rewerd shall send
That when we have triumphd on their decay
Them selfs shall be unto them selfs a pray. ^o it fell forth sone after.

Thus endit his Prophetik speech devine
Which breathing life in their dead hope they leiue
His countenance with lightning seimd to shine
From his bright looks did courage them revive
And humbled all befoir Joues sacred shrine
With fasts and Prayr these starrie walls they cleiue
Before the Lord them selfs they humbly lay
With brokin hearts and weiping souls they pray
The King and all his Princes of estate
Of Godliness and faith ensampills be
With fasting public prayr and sins regrait
The one eternal everlasting th^ie
They do beseich to Pardon them ingrait
And vieu with mercy this their misery
Thus they inuoek and from the I ord above
On them discends grace, mercy conquest, love.
Now whill they brought their solemm fast to end
And holy vous unto the lord had made
To turnberry their haistie course they bend
It would ^hey first besige and first invade
Which town the warlick Perse did defend
Within the castle strong him self abade
By warlick bruce inuirond so about
That noght but fear getts in and curage out.
So suddantlie so unawares They came
That they no time had left unto them so
Their town to victual or their strenghts to frame
Them to defend or to offend their foe
No rolling forc no Ingine nor no ram
Our Gallants soght the walls to overthro
By force he enters at the first essay
And to his army giu's it as a prey
But still the Persie did the castle hold
Built on a rock impregnalbe it stands
Thrice feirslie he assaults and thrice the bold
Northumbrean, beats bak his valiant bands
At last the warlik Persie yield it would
For want of victalls in the Prince his hands
Not moved forsd feared by Gold by strength nor terror
want breeds his faultlesse fault his guilteles error.
This worthy Prince his army heir would rest
Wereit with travel both by sea and land
His foes disigns to vieu he thinks it best
Which charge he putts unto the Douglas hand
For this attempt him self he soon addressed
With him twice twelf hid dangers to withstand
And forth they went the Contreie for to view
What they by valor wroght does nixt enseu.
The Argument.
The warlick Douglase on his iournay goas
Wheir his most loved Lord did him command
He finds a deing knight that sadly shoes
A tale most Pitiful to understand
Which does a woeful Injury disclose
Wheir of he vous revenge and in that land
He knou's a knight who is counsall does obtane
Douglase chief strength the English bands ar slave.
Caput. 7.
FAir fortuns knight that erst had taken in had
The cuntrie al about to vieu and sie
And all the fois designs to understand
when titanes spous with purple wings forth fly
The golden bars heaunis silver gates vpbad
She straight vndois when with dreid majesty
On silver pauid heauins her Lord of light
Rolls forth his golden whils and chareot bright
The weestern lands in clouds of night enrold
From shadow is dark of death he does releas
When as the earl so strong so stout so bold
Brings forth his troup weill armd and thence a pais
He marched over daells, hills vaills and forests old
And paissaige fry he finds in eve rye place
For being often encountered by his foes
Fair victoorie still foreward with him gois
This conquering Lord thrie dayis surth Iournay't right
When in a wod hard by a river side
They sadly hearea woeful groaning knight A pitiful ^eild told the doug^^e by
a gentl^ma^ of dou glaifdail called kenedie.

Forth throu the grous to him in haist thy ride
Who deidlie woundit lay a woeful sight
His gorie blood the flourie verdir dyit
The earl with pity sadly him desoght
What murderers that cruel act had wroght.
He weaklie leans his head vpone his hand
Wan was his face paile death haith dimmed his sight
An holow sound his deing voice yet fand
These words he braethed faintlie as he might
Ah shall the conquered conquerours with stand
When eu'ne them selfs against them selfs still fight
Ah heauins thy wrath procured does nou descend,
Ah Scotts, your name, fame, glory, nou must end.
In Douglas duelt I kennedie I hight
My wife a lady was allace too fair
To fair allace my sorrous does indight
Her too chaste mind was frought with virtues rai^
In her was all my joy all my delight
With her remaind my heart my thought my cair
Yea she me also loved as much and more
She me esteimd all earthly ioys before
A hundredth soldiers and a captane bold
In Douglas strongest castle does remane This captane his name was (...)

These has the land in all mischeiff inrold
Which nou by wrong to clifford does pertane
By wrong usurping Edwards gift and gold
whill the right heir deferrs his right to gane
And all the land obeys this captains will
Either in right or wrong in good or Iil.
One day he chancd my lady for to view
Whill she one divine service did attend
Whill as enamord straight of her he greu
Whom not enioy't death would affectioun end
Freindship hevrg't on me thus did enseu
Tuixt me and him great love but still he faign'd
For all his freindship was for to desceaue me
And of my chiefest joy for to bereave me.
Such freindlie love he seim'd to me to bear
Confermd with words with vous with oaths not feu
That my too trusty mind could noway fear
From such fair sugrad words decept t'inseu
But lo he whisperd in my ladeis ear
That I to her did bear a mind untrue
By this one Slight to winn his soot he tryit
When by all other means he was denyit
No head to this fond taill at first she took
At last he urged so far he taks on hand
She should it sie her eye theiron should look
Providing that she would but cloisllie stand
And nothing would beuray to his rebook
Wheit to she yields at last which erst I fand
Then forth into a Grove he did her bring
Our which a mighty clisted rock did hing
Neir to my house this quiet walk dothly
By which a cleir swist running river glyds
A Sister has my lady neir hand by
That with her sire a grave old knight abide
For her the captane seimd in love to die
When Pensive oftentims allone he rids
He hants my house and yet no Ill I deim'd
His virteus worth I still so much esteim'd
Whill often he pensive seimd and sad with grief
I much desird the cause thereof to kno
Often wishd I to his woi's to find releif
When after great and much Entreaty lo
He so disgueis'd his thoghts that to be brief
He made me to believe his ceasles woe
Proceids from lady Anns fair beauteis beam
For so my ladeis sister heght to name
I pitied him and glad of this his love
Promeisd his suit should cunningly be wrought
For which in sacreit I her mind would prove
This he allous for this was all he soght
But prayed I to my wife sold nothing move
Nor she nor any else should know his thought
But trist her to that secret Grove I should
And their allone to move her if I could
When night driu's day down from the western lands
Eu' ne then he brings my lady forth to vieu
Wheir I and her fair sister cloislie stands
Within a Grove of bussis thik that greu
My Aarms Embraced I gript and wrong her hands
And of these words I softly did reneu
Thou then most worthy fear not lou's annoy
Be secreit still and thou shall all enjoy.
This hard my lady like to burst for grief
Tortred with burning love and cold disdane
Whilst I poor Soul knew noght of this mischief
Which to aquite my pains he does ordane
Yet to his love this finds him no releif
Her spotles name for this she would not stain
But closlie heaps her pane her grief her woe
In her poor heart till it sold burst in two.
As does a neu fresse strong and might wine
Perse throw and burst his vessel old a shunder
So would her sorrous split her heart in twyne
So often she wishd to fall her Burden under
But he that could not work with this Ingine
His lust to fury turned almost o wonder
Yet loath by force to work this cruel fate
Lest he were thought of all the most ingrate.
Not that he cair'd for creder faith or fame
But that he feared some fatal punishment
Whill as his passion birneth so extreme
As if it lested death would all prevent
For seiknes does him quite from health reclame
His vital pour's a burning ague spent
Wheirwith he seimd tormented so indeid
As his disease all humane panes exceid.
Such grief for his diseas I did conceive
And such the love was I to him did bear
Of food of rest of sleip did me bereave
Nor can I half expres my loving fear
One day I hapt of his diseas to crave
The ground or cause which long I could not hear
Ah if your health were in my pou'r said I
Or that my life with death your life might by.
Do then to me your Sorrous all declare
That if I can both would and should reliue you
Hope helith woe wisdom our cums dispare
And counsall can remeid all pains that greiue you
By craft by strength by wit or forsights care
We shall have hence all hurt that does mischief you
Let not fond shame against health and faiftie strive
Fly willing death whill hope is yet on live.
So earnestly in woe these words forth brak
As he at last to tell me seimd content
And having pausd a little thus he spak^
Dear friend it fear's me much you shall repent
When ye have known what does my sorrous mak^
And to my death you will give soon consent
For in my death much pleasur does belong you
In life I can not leiue except I wrong you,
No then said I, I fear not let me know It
Come weill, come woe, come death, come life, com either
Weill then said hevn willing I shall show It
Your wife her beauty nay my folly Rather
From both of these or either love does drove it
Or shall I say more treulie fate and nather
Which secretly I smotherd have so long
And rather chuisd to die then do you wrong.
To chaiss this fram^^ passion from my mind
I you desired to move her Sister Ann
For to her beauty had I bein inclind
I happily had left off wheir I began
But since remeid at all I can not find
Except of all the earth the only man
Whom I loved best I should so fare injure
Death first unto my love shall end procure.
These speiches pearst my heart in through mine ear
Nor tongue nor hand nor fute could sturr or move
Great was the love Ito my wife did bear
Him both I loved and pitied as did prove
Who rather chuisd to die without all fear
Then me to wrong this all the rest above
This this I say eu'ne this allone d^d kill me
This one respect his life to saif did will me.
Wheirfore at last I said first shall I lose
Both her my self and all my Ioys beside
Then such a worthy friend should make a choice
Of death if I can for his life provide
And to be short at length we did dispose
The matter so that kind too kind I tried
For in my place I did him so connoy
Her thoughts vn-stain'd he did her self enjoy.
But I my self such grief did soon conceive
A thousand deaths unto my self I wish'd'
For Jelosie did in my soul engraue
Such endless pains that I no torment mis'd'
Such eating corrasius my wits bereave
That my too woeful heart was like to burst
Ah woeful act which does my soul afraie,
My self consents my self for to betray
But he all reasone did exceid so far
And with Ingratitude so much was staind
That of my joy he did me quite debar
For when he had his filthy lust obtaind
He then bewrayt him self which all did mar
And which was more of me he also faignd
That I contrived the Plot that I did send him
Her I disdaind her I did gladly lend him
Wheiratshe did conceive such endless grief
That presently she does resolve to die
Whill he eu'ne he that wroght this great mischief
Departs in have and to his strength does fly,
I all this Time of cares found noe relief
Wondering that to his bed retornd not he,
Wherefore I in the morning straight arose,
And to the Chamber where she lay forth-goes.
But there I found her, ah I found her there,
As she was then, would God that I had been,
A purple stream with milk mixed white and fair,
Ran her more white and snowie breasts between,
With child she was, the milk cold well declare,
Ah too untimely fate, ah death I mean,
Thus past help forth from the bed I drew her,
And in my arms (ah woeful sight) did view her.
Eu'en as the Lilly cliere, fresh, fair and white,
Widdred with drught, grows wrinkled pale and blak,
So her saire face fair bewties choice delight,
Did swartish seem, that life, blood, moisture lack,
In her dimm Eyes, death did my Crime indite,
Once lookd she up, and once these words she spoke,
Aeh let my guilty blood wash forth the stain,
That cruel you, to my chast-bed did gain.
Ah let my Soul mount to heighe Justice throne
And their sound forth a sad still sad revenge
Heauins only viewed my Chaste Chaste thoghts allone
Heauins only may forgive this murder strange
Heauins only oues my chaste vous eurie one
Heauins only wronged since I my voues infring
Heauins only then your wrath fierce wrath surceas you
And let my blood thus sacrafiz'd apeas you.
These words Apeasd you sealed up de^ths sad birth
And her last breath deir breath deir life deir all
Ah cursed death bereft earths rarest worth
Ay me for shame whill he on shame did call
Shame closd his lips the sound went warklie forth
Shameing to shaw what after did befall
His moueing, speiche, his sight and all was lost
Down falls his head and he yields up the Ghost.
Him self had killed him self they surly scand
But when they wey these his first speiches right
Ah shall the conquered conquerours with stand
When euin them selfs against them selfs do fight
They think some friend of hers that their him fan^
Had done the deid or else some English knight
A^det by Scotts had killed him for the same
Surmiseing that him self had killed his dame.
But why or housoeur he shed his blood
They all lament this woeful tragedy
Whill their brave Lord auou'd to taist no food
Till he had taken revenge most rigoruslie
Of that same English Lords Ingratitood
Wheirto occasion fitly did apply
A present mean wheir by he might forthfill
His weell made vow and wirk his warlick-will.
By this the light gave place to schaddous broune
And sable clouds had maskit all the sky
When from the hills and forests they come down
And man valley fare they might epsy
Ane staitlie palace far from any town
To which this warlick creu did haist in hie
This old gentilman was callit dictione and is now called simintone of yat ilk
and duelleth as yet kard by the castle of douglas and hes his living of that
house for the same.
Wheir they a reverent aged knight did find
That gius them Entertainment to their mind.
To a Chamber richly heung the Earl was brought
And their disarmed by a lady fair
The rest was all unarmed and with a thought
They to a staitlie hall did then repair
Wh^^s Tables ritchlie spread their soon was brought
All kind of meats all kind of dainteis rair
Thus were they serud to supper in such sort
As might become a king for Princely port
The supper done the worthy count began
To questioun with his hoasts both grave and wise
His lineage house and name requird he tk^n
And who does reule that Prouence when he lyis
Brave sir quod he, I Will till you treulie when
Fair Schotlands glory mounted to the sky'is
When in sueit calms of peace her native borne
Dekt her fair front whoes wealth did them adorn
Eu'ne then I served a too too noble Lord
Heir silent long scarce could the rest essay
Grief kindness, love, and pity weill deploird
His grievous lose, tears did his woes beuray
This quandarie once past and speiche restoird
He thus begane agane eu'ne him I say
Whom english Edward did by wrong surmeis
In prison close and their ah their he deis.
Douglas great Erldome did this Lord enjoy
A sone he had both young strong fair and wise
The fruct that keipt his years from age annoy
The Caskat ritche wheir all his tressour lyis
Sent unto france whill he is yet a boy.
And to return it seems he still denyis
Whill heir the Clifford holds his reueneus
Who tirranizing all the land subdeus.
Ah were he heir aige from my wrinkled brou
Would sone depairt and youth would once transport
Those silver hair's with strength and vigor neu
That would my limms and weakened arms support
This arm should make him way for to reneu
His just revenge in such a woundrous sort
That Englands King should quake for fear and shame
When in his ears fame thunderd forth his name.
Why said the Earl and if him self were heit
Hou could he be reuengd vpone his foes
Whoes strenth nor his mutch greater does apeir
Which maks our Prince eu'ne Bruce so often to lose
No no said he God shall his wraith reteir
And make brave Bruce shine like the morning rose
Whose beauteous braches each wheir spreds and springs
Whose odours sueit the senses confort Brings.
The count for Joy cutting his speiches short
In quir's his name who told he Dikson heght
And then he call's to mind his fathers court
Wheir he hade sein him many a joyful night
So that Embraceing him he does report
His name and hou he was his Lord by right
Whereat he humbly Kneills and does Embrace
His feitt for Joy whill tears bedeu's his face
Nou each of vthers sight did much reioise
And after they had talked and argued long
The erlle inquirs what way he might oppose
Him self against his foes inflicting wrong
Brave Lord said he too Morrou all our foes
Will muster forth their glorious forces strong
Under the conduct of a valiant knight
Who heir reulls all beneth the Cliffords might.
This man within your chiefest strength does bide
His proud commanding Garesone with all
Palm Sunday is to morrou: All provide
Their Palms to bear at that chief festuall
They all to Church in sumptuous manner ride
Vow by the way may cause them catch a fall
My self shall lead the way unto your trane
And if I can the formest Bront sustane,
Glaid was the erie so fit a mein to find
Wheir on they both concloud then goes to rest
And on Olimpus or proud Titan shind
The ancient knight in arms him self addressed
He raisd the Douglas whoes still restless mind
Had baneift sleip and for revenge was pressed
Nou with this knight he and his train departs
Reuengfull fire still burning in their haerts.
And neir into the Church when they were got
They hapt to meit an horie aiged sire
Whose woeful looks his woeful lose did note
At whom the Earl did earnestly inquire
What did he laike Sir knight quod he my lot
Is for to laike what most is my desire
Which is allace my long desired Grave
Aige, lose grief sorrou, does all ioys bereave.
An daughter had I which was all my joy
In whom I more then in oght else delighted
But her from me an English did conuoy
An English that my natioun ay dispighted
I to the captane Plaind of this annoy
The captane that my wrongs should all have righted
But greater wrongs then these him self has done
Wherefore to right all wrongs he still does shune
And thus my Daughter with my foe does stay
Her wrging to his pleasure for to yield
Whill me thus scornd and mocked with long delay
Eu'ne nou the captane with proud words reuild
As he with all his troops from church to day
With Palms in hand was marching throu the field
They all reiosing whill my Greifs reneu
And nou they come my life for to perseu.
The aintient knight looks up that diksone hight They war one a place called the
bred libank over against the church from the which they come and ioind with the
English as they come out of the Church.

And seis a hundredth Armed men drau neir
And saeis brave Lord lo hear the long wishd sight
You of your vous and me of mine shall cleir
Then with these words he does begin the fight
Whill as this Lord the rest with conforts cheir
Whoes countenance their curage all appeill'd
Their Eis, hearts, hands and all their foes assaild.
Then burnt with hate of Glory praise revenge
This all subdweing Earl rushd throu the rout
Bright schind his looks, of sun-like beams a reange
About his head did flame, his curage stout
did his mild looks to sparkling fury change
That shoots forth noble anger round about:
On even they fight, and yet with valiant hand
Their noble Lord made way to his small band.
Who hemd about in midst of all his foes
His valiant heart and curage weill made known
His name and fame his deids did weill disclose
And eurie one to other has him schoune
All runs to him his life to make him lose
Which fondly whill they seik they lose their oune
For on his sword accusing each of error
Sat dreidfull death all armd with feir and terror.
Long foght he thus imbreud with goir and blood
Till he at last their captane did epsy
Whoes knightly valor long he vieuing stood
By whoes strong hand four knights did breathlesly
Wheirfore he steps to him with angry mood
And him to mortal Battle did defy
Which long in equal Balance did abide
Whill each his strenth and utmost valor tried.
The angry count at last with wrathful heart
Did in his stirrops raise him self on hie
His foe with force would set the blou apart
But nou no force his force could beir away
On his left shoulder to his grief and smart
The crimsone collord Brand did light whereby
His warlike arm was from his body shorn
Him self with force and pane to earth was borne.
Nou he who late did captanlike command
Was as a captive forced for to obey
Whill as this noble Earl with conquiring hand
No longer with his prisoner would stay
But where the rest in Battle strongly stand
He thither haists, his sword sheirs fourth the way
And shortly victor was of all the field
Forsing them all to die to fly or yield.
The victory by heaunis decree obtaind
They thence depart the castle to supprise
Wherein no soldier at all remaind
Nor any to gainstand them did arise
This fortres since he had so bravely gaind
Heir would he rest and heir would he devise
To make his Captives by ane vucouth death
To knou his you and justly kindled wraith.
Low in a vault the captain first he band
And all the other captives him beside
The grane and flour the Beir and wine he fand It was ever after called the
douglas Ladner.

Which they before could neu'r yneuch provide
With this he filled the house wherein they stand
Thus chokt with meit and dround with drink they died
Whoes gredie gorgis neu'r suffisd with Ill
Now in their death might gurmandize their fill.
Then all the tours he raisd unto the ground
And leueld all the ditches with the plane
Poisond the springs, and fontans which he found
And to the wonted liberty again
Restorde that land which long before lay bound
Beneth a Tirrants seruill oak with pain
But this estate they long remand not In
Such was the wrath of angry heauins for sin.
The Argument.
Scotlands great King from treasone ill contrived
By heavens and his oune valor is relieved
Inspight of twyce two hundredth he repriued
The victory which he alone at chiued
He rests their till all his knights aryud
The witty Hay is with his have agrieud
Ferce Eduard aid unto his brother lendes
Douglas to winn his strength agane in tendes.
Caput. 8.
WHill fame with brazen breath did souud over all
What she had heard in Scota's faerest land
Of Bruce return, whoes arm imperial
Now our the western regions did command
Great Eduards Viceroy did a consail call
Wherein with grave advise he chuisd a band
Of warlik Soldiers and there Captane bold
Sir Iugrham Bell, Achampion wise and old.
Now these for to gane stand his pour he sends
And for to keip him still Into the wast
For he him self with greater pour intends
To pull the wide up be the root at last
That squadron then their Warlick pour extends
And marcheing to the town of air they past
Wheiras their wary captane minds be slight
To work his valiant foe a foull dispight.
Within this land an ancient kinght did dwell
Who of our prince had secret frendscip got
He liebail heght whom the English did compel
Of his sad death for to contriue the plot
Two valiant sons he had nay sons of hell
Who stainis their fame with filthy treassons blot
Nor this their treassone would at all reveal
But waits to tak occatioun by the heal.
Neir to king Roberts camp a Grove their lay
Low by a rivers side and out of sight
Wheir aiged oaks their branshed arms display
And maks dimm shaids with dark and glomie light
Heir often our prince in secret vst to pray
Heir lay the murderers till on a nicht
Down to this grove the Prince allone descended
On who is return a paige without attended
No sooner mong these thickets did he go
When he beheld wheir they had cloislie lain
By what intelligence I do not know
Or rather reuelatioun most diwyne
He calls his paige and from his hand does throw
A crosbow and a bolt both sharp and fine
The ancient knight he kills with the same
As he vnwar's too rashly fordward came,
All armed the vaher tuo in wraith and rage
Began him cruelly for to assaill
But his good sword did both their wraiths assuage
And did so much against them both preuaill
Eu'ne then expird the daits of both their aige
They in their death dispaering curse and raill
Against their fate and fortuns bad decree
Of God who cairles leaves shall cairles die.
Thus to the camp the Prince returns agane
Loud, honored, feared, admird, and praisd of all
When night of day the victory did gane
The Scoutts returned befoir his feit they fall
Whill in his Regal Tent he did remane
Presenting their a prisoner with all
Who to this worthy Prince in secret shoes
That he should be assailed by his foes,
And how they would aproche that very night
Under thik darkness blak and cloudie veil
And would assault his Camp with sudden fight
Nor would strong Trenches noght at all preuaill
With fire throune futth their Tents should burn so bright
Yet could not this his wonted curage quaill
But with a glaide and cheirfull countenance
He does inquir what way they would advance.
Beyond this river ar they yet said he
And by a secreit foord they pas vnknoune
Then quod the Prince heauins our Protector be
As is our cause such be our fortons shoune
Now he commands his captans for to sie
That his small army from the Camp be drown
And rank't in Battle forth vpone the plane
Wheir they in arms must all that night remane.
To Guarde the Camp he sxtie maks to stay
And brings four hundredth forth with speir and shield
With this small army he would neids essay
To force his subrill foe to fly or yield
And that brave Lord that bears the name of hay
He does creat as General of the field
Him self with only two would go and view
The foord wheir they sold pas that would persew.
Now down the River side his course he bent
From whoes steip banks heig he crags and rocks arise
And still he seis the farther that he went
Heigher the Shoir lover the stream still lyis
At last wheir as the rocks in two was rent
Their nature did a narrow path devviss
So to the River down or up might go
But one in rank or at the most but two
When this brave Prince this strength did well behold
Quickly these two that with him thither went
He bak derects and prays in haist they would
Drow up the rest his foes for to prevent
For heir quod he our foes to wsar sold
To die what death we list for to invent
Craft without crafe we should with stand in vane
Heir will I stay till you return agane.
When they were gone he softly nerer drew
Whill as he hears a noise and rattling sound
Which still the longer heard the greater grew
At last horse Braying men's shrill voice confound
Yet these he vous his flight shall neu'r persew
Nor oght but death sall make him lose his ground
When lo paill Phebe shynd so bright and cleit
That he discryis four hundredth horse well neir.
These crossing over the River did ascend
The passage wheir with sword heighe borne he stands
And with an blo^th^ first bright Crest does rend
Nor head nor breist the mortal blaid with stands
Down falls the knight his reilling horse does bend
And fordward leaps but lo in both his hands
The Prince his sword sheirs throu his hoarie syds
And for his Lord a bloody Tomb prouyds,
Now with a shout the rest of this proud crew
Throngs up the path and strongly him Inuaid
Part climing up the crags upon him flew
And at his feitt they fall Leam'd, Bruisd dismayed
Troad by their fr^nds they die the rest forth drew
Their swords each other hurts, have Love betrayed
Strait way, dark night, firce raige does blind them so
Each hurts his friend, for haste to harm his foe.
But as a Roke, a Craig, or Cap of land,
That fire air watter raiging would divide
Does steadfast still and unremoved stand
Against thunder lightning tempests storm or tide
Eu'ne so the Prince ganstands this warlick band
And all their raige their wrath their strength does bide
Still as they came in troops confoosd to find him
He marcheing leau's them slain in heaps behind him.
Their Leader formest now to speak began
Ah shame quod he now never leiue we more
So m^nie hundredth beat by one poor man
Should die a thousand deaths death cloisd the door
An organe of his speech he staggring ran
And relling twice he falls the Prince before
Whoes sword had perst his heart he lifts his eyes
With half groned words he threats and threatening deis.
The captains Brother thristing for revenge
Thrusts throu the throng and to the Prince he hyis
Wrath from his eyes forth sparkled lightning strange
And with an Angry voice he sternlie cryis
Ah villans you your credet thus infreinge
Ah soldiers you no soldiers thus that seis
Your captane slane ah now return you never
You Fasards wretches Outcasts cursed for ever
Waik feeble faint for horse for sword or spear
More fit for iron toolls then Armor bright
Your heads Breists baks should hauie burdens bear
No helms nor sheilds should you adorn with light
In curage place, is entered shame and fear
No hope is left but in your feit and flight
In darkest night your chiefest strenth abyds
Darkness your shame your fear and faintnes hyds,
And full of raige for every word a stroke
He gius our Prince whoes sword bears eurieble
And whill he yet enraig'd would more have spok
He cuts his words and with them cuts in two
His Iaws on him death spreads his mistie cloak
He on his brother falls who leiuing lo
Him does embrace both kish both souls remove
O! Pity, great, O! Blesd, O! wandrous love
Now foreward rushd this single Campioun stout
And maks such hauock always wheir he goes
As Boreas when he has blasted out
His storms: of Herbs, Treis, Beists, and Foulls, the foes
Or as the raiging Floods that rore and rout
Against Rooks or Thunders that heigh Tours down throes
As Earthquaks threat to burst the eairh a sunder
His force so shaks thois bands O Strenth! O wonder
Whill thus he kills and driu's them bak by force
And all their bloes vn-harm'd vn-hurt sustaind
Horse bruisd their Masters whill he treds the horse
In and beyond the stream they all remaind
Forced down with might the passage quite they lose
When lo the army cums and quiklie raind
A storm of swords whill trumpets roaring blast
Warr's thundering tempests forth with lightning cast.
Death, horror, murder, fear Grief sorrou Pain
Came fare before and with their tallons wide
Sease on their hearts and chilid in eurie vain
Their vital Breath, that fleis it self to hide:
Nou ar they so benoum, d that scarce remiane
Strenth for to fly Or force for to abide
Some flee some fall some droun dispaird allone
Each other hurts for haist for to be Gone
The Prince by this of al his foes was cleird
And setts him down vpone a stone to rest
Sueat on his face Blood on his arms appeird
His breath was short faint heat his hairt oppressed
Weary his arms his hands so stiflie steird
He could not weild his sword which he possessed
And lo the sword did seem no sword at all
So blunted was the Edge and hack't so small.
By this his Troops were come unto the place
And for him calls and for him loudlie cryis
But when they fand him when they kneu his face
In heaps they run to feid their longing eyes
And down they fall his feitt for to embrace
With thanks and praise to God they rend the skeis
That he allone overcums a thousand foes
They doubt who wonders most or most reiocs.
They find the captain and his Brother slane
And fiftein more ly wallowing in their blood
Some English were some Scotts who felt the pane
They gane who against their king and cuntrie stood
In Gallowoy these Troops did all remane
Holding that cuntrie in great feruitude
They took King Edwards pay their captane bold
Brought them in hope of gane praise, Glory, gold.
But the Lord hay and vthers grave and wise
Against his rashness bitterly did chide
Quod they what prove you in this interprise
No General nor no captane Prince nor Guide
In whoes deir lose en'ne all our loss nou lyis
Nor ours allone but all this all beside
Ah should you not to mind our natioun call
That but for you no natioun were at all
Allace do you of Glory so at count
That It to gane ane Empire you would lose
Nor can you not to endless glory mount
But to all dangers you yourself expose
In vain poor valor does for Glory hount
If noght for Good of wisdom he maks choice
Be wise dear Lord since of our croun and camp
You ar the head the heart the life the lamp.
He little answer to these speeches made
But said he forcd was either fight or flee
Now to the camp triumphand ways they ryid
Whil day shuttes forth his silver horns on hie
Fame flees our all on Warr's wings sanguine reid
And stroues the seid of this great victory.
Which back unto the camp brought many skore
Who crossed with fortunes bad hade fled before.
Edward the bold in Lennox nou remiand
And with thrie hundredth did that land subdeu
Who hearing what his brother late hade gaind
Returns unto the camp with all his creu
The Douglas with his train that late obtaind
His oune cheef strenth which last he over threu
Hears that the Clifford had with wondrous care
Reedified the bulding much more fair.
And left a warr-like man a valiant knight
To keep the hold with him three hundredth strong
And he who thus commanded Thirswall hight
A man who hade in war experience long
Yet would the Douglas needs essay his might
And to the world make known his right their wrong
To sixty now his train augmented werre
With those he would essay the chance of war.
The Argument.
An English visard with great art foreshowes
The Douglas of spring great to these our days
And how that happy famelie aroise
To fortunes height where at the world may gaize
The secound time he does himself apoise
Against his foe and their with endless praise
Our throws the captain of his chiefest streinth
Then back to ead his Prince returns at leinth.
Caput. 9.
NOw with this English captain did abide
His Uncle old grave learned wise and true
Whoes judgment deep was rairlie deified
High mysteries and secreitts hidd he kneu
One day by chance the Douglas he espyde
Who thus unto the Captane quickly drew
From this infused spiriet and flowing mind This capten heght thirsuall wha
kipt the castle of douglas

This History by hea'une long since deuinde. The race of ye douglas is from
Sir Iemis to yis our tym

The righteous heir of that most famous line
That shall the Scots ferce natione still adorn
To whom and not without right does incline
These Lordshipes great which Clifford holds in scorn
Who once has wunn this strength without ingine.
Whoes virtue be no time can be outworne
Shall win the land again and it posses
In vain would mighty England him oppres. Sir Iamis Douglas lord Douglas.

Over him to triumph never shall England bost
But victor he shall ouermore remain
He shall not fear to meet their mighty host
With his small troop the gatland still to gain
Whill fortune his attempts has never crossed
He cloi'd with conquest heir shall croce the maine
His Princes unperformed vow to bear He triumphd seauintie seven times over
his ennemies.

Where infidells his worth shall knou and fear* He buir his Princes heart to
the holy grain.

Naught without cause the west shall fear him still
Their cheifest nationes force his sword shall tame
And all the Eist his worthy praise shall fill
To Ganges soundes the terror of his name
But there a dreadful tempest shall him kill
Yet of his death none dare the conquest clame
His courage fearce shall arm his foes deceat He was thirteen tyms victor
over the saracens.

And thus himself subdewes him self to fate. He died in Spain follouing the
victory too rashly, being enclosed be his enemies. Anno 2330.

Here silence stays his tongue his speech is crossed
Both Joie and greef at once his heart oppressed
Greef for so rare a knight that should be lost
Joy that his death should cure rich Englands pest
But now enamord of his worth almost
The Caiptaine him intreatts to sheu the rest
And needs would know if heavens should nature will
From such a root to bring such branches still.
Ah quod his uncle thence does greef proceid
For as great Joue ordaind ane hatred still
Betuixt the serpent and the woman's seid
So shall his line bear us and ours il will
Whill their ambitious minds on fame does feid
Yet heaune shall raise for to with stand this ill
A famous race their dreadful wraith to bear
Whoes worth shall prove right fortunat in war. The p^^sies ^ls of
Northumberland.

Now first of him discendes that valiant Lord
Whoes heighe atchiuements shall his foes with stand
His victoreis most rare shall be decor'd
With valor flowing from his conquering hand
Yet cruelty in him shall be deplord
Which hermitage does fatallie demand
But for his valor worthelie renound
Whoes deades almost are all by fortune cround. William Lord of lidsdail sone
too Sir James of whom is descended the house of (...).

Then cums his uncle whoes all matchles brood
Seems thundering flammes with fire consumeing breath
A new deludge ane over whelming floode
A storm that nipes our springes fair flowers to daith
For he like thundering Mars embreud with blood
To dreadful arms shall all his days bequeath
But reuling for his Prince with roialtie
Too forwad in his countreies cause shall die. Archibald brother to fi^ James
Lord of Douglas was regent of Scotland he faught halidone hill and being too
fordward was slain Anno 1333.

His brother bold ane English dame shall bear
Whoes famous line in wondrous gifts exceids
This man a mighty family shall rare
That shall the world astonishe with their deids
Which at this time to sheu I will for bear
Till thou have known who from the first proceeds
Who valiantly in battle spends his lyif
To bring to end his countreies endless stryif. John Lord of dakeit of whom the
house of Mortoun is descended, Whoes mother was one English lady called Feres.

Then shall appeir that first great sheining light
That dimes thoise blazing stars his heauins bright sune
In midst of arms and thoundring wars dread sight
At him is honors title first begune
Conquestes first fruits deoth much ogment his might
Penwick his wraith they wealth shall over rune
And Berwick strong his angers birning fire With first Earl of Douglas,

Shall turn to ash yet shall not quench his ire. His bre^^^ was,

His brothers worth shall to all times be told
Whoise sone shall sore on princely Egels wings
By wertueis rare and valor so extold
That he is preferred to princes lords and kings
In arms his fortune strength and courage bold
Shall strive whoes mereits most the muses sings
From this fair imp shall spring a faerer tree
Whoes fruit shall much adorn this family. Archibald Lord of gallavay his son
was Lord of midsdeall he mariet the Kings dochter, whom the King of France
sewed for in marriage of him is disce^ded the house of drumlenreik.

But o thou Bellicous what man may know
Thy verteus mind thy worth and warrlyk deades
The brightest lightning of thy works does show
Daizling the beams that from thy peers proceides
Heauins lamps remoues their painted sirling so
To bright Apollos fyrie flamming steids
Yea thy rare line thy rarest virtues cleames
In whom still shynes thy former glories beams. James erlle of Douglas sone to
william first earl he dismonted the persie befotr neu castle and wan
Otterburne being thrice strokin throu the body wheir he de^ld Anno. 1388.

The deades of all, thy deades does ouerturne
All fortunes rare thy fortune foylleth still
E're victor thou never conquest shall return
And Yorkes proud walls bears witness of thy skill
Lastly that ever famous otterburne
Seals all thy conquests against thy countries will
Whill thou thrice wounded victor sheeds a flood
To die thy latest triumphs with thy blood, His brother was.

Thy valiant brother shall to the succeid
Whose aufull looks presageth wrath t'insewe
With him shall fortune lyk vayes forth proceid
And Lintone battle shall his prais renew
But o his sone shall all that aige exceid
In wit and courage strength and valor true
To princely steat in Europs gairden fair
He shall be reasd and honors great shall bear. Called archibald grim he van
Cintone Battle the Persie and the erlle of march Anno 1403. his sone was
called archibald Tynman Was valiant but most onfortunat who was slain at the
battle of wernell in France Anno 1422. he was d^ck of Turin Lord of longuell
and martial of France his one.

Yet all in vain since fortune proud heath sworn
The world shall build no trophe to his neame
Nature does him with such rear gifts adorn
That she invying cuts the wings of feame
He tryes her favor often but she does scorn
His suit, and does hit favor quyt recleame
Thus he whom nature freames for gloreis throne
Fortune throues done for fate to treed vpone,
Then cumes that lordly Earl whoes pourfull might
Is both suspect and feared and vist more small
Whoes race once run his sons with out all right
Most fry the vay to rule by their great fall
Which turns the Scotts calm day to stormmie night
Whoes tempest threats the kingdom croun and all
Yet he that must succed shall fly mischief
And vislie to his End conceall his grief Archibald er^e of wigtoune duck of
Turyn and Lord of longuvyll his sone will: duck of Turijn and Lord of longuvyll
he was behaded in the castle of edinburgh 1445 to him succeided his uncle
gross James earl of abercorne.

This starr gone down ane other does appeir
Whose bold mind feeds the flame of martial fire, Williame duck of turyn
Lord of longuvyle he maid his tua brother erlls of morray and ermound and the
third Lord of balvene anno 1452.

Yet shoots forth beams illustred white and cleire,
Which shows to war or peace a like desire,
At Honors croune he aims, though never so dear,
His conquering looks presageth martial Ire,
To honors great he shall his breether raise,
But he offends his prince, who ends his days,
His brother then enraged vpbraids there King,
Whose minds bursts forth a storm of desolation,
What he heapd up in silence forth they bring,
A flood of war, a fearful inundation,
That well might choke their foes over flowing spring,
But vented wrong flows to their Princes starioun, James secound sone to thros
James with his thrie brother of murray of mond and Bonenie a roise a gains the
King and was pacified with tyt deficultie.

Yet this hudge flood eu'ne in the height shall turn
And of a boundles Ocean seem a burn.
For with the wecht of their own heavy swey
The currents swiftest motione they recall
Their too too lofty minds does mount so hie
That skoarchd with Phoebus beams to earth they fall
From topes of touring clouds in wars bright sky
Their smook euanishd throne dissolues and all
For why the heavens ordaines no force of men
To rouse the lordly Lion from his den.
Yet their deserved fall shall not be such
As shall extinguishe that most famous line
Nor darkine shall their wounted glory much
Nor yet their former greatness shall decline
Tho pride o'rethrowes whom ere he hapes to touch
But they be virtue shall their thoughts confyne
Within the limits of their former worth
Wherein they stretche their friutfull braches forth,
Yet ends this reace their room the secound line
Obteanes and brings their wertues from the grave
The first in worth and wounderous deads shall shine
If he from Shrosburre him self can saiue
Nor shall his sone to any vice inclyne
But of dew praiss suift time shall him dissaue
Whoes secound sone shall to the world bring forth
A famelie of much redoutit wourth, George first erlle of angous was sleane at
shrosburrie ending the persie ageans the King of England Anno 1403. George
secound e^lle of angous of his base sone called George the house of boundward is
cum. Archi bald erlle of angus his sons and friends var al sleane at flouden
he vent hom him self being reprehended for god counsel.

But to bear up that house lo one appears
Cled with the light of bright Auroras rays
Whoes great experience and whoes aiged years
His Prince reiectes and still at Flouden staves
With whom he leaves thrie sons him self reteires
Fearing his lords vnty melie blasted bays
And as he does presaige so shall it fall
Their dies his royell Prince his sons and all.
Yet shall their rich and froutfull seid spread forth
Four brainches fair whoes frout is rypt by fame
Whearof the secound planted in the north
Shall graice that soyll with blossoms of his name
Nor shall the third know any vant of worth
The fourth shall cleinge his blot in virtues stame
But lo the firsts rare sone shall grease the line
And shall our English roy ell blood proypne. Sir williame his secound sone
leard of glenberuie his ^ sone leard of kilspindie williame his bas sone Lord
of Torthorall Archi bald sone to George mester of angus he mar^ed the quine of
Scottland sister to King Hendrie the 8 of England and begat margaret countas of
Lenox mother to Hendrie dooke of Albanie father to King Ieames the 6.

With that rare dame whoes heauinlie grease is such
As her sons sone shall be that blaising light
Whom all divyns and Prophets praise so much
Of whom fair Albione longes to heave a sight
The Eame which all the prophici^s would twich
The ioiner of this Iills disioyned might
For Albeone it is now in name allone
But then in substance we shall Albeone.
But leave we him till god appoint his time
And turn ws to that Lord that ancient knight
Whoes chairge is free vnchairg'd with any crym^
Famous for wit and fortunat in fight
Not one beneath this cold distemperd clyme
May clame more princely virtues for his right
Yea An^kermure his fortune fare shall sie
Whear he obteans a glorious victory. The foresaid archibald that Mareed the
^^ine he w^^ (...) he died in Tamtallon Anno 1557.

Two brother shall he heave both valiant knights
From whom two famous fam^^^is shall spring
The first's rear sone weill skild in martial fights
Obteans his uncles pleace in every thing
Thus is that house prepaeid of glorious lights
By heauins eternal universal king
For reulls the line, they sore in verteous deids
And if the breanch? it self that breanch exceids. His secound brother Lea^d of
pittindreich his 3. brother pi^ot of condinghame David sone to the Leard of
Pittindrich succeided his uncle archibald earl of of angus 1558.

Then cums the last of this fair braench in fine
For virtue called the good when from the north
Shall come a knight that shall succeed by line
Who weied with him, does equalize his worth
And yet with fame can not the world propine
So loath is time to bring occasioune forth
Yet virtue for his sone shall grace prepair
And thus to fame shall measour forth his shair, Archibald soue to David Earl
angus died with out is hue 158. Williame the 3 from Sir Williame first Leard of
gle^beruie succeided Earl of angus he died Anno 1591.

Heauin cheanging time shall civil discord reas
And wrap the Scotts in wealth consuming woes
When he by god set up unto thees days
Shall leave his soil to foreign lands he goes
Widing throu rtubles stream and thear with praise
His pen unto his predicessoures shows
The way to win from darck obliuiones night
Boolding their trophe is with his virtues might. Williame his sone earl of
angus died in pareis Ann^ 1611. He hes writtin then cronicklie of that name to
which I have refered most pairte of their actiouns.

This lamp gone out o then his sone succeides
Reasing that house declind to former height
Whoes mind is great with child of glorious deids
And as a Collon fair vpholds the weight
Of ane learge frame so from his wit proceids
The strenth that onder props that neames great might
Yet he by airt stops natures stream to flow
With Junos string still bending Pallas bow. Williame now Earl of angus.

He ripes the tumbes of his Ancestors old
And brings them clod with robes of heavenly light
For all enshewing aiges to behold
They shute forth beams of fame and glory bright
Which long lay hid in nights dark pitchie mold
Over vaelde by sadd oblivion from our sight
Their ghostes reioising that so rich a geme
Springs from thear loins t'immortaliz their name,
Now cumes the nixt great famelie in sight
That jointly with the first at first shall spring
Which eurie where sendes forth such lamps of light
As Earth and other firmament does bring
Wherein each fixed star does burn so bright
As yeelldes hoth life and light to eurie thing
So far those glory lighting flammes does shine
Moueing their orb with influence divine. The dissent of Erle^ of mortoune.

The first that shall illuminat the sky
Of this bright orber this hea'une reflexing sphere
Armed with his fathers magnaminitie
Shall be a great and mighty man of war
Of whom shall two arise to rectify
Two lines that shall their fame to heaune vprear
Yet to the younger shall the elder fall
And both thus joined shall one great house install. John Lord of dakeith Sir
James Douglas his youngest brother he had tna sons the ouldest was Lord of
dakeith and the second leard. of Iochle^in.

O thou thrice famous lake and strand of Leuine
Famous, The descent of the lairdes of loghleuin. The first lord of logh levin.
for that great reace shall come from the
Enriched with graces by the wandering Seuin
That still aloft in th'azure vallers flee
The first that shall adorn thy watrie hea'une
With sure and stayed establisd reul I sie
By fatell deades shall many fortunes shair
And Pallas sword shall all his paths prepair. He was with arichbald grim at
intoune battle Wheer heauing vin the enemies standard from the hand of Sir
Thomas Kolbuth was the chief of the victory. The second lord of logh levin
who going with the Earl of buchan to france defended the passage of a brig
there with thrie handreth agains the dooke of cl^ ^ens his army whom he maid
reteir and inperseung forceie was killed.

The beaies thy temples shall at lintoune bear
Whear thou by valout from a valiant knight
The leopard and Flourdeluce shall tear
Thus shall thy arm put all thy foes to flight
But when the valiant Perfie wageth war
Against his Prince in that ontimlie fight
Thou valiant lie aduentring then shall fall
Yet after death thy fame shall sore our all.
But thou brave youth although a stripling young
Scorns in thy native soil for to remeaine
Thou heirs B^lonas dreadful bell was roung
Following the voice with honors thristing pain
Wheer all the plains inbroudert war along
With gorre, blood, rent arms and soldiers slain
Theer haiueing win fair conquest by the hair
Thou leapes from of this wordlie theater.
And then succeides that all prais worthy youth
That with the ground stone lays a fairer stream
Mounting that house up to the secound grouth
Whois worth in varre illusterates his name
Then cumes that blaizing comet of the south
Whoes voundrous deads with terror soundes his fame
His looks sendes virtue forth so graic'd with art
As striks mild reverence in each barbarous heart. The thri^ leard of loghleuin,

And yet his galent sone shall with him strive
Who to that aige shall greatest light restore
As painful bees still works to serve the hiue
And leazie drons that deoth their wealth deuore
Their dares not enter nor with them may strive
So nature does prouid for to decore
That fruitful Stem with such whoes pains excides^
Past all cumpare in heigh and virtues deades The foeth leard of loghleuin.

No frutles drone shall from that reace arise
Each gives testificats of honors height
What praises to the sext can I devise
That serves his Prince in many a blood die fight
Nor conquest ever to eroune his pains denies
Nixt him cumes one whoes worth and pourfull might
Does aid his Prince against usurping foes The fifth lord of loghleuin.

Whois vant at last that mighty Prince ouerthoues. The saixt lord of
loghleuin (...) The seuinth leard who was always with King James the 3 against
the hums and the habrons, his good service was often times of grit walue to his
Prince.

But O what knight is this, The 8 Laerd of loghleuin who bein upon he King his
left hand at flouden and ane other upon the right hand was boith sleane with
their Prince, their being 45 of their enemies fond killed a^bout theme The 9
lord of loghleuin.
Adrest for war
That all the countray round about Obaies
Whom greatest Princes of the land does fear
In bloddie battle who at last assaies
Our English force from of his Prince to bear
With whom ane other valiant compioune stays
And whill to seaue their Prince their lives they yield
Great multitude from valor wins the field
But who coms heir in the could north t'insius
Such heavenly gift is, all Europe passing by
O, its Apollo suir, that does refius
The east, and coms the wast too beutifie
Whear he the silver laik of Leuin does chuis
The cleir Caballian streams he does deny
Thus leaving Gretian plainis, and pleasant fontanis
He seats him self neir too the Ocheell montanis.
Whear whilist he veiues the valeyis round about
By chance shall sie fair natours quein cum thear
That Daphne does surpas and all the ^out
Of virgins queens or shephards known of ear
Whom following long at last shall find his out
And wedd the dame who onto him shall bear
Fine Virgin dames nay greaces five for lo, His wife a^ moist virteus wisse
and beutifull Lady.

The wordle shall not their match in beauty sho.
Yea this rare beauty past compare shall be
Nor longs to one but in them all it duelleth
Eune all in color neitnes decensie
Preportion and the minds rare gistis excels
Nor shall it spend nor weist, nor fead, nor die
But too all times a quintisence distelleth
For lo their seid shall in this land be borne
As stonis to ringis or stars that heaune adorn. His five daughters so
admirable in all the gifts of nature as not only the^ selfs but their of
spring at the ornaments of their seexe.

And from their sire both sanctified and seag
Cold wise and bold with heastie wroth not brunt
Adornt with wertue both in youth and aige
Whom heaune decres with honors height to munt
Shall likuayis spring that youth whom forteouns reage
One swelling theetis shining back does hunt
Till angry Neptuns fury bursteth forth
And swallous up that treasur house of worth. ^^ he tent pari^^^ at sea be
tempest of vather.

O but his sone is Mars and Phoebus knight
For valor corrage wit and beutie store
The foggie mistes of ignorantes dark night
He cleres, Williame now Earl of mortune.
to knowleg day he ops the door
Eu'ne as a lantern from a toures proud height
Shoues the seas port for shipes to win the shore
So his cleir lamp of judgment shows the vay
For dark gross wites to land in virtues beay.
The active boldness by his spreit refind
Produce resistles actiouns strongly Knut
The quick vivasitie that meltes his mind
In streams of eloquence ou're flous his with
And yet so much to courtessie inclind
That humble mildnes on his broue does sit
Which tempers passioune still with faculty
And makes a simphatheising hermonie.
For lo his souls rear faculteis devine
Is so cut forth on his human perfectioune
Yat in his lowkes heigh majesty does shine
By modesty held in so sweit subiectioune
As alvay holds a mean nor does dicline
To simple mildnes or to proud infectioune
Thus descentie stells forth with every glance
And freames a persing amorouss countinance.
Which breeds respective reuerance with dilyt
In every heart whois eyis does him behold
With admiratioune and amezment gryt
That streans a sweit obedience on controld
But now I fear if I the rest indyt
To cloy your ears with my discourse to bold
Yet quod the captain I would glaidlie kno
If still that name produice such fruits or no.
O still quod he and shall be still increst
For both thoes mighty famaleis proceides
To honors great whear of they at posest
Mounting aloft with heigh and glorious deades
And this lords sone; whill he would say the rest
A sudden tumult their amezment breides
Over all the land great clamoures they might heir
Which did forshow sum deanger to drove neir,
Wherewith they leap to earmes the captain cries
For all the Garisone in arms to be
When lo hard by the castle he aspyes
Weer driu'n great heardes of cattle hestilie
This was the conquering knight that does deuyis
How he that countray might of thraldom fry
And neids would treane the captain from his hold
Whoes strenth he would assay with currag bold.
But this his purpoiss greatly does with stand
They hardly could be brought unto the field
Wheirfor he takes this Stratagem in hand
To treane theme out to feght to fly or yield
A wooddie pleane neir Sandy Lands he fand
Whoes vmbrage seemd from Phoebus heat to shield
On each syd grew the Treeis so bushie thick
It seemed that Nature freamd it for a trick.
Thither the Erlle by night his troops forth gwids
Wheir each lyis closlie quiet whist and still
His wantcuriours in ha^st he thus prowyds
To bring their herds of cattle from the hill
And those that neirrest to the tour abids
Those drive they hence whill as the heard men fill
The air with schricks, the land with loud allarms
Wheir with proud Their swall cled in glorious arms.
With all his Garesone addressed for war
Isht forth in haist for to return the pray
And followed haiuing nether dout nor fear
Till they were past the Ambush fare away
Then these that fled returned, their swords they rear
Aloft their sheilds, before their strong arms stay
Their blous they bear they pushe strik stab and kill
Th'amased foe, who yet resisted still.
Till at their baks a suddant storm a rose
Whoes horrid noyss does make them all to quail^
And with their force their fury and their blois
Their brokin rancks begins to faint and shaik
The first rank bakward on the second gois
The second on the third the third does brak
Crushed by the fourt and fifth and at e^he end
They leap forth scattring heir and their they bend
So do the cluds dispersed from East to West
In ranks and roues that hing cleir white and fair
When as the Northern and the Southern blast
Forth from their caves breaks throu the trubled aer
Rank against a rank cloud against a cloud they cast
Till in a heap confoosd at last they rear
And burst asunder crushed with furious bloes
Scattred in drops fleis from between their foes.
Th^^iswall their deid beneath the Douglas sword
Of all his men but nintie went away
Who in the Castle got from thence they pourd
Dairts quarreis Stones like haill without delay
The Erll^ reuerd his band when they were tourd
And from his Prince no longer would he stay
Against whom he hard an army was prepaird
Of which in time to show him he repaird.
The Argument.
Whill Fortune houeres doutfull of her ch^'s
Nor peace nor war on either syd displays
Hard fait anon prepaireth greatter voes
Great diss forsies that Jove the Scots will reaise
To former height and forth his feinds he throws
Who temps the Scots they leave the Bruce whoes praise
Augmentes whill vnawarrs his foe assailles
His witty flight his valor twyse prevails.
Caput. 10.
THe Prince of Darkness now long time reiofd
Of Gods great wrath among his children throun
Whoes foull offenses had his favor los'd
Fearing if they repent that Grace were shoune
A thousand Ills into his mind he tossed
Wheir with to tempt them yet to heauins vnknoune
Thus wyldlie Staird he when he muisd allone
Whill as he sitts on his Infernal Throne,
And now resolving to his work he falls
And with a dreadful greislie countenance
The cursed and haitfull Fureis up he calls
The Mounsters trembling gius obedience
Their poisond Gorgis all with Venom swalls
Enflamd with his reid Eyes hot flaming glance
Whill his strong breath forth from his rattling thro^
A noise like to a fearful tempest shot.
Which made the Earth to quaik and deafned hell
Thus understood they this confused Sound
You malice proud and you inuy that dwell
Amid our fiery Regious under ground
Haist up and with infecting breath expel
All peace and let no ametie be found
In the great North and sie that you defyle
With blood and war great Europs greatest Iile.
Make Englands King to forge some causes new
To keip the right which he by wrong hes got
Tell him that heau'ne ordains him to renew
Sins just reward upon the sinful Scot
Make English all with deadly hait persew
The Scots their only ancient foes by lot
The only blok that ever bears them down
From all their greatness Glory and renoune,
Thus edge them on, Sc^tts only were the over throuwers of them selfis deuiditt
in thrie factions the brooce the baliol, and the cumming, both the last took
pairt with England against the Bruce.
It were great lose great shame
If they unto their wonted greatness rise
Your strength allone was never so extreme
To make them once to shrink nor could devise
By slight or might to droune their famous name
Till now that lo them selfs them felfs defyis
And what you swords before could never do
Their swords have down and winn them selfs to you.
So that you sie heau'ne favors your intent
With these and other your intendit slight
Arm them with pride hate Anger discontent
And move the Scotts still against them selfs to fight
For lo I sie Joue does his wrath relent
And minds to raise the Scotts to greater might
For in that famous Bruce and in his line
They must be blisd and over all Europe shine.
Though what great Joue decrees we can not mend
Yet may we often delay th'intendit blise
Which he ordains upon fraill man to send
Since sluggish man by Nature cairles is
And we may move him thankles to offend
And often to disobey his law I wish
For man is fleshly geu'ne to foull delight
And God is always pure cleir holy right,
Since we of all the damned heirs as cheiff
And has no longer time from Torments fry
Then till the cup be full of Gods hot greiff
And that great day of his fierce wrath we sie
Then with the souls which now without releif
We still torment shall we tormented be
And which is worse our pains shall neu'r be spent
Whill we our selfs must still our selfs torment.
Then heauins decree to stay our strength is small
Yet heaueing time we may not tire of Ill
Since what we would that can we not at all
Do what we may we may not what we will
At these his words Invy and malice swell
With murdring hate their breists with venom fill
And up they fly to view days glorious light
Bringing Mischief, Grief, horror, war, dispight.
Arriving heir they fill each Godles heart
With anger, raige, Mischief, pride, hate, inuie,
Then to the camp they hie to use their airt
But their vane Slight the nobler sort descrie
Whill grace, love, wisdom, with their worths desert
Did dreiue them thence in endless infamy
Yet in the basser sort great pou'r they win
Throu whoes faint hearts despair, feir, danger, rune
Great bands of these by their deceat they dreu
Who stelling from the camp by night does fly
And still these feinds to their fant minds does shou
For hoped Conquest shameful Infamy
There former lose remembrance lets them knou
Which often repeated maks their hopes to die
These words they murmur still them selfs among
On shameful death shall we attend so long.
Allace what strength what might what pour'r have we
Rich England warlick Schotland to ganestand
May not our Lord behold his infamy
And in the glass of former works have scand
That against his will heaunis bend their just decrie
Earth scorns to build a Trophee for his hand
Fate to his fall his frouning fortun brings
Heaven, earth, fate fortun all crose his desings.
Heauins never yet did feuour his intent
Earth neu'r looked for conquest at his hand
Fate never fraimd his will to find content
And fortun never liked of his demand
Fair victory her chiefest wealth has spent
On his proud foe who conquering does command
Us all if got like robbers hanged to be
Thus we are but outlawes to his majesty.
With Grief and sorrou pane and travel sore
We hunger-sterud Amidst the montansly
Our friends still aid our foes and which is more
Eu'ne our oune natioun us with scorn defy
Thousands that rose in our defense before
Now with our foes against us there forces try
Whill we that noght but shame and want does gane
Attend on hope and still attend in vane.
Why stay we then to immitat their flight
Who with our foes abide in wealth and ease
No let us render up this camp but fight
And give our Lord to use him as they please
Or if noght this then let us fly by night
And yeildinge to our foes, their wrath appease
This last opinioun each approves so
That every night in troops away they Go
Thus wroght blak Plutos messingers their will
And now to work the rest of their mischeife
Brave Pembroks ear with these glad neus they fill
And fills his warrlik mind with raige and grief
To make an end of war they show him still
That now he may at ease without releif
His waikned foe of forder hopes deprive
Quite ouerthroune or killed or taken alive Sir Odomer de wallance was crll of
Pembrok.

Then fed with hope he does an army raise
Of Scotts and English neir ten thousand strong
Whoes minds with hate and with desire of praise
They do inflame nor stay they those among
But heir and their through all the land they gaise
Subjects to find whereby to work more wrong
At last of lorne that cruel Lord they find
And unto new revenge they stir his mind,
To nev revenge of his deir cusings blood,
Great Cummernald whom Bruce before had slane
He to this war brings forth five thousand good
And to great Englands general ioins amane
Thus foreward prikt with hope and hatfull mood
They bravely martch over hill over daill over plane
Whereof our Gallant noght at all did kno
So speedily and secretly they go.
Now of five hundredth thrice with him remaind
Thrie hundredth scant the rest war fled and gone
Whereof he often and secretly complaind
Yet wise lie in him self conceall'd his moan
But nou his scouts by travel that obtaind
A sight of their Proud foe return anon
And to him bring those woeful neus at last
Whoes sound from ear to ear right sadly past.
The relicts small of his forsaeken host
Wheir all about him standing in a round
Whill as bold Edward thus did him accost
My Lord and brother let not this confound
Your noble thoghts tho numbers quite be lost
In this small band must all your hops be cround
Tho fortun bear your just desings aurie
She can not let us bravely for to die.
Will is it known since first we Armor took
When in our cuntreis cause we swore to stand
That ever since we suffered have rebooke
Nor fortun once would favor out demand
With shame and lose our. Friends us all forsook
Our soldiers seeing noght but lose at hand
Have left us Cowards worthy not to breath,
That we may look for nothing now but death.
Yet sall it neu'r be said nor sein nor known
That in our latest hour we shrink or fly
No let our hearts our hands and al be shoune
Eu'ne in dispight of fortuns cruelty
To work most dread revenge if ouerthroune
And with their brauest captains let us die
Lo fame and Glory shall our death attend
Nor shall they much reioise in this our end.
The rest whom Anger curage grief despair
Tormenting made to wish their deaths were nie
Applaudeth all that he had said and their
All cry dye die revenge and bravely die
But their brave Prince with mild looks does declair
His counsall wise and his command whereby
Their fiurie hot and fond despair refraining:
He to his brother answers thus complaining.
Thy counsall in the wise no place will find
With such dispairing hezerds to betray
Our selfs unto our foes they prove to kind
To please their foe that works their oune decay
What tho the basser sort their beastly mind
In flieing from our camp does weill beuray
Yet hope and forsight fortun still commands
And wars good luuk in wisdoms counsall stands.
What though our fainting troops have fled before
Who ever the neues of ill with terror stings
These at the real sight will fear much more
And confort none but meir disconfort brings
Yea when they fled my hopes they did restore
And with them fled the Douts of my desings
Great foolls ar they that builds their hopfull good
Vpone the ever changeing multitude
In you that does remane my confort lies
Nor can a world of armeis me effray
For heau'ne promeisd me that I should ryise
Unto my foes shame ruin and decay
I cair not I what earth or hell deuyis
They can not hinder heauin though they dalay
Fraill man's intendit blish by heauins decreed
With heauinlie faith is eathlie wants suppleid.
Knou then this praise to Scotts is only deu
Neu'r conquered yet neu'r yeildit to their foes
For want refusing never to perseu
With endless war the just revenge of those
That would their lives or liberteis subdeu
For Scotts will either all way make a chose
Of friedome ever poor with war maintaind
Then bondage ever rich with peace still gaind.
By this they sie an army to appeir
Before their face and at their baks they vieu
The Lord of Lorne with all his troops drau nei^
By secreit by-wais led, them to perseu
Whereat they stand amazed until, they heir
Their Lords wise hardy resolutioun treu
Who thus to cheir and confort them began
Fear not their slight for do the worst they can,
We shall esheu their craft their hate their force
Then he commands his brother to depairt
And Lennox Earl with them ane hundredth horse
Douglas and Hay unto the contrair Airt
With equal number bend their speedy course
Now friends quod he each bear a valliaunt heart
And fleing fight and fighting fly your foes
For your brave flight hew forth your wais with bloes.
So our's shall be the Glory of this day
And we with fame return but they with shame
We with the rest will likewais hold our way
Betuixt their armeis so shall we reclame
Our life and honor which they count their pray
Yea and perhaps er long may pay them hame
This said all Thrie thrie sundry way's oppose
Their Warlick breists against thousands of their foes.
Yea suerlie each of theme great valor shoes
And wisdoms beams still gave their valor light
They brak throw armed Squadrons of their foes
Thus they perseuing fly and flieing fight
O curage great O valor worthy those
That rise to ewer shyning Glory bright
Throw thrice five thou sand fighting fleis thrie hunde^
Not loseing One. O curage great! O wonder!
The valiannt Bruce with unresisted might
Fleis yet his deids still maks him known of all
The lord of Lorne that weill espyde his flight
So one folloud him in hope to work his fall
Five hunderth thrice on horssis swist and light
With him he taks and gius but leisure small
To Bruce who thrice diuids his Men in thrie
And thrice thrie sundry wayis the're forced to fly
At last with him their did remane but one
And yet his foes still followed on his tract
Their care is only him to have allone
Nor seem they of his Men account to make
Five knights that all the rest had far out gone
Were cum so neir that him they overtake
Who scornd to Fly whill he had bein alive
Though but allone from fystie joined to five
The knight that with him stayed was bold and stout
Whoes birth made in his dams fair breists appear
The milk that nur'st the Prince for which no dowt
He greatly loud the Man and held him deir
Who with him twrns now to their foes abut
Both on theme twns nor would they once reteir
There salutations were in raige and wrath
Death on each wound attends and shame on death
Thrie to the Prince and two unto the knight
Addressed and thus the combat's wndertane
The valiant Monarche with two bloes down right
Ones heart another head did cleiue in twane
Whairat dismayed the third does shwn to fight
And now this matchles lord thus left allone
Len'ds the one a blow that did his knight assaill
Till from his horse he sank down cold and paile.
Beneath the knights good suor^d the fourt soon dyis
Death after him that flees was quickly sent
This strattagem the Prince does sone devyse
To learn to sie and know his soes intent
He on this horse in this knight arms does Rise
And to his foes bak as a friend he went
His knight he their Commands for to soiurne
Till he again dead or alive Return
This bak agane a Myll (...) had not gone
When as he meits the Forward of his foe
Come with a spedie march that way anon
And them before a hundredth knights and more
Come toward him before all these allone
A senting Slewth hound coms with Squyars two
The hound his own he knew without all dout
Which by his foes was brought to find him out.
Without delay without advisement long
He foreward spurrs upon his lofty steid
Whose Swiftnes had no match them all among
Known by the hound whom he was wount to fied
On him he fauns and with a leap h^flong
Forth from the leische running on him with speid
Whom when he would have killed poor pity moved him
He cold not be ingrait to none that loved him.
Wherefore he bak Returns the way he came
The hound still following him had keept him still
When lo these hundredth knights espyde the same
The horse and Arms they know yet doubt some Ill
That with a scornful raige their mynds Inflame
And with auou'd revenge their hearts they fill
Thus with disordred haist they quiklie runn
And one by One much ground of him they winn
Some him to kill, and some the hound to take
Did oftentimes assaie, but al in vain,
For their disordred fury still he brak
Each wound with holds a foe with death or pain,
Yet was he forced at last away to make
By killing of the hound his life to gain
And being now come neir unto his knight
He thinks not meit against them all to fight.
But him commands in haist to kill that hound
Which he him self could not abide to do
Hard by a Forest covered all the ground
Whoes treis our all the Rockie montans Bow
Hither they fly where such dark ways they found
As from their foes their saiftie did allow
Thus mocked and scornd, the army turns again
With lose and Shame their travel spent in vain.
The Argument.
Hells damnd fiends finds Scots renouned King
And by three thieves works him a niew dispight,
To God he prays who graunts his just design.
Through deserts wild alone he flies by night,
He finds his men at last, whom he does bring.
On his proud foe who slawghterd fear's his might
Winter maks both their Camps brak up at last
At hunts great Bruce a fearful danger past.
Caput. 11.
Infernal Pluto Missing his Intent
Began to rore his voice his words confound
From whoes foull throat such thundering noise forthwent
As schook the hell resovnding throw the ground
His Bowels deip a mistie smook forth sent
Which made the Souls in endless Torments bond
To dive in floods and in the flams to hide them
Eschewing pain whill greater pains abide them.
His dreadful looks effrayd the feinds and Ghosts
Chokt with the savor of his noysum breath
Like fleghts of Crows Hell musters forth her hosts,
From Herebus with horor fear and death,
In clouds of dangers on our Northern coasts.
They rain the bloody tempests of their wrath
And scatred here and there, they soon untwinde
The webs of Woe, wouen in each sinful mind
And one of them eu'ne then did hap to light
On Robbers thrie that in this forest lay
Wheirthrou the valiant Bruce had taken his flight
Him (...) they whom they count an easy pray
For which great Eduard ritche rewards had heght
Wheirfore their Treassone thus they did essay
Myldlie they come unto that noble Prence
And vous to spend their lives in his defense.
They Scotts-men war by right his subjects too
Which to their treasoun ads more credit still
Dark night to shroud the rest which they would do^
Heauins silver walls with sabill hingings fill
Within this fortest stood a Schiphirds croo
No other ludging were they neir until
Thither those theius this noble Prince forth guide
And with their Schift a supper soon prouid.
When he right pleasandlie hand taken repast
Of viands such as time would then afford
On the cold earth he lays him down at last
A sheld for pillow serud this noble Lord
When thousand cairfull thoghts were ouerpast
Sleips charning rod of silence him restord
Unto a slumber, soft but whill he lay
He thought he hard a voice him threatening say.
Though careless of they self heauins for thee care
Up up arise from danger the defend
Whaerat he starts aloft begines to stare
When as he seis com from the houssis end
The Robbers thrie that with their swords prepare
Death on his Knight and him in sleip to send
But with his sword he their designment braks
And with his foot his faithful knight awaiks,
Yet or he could arise one of the thrie
Unto him st^p^t and with his trenshant blad
He forced his soull forth from his breast to fly
Which in the Prince both grief and anger bred
And in his wrath his death so venged he
That of these Traitors thrie he soon was red
Then thanks he God who saift him from that snare
And thence depairts loadned with grief and care.
Wheir as his horse was feiding their he goes
Whill as the darkness sum what cleirer greu
And being monted then no way he knoes
And yet from thence him self he soon with dre^
Yea oftentims him self him self did lose
In deserts wyld in paths but used by feu
Renoluing still within his troubled thought
What greuons cait's proud fortun had him wroght
At last beseching his great Lord of Grace
To pity him and confort to him send
His earnest prayer cleius heauins starrie face
And at Jous throne for mercy did attend
Who bends his gracious eyes on mortals race
Vieuing their woes their waiknes weill he kend
The splendor of his glorious countenance
Cleir's heaune and earth and chaisd hells feinds fare hence.
Earth fred of such a sinful Burden vild
Begins to smill on heauins all glorious sphear's
When from the Prince all sorou was exyld
Confort from heauin to his sad soul repair's
His faith had brought from his deir saueour mild
Assured hope of what his soul requear's
Now to that place he goes the neirest way
Wheir he appointed all his men to stay.
When bright Auror her treasurs had forth sought
She edgd the silver clouds with freing's of gold
And hangs the skies, with Arras rarely wroght
Powdered with Paarle and precious stones untold
Then roses reid and whit from inde she brought
And strou'd heauins floor most glorious to behold^
Yet weips she for she thinks it all to small
To welcum great Apollo to her hall.
Ere Sole could shine his way did him restor
Wheir Edward and the Douglas did abide
With all his troops that scattred were before
With whom the Prince does secretly provide
For to assalt his foes so proud of yore
For them he cairles kneu dispersed wide
Disordred quite and scatterd heir and their
Nor for him would they look nor for him care.
They all agrie yet thus he would them cheir
Brave friends (quod he) behold this happy day
That shall the clouds of our disasters cleir
And bring the Garland from out foes away
Me thinks I sie fair victory appeir
To croune us that triuphms on their decay
And their hot blood rich trophes us aduances
Borne on the points of our victorious lances.
Me thinks vpone our glistring creste I sie
The glorious garland of the conquest worn
Whill fether-futted- fame before us fly
Vpone the golden wings of Honor borne
Although nor ours their numbers greater be
Yet fear them not Jehoua heighe has sworn
To yield them in your hands that ye may steip
Your thristie blaids in blood whill as they sleip.
This said from heaven reflected on his face
A lightning beam bright shining pure and cleir
His countinance shind with such heaunilie grace
As lightened all about both far and neir
a Martial fury in his breist took place
Whoes sparkling did his eyes with lightning cheir
So that his gallant port and graceful looks
The bold conferms the faint with shame rebooks.
A Guide he got who brought him wheir they lay
Encamped in a fair and open plane
And or the glorious soun could guilt the day
Four hundredth he had wounded hurt and slane
For these before the camp a littel way
Within a village cairles did remane
Yea eu'ne the camp at last they did perseu
And their with slaughter did the fight rene^
The fire yet stayed within his assie coath
When they began the camp for to invaid
Sleip rest or silence eurie one did touch
And heir and their they lay disordered
Some were a sleip of wine that drunk too much
And some with cards and some with dice were led
Some lasie lubbards quafd carrousis deip
Till eurie drink began an endless sleep
Whill thus they ly thois warreours enter in
Too strik Iustitiars for to pairt the fray
The wine and blood both forth togidder rin
From bak from breast or side eu'ne as they lay
Half words confoosd their hollow throts within
Made billowing nois their blood their breath did stay
Some^ise to strik some op's their, mouth to chide
Those fall and these with blood chokt gasing diede
Thus whill each sword dislodged a hundredth lives
Brave Bruce made known his rancour wrath and ire
Squadrons he kill^ cuts cords and tents he riu's
And for revenge enflamed with hot desire
To ouerthrou them all alone he strius
To kill the men and set the camp on fire
And foreward still allone he Murthring goes
giving more deaths then wounds more wounds then bloe^
But as a hungry Lion for his food
Kills thousand beasts mo then he can deuore
So thou stout Edward does their lives seclude
Whom thy brave Brothers haist had past before
And tredding proudly on the multitude
Thou seem sad because thou findst no more
Whereon to exerceis thy valor so
Wishing each trunk could raise a stronger foe.
Now at an other Part does enter in
The conquering knight that dreidful slaughter mak^
So from the west the drying winds begin
To cleir heauins cloudie front and strongly braks
The spoungie bann exhaled up by the Sun
Forth of the Germane laik which A^oll taks
Vpone his wings and mousters sorth in hosts
Wheir with he threats to droun the northern costs.
Eu'ne so this campioun d^iueth bak by force
The multitude of armed Squadrons strong
His warlik wepon kill's without remorse
His eyes such fiery splendour dairts along
As burns their hearts but fear concealls their lose
All turning baks forget to venge their wrong
And cairles of their shame their fame their fall
They lose their lives their honor hope and all.
And he that to gainestand will prove so bold
As not to fly but bravely bear it out
Soon lyis he breathles tumbling on the mold
Which in the rest conferms their fear and doubt
Thus foreward none his fury can with hold
Till with his Lord he meits wheir all the rout
Assembled were and weareid nou with killing
The soldiers dispersed the tents were pilling.
But Scots great king who saw them cairles, care
More for their gain then conquest to prolong
Causd sound retreat least some neu force repare
And bring the conquest back with shame and wrong
By this the English General did prepare
Of armed knights above five thousand strong
But this brave Lord in time reteird his crew
Whill as they had no lust for to persew.
The worthy Bruce thus haueing paid his foe
Of that disgrace which he had lait received
He was both loved and feared and hatit so
As the just worth of his great deids had craved
Yea Englands warlick General thought in woe
Extold him much when he his worth perceau'd
Swearing by Joue that heauins decred to raise him
And in the midst of hate was forcd to praise him.
Wheirfore he breaks up his camp that night
Letting his Soldiers to their home reteire
The mighty Scot to Carrick marches right
And soiorns their the dead time of the year
Wheir noght befell him worthy to reciet
Saif once he went a hunting of the Dear
For their he thought no foes could harm afford
Since all that land obeyed him as their Lord.
Now being much delighted with that sport
His warlik knights were neir about him still
One day unto an forest they resort
The heart and hind with Grewhounds for to kill
And he allone stayed in a private sort
With two swift hounds above them on a hill,
Till all the rest were scattred far and niere,
Rousing the woods to bring him in the dear.
While here he stayed, three men he did epsy
Come from the wood with awful countenance,
Each bends a bow and thus does him defy,
To venge the Cumings blood is our pretense
Brave Sirs quod he then, first I pray you try
Me with your swords, if I can make defense,
Thrie one to kill so far were endless shame
So Cowards fight, the ualiant hates such game.
At these his words, their bows away they threw,
And with their swoords they sharply him assail,
His hounds he loosed, his sword he quickly drew,
And many bloes on either hand they deal,
The hounds that sie such foes their Lord pursue
One by the gorge unto the ground they hail,
One of the other two by this he killed
Then kills him whom the hounds at ground still hild
The third who fears such guerdon for to try,
Stayed not, but soon betakes himself to flight
Whom when these Heauen-ordained hounds epsy
They follow both with kien and aufull might
And in a Trace they force him by and by
Most furiously upon the ground to light
Their Lord at last from them did him reswme
And striklie giv's him his deserved doom.
When all his knights returned they wondering view
How heavens their Prince from danger had preserved
To God they gave great thanks and Praises dew
Rejoicing that so brave a Lord they served
This did his fame throu all the land renew
All wished him now what his great worth deserved
Who skap'd so many Dangers they conclude
Must be reserved for a greater good.
The Argument.
FIrst at G^entr^ll does Scotts renowned Prince
Get victory above the English foe
Douglas at Ederfoord with valiaunce
By forty does a thousand overthro
Then Pembrok Sews for Battle with pretense
To fry the land from longer war and so
(...) Lowdon-hill he brings an army fare
But vanquist, Fleis the land in great Dispare.
Caput. 12.
WHen in his goolden carroish Sol returns
From Zenith bake into the northern starr
The Ram grown proud with amorous heat so burn
That with his horns he seimis too make him war
Hills turns in tearis their milk whit Robs and murns
To se them selfs so stripped by Sol afarr
Who too redress that wrong is quickly seen
For ermins poor to cloith them all in green
The Gardens pranckt with rosy buds still spring
Whill Flora dalleis in her flowire bed
Whom Zepheir Cowrts and swit to her does sing
Wiping away the Tears Aurora sched
Whoes shril sweit notts throu all the sorre^^s ring
When Meids with grase and woods with Leaves ar cled
So that the spring thus following Phoebus treace
Made ewre thing to look with cheirfull face
When Bruce Scotts hope their confort and their Joy
With all his knights does too the feilds repeare,
Stout hardy Eduard feirles of Annoy
And fortuns knight brave Douglas als was there
Whom victory did sewintie tyms convoy
Crowned with the Garlands of her golden hare
And many mo all knights of high renown
Pillars of State and Pearls unto the Crown
Thrice nyntie knights their number were at most
All marcheing forth with cheirfnll Countenance
Whoes worth was known so to their Enemeis cost
As their brave General feared not to advance
With these against a great and mighty lost
And hazard all upon a Battles chance
Thus marches he and would with these begin^
To conquer all or lose what he has winn.
This warlik Lord when as the night drew nere
Camps on a hill a strength by nature wrought
And as the second morning did appear
The watch a Woman had before him brought
In beggars weid whom he did straight Inquiet
What her Intention was or what her thought
That way to come She answered to betray him
And that his foe would presently Essay him.
Pembroks brave Earl (said she) within a myll
Is come with thousands five thee to supprise
That Scots and English are and swears the whill
That they triumphing on thy death must rise
I hope quod he their hopes shall them begyll
The right is ours and with the world he cries
To arms to arms and in a moment their.
All cled in dreadful arms to fight prepare.
The Prince without the Camp his army drew
In thrie Battalions or Squadrons strong
The vangard gave he to the Douglas true
Under whoes standard Sixty marched along
Expert in Arms that feats of wars well knew
The rei^ward too prince Eduard did belong
Which also did consist of Sixty more
That faint fearis ghostly house did newer kno.
The King him self the great Battalion led
Wherein there stood thryce fyftie borne too fight
There Scotlands, constabill, in arms was cled
The worthy hay, a bold and, fearles knight
There Lenox faithful er'le his ensign spread
There Walorous Boyd and others scorning flight
All Soldiers old all weill aprou'd at arms
all breathed war and conquests loud allarms.
Be they were ranckt and well in Order set
A cloud of men of horse of spears and scheilds
Comes from a Wood, a heard of Deir besett
By huntars kein to fearful flight so yields
Whoes horned heids a rattling noise begett
Such noise their lances made when all the fields
Were hid with Troops and ew'ne as flights of Croe^
Sing throw the air their haist such sounding shoes.
But to the Scots when they approached nere
They stood Amazd to sie there good Array
Till their Curagious Genrall did them cheir^
With hopfull words of Conquest spoill and Pray
Lo what are those said he which you sie here
But Robbers which dare newer view the day
Outcasts and not true Scots whoes warlik force
You often before have tryde unto their lose
And tho they were there Nations flour and choice
Yet are they but a handful unto you
Against ew'rie one let ten them selffe oppose
So they beneth Our conquiring sword shall bow
At these brave words the Army foreward goes
With schouts and clamors great and with a show
A front the Douglas troop they give the charge
Who was too few against these squadrons large.
Yet make they nether murmur noise nor Dinn
Saif Armours clash and death resounding blows,
Till they had pearst these squadrons wide within.
On eurie hand a stream of blood forth floes,
That over their Man-made banks to swell begin
And on their friends they help to venge theer foes.
For such as wounded cold not stand for pain,
Falling vntimlie, were both dround and slain.
The conquering Knight with his victorious band
That now hade brokin all the ranks well niere.
Beholds the Clifford that still fighting stand.
Whose valors, worth, he cold not but admire,
For by that gallant Earls strong conquring hand
Some slain, some hurt, some forced were to retire,
To him for just conceived hate, he hies,
And him to bloody mortal fight desies.
Now first when as the Bruce his foes did view,
Under an ensign al to march in groe,
He chargd his Troops their distance to renew,
And leave more ground twixt every batel so,
In seu'rall parts they did their foes pursue,
One chargd a front, one to each flank did go.
And each a solemn vow had made with all,
Mid-waie to meet, or by the way to fall.
On the right side firce Edward gave essaie,
Whose courage hot cold scarcely be refraind,
By those more cold by his brave Troop to stay,
And yet the valor of his foes constraind
Fair Victory above them both to play
With doubtful wings, till at the last detaind
By his all conquering hand beneth his sword
They fall yield, fly and tremble at his word.
But Scotlands famous Champion the while
Whoes chairge he kneu was their left syid to charge
Brak throu the ranks with long and bloody toill
And to his troup he made an entry lairge
Whill the English General chusd their force to foill
Five hundredth strong, with lance, with sourd, with targe*
Whoes armed ranks he settes into the way
Of Scotts renouned king his force to stay
These at the first so feirclie do assaill
They brak the Scotts with wraith and heigh disdain
Who yielding straight begins to bend and reill
And braik their ranks nor could from flight refrain
Which the English captane harriugtone sau well
By whoess brave hand aught deid the nint neu slain
The standart bore: which winn he loudlie cryis
The victory is ours who yeeldis not dyis.
Scotlands great campioun who this while had fought
Amidst his foes and left his men behind
Rushd throu the throng and this stout captane soght
Whom got his head he from his shoulders twind
And wan agane that standart deirlie boght
With which he fordward goes wheir he did find
His men dispersd but with his cheirfull words
They rank them selfs and march with conquring sword^
The victory recouerd thus with pane
And raerlie wrong out of the English hands
Earths brauest Prince leads on his troops agane
The standart still he bears and throu the bands
Of his proud foes he looks if they contane
Some object worth the hyir of his demands
He shaiks his sword wheirat the English quaik
And shrunk oway and out of order brak.
Then he espyis a littel him before
Lennox stout Earl and Hays vnconquerd Lord
And famous Boyd all thrie assailed sore
And hemnd in by their fois, he much deplord
Their danger great, and valors worthy store
They shou, for to be taken they still abhord
And all the ground to strou it seems they strive,
With woundit men half deid and half a live.
Not fare from them he also might espy
Wheir as the conquering knight with clifford stood
Clifford was strong but fought too furiously
And nou groune faint with sheidding too much blood
His cairfull band to saif their Lord would try
Thrusting betuix him and the Douglas good
Yea all at once him furiourslie assaill
But his vnconquerd valor does preuaill.
All this the Prince of warriors did behold
And as a Lion nev cum from the wod
Roaring for pray espyis a scheiphirds fold
His ^ungrie Whelps still follow houling loud
Whoes sight and sound effrais the heardmen bold
Thy fly that fearful foe resistles proud
Who kills all, tho one would serve for food
His Whelps by his example feids on blood.
Eune so he cums with scarled cullored bled
His conquring creu, encurage by his sig ht
Before whoes terror threatening face they fled
Yea eune great Pembrok yields him nou to flight
This uproar such a great confusioun bred
The English throws away their armor bright
With still sad murmurs Scotts perseu their foes
And noght was hard but dying Groans and bloes*
From Erebus blak darkness taks her flight
And spread her wings above over half of Ground
When the English aided by the freindlie Night
Ow're Hills and Daills dark wais for saiftie found
And of their Native soill to have a sight
The greater pairt by solempt vous was bund
For noght they fand in this our barren soill
But death and wounds in stead of wealth and spo^^.
After this victory so rai^lie got
The choice of Princes with ane humble mind
Gave thanks to God for his successiue lot
And holy vous unto the Lord enshrind
Then marching forth in haist he rests not
Till all the western cuntreis were inclind
To his meik reull and with advise more stayed
Kill, Cuningham, and Carrik, him obay'd.
Whill in the West he regnd as conqueror
Sir Odomer was greiud at his succes
And thought he had dissolud his strongest pou'r
Seeing his oune atcheuments fortunles
Yet fortun on ane other would not lour
An other captain whoes great worthiness
Had giuene good proof in many a bloody fight
A Scotts man he, sir Phillip mubray hight
Him would be neids employ unto this fate
And to his chairge commits a thousand horse
With these to vieu Scotlands great Kings estate
And wait advantage to employ his forse
But mighty Bruce exper'ence had of lait
That strenth shall often of craft receive the worse
And being cairfull vigilant and wise
Preuents his crafty foes sly interprise.
With fortuns knight tuyce tuentie forth he send
To understand and knou the foes desings
Who haueing searchd and traueld far in end
His way him to an narrou Passage brings
On eurie hand did mighty crags ascend
On eurie side beloue deip marras springs
And of this place he fitly maks a choice
For to ganestand or to assalt his foes (...)

Long staid he not when all his foes drew neir
For by that way they neids must only go
Stout moubray then his warlik troops did cheir
Whill they curagiouslie did chairge their foe
And as on Neptuns humid sky so cleir
Stern Borias to the land the walls does blo
Till wave on wave brak on the Baltik shore
Whoes dying voice over all the land does rore.
So eurie Rank on Rank is beaten bak
By that brave count and his resistles crew
Their ranks in Ordour ordourles they brak
They kill the bold and fliers faint persew
All gois to death they none to mercy tak
And with meir strenth and valor overthrew
Their foes at last and forced all with might
Nor can their captain stay their fearful flight, To wit the Douglas,

But Moubray stout wise valiant featles bold
Whoes words nor deids lets not his men to fly
Scornd such a flight, nor could his foes with hold
His Resolution Acted constantly
Forth throu their ranks he does his wey unfold
Wheir much blood does his stern wrath satisfy
At last he lost his brand and shund the fight
Else had he yeildit captive to their might.
His fanting troops fled home the way they came
Which when he vieud vpone the other side
Such raige and fury did his breist inflame
As he would neids return and would abide
Against all his fois but that could no way frame
For want of wapins forced him turn aside
Whill as the count whoes deids ar eu'r glorious
Triumphing to his Prince returns victorious.
His Prince that nou was under Loudon hill
And all that cuntrie to his Peace had brought
These Losses all great Pembroks ear's did fill
And sets fierce rage on edge for this he thought
If Scottlands King had fortun thus at will
Englands intendit Conquest turns to noght
Wherefore this motione has unto him sent
By which their wraith should soon or neu'r be spent.
He bids him under Loudon hill prepair
To give him Battle on the tenth of may
And if the Conquest fell to Scottlands shair
England sold quite the land that very day
And neu'r return to clame a conquest their
But if the English wan without delay
Then yield he should unto fair Englands Prince
And at his sentence stand for his offense.
To this the grave wise worthy Bruce agreis
And for that day great Preparation maks
But with great foresight wisely he foreseis
How that his mighty foe advantage taks
Of multituds of men and lairge suppleis
Whoes endless numbers his mean force brake
For which thrie walls he raises wondrous hie
Eune their wheir as the battle fought should be.
And in the midst he leaus a Plain so wide,
As hundreths five might martch and feight at ease,
At every end lay Marrasis beside,
So at their back, they could no forces raise,
Thus only here he would his foes abide,
Let Fortune, froune or favor whom she please,
But twice three hundredth marched with him along
Although his foes were full seven thousand strong.
Sir Odomer the bold does keip the day
And marched bravely under Lowdon low
He puts his warlick army in array
Whill as the king of men him self does show
With his small pour his passage for to stay
His hardy knights the art of war did know
These often approved so often had tryde their might
He neids not to encurage theme to fight
Yet Earths great Warrior restles still did raunge
Now here, now there his restles troops among
Kindling their breasts to hole and new revenge.
Of old done Deeds, and long received wrong,
The Captains of his troops he need not change.
For these were matchles, hardy, wise and strong,
The worthy Douglas and the valiant Hay,
Edward the firce impatient of delaie.
Who with his troup did first assail the foe
For his fierce wrath could brook delay no more
How soon this angry Prince him self did sho
Terror and fear went sadly him before
As when strong winds does cause heighe tyds to flo
Whoes brackish waus still beat the brokin shore
Seas smoth back rold before with gentle breath
In briffels set, spits forth his foamie wreath.
So after furious Edward all the plain
Was ouer-run with Ranks of spears and shields,
Horse, armor, weapons ecchos aye again
The dreadful noise that Drum and Trumpet yields
Strife, Terror, Rage, follow both Hoasts, anon
Death softens armor and strong weapons weilds,
Fury and Strife stalks through the hoasts with fire
Of deadly wonds kindled with blood-blown Ire.
Now both the armeis insteling roodlie met
And spears and sheilds against spears and shelds opposd
Strength answered strength and wound for wound they get
Swords targets piks with piks swords targets closd
Then Tumult coms to heauin her head she set
And from her throt a thousand sounds she lousd
That throu the Air confusdlie Iarring roar
Such sound great waters send from brokin shore
Or as when Rain by nights blak tempests borne
Down from heighe Rocks and mountans to the plane
Stons earth and treis up by the roots has torn
Till streams and all in one pit fall agane
Whoes bullring noise when cums the pleasant morn
The herdmen frights that with their floks remane
Such sounds their conflict yields and throu the aer
Sends clamors groans and all the affects of rear.
But thou brave Eduard was the first did wound
And wounding killed and killing did affright
Thy Enemers whill through the troop redound
The neus of thy great deads, which raise on hight
Thy soldiers hairts; their valor did abound
With aufull strenght resistles still they fight
And thou bold Hay aduentrouslie did venture
Heuing a way nixt for thy troops to enter
The woes Hay wroght, an English lord their brings
Who wonders at his deids, at last in wrath
A darte he sends that to his labors sings
And weill neir brought with it a haistie death
Persing his Curace from his breist out springs
A stream of blood neir wheir his life took breath
Wheir with the throuer call's, now do not bost
If thou has killed, thy blood appease their Ghost.
My blood quod he cums from an honored wound
But this kein dairt from ane deceitful hand
To tell me of thy treasone it did sound
And vows to aim more right at my command
By this the English campeoun was bound
With chains of death no longer could he stand
Death child his blood and strength within his vains
For lo the Schaft send bak had perst his breans.
The warlick English General seis him fall
And thrusts unto the front or face of fight
His brand he shaks so dreadfullie with all
That many fanting schrunk out of his sight
But our bold Hay would not his steps recall
Whoes honored march reproou'd their shameful flight
And for him self he wishes death were ny
So that brave Imp of Englands race might die,
The conquering knight this while had marched so fare
And led his troops so bravely on his foes
That their they yield unto the chance of war
Their ranks sore shakkin now much ground they lose
Bak went the first their ordour quite they mar
And then the Scotts with clamours hudge arose
Some stuffs the chase whoes breists with curage boild
And other some drew forth the deid and spoild.
Great Odomer of all this nothing knew
Who being woundit by the valiant Hay
Enraged like a savage bore he grew
And with a fureous blow he does him lay
Senceles to ground, and off his helmet flew
Yea surly this had bein his laitest day*
But that he saw his side go to the worse
And turns to stay their flight his en'meis force.
He haisteth forth and shaems to sie their foill
Whoes cheirfull count' nance maks them all return
Against the Scotts who still dispysd their toyll
And thikning their instructed pour's they burn
With hot desire, of their expected spoill
And in that very place would they soiurne
Whill as the light was pent vpin the skies
With swartish clouds of dust that did arise.
Eu'ne as in Mills wheir Grain is ground non may
Stand neir for dust blown up by breathing aer
That turns to paled hew their bright array
So from returning troops and squadrons faire^
The clouds of dust suited the Scotts in gray
Now fights the English fierslie to repare
Their faults; the Scotts would keip what they had winn
Both sides stands firm and freshlie does beginn*
Bold hay recovered of his trance agane
With angry shame did venge him of his foes
Searching for him that left him so in pain
Many their life's for their lords fault did lose
Whill he on wereid killing did remane
And against wholle trowps he does him self oppose
Whoes good example cheirs each english band
And to their bold lords work they boldly stand.
Weill bakt with trowps this Mars-like man coms in
Whose deids struck fear through all the Scottish host
Who lossing ground to flight does nou begin
But Edward, Douglas, Hay and Boyd does cost,
Along their troops and here and there does rinn,
Praising the bold and cowards still they boast,
Yet their brave deids prevails more then cries
In leaders deeds, the soldiers confort lies.
But worthy Bruce, their hearts with courage fills,
A cloud of Knights with spears and shields he brings,
And as when sheepheards sees from tops of hills,
A cloud brought from the sea on Eurus wings,
Amazd they stand, and gaze against their wills,
While heaven on earth a smoakee darkness wrings,
Which drawing neire to them, affrighted then,
They dreue their herds into some covert den,
So darkning Earth with spears, with swords, with shields
They came, and in their breast a tempest brought,
To whose apparent wrath the English yields
For they had seein what these before had wroght,
Of their left wing they quite had scourd the fields,
Thus quickly they resolve, and with a thought,
All yields to flight, and down their weapons threw
Scotts kill anb chase til night her conrteins drew.
The Argument.
Bruce falls sick neir to the Northern Shore
Tho army mutanes for his sore diseas
Whom at that instant heauins to speich restore
Else all hadd yet his speich does all appease
They fight with Buchans Earl and thence they bore
Their Lord in spite of foes their camp they raise
Auld- Meldrums Battle brings his health agane
He wins Sanct Iohnstoun with a subtle trane.
Caput. 13.
LIghts cheirful dame in saiffron Robs did shine
Whoes silver beams through eurie pairt dispersed
Of this Terrestrial Glob did nou refine
The thikned air and leauie forests peirst
Wheir hills Groius, dens, and valeis, deip decline
To nights dark showis thoes shadowis broune it sher^
When to the camp of conquring Bruce aspird
Great troops of Scotts of English thraldom tired,
And all that land soon to his peace was brought
Bold Odomer nou like to burst for woe
To Bodwell flies and then to Englaud soght
No more to Scotland would he prove a foe
Thus was the third pairt of the Kingdom thought
True homage to their native Prince to sho
The rest for Lord the English King did know
By threttie thousand English held in ow
Great enemies had our far greater King
In the great north that native Scotts ware borne
Their Buchans mighty Earl did proudly regne
That Cummernalds revenge had deiplie sworn
Brechins great Lord like vengeance coveting
And with them Sir John Moubray they suborne
With many more that by the Cumnings factioun
Held many boundles Bounds in great subiectioun.
To quaill their pride and tame their tameles wills
Directly north our dantles Prince does go
Crossing these far renoumed toples hills
Of Grangebene that Scotland pairts in two
His ever famous name these regions fills
With fear and terror of ensewing woe
He led his famous captains with him all
Saiue Douglas whom he left for to recall.
True Scotts to peace and wrakfull foes restrain
who did so much by valor wit and Grace
Jedbrughe and Etrik Foerests fertile plain
With ceasles war he forced to timlie peace
And Douglas tour which Clifford had again
Boolded and mand his conquest did incres,
The Garesone and captane both he slew
The Tours unto the ground he overthrew.
Strife Discord War now in the north did wyve
A bloody Wob with hate Revenge and fear
Most mighty mindit Bruce would neids deprive
His foes of strenth eu'ne wheir they reull did bear
To his most royal camp their did arrive
A gallant troup of youths addressed for war
The bold Lord Fraser led this gallant crew
His cowsing deir and to him always true
But whither change of soil or change of air
Or climats cold or rat her heauins decree
Has been the cause, A mo o^ine in the Army for the Kings diseas which shous
their love to him worthy to be notteth.
but earths best campioun their
Feseik into an feitfull Lithergie
For which the soldeors made such dooful care
That raige with sorrow throu the camp did fly
All rose in factiouns non regeardith reasone
Each other wrongfullie accusd of treasone
Some Lennox Earl some Edward did accuse
Some Fraser vthers Boyd and vthers Hay
Sum say that his Phisitioun did infuse
Poison in drogs nor would they thus delay
But headlongs led with furious love would use
A strange revenge All would they kill and slay
This tumult rose to such a fearful hight
That noght but drums and trumpets hear you might.
Thus whill they stand them selfs for to distroy
With blood to glut revenge suspected wrong
Buchans bold Earl and Brechens Lord conuoy
Eu'ne in their sight an Aarmie great and strong
Who haueing knowledge of their strife did joy
To sie the time which they expected long
Yea this one day had made a woeful end
Of all but Joue from heaune some help did send
Not unto health but unto speich the King
Was at that instant wondrouslie restorde
His Lords praise God and forth they did him bring
Whoes eyes bent vpuard first heauins aid implorde
A purpell Rob about him wreth'd does hing
A croun not him but he a croune decord
His sceptered hand proud majesty does threat
Borne by four Lords up in a Royal seat.
His couquering hand his scepter shakes allone
Thus he to all the army shouis his face
Wheir majesty's cleir lamp of Glory shone
Then with I know not what a heunelie grace
A Mars like voice ane Angels shaip put one
First softly to him self he groand allace
He looked his looks moved all with staitlie fear
Silence fleu fuith and seized on every ear.
What words be these we hear what threats quod be
What noise of Arms who dares these tumults raise
Wheir ar we honored wheir your fear we sie
Not your obedience, shall our rewll this cease
Of our diseas is this your memory
By wrong surmeisd offenses us to please
Who darres of treasone think against their King
No no you can not thus excuse the thing,
Make not so side a cloik of publ^ct wrong
To private grudge if grudge we may it call
If love, to us tak head your selfs among
For in your lius your weills your saifteis all
Consists our health nixt heau'ne who will er long
Restore our health and wounted strenth recall
O can the head a pleasant heelth enjoy
Whoes members still each other does distroy.
Ah sie you not our proud Imperious foe
That seiks our fall our ruin our Decay
No Treasone to our person heir we kno
None in our Army that would us betray
But these ar rebels to our croune and lo
These would put violent hands in us to day
Brethren in arms go then your King defend
Let not our want unto our foe be kend.
Hereafter we will think on this your love
When heaune to wonted health shall us restore
Whill thus he spak the lightning beams did move
Of maiestic his sparkling eyes before
That all the army who did lait approve
Wraith folly Raige, sheams with repentance sore,
Bak to his tent he goes his soldiers kind
Cry all go too go too to fight inclind.
By this their proud and mighty foe drew neit
Whoes number ten to one did them surmount
Yet martch they on whill each did other cheir
Nor neid their captans do as they had wount
Their to menace or to encurage heir
But rather forcd to stay by wise atcount
Their too too foreward haist for still they cry
Let eurie One a rebel kill or die.
The rebels se them disapointed clein
Their hearts begin to faint their hands to faill
The royal armeis trumpets soundet bein,
And valiantly they began for to assaill,
The fois so great a Multitude ver seen,
They shame a handful should their curags quaill,
Thus each on other rusht with furous might
First wounds then blood then death aproch'd their sight.
Great deids of Arms on either side were shoune
Till Phoebus piteing such unkindly war
Shrunk down anon on silver skyis were throune
Dark sabill clouds that thikned all the air
Than by the rebels the retreat was bloune
Which made the royal hoist seim sade with cair
Nor would reteir till by their leaders au
Their forcd within their trinches to with draw.
Four days within their camp still they remand
Four dais their foes encamped in their sight
No day did pas wherein they once refraind.
From skirmish hot and many singil fight
At last the royal army was constraind
To raise their camp and for to martche fourth right
For victualis in their camp were waxing small
Nor Physic helps their kings diseas at all.
He in a glorious chariot ritchlie wroght
Goes in the mids they marching round about*
In Battle rank and all their Baggage brought
Within the formest ranks thus all the rout
still reddie was to fight if their to soght
Their foes perceiud their resolutioun stout
And for that time they thought not good to move the^
But follou still at vnwarrs to prove them.
Eduard the fierce whill his deir brother lay
Over all the royal army did command
Wheir with he martcht a soft and easy way
By Citeis fair through money a fertile land
At last he causd the army for to stay
In Marrs renowind schire wheir as he sand
A willaige situat one a pleasant plain
Wheir walthie Ceres, treasure does remain.
This famous town Eururie heght to name
Famous for that great victory obtaind
By Bruce unto his foes eternal shame
For in this town for health whill he remaind
Buchans bold earl still thristing after fame
From urging Battle could not be refraind
Within two mylls besyid old Meldrum long
Upon a hill he lay encamped strong.
A chosin band with Brechins Lord he send
At vnawarrs his Princely foe to find
Who of his long diseas began to mend
Whoes haughty mind was neu'r to rest inclind
His armies forward at the village end.
Encamped lay of foes that had no mind
Whill Brechins Lord against their wills would will them
Battle to give or in their tents to kill them.
But he and all his chossin crew discryi'd
Hade been by them when neir to them he drew
Who fand not as he hopt fair Scotlands guide
Vnwars nor yet vnreddie to persew
These that espyid him for the fight provide
All rankt in ordour forth their wapins drew
And tho their foes were far the stronger might
They boldly bide the Battle and the fight
But these so few that could not long endure
Were forced with-lose for to reteir at last
Whill swift report with Informatioun sure
Of their succes unto the King had past
Which did his wonted curage so procure
As up h'arois and calls for armor fast
His Lords wictheld him till he cried a loud
His health was only gaind by thretnings proud,
His own chief Guard he with his brother send
To hold them play till he the army brought
Who boldly met them forcing them in end
To fly and by that meins their saiftie soght
He following to their camp did them attend
Wheir Buchans erll still freting in his thought
Ledd forth his troops unto a valey wide
Wheir strongly rank't, the batell would abide,
By this the King was cum who thought it best
Eune then to Join and give a furious charge
Him self advancing fare before the rest
Let Horror, Terror, Fear, and Death at large
Wheirwith the rebels hearts were sore possessed
Dismayed they fant their deutie to discharge
They fly, his looks prents feir in every heart
Euin fo our stars their influence does imparte
Few was their left vn-kill'd unto the chaise
The erll and Moubray unto England fled
But neu'r returned whill for their worthiness
The King gave Buchans schire thus conquered
As soldiers pray wheir plenty did incres
Such store of wealth from thence the army led
As eune the poorest soldier for his shair
Boght lands and ritche possessiouns to his heir.
All the great north now to his peace was brought
Erlls Lords and Barrons were his hegmen sworn
Touns Citeis Castells strengths unto him soght
And still their oaths with presents ritche adorn
Benorth the famous Grangeben was noght
One schire but his myld yok had glaidlie borne
Then bak to Anguse he his army guyds
And to reduce that pleasant land prouids.
Forsars strong hold did Fraser of Platane
Recover from the English by a train
Then all true Scotts show them selfs begane
And with some worthy service peace t'obtaine
Atholls bold Erll Brechin both Seigd and wane
And brought that Lord unto his Prince again
Thus both the Merns and Angus did obey him
No foe was sein from conquest for to stay him.
Then suddenly to perth, he marchd and raisd
Strong men made walls about thoes walls of stone
Where with encompast round they stood amazd
Yet did resolve to yield at last to none
There pouer was such as all there feir apeasd
There strength was such as brought there curaige one
But this their pouer and this there strength agrie
To bring them to there end with imfamie.
For being two within for one without
And heauing so impregnabill a hold
They fedd security and banist dout
In wain great Bruce had spent his soldiers old
Who had reneud the assault there walls about
In thryce seuine dayis full sewintie tyms, so bold
As, of nine hundreith thryce, he with him brought
Six hundreith soldiers he had lost for noght.
Wheir for by offering peace he tried their might
Since nether strength nor force culd them supprisse
Their Walls was built of such a wondrous hight
On which strong, Tours their entry still denise
The Ditches war so broad and deiplie dight
Wheirin Tayis flood up too the brinks did rise
Still in thoes Touris and all thois Walls along
War armed men above five thousand strong,
Then after he two months had stayed before
The walls in haist he raisd his seige at last
Wheir with the Citizens with threatenings sore
Would brag and taunt the army as they past
But Scotlands campeoun wishd nothing more
Then this their insolence and noght aghast
With silence he replied nor minds to stay them
For ten to one he hops or long to pay them.
Thrie days the army marches to the west
Till they ariue within ane forest fair
And their the King commands great Treis to cast
Wheir of they ledders make and does prepare
Bake to return thus secretly they past
The way they came by night nor whispring are
Of their approach let forth the meanest sound
Till they arrive hard at the ditch profound,
Weill knew their Lord the way that they should go
For he him self had markit it before
A schald he found into the ditch belo
And he for to encurage them the more
First wydeth over and on his shulders two
The longest and the lairgest Ledder bore
His shulders bred Iumpt with the waters crop
Yet over he goes and setts his ledder up.
Each one admeird and woundring praised the deid
But most of all a Frenshman standing by
And all (...) the water leapt with speid
Raising their ledders to these walls so hie
The King first montis with weill deserwing meid
All mounted then and none did them discrie
For all securely sleipt nor feared offense
The doubtful night yet had not parted thence, This Frenshman was Thomas of
Longouell.

Their Glorius Ensigns on the walls they spread
Then to the dreadful work of death they fall
Death that throw eurie Street his troops furthled
Whom by their names heighe Tumult forth does call
Sorrow in Sabill Clouds all muffilled
With cankred care came murning first of all
Then Infant pity weiping then Dispare
Then Horror, Terror, Error, Pain, and Fear.
Fear that ran witles heartles bloodles faint
And trembling like ane espin leaf did quaik
Base shame and drousie Sloth that gaip and gant
Sadness that set in secret wyes her wrak
And thousands mo in nature discrepant
Each one from these and all came heir to sack
The woeful Town their gredie pansche to glut
And War to eurie one his Morsel cut.
War that with her led laules lewd Enormitie
Rapt, Reiuing, Wrong, Raige, Discord, and Impiety
Sakt, Sacr^ledge and sin in one conformity
Atheismie dispising Faith and scorning Deity
Wrath Anger, Hate, and monstrous Deformity
That Laus. A^r^s, Mauers Marrs and braks society
Poor Poverty and waistfull Desolatioun
L^f^ turned in bloody Deaths sad Transmigratioun.
These fill the town and send a dreadful sound
Up to the heauine with clamors rapts and cryis
Tears mixed with blood ouerflo the streits a round
Wars bloody arms lift clouds about the skyis
Of deid groand fighs, delighting in each wound
Her looks ar lightning from her eyes that fleis
Her Iron feitt shak Touns and Tours asunder
The roaring of her voice is dreadful Thunder.
All night this fearful Massacre did lest
Till Titan cround Olimpus top with fire
Then death and all this hellish creu addressed
Them selfs to flight to darkness they retire
And in a sabill cloud them selfs they placed
Then to the west they fly with Night their sire
And all the way they went they left a track
That did infect the air with vapors blak
This they once gone both blood and slaughter ceast
All that would yield was then to mercy taken
Stratherns old Earl got by his sons request
His Princes peace tho he would not abstane
To help the town for with the King at least
His sone remaind nor would from him refrane
And then the town was leuelled with the ground
The walls war raized the ditches filled around.
The Argument.
The field of Cree feirce Edwards praise beginn
He beats with fifty fiftein hundredth foes
The third time Douglas does his castle winn
Then Bonkill, Randolph Huntleis Land does lose
The bloody and the cruel fight of Linn
The first two Douglas taks fry Gordone goes
Great Bruce does Lorne to his obedience bring
The virgin-Tour is Randolphs conquesing.
Caput. 14.
SHrink not dear Muse nor rest thy restles Team
Tied to the labors of this endless story
Pend in the narrow path of treuths poor theme
Wind in these Laborinths yet be not sorry
Because that Phoebus baies thou dares not cleam
Nor range abroad for gain nor hunt for glory
Nor with smooth Venus, sweitest songs can sport the
But heir rude Mars harsh iarring must consort the.
Thou art not heir s^t in an open plain
Wheir as thou may in eurie pai^t be bold
To wantonez ot like the horse of Spain
Who bursts the helter erst that did him hold
Scouring the medous heir and their amain
Coruets and leaps with curage uncontrolled
Nor drinks thou heir of Heliconian fontains
But walks throu barren creiks and bo'lls of Montains.
Be north the banks of Sea-like- forth did bow
All in obedience to their native King
When in Brigantia called Gallo'way now
The English raige and mightelie did regne
Wherefore the ferce knight boldly does auow
That cuntrie in subiectioun for to bring
And thither with his brothers leave he goes
Small was his trine but many war his foes. To wit Edward.

When he ariud within this pleasant land
Eune all with sword and fire he did distroy
He hight that our the English did command
Sir Ingrhame Omphraueill whoes greatest joy
Was still his foes by battle to with stand
Who ay unto the Scotts did much annoy
Experience long had made him wise and bold
Cuning in feats of War in counsall old,
Forth then this mighty man the English brought
And did a mighty Army soon provide
Of which when Edward hear's he fears noght
But on the banks of Cree would them abide
Tho thy were ten to one that to him soght
Yet cair'd he not for these whom he did guide
Were worthy men whoes valor weill he knew
With ten of whom he tuentie would persew. Cree a water or ^euer in galway.

At this fair flood his foes he neids would stay
The stream was to his bake a rampeir strong
The soothern now at Butell Castle ^ay
From which they brought ^her armed force along
Wise Omphrauell still marched in good array
Fearing some train thoes hills and daillis among
Whill Edward choosd betuix the toure and stream
A valey fit for bloody Mars his geam.
And when the warlick English cums in sight
Fearce Edward forth his bands to battle brings
Tho feu yet famous whoes great valors might
My long spent Muse groune hoars but harshlie sings
Both sids approaches futiouslie to fight
Their bloody raige throu all the montains rings
Send forth by Drums and Trumpets roaring cryis
Which Roks and Montains Echoes through the skyis.
As two stout Rams when Jelous haits infused
In their hot Renis a front two fl^issie floks
Meit with their horned heads to pushe inus'd
And rush on other with still ceasles knoks
So meits those armeis and with bloes confused
Their arms resounds and with tempesteous schoks
Earth rius but when dread Wrath her drouth remembers
Sche's drunk with blood and cled with marterd members.
For the fierce champione gius so fierce a chairge
His foes un ablle longer to resist
Shrink bak at last and brak their ranks at lairge
Some fleis some falls some fight some friends assist
Although their warlik General did discharge
A gen'ralls pairt yet neids he not t'insist
For nather words nor martial deids at all
Could hearts from fear nor feit from flight recall.
Whereat he taks such Indignatioun great
That shameing of their deids and scorning flight
He last abyds and with a brave dispite
Assalts his foes with on resisted might
With him a cornet stays for to indite
Their fe^lous shame in their death-wishing fight
And their brave Lord with this small band assisted
His foes fierce wrath with manly breast ressisted, This was the general of
the English armmie calid (...) ingrem ^mphranell.

But as bush of Saplings tender crops
Is soon cut down by Pesants vndertakin
Eu'ue so their gilded casks and ploomed tops
Fell down like blasted leaus all winter sh^kin
And yet their Lords brave valor under props
Their yiedling strenth their dieing spreits, t'awakin
But hemmid in with multitude at length
All deis that yields not to such pourfull strength.
Their General non that seis no help at all
Scorns to be tan^ and maks a worthy choice
Fry must he go and leiue or die he shall
Dieing the best with him his life must loise
Thus all his strongest pours he does recall
And braks forth throw the thikest of his foes
Hewing a way for four that folloud still
Who by his valor skaipt deaths endless Ill.
Fierce Edward come eune as they took the flight
Who being loath they should escaip so fry
Still follous them but now they came in sight
Of Buttell Castle to the which they fly
This strength Inpregnabill they wan ere night.
Yet for to force them Ishe immediately
He causd some troops beneth their castle wall
To bring away their herds their floks and all, Butteil Castle a strong hoild
in galloway.

But all availls not their they must remain
Till Englands King with forces them releive
Bold Edward seiged the castle but in vain
In thrice two weiks he could them nothing griu^
Till Englands mighty King at last did gain
Sir Odomer de Wallange to revive
Old hate, and came in Scotland to revenge
Long passed harms but does his oath infrenge
He only fiftene hundredth with him brought
To raise the seige and to releive his friend
Edward gatt word of his intendit thought
Whoes army skant but hundreths thrie conteind
The choice of which but fifty forth he soght
With these weill horsd his foe he thus preueind
Ten leagues from thens within a forest learge
He stays at onawars his foe to chairge,
Tims restles hours undoes the Gates of day.
All quikning bright Apollo would be gone
Whoes golden tressis gilds with glistring ^ay
The toples tops of famous Lebanone
When English Odomer was on his way
And being come within the wod anon
Fierce Edward would have charged such was his rage
If noght with held by grave advise of aige.
As hungry Ravening Wolfs that do intend
To pray on flocks by Schipherds called to fold
In Paths unknown their silent way they bend
Their fetherd feitt by wings of hope made bold
Far of they follow warlie till in end
Occasioun quiklie by the top they hold
So follow these their foes unto the plain
Who still securlie marched nor feared their train.
And on them now they set with curage stout
With shouts and cryis they make a fearful sound
Their first assalt disordred all the rout
With lancis stiff they bore them down to ground
Who feared they were an army great no dout
So suddan fury does the thoghts confound
But their brave Lord sir Odomer suspected
Their crafty gyll the which he thus detected.
Ah fear them not quod he I know their trains
I know their craft I know their force their might
We twenty ar wheir one of them remains
Ah villans this is but a silly slight
Come you shall have your weill deserved pains
In your own netts your selfs ar taine full right
Com we are for you come receive your bloes
I sie you long your wretched lius to lose.
Nou nou-oure swords shall all those wrongs amend
Bold, Odomer, with visage stern cries out
And sindrie of his troops with him contend
To force them bak but they with curage stout
An ansuer sharp on points of lances send
Who brought by this an other course about
Fierce Eduard then with suord and shield so hollow
Cuts down their ranks who^ blood and death did follow.
From his stern looks his fearful foes withdrew
Their eyes that winkt which clouds of night bedims
Their fanting hearts distills a bloody dew
Deaths thriefold horror through their ears still swims
Their feit seem light to fly fant to persew
A shevering cold throw all their bodyis clims
Yea at his very sight his foes resemble
The Seggs or reids in fens with wind that tremble.
And now no more their captane they obey
His aw seims nothing to their aufull foe
Although them selfs were willing for to stay
Their legs, hearts hands unto their will said no
All go to flight and heir and their does stray
Their Lord although unwilling neids must go
He shams to England whill he heasts with speid
That he had brok his vow for such a deid.
Victorious Eduard ^o the Seige retornd
Whill omphrauell that hears this ouerthro
Knew that proud fortun now her bak had tornd
Whoes smylls were chaingd to frouns remeidles w^
Wheirfore he yields the strength wheir he soiornd
With passage fry in England for to go
To this ferce youth now all the land obeys
None his commands nor his behests gainseys.
Whill thus he raignd and rewled over all
His valiant brother that all conquring King
The Lord of Lorns old hate he did recall
Which all in one his angry pour's did bring
His Heralds gius the camp but leasur small
To Lorne to Lorne their proclamatioun sing
But all this time the worthy Douglas goes
Victorious still amongst his armed foes.
Douglas strong tour essais he first of all
And fifty load of hay in saiks weill bound
He causd to drive hard by the Castle wall
The Captane hoping victuals to have found
Isht with his troops whom or he did recall
He seis that conquering knight so mouch renound
Betuixt him and his strength who now with might
Would force him ather for to fly or fight. This capten ^eght wob^ount.

And thus the Scotts assaill with rageing mood
Whom long the English valiantly withstands
Till like a Lion wet with luke warm blood
The Douglas slops their ranks and braks their bands
He heauid his sword above their heads wheir stood
Both life and death that vrgd him with demands
But as his fury led him all to kill
Fear led them for to shun remeidles Ill.
Wobtoun him self dyit by his valiant hand
Wobtoun that captane was of all the rout
The rest from him that fled no mercy fand
All dy't, yea eune the fearful with the stout
Nor wall nor tour nor Castle let they stand
All throune to ground the ditchis filled about
Great Douglas fame now fleis over all the land
All yields to him over all he does command. This wobtoun was inioynd by his
miseres to keip thee venterous Castle of Douglas an eir befoir she wauld
favor him which in Inn^k tione was found in a letter gottin on him when he was
slea^e.

All Douglas Daill and Etrik Forest fair
And Jedburch to their native Prince then soght
But the Lord Steuart Bonkills only heir
A man that valors rairest fructs forth brought
Was chairgd by Englands King for to repare
Against fortuns knight for this great wrongs he wroght
Who with him brought the valiant Randolph forth
And bold Sir Adam Gordone much of worth. The Lord stewart of buhkill ris^th
agenst the douglace.

With these and fifty more he came to view
The land and how the people stood affected
But worthy Douglas of their cuming knew
Their secret drifts to him were all detected
Then after them he softly did persew
And folloud them a fa^^ still unsuspected
Till they at night reteird unto ane Inn
Was ^itchlie bult upon the banks of Linn.
Then round about the house his men he set
And threatened fire till they came thronging forth
With bloody fight then both the pairteis met
And both did prove the utmost of their worth
Thus Scotts against the Scotts were hardly set
Nor was their any their of English birth
Great is the heat and fury blouis the fire
Wheir friends against their friends ar moved with Ire. A crewell fight,

Greats pity was to view this woeful fight
Still was the killer killed yet none would fly
The Douglas party was of greater might
Yet still the vthers fight and fighting die
At last when death and slaughters at the hight
Of fifty none was left alive but thrie
That with the Stewart came and Douglas lost
Of fifty twiss neir sixte six all most.
Bonkills bold Lord that could no more defend
With Randolph and with Gordone steps aside
And soune was horst to she but lo in end
The Douglas did so weill for that provide
Their way was stepped what course so eu'r they bend
Sir Adame Gordone leads and was their guide
Who with a disperat hazard brave and bold
Braks throu his foes and saiff his way does hold,
The other two did to the Douglas yield
Who intertaind them as his friends most deir
He many days theirafter keept the field
But saw no enemy at all appeir
Yet neu'r Irkt he armor for to weild
Wheirfore unto his Prince he would reteir
Who now was on his Iournay Lorne to view
Yet to the Camp he came are any knew
Eu'ne to the royal Tent swift fame had borne
The news of his approache unto the King
Who from his throne rose like the glorious morn
And to him says my thoghts were combatting
If my loue'd Erlle did leiue, or died forlorn
And with his arms about his neck did hing
Whill as he kneild my gracious Prince said he
I leiue if in your grace, if noght I die.
Much more they said at last the knight presents
His prisoners unto his royal Prence
Whoes love, his Nephew too too soune preuents,
With speiches proud and spit'full conferrence
But wisdom myld and grave with raige conuents
And stayed wrath haisting death for his offense
Yet Bonkills Lord and he is to prison sent
Wheir they must stay till Lorns new war bespent. Randolph was his sister
sone.

But now the Lord of Lorne that cleirlie knew
Of their approach so weill did him provide
By schip him self on sea the fight would view
And left two thousand on the land beside
That (...) montans tope them self withdrew
Which did that cuntrie by it self divide
And underneath that hill the passage lay
So that the arme's forced to pas that way.
The King that of them had intelligence
Sends Douglas forth with him a chosen band
Who with much pain but schort continuance
Had winn their baks by hid wais which they fand
Now comes the army to the strait and thence
They sie their foes above all armed stand
On crags, and hurld down mighty stons from hie
And thence they lat their clouds of arrous fly.
Wherefore an other chosen band intend
With valiant Hay to give the chairge before
Of these the stons brought many to their end
And some returned leamd briusd and wonded sore
Yet to his foes bold Hay did still ascend
Still formest to encurage them the more
And tho but feu in spite of all their foes
They wan the montains heighest top with bloes.
But surly their each one had losd his life
Their foes so hudge encompast them about
If Douglas, who with labor pane and strife
Had not arrived with his resistles rout
But then o then bloes, wounds, and deaths were ri^e
Long faught they long was victory in dout
But Douglas now began on his men to froune
Because they were so long un ouerthroune
Then with the strongest ranks it faireth worce
His sword their maks a wide and bloody lain
He treds them killed and wounded by his force
Who yields leius, all that resists at slain
So kill's a hound the cur without remorse
That bits when he that yields his life does gain
Our knight still kills the armd with best assistance
And scorns t'assaill but wheir he finds resistance,
Good valiant Hay that through the rout furthwent
Fand matchles Douglas dealling deaths anew
And to his side he step't incontinent
A hardy friend bold constant wise and true
These two once met were all sufficient
A great and mighty Army to subdew
Yea though bold Hay had bidden from the fight
Douglas allone had put them all to flight.
At last discomfeit all does fly away
Down to a tumbling river deip and read
They past a bridge that our this river lay
Which they would cut of danger to be fred
But of their work they did them quiklie stay
And gave so fierce a chairge till thence they fled
By this one bridge the Army past the flood
And fand from thence that no man them with stood.
A wondrous strength was their Dunstaffage heght
The vanquest rebels mand this fortres strong
But with a Seige inuirond hard and straight
They forced ar to yield it up or long
Argills old Earl a man of wondrous might
Got peace whoes sone had done such endless wrong
Then all submit them selfs the King before
Eu'ne all the Lords along the western shore. The Lord of lorn was sone to the
^rll of Argill.

All faithful Scotts reioise of his succes
And for to show their just conceaud Ire
Their crafty foe by craft they would supres
Still when occasioun winkd at their defire
Amongst the rest that show his willingness
A country suaine their duelt in Lithgo shire
That was both fearles hardy strong and bold
He to his native Prince some service would.
A peill or strength by Lithgo lake their stood
That held in aw the country round about
A hundredth English with their captane good
Comands the strength wells fortified about
This country cloune, often for their horses food
With prouender and hay came in and out
Five sons he hade as bold as was their sire
Thrie brether borne and bred in Mars his ire.
And these weill armed within a wane he set
And cuning lie he couerd them with Hay
Then drives forth his wane straght to the gat^
Wheir he ar^^ed with the morning gray
The porter rose and in the wane he let
This driuer Binny heght who made no stay
But to the porter lept and soon dispatchd him
Then forth he lets the rest whill nothing fashd him*
And soon them selfs they throw the chambres spread
Some sleipt some armd and naiked some they fand
But all their lives at length they quiklie red
None that resists could their rude rage with stand
Thret tien were to the captains chalmer fled
Who with him tho^n armd these houses mand
But tours nor walls could not prevent their smert^
Mild pity dualls not in a Curish heart.
The King returned from Lorne did weill reward
This binnie for so hazardous a deid
Then of his nepheu Randolph heth regaird
For still his love his Anger did exceid
Morais great Erldome he for him prepaird
Of whom hereafter he might stand in neid
And sure his worth is worthelie renound
A brauer knight neu'r tred vpone the Ground*
Who being to his uncle reconceild
Wisl^d often within his haughty heart, to sho
Some piece of rarest service in the field
Who^s fame his former faults might far outgo
Fortun eu'ne then did fit occasioun yield
Whereby the King his willing mind should kno
Nine provinces with England yet did stand
Besout^ the silver Forth eu'ne all the land,
Obeid to Englands King but only thrie
Iedbrughe and Eirik and fair Douglas dail
These by the mighty Douglas conquered be
Against whose all couquring arm none could preuaill
In all these lands brave Randolph weill did sie
Many strong holds and castells to assaill
Amongst the which was one whoes strenth excel^
The Virgin-tour or Maiden-castell called.
Of that heigh crag this beautifies the top
Whereon the famous Edinburghe does stand
And that fair touns fry liberteis does stop
So proudly does the Garesone command
Whoes wills to tame their insolence to crop
His uncle puts the chairge into his hand
Which he obeis and being furneishd out
With a strait seige he sets the walls about.
A Gascon captane chief was of the hold
Whom straight the English tak and putt in bands
And of them selfs they chusd a captane bold
That valiantly their enemy with stands
Who in continual labor does them hold
By new assaults with fresh and warlik bands
Yet still with lose he is forcd for to reteir
So resolute and bold his foes appeir The name of the Gascon was (...) bald.

At last he seiks for to obtane by slight
Wheir strenth did faill and wheir no force preuailis
For sure it was vnpregnable by might
In vain with warlik force he still assaills
Sir Williame Frensh or Fraunces lo he hight
Who comes one day to him and thus reveills
To winn the hold my Lord I know the way
Nor all their force my subtle craft can stay.
My lusty youth I spent within these walls
As capteiue whill my father did command
My love within the town as often it falls
To whom by night a secreit way I fand
Tho dangerous to Bank^ts Masks and Balls
I went for love O what can love with stand
I shall you lead up throu the crag by night
Unto a wall but scant seavne cvbits hight.
Glade was the earl that he did thus devise
And promeist him a fair and ritche rewaird
When pitche clouds then muffills up the skies
With thrittie and his guide the count repaird
Hard to the rock and mounting does arise
A thousand faddoms height without regaird
For fearful danger could them noght with hold
Under the wall at last they rest them would,
When straight above them does the watch repare
And our the wall one throus a mighty stone
The which a corner of the crag did bear
Hard by them else they died had eurie one
Fly trautors fly quod one I fie you their
But with her dreadful waill blak night allone
Had couerd them by heauins heighe providence
Else with a thought there sowlls hade pairted thence.
The watch that hears not seis nothing depairts
When to the wall they set their ledder straight
And Frances first assends that knew these pairts
Sir Andro Gray was nixt a valiant knight
Then mounts the erlle when with curagious hearts
The watch returns that now had got a sight
Of them and treassone treasone loudlie cries
Wheir with they all awaekd in arms arise.
Then that brave Lo^d and his two knights persew
The watch with such undaunted curage stout
That all of them they quiklie overthrew
When all the armed garesone cums out
The Scotts or then got up all does renew
A deadly fight whill Blood flowed round about
Their bloody swords often gius a glomeing light
Still made more fearful by the dreadful night
Great was the Number of the English foe
But many hearts were ceased with soddant fear
And yet their Captane did great valor sho
With whom as yet them selfs they brauelle bear
A hardy Scot does to the Captane go
That Setone hight a knight that knew no fear,
Grave wise and old whoes counsall's stayed effect
The worthy Randolph held in great respect^.
Thrie sons he hade that with him self forth speids
And when he seis the Captans murdring Ire
My sons quod he let this bold knights brave deads
Be bellows for to kindle angers fire
Perrells and dangers hard, or honors seads
Fame worthy prase to perrells still aspire
His tender whelps so leads the Lion old
Forth to their pray and whits their curage bold. A pitiful fight.

The youths stepped forth and with their hardy father
The warrlick Captane furiously persew
The old knight hits him on the helm but neither
His armor pearst he nor his blood forthdrew
Who nocht afraid but enraged rather
His brand with blood of honored aige t'inbrew
Quite throu his gentle breast the brand he thrust
Whoes life and blood both at the wound forth burst.
The yeoungest sone that seis his father slain
Holds up his dying sire with both his hands
But o poor pity, kindness o in vain
In vane for help he calls, for his demands
Ar soon cut of, and with them cut in tuaine
His arms, that links about his Sire like bands
Down fall they both Both bid the rest adieu
Both kissing die; Ah woeful sight to view:
Two brether now was only left a live
And yet tho both alive both twice were slane
In these two deaths yet both against him strive
But nather could his fury great restrane
The breast down to the bowels he does riue
Of one the vthers head he cleft in twane
The noise and tumult of this haples fight
Brought Randolph for to view this woeful sight.
He rudlie brak the prease and came in time
To tak revenge but too too late to aid
Ah woes me quod he shall you hs fair pryme
Be thus distroyd and wisdoms wealth decayed
Who durst commit so in humane a crime
Who has so fare from reasons center strayed
He quod the Captane who dars seall his deid
With thy hot blood and on thy heart dart's feid.
For rage and wrath the count could not reply
But strongly thrusts his sword forth him before
Quyte through his breast, the wound he ripped t'esspy
His cruel heart which his left hand forth tore
And wrong forth blood sprinkling on these that ly
But neulie dead, if this can bak restore
Your lius, he proous a Pelicane quod he
If noght let this appease your Ghosts from me.
And noght suffeisd with this revenge at will
He wraks upon the multitude his wrath
There Captanis blood suffeisd him not until
They ^ane in heaps to fly such crwell death
Some leaps ye craige some runs out our ye hill
These breaks there necks those crushd to dust beneathe
So headlong flies a flight of simple dous
When from her way the princely falcon bous.
Or then night fled to let the lightsome day
Unfold her works of murder death and blood
The strength was wune no southeron their did stay
Nor saw they any that their will gain stood
The Gascon Captane that in prison lay
The Erlle releasd from bands and servitude
Then fully was that prophecy perfited
Which Candmoirs Sanct-like Queen theirin indyted. Queen (...) garet that was
cannoneidse the chaste wryie upon the wall of the chapel Gordevous (...)
Francois. with ane man ^limming up ^llledder (...) ^ne wall which is meint by
France that was the cause of the wining of the Castle.

The Argument.
A messinger unto the King does scho
Sad neus that does incense his wrathful lre
From Roxbrughs tours brave Douglas beats the foe
Eduards bold answer Quens;hd his brothers fire
To view the Englis camp does Douglas go
The Scots obey their Princes Just desire
Jew men they send but valiant fierce and bold
Chusde forth of eurie Region uncontrolled,
Caput. 15.
SCotlands great King that all this time had gone
From town to town from city strength and tour
Through fiffe, Stratherne, Merns, Angus one by one
And Goureis cars which all unto his pou'r
Did glaidlie yield, and he eune he allone
Their native Lord was their great conqueror
But he to Fdinbrughe returned at last
Till Isickles his chilling breath forth blast.
No greater pomp, Solempnitie, nor glory,
Magnificence, Praise, riches, nor renown
Got Caesar as records the Roman story
When as he made the western world bow down
To Rooms proud reull wheirof he might be sorry
Nor entered he more bravely in that ^oune
Then our great Lord when first he enterd heir
Who was more loved whom all as much did fear.
Whill heir he stayed admeird feared loved of all
To him brave Randolph did the Castle yield
Which to the ground he raizd both tour and wall
That their his foe agane fould have no beild
And on a day set in his Princely hall
He to his knights and Lords his will reueild
When straght a messinger does to him bring
Tidings of Joy wheirof new trubbles spring.
The Messinger upon his face does fall
And sayis great King and my most Gracious Prence
All praise be geune to God that does enstall
Upon our throne thy worth thy excellence
God grant that in thy seid he may recall
Thy glory and resume thy greatness thence
Thy brother Eduard humble greiteth thee
And warns the thus of what is past by me.
Rugleins strong peill is taken by Eduard bold
That warrlike town Dundie by him is winn
And also royal Stirling uncontrolled
Gladly received his conquring army Inn
But that inpregnable and matchles hold
Stirlings strong Castle would not once begin
To hear of peace till famein forced at last
They parle thus, and thus their peace is past.
A yeir to keip the hold he them permits
And if within that time great Englands King
Releius them noght but cairles them omits
Then in his hands they shall the place resing
Sir Philip Moubray their in reuling sitts
He Is gone to England Succor thence to bring
And now that mighty King prouids we hear
By Gain and gold to bring all Europe heir.
For he by proclamatioun great has sworn
Through every kingdom cuntrie town and shire
That Scotlands name by him shall be out worn
He will distroy that nation in his Ire
And all that comes of other nations borne
To keip that day shall have what they desire
And of this Kingdom great without extorsioun
Each equal to his worth shall have his portioun.
Great multitude of strangers day by day
Brought by these means in England does ariue
So that they think ritche England scarslie may
Find store ynuch to keip them all alliue
Besides those cuntreis great that him obey
In France all Princes his confedrats strive
Who shall the best and greatest armeis raise
(...) willing seims all Europe him to please.
And thus in time your grace would neids be ware
To sue with gifts the angry King to please
Or give you mind to try the chance of War
Provide in time your forces for to raise
Wheir with the Kings eyes brunt with wraeths teid sta^
Should we his Iyre with gifts quod he appease
Why villane what base fear so timorous
Ere till this day has thou espied in us
Have we till now sustaind such endless pane
And storms of Wars sad tempests has out worn
Our Kingdom croune and cuntrie to obtane
And raisd our self in spite of Englands scorn
For braggs thus for to fold with shame agane
When Fortune to our foot the Ball has borne
No heauins forbid such clouds of fear and shame
Sold so obscuir our mornings rising beam.
What tho the pride of our imper^ous foe
With ever soll destruction does us bost
Our forces mean his multituds does kno
Yea tho a world of men augment his host
Our mite incresleth with his talent lo
The widous oill when blisd tho leist was most
He must be many still and still be glorious
And feu we must be still, and still victorious.
Let him bring forth his England, Ireland, Waills,
With Britange Gascon and fair Aquitane
Poitew and Guian and all cuntreis else
With Scotlands better pairt yet all in vane
God us protects against whoes strong a^me preuaill^
No Earthly pour in him our hopes remane
True Scotts we bring and brings this prais with all
Against Scotts allone all Europs thought too small
Thus spak the King whill all his Lords and peers
Reioisd thereat and hoped in heauins revenger
Whill he not only fearles bold appeirs
But also ware and wyislie weyis the danger
He for each captain sends who sone compeirs
Consulting all how to bear af the stranger
The conquering knight came their whoes worthy acte^
My tird quill mends and my dull Museawaiks.
How soon the King returned was from Lorne
And progres took through eurie regione fair
To vieu the land wheirto himself was borne
As righteous King just Prince and only heir
Douglas that rest and ease did ever scorn
Did bak unto the south agane repair
Wheir he the English often did ouerthrou
But Roxbrugh how he wan Iyll only shou.
And thus it was on fastingeuins dark night
Thrie scoir he brings in armor pitchie blak
All on their hands and feit does creip out right
No noise no sound no word bewraid their tract
The watch them seis but so as in their sight
They seimd a heard of bews and this they spak
This night good Rodger lets his heard at learg
Whereof er long blak Douglas may tak chearg.
He smils to sie their sight disceaued so
But hard below the wall arrived at last
In goes the watch, such thundering tempests blo
Ledhous a Ledder made of Touis up cast
Whoes clerks of j^on sounds with the through
Yet full of euraige he ascend^th fast
This ingine he deuisd wherebe to gain
Him self sum glory and his foe sum pain,
The Sentinel that hears the sound espyis
Ledhous ascend and quiklie to him goes
Who does not only on the walls arise
But kills him too, then down the carkas throes
When all was mounted Douglas quiklie hyis
Down to the hall for to assaill his foes
Who now amid their feastuall Ioyis var caght
Sum play to death sum drink their leatest draght
With life devoring swords the Scotts, The captane hight Guilliame ^erms whereby
it appeirs he was a (...) man.
ariue
That Douglas Douglas cryis whoes verey name
So dreadful seimd, that few for wapins strive
But flei to save their lius not cairing shame
Or day thrie hundredth they of life deprive
The captane with the rest them selfs reclame
In an strong tour but Douglas kept the field
Till famien forcd them all at last to eild.
And then brave Douglas they entreat for peace
To whom anon they render up the hold
Them selfis their liwes and all unto his grace
Who was as wise and mild as feirce and bold
Them of that bondaige straight he did relace
And send them home with all their wealth their gold
And then to Edinbruche his course he bent
Where warlik Bruce for all his Lords hade sent.
Their Edward their great Steward might he sie
True Mar wise Lenox, Hey, and Randolph strong,
With many more grave counsalours that be
To their brave Prince who satt them all among
All silence keipt he muisd with majesty
Whill one his throne he satt at last of wrong
Acuisd his brother who with reverend fear
Too this his wise and solid words gave ear.
Brother what haist what raschnes did you guide
What folly causd you give so long a day
To Englands mighty king for to provide
His forces great when weill you know he may
Bring forth for eucrie one upon our side
A hundredth warlik knights in good array
How could you think that we culd him gainstand
Who yet most part of Scotland does command.
Yea thought he would no other forces raise
But only Scots for to releive the hold
Eu'ne these can ouermatche us if he please
Much more with Irish English Welshmen bold
With Almans Frenshe and Dutchis by all these
Whom in subjection he in France does hold
All these shall come and with a world of men
Shall we be able to encounter then.
Surly you had no foresight heir at all
And to our rising state you wronged much
What we have conquest yet is very small
Nor ar we siure of these, the commouns such
Inconstant minds do bear, and so our fall
Is neir, if one the brokin reid but tuche,
Better had bein we neu'r had soght with pain
To clim so hie so soon to fall again.
His brother answers heauins forbid that so
Should fall, what I have done we can not mend,
Not neid we much to fear our mighty foe,
Thought he bring armeis from the worlds end,
His Sun is at his Sommerr S^lsteice lo
And neids he must return for to descend
Fortun must Froune when she too long has smil^
Who surest hops often is often beg^ld.
Yea tho he head a hundredth Kingdoms more
And could a hund^eth Englands bring to war
By heaune he shall have Battle once before
He come to Stirling if to come he dare
This spak bold Edward whoes bold words restore
The shining light of Gloreis darkened Starr
In many hearts which to great love does raise him
His Brother in his heart does greatly praise him.
But gravely thus agane the King began
My Lords my captains and my chiftains all,
I gladly would we were assured when
Our foes should come, and when our troops recall,
For our mean force must be made stronger then
To catch occasioun and give vantage small
Then Douglas sai's my Lord let one be sent
That warlie can perceive whaat's their inten.
And surly I my self the man must be
^yll slilie walk through all their squadrons brave
A Frensh man of a Scot they all shall sie
With Almans Frensh and Dutch I can disceaue
I Knou their Lords and Princes of degrie
Through all their camp the secrets I will have
Iyll raise my beard and bazane make my face
Iyll change my voice my gesture and my Grace
Loath was the King that he should undergo.
This fearful task he for him self prouids
But neids he would be gone at last and so
Disguised like a Frensh man forth he rids
His face straik with ane oil no pairt did sho
Of his first Grace his countenance it hids
The accen^s hard of Frensh he sounds so right
That eune the Frensh them selfs mistak their sight.
The worthy Bruce his time not idly spent
But forth to muster calls his men of war
Forth to the flourie banks of forth they went
Unto a pleasant Medou lairge and squair
Deir Muse tho time has in oblivion pent
These wortheis names that heir did armor beit
And made their of springs nams to differ fare
Thou knows both what they were and what they are.
But what they were, were longsome to repeat
Only as they are now to us unfold
That tho their names be some what changd of lait
Yet we may know them for the of spring bold
That yet remains stand not on points of stait
But lat each land each province be enrold
With their Lords name and these such Tinkior lend
As mighty time nor age may after spend.
Unto the camp their worthy King forth goes
Their King their Captane and their General great
Whill all the commoun soldeors arose
With Joyful shouts and signs of Love perfyit
Pleased with their salutatiouns sweit, he shoes
A cheirfull smyle, their love for to requyit,
Then gius command against the following morn,
Their glorious standarts should the plain adorn.
No sooner Titan Butneist Neotuns vawe
And spread his beams over Earths enameld breast
When forth the wortheis warlick bold and brave
Came all in shining Steill, their glistring crest
Adorned with plums, their armed horse whoes show
With statlie prausing seemd with pride possessed,
Before their Lord, he from a rocks proud height
One eurie troup down bent his curious sight.
Now Eduards, Douglas, Randolphs troops remaind
About the King nor marchd they to the plain
And all on Douglas absence much complaind,
But most of all his own men thought in vain
A sight he of the English camp obtaind
Nor fea^d he oght nor would he turn again
Whom to his fortun leave we now to sho
These troops that martchd unto the plain belo,
From Skieland orknay Caittnes fair and wide
Forth stretched to the great north these, cuntries lies
Came forth two thousand led in martial pride
By two bold erlls of Ancient families
That long these cuntries lairge did wish gyde
And tho far of they ly yet they aryiss
To help their noblle prince there minds so hautie
Showing thereby their faith, love, zeall there deutie. The erlls of orknay and
caithnes.

Ross Sutherland Stranauer nixt to them
As many men as brave as stout as strong
Led by two worthy erlls of ancient fame
Great Sutherland and Ros right famous long
Of Irish Scotts in clanns that keipt the name
Five hundredth thrice their chieftans brought along
From all these montane cuntreis north that ly The erlls of sother land and ros.

And plesaunt shoirs that coasts the Irish sey. The frasers Grants and
Glenhatten.

Randolph brought forth all Morrays shire almost
These wait on him he waits upon the King
The men of Buchane though their Lord was lost
To show their love and duette forth did bring
A thousand bold brought from that pleasant cost
That still beholds the German Ocean spring
For Grain a fertile land for pastor good
The men a people of Bellonas brood. Erlle of moray.

From Mar two thousand came of warlik fame
Led by that ever famous erlle of Mar
Whoes faithful heart whoes much redoubted name
Yet never left his Prince in Peace nor War
Whoes Starr of Glory ever casts a beam
Which still Illuminats both neir and far
The men of at holl then their Ensign spread Erlle of mar

A thousand by their gallant erlle forth-led. Erlle of Atholl.

From Merns their came of Squiers and of knights
A thousand warlick, Earl marchel his first forbier at the ^attell of ar broth
slew camus Prince of dains for which he gat gryt sands and was made Marchell
of Scotland.
hardy, fearles bold
Led by their Erlle traind up in marti'all fights
Their erlle whoes worth my Muse can not unfold
Whoes great ancestors shind still glorious lights
And whoes first father did the land up hold
From bondage wild for which they still command
As only great Lord Merschalls of the land.
But Angous heght the Region nixt that lies
A famous fertile fair and pleasant land
From which two thousand did in arms arise
Led by great Lords that by them selfs command
As Ogiluy and Brechin bold and wise Lord Ogilluy.

Montrois great erlle that led a valiant band Lord of brich me.

But he that led the most pairt of that host Erlle of montrois.

Was Crausurds mighty erlle who reuled most Erll of Craffoord.

Nixt Goureis Carss a pleasant euntrie lies
Vpone the northern banks of famous Tey
And to the North the Eist and West arise
Pleasant grem hills up to the cloudie sky
That like a wall impregnable defyes
The boasting foe or foragne enemy
Streaching their ragid arms aloft ascending
The pleasant plains from tempests still defending. The discriptione of the
carrs of gourie.

Wheir Barlie Wheat and all the sorts of Grain
That pleasant cuntrie plentefullie yields
In all the valeys meids and eurie plain
The frutfull Treis at strou'd through all the feilds
The Regions round about that does remane
At still suppleid from thence wheir plenty weilds
By heau'ne and nature greac'd with all things else
That eu'ne the famous Normandy excel's.
The port or entres to this pleasant land
Is strong Dundie weill cituat and fair
Betuixt it and the German laek that stand
Wheir as Tays mighty flood with murmuring cair
Like Tagus rolling our the golden sand
Does cast him self away as in despair
From this fair land came forth a thousand good
That in their cuntreis cause would spend their blood. Erlle of arrall his first
foibeit a^^ us bat^ell of with his two sons.

By mighty Erroll were these troops forth led
Whoes great beginning gloriously was wrought
When as the bloody Danes their ensigns spread
Heir to distroy our natioun whill they soght
As endless swarms in thousands Bie-hyus bred
Such endless swarms these rude Barbariens brought
Of armed sauageis tho still with stood
And filled the land with Famine War and blood. And yoks in their hands stayed
the Scotts from flight and obtainned the victory for ^he which they got the
care of gourie and was made constab^^ (...) Scotland.

But when their Moon was full their Tide at hight
Our Eb so low that hope and all was lost
Thy first forbe'r stout Hey came to the fight
Who with two sons allone their fortune crossed
Whoes valors only put them all to flight
O wonder thrie our cums a mighty host
But so Joue wild that from so fair a spring
Scotlands great Constabill his stream should bring.
Then fertile Fife nixt musterd forth her brood
A land by Nature fair and ritche by art
From Tay's great stream to Forths cleir crystal flood
She gathers forth her bands in eurie part
Erlles Lords and knights they all ar horsemen good
Th^^^ thousand chosen men of heighe desarte
Rothes great erlle and many erlls beside
Amid these troops spread forth their Ensigns wide. Erlle of rothes and the Lord
lindsay with others.

Thrie thousand more came forth of Louthean fair
All Princes Lords and knights and men of fame
Wheir Setons Lord eume Weintons erlle did bear
Not meanest reull with vthers of great name
Angous great erlle and Morton both was their
Tho other cuntries fair might them reclame
Wheir they bore reull with many barrons more
As Gems do ringis whose worths that land decore. Lord setone erlle of wencon.

Then Lithgoes schire and Stirlings pleasant land
Seauin tims five hundredth men of arms forth send
Their Liuingston our Lithquhow did command
Lord Elphingstoun his aid did likewaies lend
Monteiths old erlle brought forth a chosen band
A gallant rout on Erskins Lord depend
From C^yde that came all these and many mo Lord liuingston erlle of lithquhow.

As floods to the ocean to their soueraing flow. Lord elphingston.

Perth and S^ratherne two regions fair and bred
Send furthe two thousand hardy knights on horse
Stratbern and Drumond erlle of perth forth led
The greatest pairt of all this martial force
And h^it the Morrayis turth there ensign spread
Who from Morauia bring there ancestors
A doughtie race of people bold and stern
Led by that valiant Lord of Tulliberne. Lord drummond erlle of perth and Males
then erlle of strachern Lord murray of Tullibern erlle of ball^uhidder.

And Bunkills Lord their came, that Stewart hight
Whom Douglas with brave Randolph took of yore
When Huntles mighty Lord by honored flight
Eschaipt from Jedward as you hard before
He brought a gallant troup and wroght so right
That to his Princes peace he did restore
This Adam Gordone huntlies noble Lord
With virtue and with valor much decorde. Lord Stew^rd then of Bonk^ll.

He is the Mers a mighty reull did bear
Eune he of whom heauns maker had decred
Such Branches still should Spring as should up rear
That house to such a height as now his seid
Ring's in the North nor can tims aig out wear
Their greatness worth and vell deserving meid
Nor can it be amise for to repeat
From South to North what causd them cheange their seat. Lord Marquis of huntle.

This Lords brave sone in Mars his bloody field
In spite of thou sands of his armed foes
With conquering suord made Atholls er'll to yield
That in dispight of Scotlands King arose
And to the English foe became a shield
Till they the secound time procuild new woes
For which brave deid his Prince did him declaire
Lord of Strathbogis fertile region fair. This sir Allexander Gordone sought
the field of keil^line agains the Earl of Atholl who took pairt with England
which Erll the said sir Allexander slay with his oune hand for the which he
gatt the lands of Strathbogie.

His race ay since often mixed with Princely blood
In the great North does worthelie command
From Bogyis stream too Speyis greart famous flood
And famous made their name in many a land
And to their Prince has done such service good
As in the hight of Glory still they stand
So litill springs of fair cleir crystal fontains
Become great floods and sueill ore toples montains.
From thence great Lords arose, whoes virteus rate
Might well by fames eternal beayes be cround
Of whom our cuntreis vriters at so spear
That in obliuions floods their deads ar dround
Whoes worth great woloms cold not all declare
Deserving well for ay to be renound
Yet vriters bleamles ar eas may be seine
For of renoune all Scott^s has carles beine.
Which maks them yet unto the wordle obscure
So that most part of Europe does not know them
Although their worthy actions might procure
Our all the Earth in glory for to shou them
What Homers pains can make their name endure
Prais them alive let death quite overthrow them
They scorn their wealth should ^herish learning tre^
And after death to look for payment deu.
But soft my Muise faint not for all they pain
This famelie does for the world prepare
A youth who seiks too waish away that stain
From this great house with Magnanimious care
Whoes Martial heart heaven never framd in vain
Like to his valiant Syres that might compare
With fortuns knight for happy succes still
So fortune shall his brave desings forth fill: George Lord Gordon Earl of
enzye.

O this is he that most one day propine
Me with the flowing subject of my song
Upon whoes brou such glory great shall shine
O Muise my zeall inflame with fury strong
His cheracter to paint with tinktor fine
Transparent neat and cleir my lays among
All mistereis thou know is beneath the skies
Then lead me in whear his rare fortunes lies.
What is he then O bodlie may thou say
In his rich Soull all faculties inshrind
Whoes sweitt complexion bears a mutual suay
Of all the elements in peace conioind
With such a love and fraudles s^^pathie
As all commands yet all obeis the mind
His temper fine does moddell forth aparte
The rare ingine of nature heaune and art.
Time shall not cheange his purpose soleid ground
His course no course shall let or bear awry
Fortune in chains his fortitude has bound
Nor Judgments sharpest cleir and subtle eye
Can pry where danger once his heart shall wound
His matchles mind is Eleuat so hie
Yea Nature of her Treasure Wealth and Store
Gives him the key and lets him opp the door.
But o how am I thus with pleasure led
Amide the wilderness of his perfection
Where having thousand sondrie ways to tred
My self may lose my self without derection
From such a laborinth I most be fred
To hold my wandering wits in some subi^ction
Their where thou left deir Muse return in haist
When Gordons Prince him in the North had placed.
He did not leave by south his seatt so bear
But of a younger brother is descended
From that same Stook a race whoes virteus rare
Has worthy still bein judged to be commended
But pardon me that stands for to declare
The race of which I not so much intended
Yet if I bring more from obliuions brink
What reasone is it they should in Lethe sink.
This Huntl^es Lord great Gordone with him brought
A thousand horsemen clade in glistring arms
All these cast of the English yock and soght
After the dreadful sound of wars allarms
From Huntlie and long Gordone some all thought
The Mers obeid and feared great Englands harms
But lo Argill coms with their Erll whoes sone
Yet to repent his wrongs hade not begone. The Lord of Lorne was sone to this
Erll of Argill.

Scotlands great Justice is that aged knight
And our the Irish-Scotts great reul he beir
These men ar active nimble quik and light
Light is their raiment armor none they weir
At all tims reddie for to fly or fight
Weill made weill fauord cleinlie smooth and fair
Their some what rude yet mild if mildly vsd
Most cruel in revenge if once abusd. A short description of the Iyrish Scots.

Of these two thousand Archers brought he forth
And with tuo handit-suords and schirts of maill
A thousand more of much redouted worth
Five hundredth horsemen bold for to assaill
Barrons and knights all sprung of noble birth
Guards him against whom his foes could not preuail
These Gallants brave were much to be commended
All of his name and of his line descended. Ties war the barrons of his neame
as the leard of Londy Glenurche Cadel and others.

And from the west came forth a valiant band
Which did consist of twice five hundredth horse
Quik, agill, reddie for to chairge at hand
With sword or lance all of approved force
From Lennox and Dumbretons pleasant land
Whoes flourie Mairg still seimeth Amorous
Of tumbling Clid whoes Billous strive in vain
To wond the bossome of the western Maine
These to obey their gallant Lord was glade
Lennox good Earl that neu'r serud in vane
The last brave troup was also bravely led
A thousand horsemen they did weill contane
By Glasco Iruing and Ranfrew were bred
These men, in Boots strong I Will did some remane
Scotlands great Stewart was their Lord and heght
Walter by name wise valiant bold in fight. The grit steuert of Scotland.

These ar the troops and bands that heir were brought
And all were bred so neir the artik Starr
That cold keips in the heat whoes pours has wroght
Strength in the heart and their united ar
Which maks them fierce curagious bold for oght
Marcheld for bloody Mars and meit for war
But yet seaune Earls and threttein Lords did sho
Them selfs in Arms to aid the English foe.
Yea many Lords and Erlls have I forgot
That to the mighty Bruce assembled heir
Whoes geatnes until now no pen did not
Englands good fortun did so weill appeir
Whill Joue him self did favor still their lot
Wherefore they wisely did them selfs reteir
As cannons fird gois bak that earth may wonder
When they advance, their all distroying thonder.
So these inflamd with fire of hot disdain
Reteird with grief with hate with lose with ire
That with the greater force they might again
Advance their lightning wraths-consuming fire
And then a thundering tempests would they rain
Crushd from the suelling clouds of their desire
Which to the King and all should weill declair
That barren treis could now both bude and bare.
Now passed was each troup each squadron strong
When to the camp their Prince his course forth bent
And all his Princes go with him along
To hold a counsall in the royal Tent
Mean while the Douglas all his foes among
Walked for to kno their number, pour intent
At Beruick fair he had arrived vn-sein
For their this mighty host did all conuein
The Argument.
The English army forth before their King
To m^^ster comes and all their foraeigne aid
Doug as returned recounteth eurie thing
Ditchis t'intrap his foes great Bruce has made
Randolphs rare fight fair conquest first does bring
Bruce Beumont kills the English does vpbraid
The Scots with tants two Brabanders defend theme
For which the King unto the Scots does send theme.
Caput. 16.
STrong Beruiks town on Scotlands fronteir stands
Their wheir with silver streams the River Tueid
Diuyds our kingdom from the English lands
And wastes his waust' enritch the Ocean flood
Heir brought the Monarch all his warlick bands
At whoes great name all Europe trembling stood
And eurie Lord and eurte Prince and King
Some gold sum gifts and all great aid did bring.
This mighty Prince his pour assembling sought
To kill the Scots or send them all in rout
Over whom he streachd his Empire with a thought
Nor for to work the thing had any dout
Douglas his way eu'ne at that hour him brought
When this hudge army Bervicks walls about
Encamped lay and when to sie each crew
The regal, throne reard on the walls they view.
Him self in glory sat upon the throne
A diadeleime upon his head he wore
A paill above of glistring gold cloth shone
He trod on carpets, ritche in pratious store
Poudred with stones the robs which he had on
And straight in ranks repeared him before
His armed guard, thus set each troup he knoes
Whilst on the plain there Martial glory floes.
Their Squadrons first the cheirfull English shoes
In thrie Battallions each a seu'rall guide
By Seuerns streams from waills and Cornvaill rose
Some threttie thousand strong that did provide
Armd with their piks swords targets to oppose
Their thretning force against their foe defide
By Monmouths hardy erlle this host was led Waills.

He raignd, he reulled in his Princes sted. Cornuell.

And fifty thousand horsemen soldiors good
From Trent that pairteth England Just in two
To Thams and thence unto he British flood
These rose in glistring arms a warlick sho
Like Mars him self each breathed war and blood
Whoes sight would vanquhish eune the boldest foe
Led by two Princes of heighe fameleis
Great Arrandell old Oxfoord grave and wise. England.

To Humbers tumbling waus from silver Trent
And thence to pleasant Tueids cleir crystal streams
Came fifty thousand Arches with Intent
To die or win in midst of most extremes
All these were of approved h^rdiment
These Englands most triumphant conquests cleams
As theirs; and this great host commanded be
By Gloucester the bold and Hartfoord sly.
From threttein regions fertile fair and good
Of Scotlands Kingdom which did yet obey
To Englands King and held in servitude
By his all conquering force until that day
Came five and tuentie thousand warriors tude
All Horsemen brave and bold for each essay
Sir Ingrhame Omphrauell led these along
A subtle warrior crafty wise and strong. The mers and many of all the
deals borders and much of the Wastland.

Nixt unto them came fifty thousand more
Gross men of shaip weill limd both strong and tall
They croc'd the seas from Irelands craggie shore
But slightlie armd sum weirs no arms at all
Their chiefest strengths ar woods and montans hoar
The English deput was their general
And under him Fits geralds chief kil-deir.
With great Oneill and Desmont reull did beir. Ireland.

Then came his subjects and confed'rats great
Whoes limits stretche along the Baltik cost
And these ritche cuntreis Charles the fifth did quite
To his deir sone but soon that reull was lost
By Spanish tirrany which heigh dispite
All Europe since her deirrest blood has cost
And war that else wheir does distroy and waist
Their both cluilitie and wealth has plaic'd. Charles the (...) gra^e the
^^lands to his sone Philip King of spane long after this time.

Allong the foot of Piriane montans fair
A ritche and fertile region does remain
Famous by that great Bartell lost of air
Against the Infidells by Charle maine
His famous Nephew Rolland lost he their
Still famous made by Ariostos vene
Forth of this land upon their oune expense
Ten thousand came to aid the english prence. The Cnntrie of Gascon.

That land that west from Tours does stretche along
To wasche his feit within the Ocean Sea
Whoes Induellers take much delight among
The Moorish fens to sie there falcons fly
And in their montans woods and forests strong
The Prince lie Game of hunting used be
That pleasant land that Poictue hecht to name
Send to this wart five thousand men of fame. Poictue.

That land which Loir from Poictou does divide
From whence the Britons erst the Gaulls displaced
And changd the name from Armorick beside
To Britangnie and all their laus defaced
Wheirin thrie sundry languages abide
And Masteius for sanct Molois Guard is placed
From thence to aid their great ancestors old Britangie.

Come fifteen thousand warlick soldiors bold. Sanct Molois ha^^n a gri^e
strength is guearded by Masteus.

From that most frutfull orchard fair of france
Which Rollo great and his Noruegians stout
Of simple Charles got for Inheritance
Of them it still yet bears the name about
From thence a galland did him self advance
And conquered England with a warrlike rout
Of thousands ten: heigh heauns such wonders wroght
Like number now to Englands aid was brought. Normandy.

From that ritche land whoes chalkie swan like schoirs
Fair kent beholds best when the Sune goes down
Whoes chief town vieus fair Douers cleif and gloir's
To sie the tours that her fair front does croune
And thence wheir Cesars monument restoir's
His never deing memoreis renoune
Came thrice ten hundredth soldiors to this war
Bold strong and brave that never dreamd of fear. Boloigne wheir their is and
old strong Tour built by Caesar to be sein at this day.

From that fair land wheir smoothly slyding soam
Waters the medous and the pleasant plains
And from that city wheir two floods do come
T'vnload their waus from ever springing vains
Seu'ne thousand warlik soldeors came and some
From that old famous town that yet retains
Pairt of the Guseane famelie and thence P^cardie.

Sprung that great houses glorious excellence. At Amiens two other rivers
discharges their Burdens in the soum.

From Henolt came five thousand men of fame
Led by their erlle in whoes great might they gloird
From their chief town eune Mons that hecht to name
Four hundredth came with shining arms decorde
All these were youths not moud with fear or shame
That gaird the person of their migh^ie Lord
And came to spoyll the Garland of the Maine
But few ot none at all return agane. Henolt.

That land which has within his borders placed
The holy empi^s Marquesad of old
By Skeld cut of, from Flaunder, in the west
Wh^iron stands Antwerp glorious to behold
This land the Maiss so lovingly has graced
She in her bossome does the same enfold
From whence the hope of gain and praise did bring
Ten thousand Soldeors to the english King. Brab^nt

This war on Europs fairest Erldome calls
Wheir stands upon the banks of Skeld and ley
That town so hudge in cu cuit of her walls
Famous for that but famous more for why
That ever famous monarch which apalls
Ronoune, Fame, Glory, Praise, and Victory,
As his Just dew, was their both borne, and bred Flanders.

Thence to his war, was fourtene thousand led. Gent thought to be the lairgest
town in Europ, wheir cha^ll* the 5 tha^ famous Emperor was borne.

From these strong Illands made so strong by art
Against Neptun who still proous their greatest foe
Because his floods ouerfloud the greatest part
Of all these lands as some thinks long ago
But when else wheir his swelling streams convert
The lands to seas these lands the sea did sho
Six thousand thence unto this war was send
Vpone the E^glish Monarch that depend. Zeland is (...) Islands within the sea
which the sea s^m tym ouerfloued as appeirs by sindrie good arguments.

Their lyis a land along the Germane flood
Throu which the Mais and Rhine their course does hold
Unto their Lord whoes rage is still with stood
By sandy douns else all should be enrold
In waves, thus sand that else wheir eats for food
The fatest soill, heir serus for bulwarks bold
Of cuntrie-men and wageitt soldeors thence
Come fiftine thousand to the English Prince. Holland.

When these great regiments all were past and gone
Down from his throne, the monarch did descend
Inuirond round with Lords and knights anon
Unto a royal tent his course he bend
That stood in midst of all the camp allone
Without the walls and did him their attend
And their him self first by him self was placed
Then all his Princes at a royal feast.
All that was past the Douglas weill espyis
Now thtou the camp from tent to tent he goes
Hearing strange tongs but stranger harmonyis
Of drums and Trumpets which to heaune arose
He hears their brags their braues and their defyis
The Scotts were now their slaws and not their foes
And often he hears him self condemd to die
A crwell death in shameful Infamy.
He smild and to the royal tent agane
He turned, assembleis great great neus affoords
The feast was done and to the counsel then
Set was the King with Princes duks and Lords
He could have wishd to heir them but in vain
No cuning slight could make him hear their words
For round about the tent the gaurd did stand
And none from thence Approaches nearer hand
Wherefore for oght that he could find at all
By conferrence with English Frensh or Dutche
He seis to trains nor slight they would not fall
So proud they were of strength their force was such
This Kingdom lairge by lots too great and small
Was given, nor would of Scotts be left so much
As one, that monarchs wraithe was so extrame
From of the werie earth too raise their name
The counsel raise and forth the heralds went
Chairging that spacious hoist in arms to be
Raising to morrow with a full intent
To march derectlie to their enemy
The Douglas heirs and vould their haist prevent
From thence that night departing secretly
Unto his Lord he haistelie with drew
Longing too shou all that he learnd or knew*
Thus forth he tyds through silence of the night
Fair Cinthea seimd to favor his intent
Wrapping her self and all her beauty bright
In duskie clouds which often in two she rent
Where throu she pri'd to sie if he were right
Often wishing him up in the firmament
Beside the whirlling Pole their stellefyid
His bright aspect might gilt her swartish side.
When golden haird Apollo first did light
Earths better half then could he weill discry
The Scottsh camp which enterd once he might
Perceive the soldeors give a joyful cry
Heir drums and trumpets their ror's forth on high^
His joyful w^lcum thundert throu the sky
All to the royal tent did him conuoy
Whom his good Lord receaud with woundrous joy*
Up was the King that night no rest he got
Such sad confused thoghts his brains did fill
Of great effairs and many mighty plot
Of Douglas he hade dreamd and fearing still
His Lords and Princes round about did not
His (...) him and Joyed in his goodwill
The knight kneld down and kissed his Princes hand
Who reasd him up and thus did him demand,
Where have you bein why have you stayed so long
What have you veiud hou faires fair Englands Prince
My royal Lord quod he at^ Berwike strong
I stayde til Englands army came from thence
I veiud and walked their squadrons all among
I save that monarchs greatt magnificence
Whoes Royal pomp and mighty pouer in watt
Surmonts all, European Princes far.
The number great of that so mighty host
Passes thrie hundredth thousand as I think
They cover all the land from cost to cost
They spoyl^ the contreis dry the floods they drink
Thither all Europe gatherd is almost
And if proud vaunts be deads they scorn to shrink
But in a word suck their confussioun is
Joue be our aid they shall the Garland mi^.
For of the greatest part of all their bands
Both horse and fute their disciplein is small
They k^ip no ranks their captains still with stands
They knou no drum no^ trumpets sound at all
Naiked un armd their wapins f^w commands
Only the English archers bold and tall
All valiant men so weill traind up in wars
Or pace should reign from heauin they'il tear the (...)
And their is twenty thousand horsemen more
That always on the King him self auait's
Earth can no brauer men then these restore
The rest of English knoes no war lik feats
Nor were they ever vsd to war before
But hope of Lordships rents and heigh estaits
Has brought them forth for all this Kingdom great
Is geu'ne and Scotts by thought distroyed quit.
And that your grace should not eschaip their hands
Two knights unto that mighty King has sworn
Dead or alive to bring you bound in bands
T'abid what Death he list impose inscorne
Of your new croune, which each of them demands
In meir disdain their trophes to adorn
Great Gloucester is one as does apeir,
Sir Henry Boem the other hight I heir.
They to your brother and my self applyis
Great torments too for out so bloody mind
This said forth from the Princes angry eics
Flea sparks of wrath flams from his face forth shind
Praise be to god quod he our enemies
He blinded has and that Kings hautie kind
He hardness still with Pharaos, so his shame
And fall I wish may glorefie his name.
Now strongly were the Scotts encamped their
Where Banoghes burn among shaddie banks does plai^
The Torwood neir within a valley fair
And for the battle their they neids would stay
Whill as this worthy General did prepair
To stop their foes least they should find away
Them to encompas round, which threatening storms
Their multitude might easily perform.
Wherefore eune their where their great host should stand
With ditches deep the plain he overcl^d
Wherein sharp Staiks were pit^d at his command
Then cuninglie again al covered
The enemy by this was hard at hand
Whoes squadrons lairge over all the land was spread
When their for-front was at the valeis end
Their last Battaillon did thrie le^gues extend.
Wherefore the King his matcheles Nepheu sent
With him five hundredth Martial men of war
Down to a way that throu the valey went
To sterling castle and would neids debarr
That hold of aid ye he would still prevent
His foes great slight or strength thus brought from fa^^
But this his forsight did the sootherne know
That would over shoot him self in his oune bow. My ^ Author says ane
ho^deri^h but all the cronickles agree on five ho^dr^th

Cliffords brave Lord a bold and warlik knight
They sent before the hoist a mill and more
With twice four hundredth horsemen swift and light
That choos'd from all the army martchd before
Ane other way to Sterling go they right
Bruce seis and sends Randolph this chek full sore
Thy, Garlands, chiefest flour is lost this day
If those have past the way, wheir thou do stay.
They craftily escheud where he did ly
Nor feared they him nor any erthly foe
But they another secret way would try
And by him were they past er he could kno
Yet he his uncles bitter tant does wey
Which stung full deip but he concealls his woe
His silence shoes he bears a generous mind
That of a Just reprooff best fruct will find,
For with his band he follous hastily
And ouerraichst them like a storm of wind
They scorn from fewer them themselfs to fly
And for to give them battle turns around
One knight ambitious of some victory
That for his valor had bein much renound
Before the rest him felf did fare advance
And challengd Randolph for to brek a lance
Glaidlie the erlle accepts and forth he goes
A strong stiff lance into his hand he bore
Swiftly their steids bore forth these noblle foes
Yet their desirs far swifter came before
As Bo^eas brok from erthin prison bloes
Eune from the Toples heights and craggie shore
Of Coucasus, the clifted rocks a sunder,
Such fury bring they, Earth-resounding under.
Sir Williame Hauecourt hight the English knight
Whoes speir too weak to harm so strong a foe
Beaks on his breist but his stif lance does light
Beneth his curas sklenting up ward so
As from his head of heuines it got a sight
His helm then lights upon the earth belo
Forth at his croune the spears point looked and thence.
Bears him to earth then breks with violence.
This deed prouocks the Scotts advancing light,
And does inflame the English all with Ire,
A shout the Scotts encurage to the fight,
Of English wrath still silence blous the fire,
Brave Randolph cairs not fears not all their might^
Nor for his men would stay nor once retire
But through the rout he breaks with wondrous for^
And strongly bears to earth both men and horse
Rudlie both Syds togidder rushith in
And blow on blow they give and wound on wound
Death Horror Blood from rank to rank does rinn
Yet nather side would shrink or lose their ground
Whill Scotts thus strive to keip what they had winn
And English to repair their lose new found
The valiant Bruce was suddenly assaild
With in his camp yet his awin worth preuaild.
And thus it was the wantgaird of his foe
Still marched two leagues before that mighty host
Straight touards him they cume or he culd kno
Who sheam'd within his trenchis to be forced
But in the plain him self did quiklie sho
Drew forth his bands in haist no cyme he loft
Nor could his foes refrean from fight at all
Still as they marched for battle still they call.
Yet did the rest of this great army stay
Two leagues from thence encamped one a plain
The King comandit so, so they obey
The day neir spent to fight war all in waine,
The wantgard knew not of this new delay
Nor with such strength d^rs leasie dout remain
One horse and foot they fifty thousand were
Led by that mighty erlle of Gloucester.
The Scotts brought forth by their brave worthy Prence
His cheirful looks did conquests hope restore
Encuraging each one to make defense
From band to band he rode the ranks before
The English knew him by his countenance
A Mass or Brazen staf in hand he bore
Whill thus he rode Sir Henry Beome espi'd-him
And to perform his promeis past he tri'd-him.
This was the one that should him tak or kill
And forth before the host he does advance
Toward the King he bent his course so full
He hops to make him yield beneth his lance
But quiklie does the King avoid this Ill
And with a more then manly countenance
Gave with his Brasen-staf so hudge a blo
As killed the knight and brak the mass in two.
In the English that has seen their campeon fall
Disdane and Wrath with Shame and feir contends
Disdane and Wrath for dread Revenge does call
But shame and fear bewrays their want of friends
That they were thus allone now knew they all
A spur to haist both shame and fear it lends
Thus in amazement long they stand in dout
If they should fly reteir, or fight it out
Yet heighe disdain did fearis faint strok rebatt
Now they would force the Scotts to fight or fly
Each to him self these words does ruminat
Out number far exceideth theirs we sie
But lo their leader strenght repins their at
Softly reteir and keip your ranks quod he
Our last commissioun is expir^ of right
We had in chairge to martche but not to fight.
Wheir with the Scots so fircelie does persew
As they war vrgd a forcd retreatt to take
And scattered in disordered flight with drew
When wislie Bruce, his galland troops drew bake
Ill to prevent, deceate for to eschew
He think, to tymlie fortune to awake
Haist wants wit, rashness, shall loose his winning.
And maks great lose attend a fair beginning,
Now were the Scots reteird and left their wrath
When all the Lords thus to their King does say
What may this natioun look for else but death
What may this Kingdom look for but decay
In you consists our being life and Breath
You gone we die you lost we are lost for ay
Yet you your self and ws in you expose
To Danger still and hazards all to lose.
To this was answer dah my Lords quod he
I broke the brauest staf that eure was made
I must confess: O wisdom worth to fly
On golden wings of fame for ever laid
This answer seimd no answer for to be
And yet theirin both wi^t and patience stayed
He clois'd their mouths ere half their speech was do^n
For what he did vnkilld, he could not shune,
Yea he the danger braulie did awoid
And Just praise merits not unjust reproof
He deimd no lose, if he hade keipt his rod
But all this time Randolph without releif^
Inuirond with his mighty foes abod
Which to the worthy Douglas bre^d such grief
That when the King refuisd him leave to aid him
To braek forth throu the camp in raige it made him.
But as he neirer to the Battle drew
He saw the English bands begin to reill
O then quod he it were noe freindschip true
To reaue the glory thou deserus so weill
Then stood he with his band a fare to view
The will of Mars and works of cutting steil
Mars blisd him often that wap^ns first invented
But Pity cursd and wishd him often tormented.
At last he seis them wholl he put to flight
And bak unto their camp they haist with speed
The Scots for to persew them seimd not light
So werrie they so fant so much they bleid
Many of them were wounded in the fight
Tho none but one was killed and for that deid
Thrie hundredth foes lay dead into the place
Or eu'r their fellous would the flight embrace.
Lo only heir true valor might be seine
Blew Theetis boundles arms did noght contein
More worth in war more strength more curage kein
Then in thoes gallant English did remain
No falt in them: no conquerours to have bein
One earth to strive with fortune is but vain
What Mars requeris, was theiris without Intutione
Only over matched in constant resolusione.
These loses through the English camp do fly
Whill Terror fear and Conscience leads the way
Confusioun follous after speedily
Of these when Curage hears he maks no stay
Forth from the camp he stelleth secretly
And to the Scotts he came er braek of day
But Pride and h^ighe Disdane behind abaid
That all the world could to distructioun leid.
Yet heir and their in twoes and threis they go
Their leaders conscience la^rge accusing thus
He would an ancient natioun ouerthro
A fry croune reaue. O this is dangerus
Joue fights for them Gods thundering wrath we kno
What heart so bold but heaune maks timerus
If heir we fall as we must surly fall
Heigh justice dealls with us with them and all.
Vthers that on Disdain and Pride still fed
Thus say, tush Scotts what ar these Scotts to us
Meire dunces gross by simple outlaus led
Wild savage naked poor and barbarous
Their Lord a montain climber ^aslie cled
More like a cloune then King victorius
A hundredth thousand does adorn our host
In whoes stern face he darrs not look almost.
No sooner we shall in the feilds appeir
When they in Caves and Dens them selfs shall hide
Against flights of Egills darres poor Crous compeir
Or silly sheip the dreadful Lions bide
Dare a poor band of cuntrie swans draw neir
Unto a world of martial soldeors tried
In bloody fights, no no if we but sight them
Our very drums and trumpets shall affright them.
Thus brage the English whill two courteous knights
Whois chaist ears still abhord vane glorious bosts
Replied, these Scotts whom your cleir day benights
A handful ay compaird with your great hosts
Poor sauge simple whom your neame afrights
These many hundredth yeirs has keipt these costs
And throu the wordle have wone a famous name
Their trophes darkning often your gloreis beam.
And sure these Crous do merit double praise
That beat the Princely Egills from their nest
These scheip above all beasts them selfs does raise
That tear the Lions which disturb their rest
If a poor band of fermors nou adais
Of conquests wrong, great Kings has dispossessed
Eune in dispight of such great strenght so neir
They merit most whoes worth does most appeir,
As for the Bruce whom you so much disdain
And rather termis a ruffian then a roy
We heir that he but with a simple train
Eune Englands mighty armeis does distroy
And tho the Scotts them selfs be him again
He conquers still a Greek in midst of Troy
Ah if he be so worthles as you make him
Why trouble you all Europe thus to tak him.
In Brabant borne these knights were both that make
Their part so good whom yet they never knew
Such indignatioun heighe the English tak
Both Sids leap forth to arms and wapins drew
But soon commanders wise their fury brak
And both were brought to that great Monarchs view
Who when he hard what they had boldly said
This hauie punishment vpone them laid.
We chairge you quiklie from our camp quod he
And presently unto the Scotts repare
Their hinder what you can our victory
Both with your counsel valor strenth and ^are
And who soever too morrou lets us sie
Their Sotish heads cut from their trunks I swea^
Against eurie head a hundredth punds to set
And think the dead good service to our state.
Then wheir the Scotts encamped were they go
A guard of horsemen did them their conuoy
When great and worthy Bruce their cause did kn^
He did receive them with exceiding Joy
And when the battle endit was did sho
Such bounty high as ritche without annoy
To Antuerp they returned and bulded their
In honor of the Scoots a Mansion fair. The, Scotts hou^ boolded in hand war^,
wherein Bruce* Portrat and the Scotts Arms was set.

Each Army now for battle stern prouids
Each on their Lord and maker loudlie call
Long time the Scotts in zealous prayer abids
Before the Lord in humble wise they fall
That Faith that Truth that Right and Justice gid^
In which they pray him to protect them all
Whill heauins gold spangled Cannobe was spread
And silent Morpheus brought them to their bed.
The Argument.
Both Armeis Join in long and doubtful fight
And threttie thousand in the ditches die
King Edwards deids encurage eurie knight
And Scotts for to prevent their victory
Is for^d to Join with them in Singill fight
When the Argentine great Bruce has ki^d they fly
Their King abids and would the flight restore
But seis new aid and fless his foes before.
Caput. 17.
WHen bright Hiperion^s goldine carr arose
Both arms soon were cled in glistring arms
Whoes golden splendour against the Sune forth shoes
Earthes lightning hot the Aers cold region warmes
First each brave Scot to divine service goes
No trumpets blast was heard nor drumes allarmes
The sacrament they take to heaune vpfleis
Each humbled hearts best pleasing sacrafice.
The English squadrons marchd unto the plains
And all the land with arms does ouerflo
A just half moon their battles form contains
Sharp to each point brod to the mids they gro
In battles five their mighty Host remains
Two on the right and on the left hand two
Of their great King that in his battle large
A hunderth thousand horsemen led to charge*
Great Arrandell nixt him on his right hand
The chairge ou^r fifty thousand Archers bore
Those English were all come from English-land
No brauer warriors could the earth restore
Nixt unto him did valiant Hairtfoord stand
On horse and futt that led as many more
From Scotland, England, France, and Ireland brought
With Sheilds, with Lances, Piks, and Swords, they foght
Nixt on the left hand valiant Oxfoord stood
That fifty thousand footmen brought to fight
All these did seim approved Soldiers good
With dairts sword Piks and other Ingins wight
And Glochester nixt him that thrists for blood
Had in his battle many warlick knight
Like to the other wing his wing was pleac'd
With arms and curage both alik ar greac'd
In the great battle with the King abod
Henolts great Earl and many Princes mo
On his right hand that warlick campioun rode
Whoes fame so much our all the world did go
Of Argentine sir Giles that gaind abrod
So many conquests our the pagane foe
Great Pembrok^ Earl on his left band did stay
His saiftie only in their valors lay. Sir Giles of argen^ine and Sir Odomer
de vallange rode on eather hand of the King.

And then great Bruce came to the plane at last
And this new moon thus for to perse essayis
First brod behind his battles form was cast
Then stretched forth to a point Pirameid wayis
Seuin thousand warriors in the vantgard past
With the feirce knight in war more bold then wvis^
Whom Scotlands Stewart seconds in command
His feirce and fiery nature to withstand.
Many brave knights unto this battle drew
Bold warlick* ferce and men of worthy fame
And then the second battle did ensew
Morais stout Earl them led whoes famous name
Shall never die and many we^lick crew
With him* whoes hearts did fleit in valors stream
Their number like the first and these did be are
Spears Piks and Suords and all Ingins of war Randolph.

The conquering knight the third Batallione brought
Seauin thousand also did this host contain
Sco^lands great Constabill unto him soght
Brave Hay and these that did with him remain
The Boid and other Lords still worthy thought
But last of all did march unto the plain
The greatest battle which the King commands the Valient Douglas

Wheir fourtein thousand armed warreors stands the Erl of erol*

Many of all the noble men ware their
And all these hosts on fut did march to fight
To eurie battle did the King repair
Whoes quik cleir eyes send forth a cheirfull light
His v^sard up he mildly does declair
The price of conquest punishment of flight
And with a countenance which would have, made
Even cowardis hardy thus into them said.
My friends quod he behold this glorious day
Wheirin the heauins to croune ou^e Ioys has sworn
Let none of you their multituds effray
Against God and querrells Just force seims forlorn
In Scotland fifty thousand yet does stay
Meit for the war whom we have all forborne
And you we chuisd whoes hearts could never fail-yow
Nor could base fear of death, at all assaill you. The Bruce his oratione.
Multitood maks novie^torie.

The worst of you his Gentreis will declair
And of his reputatioun still will bost;
A Gentleman may with a Lord compair
But what is he if honor once be lost
And heir on honor waits riches fair
These two that all the world so much do cost
Which if you wish, do now but cair for fame
He never deis that winns a famous name. The Scots were all chofin Gentilmen no
commons amongst theme.

What is that army which you now behold
But eune a new raisd Babell of confusioun
The Soldeors mistak their captans bold
To colonels reull the captans make intrusioun
Thus eurie one by other is controld
And Iarring foundeth forth a ghostly vifioun
All kind of beasts would in one heard confound
Their reullers wit with their confused sound.
Besides they came our natioun to distroy
And from the earth to root and raise our name
Look not by flight your life for to enjoy
But rather thousand torments most extreme
Your Maids and Wyfs to death they shall convoy
When in your sight they raueishd ar with shame
Ye all must die and they enjoy as theirs
What you have buld or planted for your heyrs*
Then if you would prevent their cruelty
And endless praise and endless wealth obtain
Let eurie one of you make one to die
So one triumphand conquest shall we gain
As for ten thousand which among you be
We know such valor does in them remain
Each shall kill two: and who of you be is lost
We swear his Airs their wairds shall nothing cost.
Yea what I seik you may perform at will
For what at they a Chaos heap confuisde
Na^ked or slightlie armd and wanting skill
To till the ground and keip their flocks more vsd
How can their King prevent their following Ill
When fear and Ignorance has teull abusde
In danger who wants skill has curage lost
One coward disconforts a mighty host.
The English King (his army in array)
Thus by him self and by his Trinshmen spak
If I were not so weill assuirde too day
Of victory and of these Dastards wrak,
An other form of speech I would essay,
But Bruce that Fox now may not turn his bak*
God does him thus wit hin this field enclose
That we may give what death we list impose. King edward his ^ratione.

His brether by our Princely Syir was taine
And Justly punishd were as they deserud
King Robert and Eduard his brother.
And only but these two does yet remain
By ws it rests they should alike be served
These Scotts which yet their small host does contain
Ar noght but Robbers poor and hunger sterud
These are not they that has so often before
Fors'd our bold English from the northern shore. King Robert head 2. brether^
taken preso^ers who ware both slain.

In this long war all these ar spent and lost,
Noght but the dregs remains run is the wine
Distroy them kill them scatter all their host,
We sie them else to fearful flight incline,
This kingdom, fair and lairge from cost to cost
Tak you for eu're: Noght but the name is mine
Dare one poor slave against thousand Captans fight*
No no our shad shall put them all to flight.
Whill thus he spoke the Scots on kneis down fall
And prayed to Christ, whill as they did espy
His Croce reard up on hight before them all
By him that ^^uld Sanct Androes Priorie
S^e quod the King how they for mercy call
Wheir at the English army gius a cry
But thus that Ancient Grave and warlik knight
Did answer him Sir Omphrauell that hight*
Your majesty indeid has spokin true
They call for mercy to the Lord of grace
But at your grace they do no pardon sew
Nor will they fly this mighty host a space
The more their wounds the more their strength renew
To sie their blood their valor does incrces
But if your majesty would overthrow them
Use this devise for surly best I know them,
Before them let your army seim to fly
And you shall sie them brak their Battles strong
None with his Captane will commanded be
Thus quyte disordred shall they be er long
Tush quod the King, I scorn they flight should sie
When both our force and valor is too strong
Let these that fear them use such craft or fly them
We mind if they darr fight at all, to sie them.
Thus martching on the English army goes,
The Scots enflamd with fury hate and Ire
Would give the Chairge, but their wise Lord that knoes
Their haist does Curb and brydill their Desire,
Until the pits prepaired for his foes*
They could not shune: and then he bloes the fire
Of their feirce Curage, when his will was done:
And both the armeis rush together sone.
It was a wondrous strange and dreadful sight,
To sie these squadrons meit upon the plain,
How eurie soldior Captane Lord and knight,
Straue endless praise and glory to obtain,
The Scotts schrill trumpets thunders forth the fight,
Their foes send forth heaune deafning sound again,
Both armeis seimd two woods their leaus that cast
When Winter forth his bitter breath does blast.
Both sides approach their blooddie rage to glutt
And terrible the coward seems to be
Hot fury flammes within and burns without
Blood heates their heart fire from their breasts do fly
True Curage and Desire had banishd Doubt
Their hand and foot strove with their thought and Eye
In gesture thus they were alreddie joined
By thought their triumphs all were quikly ^oynd.
Earth shrinkes and aer was darkened with the dust
Tumult ascendes whill thunder shaekes the ground
Both armeis rudely meet and bravely just
Brave yet in show till terror beauty dround
Swords sheeldes and helmes glistred like heaune almost
Horror it self seemd first with pleasure cround
Blood had not guard their arms, caskes keep their head
No members cut, nor murd^ed heaps lay dead.
But as in Autums first and fairest Prime
The angry wrath of heauins reuengefull King
For hell bred sins, forth of stern Boreas clime
Scharp shours of hail with blustering winds does bring
So heir the shours of arrous lairger time
Darkins heauins face whill throw the air they sing
A heaune new framd of iron clouds they view
Whoes pearsing beams the vital blood forth drew
There storms pourd down who^s haell were yrone stinges
And funde no earth but couerd horse and men
And each a wakning wound or death forth bringes
Heaune sends down suddane harm no^ know they when
Chance seemis true fate hape killith hopes disignes.
But aim the archer spends no shaft in vane
The brauest kills triumphing our his foe
But he is killed of whom he does not kno.
Scotts worthy King that seis the harmefull wrong
Done to his men by English archers kene
Five hundredth horsemen sends fresh hardy strong
Led by the ever famous K^i^h I wene
Who goes about and at their baks ere long
With stiff strong lances all in reast were seen
Through all their ranks they brak with furious might
And beats them to the earth with sad affright. This was the Lord Mershall and
^eght Robert Keith.

Scotlands great Merschall heir such Valor show
As maks h^s glory leiue in endless fame
For more then seauintie tims he did renew
Unequal fight with Danger most extreme
Great Arandell in fight he did subdew
And by his only valors lightining beam
Foyld fifty thousand warlik men of pride
Whill scars five hundredth did with him abide.
Thus whill the fronts of both the armeis fight
The great Battalion of the English Host
Fourth over the covered ditchis mairchith right,
Wheit more then thrertie thousand horse almost,
With groaning Earth does shak, and turns to flight,
But such dreid Thunders earths wid bowels tossed
As tumbling in her breast, does vaune a way
To suellow them in darkness hid from day
Some break their necks legs arms their horse below
Some smoird some crushd to Death with vthers weight
Some horse and men with shairp st^oks persid throw
The liueles truncks semis carved stone in sight
This fearful accident does ouerflow
Their fellous hearts with Horror Fear and Flight
They stand: not mairtch amazd they look at lairge
Till their bold foes gave them a furious chairge.
Thronging throu tanks and each wheir strous their way
With Herror Terror Slaughter blood and Fear
In harvest so reapers reap without delay
A field of Wheite of Oats of Rye or Bear
And raizeth all the pleane nor maks no stay
Till want of Corn make them their task forbe^^^
And Ceres-locks cut down in heaps dothly
Such heaps the Scotts still kills and passes by.
Their angry King that led them this does view
And bravely from his troops does forth advance
And wheir his steid he turned or sword he drew
The killed fell down, hurt fled his countenance
From his fair eyes dread Majesty forth flew
Many fell down struk with the lightning glance
But better he whom he had killed before
For these with teith and feit his curto tore
And their were killed by his Princely hand
Seuin valiant knights whoes names has time forgo^
From rank to rank he martchd from band to band
And whom he meits death sure must be his lot
Stratherus old Earl their deid beneth his brand
Whoes sone with sorrow prickd with fury hot
Did ferslie him assaill but all in vain
Death made him soon forget his fathers pain The Erll of Stratherne and his
sone both killed by the King of England.

Now I almost forgot the wondrous deids
O^ these bold campions set on ather hand
Of this great King who after him forth speids
When first he left his battle guarde and stand
And still on death on blood and murder feids
Marching from troup to troup from band to band
Yea these thrie campions fearles bold and strong
Cut forth thrie bloody lains their foes among. These two (...) Sir (...) of
argentine and sir adomer de vallange.

So does thrie mighty Cannons shot at once
A front an army standing all in gro
The heaune with lightning earth with thunder grons
Each sirie bullet cuts the ranks in two
Heir lyis the head and their the helmet shons
A furlong thence the Body fells a foe
Scheilds Arms and Legs heir monts and their does mank
And make wid windoes deip in eurie rank.
And now the great Battallion which they led
Wheir yet remand thrice twenty thousand horse
By their example all encuraged
Rushd foreward on their foes with wondrous forse
And in a moment all the plain vas cled
With corpse whereon they tred without remorse
Proud fortun seimd to froune vpone the Scot
And victory to croune the English lo^.
Now seimd the Scotts too waik against their foe
Squadrons of barded horse still beats them down
And these thrie campiouns that before them go
Thrie Wonder-wirkers conquering a croun
Great Bruce espyis this Dangerwrak and woe
With noble wrath Ielous of their renoune
Would with the strongest cop by fatal chance
And to the Argentine does forth advance.
O who had seen that fight so bold and strong
Their was the Scoo^^ that taugh^ the art of war
These Masters were and had b^ine Loureat Long
Nor Mars nor Pallas could the sight forbear
Wondering on earth the mortals all among
To find such two as eune them selfs woldfear
And think if these two only took in hand
To conquer earth none could their force gainstand. A gallant fight betuex the
Bruce and the argentine.

These matchles Lords those warriors bold did weild
Two heavy masts rather then lances strong
Two horse of Spain forth bear them trough the field
With force alike they meit amid the throng
O sacred Muse some golden phraises eild
T'enritch my verse and guild my lais along
Make of those lines a heaune reard throne renound
Where let this famous fight for aie be cround.
The fureous stroke made all the earth to quaik
And Woods and montains echod bak the sound
Yet could it not these valiant champions shak
Nor bear them from their seat nor force a wound
In fleinders fly their spears their horses brak
Their neks, and both the riders lay on ground
Yet up they they fly with swords they soon addres
By death wars dreadful sound for to suppres.
Both sword^^ weill couched each at his wa^d does ly
Their eyes their hands their feit they wisely guide
Then ceasles strokes thrustes foines and bloues they try
They wardetrauerse reteir marchd leap a side
Both gives and both receaues both falsefie
Both shunes and both lyife garding wards provide
Both oppin stand for death like despirat lovers
Which craft in the one the others art discouers.
The Prince on futt was ready suift and light
And could with stand the Argentins bold suit
Who was on horse more skillful in the fight
But he more stong mote quik to execute
Sir Gilles hade more art and cunning slight
The King more painful kein and resolute
More fearce he was* his foe more could and sly
And yet in art both seemd a like to be.
The Prince vpone the Argentine would enter
Shuning his doun-right blow his strength to teame
Then at his heart the Argentine does ventre
Which whill the Prince strikes by he does reclame
And paintes his breast too cuning was the painter
For show of blood floues forth a bloody stream
Which so inflammed the King with curage fire
Art now reteird shame bringes revenge and ire,
This knew the knight but would not seem to know
Whill as great Bruce his breast to danger laid
Whereat the Argentine soon reached a blow
But left his syid quite naeked to invade
The worth King first shunes his furious throw
And then a wound both large and deip he made
This his revenge the proverb old belied
Heir cunning Art and furious Raige agreid.
Whill thus they strive and double wound on wound
Bold Edward matched with Pembrocks Earl in fight
Of whom fames sweit sh^ill trumpet shall resound
From Jude to O^kades their praise their might
Deserving weill with Glory to be cround
And in all age to shine with glorious light
Their woundrous strength their Curage each did she
But nather side advantage yet does kno.
Now Englands King not one darres match at all
Whom blood and death attends throu all the field
But worthy Hay his curage did appaill
No danger maks him shrink or fear or yield
Alcides club with more strength did not fall
Vpone that mighty Tirrant Brouseirs shield
Then on the helmett of this dreadful King
The Earl his feirce and furious bloes does bring Hay Erll of (...) constabill
of Scotland.

Eune their wheir goold and perll and pratious stone
Upon the Prince his curious helm was wroght
He lightis and cleft the cask which brightlie shone
And to his horses crest his head down brought
For pain the enraged King sendes forth a groan
Trembling for (...) whill dreid revenge he soght
And on his helm he gius a blo so rood
That from his noise and mouth Isht crimsone blood.
But to repay him when the warr-lik knight
Hade lift his sword gone was the Prince in rage
Still when his fury ledd him through the fight
No general ought a combat for to waige
But all this while in equal ballence right
Both armeis stand conquest departes the staige
But in the left winge with the Douglas bold
Great Gloucester a bloody fight did hold.
This was the man that swear to Englands King
To bring the Bruce capteiw in chains and cords
The Douglas fand him aiming at the thing
A band of knights with him thairto accords
But forth to combat Douglas did him bring
In spite of all these Sold'ors knights and Lords
A squadron strong at his command had foght
With them and both almost were brought to noght*
These campions strong thus fought a Battle bold
Troy never vieud the like in all her wrack
Their Skill their Strength their valor to unfold
My slender M^ise darrs noght in hand to tak
But sure I know the worthy Douglas would
Noght leave the fight till his proud foe he make
To yield his nek beneth his conquring bled
And for his fault his guilty blood he shed.
This done he marches throw the host at last
Working new wonders still wheir ever he goes
Close ranks he breaks and oppins as he past
Before his face still fleis his fearful foes
He seis brave Randolph haisting conquest fast
And crafty Omphrauell beat by his bloes
Steward the great with Hartefurd striving stands
Who first should get a kiss of conquests hands.
Long foght the knights but neither side would yield
Equal their hope and equal was their fear
Spears helms and swords were stroud through all the field
Heads arms and legs by headles bodeis were
Some dieing look to heauin leans on their shield
In deaths pane some blood from their wounds forth tear
These ranks to march reteir or chairge that minds
Trods on the bodeis of their slauchtred friends,
Their horses killed lay with their masters dead
And he to death that did his foe persew
Now in his bosom laid his heavy head
The conqueror by him he overthrew
Is pressed to death and finds no remeid
Over all confusione tumult and terror flow
Their nather silence was nor noise perfect
But sounds of Death pain pity rage dispight,
The Glorious arms that lait did glistring show
Now blood and dust and myi^ had dinid their beams
Fear Herror Terror on swch hight does grow
That sullen pride sunck down no honor clames
Her glory stroud upon the earth below
Over all her beauty blood floues forth in streams
Now Grief and Sorrow beats Delight fra thence
And all does look with woeful countenence.
Earths rairest King that all this while had fought
With his fierce foe and geuin him many a wound
Yet doubts who thence with conquest will be brought
Such valor great was in that knight renound
At last to kill or die him self he thought
And with a strength far more then erst he found
He thrustis again and from his side forth tore
A deadly stream, a flood of blood and Gore.
Ah matchles Prince when thou hes knoune the man
Whoes days by the must now be brought to end
Thou shall be like to burst for sorrow then
No confort shall thy conquest to the lend
He was thy srend thy deir companioun when
In the English court thy youth thou hapt to spend
No Favor he at all to the did s^o
But Virtuous minds lous Virtue in their foe.
The Argentiue that seis this bloody sight
Bathd in his louk-warme blood him self does stay
Ire in his fanting hairt prolongs his might
Feeble his force for to renew the sray
Fury Disdane and Raige mantaind the fight
For strength was gone and Curage was away
Life leaves his toure and in the breach remains,
That death should gain so brave a hold disdaines.
Vnitting his spent pours a blow he lendes
The Prince, that wounds his head and cuttes his cask
With whoes la^t force and weight down he discendes
Death winnes the breach, begins his endless task
Forth from his lips life's aged Sire he sendes
Then on his fa^e he spreds his doolfull mask
(...) his soulle fle^s throw the cloudie Air
Whoes great name some time all the Ei^t did fear.
In thrie set Battles thrice he did with stand
The Sarasins and still with conquest cround
And twice beneath his all victorious hand
With chains of death their chiefest Lords he bund
But now when endless sleip did him command
No longer durst proud Fortun their be fund
Wheir English fight but she and victory
Rankt with the Scotts, upon there enemeis fly.
The English Irckt and wiered then disrank
All fly yea (...) the boldest yields to flight
Their Colors throune away with thankles thank
Threats Cries and Plaints redoubles their Affright
Their King still threats but still away they shrank
For yet with him vnbrokin byds the fight
Whole tuentie thousand horse with whom he wol^
Their Fight, or Die or, Conquer uncontrolled.
But as the seas when tempests past and gone
That ^old her tombling waus unto the shoa^s
Of lait past storms retanes some shoues anon
And heir and their sum swelling Billow roars
So thought faint fear triumph' do're these allone
Some sponks of their spent Valor hope restors^
Wheiron sustaind their task they new beginn
But wound on wound and death on death does rin^*
The Carriens of the Scottish camp arose
And see their Masters still mantane the ^ray
Both Lak^ys Carters Women Sla^^es and those
That carage keept, came in their best array
And disperatlie would assaill their soes
So al should winn oral should lose the day
Long napkins white unto their staves they bind
These served for Ensigns wauing in the wind,
Whill thus the English fighting loath to fly
Eune suddandlie appears into their sight
An army fresh that seimd in arms to be
With th'eir their silver Ensigns wauing bright
They haste their pace and with a shout they sie
That these curagiouslie intend to fight
Disconfeit quite they now resist no more
But flees that would have fled long time before.
The Scotts persew them in a dispirat sort
Some through the plains some to the montans fly
Wheir eu'r their headles fear does them transport
A whirll wind seims to bear them haistelie
Thousands the tumbling forth of life cuts short
And thousands mo in flight their foes our hy
Base deaths they se^k but fleis the death which lend
In Glorious fight a fare more Glorious end.
FINIS.

