THE HAPPINESS OF THE SAINTS in Glory, OR, A Treatise of Heaven, On ROMANS 8.
18. For I reckon, that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be
compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us.

By THO. GOODWIN. B. D.

LONDON, Printed by E. Griffin for Robert Dunscomb, in Lillipot-lane. 1638.

The scope of the Treatise
IS to open and describe Heaven, and the glory of the Saints therein. page 2 1.
Comparatively, in four respects. 1. By comparing it with all the good things
which this World affords; as pleasures, honors, riches, beauty. p. 4 2. By
comparing it with all the aflictions which we suffer in this life. p. 7. 3. By
comparing it to that joy of the Holy Ghost, which Gods children are capeable of
in this World. p. 8 4. By comparing it with those joys and that glory which
the Saints now in Heaven enjoy, before the day of Judgment. p. 15
2. Simply as it is in it self; and that, first by the causes of it. 1. The
efficient cause, the great God of Heaven and Earth. p. 19 2. The material
cause, Christ Jesus the Lord of glory. p. 25 3. The exemplary cause, the glory
of the Lord Jesus. p. 33 The Object of this glory is God himself. p. 37 The
Subject of this glory, or the vessel which shall receive it, is the soul of
man. p. 53 4. The final cause, in which, First, the persons for whom God has
prepared this glory, viz. his Saints. p. 66 Secondly, the end, for which, to
manifest his own glory. p. 70 Secondly, by the properties of it, 1. It is an
inheritance, and that of every believer p. 75 2. An eternal inheritance. p. 78
3. An inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled. p. 83



Imprimatur.

Johan. Oliver. Reverend. in Chapter patri Dom. Arch. Cant. Cap. Dom.
December. 11. 1637.
THE HAPPINESS Of the SAINTS in Glory.
ROMANS 8. 18. For I reckon that the sufferings this present time are not worthy
to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed in us.
MY scope is to raise up your hearts to heaven, and to consider that great
glory which God has prepared for them that love him, to open and describe
heaven, whereof there are many uses both to those that are in the state of
nature, and those that are in the state of grace. There is nothing more
powerful with the wicked for to bring them to Christ, nothing more
proportionable to a principle of self-love: and likewise to the godly, that
they may willingly and with cheerfulness pass through the afflictions of
this life, that they may pass through the evil world with their hearts raised
up to heaven. The Apostle from the 17. verse to the end of this chapter sends
it in, beating this upon the hearts of Gods people in steeling their hearts and
raising them up against tribulations, and among the rest this is one
encouragement, to consider the joy which shall not only be revealed to us but
in us, which we shall be made partakers of. Brethren* the consideration of
Heaven which is so little thought on by us Christians, this I would lay open to
you: the excellency of which glory, that we may more clearly behold, man may
look upon many things, but I will only name two:

First comparatively, and this the Text leads us unto, For I reckon not the
sufferings, etc. Secondly, simply as it is in it self.

Revel 22. Out of the bowels of this earth are raised gold, silver, pearls,
and precious stones, which serve but for the materials of the walls of this City
and for paveing the streets of it, The most glorious things this World has,
serve I say, for the gates of the Temple. If the outside be so glorious,
consider how glorious must the inside be, how beautiful must it be within.
why, no creature this world has is worthy so much as to shadow it, all the
creatures be swallowed up with this glory, even as a drop is swallowed up with
the Ocean: Take Solomon in all his royalty, the most magnificent, rich, and
glorious Prince the World ever had, he lived indeed at the best rate, he had
the very quintessence of them all, in so much that a Queen her self was amazed
to see his great glory, yet let me tell you, this Solomon which is now in
heaven, 10 thousand times exceeds all the glory and pomp he had on earth, I
say the glory he has now exceeds it infinitely: I say, the glory he has now
in heaven excels that glory he had on earth, being on his Throne in all his
royalty, even as much as he did then excel himself when he was in his
mothers womb; we see then the good things of this life are not worth talking
of, they come far short, they are not worthy to be compared together.

we see that the afflictions of this present time are not worthy to be
compared to the glory which shall be revealed in us.

In the third place, to 3. Com.
make a further demonstration of this to you: There is a joy which Gods people
are capeable of in this life; the joy of the holy Ghost, which is unspeakeable
and glorious, one drop of which transcends infinitely all the joy the creatures
can afford us: my brethren have you ever heard of this joy? have you ever
tasted of it? has God ever raised your hearts to see it and his glory, if you
have but tasted, as the Apostle says, how good the Lord is, you shall say with
David, Psalm 4. Lord lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon me. Thou
have put gladness into my heart more than in the time when Corn and Wine and
Oil increased. This is the joy which comes fresh from the fountain: My
brethren mark well what I say, the Devil himself when he transformes
himself into an Angel of light affords more comfort to the heart of an
hypocrite than the World can do: why then how much more does the joy of the
holy Ghost which comes from a true fountains, if it be shed abroad in your
hearts: And hence it was, that the Martyrs suffered so willingly, and ran
through so many persecutions, and yet the glory which is in Heaven, if it be
compared to this, infinitely transcends it. The joy which shall be revealed
swallows up all these joys which we have here, even as the sea swallows up
mole-hils, it is nothing in comparison of Heaven, it is but as a drop to the
Ocean, and yet one drop of this joy of the Holy Ghost is more excellent than
Oceans of worldly comforts. All the joys of this world is but as a drop to the
Ocean, for infinite drops will make a Sea, but infinite worlds will not make
heaven, but indeed infinite drops of this joy will make heaven, because, it is
of the same nature; yet this, I say, is not comparable to the joys in heaven,
why? its but the earnest penny of our inheritance, 2 Cor. 5. 5. Now he that
has wrought us for the self same thing is God, who has given unto us the
earnest of the Spirit. GOD does fashon and prepare his people here at the
revenewes of their joys, which shall come in hereafter, all that the Holy
Ghost makes us partakers of in this life is but as a six pence in respect of
the whole payment of glory, we shall have in Heaven, Phil. 1. 14. Which is the
earnest of our inheritance until the redemption of our purchased possession
unto the praise of his glory. This my brethren is but as a penny to the dowry
of the Queen of Heaven, which the Saints the Bride of Heaven are to enjoy. The
Scriptures calls it no more but the sealing of the holy Ghost, the earnest of
our inheritance. Indeed, it is of the same nature with the great sum of which
it is an earnest; for you know an earnest differs from a pledge in this, a
pledge is of another kind, but the earnest of the same kind with the payment.
And so the joy of the holy Ghost is of the same kind with that which is laid
up for us, but it is but an earnest, and there is difference in the manner of
producing it, whatsoever we have here as our earnest is but from the light of
faith, we cannot see Christ from whom we have it, we only believe on him as he
is absent; we never saw him, and yet this works a joy unspeakeable and
glorious* 1 Pet 8. Whilst we apprehend him by faith, it is but as absent from
him: Therefore we are always confident, 2 Cor. 5. 6 knowing that whilst we
are at home in the body, we are absent from the Lord, and if we have such joy
in his absence, and seeing but a small glimpse, or cranny of light coming to
us by faith; if this I say, be so glorious, what will it then be, when to see
him as he is, to see him top to toe, to be in the presence of him, in which is
fullness of joy? By faith we see him but not all, and this causes joy
unspeakeable and glorious, what then to see him in perfection, and have his
presence the fullness of it, whose presence in the least degree of it goes
far beyond all the sight of him, we have in the highest degree of faith, yea
in all the degrees of faith, and yet the least degree of faith excells all the
joy the World can give, and therefore do but think with your selves what
Heaven is.

Compare it with those 4. Com.
joys, and that glory the Saints that are in Heaven enjoy, which infinitely
transcends both the good things of this world, and the joy of the Holy Ghost,
and yet there is a glory to be revealed after the day of Judgment that will
transcend the joy of the Saints, now mark the comparison. The least drop of joy
here that comes from the holy Ghost transcends the joy of the world, the joy
the Saints in Heaven now have as much transcends this joy of the holy Ghost as
it does that of the world, yet after the day of Judgment, there is a fuller
treasure of joy, to be broken up. And therefore let this raise up your hearts
to conceive of the exceeding weight of glory laid up for the elect, the Saints
who are now in Heaven at the Well head of comforts, who bathe themselves in
these Rivers of pleasures, why they have and are capeable of more joy than we
can conceive of, one Saint in heaven my Brethren has more glory and joy in his
heart, than all the joy that is on earth, and yet at the latter day, their
glory will as far transcend that they have now even as it does ours upon
earth, I may say of their condition as the Apostle does, Heb. 11. 40. God
having provided some better things for us, that they without us should not be
made perfect, while the Saints are without their fellows they are not come to
the highest degree of perfection, Heb. 12. 23. To the general assembly and
Church of the first borne which are written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of
all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, There is a perfection to be
given them which they yet have not when all their fellow Saints, all their
fellow brethren, when the whole number of the faithful are together then shall
a new treasure of glory be broken up, 2 These. 1. 10. Who shall come (says the
text) to be glorified in his Saints and to be admired of all those that
believe, we do usually admire a thing when our expectation is exceeded, now
the Angels and the souls of the glorified Saints in Heaven, they have seen
and enjoyed many glorious things already, and they look for far more
glorious things, but yet he will bring forth a glory at that day beyond their
expectations; he will not only be admired by wicked men, but all that believe
shall admire this, he will then put them to a new amazement: Let now the
consideration of this glory raise up your hearts to seek for it, that so such
an unvaluable and great price may not pass out of your hands, even the
exceeding great riches of glory laid up for us. Again, stand aghast at the love
of God, that has prepared such glory for you: thus much comparatively. Now
secondly, let us consider it simply as it is in it self, and because things
are best known by their causes we will begin with them.

And first* of all the efficient 1. Cause.
cause of this great glory, and that is the great God of Heaven and Earth,
whose Greatness and Glory we cannot comprehend, but only by his works, he is
the efficient cause of Heaven, and all its glory, he built this great City, and
all his works shall be like himself: If King Ahashuerus make a feast, he
will make it like a King, much more the King of Kings will provide for his
servants whom he feasts, he made a World, and how glorious is it, but if he
make a Heaven, think with your selves what a Heaven it will be: The Scriptures
( Heb. 11.) commend this to us, comparing the 10 and 16 verses together, For
he looked* says he, for a City (speaking of Abraham) which has foundations,
whose builder and founder is God; and then verse 16. God is not ashamed to be
called their God for he has built for them a City, mark the reason; In the
first place it is said to be a City whose builder and founder is God, God is
the Artist of it, he showed his art in it: in this building of heaven, God
showed himself an Artificer: indeed God has made other great works, as the
World; but he has showed no art upon this in comparison of Heaven: The heavens
which we see, are but the seeling of this Heaven which God has prepared for
his Saints, and yet they are very glorious, but yet he has bestowed no cost in
comparison, he has showed no art on it in respect of Heaven; he has bestowed
all his cost on this, in making heaven he showed himself an Artificer. And
would you know the reason of it? it is because Heaven is his standing house,
Kings you know use to enrich their standing houses, they bestow more cost upon
them than others: This World my brethren, is not a house that has foundation,
but it was builded by God as a stage upon which when men have acted their
parts, it is to be thrown down; it is set up for a few thousand years which
are nothing to him, and then he means to pull it down, he will then burn
it; but Heaven is Gods standing house, his Palace, and therefore consider what
great cost God has bestowed on it. Again, it is said to be a City prepared,
Matthew 25. 24. Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared
for you from the beginning of the World: He speaks as if GOD had been a
great while in making Heaven; GOD has been long in contriving it, nay
further, says Christ, I go to prepare a place, as if it were still in
finishing, as if it were not yet finished, not but that all GODS works are
perfect from the beginning, but it is spoken after the manner of men, that we
might expect great glory, for which there is such great preparation, and says
he, if it were not so, I would have told you; think what you will think of it,
and it will be answerable, God will fulfill it. Heaven is a City prepared, if
there be but preparation for a Coronation of an earthly King a month or a
quarter of a year, there are great things expected, and yet more is showed;
but now God has been always in preparing Heaven, he has been making of it
from the beginning of the World; David laid up materials for the Temple, and
Solomon builded; so God prepares Heaven and Christ builds it. And therefore
consider with your selves, there are great things to be found, expect what you
can and it shall be answered. And thus you see God has made a Heaven with a
foundation, he has been long in preparing of it, he set up the World in six
days, but he has been setting up Heaven, as I may so say, six thousand
years, and therefore let this raise up your hearts to consider what a weight of
glory God has laid up for those that love him.

Secondly, consider the 2. Cause.
material cause of it, why it is Christ the Lord of glory, Christ Jesus
himself have purchased it for us in his blood, he has laid the foundation of
it, his blood was laid out for it, he spunne this thread of glory out of his
own bowels, and therefore we may well argue the greatness of this glory,
seeing that his blood has obtained it, 1 Ephesians. It is there called the riches of
the glory of his inheritance, all the inheritance that Christ has he
distributes it unto the Saints: this is said to be a purchased possession; why,
now my brethren think with your selves, what shall be the revenues of glory
purchased by his death. Think what a large possession the blood of Christ will
procure, consider with your selves what this will amount to, and this is
Heaven, Heaven it the revenues of Christ's blood. Think, I say, what glorious
Heaven it must needs be which Christ's blood has purchased for us. This is that
he aimed at in laying down his life for us, Justification, Adoption, and
Sanctification, they are but the way to Glorification, they are but the
subsidies of it, we are justified, adopted and sanctified all to this end,
that we might be glorified: consider therefore what Christ's blood will be
worth, what the revenues of it will come to: and therefore what has been said
of Heaven, let it move you, and work upon you: If I should single out any man
present, any particular man in this Congregation, as our Savior did the young
man in the Gospel, and bid him forsake all, and he shall have Treasure in
Heaven, if he would forsake the Righteousness of the Law, and his own
conscience within himself, beloved this was a great offer: Now I single out
every man here present; why, consider with your selves, you all stand arrested
before GOD, you deserve to be accursed, and to be eternally so, yet if you
will leave all your iniquities, repent, and believe, you shall have glory in
Heaven. Methinkes now you should lay hold on this offer, and think no
strictness too much, so you could get Heaven. If you were Merchant* like men,
you would not let Heaven, this precious Heaven pass you* you would lay hold on
it, and spend all you had to get it* and to be made partakers of those
unvaluable treasures* and think with thy self thou can not bid enough for
it: Cor. 1. 14. Strive and run, so run that you may attain, and every one
that striveth for the mastery is temperate in all things, now they do it that
they may have a corruptible, but we an incorruptible crown, and if men be so
careful here on earth to obtain temporal preferments, much more then run to
get that preferment which of all other is the chief, even everlasting
happiness in Heaven, its for Heaven an incorruptible Crown, for Heaven that
transcends all other things, and think with your selves how it will trouble
you if you come short of your prize, what a fearful and sorrowful voice will
it be to you, who can express your anguish, when you hear Heaven and your
Crown is parted from you: it was a pitiful saying to Nebuchadnezzar, thy
kingdom is departed from thee; much more to us then, to hear that we have
lost Heaven, how will it astonish thee to hear Christ say, Heaven and thy
Crown is departed from thee, thou must be turned to Devils for ever, this will
be thy condition to the end; it is our duty to speak unto you, we can but
exhort you, we can do no more, Math. 10. 14. If they will not retain it,
says he, shake off the dust of your feet as a testimony against them. If ye
look not to your selves in this life, this will be the event of it. Oh how
will it fret you to the heart; what inutterable perplexities will you be in,
when you see others follow Christ to his glory, and you your selves have that
curse denounced against you, Go you cursed, etc. Alas then it will be too
late to get Heaven: oh! what terror and amazement, what bitter anguish to
think Heaven came near unto me; it was offered me, and yet because I would
not part with some darling sin, some beloved corruption, some base lust I
have lost my interest in it, I must not partake of those rivers of pleasures in
Heaven. This certainly will be the issue except here, whilst you have space,
you make sure this Crown to your selves by Faith and Repentance. 3. Cause.


I proceed in the third place, to the exemplary cause, and the greatness of
this glory appears from this, and this is the glory of Jesus Christ himself;
consider. the great glory of the Lord of glory is the nearest pattern of it,
and therefore in Scripture that glory the Saints shall have in Heaven is said
to be like his, we shall be like the Lord of glory, he is not only made the
efficient and meritorious cause, but also the exemplary cause of this glory,
what can be said more then this, we shall be made like to Christ Jesus, who is
the Lord of glory, the eye of all things, the firstborn of every living
creature, in whom all excellencies remain, and all fullness dwells; oh then,
what infinite glory to be like what Jesus Christ now is! why, thou shall be
made like to him, John 17. 24. That they may behold my glory which thou have
given me: but that is not all, though this was sufficient to make us happy: A
beggar may behold the glory of a King, and be never the happier for it, nay
be more sad in his thoughts, because none of his glory reflects upon himself,
but says our Savior, John 17. 22. The glory which thou gave me, I have
given them, that they may be one, even as we are one; we shall wear the same
kind of glory which Christ wears, and he wears all the glory both of Heaven
and earth about him at all times, what kind of glory shall we then wear? We
shall be made like unto his glorious body. As we were all borne like Adam* so
we shall be made like Christ* we are said to be predestined, to be made
conformable according to the Image of his son, so that as we were
predestined to be made like him in grace and sufferings here, so likewise in
glory, we see here but as in a glass the glory of Christ, and yet are changed
into the same Image from glory to glory, 2 Cor. 5. last, But we all with open
face beholding, as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
Image from glory to glory even as by the Spirit of the Lord: If we seeing him
here upon earth as an holy and a righteous man, conceive and have such glory in
him: consider brethren what that shall be when we shall see him as he is, what
a comfort will that be, when we shall see him face to face in Heaven* and be
made partaken of his glory, we shall be like him, 1 John 3. 2. Behold now we
are the sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be, but we
know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him.

Materia in qua and circa quam, the object and subject of this glory. And
first, the object of this happiness, why it is not any other creature, but God
himself, no creature in Heaven and Earth is the matter of our happiness, but
God himself will be made happiness to us, he will not only be the efficient
cause, but the material cause of our happiness, Genesis 17. He sums up all in
himself, I will be an all-sufficient God unto thee, he promises himself, not
heaven separated from himself, but he will give us his own glory, he does not
only promise us great and glorious things to be created by him, but he
himself will be our Heaven, Psalm. 73. Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and
there is none that I desire on earth, besides thee, mark the phrase, indeed
there are all other things here on Earth which we may stand in need of, but
says David. though I have need of them, why yet none of them all I desire
besides thee. God alone made David happy, for indeed God himself makes Heaven,
though there were neither Saint nor Angel: indeed they are all there, but we
need nothing but God and Christ to make us happy of this glorious City which is
the forerunner of Heaven if it be not Heaven it self, yet of that glorious
condition which indeed is the immediate forerunner of Heaven, Revel. 21. 23.
The City had no need of Sun or Moon to shine in it, for says he, The glory
of God did lighten it and the Lamb is the light thereof: why, my brethren,
though there be many glorious things in Heaven, though there be the fruition of
the company of Saints and Angels, yet that is not it which makes us happy, but
God is our happiness. Indeed the glorious societies of the glorified bodies of
Saints is very delectable and ten thousand times excels all the delights of
creatures here below, yet I say, we have no need of them to make us happy: it
is but overplus, God himself and Christ Jesus make our Heaven and happiness.
Think now my brethren with your selves what Heaven is, are you all able to
consider what it is to have God to be our happiness? It is impossible for you
to conceive it, and for me to express it, I can no more reveal what God will
do to you, then this light can reveal the light of the Sun which can be
known by no light but its own. In the first place God contains all things,
all manner of divine perfections are bound up in him. The pleasures of this
earth are scattered here and there, and therefore the soul goes wandering up
and down from one creature to another, from one flower to another, because
some part of his happiness is in one, some part in another, but my brethren,
in God we have all happiness summed up, and wrapped together, all our delights
are together in him, Revel. 21 7. He that overcomes shall inherit all things,
and I will be his God, and he shall be my son: Consider with your self that
God himself can but inherit all things, and indeed he is all things, and if we
have God for our God, we shall inherit all things he will be meat and
drink, wife, husband, and whatsoever else unto us, he will be all things to us
himself, and therefore it is said, 1 Cor. 14. 18. That at the day of
Judgment, when Christ shall give up the kingdom, then all things shall be
put under him, that God may be all in all; which implies two things: First,
that God himself will be our happiness, he will be happiness enough, for he
is all in all. Secondly, That he will be all unto us in a more transcendent
manner than the glory of the creatures. I may compare these joys of Heaven to
those receipts which contain the very spirits of things, the very life and
quintessence of things extracted out, a little quantity whereof, as much as
will lie on a knives point is of more virtue and efficacy to work upon a man's
body (because they are the spirits) than a great quantity of all other drugs:
so now these contentments which God gives are the very spirits of comforts
which will add more happiness than all the drugs of worldly pleasures can
administer unto us, for all the happiness that could be had here, nay further
all the happiness God could create to men as men here on earth, are but as one
drop to the bottomless Ocean of Gods glory: and yet this false short, this is
too scant a comparison: for I say; infinite millions of drops will at length
make an Ocean, but ten thousand millions of the glories of this World cannot
make up one drop of the glory which is in God. Thus God will be all things to
us, and all things in a transcendent manner. Again thirdly God will pour out
himself unto us, he will give us communication with himself of this his
infinite happiness, he will pour out all his glory unto us, Ephesians. 3. 19.
That ye might be filled with all the fullness of God, which will give all
comfort; open thy mouth wide, he is able to fill it, for one drop of God will
fill thee full* I will fill thee with fullness and fullness of the best kind:
oh! what ineffable comfort will this be, when the vessels of mercy shall be
thrown into this bottomless sea of glory. Therefore do but think with your
selves what a happiness this will be when you shall be made partakers of Gods
glory, of all the blessedness that is in God, for although he cannot give us his
glory essentially, yet it shall as truly seem to make us happy as it does to
make him glorious. Fourthly, we shall be made one with him, they are Christ's
own words, John 17. 21, 22, 23. That they all may be one, as thou O Father
art in me, and I in thee, even that they may be also one in us, that the
world may believe that thou have sent me, and the glory that thou gave me I
have given them, that they may be one as we are one I in them, and thou in me,
that they may be made perfect in one and that the world may know that thou have
sent me, and have loved them as thou have loved me. My brethren, what is it
that makes God happy, but God himself, and yet what is that which makes Christ
so happy, but that he is equal with God the Father? Now if God make himself
happy, how happy shall we be then when we communicate with God in this his
happiness. To be one with him then must needs make us happy, indeed we
cannot be one with him as Christ is, for he is the brightness of his glory,
the express Image and character of his person, he is the natural Son of
God, and of the same nature with God, but we shall be made one with him so far
as the creature is capeable of, and the next union to that which God and Christ
have one with another we shall have, that they may be one even as we are one.
And again, being made one with God, we shall rejoice in all that God rejoices
in, that God is so glorious a God it shall make thee glorious, thou shall have
all those joys by revenues of which he now lives in Heaven, thou shall
rejoice more in Gods happiness than in thine own, the more happiness rises
to God, the more rises to thee: that which is the matter of GODS glory shall
be the matter of ours; it is the nature of love, that it rejoices in the love
of the person beloved, John 14. You are my friends if you do whatsoever I
command you, Ioh. 3. And therefore says John, in that he increases, I must
decrease, in this my joy is fulfilled; Our Savior says also to his Disciples,
If ye loved me, you would have rejoiced because I said, I go to the Father.
Now my brethren, if we shall rejoice in the same God rejoices in, both in
that joy which is intrinsecus within him, and in that joy which is extrinsecus
whereby he delights in all his works and providence, if both these I say,
shall be in us, how glorious shall we be? John 15. 11. Christ says, These
things have I spoken unto you, that my joy might remain in you, and that your
joy might be full. And this is not to be understood of our Saviors joy, of the
hopes he had of them, but that the joy which is in Christ shall be in us, that
my joy, says he, may be in you, 25. Matthew. 25. We shall enter into our masters
joy. Romans 5. 2. And rejoice in the hope of the glory of God, and not only so,
but we joy also in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall not only
rejoice in a created glory which he shall bestow upon us, but further we
rejoice in Gods own glory; I should come to show you the subject of this
glory, namely the soul of man: But my brethren, I will first make some short
use of this which has been spoken: Let us therefore take God for our portion,
whatsoever else becomes of us, whatsoever befalls us, let what will come, what
afflictions, what throbs, what miseries or crosses will come, Heaven will make
amends for all, for thy pleasures of sin, and worldly contentments God will
be better to thee than all: put them all in one balance, and God with that
glory he will bestow on you in another balance, and he will over-waigh them
all, they are not worthy to be compared to this glory, this was it that made
the Martyrs run through so many persecutions and tortures and that with
cheerfulness, they took God for their portions, so they had him they cared
not what became of their bodies: For, says Paul, We look not to things which
are corruptible, but to things which are eternal: And because it is probable,
yea and more then probable, that there are degrees of glory in Heaven, that God
will reward every one according to their works: why then do not only content
your selves to go to Heaven, but endeavor to serve God more, that you may
have great glory in Heaven, be abundant in good works, hoord up good works,
according to which glory shall be waighed to you in Heaven: let not pleasures
hinder thee of the least degree of glory, for to have but one pearl added to
thy Crown is more than the whole World: commit therefore no sin that might
hinder your attaining of glory, for what though God pardon thy sin? yet thou
loosest glory, thou might have gotten whilst thou wast in committing it,
the least shred of which glory transcends all the glory of the World.

Now we come to the subject of this glory: the Materia in qua, the Vessel
which shall receive this infinite mass of glory, and that is the soul, it is
called the salvation of our souls; the soul which will hold so much is the
vessels of this glory, the body shall be exceeding glorious, but the soul is
the receptacle which must receive this glory, Romans 9. 23. And that he might
make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had
before prepared unto glory; And S. Peter calls Christ the salvation of our
souls, the end of your faith the salvation of your souls: My brethren your
soul, howsoever you value it, is capeable of more glory than this world can
afford, the pleasures of which will fill your soul no more than one drop
will fill a Cisterne, or a little shower the place where the Ocean stands,
Eccles. 3. 11. Now it is said, that in this life God will put a World into the
heart of man, and yet all that World will not fill it; why, my brethren your
souls are narrow in this life, in respect of that they shall be hereafter,
they hold but little in respect of that they shall hold in Heayen, they are but
little bladders which there shall be blown up, they are but dunge bladders in
respect of that they shall be in Heaven hereafter, which may appear in this:
Solomon had a very large heart, he had as many notions in him as the sands of
the sea shore for number, and yet the soul of the least child in heaven,
happily but new come out of his mothers womb exceedes all the knowledge which
Solomon had on earth: our souls are capeable of more joys than the senses can
give, they are not able to satisfy it, it will drink up more glory even in
one hour, than the senses can provide in many hundred years, it will drink
them all up at one draught. My beloved, your senses cannot let in the King of
glory, such narrow gates cannot receive such infinite great glory, Psalm. 24.

In Heaven the doors of your hearts shall be opened, and when those doors are
open, I say, the everlasting doors of your hearts are open, they cannot
contain this glory, you must be contained in it; Enter, says Christ, into
thy masters joy: If the joy of the holy Ghost in this life pass all
understanding, and believing, we rejoice with joy unspeakeable, and full of
glory: how much more in the world to come, shall our joys pass all
understanding, when we shall have fruition of Gods presence, which is life it
self? My brethren your souls have two great gulphs, viz. the understanding
and the will, which must and shall be satisfied: Now says Solomon, The eye of
the body is not satisfied with seeing, it can comprize half the World in it,
and if the eye of the body be so hard to be satisfied, much more the eye of the
soul, and yet in Heaven this shall be satisfied, this gulf shall be
satisfied, Psalm. 17. 15. I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy likeness,
he was to lay his head in the grave for a while, but he should arise when the
Heavens shall be no more. As Job said, I shall see him again, so David, I
shall awake and then I shall be satisfied with thy likeness. John 14. 18.
Show us the Father, says Philip, and it suffices us; you will say, if you
could but see God, it would suffice, and indeed you may well say so, for the
sight of God will suffice you, why you shall see God, John 17. 24. for Christ
does desire this especially, those that are his to make the^ happy, to be with
him, to behold his face: Father, I will that they also that thou have given me
to be with me where I am that they may behold my glory which thou have given
me. So Math. 5. 8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, they
shall be able to behold him: If the Queen of Sheba who had seen so much glory
before, and being a Queen had partaken of so much glory in her self, if she,
I say, was so astonished, so amazed that she had no spirit in her even to see
Salomons wisdom, and to see his magnificency in honor, and riches, how much
more shall the glory of God ravish us, part of which we never saw, no not the
glimpse of it: oh! how will thou be amazed with joy when thou shall see his
glory, and see him as he is, when we shall know as we are known, and GOD
knows us as far as can be, 1 Corinthians 13. 12. For now we see through a
glass darkely, but then face to face; now we know but in part, but then we
shall know even as we are known, all our sight of him here it is but as in a
glass. Now what a great difference is it to look upon a man who is behind
us, and to turn our face and to look truly and sted fastly upon him? why
there is infinitely more difference betwixt that light we have of God by faith
on earth, and that perfect light of him, and fruition of his glory, which we
shall have in heaven: why as I said before, the eye of a man's body as it is but
a small thing, and the apple of it much smaller, and yet by the help of the
sun, it is able to take half the World into it at once: how much more shall
the eye of our understanding conceive infinite joys pastor apprehension here
when it has the light of Gods glory shining about it, Psalm. 36. 8, 9. They
shall be abundantly satisfied with the fullness of thy house* and thou shall
make them drink of the rivers of thy pleasures, for with thee is the fountain
of life, in thy light shall we see light: when as the Sun of glory comes to
shine about us we shall even draw God into our souls; and thus you see the
first gulf shall be filled.

The second gulf of man's soul is the will, thou have a will and amongst all
the affections of it, love is most comfortable, now that shall be fully
satisfied we shall be satisfied with Gods loving kindness, for ( Psalm. 73.)
all other affections bring pain with them, but love is always comfortable,
Phil. 2. 1. If there be any consolation of Christ, if any comfort of love: We
love things here on earth that cannot love us again, as money riches, and the
like, how much more shall we love love it self? Indeed, as Solomon says, The
love of friends is very delectable, Pro. 27. 9. Ointment and perfume rejoice
the heart, so does the sweetness of a man's friend by hearty counsel: The same
testifies David, in his lamentation for Jonathan, 2. Sam 1. 26. I am distressed
for thee my brother Jonathan, very pleasant have thou been unto me; Thy love
to me was wonderful, passing the love of a woman: but I say, though the love
of friends be great, Jonathan exceeding lovely, yet they are not so lovely as
God, it cannot be affirmed of them, that they are love it self as God is: on
then! how pleasant will it be when this vase affection of love shall be
satisfied! GOD will come into us and dwell with us, and do but think what a
pleasant thing it is to have the great God of Heaven and Earth to dwell
together with the creature in unity, to have him who is love it self to dwell
in us from all eternity; it is said (1 Pet. 1. 8.) Whom having not seen you
love, in whom though you see him not, yet believing you rejoice with joy
unspeakeable and glorious: Why if that be a cause to make you rejoice so
unspeakably, how much more joyful will you be when you enjoy his presence, not
only to kiss him through the lattice, as here we do enjoying only his
presence through his ordinances, but to lie in the bosom of his love, to be
enfolded in those everlasting arms of his mercy, to be loved of love it self,
to be made partaker of all his goodness, and Gods love is free, he loves us with
out any cause in our selves: why the^ brethren consider with your selves, what
is the height, depth breedth, and length of Gods love to be filled with all
fullness of God ( Ephesians. 3. 8.) Oh what a bottomless sea of Gods love shall we
be slung into, one drop of which is better than the gold of Ophir, yea
surpasses the whole earth.

In the last place, I will endeavor to show the final cause, and demonstrate
the greatness of Heaven, by this, that both the finis cui, and the finis
cuius, that is the end why God has prepared, all this glory, and the persons
for whom: Who is it for that God has been from everlasting preparing glory?
Is it not for his Saints? Is it not for his friend and spouse? Is it not for
Sion (Heb. 12.) But you are come into Mount Sion, and into the City of the
living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of Angels,
to the general assembly and Church of the first borne, which are written in
Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made
perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the blood of the
sprinkling that speaks better things than that of Abel: God has reserved
Heaven for us, Heaven is made for the feasting of his first borne, he has in
heaven all his children about him, there shall be called a general assembly
of them, one will not be away: you know parents they bestow the most cost when
they have their children all at once together, they respect no cost, looking at
the joy, which is set before them: they have joy unspeakeable in the presence
of their children together, and therefore at times of rejoicing men will send
for their children home: Now, my brethren, God will have all his Children home,
he will have a general invitation, the great Congregation of the Elect shall
be called together, he will have them all home, and therefore he must needs
make great provision: consider what he has vouchsafed to wicked men, the worst
of men, beloved these run away with the blessings of the World, even such as
God has set himself against to hate with an eternal hatred, why then think
with your selves what he has prepared for those that love him, whom with an
everlasting love he has loved in his Son, for his Sons sake which is as
great as himself; certainly he will communicate himself to the uttermost: I
say, then think with your selves what God has prepared for those that love
him.

Secondly, consider the end for which this is, and that is, to manifest his
own glory, he truly has had a great deal of glory out of this World
already. The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his
handy work; he has had a great deal of glory out of this World by
justifying poor sinners, and sanctifying their hearts, and also by punishments
inflicted upon wicked men, but all this is nothing to that glory he means to
have, not comparable to that he will have in Heaven, 2 These. 3. 10. When he
shall come to be glorified in his Saints and be admired of all them that
believe: We think wonderful things of God, and yet all our thoughts shall
come far short of the excellency of his coming, he will come beyond our
expectation, he will come to purpose, to be admired of all them that believe.
The matter of Gods glory, the revenues of it must come out of you, the chiefest
of his glory, as for the manifestation of his glory, it must come forth of
that, he will come to be glorified in his Saints, he will then show how
glorious a God he is, by manifestation of his glory, it must come forth of
that, he will come to be glorified in his Saints, he will then show how
glorious a God he is, by manifesting what glorious creatures he has made: it
is not a little glory that will content GOD, it is not a little glory that will
content a King when he means to take state, Romans 1. He will glorify
himself as God, or else he would never have begun, he would never have gone
about it, unless he meant to do it to the utmost. And in what does this his
glory consist? why, in making us glorious, and the manifestation of his glory,
as he is God, comes from us. It is true indeed, Gods essential glory can not
be added unto us, but the manifestation of his glory shall arise to us, we
shall have it communicatively, as when you see the Sun reflect upon the
waters, though you see not the Sun it self, yet you see as perfect a
manifestation of it, as if you should see the Sun it self. So likewise, though
you cannot have Gods glory essentially, yet you shall have it perfectly
communicated to you, manifested in you, 2 Cor. 8. 23. And therefore the Saints
are there called, the glory of Christ; now think with your selves, God has
had infinite vast thoughts of glorifying himself, there has been a fountain
of thoughts in him for that cause, and that unceasing spring which has run
in GOD from all eternity must needs make a vaste Sea, and who must be the
vessels that must go into this, into whom all this must be emptied? are they
not those that love him, those that he has loved with an everlasting love?
why then, do but think with your selves how unutterable are the joys we
shall have in Heaven. I would add something more to it, if any thing more can
be added to it; and if I but mention the properties; they will further add to
this glory and make it abound. He name no more than those we have already laid
down to our hands, 1 Pet. 1. 45. Elect to an inheritance incorrupted and
undefiled, and that fades not away, revealed in the last times.

In the first place brethren, 1. Property.
it is an inheritance the deed of which runs for ever to him and his. The
subtillest Lawyer that is, yea such an one as can almost find a knot in a
bulrush shall not be able to pick the least hole in your evidence: it is an
inheritance to which every one of you shall be heirs and shall have an
everlasting possession in it: it is not in Heaven, as it is in this world,
where the elder brother is only heir, and goes away with the inheritance,
when many times the younger are beggars; but in Heaven it is not so, for there
we shall be all heirs and coheires with Christ: and the reason of it is,
because it is called the inheritance of the Saints, 2 Col. 12. Giving thanks
unto the father, who has made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of
the Saints in light. Why my brethren, now you know light is such a thing as is
common to all, so that if there were ten thousand times more men in the world
then there is, they might enjoy it; neither does any envy at the light another
has; why, Heaven is an inheritance of the sons in light which we shall be
partakers of; there shall be no envying of one another happiness and light in
glory: why my brethren, you may be all heirs; yea you shall be all heirs,
there are no younger brethren* Again, why alas in this life the livings we
possess, the inheritance of them passes from one to another, from the father
to the son; yea and further, all the evidence they have will be burnt one
day, they will be made void at the day of judgment, the whole world will be
burnt and what will become of their inheritance?

But now secondly, this 2. Property.
inheritance is eternal incorruptible, 1 Cor. 5. 1. For we have, if this
earthly house of our Tabernacle be dissolved; we have, I say, a building with
God not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. An inheritance, my brethren,
that will be for ever: why, now think what eternity is, and think of it
again, it will even amaze your thoughts. Eternity is that which multiplies our
joys here upon earth: to enjoy a thing many years is our greatest joy, if we
can so enjoy it there lies our comfort, hence those words of the rich man in
the Gospel, Soul take thy rest, for thou have goods laid up for many years.
What a happiness is it, not only to enjoy an inheritance many years, but for
ever; goods laid up for ever? what a mercy is it that they are for ever? the
eternity of them adds to our joys, it was a rejoicing to David, that God
would give him a Kingdom; but more, that he would prepare a Kingdom to his
house a great while, 2 Samuel 7. 18 19. Then went King David and sat before the
Lord and said; Who am I, O Lord God, and what is my house, that thou have
brought me hitherto? and was this yet a small thing in thy sight oh Lord God,
but thou have spoken of thy servants house, for a great while to come. David
took it for a great favor, that God would bestow a Kingdom upon him, and
yet, says he, this was but a small thing in thy sight: what was it a small
thing to give a Kingdom? No, but there was another thing more than a Kingdom,
and that was, that his posterity should sit on the Throne for a great while,
this made the mercy the greater; if Heavens glory should last but for a few
days or years, it were worth more seeking after than all the things of this
World: we make a great strife for momentary trifles in this world, but Heaven
shall last for ever: it has an everlasting evidence, it shall never have an
end: the day thereof is for a long day, for it is for eternity and a day.
Again, David was to die himself and to leave the glory of his Kingdom to
another, yet he took it for a great favor and mercy, that it was promised to
his house for a great while; but now in Heaven we shall never die; we shall
possess our Kingdom in our own persons to everlasting: the pleasures and
riches we enjoy here must go to others. The rich man in the Gospel sings to
his soul: Soul thou have goods in store laid up for many years; eat,
drink, and take thy rest: but mark the answer, Thou fool, this night shall
thy glory be taken from thee. Now in Heaven it is far otherwise, we shall
never be deprived of our glory: why, let not the least thought of jealousy
come into our minds. For this in the next place is incorruptible, and not
only incorruptible in it self, but also in those that enjoy it, we shall be
ever with the Lord, we shall be the persons themselves The Kingdoms of this
world were brave places if they might have no end, the Kings of them exceeding
happy if they might never die, but live always: but alas, though they live
like Gods, they shall die like men. Now in Heaven there is no such thing, there
is no dying nor talk of dying, but mortality shall be swallowed up of
immortality; we shall enjoy those inexhaustible Rivers of pleasures to
eternity.

Now we come to the 3. Property.
next property. It is incorruptible and undefiled, 1 Cor. 5. 25. All the
comforts we have in this life are mixed with sin, yea with the impotency of
sin and misery; so that one says well to this purpose; Though the joys of a
King be many and greater than others, yet they have as many sorrows attending
upon them as joys, and if not crosses, yet sin the greatest cross of all,
if men be sensible of it; but Heaven is undefiled, there is no anguish, no
grief, no tears, no sorrows, but joys to all eternity. There shall be no
vexing Canaanites to trouble you, neither outward nor inward enemies, Isa. 35.
And the ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to Sion with songs, and
everlasting joy shall be upon their heads: they shall obtain joy and
gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall fly away: here the guilt of sin
afflicts us, the punishments due unto the same affright us, one man is troubled
with a lust which he would feign master, another man cries out with the
Apostle, O miserable man that I am, etc. Qualmes come over many men's hearts for
the guilt of sin; and how many throes have they before they can get sin
abandoned! another is vexed with some tormenting malady and grievous sickness
in his body; but in Heaven we shall be freed from these sorrows, there shall
be neither soul nor body sick, Isa. 33. 24. And they in Heaven shall not say,
I am sick, the people that dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquity:
there shall be no thought of the pardon of sin, for the inhabitants that
dwell therein shall be forgiven their iniquities: that is, those sins which
they have committed in this life shall be forgiven there. There is no thought
of sin in Heaven, there they shall be everlastingly buried in oblivion.



Empire, what a glorious Monarchy was it! but now it is come almost unto a bare
title. But in Heaven there is no decaying, no failing, there is always a full
springtide without ebb. That infinite mass of glory which thou shall receive
at the last day thou shall keep for ever: after as many millions of years
expired as there are hairs on thy head, it shall be as bright as it was on
the last day, and the reason of it is because of Gods presence, we shall be
present with him who is the fountain of life, whose streams of glory must
needs issue to eternity, for at his right hand is fullness of joy, and rivers
of pleasure slow from him for evermore: so long as God fades not, Heaven will
never fade: when God himself fades, when that fountain can be dried up, then
those rivers of pleasures shall cease flowing, but that is impossible, for he
is the Well of life: What is the reason that precious stones decay not, but
that there is no dross or corruption in them? as the Diamond being pure in it
self, fades not away, but always keeps a luster and splendor in it, whereas
other base stones that have dross in them soon decay and moulder away. In
like manner though this World have dross in it, and by reason of that perish,
yet in Heaven there is no dross of sin or corruption, and therefore it cannot
fade.

Why now you will say again, grant all this you have said before, yet I doubt
I may be bereaved of it: it may be taken away from me by violence, for
Kingdoms in this life are taken away, Kings deprived of their dignities.

Why, but there is no fear of this in heaven, it is kept for you sure enough,
no mothes of corruption to make you sin, no violence of Satan's temptations to
make you fall: The devil and sin crept into Paradise, but neither of them
shall come into Heaven; ( Matthew, 6. 20.) Lay up treasures for your selves in
Heaven where neither moath nor rust does corrupt nor thieves break in and
steal.

But you will say again, if I could once get thither, I had no cause to fear,
I should never fall if I were once in heaven; but I fear the vileness of my
own heart, I fear I shall be defiled with my corruptions and by Satan: and as
David said, I shall one day perish by the hand of Saul; I am afraid I may
perish hereafter, though I now be in the state of grace, I may fall, and never
come thither.

But look further, it is said, It is reserved for you who are kept by the
power of God to salvation; you are kept for it, Christ has reserved it for
you, who says further, Of those which thou have given me, I have not lost
one. If all the power of the Creator lie for it, you shall not lose it: but it
does; therefore you shall not lose it. And lastly, thou shall not stay long for
it, thou shall not be a probationer, but till thy death at the farthest; it is
laid up ready for thee, a Crown of glory waits and stays for thee: but now
all these things are showed, this is the misery, that we will not believe, In
my Fathers house, says he, there are many mansions. If it had not been so, I
would have told you, he will not deceive us, believe him on his word, we use to
believe the promise of a man we judge saithfull, much more let us credit God
who is truth it self. Therefore as ever we would be partakers of these joys,
and have part and portion in these eternal comforts: let the belief of them
be steadfast, and though there be many uses to be made of this, yet this is
the chief, that we would believe this truth: Indeed you believe, but I say
unto you believe, and again believe: those that entered not into the promised
Land, entered not, because they did not believe. This is the cause that men
perish and enter not into Gods rest, I say therefore believe God, seeing he
has fulfilled all his promises, he has not failed in one promise since the
beginning. The Land of Canaan he gave according to his promise long before (1
King. 8. 23.) Lord thou keep Covenant and mercy with thy servants (verse
26.) Blessed be the Lord that has given rest to his people Israel, according
to all that he promised by the hand of his servant Moses: If he has promised
that ten Kings shall destroy the whore as indeed he did, she shall be
destroyed, he will not fail in his promise, he has spoken, and he will make
it good, he is abundant in mercy and truth, yea he will be better than his
word. Let me speak therefore to you that are yet in the state of nature, who
still delight in your sins: if you believed these things, surely you would not
dote on your sins as you do; it would make you utterly abandon them: and
also let me say something to you whose eyes God has opened, who are in the
state of grace; surely if you labored more and more to petswade your selves of
this, you yould not be so glued to the world as you are; it would make you
like men of another World, you would be transformed and be even as if you were
in heaven. Let then all your carriage and manner of conversation be here, as
if you were in your heritance, let all your thoughts be in heaven, let your
hearts take possession of this incorruptible Crown, whilst your bodies are on
earth.

FINIS.

