The Trumpet of War.

A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross the seventh of May 1598.

By M. Steph. Gosson Parson of Great Wigborow in Essex.

STANTIA LABOR^^ ET



Printed at London by V. S. for I. O. dwelling in Paul's churchyard at the
sign of the Parot.

To the most reverend Father in God, Richard Bishop of London, my very good
Lord, health and happiness here, and in the world to come.
RIght reverend my very good Lord, every divine knows, that there is a
storehouse in the Church of God, into which every good christian brings some
affliction suffered, or some travel undertaken for Gods sake. And although
that from Abel to Christ, and from Christ Jesus to this present day, there have
been many prizes of both sorts carried into this treasury yet will it not be
full before the end of the world, until which time, neither the tears nor
the travels of the Church are like to cease. Therefore seeing it has pleased
God of his goodness to make me a little Nail in his Temple, to hang some
part of his service upon, and has from time to time affoorded me a place
among many learned men, called out from their studies in the Universities, or
from their particular charges in the country, to the public service of the
church at Paul's Cross, where every man bestirres him like a Be, to carry
wax and honny to the hiue, and every man is profitable in his pains: I have
brought in these labors to the church, fitted as well as I could, both to the
time wherein we live, and to that honorable assembly to which I spoke.

And because S: Augustine confesses, that when he beholdes men carried away
with a love of this present world, he cannot tell how wisdom should come in
season to do them any good, in that people blown up with prosperity despise
all that is said unto them: finding a great part of the ancient glory of
this kingdom blasted with the breath of schism, and with an expectation of
wars and troubles, and espying also with the Prophet Jeremy, that there is
no taking the wild Ass in the wilderness before she be with foale, I have
slept in in such a time, as wisdom may happily come in season.

The matters I entreated of are great, and I am little, but God (which when he
was great became little to preach unto the world) has assisted me: and what I
have delivered, men shall best see to be true, when reading and preaching shall
be removed, the cloud of this body rent in pieces, and we with purified and
glorified bodies shall look upon the Lord. I know, that whilst we live
here below, as preaching is compared in the Revelation unto thunder, so it is
like it in the cause and effects of thunder Thunder proceeds from a vapor
lifted up from the earth, and compassed with a cold cloud, in the motion and
agitation, it catches fire, which breaks out presently where the cloud is
thinnest, and being out, sometime it strikes the body of a man, and not the
clothes, sometime the clothes, and not the body. Preaching proceeds from
the meditation of the heart, lifted up from earth to heaven, cold flesh is the
cloud that keeps it in in the motion and agitation of the mind, it catches
fire, while I missed (says David) the fire kindled, being straightened within
us, it strives to vente it self, and breaks out at the lips of the preacher
where the cloud is thinnest and being forth, sometime it strikes the princes of
the earth, and not the people that stand about them: sometime again it hittes
and mooues the poor people, and not the Potentates. When these arrows of the
almighty fly abroad, a preacher must not be dismaide to see them glaunce in
the going for they stick not every where.

Nay, it falls out sometimes, that the hearers deal with us, as Saul did
with David, who threw a spear at him when he plaide upon his harp, to charm
the eiull spirit that was in Saul. Of which action it was wittily devised and
written by him that cut the whole History of David for the King of Spain,
and set it out in pictures. Dura est men's hominis ac sancto ingrata labori,
The heart of man is hard, and unkind to holy labors.

I speak not this in respect of any crooked measure laid unto my travails,
for then I should detract from that religious auditorie which gave me gracious
hearing and acceptance, the glory shall be Gods, which wrought it in their
hearts, and I trust, their answers a reward to them in heaven, for the heed
and regard they gave unto me. And that my sermon might remain somewhat longer
with them then the time wherein it was delivered, I have at the request of my
friends put it forth in print, to the view of all, dedicating it unto your
Lo. partly to submit it to your L. grave and learned censure, and to the
censure of the Church of England, according to the rule of the holy ghost,
which will have the spirits of the Prophets subject to the Prophets: which
course if every man could be content in humility to take, the controversies
of our church would quikly be composed: partly to give some public testimony
of my thankeful heart and dutiful affection to your Lordshippe, which has
enabled me to do some good in the church of God, in some inferior services
thereof, according to the talent bestowed upon me. Thus humbly beseeching God,
which is the beginning and the end of all things, to give peace to his church
and to our country, and to bless and continue your honorable labors in them
both, and to crown them in heaven when your race is run, I humbly take my
leave.

Your Lordships most humble servant, Stephan Gosson.

The Trumpet of War.
The Text. 2. Chro. 20. verse. 20* And when they arose early in the morning,
they went forth to the Wilderness of Tekoa, and as they departed, Iehossaphat
stood and said, Hear ye me O Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, put
your trust in the Lord your God, and ye shall be assured believe his Prophets;
and ye shall prosper*
IT is a wonder Right honorable) to see the base fear of man, the people of
God may sometime be cast into, when they hear the enemy is in arms, or
approaches the Land, or has taken some fort to intercept the passages and
annoy the land: It was Asa his case, king of Judah, when Baasa King of Israel
was come to Rama, and had fortified there in such sort, that he stopped the
passages of Asa his kingdom, and none could safely get in or out. This did
cast Asa into a fear, and Hananie the prophet reproved him for it, 2 Chro. 16,
7. Indeed as Hambal never saw Fabius appear upon the mountains, but he
likened him to a cloud that threatened rain: So when the enemy is possessed of
places of advantage, it is humane wisdom to reckon upon a storm, but if he
be Gods enemy, it is humane weakness to stand in fear of him. In this
case the heathen Poets have had their times to turn their pastoral tunes into
sound of Trumpets, and the holy Prophets and Priests of God have had their
times also to change their exhortations to mercy and compassion, into charges
and allarmes, and either with Azariah encourage both the Prince and the people
to be strong handed, 2. Chro. 15. chapter 7. verse. Or with Iehaziel in the 15.
verse of this chapter, even in the name of God command both the Prince and
the people not to fear the multitude of men, but to march forwards boldly
toward the enemy, and look him in the face. I will follow the example of
the Prophets and Priests of God at this time, and make you such music upon
this ground, as it shall please God to minister unto me. This Scripture which
I have read unto you, is a very Trumpet of war: herein we find Judah and
Jerusalem marching toward the enemy, under the conduct of Iehoshaphat, upon
intelligence given, that there was a great combination of foreign Princes, the
Moabites, the Ammonites, the inhabitants of Mount Seir were come from beyond
the seas to invade Iehoshaphat. The place in the wilderness where the army
sat down was discovered.

That which offers it self to be discoursed, The division.
stands upon these two parts in general, the first is the action of war, in
these words, And when they arose early in the morning* they went forth into the
wilderness of Tekoa: The second is the exhortation to this action in these
words, And as they departed Iehoshaphat stood and said, hear ye me O Judah,
and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, put your trust in the Lord your God, and ye
shall be assured, believe his Prophets, and ye shall prosper. In the action of
war there arise these four points in particular to be handled: first, the
equity of the action: secondly, the cause that makes the action of war to be
just and lawful: thirdly, the persons concurring to this action: fourthly, the
execution of it, that is, the manner how it must be executed. These four I
must fetch a little further off, yet not so far, but that I may easily draw
them out from the verses going before, and immediately following after in this
chapter. In the exhortation to this action, there be also two acts of the
soul, two objects, two consequents: the first act is to trust: the first
object is God, the first consequent is safety. Put your trust in the Lord your
God, and ye shall be assured. The second act, to believe: the second object,
the Prophets: the second consequent, Prosperity. Believe the Prophets, and ye
shall prosper. That I may speak of all these parts in order, to Gods glory,
and the opportunity of the times wherein we live, I beseech you to join with
me in humble and hearty prayers, etc.

1 The equity of the action of War.
TO give you a view of the equity of this action, you shall find it to be
just in reason, in religion, and in the practice of the church. It is just in
reason. Thomas 1. p. q. 76. a. s. disputing how fit a receptacle the body of
man is for the soul of man, shows that Natura non deest in necessarijs,
Nature is not wanting in things necessary. But as nature has given to bruit
beasts horns and hoofes, teeth and talants, for defense and offense: so
having given unto man none of these, she has given him reason and hands in
steed of these. Man naturally consists of a body and a soul: his soul is
comprehensiue of universalities; and has Uirtutem ad infinita, it is able to
devise and contriue infinite things: nature has set no bounds nor limits to
the thoughts or opinions of the soul, neither has she set any bounds to the
couerings of the body, but as the soul is able to devise a covering for the
body of such a temper as shall hold out the dint of sword, and smaller shot,
and to devise engines of wars for battery and assaults, so has she given
hands to the body, which are organa organorum, instruments of instruments to
frame these when they are devised. Nature not being wanting in things
necessary, there may be a time wherein it shall be just and necessary for the
soul of man to contriue weapons, and engines of offense, for the hands to work
them, the body and arms to wear and weild them, and to put them in execution:
such is the time of war. It is just in religion, for the spirit of God which
is a holy spirit, that never persuades men unto any sin, was upon Iehaziel
verse 14. of this chapter, exhorting Judah and Jerusalem to this action at the
putting on of their armor, Exodus 15. this is Gods Title: The Lord is a man
of war. In the Psalms, he is said to teach the fingers of the warrier to
fight, and to cover his head in the day of battle; in the time of war the
battles fought, are said to be Gods battles, and the overthrows given, are
said to be given by him. It is just in the practice of the Church. Deuteronomy. 20.
2. When the armies are come to an enterview, and the battle ready to join,
God commaundes the Priest to stand forth and encourage the soldier. God has
so disposes of our function, that we shall carry the hearts of the people in our
hands, and either discourage them from the fight when God i^ angry, as
Michaiah the Prophet did 2 (...). 18. 16. I saw all Israel scattered in the
mountains as sheep that have no shephearde, let them return every man to his
house in peace: Or animate and harten them on to the fight when God is with
them, as the Priests did in the 6 of Joshua, when they blew the trumpets and the
walls of Jericho fell before them. This has been the practice of the Church
of England by the testimony of our own Chronicles, when the honor of our
nation, the chivalry of England has been in the field, it has been used
for a sufficient argument of encouragement unto the Soldier, before the
actual encounter with the enemy, to say thus much, This day is the Church
of England upon her knees for us. The action of war being thus found to be
good and lawful in reason, in religion, and in the practice of the Church: it
follows in the second place, to discover the cause y^ makes it to be just and
lawful.

The cause of War.
War is of the nature of just judgment, and the calamities that wait upon
war be very great: therefore as a Judge does not punish every light offense,
but such as are against the good of the common weal, so war is not to be
undertaken upon every light occasion, but upon such as shall be proportionable
to the damage and distress of war. Because there are many false claims and
titles laid upon the action of war to justify the same, it shall not be
amiss to shut out the false titles as I pass along, and let in the true. The
first of them False titles of war.
is infidelity: the second is, the revenge of the injuries done unto God by
the sin of Idolatry, because Deuteronomy. 2. 34. the children of Israe war upon
Sehon king of Hesbon an Idolater, they destroy his people, and take his
cities. And Deuteronomy. 13. 13. this title seems to be expressed, God charge his
people, that when they shall hear any has gone out from among them and
drawn other to the worship of strange gods, they shall destroy the
inhabitants of that city, and race the city. The third is, supreme
authority in things te^porall. They that hold this opinion, imagine the
heathen not to be Lords of their own lands, but either the Emperor or the
Pope. The fourth is, unaptness to govern, because the heathen are barbarous
and unfit to govern, and the law of Nature wills that such should be ruled
by wiser than themselves; Aristotle says, that war undertaken 4. Polit. cap.
5.
against such, is just and lawful, because it is attempted against those that
are borne to obey, and will not. This title is vphelde by Mayor 2. d. 44. and
by Sepulpeda 7. polit. cap. 3.

They are all four false and erroneous: the two first, because God has not
given every man authority to revenge the injury done to him, but says, Mihi
vindicta, and ego rependam. Neither is it expedient for the race of man that it
should be so, for, by this means the garboiles and troubles of the earth would
be so great, that Gods injuries would rather be wultiplied than avoided. And
seeing this cannot be demonstrated, Idolaters might lawfully betake themselves
to arms in their own defense, whereby war should be just on both sides, which
is impossible. As in things natural, Simile non agit contra simile, Fire does
not fight with fire, but fire against water, one contrary struggles with an
other: so in things moral, ^nnocens non agit contra innocentem, The innocent
strives not with the innocent, but the innocent with the offender, and the
offender with the innocent, the war can be just but of one side.

As for the instance of the wars of Gods people upon Idolaters, diverse titles
have bin sifted, and soght out by diverse authors to justify them, of which I
will yield you but two, both discovered in the scriptures. The one is Gods
donation. Psalm. 105. 44. He gave them the lands of the heathen, and they took
the labors of the people in possession. Iphtah pleades this title against the
king of the Ammonites, Judge. 11. 24 Would not thou possess that which
Chemosh thy God gives thee to possess? So, whomsoever the Lord our God
drives out before us, them will we possess. The other is the wrong first
done unto Israel in their passage as they went out of Egypt, for which God
gave Sihon and his people into the hands of Israel, and they possessed their
lands. 27 verse of the same chapter. The third title is as false as the
former, in that all the kings of the earth do hold their crowns of GOD that
^aith Per me Reges regnant, by me Kings rule and Princes decree Justice, in
their lands and dominions temporal, neither Pope nor Emperor have any thing
to do. And Caietan avouches, that to give any Q. 59. a. 8.
such right to Pope or Emperor, is to take away the distinction of
jurisdictions, and to bring in a confusion into the world. Last of all, how
untrue and erroneous the fourth title is, may easily appear, in that many
pagans and infidels are more ingenious, politic, and apt to govern, then many
christians. Neither is it enough to justify the war, that the people upon
whom the war is made, are inferior in wit unto the warrior, except they
be so poor that they live like brute beasts, or feed upon humane flesh. In
which case peradventure it may be lawful to invade them, not to kill them, as
the Spaniardes did the naked Indians, but to bring them in order to live 1.
Polit. cap. 5.
like men. Aristotle holds this to be lawful, when such people differ as
far from men, as the body differs from the Soul. Yet is this either seldom
or never to be admitted, except upon some occasion of innocents or wrong, and
the war rather revoked to a defensive, then an offensive war.

The false titles excluded, there remains but one just in general, that is,
Necessity. Nullum bellum iustum nisi necessarium. It may be just and
necessary two ways, the one is in defense of the innocent, the other is in
revenge of injuries. In defense of the innocent, because God has given all the
kingdoms of the earth to his son Christ Jesus, Ps. 2. Princes are exhorted
to kiss the son of God, least he be angry, and they perish. In another
place of the Psalms, Princes are commanded to set open their gates, that the
king of glory may come in. Therefore if either Turk, or Pope, or Idelatrous
Princes force the law of Mahomet or Idolatry upon their poople, when they are
desirous to embrace the Gospel, the Gospel may then be bronght in by arms:
but if the Turk or Pope, or Idolatrous Princes beguile their people, and their
people willingly entertain a false religion, there is no violence offered, and
Vbi non est vis non habet locum defensio: where no violence is offered, defense
can take no place. On the contrary, if the Turk, Pope, or Idolatrous Princes
conspire to drive out the Gospel from those Christian kingdoms where it is
preached, Non est simile ius, The case is not alike: to banish the Gospel is to
do an injury.

The injuries that may make war to be just and lawful, are of diverse sorts.
In iuries.
Either when one Prince withholdes that which is another, or when iura
gentium, 1
the laws of nations or passages are denied, 2
Deuteronomy. 25. 17. When Amele^ had vexed the Israelites as they went out of Egypt,
and smote the hindmost of them, God commanded them to revenge it, and to root
out the remembrance of Amelec from under heaven.

Moreover, if the fame and honor of a Prince be hurt, or disgrace and
indignity offered to his ambassadors, war may lowfully be waged to revenge
it, 2. Sam. 10 Upon the like wrong done to David's Messengers sent to the King
of Ammon, when their clothes were cut, and their beardes shaued, David
revenged it by arms. Yea, it is sufficient if injury be done to a Princes
friend, Genesis 14. Injury was done to Lot in surprising him, and Abraham rescued
him by sword. 1. Macha. 11. 27. Demetrius promises succor to Jonathan against
them that kept the Castle of Jerusalem, and commanded the forts that annoyed
the Jews; Jonathan reciprocally sent a supply of three thousand brave
soldiers to Demetrius when his owue companies had forsaken him. The reason of
it is this, Amicus est alter idem. Wrong done to a princes friend is done unto
himself, but this caution must be added, that is, that he that stands in
need of succor do request it, as the men of Gibeon did in the tenth of
Joshua, or at least be willing to be succourd voluntate expressa aut
interpretatiua, to give aid to such, is to set the helping hand to a just and
honest action. The last injury of all is invasion, and this is the Title of
the War in this place, Iehoshaphat and his people fight for their wives,
children, goods, lands, their own lives, and their religion, against the
inuader.

3 The persons concurring to the action of war.
THe third consideration is of the persons that concur to the action of
war, which in this chapter are of four sorts, the Prince, the peers, the
priests and the common soldier. As war must have a just title to make it
lawful, so it must also be undertaken by lawful authority, that is, the
authority of the Prince, who as he carries the sword of Justice to punish
domestical disturbers of the common weal, in respect whereof he is said Romans
13. not to bear the sword in vain: so he defends his people from the
sorraine enemy by the sword of war, and is bound so to do Psalm. 82. 4. He is
charged to save the poor and oppressed, from the hand of the wicked that
oppresses them. The reason of it is this, that as in a common weal it is
requisite there should be an authority, to punish offenses, and to keep the
same in order: so in the wide world, that all kingdoms and commonweales might
be preserved, it is requisite there should be a power and authority to punish
injuries, this power resting in no one Prince in the world as superior to al
other Princes, war steps in in the place of just vindicatiue judgment, God
has left no other means unto Princes to fly unto. Howsoever, this may seem
to be controlde by scripture, and reason, in that Romans 12. the Apostles
council is, Render to no man evil for evil. And if private revenge be not to
be admitted, because the self and same person is both a Judge and an actor in
his own cause, it may peradventure be thought as unfit for a Prince to be a
Judge and an actor in his own cause. Yet is not the revenge of a Prince cut
off by this. The Scripture Romans 12. forbids private revenge, because Revenge is
an act of vindicatiue Justice, which is Actus iurisdictionis an act of
jurisdiction, which no private person obtaines by reason of any wrong done to
him: nevertheless, if revenge be taken by authority, it is not only not
forbidden by the apostle, but commended as a thing necessary, in that he
says, Princes and Magistrates are the The difference between Princes and
private persons in revenge.
ministers of God to take vengeance upon them that do evil. The argument
drawn from a private person, holds not in comparison with a Prince. A private
person has a speedy way to redress his own wrongs, by recourse to the
authority of his superiors: a Prince has no superior upon earth, nor any
other redress than war if satisfaction have been expected, and denied. A
private person in taking revenge in his own cause may exceed the bounds of
justice, there is no such fear in the person of a Prince, his authority is
public and administerd by public council, whereby the affections of Princes
are easily restrained: A private person cannot revenge himself, because he may
not be a Judge and an actor in his own case; a Prince may be a Judge and an
actor in his own case: Princes are gods, the authority of a prince is a
little arm of the broad sea of authority which is in God, and as God revenging
the injuries done to him and his kingdom, is a Judge and an actor in his own
case: so a Prince revenging the injuries done to him, and his dominions, may be
a Judge and an actor in his own case.

The second sort of persons are the Peers, 2
which may be divided into two ranks, either The Peers
they are such as are called to council of state, they are all bound to give
faithful council, not to deal with their master as Hushai dealt with Absalon
when he taught him a trick to overthrow himself, or such as be leaders and
commanders in the field, and they are all bound to the act of fortitude, to
fight manfully, and neither for fear, nor flattery, nor corruption, nor loss
of life, give up the towns and castles committed to their charge, without the
consent of the prince that committed them to their trust.

The third be the priests, we concur to 3
this action, not to manage arms, our warfare is spiritual, our weapons
spiritual, they The Priests
be prayers and tears: and as David was unfit to build the temple, because he
was a warrior, so are we unfit to fight, because we are of the temple. Yet we
co^curre with the action of war thus far, we converse with the soldier in
the field, we bless him and pray for him before the fight, and we praise god
for him when the fight is ended.

The fourth and last is the common soldier, whose duty S. John Baptist
describes, Luc. 4
3. 14. it is to do violence to no man, but to be The Common Soul. dies.
contented with their pay: war being of the nature of just judgment,
soldiers are of the nature of executioners, when they are called forth by
authority to fight, they must remember that in this case they are inferior
instruments unto God to punish the offenses of the wicked, and fetting him
before their eyes in these actions, they may not consecrate the first fruits
of their fingers with robberies and outrage upon their friends, as they march
along the countries, but join with the priest and the Leuite, and the singers,
as the soldiers do in this chapter, to call upon the Lord who^ they serve in
war.

4. The execution of the action of war.
The last point to be discoursed in the action of war, is the manner how it
must be executed, which in diverse places of the scripture is very different.
In this ca. Iehaziel wills them to stand still and look on, without striking
stroke, but this being a particular direction of Gods spirit for this war of
Iehoshaphat. and liable only to that time, it cannot be a president for all
other wars at all other times, therefore in the execution of wars there be
three differences of times to be considered: the beginning, the progress, and
the end of it. In the beginning, because reason requires in the ordinary
affairs of this life, advice and diligence should be used answerable to the
quality of the business in hand, war being the most weighty of all humane
affairs, there must be counsel and deliberatio^ to begin it, Pro. 24. 6. Thou
shall enterprise thy war with council,. In the 21 verse of this chapter
Iehoshaphat enters Five things to be considered in the beginning of wars.
into consultation about the war. ^ here be five things in the beginning of
war to be thought upon, the loss of the country against which we fight, the
loss of the country that goes to fight, the loss of the church, the
probability of the victory, and the intention of the warrior. If the loss of
of the enemy be likely to fall out to be greater than the hurt he has done, I
find no great reckoning made of it, because the wilfulness of the enemy is
the cause of it, which may have peace and will not. If the loss be of the
second or third fort, that is, the loss of the warrior, or the loss of the
church be likely to be greater, then the hurt already received, there is some
care to be had of it, for war has the property of physic, if the physician
by healing the present infirmity, bring the body into worse case then it was
before, his physic is very dangerous. Concerning the probability of the
victory, which is the fourth point. Caietan holds that in the enterprise of
war, the preparation must be so great, that the warrior may be Moraliter
certus de victoria: sure of the victory. He brings in two examples G: 55. a. 3.
for it, one of a Judge, another of the Agent and the Patient. If a Judge
(says he) send to apprehend a malefactor, and do not send so strong a company
that he may be sure to take him, he does more hurt then good. In the time of
war the revenger is the Agent, the offender is the Patient, and in things
natural Agens debet esse potens ad superandum passum, The agent must be
powerful and able to overcome the patient: the medicine must be stronger then
the humor. But this is not absolutely necessary, because it is impossible:
Psa. 33. The king is not saved by the multitude of an host, nor the mighty
man delivered by his great strength. How pusian^ soever the preparation of
princes be, if God be not with them it is nothing worth, 2. Chro. 25. 8. The
Army of Amafiah consisted of an hundred thousand very valiant men, but the
man of God told him, that how strong soever he made himself, he should
surely be overthrown if he did proceed, because God was not with him. David
observes it, Psalm 89. 43. That it is God that turns the edge of the sword of
the warrior, and makes him unable to stand ^ the day of battle. Remember the
great Armada in the year 1588. The preparation was such, that the inuader
assured himself o victory and termed it invincible, yet was it in so short
time with so few strokes and skirmishes, and with so small ships scattered and
defeated, that to the eternal memory of gods high hand, and the utter scorn
and reproach of the inuader there was after the manner of the old Romans, a
monument made of it, in certain coin stamped beyond the seas, with a
resemblance of a navy, and this word fastened to it, venit, iuit, fuit, it
came, it went, and it came to nothing. And there was not one ancient or
honorable house in Spain but lost a son, or a brother, a kinsman or a friend
in that voyage. If it should never be lawful to war but upon assurance of the
victory drawn from the preparation, it should never be lawful for the
smaller number to fight with the greater, or the weaker with y^ stronger, so
should it have bin unlawful for the Israelites to encounter the Aramites, 1.
King. 22 27. when the Israelites pitched like two little flocks of kids before
the Aramites, and the Aramites filled the country: So should it have bin
unlawful for Iehoshaphat in this place to resist the inuader, for he confesses
verse. 12. of this chap. There is no strength in us to stand before this great
multitude that comes against us, neither do we know what to do, but our
eyes are toward thee. Whereby you may perceive that in the action of war a case
may so fall out, that it shall not be needful for y^ warrior to expect any
great assurance of the victory, but put the matter in trial, even when the
success is doubtful. Nevertheless I will say thus much unto you, that if a
prince can find any means to assure himself of the victory before the war
begin, he may use it. 1 Samuel 30, 8. When the Amalekites had sacked and fired
Z^klag. David asks counsel of God, whether he shall pursue them, and god
assures him of y^ victory, he shall recover al. 1. Ch^. 14. Before he set upon
the Philistines, god prescribes unto him which way he should go to work, he
should recoile, and fetch a compass about by the mulbery trees, and when he
heard a noise or a rustling of one going in the tops of the mulberie trees,
then God commanded him to charge his enemies, for God was gone out before him.
The like we find in Gedeon, God gave him signs and tokens to assure him that
he should prevail, Judge. 6. The sign was by the fleece wette when the
ground was dry and the ground wet when the fleece was dry. Judge. 7. 11. God
sendes him by night to the host of the Midianites, and by a dream of the
enemy touching a barlie cake, that tumbled down into the host of Midian, and
destroyed it, God assured him that he would deliver his enemies into his hand.
This assurance is not gathered from the preparation of man, but from the favor
and power of God. Therefore when this certainty cannot be attained, princes are
bound to attain to the greatest probability they can, and comparing the hope
of their victory with the danger of their loss, adventure as far as shall be
good for the common weal. If the probability be slender and the war
offensive, they ought to give it over, because the war is voluntary: if the
probability be slender, and the war defensive, it may not be given over,
because the war is necessary, It is Iehoshaphats case here, the
probability of the victory is very small in respect of his own forces, yet
because he is invaded, and the war necessary, he makes head to resist the
enemy, and commits the cause to God. The fifth and last point concerning the
beginning of this action, is the intention of the warrior. I ho. 2. 2. q. 40.
a. 1. defines it to be Studium Pacis, desire of peace, for peace is the end of
war, and v^ Mali coerceantur, and boni subleuentur, That the wicked may be
bridled, and the good relieved. War may be undertaken upon good cause and law
full authority, yet the intention of the warrior may be evil. Hereupon Cont.
Faustum.
S. Aug. condemns in a warrior Nocendi cupiditatem, vlciscendi crude litatem,
animum implacabilem, feritatem, dominandi ^ibidinem, A desire to do mischief,
cruelty in revenge, an implacable mind, a fell spirit, and an ambitious humor,
seeking after rule and domination

The second difference of time, is the progress of war before the victory:
during which time, all the means are lawful that are requisite to the attaining
of the victory, sleights, shifts, stratagems, burning, wasting, spoiling,
undermining, battery, blows and blood. I will give you one example in Scripture
for all, ^ol. 8. In the taking of Ai there is a stratageme, an ambush laid
behind the city, an assault given before it, semblance of flight, by retiring
to draw the enemy out, the city fierd, the enemy enclosed, and then slaughterd
before and behind. S. Aug. q. 10. upon Joshua determines this matter in few
words.

The third and last difference is, the time 3
after victory. Uictorie achieved, and the enemy The time after victory.
subdued, because the blood of the conqueror begins to cool, and it is
against humanity to kill more than needs, the slaughter cease. There be
many things in cold blood to be required: first, to spare the innocents, Thou
shall not slay the iunocent. Exodus 23. 7
The innocents are reputed to be young, and old, women, and children, which are
by reason of sex, or years, or infirmity, unable to carry arms, strangers,
and Merchants, which are no parts nor members of the commonweal that has
offended, if it may be found they have stirred no coals in setting Princes
together by the ears, nor carried arms in the restance made during the time of
the fight. The next thing is satisfaction for the wrongs done, wherein the
spoil and waste of the country is to be reckoned for a part, because it is a
part of the punishment. Last o fall, hostage may be taken for security of
peace, and the spoil may be divided among the soldiers, who deserve as well to
be partakers of the sweet, as of the sour and bitter brunts of war.
Iehoshaphat 2. Chron. 20. verse. 25
gives the spoil of the enemy to his army, every man carries for himself
until he is weary.

Now, seeing we do not make Sermons as beggars make tape upon a sticks end,
wherein there is no taste, to give you a relish of all that has been spoken
about this action, cast your eyes upon the wars of your enemy, and your
own wars. You shall find the wars of the enemy, in the Indies, in
Portingale, in Granado, in the low countries, in France, and against us, to be
uncharitable and unjust, uncharitable, in that they are enterprized without
care or consideration of the loss of the countries, upon which he makes
war: or of the loss of the Church, whilst by his turbulent spirit
christian kingdoms are dashed one against another, the professors of Religion
extinguished, Christendom weakened, and the Turk strengthened: without
commiseration or care also of his own country or forces by which he fights,
leading the^ forth like sheep to the shambles to apparent slaughter, his own
eyes beholding them suncke into the bottom of the seas like a stone, as the
host of Pharao, or to lie pitifully bleeding at the feet of the revenger, as
the Midianites lay at ye feet of Gedeon. That his wats are as unjust as they
are uncharitable, appeeres by the rough regiment of his warriers, that break
all the ancient laws and privileges of the Countries where they enter, and
turn the glorious and golden administration of justice, into a hard and iron
government of war, administered by violence of arms: so that I may very well
liken the feet of his soldiers to the feet of the wolf, of who^ it is written,
that whatsoever he treads upon never prospers after. Look upon your own
wars another while, you shall find the^ to be very charitable and just,
charitable in that they are undertaken with greater care of y^ loss of ye
enemy, than the enemy has deserved, and with such a regard of our own loss
and the loss of the church, that it is the prayer and desire of our superiors,
that it may be performed with the least loss of English blod. The equity and
justice of your wars appeeres, in that they are undertaken, either in the
defense of the innocent in those dominions that are bound to set open their
gates, that the King of Glory may come in, or in defense of your selves at
home, your wives, your children, your lands, your lives, your country, and an
innocent maiden Queen, whose glorious life has injuriously and dishonourably
been sought and thirsted after these many years: and to this purpose,
mercenarie murderers, Jews, unnatural English, and hateful traitors hired by
the enemy from time to time to destroy it. These injuries not ceasing, but
increasing yet every day more and more, Crescente iniuria crescit ius ad
satisfactionem, The more her Majesty's wrongs and injuries increase, the more
her Majesty's right, and the right of the whole kingdom increases to redress
it. And if you be not able in all this to conceive what a price god has set
upon the head of her Majesty, do as the countryman does that knows not the
price of a precious jewel: stand by the buier and the seller, mark what the
chapman bids for it, and the Merchant refuses, and you shall find it. Spanish
iron has been many times adventured with great preparation of sword and shot,
but all scatterd and defeated: Spanish gold has been offered, ask what ye will
to kill and murder, but still prevented: Spanish policies distild every day into
driftes to compass it, but disappoynted. Blessed be God that has set such a
price upon the head of her Majesty, that the forces of this world are too
weak to conquer her, the treasure of this world too base to buy her, and the
wisdom of this world too crazde to circumuent her. In respect of these high
favors of almighty God, this word may well be written upon the crown of
England, in great capital letters, set with shining diamondes, that every one
may read it running, videntis and viuentis, It is the emperial crown of that
Lady, which by Gods great mercy sees and outliues her enemies. To encourage
you in so honorable wars as these, I know that if her majesty only were seated
in some eminent place between heaven and earth, and did but cast down one
princely regard upon you when you begin to march, it would give wings to your
hearts, and hands, and feet, to fly about this action. But I can tell you of a
greater then her majesty. As in public Theaters, when any notable show
passes over the stage, the people arise up out of their seats, and stand
upright with delight and eagerness to view it well: so is God described in the
scripture to stand upright at the passions of his Church (as at the stoning of
Stephen) to mark every man's carriage in the same. Assure your selves
therefore that in these invasions and wrongs of the enemy still attempted
against our country, the God of S Stephen, the God of S George, the God of her
majesty, the God of us all stands in the confines of heaven and earth, to see
and mark, who sendes his strokes nearest to the face of the enemy. And because
the enemy has but two ways to quail your courage, flattery and spanish
facing, I will shut up all that I have spoken to this purpose, with a short
exhortation of S. Aug. Exhorresce quod minatur omnipotens, and ama quod
pollicetur omnipotens, and vilescet omnis mundus, sieve promittens, sieve
terrens, Fear that which the almighty threatens, and love that which the
almighty promises, and the whole world shall become so base and contemptible
in your eyes, that you shall neither love nor fear that which the world
promises or threatens.

The second part. The exhortation to the action of war.
THe action of war being thus discoursed, we are now come to the exhortation,
wherein the first act of the soul is, to Trust. The hope of a Christian is
compared sometime to a helmet, 1. These. 5. because it breaks many a blow that
would astonish him: sometimes to an anchor, Hebrews the sixth chapter, because
it stays him when the sea works, and the wind blusters. Gregory likens it
to the fasting day that goes before a great holiday, because in the midst of
our heaviness it puts us in mind, that joy and salvation is at hand.
Bonauenture observes that it includes two things, it has two acts, which are
the very wings that move it: one is an expectation or longing for the thing it
self 3. d. 26. g. 4. and 9.
that is hoped for, Esaias 40. ver. 21. They that wait upon the Lord shall renew
their strength, they shall lift up the wings as the Eagles, they shall run
and not be weary. This act is proper unto hope. The other is Trust, the act
which Iehoshaphat calls for here: this is a persuasion whereby we judge in
distress that we shall have help at Gods hand, and that without him we can
have no help at all, Esaias 30. 3. there were some that thought upon help from
Egypt, to whom God says that the strength of Pharao should be their shame, and
their trust in the shadow of Egypt their confusion. This act is not so proper
to hope as the former, but is borrowed of faith. And if you will see the
necessity of it in the time of war, look into your own weakness. What is
man but a worm crawling upon the earth? David was a mighty king, yet he
confessed himself to be a worm and no man. As when little children first
learn to go alone, feeling the feebleness of their own feet, nature
teaches them to thrust out the hand to the wall, and trust to it to stay them:
so being once made acquainted with our own weakness, both nature and
religion teach us to trust to a strenger then our selves. This may not be, the
fair speech of man, Hier. 7. 4. Trust not in lying words, nor his fair looks,
Ezech. 16. there were some that trusted in beauty, and were deceived; nor his
strength, Hier. 17. 5. Cursed is he that trusts in man, and makes flesh his
arm; nor his wealth, 1. Tim. 6. 17. Trust not in uncertain riches: nor his
wit, God is able to turn it into foolishness, as he did the wisdom of
Ahitophel. Seeing no trust may be reposed in any of these, we must seek out a
better object, that is here set down to be God himself.

The first object [God.]
THe reason of it is this, that all natural effects have recourse to their
causes when they stand in need, and they become the stronger. The fish
distressed slides into the water, and it is relieved: the bird flies to the
dam, and it is shrouded under her wings: the Child runs to his parents: the
Shunamites Child complained to his Father, he sent him to his Mother, she
laid him upon her Lap, and forsook him not in death. Strike the dog, he
runs to his master: wound the Soldier, he flies to the army. The
Antiperistasis of the cold makes the heat retire into the fire, and the force
thereof is greater. God is the first cause of all things, and all things have
recourse unto him, Psalm, The eyes of all things do look up and trust in
thee O Lord.

If natural causes, whose goodness is finite do cherishe their effects,
how much more shall God, whose goodness is infinite? Sometimes man looks
about him for the help of man, and finds none: Psalm. 142. 4. David says he
looked about upon his right hand for help, and no body would know him, and
espying man to fail, he turned him to God that never fails. The Prophet
Hieremie blesses him that takes this course, he likens such a man to a tree,
his trust to the root, Gods favor to the sap that lies continually at the
root to feed it and defend it. The devil knows this very well, therefore
has it ever been his practice to strip us of this object. You may see it in
ye speech of Rabsakeh, 2. Kings 18. 29. when the enemy lay before Jerusalem.
Let not Ezechia (says he) deceive you, neither let him make you to trust in
the Lord, saying, the Lord will surely deliver us, and this City shall not be
given over into the hands of the king of Assure. Uerily the people of
Jerusalem were pitifully streightend when this was spoken, and their trouble
so inevitable in man's eye, that they saw no present way to escape, nor
conceived any likelihood to avoid them in time to come.

The success of the ennemie many times is so great, that he seems to be
placed at the right hand of God, and to prosper in all his actions, such a
matter it was Rabzakeh vaunted of in his speech, that God was on his side, in
suffering him to come so near as to whet his tuskes upon the walls of
Jerusalem. Gods own people in this case, appear to be at his left hand Genesis
4. 8.
miserable and unregarded. Yet as Manasses and Ephraim standing one at the
right hand of Jacob, the other at his left, both ready to receive his
blessing* Jacob suddenly crossed his hands, laying his right hand upon
Ephraim, and his left upon Manasles: so God suddenly shifts his hands in the
days of trouble, he lays his right hand upon his people, and delivers them,
and his left hand upon his enemies, pouring an unexpected contempt and
confusion upon them all. I will give you two examples of it in the Scripture.
Even in one night, when Ezechiah stood in fear of all, and Rabsakeh thought
himself sure of all, the whole army of Sennacherib was defeated by an Angel.
In one day, when the forces of Iehoshaphat were very small, and the army of
the inuaders was very great, the whole power of the enemy was suddenly
broken, they sell one upon another, and Iehoshaphat found their carcasses
dead upon the ground, before he could come at them.

It is a rule in Rhetorique, that if a man make choice of a friend to fly
unto in time of need, he should surueigh his power in him, whether he be
able, and his kindness, whether he be willing to yield him any succor. In
this manner when we have singled out God from all other things in heaven or in
earth to trust unto, it is good Rhetorike and good Divinity to take a view in
him of his power, whether he be able, of his knowledge, whether he be
skillful, and of his goodness, whether he be willing to relieve us.

His power, without question is far Gods power.
above the power of man, for man's power is finite, and Gods power is infinite,
Psalm 89. O Lord of hoastes who is like unto thee which art a mighty Lord.
David acknowledges him to have such a power as cannot be matched. Ephesians 1.
19. Paul desires God te lighten the eyes of their understanding, that they may
know what the exceeding greatness of his power is toward them that believe.
In Arithmetike set one against ten ten against a hundred, a hundred against a
thousand, a thousand against ten thousand, although there be great odds, yet
there is some comparison, but if you could set down an infinite number, then
there could be no comparison at all, because the one is finite, the other
infinite: so is it between the power of God and man: set all the Princes of
the earth in opposition against God, they shall never be able to withstand
him. Pompey was wont to say, that with one stamp of his foot he could have
all Italy in arms. God may say that with one stamp of his foot he can
overthrow all Italy, and all the world beside when it is in arms, Psalm. 68.
1. Let God but arise* his enemies shall be scattered, and they that hate him
shall fly before him. God is said Psa. 149. to bind kings in chains, and
their nobles in fetters of iron. if he once fall into fettring of princes, it
shall be done so sure, that no flesh shall be able to knock off their bolts
again. P^. 147. God is reported to make fast the bars of your gates. If he once
make the bars of your gates fast, trust to it, they shall be so fast, y^ no
preparation of the inuader shall break them open. We have three rules in
Philosophy, that will make this plain unto you.

The first is, that where there be two agents, a superior, and an inferior,
the inferior can never overcome the superior, because the superior is more
active. We say in Philosophy, that that is most active which is most
separated from earthly parts, most elevated a materia. The physician distilles
his simples into waters, he makes his extractions and quintessences, that the
more they be elevated a materia, they might be the more active, and work the
better. Water is stronger then earth, because it is more active, and more
elevated a materia. Fire is stronger then water, because it is yet more active
and elevated a materia. You shall find it in the sacrifice of the Prophet,
where the fire lickt up the water, burnt the wood, and consumed the sacrifice:
Angels are stronger then men, because they are much more elevated a materia.
God is stronger then the Angels, because he is most elevated, he is above
earth, above water, above air, above fire, above men, above Angels, above all,
and over all Actus purus, so full of actiuitie, that none is able to inflict any
passion upon him. The second rule is that variante materia, forma manet eadem,
according to the change and alteration of your diet, according to the variation
of the air, wherein you live, your blood, your humors, your bodies, your
complexions do change and alter, but your soul is the same still. A man's
ennemie may cut off a piece of his body, a leg, or an arm, but he cannot
cut off a piece of his soul. Look what the soul is to the body, that is
God unto his church: all the prophets and apostles, thousands of holy and
learned bishops and preachers have been cut off, some by persecution, some
by natural death, yet religion stands, and the Church stands to this day,
which is a sign that it is maintained by such a form as can not vary. Seeing
then that all worldly things be transitory, men vary, the times vary, the
policies of war vary, the weapons vary, the squares and orders of fight
vary, the places of advantage and disadvantage vary, it is best trusting to
such an object as cannot vary: such a one is God that has esse quoddam
magnum, such a great and inuariable essence, that a man safely say unto him
Pone me iuxta te, and manus cuiusuis pugnet contra me, Lord set me by thee, and
then let every hand fight against me, I fear no variation. The third rule is
this, Animalia multa agu^t and patiuntur per phantasiam, living creatures here
beneath, do many things, and suffer many things, by reason of their
apprehension of their object. The sheep at the first sight of the wolf
apprehends him for a terrible object, and naturally fears and flies him: the
lion quite contrary apprehe^ds no terror in the wolf at all, but passes by
him, and by all the beasts of the forest, with an honorable scorn and
disdain of all.

About man's apprehension of fear or courage, the situation of his eye either
makes all, or marreth all. When you stand here below upon the ground, and
look up to the top of Paul's, they that stand upon the steeple, appear small
of stature to you, although they be tall and great, and they that are next to
you seem great, by reason of the distance of the one, and the neerenesse of
the other: but if you stood upon the top of Paul's and looked down, then they
that are above would seem great, and they that are beneath would seem
little: So is it with men in the time of trouble, if their eyes be fastened upon
the earth, their enemies will appear unto them to be great and mighty, and God
which is so high will appear little. Nevertheless, if their eyes be in
heaven, as Iehoshaphats eyes were, 2. Chro. 20. 12. Our eyes are toward thee,
and look down from thence upon their enemies, God will appear strong and
mighty, and the enemy weak and withered. I will give you three instances of
it in the scriptures. Numbers 13. Espialles were sent out to discover the land
of Promise, some of them had a sheep eye, they no sooner saw the great
stature of the Inhabitaunts, all Giants or Giants fellows, the high walls of
their cities reaching up to heaven, but they were afraid, they took the
people to be invincible, and the towns impregnable. Caleb quite contrary
having his eye in heaven upon Gods power and promise, and looking down thence
upon the people, and the Cities, apprehended no terror in them at al: let us go
up (says he) without doubt we shall overcome them. Caleb had a Lions eye, he
passed by the people and their Cities with an honorable scorn of all. 2. King.
7. Samaria was in great distress, a mighty enemy before it, a sore famine
within it, there was a noble man upon whom the king leaned, that had so base
an eye, that looking upon the present miseries, he took them to be greater
then God, he persuaded himself that although God should rain vittailes out of
heaven, the famine could not be speedily removed: But E^^^a had his eyes in
heaven, and looking down from thence, despised the present calamities, in
respect of the present help and hand of God, that by next day would make the
price of corn to stoop so low at the gates of Samaria, that it should be
there at a very easy rate, and the siege removed. 1. Esdras 4. there was a
flattering courtier, that looking upon the royal person of the King, held a
paradoxe that the King is the strongest thing in the world, because he
sends out his warriors that slay and kill, and overthrow Castles, Towns,
and Towers, and dig up the mountains as they go: but Esa. 40. 22. the man of
God apprehends no such greatness in kings and princes, when they be compared
with God: and looking down from heaven upon the Kings of the earth he says
they be crickets in respect of God. Even then when they are in their chiefest
ruff, with their chariots, and horse, and men at arms marching to the
battle, they are but as grasshoppers trouping out, skipping and leaping up
and down the field. By these things you may perceue that as Moses serpent did
eat up the serpents of the Inchanters, so Gods power deuoures and swallows up
all the power and strength of man.

There may be power where there is no skill to use it: If the Ox knew his
strength Gods knowledge.
he would not suffer a child to drive him: if the horse were privy to his
own force, he would not suffer a boy to ride him. But it is not so with God, as
he has might, so he knows when, and where, and how to use it, Job 12. 13.
With him is wisdom and strength. The School men say that he knows non
entia, things that are not. They take it out of the fourth chapter to the
Romans 17 verse. He calls things that are not as if they were. These are of two
sorts, either such as are not now in act, but either have been in time
passed, or shall be in time to come. A second sort of things that are not, is
such, as neither are now in act, nor ever were, nor ever shall be. Seeing
then it is the cowardice of man, especially in the times of wars, to fear
many things that never were, nor are, nor shall be, it is good at such times to
make God the only object of our trust which sees and knows, that many things
which we fear shall never fall upon us.

Last of all there may be power and skill Gods goodness.
to help when there is no will to use it: let us search then whether God be as
willing to succor his people as he is powerful and skillful. Surely if he were
not, he might be said to be less kind unto his children, than man and beast
is unto their young, they cherish their young, they fight for them and defend
them. Gods goodness toward his people can not be deliuerd unto you by a
better hand than by the doctrine of his providence which includes both his
knowledge and his will. Concerning which, seeing there have been diverse errors,
and I perceive the days and times require they should be touched and opened, I
will deal with them as the venerable Judges of our Country deal (in care and
compassion of the Queens liege people) with those atturnies whom they find to
be loose in the haft, and fit for nothing but to disquiet a kingdom, I will
disgrace them, and disable them to do any more mischief, race them out of
Errors about the prouidens of God.
the roll and let them go. There be 6 of the^ in number. The first is, the
error of the Stoikes, setting down a kind of providence which they call Fate or
Destiny, which runs through a rank of causes, and brings in an absolute and
inevitable necessity that pinions the arms and the actions of God and man.
This error Theodoret discovers in his sirt book of curing the affections of
the Greeks, and Alphonsus de Castro in his seventh book of Heresies, in two
several Treatises, one of Fate, the other of Future contingent, beats the
nose of this error flat to the face of the deuisers and amintainers of it. The
second is y^ error of Auerroes Metaph. 12. tying Gods providence only to
celestial things, al terrestrial and corruptible things exempted. This is
bewraied by Cyril. Hierosol. catach. 8. Clemens Alexandr. li. 5. S^rom. and
saint Hierome upon the eight chapter of Ezechiel, and the twelfth verse (where
the Jews said, Dominus dereliquit terram, the Lord has forsaken the earth)
auowcheth that this error was crept into the hearts of the Jews, for which
God threatened in the ninth chapter of Ezechiel that his eye should not spare
them. The third is, the error of some that held, that Gods providence
stretches it self to corruptible things, only after a general manner, and
Ad rerum genera and species, non ad singularia. Nicenus shows it in his eight
book of Philosophy and the fourth chapter, this is against the doctrine of the
holighost, that teaches, that a sparrow lights not on the ground, nor a hair
falls from our heads without his providence. The fourth is, the error of
Rabbi Moses the Jew, laid open by Tho. 1. p. q. 22. a. 2. Rabbi Moses thought,
that among corruptible things, man only appertained to the providence of God,
which the Prophet Hieremie confuteth in his two and thirty chapter and the
seven and twenty verse, Ego Dominus Deus vniuersae carnis, I am the Lord of
all flesh, both man and beast. The fifth is the error of the Platonists, which
distinguish three kinds of providence, one of the supreme and high god, which
stretches primarily to spiritual things, and secondarily to all the world:
another of separated substaunces that move the heavens circulariter: a third
of certain daemones, which the Platonists place in the between God and man.
Of these I may say as the Prophet Esaias says, chapter 28. They have made
falsehood their refuge, they have shrouded under vanity, and have trusted unto
lies. The sixth is the error of Atheists, which utterly denies any God, any
care or providence concerning the creatures, but will have all things to be
ruled by fortune and chance. This is disclosed by Lact li. 1. instit. ca. 2.
Nicen, ^. 8 Philos. ca. 3. and others. The best way to disgrace and disable
this, is to set a cocks-combe upon the head of it, as David does, The fool
has said in his heart there is no God. Look upon all the creatures in the
world, you shall find them all make up one great and glorious army, whereof
God (like a Monarch) is the high commander, they are all marshalde into their
several ranks and orders, wherein they march and move obedient to his beck.
Look upon the actions and operations of insensible things, stones, plants, and
herbs, you shall see them all tend to their peculiar ends for which they were
created, of which ends they have no knowledge themselves, but are directed
unto them by the hand of God, as the arrow is directed to the mark by the eye,
and the arm of the Archer. Our faith acknowledges him. I believe in God.

The Scriptures discover him. Ps. 70. 90. 1. O Lord thou have bin our
habitatio^ from generation to generation.

Comparisons bewray him, Wisd. 7. Gold is but Gravel in respect of him: the
creatures confess him, Ipse fecit nos, et non ipsi nos, it is he that has
made us, and not we our selves.

What a shame is it, that the young, both of men and beasts are no sooner
borne into the world, but by and by nature teaches them to turn their mouth
to the breasts that brought them forth, and men should live in a religious
kingdom until they come to the years of discretion, and neither by nature
nor religion yet be taught to turn the mouth of confession unto God to find
him out, that set his hand to the womb to bring them forth? I will leave all
other proofs and examples that may serve this purpose, to bring you near to
our own times.

There was but few years since a profane company about this City, which
were called the damned Crewe, men without fear, or feeling, either of Hell
or Heaven, delighting in that title: It pleased God to draw them all into one
net. They were shipped all into one Bark, and passing down the River with sound
of Trumpets, in a fair day, a fair tide, a fair wind, and a fair new bark,
suddenly about one of the Reaches a perry of wind came from the land, and so
filled the sails, that they were all run under water before they came to
Grauesende, I could never hear to this day that any one of them escaped. If
that the Bark did appertain to any of this honorable city, you may remember
this great judgment of God by your own loss.

I do but gather it up as I go, to put you in mind that if God did bles
Laban, for Jacob, and Putifar for Joseph, he shall bless you and your affairs
for receiving of such as receive him, and curse and cross you and your
affairs for entertaining of such as do not entertain him. It is well noted in
Gregory that the performance of things past breeds an assurance of things to
come. The experience of Gods Judgments executed upon his enemies, and of his
favors and deliverances extended to them that fear him, are sufficient
arguments of the care he has of us, Tho. 1. 2. q 40. a. s. shows yt
experience makes a man confident two ways, the one is by making a matter
easy, that which a man has done often he can easily do again, he has no
distrust at all to work it; Eth. 3. ca. 8. He that has often overcome in war,
trustes to overcome again. The other is the persuasion experience breeds, that
the thing which we go about may be compassed. Both these are in David's
experience, and in Paul's. David having found deliverance by Gods hand out of
many trobles, says: yt in the name of his God he will leap over the wall. His
experience had made the matter so easy to him that it was but a skippe or a
iumpe in his conceit. Paul confesses. 2. Cor. 1. 8. of the troubles that
happened to him in Asia, wherewith he was pressed out of mesure, that they were
cast upon him to this end, that he might not trust in himself but in the Lord
which has delivered him, and does deliver, and will deliver him hearafter.
Seeing then God has a care to save and defend his servants, as it was a base
fear of the Israelits, after so long experience of his mighty hand, so many
miracles wrought, signs and wonders showed on their behalf, in Egypt, in the
red sea, and in the wilderness, to distrust of their entry into the land of
promise: So after so many trials of Gods favor in the delivery of this
kingdom from the hands of the enemy, it were a vilde and contemptible
cowardice, to distrust of the like hereafter. And because in the time of war
the fear of one makes many fear, and the running of one makes many fly, I will
end the discourse of this object with the speech which Vitalis a soldier and a
martyr, used to Vrsicinus a Physician which suffered many bitter torments for
religion, but at last, Vitalis perceiving that as his pains began to increase,
his courage and countenance began to be abated; Noli Vrsicine (says he)
quialios curare consueuistite Antonin 1. p. hist. cit. 6. c. 25.
ipsu^ perdere, and post tot vulnera accepta, corona frandari sempiterna. Do
not now Vrsicinus which have vsualy healed others, destroy thy self, and after
so many wounds received, loose an eternal crown of glory. Uerily the
attempts of the enemy upon this land have been many, hitherto your courage and
forwardnes in the defense of your Country has encoraged others, if you chance
at any time to espy the drifts of the enemy to increase, or his rage grow
greater and greater, be notnow apalled, and after so many and furious brunts
manfully withstood, loose an eternal crown of glory.

The first consequent [ safety.]
THe first conseque^t, flowing from this act and this object, you see is
safety, [you shall be assured.] To understand this security aright, you must
consider that our trust looks two ways, one is toward God, and there it has
assurance, because his power is such as cannot be masterd, his knowledge such,
that none can go beyond him, and his goodness such that he is ever ready and
willing to help his servants. Es. 28. 6. He is a strength unto them that turn
away the battle from he gates.

They that trust in the lord (says David) shall be as mount Sion that cannot
be moved. Psa 125. David found him to be his viceadmirall, that carried the
light before him in the darkest times of trouble and guided him with wisdom
out of heaven. Ps. 27. 1 The lord is my light and my salvation. The other way
it looks is, to the thing hoped for, which is salvation, and this is of two
sorts, either eternal, or temporal: God promises neither of these absolutely,
but upon condition. The condition of the former is To. 8: Si tamen compatimur.
If we suffer with him* we shall be glorified with him. The condition of the
latter is Inuoca me and eruante, God enters into a covenant with his people.
Exo. 23. to cast out their enemies by little and little; the people enter into
a covenant with God also Ex. 24. to do all that he commands. It was the order
that God and Solomon took one with another, 1. kin. 8. 44. That when the
people went to war, they should pray toward ye temple. Therefore if you trust
to receive at Gods hands any of these two things, you must do it per debita
media and debito sperandi mod^, otherwise it is presumption. But if you go the
right way to work in the time of war, if every man reform his own life, it
was it that A chior told Olophernes, If there were no sin in the inhabitants of
Bethnlia, he should fall before them and become a reproach and a scorn onto
all the world: if every man betake himself to such a care and preparation of
defense, as if all lay upon man and god did not concur, and then with prayer
and devotion so commend the cause to God, as if all lay upon God and man did
not cencur. You shall then find that to be verified in you, which Socrates
found in the Lacedemoniens, who perceiving that in certain wars between the A
thenians and them, the A thenians offered much gold unto their Idols, yet they
departed still out of the field beaten. He asked the Oracle what might be the
cause of it? and it was answered, that the prayers of ye Lacedaemonians
prevailed more than ye gold of the A thenians. No doubt but much cost has been
laid upon all the actions and attempts of the enemy against you, yet he goes
away beaten, if you will know the reason, the prayers of the church of Eng^^nd,
have prevailed more than the gold of Spain.

The seccond Act [Beleeue.]
THis act in the handling of my Text comes after, which in order of generation
goes before the former. Heb. 11. Faith is the foundation of things hoped for,
and the evidence of things not seen. The foundation goes before the building,
and the evidence before possession. The gloss upon the 1. Matt. says, that as
Abraham begat Isaac, so faith begets hope. Prayer is the interpreter of hope,
and Romans 10. We cannot pray except we believe. How shall they call upon him,
in whom they have not believed? ver. 14. Intellectus est prior potentia qua^
voluntos. Man's appetite moves him not to hope for any thing before he knows it
either by sense and feeling, or by an apprehension of understanding. Therefore
as 2. Kin. 6 the servant of the Prophet feared until his eyes were opened, by
which he saw the help God had provided, and when he saw it his fear
vanished: so until the mind be lightened by faith, we are distrustful and
stant in doubt, but if we believe our doubt is over. Believe we cannot but by
preaching, whereby it grows that the object of this act in this place, is the
Prophet.

The second object. [The Prophet.]
AMos. 3. 7. God will do nothing but he reuealeth his secrets unto his
servants the Prophets. In this respect the Prophet is called a seer. 1 kin. 9.
He sees says Isidore many things that other men see not. Sometimes he sees
things belonging to the Majesty of God. Esa. 6. He sees God sitting upon a
high throne; sometimes he sees things appertaining unto the manners of men.
Esaias. 58. 7. He sees it necessary to the fasts of the Jews to join works of
mercy, in feeding the hungry, and releasing the hands of such as were
oppressed; sometimes he sees things present. 2. king. 5. Elizeus sees Gehesi
taking rewards although he were not with him: and 2. kin. 6. although he were
not in the counsel chamber of the king of Syria, yet he discovered all the
plottes and practices of the king of Syria to the king of Israel, s^ that the
king of Syria wondered at it, and mistrusted that some of his own counsel had
been false unto him, until they told him there was a Prophet in Israel
which bewraid al to the king of Israel which the king of Syria spoke in his
privy lodgings. Sometimes he sees things to come, Es. 47. 12. The prophet
foresees the destruction of Babylon, and tells them of it, that two things shall
com upon them in one day, loss of children and widowhood. The light where with
the prophhetes saw so much, was a light above nature, confirmed with arguments
above nature, it was confirmed by miracles. And as the doctrine of the prophets
came down from heaven confirmed by miracles, so ye gospel which we preach to
you came down from heaven and was confirmed by miracles. Mar. 16. it is said
that the Lord wronght with the Apost and confirmed the word with signs that
followed: yea, there is a kind of miracle wrought by it unto this day. What a
wonder is it to see a grievous sinner that has frozen in his wickedness many
years suddenly converted with one sermon, with one sentence in a sermon? All the wisdom of the philosophers could never do it without a mou^tain of books,
much time, much teaching, much practice ex frequentatis actibus, and when they
had done their best, they could never attain unto it. It may seem strange that
the office of the Prophets and Preachers being so excellent an office, and
their doctrine so confirmed from time to time, that neither prophet nor
preacher should in this declining age of ours be regarded, and we may say as
the prophets did Quis credidit auditu nostro? Who has believed our report? The
people are grown like to springs in summer, the more heat without, the more
cold within, the more preaching the less devotion. They may be compared to the
pinnacles of the belfry, begin to ring they begin to quake, as if they were
afraid, continue ringing, they stand still, their fear is past.

In the beginning of her May. reign every man began to tremble at the word
of God and to give heed to the preaching of the same: but the happy
continuance Seven reasons of ^he contempt of ^he Prophets and Preachers of
Gods word.
thereof has made it so familiar unto you that you care not for it. Methinks I
could yield some reasons of these euentes, 5 on your part, 1. of ours, and ye
last on gods part

The 1. is the disposition yt is in men. As between the face of a man and a
glass, so is it between ye precher and the hearer. The face of a man, is the
same face, but acording to the disposition of the glasses whereon it has
reflection it appears different, in some it seems smooth, in some wrinckled,
in some long, in some round, there be some preposterous glasses, that make
that which is straight, appear crooked. Some will inuert the parts of man,
and set his head down and his heels up.

Such a glass was Amasia to the prophet after the slaughter of the Edomits,
the prophet reproved him for offering Incens to Idols after the vctorie, he
shook him up like a dishclout.

Art thon become the Kings counceller? such a glass was Ahab to Michaia when
he fed him with the bread of affliction: such glasses were the people to
Hieremy lament Raita Iehoua gna uatati it is as much as if the Prophet said,
Lord thou have seen that that which is right in me they have made crooked.
Such a glass was Harding to Iuel, the learned Bishop complaind of it, that
whatsoever he spak was to long or to short, or one way or other it stood awry.
Such a glass is the new Presbytery couching down at the gates of great
persons, with her belly full of barcking libells to disgrace the persons of
the best men, and the labors of the best learned in the Church of England. And
to be plain with you, because I trust you love plains, such glasses we that
are preachers in the country meet withal. You may see it by the practisse the
holy ghost discouers Hier. 18. 18.

Let us smite Hieremie with the tongue, and give no heed to his word.

The best way the devil can find to disgrace preaching, is to disgrace yt
preacher. Concerning this practice, I assure my self that much water goes by
the Mill, which the Miller knows not of, therefore standing before the
honorable Judges of our Country, I will open some things to this purpose as I
pass along.

The last Assizes in the Country where I dwell, there was a Minister, a
bachiler of Divinity, that had a cause against one that held his benefice as
farmor, and would keep from him both his living and his rent that should
maintain him, and do it by law. But there was a base generation then present,
which belike have some inferior services to courts of justice, whom I cannot
beter liken than unto Florus an idle fellow, that said of Caesar, Ego nolo
Caesar esse, I will not be Caesar to march up and down in armor among the
Britains, and so lead a laborious and painful life: to whom Caesar answered,
ego nolo Florus esse, ambulare per popinas, etc. I will not be Florus to creep
into every kitchen, or to be shrouded under the roofes of victualing houses,
woorried and and eaten up at last with lice and laziness.

This generation is such as have had honest trades and occupations to get their
living, but per adventure by some evil carriage in their trades, having lost
both credit and custom, and now scorning the sweat of their occupation, have
found out a new occupation, to live by ye sweat of other men's brows: and to
compass this the better, have joined themselves to some cracked Attorney,
which since his disgrace and rasing out of the roll, has wandered a while in
France, until his face, or his fortune, or ill fashion of life might be
forgotten, and so returns closely to his old byas. This kind of people espying
but one minister to be drawn forth into suits and quarrels, gave it out lustily
that they would have the next assizes better furnished, they would have three or
four of our brethren there. I will say to your Honors of these people, as
David said to Solomon concerning Semei. 1. kin. 2. 8. With thee is Semei that
cursed me with a horrible curse. Although my hand be not upon him, yet thou
shall not count him innocent, for thou art a wise manne and know what thou
ought to do unto him. When any of these caterpillars and coosners of the
Queens leege people, shall hale any of the Clergy by violence into the courts,
as you are wise and learned in the laws of our Country, mark well the nature
of the action, and the quality of the persons, and do according to the
wisdom God has put into your hearts, you know what you ought to do in these
cases better than I can teach you.

I dare be bold to say, that you shall find the Clergy of England haunted at
this day with three cumbers that troubled the Prophet Jeremy, Lament. 3. The
first is, that his enemies chased him like a bird from tree to tree. The
second was, they would not tarry until he was dead, but cast him quick into
a pit, the third against all humanity, when they had him down they threw
stones upon him presently to keep him down, a barbrous cruelty passing the
cruelty of the Italian, the heathen, and the spaniard. The Italian has a
trick in the art of the rapier and the dagger to teach his scholar with a
trauace or two to get the point of his adversaries weapon, and having that, to
lock him up so sure that he may turn away his face from him and run him
through, which he says he does Per non veder crudelta because he will behold
no cruelty. The tragedies of the heathen poets are stuffed full of murder,
inhmanity and horrible actions, yet are they performed with such a care and
compassion of the people, that they are al conuayed from the peoples eyes. The
spanish inquisition has been so kind in some cruelties, that they have of
grace and favor greased the halter for some that wear strangled for religion,
that they might be dispatched the sooner. Let us crave any of these favors at
the hands of our enemies, let them turn away their faces from us when they
kill us, that their eyes delight not, and their cheeks blush not at their own
cruelty: or convey the horror and inhumanity of their* actions behind the
stage, that the people be not sxandald: or grease every halter that stops our
breath that the rope may ride, and make a quick riddance of us al. Or if they
be so gallant faulkners that they make it their pastime and recreation to
pursue us like a quail or a partridge from place to place, and such huntsmen
as haueing once straightened their game be desirous to tumble it into a pit, let
them tarry until we be cold in the mouth, and then throw Pelion and Ossa the
Giants weight upon us, we know we shall rise again. By these practices both
you my Lords, and you good people may easily discern, that this world is a
very sea of trobles, wherein there be two ships under sail, both men of war.
The one is the church, where Christ is the master, his cross the maste, his
sanctimony the sails, the tackle is his patience and perseverance, the cast
pieces are the Prophets, Apostels, and preachers whose sound has been hard
over all the world, the mariners be the Angels singing their Celeumata glory
be to God on high, the fraught is the souls of just men, women, and children,
And the rich gifts and devotions bestowed upon churches and colleges bound up
in baggs that shall never perish. The rudder is charity, all the motions and
actions of the church are wroght in love, the ancor is hope, the flagge in the
top of her is faith, the word written in it, Premimur non oprimimur. We are
cast down (says the Apostle) but we perish not. There is another ship at
sea which has this ship in rhace, that is the Pyracy of hell, a hot ship and
full of wildfire, where the Devil is master, pride the mast, impurity the
sail, the wisdom of flesh the Card, the mystery of iniquity the compass,
Diagoras the Atheist, Indas ye traitor, and the whole rabble of hell the
Mariners: two tire of Ordnance planted in her, one mixed of heretics and
schismatiks, another of persecuting heathen princes, that spit smoke and
sulphur at the church of God. There belonges no anchor to this vessel, to stay
it when the storms of the wrath of God arise, for it is subject to despair.
The flag in the top is infidelity, the word written in it, Lu^rum est pietas.
Gain is godliness. You may see it in the continual chase of the Church, for
the churches treasure, lands and leases given in Pios vsus. The days have
been, the question was, What shall we bring 1. Sa. 7. 9.
to the man of God? The days are now, the question is in every Court of
justice, in every high court of Parliament, what shall we take from the man of
God?

In the noble Shunamites days, they devised to build up a chamber for the
prophet, to set him up a stool, a table, and a candlestick. In these noble
days, men devise how to pull down the chambers of the prophets, to overthrow
his stool and his table, and break his candlestick in pieces. In the days of
the Levites when the portions of the priests were detained and the Levites
scattered, there was a good Nehemiah that reproved the Judges and Elders, and
set the house of God in order, and brought the tithes bark again unto the
priest. In these days, if God stir up a good Nehemia to deliver us our
portion into our hands, the Kite catches it before we can put it to our
mouth. The Clergy of England may now join hand in hand in a fair
roundelay and sing and record one to another, as little children do in the
streets, When shall we eat white bread? when the puttock is dead. Tobiah and
Sanaballet perceiving the walls of Jerusalem begin to rise, asked whether the
walls were so high that a Fox might not get over them: and in these days of
ours, if any trick of a Fox may be found to cross the Church, we shall be
sure to have it put in practice.

To this purpose it may be you shall perceive some broker belonging to the
common Law, or some iester hanging upon the Court, or some Lyris Poet and
common Rimer houering about this City, subborned and bolstered to deal in
derision of the Church in time of parliament as Italians do in their plays,
that come huffing in on a sudden with flights, shifts iugling, packing, tricks
of legier de main, all cast and contrived to no other end but to intoxicate the
whole Scene, and to make game and laughter for the lookers on. But let the
grave affairs of this church and kingdom be once turned into sport, and you
shall quickly see by the multitude of judicious eyes fastened upon the actions
of all kingdoms, by ye books of intelligences daily printed, and by the
innumerable company of learned heads and pens, working and walking day and
night, that all Christendom shortly will ring of the pageants plaide among us,
and shortly all Christendom will abhor us, as a people profane and
irreligious. A great part of this mischief being hatched by the presbytery.

2 The second reason is, the mistaking of the physic that should have been
administered unto the presbytery. Conference, conniuence, tolleration,
disputation, printing of books, and preaching of sermons, have been applied
unto them, these are all wrong Apozems, one dram of Elleborus would have purged
this humor. It was the judgment of a very learned Bishop many years ago,
that correction would amend it.

By favor and support these Uermine that were long since, by the labors of
learned bishops hewn in pieces, have crept out of their holes, from Leidon
and other places, and by continual rolling recovered their tail, their torn
papers and maimed pamphlets have bin sticht together again with a skaine of
Sisters thread, and wrought round with a white seluedge of reformation to grace
them, whereby the ears of the Church have been filled with a new hissing, to
the very mockery of religion, and the impudent slander of the church of
England, which is by Gods great blessing at this day (even in her ruins) the
most famous church in Europe.

It is said of S. Antonie, that two years before the heresy of Arrius brake
forth, being in his devotions and casting up his eyes toward heaven, he had
a vision, wherein he saw Gods altar compassed about with a company of brute
beasts, kic king and striking at it with their heels, until they overthrew
it, and trampled all the holy things under their feet. He wept when he beheld
it, and persuading himself that some troble in the church would follow, he
prayed unto God to turn away the mischief. Were S. Anthony now alive, he
should not see these matters by shaddows or representations in the air, but in
lively acts and deeds, Gods altar environed with a company of proud Mules,
striking at it with their heels, the altar it self battered by violence and
beaten down, holy things trodden on and trampled with foul feet. Those things
which in all religious ages have been counted Phobera cai phricodestata,
fearful and terrible, are now of no reckoning nor reputation, religion
scorned, ye priest derided, those conflictes between the preachers and the
people that Paul tasted at Ephesus, where he fought with beasts in the shape
of men.

All these miseries springing from a wrangling humor of the Presbytery, that
has brought religion into contempt. Never a good S. Antony weeps over it,
never a good Mattathias rentes his clothes, no man's bowels work like the wine
that has no vent, to inueigh against it with that egernesse the cause
requires. It is a sign that religion decaies, and devotion grows cold among
us.

When the weather is hot every man opens his mouth, but when it is cold he
shuttes it so close that his teethe chatter: where zeal is there is heat, and
where heat is men will quest and open, Psalm. 77. Aperiam os meum, I will open
my mouth (says the Prophet David.) We cannot (says Peter) but speak the
things that we have seen and heard. Where no zeal is, there is no heat, where
no heat, no speech but chattering and imperfect soundes, hollow and minced
between the teeth, as if men were afearde to speak: surely such are unfit for
Gods service, he cannot abide to see a quaking hand in his quarrel. As it is a
sign of faintness to see this and to be silent, so it is a sign there is
something in me^ unnatural. For we say in Phylosophie, vnum quod que magis
inclinots in id cuius est. Every thing is naturally inclined unto that to which
it apertaineth. If the body be in danger, the arm is presently lifted up to
receive the blows coming upon it self, that with the hazard of it self it
may save the body, because it is a member of the body. This Honorable City is
a body pollitike, every good citizen which is a member of it, when he spies
the Charters, privileges, and immunities thereof granted by the grace and
favor of our Princes, to be in danger, will with the hazard of his own
substance seek to defend and keep it.

The Church is a body mystical, every one of you if you appertain to God is
a Citizen of this Jerusalem, and when you see the church in danger, if there be
any kind or natural affection in you at all, every man when the danger
does approach, will with the hazard of his own person, object and cast
himself between the church and it. But the want of this affection, and the
neglect of this physic, is a reason of the contempt that grows upon us.

3 The third is, the difficulty of man's attaining to his end, trees and
plants, and all inferior creatures, attain their perfection and end with few
motions, with nourishment and augmentation. The holy Angels of god attained
unto their end with one motion, with one conversion unto god, in instanti, even
at the instant of their creation became blessed. But Man is compared in the ps.
to a watch, he has a great many gimols appertaining to him to move him, he
mooues like a watch or a coatche with many wheels. The act of his
understanding gives him one motion, presenting the object to him which he must
embrace, his appetite sensitive gives him another motion contrary to the
former, caro concupiscit aduersus spiritum the flesh lusts against the
spirit. His own will gives him another motion, God created it to move it self
ad opposita, the external object gives him another motion, The view of the
forbidden fruit moved Eve to taste and eat it. God himself which has the
heart of man in his hands and turns it as the rivers in the South, gives him
another motion: among all these, some moving regular, some retrograde, some
forward, some backwarde, some toward heaven, some toward earth, It is no
hard matter to tune an instrument of music, A paier of virginals or a pair of
Organs when every string and pipe is out of tune, but man being a creature so
witty, so subtle, so proud, so surly, so wedded to his own will and opinions,
and rolling upon so many wheels, to set every string and pipe of man in tune,
to make al his motions concur and agree to gither Hic labor hoc epus est, It is
the hardest profession in ye world to be a preacher.

The 4. reason is a riddle. I pray you riddle me what is that, that is the
highest the lowest, the fairest the foulest, the strongest the weakest, the
richest the porest, the happiest the unhappiest, the safest and the most in
danger of any thing in the world? I will not promise every one of you as
Samson did, a new suit of apparel to expound it. It may be this age will take
order for the Cleargies liberality, yet I must tell you, that as Samsons riddle
was not expounded but by ploughing with Samsons Heifer, so this cannot be
declared but by ploughing with Gods own Heifer. And that I may not hold you long
in suspense, it is all but one thing, it is a good Christian. He is the highest
thing in the world, his conversation is in heaven, Col. He is the lowest thing
in the world, every man treads upon him, he may say with David, De profundis ad
te clamaui. From the deapthes have I called unto thee. This is very low. He is
the fairest thing in the world, he is a member of the church of God, which for
her beauty is compared in the Canticles to the Sun and the Moon, and to an
Army well ordered and set in good array, three things very beawtifull to look
upon. He is the fowlest thing in the world, so disguised with Watching,
Weeping, Fasting, Pennaunce, and many other voluntary afflictions of body
and mind, that he looks like a bottle dried in the smoke, and tanned many
times with the sun of persecution he grows as black as if he had lien among
the pots. He is the stro^gest thing in the world, he has faith, he has hope,
he has love, three strong things; faith has a force to remove mountains,
hope is an ancor that stays the greatest ships in the greatest storms, love is
as strong as death, it enters the strongest hold, neither walls, nor
bulworks, nor rampires can keep it out; what a strength had David? Non timebo
quid faciat mihi homo, I will not fear what man can do unto me. What a
strength had Eliah the Prophet that durst go to a king and face him and tell
him that it was he that troubled all Israel. A good christian has sometime a
strength and a power in his eye passing the eye of Plantianus. Herodian says
of Plantianus, Seuerus the Emprors minion, that he had such a teror in his
couetenance that men durst not look him in the face, if they did, they were so
dawnted that it drove them to cast their eyes down unto the ground. For this
cause when he went abroad he had certain Anteambulones, some that ran before
him to marshall the way and give warning of his coming, that men might cast
their eyes to the earth as he passed by; but this terror was unto his
inferiors. It is said of S. Benedictus, that he had such a power and terror in
his eye, even to his superiors, that casting but a look upon Totylas the king
of the Goths, afurious and an audacious king, he made him quake and tremble.
Mark it when you will in the persecutions of the church, you shall many times
discover such a glory and majesty in the countenance of them that are put to
death, as was in the face of Stephen when he was stoned, their torments are
more afraid of them, than they are of their torments. Yet are they again so
weak at another time, if God do but hide himself a while, that either they
complain with David, Quare tristis incedo dum affligit me inimicus? Why go I
thus heavily while mine enemy oppresses me? Or couch down with Eliah under a
Juniper tree, weary of themselves, and desire God to take away their life. He
is the richest thing in the world, he has Christ Jesus the very treasure and
riches of God, and in him all things: he is the poorest thing again, he has
his good name and his goods taken from him. Heb. 11. 37. He is destitute,
afflicted, and tormented, even to the loss of life it self at last.

He is the happiest thing in the world, he has a good conscience, which is a
continual feast. Prou. 15. He is again the unhappiest, his hands be tied,
he may not be revenged: his eyes be muffled, he may see no vanity: his lips
be sealed, he may not render rebuke for rebuke, and living here in this world
which is a kind of Paradise to carnal men, full of Honor and wealth, and
pleasures, which many other men embrace, while GOD has set him (as the Poets
fained of Tantalus) up to the chinne in these things, and will not suffer
him to taste them. Touch not, taste not, handle not. What a miserable life is
this?

Last of all, he is the safest thing in the world, he is ever under the shadow
and protection of the wings of God: he is also the most in danger in soul and
in body of any thing in the world, his soul is the very But against which
Satan discharges all his shot of temptations, his body many times in perils
by sea, by land, among false brethren, compassed about with danger, on the
right hand and on the left. Being the office of the preacher to bring both
these ends together, and every man being desirous to be partaker of the
height, the beauty, the strength, the riches, the happiness, and the safety
that accompanies religion, but few or none willing to taste of the baseness,
the deformity, the weakness, the poverty, the misery, and the danger that
waits upon religion, Many deal with us as Demas did with Paul, that forsook
Paul and be took himself to the present world.

The fifth reason is, the combat of contraries: when fire and water meet, you
shall hear a rattling and hissing in the water, which proceeds from the
encounter of two contraries, the one striving to destroy the other. The end of
Gods word is to reform man's judgment, and his life: Gods word is true, but
Omnis homo mendax, Every man is a liar, his judgment erroneous and his life
erroneous. When truth and falsehood, the word of god and the word of man do
meet, there begins the conflict, the one strives to destroy the other. Gods
word is a fire, men's affections are water, when fire and water join, they
begin to rattle and bisse one at another. Paint a fire upon a piece of cloth,
and cast that into the water, you shall hear no hissing at all, because it is
no true fire. Paul preaching at Ephesus against their idols, he scatterd true
fire among them, Demetrius startles at it and stirs up sedition among the
people, there the contrary roares and rattles: in comes the Towne-clarke with
the magnificence of Diana, a false fire, a counterfeit fire, there is no
contradiction to him at all. It is the very case oftentimes, if the preacher
come to you with a painted fire, and stroke your spleen, and tell you that
all is well, because you are predestinate you shall go to Heaven sleeping, as
men carried in a Coatch without any action or motion of your own, we shall
never be gainsaide. But come to you with a true fire, and tell you*you must
work out your salvation with fear and trembling, you begin to murmur,
because you are contrary unto us.

The word in us labors to destroy sin in you, sin in you labors to destroy
the word in us, and thus we become despised. These five reasons are on your
part.

The next is on our part, and it is drawn from generation. Preaching is an
act of generation, it begettes faith. Among other things in the talk of Esdr
as with God, 2. Esd. 5. 49. Gods tells him, that in generation, Infans non parit
ea quae sunt senum, a child cannot perform that which a man performs.
Therefore Paul would not have a preacher to be a young scholar. A great part of
ye troubles of the church of England has sprung out of green heads, that have
much busied themselves about the state of bishops, these are young cockerels,
that have learned only to clap their feeblewings, and to crow upon the roost in
time of peace, but when religion is in danger, they dare not come into the
cockpit, to try masteries for religion as M. Jewel and many other good bishops
have done that are gone to God. As preaching is an act of generation, that
requires growth, so it is an exercise of artilery, that requires strength and
knowledge. The souls of men are the fairest marks that can be shot at: and we
must do as archers do The archer first takes a view of his mark, then
considers the distance of the ground, after that he carries his eye over all
the shafts in his quiver, he pulles out, and puts in one after another, until
he have made choice of his arrow: then he proves it with his finger, and
judges by his ear whether it be dry and fit to fly unto the mark: then
he marks how the wind sittes, to help him or to hinder him: when he has put
his arrow into the bow, and begun to draw, if there come a guske of
contradiction in his way, he has the discretion to pawse and to bear with it,
until it have spent it self: when the blast is over, he settes his foot to
the ground, lies close to his bow, draws his arrow up to the head, and
sticks it up to the feathers. Either want of years for the act of generation,
or want of growth to draw the bow of the Prophets and Apostles, and want also
of skill to shoot, and care to shoot when we have taken our aim, makes us
many times to miss the mark, and so we become despised.

The seventh and last reason is on Gods part, and this is fearful. When God
is determined to destroy a people, he makes their hearts fat, and their ears
heavy, and they become careless of the word of God. It was it that the
Prophets noted in Ama^a^. By this I know (says he) that God is determined to
destroy thee, Quia non acquieuisti consilio meo, Because thou have not followed
my council. I pray you think upon it in this opposition of yours against the
Church of England* it is very ominous, a fearful sign that God is determined
to destroy you, Quia non acquieuistis consilio nostro, Because you have bin
taught the truth ever since the beginning of the blessed reign of her
majesty, and you have not hearkened unto our counsel. Let us yet obtain
the credit at your hands which you ought to yield us, and you shall see what
wilfoow of it, even this consequent, which he, Iehoshaphat, speaks of [You
shall prosper.]

The second consequent [Prosperity.]
THis may seem strange that Iehoshaphat in this busy time of war draws the
people to have regard unto the Prophets, with an expectation of prosperity:
at such times men commonly dare not give any countenance to the prophets, for
fear of the trouble that is annexed to religion. This is to exhort the
faithful to build upon the sand. A man would think he should rather have
moved the^ to prepare themselves unto temptation, as Saint James does, or for
trouble, as our Savior Christ does pressuram habebitis, you shall have
trouble, or to look for persecution, as Paul does: He that will live godly
(says he) must suffer prsecution. Of which kind of speech Saint Augustine
says, Qui hoc loquitur confortat infirmum vt non cum ille crediderit prospera
huius saeculi speret. Si autem doctus fuerit prospera huius saeculi spcrare,
ipsa prosperitate corrumpitur, and superuenientibus, aduersitatibus sauciatur
aut fortassis extinguitur. He that speaks this, speaks not this to the end
that a man when he has believed, should look for the prosperity of this
world, for if he be taught so to do, prosperity it self corrupts him,
and when adversity comes, either it wounds him very sore, or dispatcheth
him outright.

A Preacher of the word of GOD builds not upon the rock* when he builds so,
but upon the sand, and when the rain falls, the wind blows, and the waves of
adversity beat upon his work, the fall of his house is great. But if ye look
well into the scriptures, you shall find that according to the difference of
times, and of the affections of people, the exhortatio^s differ. They that have
already believed, are so affected with heavenly things that they despise the
world, and such are exhorted to look for trouble and adversity before it
comes: so deals our Savior, James, and Paul with their scholars: such as are
affected with the world, and do not yet steadfastly believe, God is contented
to draw them unto him, with promises of worldly prosperity, that by these
steps they may ascend by little and little to love him for himself at last.
Such were they that Iehoshaphat spoke unto, men affected with their peace and
prosperity, he therefore exhorts them, to believe the prophets, with an
expectation of prosperity. S. John Ep. 3. discouers two kinds of prosperity
to his friend Gaius, one of the soul, another of the body, and he wishes both
to him.

Where the holy prophets and priests of God have their due regard and credit,
both these follow, the soul prospers: the prophets doctrine is likend in
scripture to rain, ma^s soul is the ground into which it falls, and by the
watering thereof many a goodly flower of Faith, Hope, Love, Temperaunce, and
such like heavenly virtues creep out of the paradise of the soul. The body
prospers also, Ps. 8. 13. O that my people had hearkened unto me (says God) I
would have humbled their enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries.
The reason of it is the same* by which we say trees and plants do prosper,
which standing with the root in the mire, and in the water, draw that to them
which is good for them, and refuse that which is hurtful: and so they grow and
prosper, not by any understanding of their own, but because they are guided, ab
intelligentia non errante, they are guided by god, whose understanding never
erres. The knowledge of the prophet is a light streaming out of Gods own bosom
into the breasts of ye prophet, and as the learning of the scholar is a
pattern of the learning of the master, so the knowledge of yt prophet, is a
bright heame of the knowledge that is in god: they that will believe the
prophets shall be guided, ab intelligentia non errante, by an understanding yt
never erres, and they shall prosper in their actions. Contrariwise, they that
despise and reject the Priests and the Prophets sent unto them, are like unto
a beaten bark in the maine sea, without rudder, without master, without Card
or Compass, snatched away with every flaw, and rent upon every rock, they can
never prosper. It shall be good for you in these days wherein men have laid
all their battery against the Church, as if there were nothing in this
kingdom out of order but the Church, to considder somewhat better of your own
selves, and do it in time. For I dare be bold to tell you, that God can not
abide to see that kingdom prosper, which cannot abide to see his church
prosper. 2. Chron. the four and twentieth chapter, and twentieth verse, Why
transgress ye the commandments of the Lord (says Zechariah) surely ye shall
not prosper. The word was no sooner out of his mouth, but the people conspired
against him, they got him to be made away by the kings commandment. The holy
man said no more to it at his death, but this, The Lord look upon it and
require it: and the year was no sooner come about, but God sent an army
against them smaller in number than themselves, closed them all in their
enemies hands, the kingdom was spoiled, the nobility destroyed and rifled,
the pray sent to Damascus, the king himself murdered in his bed by his own
servants, and all this was done (says the holyghost) for the blood of the
children of the Priests. As many of you as take our prosperity to be a
prick in your eyes, lay this to your hearts, and think upon it. It grieueth
me to speak it, and it grieueth me more to think it: you may see it if you
will, that whilst you are whetting of a knife for to cut our throats, God
is whetting of a sword to cut your throats.

It was the promise of our Savior, that the Faith of the Church should
remove mountains: and indeed the persecuting heathen emperors were very
great mountains that stood very high, and very stiff in the churches way,
but the faith of the Church has removed them all out of her way. It was the
prayer of the Church against her ennemies long since, Dorsum eorum incurua,
Lord bow down their backs, look upon Domitian, Decius, Dioclesian, Julian the
apostata, Herod and Antiochus, and a number such like Princes persecuting of
the church, all their backs have bin suddenly bowed down or broken by one
fearful death or other. Valerian the emperor was a bitter enemy of the
Church, and it pleased GOD in his life time so to bow down his back, that he
made him a footestoole for his proud ennemie the King of Persia, to get up to
horse. Look upon the lives, or upon the deaths of all the princes of the
earth that ever stood up in opposition against the church, you shall find that
verified in them that David noted, Uindemiat spiritum principum, he cuttes off
the spirits of Princes. In which manner of speech he likeneth GOD to a vinerole,
and the Princes of the earth to great clusters of Grapes in the time of
Uintage, when they are ripe, and the measure of their sins full, then comes
God in with his paring knife, he shareth off these great clusters one after an
other, and sweepeth them away quite from the face of the earth.

My Text having thus led me by steps and degrees up to the chinne in the
Churches quarrel, because that after the last service I performed to the
Church in this place, it was told me to my head forty miles hence in the
presence of an honorable man, that I had stricken at some great person, and
should be called in question for it: I do not think but my innocence was
lookte into, in that it was almost two years since, and from that day to this
I never heard more of it. Nevertheless, that I be no more mistaken, I will
speak a word or two to this purpose, and so commit you to God.

I remember the Prophet Hieremie in his fourth chapter and fourth verse. finding
his speech to be of little force amongst the common people, said thus to
himself: surely they are poor and foolish, and know not the way of the
Lord, I will get me to the great men and speak to them, for they know it.
But when he had taken a view of them, he confessed, that they also had cast
away the yoke of their obedience unto god. This was not my drift at that time,
neither is it my intent now. I do rather set before mine eyes the complaint of
the Prophet Hieremie Lament. 3. where he compares great persons to fine gold,
and to the stones of the sanctuary, and bewailes to see them in disgrace. If
it be the comme^dation of the two Tables that they were written with gods own
finger, it can not but be a matter of high reckoning and reputation, that men
do rise to honor and authority, either in the church or in the commonweal,
it is a curious parcel guilt laid upon them by Gods own finger, and no
wicked tongue may lick it off again. Yet I must tell you thus much, that as
every man has a particular end of his actions, and embraces all the honest
means he can to attain to it; the end of the Merchant is gain, the end of
the Soldier is victory: so the end of the Preacher is Gods glory: the means
we use to attain unto it, is preaching, and preaching is haile-shot; we send
it among the thickest of you, desirous to hitte you all. And if we can strike,
and strike kindly here a Judge, and there a Magistrate, here a Nobleman, there
a Gentleman, here a Courtier, there a Countrieman, here a Lawyer, there a
Client, it fares with us as it did with the Trojans, when the siege was
raised, and the Grecians returned to their ships, they delighted to view the
void places where they fought: when our work is over, it does us good as we
come this way, to cast up our eyes to these places where we have tried our
strength in Gods service, and may say unto our selves, Here we tilted, there
we tourneyed, here we thundered, there we lightened, here we fought, and
there we overcame, bearing up a rich conquest of souls upon the point of our
spears to heaven. The Philosopher says of natural bodies, that the nearer
they come to their sphere, the faster they move. Throw a stone from above, the
nearer it comes to the earth, the faster it moves: the dog when he follows
the hare, the nearer he is to it, the faster he runs to pinch and take hold
of it: the Falcon, soaring in the air, and spying his game beneath, strikes
the wing, and comes down with such a force, that the air suffers violence in
his passage, the nearer he comes to it, the swifter he flies, and makes his
point bravely when he stowps. By this long continuance of the gospel among you,
the kingdom of heaven is nearer to you now than when you first believed: God
stands at the end of your race, as he did at the top of Jacobs ladder to allure
you: put your trust in him, and you shall be assured: he has sent out his
Prophets and Preachers to halow the game unto you, If you cling somewhat close
unto us, you shall move speedily toward your sphere, you shall run well,
and stop well, live well, and die well, and make a gallant point. As for my
self, because it is no small matter for God to separate a Priest from the
people, and to take him near to himself to do the service of the tabernacle,
and to stand before the congregation, Number. 16. 9
standing here in the sight of God, of Angels, of men, we speak present
Scaeuola. And the Wiseman says Eccl. 43. that al things are directed by God to
a good end, and when we have spoken much, yet we cannot attain to them: but
this is the end of all, that God is all, and there will come a time (says
Augustine) when we shall enter into the presence of God, wherein many things we
talk of now shall cease, and God shall be one in all, and we shall be all
one, and speak one thing, and praise one God. I will therefore wind up all that I have spoken this day with that short prayer wherewith Saint Augustine
makes an end of a laborious disputation of the holy Trinity, Domine Deus
vnus, Deus Trinitas, quaecunque dixi in his libris de tuo, agnoscant and tui:
Si qua de meo, and tu ignosce and tui. O Lord my God, which art one God, God
the Trinity, if I have spoken any thing here that is thine, I humbly beseech
thee and thine to accept it at my hands: If I have spoken any thing that is
mine, or followd the sway of flesh and blood, I humbly beseech thee and thine
to forgive it me, in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holighost;
three glorious persons in Trinity, one eternal God in substance, to whom be
all honor and glory, praise, power, and dominion, now and ever,

Amen.
FINIS.
THE LECTVRES OF SAMVEL BIRD OF IPSWIDGE UPON the 8. and 9. chapters of the
second Epistle to the Corinthians.

Printed by John Legate, Printer to the University of Cambridge.

1598


