A PANEGYRIQVE OF CONGRATVLATION FOR THE CONCORD OF THE REALMS OF GREAT
BRITAIN IN UNITY OF RELIGION, AND UNDER ONE KING.

TO THE MOST HIGH, most puissant and magnanimous, James King of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland.

Written in French by John Gordon Scottish-man, Lord of Long-Orme, and one of
the Gentlemen of the French Kings Chamber.

Translated into English by E. G.

Imprinted at London by R. R. for Geffrey Chorlton at the great North-doore of
Paul's. 1603.

A Panegyrique of Congratulation for the concord of the realms of great
Britain, in unity of religion under one King.
AN ancient writer says, that the ground and maintenance of all Monarchies
and Empires is concord, their ruin and subversion is discord. The Histories
of things past for sixteen hundred years, since the eternal Son of God and
Monarke of all Monarkes, became man to redeem such as should believe in him,
show us many fair and admirable blessings which God has powered upon the
Islands of great Britain, and the planting of Christian truth in them, the
which I will represent unto your Majesty, to show plainly that the concord and
union of the people, and nations over whom God has made you King, is the
accomplishment and perfection of all the precedent benefits which his divine
bounty has bestowed upon the people under your most happy government.

The Apostle Saint Peter in his first Catholic Epistle the second Chapter,
says that Christians are; a chosen race, a royal Priesthood, a holy nation,
a people purchased to God as his own. The which is very fitly applied to the
people under your command, seeing that God has first united them under this
royalty and Priesthood of Christian verity, and afterward has used this
union of their souls, as a Mother to bring forth the union of three Realms
under your Majesty in one royalty. The said Apostle in the same place does
teach us to what end God has placed us in this happy concord, That is: To
the end (says he) that you should declare his virtues, who has called you
out of darkness to his admirable light. The which should move us to prefer
the wonderful works of God, before all worldly things, who having freede and
redeemed us from darkness, from invocation and adoration of dead men, and
from Pagan Idolatry, wherein our predecessors have been so long abused
(worshipping Images, and the visible forms of Creatures, as the Creator
himself and the creature insteade of the Creator) has since and in this
latter age, called and inspired us to worship him the only Creator of all
things.

Moreover the Apostle in the same place does show us what man was before,
that is, Before you were no people, and now you are the people of God: you had
not obtained mercy, but now you have obtained mercy. The people (SIRE) of the
Islands of great Britain, were not united in religion, in peace, in concord,
in like affections and will under one King, but they have been long banded one
against an other, in a Sea of discordes, discentions, and cruel wars,
against the decree and law of God, for that they were out of Christian
charity, having no other object in their souls but hatred and malice, with a
desire of revenge, and so by consequence they were not Gods people, but
cast-awayes, by reason of their Idolatry and spiritual fornication wherewith
they were poluted, and so unworthy to obtain mercy. But now that the light of
the Gospel, the true worship of one God has taken lively and sure root in
their hearts under the fortunate raygne of the deceased Queen, and under your
happy and lawefull succession in these Realms, they are become of one heart,
of one affection, and finally being made the true people of God, they have
obtained blessing, grace and mercy.

The comicall Poet says. A King is the image of the living God. Christian
divinity teaches us that in God, there be three persons united in one deytie
essence and power. Saint Augustine compares the Trinity to the three parts of
a man's soul, which are distinguished in opperations and functions united in
one and the same essence. I beseech God (SIRE) so to work in the hearts of
your subjects, and in the three realms united under the power, and command of
your royal Majesty, that being bound together, they may represent the three
persons of the Trinitye in one deity, and that agreeing in one will under your
Monarchy, they may be made the true image of the heavenly, that all may be one
in Christ as Christ is one with his father.

It was never seen in any age, that the nations of the Islands of Brittanie,
were united in heart and affection under one King, as the admirable power of God
has lately brought them under your majesty: whereof the true and only cause
is the purity and truth of Christian religion: the which God of his especial
grace has miraculously planted in your realms, and sense continued in you,
causing you to be borne the lawful and undoubted heir of these three*
ancient Imperial Crowns of the west, to reign Christianly, peaceably and
happily as undoubtedly you shall, seeing that God has endued and beautified
you with learning in abundance, and so great wisdom, as I may justly say
these virtues surpass the greatness of your royal majesty.

If we examine the order of Histories, we shall observe, that this most happy
union of English and Scottish under one King, has been long before foreseen
by the divine providence, to be finally effected in our age by the
establishment of the ancient Christian religion in your Islands, and the
abolishion of the new religion of Arrius, Nestorius, and Eutichius brought in
by the Stratagems of the old serpent, the spirit of error and darkness
through the ministry of Popes, who since six hundred years, under the name of
Christianity, have built up again this pagan idolatry, having changed the
Bishops and pastors of the Church into worldly power, usurping upon the Kings
of the Western Empire, in whose souls (through superstition and ignorance of
the Christian truth) they have planted a more insupportable tyranny, then that
which ancient Rome had conquered by force of arms.

The great God of armies has (in your Majesty's person) begun this happy union
and concord betwixt two nations, which had for so many ages been in cruel and
bloody wars, that you might imploye the valor of their arms for the
delivery of his church, from the barbarous tyranny wherewith she has been
long oppressed by Popes. And as Constantine the great, the protector and
restorer of the ancient Christian Church, was borne in great Britain, and
there began his Empire, obtaining afterward admirable victories against
four Roman Tyrants persecutors of the Church of God, by means whereof he
did abolish Gentilisme, and planted Christian Religion at Rome and throughout
the Empire. In like sort the same God has raised your Majesty to the height
of greatness, to be successor unto Constantine in the said Realms, and to
chase out of the same Rome the idolatry and abomination of the Gentiles, the
which Satan has sense brought in under the name of Christ, which is the true
means to purchase you the just title of protector and defender of the faith
and restorer of Christianity. And as God by that marriage of Henry the
seventh with Elizabeth his wife made the Union of the houses of Lancaster and
York, who had a long time been in bloudye wars, and by the marriage of
James the fourth King of Scotland with Marguerite the eldest daughter of the
said Henry the seventh your great graundfather, the conjunction of the
crowns of England and Scotland within these hundred years: So we hope that
the same God will imploye this admirable Union under your command to unite
the Christian and universal Church under one spiritual royalty, which is the
worship of one God, and to abolish idolatry, which has in a manner swallowed up
and devoured the true Church.

My intention is to represent in brief unto your Majesty and to all Christians
desirous of eternal health, the infinite graces and benifits which God has
powered upon your Islands, in the planting and maintaining the preaching of his
Gospel, that it may plainly appear, that neither the deceased Queen
Elizabeth of happy memory, nor your Majesty have established any new religion
in your Islands, but banished the new, being polluted and defiled with errors
and false worshippes of the Gentiles, Arians, Nestorians, and Eutichians, and
that the Religion which does now flourish in your Realms, is the same which
soon after the death of our Savior was preached and received by the Kings
your predecessors, and by the people of your Realms.

Theodoret a Greek bishop and one of the most ancient of the Church in his
books de curatione Grecarum affectionum, sermon 9. de legibus, makes a goodly
comparison betwixt the power of the Roman Empire, and their Laws, and the
Empire of Jesus Christ, and of his Law received throughout the world. He
says, the Romans could never make the Persians and Parthians of the East
subject to their laws, nor toward the North, the Cimbrians, Danes, nor the
people of Britain. But the power of Jesus Christ has been greater, for
(says he) our fisherman that is Saint Peter, and our maker of tents, which is
Saint Paul, have made the British people subject to the laws of Christ, the
which would not obey the Roman laws, so as antiquity does testify that the
Apostles have preached in our Islands. Metaphrastes (cited by the Cardinal
Barenius) says that Saint Peter came thither. Joseph Baleus ex Gilda et a^ijs
script. Anglis. Niceph. l. 2. c 4
of Arimathie, and Simon Zelotes came likewise, as Histories do teach us. This
seed of the Gospel in your Islands took such increase, as King Lucius and all
his subjects, about the year 180. did publicly receive the Christian religion.

And indeed the Chronographers have noted that about the year of our Lord 180
Britain was the first part of the world which did publicly Plat. in vit.
The: lesph.
receive the faith of Christ, for Lucius King of Britain did in those days
depose the Priests of the Gentiles, and did substitute in their places
Bishops and Christian pastors; he banished Gentilisme out of his country,
which happened not in any part of the world, until the time of Constantine the
great. Tertulian, and Origin who lived about the same time testify, that the
countries of Britain being inaccessible for the Remains were subject unto
Christ. The Bishops of this Island were at the council of Nice, held under
Constantine the great, three hundred years after Christ, which is the first
period of Christianisme, during the which the Christians did suffer twelve most
cruel persecutions under the tyranny of Paganism and the Idolatry of old
Rome.

We well wot that during the three first Periods of Christianity, whereof
either conteynes three hundred years, the true and only worship of one God,
which has been planted since the Apostles time in your Islands, has been
continued there during the said time, and yet the Christians, which lived in
those ages (no not the Romans) did ever allow (in the public use of the
service of the Church,) of the worship of the host in the Romish mass, nor of
the pretended wood of the very cross, nor of the Images of Jesus Christ, or
his sepulcher seated near to Mount Caluarie, all which are worshipped in the
new Romish Church as God himself, which worships are abominations of the
Gentiles, Arriens and Nestoriens, which bring with it the shipwreck of eternal
health.

The Christians which lived during the first Period of the three hundred
years of Christianity, did inuiolably keep the first commandment* Thou
shall have no other Gods against my face, or before me, which the Thargum of
the Caldeans has interpreted, besides me, or any other then me. The Greek
translation says, other Gods Athanas. Oret. cont. gentes. tom. 1. page 34.
besides me. Athanasius interpreting this commandment says, He has not
forbidden them to have other Gods, for that there were other Gods, but least
any one falling from the true God, should make him a God of that which is not,
like to those Gods which the Poets and writers make mention of, which have but
the name of God and not the effect. And the same Author says, If reason and
the esteem we houlde of God does make us believe that he may be in all
places, and that nothing of all that which God has under him is God, and that
all things are under his power, why do not they which make a creature God,
see, that it is out of the definition attributed unto God.

Theodoret upon the same commandment says, that the Arrians offend against
it, and the true Christians observe it. They do not allow any thing to be
held or worshipped for God, but the divine nature: but those which follow the
error of Arrius and Eunomius, sin directly against the divine law, for they
confess the only Son of God, but they maintain that he was created and is
divided from the divine substance. God having said, Thou shall have no other
Gods but me, doubtless these men bring in another God.

By these authorities we do infer, that the Romans which worship the host in
the Mass, break this commandment, for they agree, that it is no part of the
divine nature, but of the substance and nature of Jesus Christ's humanity, who
is worshipped according to his divinity, and not after his humanity, according
to the ancient simboles of the Church. The Christian faith then has for a
firm and only foundation the worship of one God, according to this first
commandment, and the worship of any thing created by God, which is under him,
ought not to be received in the Christian religion, but the only divine nature
of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, ought to be worshipped and called on in
Triple unity, without the which nothing ought to be worshipped, without
manifest impiety and idolatry.

The same Theodorei interpreting this commandment, says, Sermon. 2. God the
maker of all things in the beginning of the law which he gave unto Moses
commanded him to worship one God. I am (says he) the Lord thy God, which
brought thee out of the land of Egypt, and when he has put Moses in mind of
his late benefits, he exhorts him to persist in the service of god, not to
divide his worship but to cleave only unto God, Thou shall not (says he) have
any other Gods but me. The which does teach us that those of the Romish
corruption have brought in strange Gods, for that they have divided the
adoration and veneration betwixt God and his creatures, making three degrees.
The first they call Latria, which they attribute to God and to the Host in the
Mass equally. The second Hyperdeulia, which they yield to the blessed virgin.
And the third Dulia, attributed to their other Saints and to their images and
relics, abusing with too gross an ignorance the signification of these
Greek words, for Deulia signifies a greater service then Latria. And we
learn that in this place Theodoret calls the service and adoration of God, by
the name of Deulia, and so do Athanasius and Chrysostom. And Saint Augustine
who has brought in this distinction, attributes both unto God only. In his
84. Question^ upon Exodus

Justin Martyr who lived under Antonius Pius in the second age of this period
of Christianity, shows plainly that the Christians did not allow of the
worship of any thing inferior to the Deity* and says that Jesus Christ had
so taught them; for speaking to the Emperor in his Apology for the Christians
of his time, he writes thus. That God only is to be worshipped, for so Christ
does ^each the greatest commandment is, thou shall worship the Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou honor with all thy heart and all thy strength,
the Lord God which has created thee. And a little after he says, we worship
God only, in other things we willingly serve you, for that we do acknowledge
you for Kings and Princes of men, and we pray unto God that he will give you
wisdom equal to your royal power. So as the Christians in matters of
religion did not yield any worship to things created, neither did they divide
the worship betwixt God and his creatures, as the Romish Church does.

Many Christians of the same time, were so exact obseruers of the only
worship of God, as they would not reverence the Roman Emperors, as the
soldiers did in civil causes, for Theophilus to Apostolicus the sixth Bishop of
Antioche, who lived in the year of our Lord 173. when as Lucius was King of
great Britain; says I shall honor the Emperor more in praying for him, then
in worshipping him, for it is not lawful to worship any but God only.

The Christians of these three first ages, had no Alters, no Images, nor any
material crosses of gold, silver, wood, or stone, for Clemens Alexandrinus
who was near the Apostles time says. We Christians are expreslye forbidden
to use In Parenctico.
any art of deceit (for so he calls painting and making of Images) Thou
shall not (says the Prophet Moses) make the likeness of any thing that is in
heaven above, or on the earth beneath. And the same author Strom. Lib. 5.
Pythagoras (says he) forbids the wearing of rings, nor to ingraue in them the
images and figures of Gods, as Moses had long before forbidden, and that we
must not make any Image, be it graven, molten, counterfeite or painted, that
we should not be carried away with sensible things, but should pass unto
those things which are comprehended by understanding, And soon after he
says; To honor the essence by the knowledge of a material thing, is to
contemn it.

The Doctrine of the Romish Church do^th herein directly oppugn the Doctrine
of Christian antiquitye, making a new God of the host of the new Mass, giving
it the name of God, worshipping it as God, and yet their doctors confess that
it is made and created by the words of consecration.

It is therefore evident that they have brought into the Church a God created,
which is not contained in the definition of God, before mentioned by Saint
Athanasius, for the host of the Mass is not every where, which is the
property of God only, neither does it contain all things under his power:
but contrariwise the Counsel of Trent says in express words, that Jesus
Christ God and man is contained under the visibie signs of Bread, of Wine,
which is quite contrary to the divine nature, which contaynes all things in
it, and is not contained in any thing. The God therefore of the Romish Mass,
is a God created which has a beginning and ending, and is contained in the
visible form of Bread and Wine, and contains not in it all things created;
so as the worshippers of this God of the Mass, do worship a new and
strange God, contrary to the first commandment.

If the Arrians (as Theodoret says) have broken this first commandment, for
that they taught that Jesus Christ according to his deity was a creature, and
yet he was God, with greater reason the Romans transgress the same
commandment, confessing that the pretended deity of the host of the Mass,
is a deity purchased by the consecration, and not by the eternal deity,
without beginning and without ending. And the same Theodoret writing against
the Greeks in the foresaid passage, teaches us, that by the commandment
which says. Thou shall have no other Gods but me, that Moses forbiddes to
make any division of the divine worship, but to give all to God only. The
Romans who have made three degrees of worshipping, cannot deny but they have
broken this first commandment, and brought in a multitude of Gods, making as
many Gods as they say Masses: So as their plurality of Gods becomes
infinite, and surpasses the multitude of the Paynims Gods. Minutius Foelix,
Tertulian, Origin, and A^nobius, who lived in the third age of this first
Periode of Christianisme, testify that the Gentiles accused the Christians,
for that they had neither Temples, Altars, Images, nor visible or Material
Sacrifices, and that they did hide from sight, that which they did worship.
Cecilius a Pagan Orator, disputing against Octauius a Christian, as Minutius
does report, objected to the Christians. Why have they no Alters, no Temples,
no known Images. They did blazon our Christians in the worshipping of the
Cross, which they said they deserved, taking the Cross for a punishment. To
whom Octauius aunsweres for the Christians. We neither worship nor desire
Crosses, but you who have consecrated Gods of Wood, worshipping Crosses of Wood,
as pieces of your Gods. Whereby it appears that the ancient Christians in the
pureness of Christian religion did neither worship crosses of Gold, Silver,
Stone or Wood, as these do of the Romish religion. How should they I pray you
worship them, seeing they had them not? and which is more, would not have
them? But the Church of Rome does quite contrary, running after Gods of Gold
and Silver, made (as the Psalmet says) by man's hand.

Inregarde of that which the Gentiles did object unto the Christians, that they
did hide, and not show forth what they did worship. Octauius aunsweres for the
Christians. Do you think that we do hide what we do worship, although we
have neither Temples, nor Aulters? for what Image shall I make of God? If thou
have thy right senses, thou shall find that man is the true Image of God. And
a little after he says: But the God whom we worship, we neither show nor see.
If the ancient Christians had been like unto the Romish Christians of this
age, the Gentiles could not have objected, that they had neither Aultars nor
Images: for in truth they have more Aulters and Images then the Gentiles had.
Neither should they have objected unto the Christians, that they concealed what
they worshipped, for the Romans show in the elevation of the Host, the God
which they worship, and cause the people to worship it, the which they not
only show in Temples, but also in the streets, and in general processions,
and other solemnities, they show forth what they worship, against the use of
the first Christians.

Tertulian in his book of Idolatry, confutes with many reasons, the making of
all sorts of Images, to root out all matter of Idolatry; and after he had
cited the second commandment, whereby it is defended to make the likeness of
any thing that is in heaven or earth, he says, It is forbidden throughout
all the world, for the servants of God to use such making of Images, seeing
that Enoch had forecoulde that the Devil or the Angels of darkness should
turn all the Elements into Idolatry, and all that it contained in Heaven and
Earth, that all these things might be consecrated for God against God
himself. And so man's error does worship all things except the Creator of
all things. Their Images were Idols, and the consecration of Images is
Idolatry. And whatsoever Idolatry commits, must necessarily be attributed to
the maker of the Idol.

That which Origin speaks upon the Epistle to the Romans, is to be
considered, to make Christians wholly to reject Idolatry: For after that he
has refuted the Errors of the Gentiles, in that they might know God by the
visible Ellementes, yet they had fallen to the worship of the visible Images
of Creatures, concluding thus. To the end that in few words we may speak
the truth, we houlde it an abominable impiety to worship any thing* except
the Father, Son, and holy Ghost.

And a little after he says, They wrong themselves that serve Images, and
worship the Creature leaving the Creator: But we Christians which worship and
adore the Father, Son, and holy Ghost only, and no other Creature, as we do
not err in the divine worship, so do we not offend in our actions and
conversation. It is most certain that the Host offered up in the Roman
Eyturgie, is not consubstantiall with the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and much
less united in consubstantialitie with the Trinity, as it is well noted in
the sermon de Caena Domini, inserted among the works of Cyprian who lived in
the third age, where it is said. That the divine essence is infused in the
visible Sacrament after an unspeakable manner, that there might be more
devotion and reverence given to the Sacraments, and a more holy access to the
truth of him* of whose body they be Sacraments, and to the participating of
the spirit, not to the consubstantialitie of Christ, but to this brotherly and
indivisible unity: for the Son only is consubstantiall with the Father, the
substance of the Trinity may not be divided, our conjunction, and that of
Christ does not confound the persons, nor unite the substances, but does only
consociate the affections, and bind the wills. If in the person of Jesus
Christ, consisting of three natures in one person, worshipped with one only
worship: the divine nature had been only infused in the humanity of Jesus
Christ after his birth, as Nestorius did teach, and not united personally in
the virgins womb.

Cyrillus and the other Orthodoxes did rightly mainetaine against him, that to
worship one Christ carrying God in him, had been an Antropolatrie or Pagan
Idolatry. With greater reason the infusion of the Divinity in the Sacrament
and in the elements of Bread and Wine, cannot attribute unto it the dignity to
be worshipped as God himself, for (as that text does teach us) this infusion
which is made in the sacrament is not consubstantiall with the deity of the
Son of God, the which is only consubstantiall with the father and the holy
spirit, for that it does affect amost straight and mutual conjunction
betwixt God and us. Saint John in his seventeenth Chapter speaks of this
conjunction and union, where our Savior prays to his father for all those
that shall believe in him. That all may be one, as thou O father art in me, and
I in thee, that they may be one in us. If this union should make that sacrament
of the Lords supper to be worshipped, then those which are united in Christ,
and by him in God the lather, should worship one another, for our Savior says
in the sixth of Saint John. He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood,
remains in me and I in him. That we might know (says Cypria^) that our
abiding in him is a true eating, and the drinking an incorporation, with a duty
of obedience, joining of wills and unity of affections. The eating therefore
is a certain greediness in us, and a desire to remain for ever in Christ.

We learn by these authorities, that even as Christ's abiding in us by our
eating of the sacrament, makes us not capable of worship, for that by this
conjunction we are not personally united with the deity of Jesus Christ, In
like sort the infusion of the divine essence in the sacraments, whereof Saint
Cyprian speaks, makes not the sacrament to be worshipped, if it were so, the
said adoration were in idolatrye like that of Nestorius, who worshipped man
carrying God in him, as is said before.

We may therefore say with good reason against those that worship the creatures,
and the images of Jesus Christ, his sepulcher, and the wood of the cross, that
which Origin speaks against the Gentiles of his time. God is the virtue which
gouernes all things, and the diuinitye which fills all things, making
themselves thereby inexcusable, that whereas God has given them the grace to
know him yet have they not honored him as they ought, neither have they given
him due thanks, but have sought in the vanity of their own imaginations the
images of God. As those of the Romish Church do in the Mass, for in their
host they make figures and images. They have lost in themselves the Image of
God: they which vanted to have the spirit of wisdom, are fallen into the
obscure darkness of ignorance. For what is there more abominable the^ to
turn the glory of God to the corporal and corruptible image of man's nature?
the which is done at this present throughout all the Romish Church as it is
said. So as they have converted God the Creator of all things, into a
corporal and corruptible form, whom they thought to worship under those
visible forms, we will therefore conclude our discourse of the proof of the
true and only adoration of God, observed throughout all the habitable world,
during the first periode of three hundred years, with the testimonye of
Arnobius, writing against the Gentiles obiecting to the Christians, that they
would not worship any but the first, and the greatest of all the Gods, and
not the inferior Gods, according to the manner in those days, to whom he
answers saying. And we may say in that which concerns the worship and
honor of the divinity, that it suffices us to have one only God, God I say
the father of all things, who has created and governs all things. In
worshipping of him we worship all that we ought to worship, when we
honor him, we honor in him that which he requires at our hands, what the
duty of worship does exact, that we perform by our worship. For seeing
we hold the chiese of all diuinitye, of whom all divine things depend, we
think it superfluous to seek to private persons. And a little after he
says: As in earthlye kingdoms we are not constrained to worship and
honor every private man of the Kings house, but in the honor we do unto
Kings, those which belong unto them are sceretly honored with them. So the
Christians of that perfect age, did not worship nor call upon any thing under
God, as the Romanistes of our age do, which worship the blessed virgin, the
Angels Michael and Gabriel, Saint John Baptist, the Apostles and Martyrs,
their relics, Sepulchers and Images. So as it is most apparent that the
Religion planted at this present in the Islands of great Britain is the true
ancient Religion, and the only worship of one God, inco^municable to the
Creatures, the which has continued during the first periode of the three
hundred years of Christianity. So as it is a mere slander what the
adversaries of the truth say, that your Majesty has banished the true
ancient Christian Religion out of your Realms, to plant a new Religion,
pretended to be begun by Martin Luther, John Calvin, and other great
Personages in the puritye of the true Christian Doctrine.

But contrariwise it is an immortal glory which shall increase in your
reign, and continue to posterity, seeing that your Majesty is the author of
the restoring of the true Christian religion in your realms, having restored
it I say to that beauty and sincerity, as it was in oulde time planted by
Lucius your forerunner, the first Christian King of great Brittayne, who
became so affectionate and zealous of the advancement and propagation of the
truth, and so great an enemy to Idolatry and the worship of Creatures and
visible forms, that of a King he became a Preacher (as some Histories say) And
as during the persecution of the Christians under Dioclesian and Maxentius
which were the most bloody of all, God used your Islands and kingdoms as a
refuge for the true Christians which fled from the said persecutions; Even so
the same God has made your most happy reign to be a safe harbor for the
Christians of our age, who have been forced to abandon houses, goods, and
inheritances, rather then to bow to the Romish worship.

God the protector of his true Church has continued his admirable graces over
your Islands in the second Period of Christianisme, the which begun with the
most happy Empire of Constantius Eusebius. in vita Constan.
Chlorus: for during the last persecution, God raised up this wise and warlike
Emperor in the western parts of Europe, in the which England, Scotland, and
Ireland, are contained, where the said Emperor took to wife Hellen, borne in
your said realms, who received into his protection all the Christians which
fled from other provinces to avoid the cruel persecution which was made
against them by his other associates in the Empire. SIRE, we must here observe
a notable policy of this wise Emperor, to try the fidelity of his servants
and ministers in the government of his Empire, which will much avail for the
preservation of your royal estate. He did publish a feigned edict, commanding
all the subjects of his Empire to sacrifice to the false Gods, and whosoever
should refuse so to do, to depart out of his armies and Empire. This
proclamation being made a great number of Christians, did sacrifice unto the
false Gods, to preserve their estates, dignities, and goods: but the true
Christians desired rather to leave all, then to serve them, whereupon the
Emperor discovered himself presently, and discharged all such as had
worshipped these false Gods: saying, How can they be faithful unto the Idem in
Constant.
Emperor, that are faithless unto God? And as for the true Christians which
had left all, he called them home and made them guardiens both of his person
and estate, as Eusebius says. I desire not your Majesty should make such
counterfeite proclamations, but that the same God which has made you successor
to Constantius Chlorus, will give you the grace to make such an election of
your subjects, as in your most important affairs you admit not any but such as
are known to be well grounded in the true Christian religion. For even as a
modest woman ought not only to be chaste, but free from all suspicion, even so
those which are employed in the affairs of true Christian Princes, (as your
Majesty is) should be free from all suspicion of false religion. The said
Constantius died at York in England, after that he had instituted Constantine
the great his son. the which was an other especial grace which God has
poured upon your realms. And even as under King Lucius, It was the first part
of the world, which did banish the Pagan Idolatry, even so God has raised out
of the same Island, the said Constantine the great, who expelled the same Romish
Idolatry out of all the other Provinces of the habitable world, whereof your
Majesty has a familiar example to imitate in this restorer of the Christian
religion.

This great Constantine your predecessor and countrieman, in the beginning of
his Empire, He studied what God he should choose, as the same Eusebius says,
that his Father had condemned the Error of Idolatry, and al his life had
worshipped one only God, the protector and guardien of the Empire, the free
giver of all good.

Upon this resolution he made choice of the true God to serve, believing that
the only cause of Kings and Emperors felicity, proceeded from him alone, as
the same Author says. He worshipped the same God that is above all things. And
in his ordinary prayers, being alone he spoke to God alone.

Whereby it appears that the religion which your Majesty has established in
your realms, is conformable to that of your predecessor Constantine, who
worshipped (as I have said) but one only God, the Creator of all things, and
not the Cross and Images of Jesus Christ. In his ordinary prayers he did not
call upon the blessed Virgin, Saint Peter, Saint Paul, nor the other Apostles
and Martires, neither have we read that he did consecrate his Empire to Saint
Andrew or Saint George, as some of your predecessors in the time of Error and
blindness. But did dedicate Eusebius. ibid.
his house and family to one King that is God only. God was his only patron,
who recompensed him with all good things, and made him Lord and Conqueror over
all other Princes. He commanded all his army to call upon one God, as the
giver of victories, he appointed that in their prayers, they should lift up
their hands to heaven, and the eyes of their understanding to the most high
king of Heaven: He also taught them the form of praying to God as follows.
We confess thee to be the only God, we acknowledge thee to be the only
King, we call upon thee to aid us (they did not inuoke the virgin Marie) by
thee we obtain victory over our enemies, we give thee thanks for the
benefits we receive in this present life, hoping for future things by thy
means: we cry unto thee with all humility that it would please thee to make
our Emperor Constantine victorious, and preserve his Godly Children in long
life and happy health. They did not call upon the Angels Michael and Gabriel
to give them victory.

Hereby we see that it is a false and slaundrous thing, which the adversaries
of the truth impute to your Majesty to have left the ancient profession of
your predecessors, and to have planted a new religion, begun by Martin
Luther, John Calvin and other most learned men, whom God has stirred up in our
age to abolish the false Romish worship, as has been sufficiently proved
to your Majesty in the discources of the first periode of the first three
hundred years. And to show that the only worship of the Creator, without
mingling the adoration of the Creatures, continued unto this' second periode of
three hundred years in your Island, I will content my self with the saying of
Sedulius Scotus Hibernensis, who lived in the fifth age, in these words which
he has drawn out of Origin which I have before cited. It is a sin of
impietye to worship any other but the Father Sedulius in cap. 1. epist ad
Romans
Son and holy Ghost. Whereunto Saint Augustine speaks very fitly saying.
Know that the Christians, (whereof there is a Church in your Town) Worship
not any dead thing, neither Aug. epist. 45. ad Max grammat. tom. 2.
any thing that has been made by God, but God only is worshipped, who has
made and created all things.

Our adversaries dare not affirm that the host in the Mass is one of the
three parsons of the Trinity, as we have said, which were a greater herefie
then that of Arrius, who said that the Son of God was a Creature, having a
beginning, being not the Son of God from all eternitye. All their Doctors
teach that it is made and created by the pronountiation of the words of Jesus
Christ, taking his beginning by the consecration; whereby we infer that they
are worshippers of visible forms, and therefore Idolaters in worshipping it,
seeing it is no eternal creature, nor consubstantiall with God the Father: For
Athanasius, Theodoret, Cyrillus and all the ancient Fathers, booth Greek and
Latin of the second periode of three hundred years of Christianity, teach,
that if the Son of God had been created or had had any beginning, that he
had not been worshipped; for that the Creature does not worship the
Creature, God only Atha^. cont. Arr. orat. 3 et epist. ad Ephesians.
is to be worshipped; if the Son had been a creature he had not been
worshipped, God forbid we should worship the Creature, this madness fittes
best with the Pagans, and Arrians. And in another place he says, that the
Christians worship not the body of Jesus Christ divided from the deity.
Neither when we worship the word (says he) do we separate the word from
the flesh, but knowing that the word has been made flesh, acknowledge that
which is in the flesh, to be God. And a little after speaking of the Leaper he
says. He worshipped the Lord in his body, and did acknowledge him for God.
And the same Athanasins teaches us, that the body of our Lord is not
consubstantiall with the Father, and therefore not to be worshipped alone:
with greater reason the host, which cannot be said consubstantiall with the
Father, is not to be worshipped. For if the deitye of Jesus Christ had not
been consubstantiall with the Father, and without beginning as the Father is,
it had not been lawful to worship him. And this SIRE has been represented
unto you in the first periode, the which I repeat here to show the
continuance of the worship of one only God.

It is therefore manifest that the Christians of this second periode ending in
the six hundred year of Christianity, did believe that it was a Pagan
Idolatry to worship any Creature which had a beginning, restraining all
adoration but to the Trinitye alone, worshipping nothing underneath it, the
which is comprehended by Gregorye Orat. 3. pro. pace.
Nazianzene in few words, where he says that we must worship nothing above
or beneath the Trinity.

For says he, it is impossible to worship any thing above God; and to
worship any thing underneath God is mere impietye. Let us add heereunto
what Theodoret says, (who lived in the fifth age) touching the adoration of the
Sacrament of the Lords supper, for that the Romans corrupting his writings,
attribute unto him the worship of the Simbols of the body and blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which he never dreampt of; for besides that which we have before
alleged that he condemned the Arrians, for that they worshipped the deity,
which they said was created; He says in the fifty five question upon
Genesis, that God did allow to eat the flesh of beasts, to restrain the
people from worshipping of them, foreseeing that men should fall into that
blindness and superstition as they should worship beasts, as we read of
the worship of the Golden Calfe like unto the Egyptians; where Theodoret
concludes, that it is a mere madness to worship that which we eat. So as
according unto Theodoret the priests should be mad to worship that which
they eat. Athanasius against the Arrians teaches, that the deity is not to be
eaten, and yet the Romans maintain that their host is God himself and they
sin that they eat that which is present in the host, which in effect is to
make the deity edible.

Our Savior before he left this world, would leave unto all men that should
believe in him a perpetual comemoration of his true incarnation and passion, to
the end this memorial should be, as it were a Simbole of the presence of his
human nature here on earth. He might as well after the manner of the Greeks
and Romans, have left his portraite lively drawn, to serve for a
representation and commemoration unto such as should believe in him, yea they
should make infinite numbers of pictures, like unto the stars of heaven, to
be in all assemblies of Christians, and to show that he had put on a body
like unto those pictures: but he who knew the spirit of man commonly inclined
to Idolatry, would not leave his representation in the figure of a man, to
take from him all subject of Idolatry, but he chose rather to institute the
Simboles in the Elements of bread and wine, wherewith his human nature was
nourished, as ours is now, the which is nourished daily, when there is no
reason to worship them seeing we do eat them, as Theodoret says, and yet the
spirit of darkness, having in the old time induced men to eat the beasts, and
then to worship their Images, has since Expositor ordin. in Romans
found means to pull from the Church the firm bread in the Communion,
bringing in a kind of wafer, which cannot properly be called bread, Casand.
in Litur.
being so thin, on the which are printed the Images of Jesus Christ, the
which they have Honor. in Gemma animae.
since worshipped, whereas it was instituted only to be eaten in remembrance
that Jesus Christ had a humane body, nourished like unto ours, to continue
betwixt him and us the communication of this incarnation, by the Elements
wherewith we are all nourished.

This only adoration of one God, having continued the six first ages after
our Savior. Gregory the first Bishop of Rome brought in the invocation of
dead men in the beginning of the seventh age, with many other superstitions:
yet did he never teach that we must worship the Images of Jesus Christ, as
Christ himself, as Thomas Aquinas and other Romish Doctors do teach us,
neither did he teach that we should worship the consecrated Host as God, but
contrariwise writing to Serenus Bishop of Marseilles, he commandes him in
express words, that he restrain the people from the worship of Images, and
that the people should prostrate themselves with all humility in the worship
of the only Almighty and holy Trinity: So as the Romish doctrine of the last
ages, is directly contrary to that of the first six ages after our Savior.

And yet this Pope commanded them to hold Images in their Churches, yet not to
worship them, but to serve as a commemoration unto the people of the
Histories of the Bible only, but to what end served this? It was as much as if
they should forbid one to be drunk who is naturally inclined thereunto, and
yet command him to lodge in a Tavern and to consorte himsele with drunkards,
or like to him that should command a young man in the heat of his youth given
to licentiousness, to abstain from it, and yet to lodge in a brothell house.
Man's nature is as much or more inclined to Idolatry, then to drunkenness or
luxury: and therefore the divine providence knowing this imperfection in man,
would take from him all subject of Idolatry. Theodoret Sermon. 7. de cur. Grec.
affect. says, That the wicked spirit to deceive ignorant men, invented the
Art of painting, grauing, and other workmen to forge Images and pictures to
serve for matter of Idolatry: and that they have not only filled the Temple
with Images, but also the market places, streets, and public places, yea
even rich men's houses: the which we see practiced at this day in the Temples,
markets, streets and houses of our adversaries. Arnobius in the sixth book
against the Gentiles says, that they took the same pretext for the use of
Images in their Churches. To serve the ignorant and unruly people, whom they
made to worship them* giving them venerable forms, to the end says he, they
should believe there were some virtue in their brightness, which did not only
dazzle their eyes, but stroke a terror in their hearts by the brightness of
their resplendent light.

We are to observe the special grace which God (continuing his work) has
showed to the Islands of great Britain, in the beginning of this seventh age:
for Gregory the first, having sent Augustine the young, into the same Island,
to plant many superstitions, with the invocation of Saints, neither he nor his
doctrine were received, but the misery was, that soon after the death of
Gregory, the worshipping of Images did so increase, as it was the cause of
many troubles betwixt the West and the East, as we shall show hereafter.

In the seventh, eight, and ninth ages, making the third Period of
Christianisme, the Hebrewe, Greek, and Latin tongues were almost rooted out
in the Western parts of Europe, through the inundation of Barbarians, which
did tear in pieces the Romain Empire, with the true divinity: whereby we
observe that even as the true religion began with the said Empire, and so
increased: even so the Empire decaying, the sincerity of Christian religion
was almost abolished, and declined so by their deuisions in the West, that
Satan working the mystery of iniquity in the hearts of the Eastern Bishops,
made them to have no respect to the purity of antiquity, bringing in a new
worship of the Creatures, of the Cross, and of the Images of Jesus Christ, the
Apostles and Martires, an Idolatry merely Pagan.

We read in the acts of the second Council of Nice, printed both in Greek
and Latin in Paris, that the said Council did decree, that we must esteem
the image of Jesus Christ, as Jesus Christ himself and that as the person of
Jesus Christ is distinguished from that of the father in hipostasis, and united
in substance: even* so his image should differ from him in substance and be
united in person, the which is an intolerable blasphemy, and as great as the
herefies of Arrius and Nestorius: for that were to make a God of a material
thing o^ made by hand, and to worship it as God, as the Gentiles did
worship the workemanshippe of man.

At that same time God raised up in the Ilane of great Britain; that
venerable Beda, who taught the Hebrew, Caidee, Greek, and Latin tongues*
Divinity and Philosophy, out of whose School came Johannes Scotus, and
Alcuinus, who planted learning and the sciences in the City of Paris, and was
afterward spread over al Europe. This Johannes Scotus was Schoolemaister to
the Emperor Charlemagne, who with stood the idolatry of the Eastern Churches,
causing the second counsel of Nice to be declared heretical and abusiue; by
that of Ado. in Chro.
Frandfort as we read in Ado viennensis. The same Emperor became so learned,
as he writ a book against the Pagan worship of images; the which is found
among the learned.

Out of the same school came one after another Rhabanus* Ma^rus a Scotishman,
as many writers do testify, Cla^dius Taurinensis and Bertr^^ a priest, with
other lights of the Church, in the third period of Christianity, which are the
seventh eight and ninth ages, which have fought against idolatry and the
gross errors of the sacrament, as we shall hereafter show.

The fourth period of Christianisme, which contains the tenth, eleauenth, and
twelfe ages, was so destitute of men adorned with true piety and learning, as
the seeds of the Idolatry of former ages, came to the accomplishment of the
abomination of dissolution, at which time Berengarius Archdeacon of Angers
with his disciples, and Peter de Valdo, with the Schools begun by him about
the same periode, resisted the Romish idolatry planted in all the West.

We will likewise observe an especial grace, which God powered upon your Islands
and realms, during these ages of ignorance and idolatry, for eue^ as the great
men of the former periode disciples to the English Beda who maintained the
only worship of God went out of the Island: even so God during this fourth
periode: preserved the same realms, and defended them against the tyranny of
Rome, for Peter of Clugny writing to Bernard, says, that the Scotishmen in his
time did celebrate, their Easter after the Greek manner, which is a testimony
they were not yet subject to the church of Rome, which held the^ heretics
that followwed the ceremonies of the Greeks, who in the time of the said
Bernard had their Lyturgie and service of the Church, as they have at this day,
which is a communion like unto that of the reformed Church of these times:
neither did the Greek Church ever allow of that heathenish worship of the
Sacrament of the Lords supper as in the Romish Church; which caused Marcus
Ephesius (who was Orator for the Greeks at the counsel of Florence in a
sermon printed at Paris in Greek and Latin, at the end of the volume of
Lyturgies) to confute the Mass of the Latins, as directly contrary to the
institution of Jesus Christ.

So as the Scottishmen who maintained the ceremonies of the Greek Churches,
had not yet received the new Romish Mass, nor the heathen adoration of the
host, whereby we see that the people of your realms were the first that made
public profession of Christ, and abolished Gentilisme, during the cruel
persecutions of Romish Emperors, and when as the tyranny of the Bishops of
Rome, brought into the Church about 400. years since the worship of the host,
as God the Creator, the same British peopl were also the last of the West part
of Europe, which received the abominable worship of things created insteede of
the Creator.

This heathenish worship began under Pope Honerius 3. about the year 1225. who
commanded all Priests and Curats to teach the people to kneel at the
Elevation of the host in the Mass, or when it should be carried to sick
persons; yet this idolatry was not long after received in the Churches of
Germany and France. For Ralfe de Riuo printed a book at Rome. de Can. obser.
propos. 22. witnessing that Nicholas. 3. about the year 1277. took the old
missalles out of all Churches of Rome bringing in a new form of Mass invented
by the Friars minors, or Franciscans: At this day (says he) all the books at
Rome are new after the manner of Saint Francis, and meaning to discribe the
form of Mass observed in those days in Germany, France and other nations,
he says. Leaving the manner of the Friars minors, let us follow the holy
Canons, the ancient Scriptures, and the general customs of places, and in
doubtful things the most ancient books. And in the twenty three proposition
he describes particularly all the ceremonies of the Mass, as it was used in
his time, who lived in the beginning of the foreteenth age of Christianisme, at
what time it is found that the coniuction of the Bread and Wine was observed
according to the institution of our Savior, and that both the Priest and
people did eat and drink together standing, without adoration or invocation
of the Sacraments: and in the end of the said proposition he says. It is
sacrilege to use bread only dept in wine in the Sacrament of the Communion.
So as there was no difference betwixt the Communion of the reformed Church, and
the Communion of the Mass in those days, except the sign of the Cross, and
some other ceremonies, vestaments and incense. The Mass therefore of our age,
is a new fiction of Cordiliers or Franciscan Friars, and the worship of a
pretended God, and the privation of the cup is a plain sacrilege: for if they
abuse to use bread steept in wine instead of following the full institution of
our Savior, was (as they said Rodolphus de Riuo writes) condemned as
sacrilege, with greater reason, is it a more horrible sacrilege to have quite
taken away the use of the wine from the people. The Romish Church of our age,
cannot be called the true Church, seeing they have no Communion of the Cup,
and are fallen from the true Priesthood* as the Arrians and Nestorians by
their errors los^ the outward marks of Priesthood.

During the fifth Period of the ages of Christianisme, which contains the
thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth ages, the Western Church was divided
into two parts: for in the time of Bernard, Peter de Valdo, a rich Bourgesse of
Lions, having been instructed in the only worship of God by the reading of
the holy Scriptures, had the Romish Idolatry in such horror, as he sold all
his goods, and caused the Bible and many writings of the ancient fathers to be
translated into French, he made assemblies at Lions, and appointed penfions for
religious learned men to set up Schools of divinity, who being since
persecuted by the Popes and their adherents, the said Schools were dispersed
over all France, and a good part of Spain, Germany, and Bohemia, who have
ever since maintained the same articles of the faith, which are professed at
this day in the Churches of your realms, whereof some were called Albige^is,
and others Taborites, which have flourished and reigned unto this day,
notwithstanding all the persecutions, fires, flames, and cruel torments used
against them by the supporters and favorers of Rome.

Out of this School also came John Hus, and Ierosme of Prage, Wickliffe an
Englishman, Paul Cra^ a Scottish man, who maintained the true and only
worship of one only God, and other articles of the faith, confessed by the
reformed Churches of Europe, the which is seen by the articles recited by
Aeneas Siluius, (being since Aeneas Siluius in Hist. Boem.
Pope) which shows a notable correspondencie betwixt the first Period of
Christianisme and the fifth: for even as in the first three hundred years the
true Christians who worshipped one only God, without mingling the adoration of
Creatures had been persecuted by Pagan Rome, even so the worshippers of this
true adoration have been cruelly persecuted during the three hundred years of
the fifth Period, by Room disguised with a Christian mask.

There is an other admirable correspondencie betwixt these and the second
Period, for even as in the end of the first Period, the God of armies did raise
up that great Constantine to plant his Church by force throughout all the
Roman Empire, being then Pagan, abolishing Idolatry in the worship of men,
of Images, and of visible and material forms: even so after the end of the
fifth Period, God suffered the restoring of the (...) true ancient and
Christian religion to be done by arms. We read in the Bohemian History of the
said Aeneas Siluius, that Zisca a great Captain assembled in the year 1501. a
mighty army, beating down all Idols and Images, abolishing the new Mass, or
the worshipping of the Host. Soon after many Princes did rise, and many
faithful learned men by whose ministry and valor, the pureness of the
preaching of the Gospel was restored in the sincerity of Christian truth, as
it was at the coming of Constantine in the West of Europe.

I may therefore justly say, that among all the Princes which have labored for
the restoring and reformation of the ancient Church, your predecessors King
Edward, and Queen Elizabeth, (of happy memories) have been the first which
have built upon this foundation after Constantine, (although long after) and
now (SIRE) these blessed souls behold from heaven the full perfection of
their work which must be finished by you, whom they have left the successor
and heir of their most royal enterprises.

Your Majesty has a familiar example in the life of the disceased Queen, (of
happy memory) who has been a true mother unto you: In whose government we
have seen as in a looking glass, that God has accompanied her with an
admirable and extraordinary prosperity, foelicitie, and happy success in
all her affairs: for he has drawn her from a prison to a kingdom, he has
made her to reign forty and five years in great peace and tranquillity,
having discovered above twenty enterprises ready to be put in execution
against her life and state: he endued her with all kinds of perfections and
virtues, as prudence, modesty, and wisdom in all her actions, beautified with
a lively and sound judgment far exceeding her sex. And for a fullness of
happiness, the same God did prolong her days unto threescore and ten years,
in the which she was always victorious over her enemies, both homebred and
strangers. What is then the cause (SIRE) I will attribute it wholly unto God,
and to the purity of his Gospel, and to Christian religion the which she has
established in her kingdoms, whereof this most Christian and generous Princess
made a sincere profession all her life. Having therefore in this peaceable and
Christianlike manner yielded up her blessed soul to her benefactor and
Creator the great God immortal; she left those realms abou^ding in all
riches, in great peace and admirable union and concord. And moreover to seal
up her forepassed life and death with a greater benefit, for the love she bare
unto her subjects which is a great proof of the blessing of God, we have
seen the wisdom she used even at the last gasp, having so profitably and so
effectually persuaded her subjects to embrace and acknowledge your Majesty whom
she knew to be the true lawful and undoubted heir and successor of her goodly
and flourishing Realms of England, and Ireland, by right of consanguinity and
lawful succession. Who does not see the assistance of God in all this action?
In that he would have your Majesty established in this most high degree of
honor, not for any other respect, but that in reigning happily and in peace,
you should finish the full delivery and restoring of Israel, and of the
Churches of your realms: and to continue the pure preaching of the Gospel, so
happily begun by her Majesty (of blessed and happy memory) against the Idolatry
of Rome I doubt no^ (SIRE) but Satan and his supporters will herein employ
their statagems to counsel your Majesty, and to induce you to join with that
great whore of Babylon, a whore which makes the kings and princes of the earth
dru^k with the cup of her spiritual fornication. But I assure my self that
your Majesty (like unto wary and nice Ulysses) will stop your ears against al
her charms, enchantments and allurements continuing inviolable, constant and
resolute in your royal virtues, the which God has bountifully planted in you,
to maintain and preserve his Church and Sacraments (to his honor and glory) in
their purety, against the poisons and Romish inuensions of men. Most humbly
beseeching your Majesty to remember that the Matthew. Paris in Hist. Angl. sub.
Henric. 3. pa. 660. Mat. vvestmon in Flo*rib. hist. sub. an. 1216.
Popes pretend to be the true kings of England and Ireland houlding the Kings
of the said kingdoms for their vassals and tributaries; who now under color to
free you from their said pretensions, would draw you unto them, and impose upon
you a most heavy and servile yoke. If your Majesty should so forget your self
as to cleave unto them, who knows not that their successors are accustomed to
disanull the decdes and promises of their predecessors, and which is more to
hold no faith with heretics as they call you? But (SIRE) this is nothing in
respect of the hard slavery of souls, whom they torture with their censures
and excommunications. So as you shall no sooner subject your self unto their
laws, but upon the first dislike, they will absolve and free your subjects
from their oath of obedience due unto their true and lawful King, they will
depose you at their pleasures, and give your crowns to whom they like, whereof
we have too many late examples. But when they shall see your Majesty to oppose
constantly against their tyranny, they will not dare to attempt against you nor
your realms. And moreover is not your Majesty at this present protector of the
Church of all your realms? yea the greatest of the Sovereign kings which
profess the pureness of the Gospel? shall not these lawful titles of honor
be sufficient to divert your Majesty from following the counsel of such Sirens
of state? They would gladly persuade you to acknowledge this furious beast, who
seeks but to devour good Kings, and to challenge to himself all power (as he
says) in heaven, earth and hell. An essential mark that he is the man of
iniquity (mentioned in the Scriptures) which has raised himself above all
nations, and above all religion. If this monster held you at his devotion, (the
which I with all your good subjects think to be impossible, how great a
leuiathan soever he be) doubt not (SIRE) but he would make you the most vile
and most abject of al his lifetenants, treading you more proudly under his
feet, then ever he did the good Emperor Barbarosse. And then let your Majesty
consider in what misery, calamity and desolation of desolations both you my
Lord the Prince (whom you love dearly) and all your subjects who pray for you
hourly, should be reduced in these your flourishing realms.

The Almighty God which governs and disposes of Monarchies according to his
will, which gives victories in battles, who is the spring and fountain of
all wisdom and knowledge, give your Majesty a reign like unto the Queen of
blessed and happy memory. Increase your Majesty in wisdom and knowledge, and
in true piety and pureness of his service: give you victory over all them that
shall attempt against you or your estate; and finish the work in you begun for
the restoring of the true Church, banishing out of your Islands and realms, all
tyranny, heresy and Romish Idolatry. And for a happy end, the same eternal
God give you a full and perfect inioying of the Crown of glory in the
happiness of eternal life through his son Jesus Christ our Lord.

FINIS.

