The manner and order of proceeding against Christ, by the Judges which held a
counsel at Jerusalem, at the instance of Caiphas, which was High Priest that
same year: And the sentence of death pronounced against him by Pilate, then
Gouerner of the Jews, under Tiberius the Roman Emperor.
1. Simon the Leper. WHat Law have we to condemn a man that is in bondage?


2. Rabaam. I know not wherefore the Laws are made if they be not observed
and kept.


3. Achias. The cause of the offender ought to be thoroughly examined before
sentence of death be given against him.


4. Subath. No man ought either by the law of God or man, to be condemned ere
his offense be known, therefore tell us wherein this man has offended.


5. Rosmophin. To what end is the Law ordained if the true meaning thereof be
not kept?


6. Phytiphares. That righteousness which moves sedition amongst the common
people, is needles for the estate of the Country.


7. Ryphar. The Law it self condemns no man, save him that rebelleth
against it, and for that cause is it made. If he be a transgresso^ let his own
offense cast him, and not your collar or hastines.


8. Joseph of Aramathia. O what a shame is this, that in a whole City not one
is to be found that will defend the innocent.


9. Ioram. Wherefore suffer we this just man to die, is it for his righteousness?


10. Ehiheris. Although he be just yet shall he die, because the people are
moved by his words.


11. Diarabias. Although we faigne outward boldness, yet is he accused before
the Counsel.


12. Sareas. An Hypocrite is very dangerous in a common wealth, therefore let
him be rooted out from the people.


13 Rabin^^* Whether he be just or unjust, because he is against the manners of
our forefathers, we will not suffer him.


14. Iosaphat. Let him be bound in iron Chains and kept secretlye.


15. Philomeus. If he be neither just nor unjust, wherefore do we stay and
not condemn him?


16 Tecas. It were better and safer for us to banish him the Country, or else
send him up to Caesar.


17 Mesa. If he be just then let us join with him, but if he be unjust let us
root him out.


18 Sameth. Let us agree about him least he rebel against us, and if he will
not obey us let him be put to torture.


19 Cayphas. All you know not what you say: it is better that one man die then
all the people perysh.


The sentence of Pontius Pilate, Judge of the Jews under the Emperor.
IPontius Pilate, provost and Judge in Jerusalem, under the mightiest Emperor
Tiberius, (whose Empire the most highest have in keeping) greeting. Sitting in
judgment seat for love of justice, by the Sinagogue of the Jewish people, is
presented before me Jesus of Nazareth, the which with presumptuous words has
named himself to be the son of GOD, although he be borne of a poor mother:
He has preached himself to be the King of the Jews, aduauncing to destroy
Salomons Temple, and to withdraw the people from the most approved Law of
Moses. All this exactly considered and approved so, condemn we him to the
Cros^e with two murderers.

This was found at Vienna in a little box under the ground.

To the Christian Reader.
WHen I was last busy with confuting of that pernicious book of John
Enghilram (called the bluddy book) through the murders that have been
committed by the Papists among the Children of GOD, so found I at the Printers
house, this Pamphlet printed in Dutch, and considering the matter, the person
and the circumstances, I would not that the English nation, being now (God be
praised) the most famous and renowned, both for purity of Religion, and
valiantnes in Cheualry, should be thereof deprived.

Farewell in Christ Jesus our Savior, from my study in Canterbury, the 12. of
May. 1586. Yours in the Lord Gerardus Gossenius Doctor in Physic.


