THE Answer of John Gough Preacher, To Master Fecknams Objections, against
his Sermon, lately preached in the Tower of London. 15. Ianurie. 1570.

Imprinted at London by John Awdeley, dwelling in little Britain street
without Aldersgate. 1570.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful Master Pellam, the Queen's Majesty's Lieftenaunt of
her highness Ordinance of the Tower, John Gough Preacher of the word of God,
sends greeting in our Lord God everlasting. Amen.
BECAUSE (right woorshipfull) at your earnest request and godly desire, I
preached the 15. of January last passed, a sermon in the Tower of London, in
the presence of Doctor Watson, sometime bishop of Lyncolne, and Master
Fecknam, sometime also Abbot of Westminster, with others: Since the which my
Sermon, the said M. Fecknam has seemed by writing, to condemn certain
articles contained in my Doctrine at that present, and there by me taught. That
is to say: where I affirmed, that it was impossible to keep the law of God, he
has taken upon him to affirm the contrary. vz. That it is possible, and that
it lies in man's power, to observe and keep them. Secondly, where I taught,
that we be justified by faith only: he denies the same, and therewyth
teaches justification by works. Thirdly, where I denied the invocation of
Saints: he affirms the contrary. And fourthly and lastly, where as I
affirmed, yt all sins are deadly: he teaches the contrary. Aduouching that
there be some venial sins, and therefore concludes that all are not deadly.

All which his assertions, he seems very clarklye to ground and maintain by
the authority of the word of God, and consent of the Fathers. Which thing he
has in such manner, and with such goodly glosing words blased and set forth,
that at the first show he seems utterly to beat me down to the ground, and
makes that my doctrine in the eyes of the simple, and of such whose
consciences are not as yet settled in true religion, to appear false and
unsound, and therefore of no credit, nor to be received. I therefore thought it
my bounden duty to stand in the defense of my doctrine, being sound and
perfect, and according to the sacred and holy Scriptures. And bringyng M.
Fecknams objections to the bright shinyng Sun of God his most holy word, his
gay cloked colors might be detected and made apparent to the eyes of all men,
and thereby the counterfeited mistes of his Assertions driven away, the true
and wholesome doctrine of mine might be made the more manifest. And therefore
have taken upon me at this present to answer the same, wherein I have used this
order.

First, I have answered every article of the four, particularly, and restored
the Scriptures to their right sense, which M. Fecknam (for the maintenance of
his errors) has very corruptly wrested. That done, I prove my doctrine true,
both by the Scriptures and Fathers, so sufficiently, that I am persuaded that
all colors of caueling is removed or taken away, to all such as seek the
truth, and only seek the same, for the better settling of their consciences,
rather then for vayneglory or estimacion of men.

Having therefore now finished this my answer and defense of my doctrine
aforesaid: thought it good to dedicate the same to your worship, that you with
the rest of Gods Children, may be the better settled and grounded in this most
wholesome and sound doctrine of God his glorious Gospel. And the other, whose
eyes are not yet opened, God may in his great mercies hereby remove the mistes
of the false and corrupt doctrine of the Papists, from the same. That they may
yet now at length see how they have been seduced and deceived, and receive the
truth now also offered them, to their everlasting comfort. Which obtained, I
have my desire, and shall in that respect think my labors herein well
bestowed, which I pray God for his son Jesus Christ's sake may redounde to
his glory, and profit of his Church. Amen.

Which thing, as I have well meant, so I hope your worship will take in good
part. Whom I pray God so to behold with his most favorable countenance, that as
he has begone in you (and that in his free mercies) this his good work, and
opened your heart to believe his truth, and your eyes to see the same, perfect it
in you unto the end. That you may daily grow from grace to grace, from faith to
faith, and from virtue to virtue, until you become a perfect man in Jesus
Christ, to his glory and honor, and to your everlasting comfort.

AMEN.
Yours to command in the Lord, John Gough Preacher. etc.

The answer of John Gough Preacher, to M. Fecknams Objections.
I Have M. Fecknam, red your cauelyng Objections, to certain points of
religion, by me touched and taught, in my Sermon in the Tower of London, in
your presence, with others. Wherein, as you have corruptly wrested the
Scriptures in your Assertions, to the maintenance of your heresies: So have
you also with like subteltie, wrested my words, of purpose leaving out such my
reasons or arguments, as utterly made against you, and reciting them maymedly,
you will seem to triumph, before you have obtained the victory. And although
the articles (M Fecknam) which you have taken upon you to inuey against, and as
it were piked out from the rest of my Sermon, be already so sufficiently and
learnedly answered by such, as I unfeignedly acknowledge, my self not worthy
(in respect of virtue and learning) to carrye their books after them: Whereby
you might be well removed from these your heresies, if you would read them,
and in reading give place to the truth, which you only ought to seek, and not
your own estimation: Yet, least you should think I were not able to defend my
doctrine, which you seem so to impugn, with Doctor upon Doctor, and with
certain wrested scriptures, preposterously understood: I shall God willing,
with so few words as I may, and as my little leisure from waightier studies
shall permit and suffer me, answer the same. Wishing that God in his mercies,
will so open your understanding, that with humblenes of heart you may simply
seek JESUS CHRIST and the profit of his Church. Amen.

M. Fecknams first Article. 1 That it is not impossible to keep God his
commandment.
Which I did affirm to be impossible. Your scriptures you allege, are these
that follow: whereof the first is Christ in Matthew. 11. where he says:
Tollite iugum meu^ super vos. etc. Take up my yoke upon you. etc. Wherein you
triumph over my poor lump of lead at your pleasure. But if you weyed the
text, with a little more deeper consideration, you should see, that you are
fowly deceived. For in that Christ calls it Iugum meum, my yoke, he makes a
difference between his doctrine and the law, and that in respect of the
straightnes of the law, and of the easines of his doctrine, and of that he
requires of his Children and Scholars. But how heavy a lump the law is, S.
Peter describes in the.15. of the Acts, thus: Nunc ergo quid tentatis Deum,
vt imponatur iugum super ceruices discipulorum, quod neque patres nostri, neque
nos portare potuimus. That is: Now therefore why tempt ye God, to put on the
Disciples necks the yoke, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear.
Peter tells us here that the law, which he here calls Iugum, a yoke, is
impossible to be borne, and teaches us where we shall seek to be eased, in
these words which immediately follow: vz. Sed per gratiam domini nostri Jesus
Christi, credimus nos saluos futuros, quemadmodum and illi. i. But we believe
that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, we shall be saved, as well as
they. Therefore in Christ the law is fulfilled, Ephesians. 2. and we are at peace
with God through Christ, Romans 5. Christ his yoke is easy. For whereto tends
else his words a little before, where he says: Et ego refocillabo vos, and I
will refresh you? Not that we should be idle, but seeing our infirmities, we
should acknowledge the same, and according to Christ's council Luke. 7. say
Serui inutiles sumus, we are unprofitable Servants. And that this yoke is
eased in Christ, S. Paul teaches us, Roma. 8. saying: Etenim quod lex prestare
non poterat, ea part qua imbecillis erat per carnem, hoc Deus, proprio filio
misso sub specie carnis, peccato obnixie praestitit. i. For what the law could
not do by reason of the weakness of the flesh, that God performed in sending
his Son in the similitude of sinful flesh. By which words you see, the
impossibility in us, and the ease by Christ. For what need the perfection of
our works by him, if possibility remained in us? But S. Paul tells us an
other tale, Galath. 3. Thus: Etenim si data fuisset lex, que possit viuificare,
vere ex lege esset iustitia, sed conclusit scriptura omnia sub peccatum. etc.
i. For if there had been a law given, which could have given life, then no
doubt righteousness should have come by the law: but the scripture concluded all
under sin. etc. Read the place. Thus (M. Eecknam) you see your wrested place
righted, and my leady lump remains heavy still.

Where you allege S. John. 1. Epist. 5. Quod mandata eius grauia non sunt, that
his commandments are not grievous: and thereupon will infer, that if they be
not Grauia, grievous, then they are far from mine so heavy a lump. And here
you are likewise deceived, in understanding by Mandata, his commandments,
the absolute accomplishment of the law, of our selves. For the law is here of
S. John said, not to be heavy, in this respect, that the curse of the law is
by Christ removed, and our imperfection performed by him, as before Romans 8. and
the spirit of God working in the hearts of his Children, a deep consideration
of Gods mercy in Christ toward them, works in them also, an unfeigned love
to God, and of love desire (through his spirit) to please God: knowing
assuredly, that though the perfection herein be not such as Gods justice does
require, yet God for Christ's sake will accept the same as perfected, Ephesians. 2.
And in this respect they are by S. John here, called Non grauia, not grievous:
Not because we absolutely perform them: but because they are perfected in
Christ per fidem, through faith.

Now to your third alleged scripture out of the Rom 2. 2. thus: Non enim qui
audiunt legem, iusti sunt apud Deum, sed qui legem factis exprimunt, iusti
habebuntur. 1. For in the sight of God they are not righteous which hear the
law, but the doers of the law shall be justified. Whereupon you argue thus: If
they do the law, then it may be done, then it is possible. etc. So follows
your consequence, Ergo the law is not impossible to be kept. If you consider
well this text, with the circumstances, you shall well perceive, that S. Paul
means nothing les hereby, then that a man may absolutely fulfill the law, and
thereby be justified. For first the Apostle goes about to refell the
foolishnes of the Jews, which supposed that the hearing and understanding of
the law, was sufficient to the accomplishing of the same, although they in no
part fulfilled it, which S. Paul here confuteth. As though he would say unto
them: You brag that you are justified by the law, when in no part you do
fulfill the law, but bragging of a little superficial understanding of the law,
persuade your selves straight, that you do fulfill the law, as though the
accomplishing of the law, consisted in knowledge and understanding, and not in
fulfilling: But herein you are deceived, for not the hearers, but the doers of
the law are justified. And because none fully accomplisheth the law so
absolutely as Gods justice requires, therefore our justification comes not by
the law (whereof the Jews bragged) Romans 10. And therefore in the same chapter
the Apopostle concludes thus: Nam perfectio legis Christus, ad
iustificationem, omni credenti. i. For Christ is the fulfilling of the law, to
justify all that believe.

And lastly for your example alleged out of Luke. i. Erant ambo iusti coram
Deo, incedentes in omnibus mandatis and iustificationibus Domini
irreprehensibiles. i. They were both righteous before God, and walked in all
the laws and ordinances of the Lord without reproof: These words (M.
Fecknam) are not to be understood, as though Zachary and Elizabeth,
absolutely fulfilled the law, for then they had no need of Christ, and Christ
had not said truly then in the.17. of S. Luke. Dicite, serui inutiles sumus.
etc. i. Say ye, we are unprofitable servants. etc. But therefore they are
said to be just, because God in Christ imputed not unto them, their sin, for
they were not without their faults. And David is true, who says: Psalm. 14.
Omnes declinauerunt, and simul inutiles facti sunt, non est qui faciat bonum,
non est vsque ad vnum. i. They are all gone out of the way, they are all
together become abominable, there is none that does good, no not one. And in
this number I am sure, are also comprehended both Zachary and Elizabeth. And
the same Prophet in the.142. Psalm has thus: Non intres in iudicium cum seruo
tuo Domine, quia non iustificabitur in conspectu tuo omnis viuens. i. Enter not
into judgment with thy servant O Lord, for no man living shall be justified
in thy sight. And it is to be supposed, that in these words, the Prophet meant
not only such as lived in his time, but also in times, both past, then
present, and to come. But now let us see, what the Fathers say to this matter.
And first S. Ambrose has thus.

Ambros. ad Gal. 3. Et lex habuit iustitiam, sed ad presens, non quia
iustificaret apud Deum. Remittere enim peccata non potuit, vt de peccatoribus
faceret iustos, sed ad hoc data est, vt terrori esset, prouoca^s homines, ad
bonam vitam, irreuerentes puniens. Ideoque no^ est data lex, que possit
viuificare, sed condemnare. The same in English.

And the law had righteousness but for a time* Not because it could justify
before the Lord: For it could not so forgive sins, that of Sinners it could
make them just. But to this end it was given, that it might be a terror,
provoking men unto good life, punishing the disobedient or vnreuerent persons.
Therefore is not a law given which can give life, but condemn.

Also S. Augustine says: Dominus iustam legem, August. in prefat. Episto. ad
Galat.
iniustis hominibus dedit, ad demonstranda peccata eorum, non auferanda. Non
enim aufert peccatum. nisi gratia fidei. etc. i.

The Lord has given a just law, to unjust men, to make manifest their sins,
and not to take them away. For it takes not away sins, but by grace of
faith. etc.

The said S. August. de spiritu and lit. ca. 19. says: Lex ergo data est, vt
gratia quereretur, gratia data est, vt lex impleretur. That is.

The law therefore was given, that grace might be sought. Grace was given, that
the law might be fulfilled. And who is this Gratia, grace, M. Eecknam, but
Christ?

Again the said Augustine, writing upon the.118. Psalm, says: Noli ergo
superbire, noli de tuo, que nulla est virtute presumere, and intelliges, quare
sit a bono Deo, bona lex data, que tamen viuificare non possit. Ad hoc enim
data est, vt te de magno paruulum faceret, vt te ad faciendam legem, vires de
tuo non habere monstraret, ac sic inops indignus, and egenus, ad gratiam
confugeres and clamares: Miserere mei Domine, quoniam infirmus sum. That is.

Be not therefore proud, do not presume of thine own power, which in deed is
none, and thou shall understand wherefore a good law was given by a good God,
which nevertheless cannot give life. For to this purpose was it given, that of
great it might make thee little, that it might show unto thee that thou haste
no strength of thy self to do the law. And so being needy, unworthy and poor,
might flee unto grace and cry: Have mercy on me O God, for I am weak.

S. Bernard also in Epist. omniu^ sanct. ser. j. says: Beati qui esuriu^t, and
sitiunt iustitiam, quoniam ipsi saturabuntur. Sed quid potest esse omnis
iustitia nostra coram Deo? No^ne iuxta prophetam, velut pannus menstruate
reputabitur, and si districte iudicetur, iniusta inuenietur, omnis iustitia
nostra, and minus habens? Quid ergo de peccatis erit, quando ne ipsa quidem pro
se poterit respondere iustitia? propterea obnixe, cum Propheta clamantes: Non
intres in iudicium. etc. Tota humilitate, ad misericordia^ recurramus, que sola
potest saluare animas nostras. That is.

Blessed are they that hunger and thirst for righteousness, for they shall be
satisfied. But what can all our righteousness be before God? Shall it not,
according to the saying of the Prophet, be counted as a most filthy and
defiled cloth? And if all our righteousness be straightly judged, it shall be
found unjust, and having less force. What therefore shall become of our sins,
where as not even our righteousness it self, shall be able to answer for it
self? Therefore, with all our might, crying out with the Prophet as loud as we
can: Enter not into judgment. etc. with all humblenes let us run to the
throne of mercy, which only is able to save our souls.

I will therefore conclude with S. Augustine thus: Quoniam ab ipso, and per
ipsum, and in ipso, sunt omnia, Ergo non ei aliquid dedimus, and tenemus
debitorem. Vnde debitorem? Quia promissor est. Non dicimus Deo: Domine, read
quod accepisti, sed read quod promisisti. That is.

Because from him, and by him, and in him, are althinges: Therefore we have
not given any thing unto him, and hold him as a debtor. Whence is he our
debtor? Even because he has promised. We say not unto God: Lord, give again
that ye have received; but give unto us yt thou have promised.

The law therefore can not absolutely of us be observed, because God does not
only require of us an outward observing of the same, but also an inward. For
not only he is guilty of whoredom that commits the act, but he also that
lusts after an other man's wife. Math. 5. He is not only a murderer that
kills a man: but he also that hates his brother in his heart. 1. John. 3. But
who can say he lusts not. etc? Find him, and I will grant, the law is not
impossible to be kept of us.

M. Fecknams second article. 2 That the Angels and Saints of heaven may hear
our prayers, and therefore to be prayed unto.
For the confirmation hereof you allege these Scriptures. vz. Luke. 15. Ita
dico vobis, gaudium erit coram Angelis Dei super vno peccatore resipiscente.
etc. i. I say unto you, that likewise there shall be joy in the presence of
the Angels of God over one sinner that repents. For the Angels in heaven do
know that sinners repent here in earth, and therefore do rejoice: For they
rejoice not, but because they know, and therefore we ought to pray to them.
But though Christ says, that they know, that sinners do repent, yet he says
not: therefore let sinners pray to Angels. S. John tells us an other lesson,
Reuela. 22. when he was about to woorship the Angel, the same Angel says:
Vide ne feceris, conseruus enim tuus sum. etc. i. Se thou do it not, for I am
thy fellow servant. etc. and so concludes, Deum adora, worship God.

And your second scripture, which you allege out of Toby. 12. where the Angel
says: Quando orabas cum lachrimis. etc. When thou did pray with tears. etc.
Ego obtuli orationem tuam domino, I offered thy prayers unto the Lord: He says
not, when thou praiedst to me, I did this and that. Neither can you prove, that
either Tobias, or any other before Christ, prayed unto any of the fathers or
Prophets that died before them. But all their prayers were always, and at all
times directed only unto God. And as for the new Testament, ye are utterly
void either of scripture, or example. And therefore your place alleged, serves
to no purpose* to prove the invocation of Saints.

Your places also alleged out of the 2. Reg. 6. of Elias, and of Peter in the
Acts. 5. they then living in this world, makes nothing to the purpose, to
prove that we should pray to them being dead. Truly I much maruayle of this
your waywarde blyndnes herein.

And as concerning my interpretation of Esays words in his.63. Chap. I see no
more just cause, why I should more believe Ierom herein, then you: as though
Jerome never erred. But if you look unto the circumstance of the text, it will
tell you, that my interpretation goes more nere the mind of the Prophet, then
Ieroms. As though the Prophet would say thus or the like: When I consider my
unworthiness, it drives me into an abashment, so that I dare not approach to thy
Majesty, and yet on the other side, if I should pray to any other, I should
pray in vain, because they hear me not. For even Abraham him self knows
us not, nor Israel is not acquaynted with us: It is therefore thou O Lord that
must only hear and help us, for thou art only our father and redemer.

And trow you, that though Origin called upon Job, S. Ciprian upon the Martyrs,
S. Ierom upon Paul. etc. (as you allege) that we think it well done of them,
and also of us to be followed? Nay (M. Fecknam) we must follow them, as S. Paul
wills us to follow him, when he said. 1. Cor. 11. Imitatores mei estote,
sicut and ego Christi. Follow me, as I do Christ. And so far as the Fathers,
either in doctrine, religion, or conversation follow Christ, that is to say, so
long as their doings and doctrine do agree with the sacred scriptures, we will
and do, both receive them, believe them, follow them, and thank God for them.
But if they stray from the sincere rules thereof, we will leave them: unless
you can show us a better warrant for the same, then I see come from you yet.

S. Paul says 1. Tim. 2, Vnus enim Deus, vnus etiam conciliator, Dei and
hominum, homo Christus Jesus. i. There is one God, and one Mediator between
God and man, the man Jesus Christ. And 1. John. 2. Filioli mei, haec scribo
vobis, Me little Children, these things I write unto you. etc. Aduocatum
habemus apud patrem, nempe Iesum Christum iustum. i. We have an advocate with
the father, even Jesus Christ the just, Ioh. 14. Christ says: Ego sum via,
veritas, et vita, nemo venit ad patrem, nisi per me. i. I am the way, the truth
and the life, no man comes to the father, but by me. And John. 16. Quecunque
petieritis patrem nomine meo, dabit vobis. Whatsoever ye shall ask the father
in my name, he shall or will give it you. And why we ought so to do, our Master
Christ renders a reason before. John. 14. Si quicquid petieritis nomine meo,
hoc facia^, vt glorificetur pater per filium. i. If ye shall ask any thing in
my name, I will do it, that the father may be glorified by the son.

Here you see (M. Fecknam) that S. Paul and S. John says, that Christ is
only our Mediator. And Christ him self tells us, that he only is the
way to God, and that we have no access to God, but only hy him. And also you
see, he promises help, if our prayers be made to God the Father in his name,
and also that thereby God is glorified. And therefore of necessity it must
follow, that as God is glorified, when we pray to Christ, as to our
Mediator: so it must also of necessity follow, that he is dishonored, when
we of our own heads appoint to our selves of Creatures, sundry and several
Mediators. And therefore we may not in any wise impart his honor to any
creature: for if we do, we shall hear God cry out against us, by the Prophet
Esaias. 42. Ego dominus, hoc est nomen meum, and gloria^ meam alteri non dabo.
etc. i. I am the Lord, and that is my name, and I will not give my glory to an
other. etc.

By these scriptures therefore I am manifestly taught, that only Jesus Christ
is our Mediator, and therefore no creature ought to be inuocated, or prayed
to. etc. Now let us see what the Fathers say to this matter.

S. Augustine in his book De spu^ and anima ca. 29. says thus: Ibi siquide^
sunt spiritus de functoru^, vbi no^ vident, neque audiunt, que agu^tur, aut
eueniunt in ista vita hominibus. i.

In such a place doubtless, are the Spirits of those that are departed, where
they see not, neither do they hear, what things are done, and what do chance
to men in this life.

Epiphanius in his book Contra Here Is. lib. 3. To. 2. Here Is. 29. says thus:
Sed neque Helias adoradus est, etiam si in viuis sit, neque Johannes adorandus,
quanquam per preces suas pro prias Dormicionem suam admirandam, effecerit, imo
potius, ex Deo gratiam acceperit. Sed neque Thecla, neque quisquam Sanctus
adoratur. Non enim dominabitur nobis antiquus error, vt relinquamus viuentem,
and adoremus ea, quae ab ipso facta sunt. Coluerunt enim and adorauerunt
creaturam preter Creatorem, and stulti facti sunt, Si enim angelos adorari non
vult, quanto magis eam, que genita est ab Anna, que ex Ioachim donata Annae que
per preces, and omnem diligentiam, secundum promissionem patri ac matri data
est? no^ tamen aliter genita est, preter hominum natural, sed sicut omnes ex
semine viri, and vtero mulieris. That is.

But neither Helias is to be woorshipped, although he be yet alive: Nor yet is
John to be worshipped, although by his own prayers he made his sleep
wonderful. Nay rather he received grace from God. But neither Thecla nor any
Saint is worshipped. For that old error shall not rule in us, that we should
forsake the living God, and worship those things that were made by him. For
they have honored and worshipped the creature besides the Creator, and they
were made fools. For if he will not have the Angels to be worshipped, how much
more yt which was borne of Anna, which by Ioachim being given to Anna, which by
prayers and all diligence was given according to promis, to the father and
mother? Notwithstanding was not borne otherwise besides the nature of men, but
like as al men, of the sede of the man, and the womb of the woman.

S. August. again, in lib. de vera Relig. ca. 55 says: Non sit nobis religio,
humanorum operum cultus, meliores sunt enim ipsi artifices, qui talia
fabrica^tur, quos tamen colere no^ debemus. Non sit nobis religio. Cultus
bestiarum, meliores sunt enim extremi homines quos tamen colere non debemus.
Non sit nobis religio, cultus hominum mortuoru^, quia si pie vixerint, non sic
habentur, vt tales que rant honores, sed illum a nobis coli volunt, quo
illuminante letantur. etc. That is.

Let us not count it religion, to woorship the works of men's hands. For the
crafts masters themselves which make such things, are better, whom
notwithstanding we ought not to worship. Let us not make it religion to worship
brute beasts, for the basest sort of men that be, be better the^ they, who^
notwithstanding we ought not to worship. Let us not make it religion to worship
dead men: because if they have lived godlyly, they are not counted, that they
seek such honors, but they would have him to be worshipped of us, who
allumining them, do rejoice. etc.

The same August. again in his book Contra Faust. lib. 20. ca. 21. says
thus: Ipsi enim Sancti, vel homines aut angeli exhiberi sibi nolunt, quod vni
Deo debori volunt. Apparuit hoc in Paulo and Barnaba, cum commoto miraculis,
que per eos facta sunt, Licaonij tanquam dijs immolare voluerunt. Conscissis
enim vestimentis suis, confite^tes and persuade^tes se deos non esse, ista sibi
fieri vetuerunt. Apparuit and in Angelis sicut in Apocalipsi legimus, angelum
se adorari prohibentem, ac dicentem adoratori suo: Conseruus tuus sum, and
fratrum tuorum. i.

For the very Saints them selves, whether they be dead men or Angels, will not
have honor given unto them, which they would have only due to God. This
appeared in Paul and Barnabas, when the men of Licaonia, astonished at their
miracles, would have done sacrifice unto the^, as if they had been Gods. For
they, renting their garments, confessing and persuading them, that they were not
Gods, forbad such things to be done unto them. This appeared also in the
Angels, as we read in the Apocalips. The Angel forbidding him self to be
worshipped, and saying to him that worshipped him: I am the fellow servant of
thee, and thy brethren.

Also Ciril in his. 6. book Contra Iulia. says thus: At sanctos Martyrs,
neque deos esse dicimus, neque adorare consueuimus. Laudamus autem eos, potius
summis honoribus, que pro veritate strenue certaru^t and fidei cinceritate^
seruarunt, ita vt et suam animam contempserint, et mortis terroribus
valedicentes, pre ualuerunt in summis periculis, tantequod fuerint fortitudinis
quasi statuas fibi, sue vite excitaturi. etc. That is to say.

As for the holy Martyrs, we neither say that they are Gods, neither have been
accustomed to worship them. But we praise them rather with great honor,
because they have valiantly striuen, for the truth, and have mayntayned the
sinceritye of faith, in so much as they have despised their own life: and not
regarding the terrors of death, have prevailed in very great dangers, and were
of so great strength, as though they would raise up images to them selves of
their own life. etc.

Again S. August. in his. 8. book De Ciuitate Dei cap. 27. says: Quis autem
audiuit aliquando, fidelium stantem sacerdotem, ad altar, etiam super sanctum
corpus Martyris ad Dei honorem cultumque constructum, dicere in precibus:
Offero tibi sacrificium Petre, aut Paul, vel Cipriane? etc. That is.

But which of the faithful has heard the Priest at the altar, yea upon the
holy body of the Martyr, made forth honor and worship of God, say at any time
in his prayers: I offer a sacrifice to thee O Peter, or Paul, or Cyprian: etc.

These also (M. Fecknam) approves my assertion true, that the Saints are not
to be prayed to, and likewise utterly condemn your heresy, which maintains
ye contrary

M. Fecknams third article. 3 That faith only does not justify.
And for this Article which you thus affirm, you expound the place alleged by
me out of S. Paul Romans 2. Arbitremur iustificari hominem sine operibus legis.
We suppose a man to be justified without the works of the law, after this
sort: You say that I inferred hereupon, that works do in no manner of wise
justify us, which is utterly false. For my words were, that hereby S. Paul
did teach us, that we were not justified by works: Your addition (in no manner
of wise) I spoke not. For I know M. Fecknam, that there is two manner of
iustifications understood in the scriptures, the one before God, the other
before men. Of justification before God, it is truly said by S. Paul Romans 4.
Credidit autem Abraham Deo, and imputatum est ei ad iustitiam. Abraham believed
God, and it was imputed unto him unto righteousness And of sustification before
me^, S. James speaks in the. 2. Chap. of his Epistle thus: Abraham pater
noster, no^ne ex factis iustificatus est, cum obtulisset filium suum
super-altare? etc. i. Was not our father Abraham justified through works, when
he had offered his son upon the altar? etc. And that he so meant, appears
by his very words which follow within few lines after, thus: Credidit autem
Abraham Deo, et imputatu^ est illi ad iustitia^, and amicus Dei vocatus est.
Abraham believed God, and it was reputed unto him for righteousness, and he was
called the friend of God.

Thus we see S. Paul and S. James reconciled, and both teach justification by
faith, in the sight of God. For it is necessary, that because faith is an
invisible thing, and cannot rightly be judged of men, for that a man may brag
before men, and say, that he has faith, when he is utterly void thereof. And
therefore of necessity works be required, to follow the justifying faith, as
the shadow the body, that the faith which is only known unto God, may by the
godly conversation of the justified man appear, and be made manifest to men
also. And therefore S. Paul, after he has proved our justification by faith,
without the works of the law (from the.3. Chap. of the Epistle to the Romans
unto the.8. of the same) then he there concludes thus: Nulla igitur nunc
condemnatio his, qui insiti sunt in Christo Jesus, qui non iuxta carne^
versantur, sed iuxta spiritum. i. There is now therefore no condemnation to
them which are graffed in Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh, but
after the spirit. And when the same Apostle has in most plain words thus
proved our justification by faith without works. Ephesians. 2. Gratia enim seruati
estis per fidem, idque non ex vobis, Dei donum est, no^ ex operibus, ne quis
glorietur. i. For ye be saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is
the gift of God, and not of works, least any man should rejoice: He
immediatelye adds this. Nam ipsius sumus opus, co^diti in Christo Jesus ad
opera bona, que preparauit deus, vt in eis ambularemus. i. For we are his
workmanship, created in Christ Jesus, unto good works, which God has
prepared, that we should walk in them.

And where as you (M. Fecknam) make great wonder at our subteltie, or rather
sensible absurdity of this our opinion, of justifying by faith only: you fall
into these questions, whether we mean faith without penance (as you term it)
I suppose you mean repentance, or faith without Baptism, or faith without hope,
or faith without fear, or faith without charity. As though, when we teach that
we be justified by faith only, that we speak of an opinion of faith only, or
of a dead or imagined faith. No, no M. Fecknam, you wilfully wrest our meaning
herein. And (to say the truth) I may much better herein wonder at your peuish
overthwart understanding of us, then you marvel at our subtle opinion, or
sensible absurdity. For when we speak of justification by faith only, we
understand not as you fondly imagine a dead or imagined faith, but such a faith
as can no more be without repentance, hope, filial fear, charity. etc. the the
sun can be without his brightness, or the fire without his heat.

Neither do we speak herein of works before faith, but even of works after
faith. For we know S. Paul's Maxim Roma. 14. Quicquid non est ex fide,
peccatu^ est, what soever is not of faith, is sin. And Hebr. 11. Atqui sine
fide fieri non potest, vt quis illi placeat. 1. But without faith, it is
impossible that any man can please him. Our understanding is not so gross, as
to mean of works before faith, though you lust so to cauel herein with us. For
after a true faith is conceived by the holy Ghost, in the heart of a good
Christian, he works not of hope of merit, but of love, not to be justified
thereby, but because he is so commanded by his Savior. John. 14. Si diligitis
me, precepta mea seruate If ye love me, keep my commandments. For a true
faith is not idle, but woorketh of love. etc. Gala. 5. Na^ in Christo Jesus,
neque circumcisno quicquam valet, neque preputium, sed fides per dilectionem
operans. i. For in Christ Jesus, neither circumcision any thing avails,
neither uncircumcision, but faith that works through love. Not that thereby we
seek justification, but thereby our consciences be ascertained of our assured
faith and justification by Christ.

And as for your fond exposition of ye words of the Prophet Esaias. 64. Et facti
sumus, vt immundus omnes nos, and quasi pa^nus menstruatae universe iustitia
nostra. etc. And we are all become unclean, and all our righteousness as a
cloth defiled with filthy blood. etc Where you say, that the Prophet there
speaks of the works of the Gentiles, and of the unfaithful only, and not of
the works of the unbelieving man: truly I do much marvel at your violent
wresting of the text, rather to your peculiar fence, then to the natural mind
of the Prophet. For I pray you, when he spoke those words, was the Prophet
himself either an Heathen, or an unbelieving Jew? I am sure you will say he was
neither of them, and yet he says omnes nos, all we, and takes him self in
the number: and yet I am persuaded his faith was as perfect, and perfecter,
then ever was the best of the Papists, take even the holiest of them. I pray
you therefore M. Fecknam, leave your wilful wresting of the scriptures, to
deceive simple souls wtal, and give place to the truth in time.

That we be justified by faith only, is manifest by the scripture. John. 17.
Hec est aute^ vita aeterna, vt cognoscant te solum deum verum, and quem misisti
Iesum Christum. And this is eternal life, that they may know thee the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. And again. John. 5. Amen, amen
dico vobis, qui sermonem meum audit, et credit ei qui misit me, habet vita^
aeternam, et in condemnationem non veniet, sed transiuit a morte in vitam. i.
Uerely, verily, I say unto you, he that hears my word, and believes in him
that sent me, has eternal life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is
escaped from death unto life. Again, Romans 3. Iustificantur autem gratis, per
illius gratiam, per redemptione^, que est in Christo Jesus. i. And they are
justified freely by his grace, by the redemption which is in Christ Jesus. And
S. John. 1. Epist. 5. Et haec est victoria que vicit mundu^, fides nostra. i.
And this is the victory that overcomes the world, even our faith. I pray you
M. Fecknam, is not Gratis, freely, as good as Sola fide by only faith? And
that Sola fides only faith does justify, even your own Fathers, of who^ you
brag so much, teach in most plain words.

For to begin with Origin first, in his.13. book ad To. has these words:
Quis autem vel super iustitia sua gloriabitur, cu^ audiat Deum, per prophetam
dicente^: Quia omnis iustitia vestra, sicut pa^nus mulieris me^struatae? Sola
igitur iusta gloriatio est in fide crucis Christi, que excludit omne^ illam
gloriationem que desce^dit ex operibus legis. i.

But who shall glory of his own ryghteousnes, when he hears God by his
prophet saying, that all your righteousness is like a most filthye defiled
cloth? The only true glorieng therefore is in the faith of the cross of Christ,
which excludes all that glorieng, which discendeth of the works of ye law.

Also S. Ierom in lib* 2. contra. Pelag. says: Existimamus fide iustificari
hominem, sine operibus legis, siquide^ vnus deus, qui iustificat circumcisionem
ex lege, and preputium ex fide. Manifest ostendit, non in hominis merito, sed
in Dei gratia esse iustitiam, qui sine legis operibus, credentiu^ suscipit
fide^. i.

We think that a man is justified by faith without the works of the law. For
because there is one God which justifies circumcision of the law, and
uncircumcision of faith. It manifestly shows that righteousness is not in the
merit of man, but in the grace of God. Who without the works of the law
accepts the faith of them that believe.

The same Ierom again in lib. 2. contra eundem says thus: Tunc ergo iusti
sumus, quando nos peccatores fatemur, and iustitia nostra, non ex proprio
merito, sed ex Dei consistit misericordia. That is.

Therefore we are then righteous, when we confess our selves sinners. And
our righteousness stands not upon our own merit, but upon the merit of God.

Ambrose De Iacobo Cap. 21. says thus: Non operibus iustificamur, sed fide.
Quoniam carnalis infirmitas, operibus impedimento est: sed fidei claritas,
factorum obumbrat errore^, que meretur veniam delictoru^. i.

We be not justified by works, but by faith: For the weakness of the flesh is
a let unto works, but the brightness of faith, shadoweth ye error of deeds,
which deserves pardon of our sins.

Also Chrisostom de Fide and lege writes thus: Latro autem credidit duntaxat.
etc.

For the Thief believed only, and was justified by the most merciful God. And
here say not unto me, that he lacked time to live vpryghtly and to do good
works. For I contend not about that, but this only I stedfastlye affirm,
that only Faith by it self has saved him.

S. Ierom again ad Roma. 4. says: Conuerte^tem impium, per solam fidem,
iustificat Deus, non opera bona, que non habuit. i.

God justifies the sinner that repents by only faith, and not by his good
works which he had not.

The said Hierom in the same place says further: Vt omnes qui ex gentibus
credunt, filij sunt Abrahe, dum et illis sola fides ad iustitiam reputatur.
That is.

As all they which among the Gentyles do believe, are the sons of Abraham,
whylest unto them also, only faith is reckened for righteousness.

Ambrose upon 1. Cor. 1. says: Hoc constitutum est a Deo, vt qui credit in
Christum, saluus sit sine opere, sola fide gratis accipiens remissionem
peccatorum. That is.

This is ordained of God, that he which believes in Christ, should be saved
without works, by only faith, freely receiving remission of sins.

Bernard in his.22. sermon upon the Cantic. says thus: Quamobrem quisquis,
pro. etc.

Wherefore whosoever inwardly grieved for his syn, does hunger and thirst for
righteousness, let him believe in thee, which iustifiest the ungodly, and being
justified by only faith, he shall have peace with God.

I will therefore conclude with S. Paul and Barnard thus: Roma. 3. Nunc vere
absque. etc.

But now the righteousness of God is made manifest without the law, whilst it
is allowed by the wytnes of the law and the Prophets.

Barnar. ser. 5. in vigil. Not. a Dom. says thus: Nam sibi quidem ipsi fidere,
non fidei. etc.

For truly, for one to trust in him self, is not of faith, but of unbelief.
Neither is it confidence for a man to put his trust in his own self, but
diffidence and mistrust rather. But he is faithful, which neither trusts to
him self, nor hops in him self, esteming him self as the vessel of
perdition: but so loosing his own self, that he may keep it, unto life
everlasting.

Thus I hope M. Fecknam, if you be not wilful, I have sufficiently proved by
the scriptures and Fathers, that we are justified by faith only, contrary to
your assertion.

M. Fecknams.4. and last article. 4 That every sin is not mortal.
That every sin is mortal (M. Feckna^) in that it is sin, is evident by
the words of God himself (who can best judge of this matter) in the.18. of
Ezechiel, saying thus: Anima, que peccauerit, ipsa morietur. The soul that
sins, shall die. Here is no exception or difference made of sin, but any sin,
in that it is sin, is deadly. And S. Paul says, Romans 6. For the reward of
sin is death. Here also you see, that S. Paul makes no difference of sin,
but that Mors, death, is the reward of sin generally, without exception. And S.
John says John. 3. Every one that commits sin, the same also commits
iniquity, and sin is iniquity. Here also you see, that S. John says
(making no difference of sin) but that syn, in yt it is syn, it is iniquity,
without exception. But peradventure, he was not so well learned as you M.
Fecknam, he was not acquainted with your Popish school Doctrine, for they be
so deep in their divinity, that they dare corred the holy Ghost, and say,
that S. Paul, in defining of faith, in the.11, to the Hebrews, has not don it
Satis Magistraliter, not Doctorlike enough or not Clarkly. And so I think you
will not stick to say, that S. John here, speaking of sin generally, has not
done the same Satis Magistraliter. Well, we will hold our selves, M. Eecknam,
contented with S. John's difinition of syn, and think more of him, the^ of the
best Doctor yt ever was in the Popes scoles.

And because you make it so light a matter and so small a syn of our thoughts,
as of little pretty sins, and as it were not worthy the speaking of: yet our
Master Christ in the.15. of Matthew tells us otherwise, when he says: Nam ex
cord exeunt cogitationes male, cedes, adulteria. etc. i. For out of the heart
proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries. etc. And then he concludes,
Haec sunt que impurant hominem, These things defile a man. And you are not
ignorant, that our Master teaches us also, in the.5. of the same Evangelist,
that whosoever beholds another man's wife, to lust after her, has already
committed adulterye with her in his heart. And S. John following his Master like
a good scoller, teaches no less, when he says 1. John. 3. thus: Omnis qui
odit fratrem suum, homicida est, Whosoever hates his brother, is a murderer.
So is it evident by the sacred scriptures, that all sins, without exception,
according to my doctrine, are mortal or deadly.

Now M. Fecknam, let us a little while see, what the Fathers also say to this
matter.

Ciprian Sermon. De Ieium. says thus: Fuerunt et ante Christum, viri insignes
etc.

There were also before Christ worthy men, both Prophets and Priests, but yet
conceived and borne in syn. Neither were they free from original nor from
actual syn. And there was found in the^ all, either ignorance, or
insufficiency, in which they going astray have sinned, and have neded the
mercy of God. By the which being taught and in structed, have given thanks to
God, and have confessed them selves to have lacked mutch of the full measure of
righteousness, and trusting in God, have not presumed to ascribe unto them
selves any soliditie or righteousness of their own.

Lactantius also De vero cultu. lib. 6. Ca. 13. says: Nemo esse sine delicto
potest. etc.

No man can be without syn, so long as he is laden, with the garment of the
flesh. The weakness whereof is three manner of ways brought in thraldom and
subjection of syn, to wit: by deeds, by thoughts, and by words.

Hierome likewise Episto. ad Algasiam says thus: Affectus, et perturbationes.
etc.

We may (so long as we dwell in the tabernacle, of this body, and are compassed
about with frail flesh) measurably rule our affections and passions but cut
them of quite we cannot by any means.

Augustine De perfect. just. lib..says: Querendum est, si natura hominis bona
est. et ^.

It is to be demanded if the nature of man be good, which none dare be so
bold to deny, but Mauicheus and Marcion. How then is it good, if it be not
possible for it to be without evil? For that all syn is evil, who doubts?
We answer, both that the nature of man is good. etc. See the place.

I will therefore conclude with Barnard and Gregory thus, Bernard writing De
donis spirit. sancti ca. 2. says: Vnde beatus Gregorius ait, Qui virtutes,
sine humilitate congregat, est quasi, qui in ventu^ puluerem portat. Sicut enim
puluis venti validi flatu, dispergitur: Sic omne bonu^ sine humilitate, inanis
vento glory rapitur. Multo etia^ melius est peccatorem esse humilem, quam
iustu^ arrogantem: Quod a domino euidenter ostenditur, vt Publicanus and
Phariseus in exemplu^ adducuntur. Sicut quidem sapiens ait: Melior est in malis
factis humilis confessio, qua^ in bonis factis superba gloriatio. That is.

Whereupon S. Gregory says: He that gathers virtues together without
humility, is as one that bears dust into the wind. For like as dust with a
mighty blast of wind is scattered abroad: so every good thing without
humility is with the wind of vain glory disperced a sunder. And also it is
much better to be an humble sinner, then to be a righteous man and arrogant.
Which thing is plainly set forth by the Lord, as the Publican and the Pharisey
are brought in for example. As a certain wiseman says: better is in wicked
deeds an humble confession, the^ in good deeds a proud bosting

But M. Fecknam, I mean not yet to let this matter so pass, but let us return
again: You say that there is venial syn, and deadly syn. And we say that all
syn, in that it is sin, it is deadly, and yet we say again, that there is not
any one syn, but that the same is both deadly and venial. Deadlye, if the
offender repent not: venial, if the same be unfeignedly repented, and by mercy
craved at ye hands of God, in the blood of Christ. For the same God that said
in Ezech. 18. Anima que peccauerit, ipsa morietur, The soul that sins,
shall dye, says also in the same chap. And when the wicked man turns away
from his wickedness that he has done, and does the thing which is equal and
right, he shall save his soul alive. Here you see M. Fecknam, like as all syn,
in that it is syn is deadly: so again all syn, in that it is unfeignedly
repented. etc. is also venial. For although Christ says, Mark. 8. Whosoever
therefore shall be ashamed of me and my words, in this adulterous and sinful
generation, of him also shall the son of man be ashamed: Yet our Master
Christ forgave Peter that fact afterward, because Exiuit et fleuit amare, he
went out, and wept bitterly. Again on the other side, we are not so blockish M.
Fecknam, to teach yt every thought is syn, but every evil thought that ryseth
in the heart of man, and is not resisted, but with delight followed, although it
be not accomplished in act, the same is deadly, and damnable, if it be not
repented, Math. 5. and 1. John. 3. And hereto agreeeth also these fathers, with
others.

Hieron. ad Demetriadem de virginit. writes thus: Distinguendum est autem,
inter istas cogitationes, quibus voluntas fauet, and

But there must a difference be put between these thoughts, which our will
favors, and with love embraces: And those cogitacions, which after the manner
of a dark shadow are wont to pass over the mind, and but even only in
passing over to show them selves, which the Greeks call (...) that is of bare
or naked form or shadowyng of any thing, or at the least between those which
come into the mind with a certain detestation, strongly strives and
resists. For the loss of the which, as it sorroweth, so it does rejoice that
they are driven out. In those truly which show them selves softly to the
mind, and do declare them as it were fleing away, there is neither syn at all,
nor yet battle. But in these with the which for a space the soul strives,
against the which our will resists, there is an equal fight. For either we
consent, and are overcome, or else we withstand, and do overcome, and in
battle get the victory.

Augustine also, Contra Pelag. lib. 3. cap. 2. says: Quidam ergo filij huius
seculi sunt. etc

Some therefore are the children of this world, and yet are not the children of
the devil. For albeit the devil is the author and chief worker of all syns,
yet all syns do not make men the children of the devil. For the children of
God do syn also, for if they say they have no sin, they deceive them selves,
and there is no truth in them. But by that means they syn, by the which they
are as yet the children of this world. But in that respect that they are the
children of God, they sin not at all. For every one that is borne of God,
synneth not. But unbelief makes the child of the devil, which syn is called
their own. As though it were alone, if it be not expressed what manner of syn it
is.

Thus you see (M. Fecknam) our doctrine to agree with the sacred scriptures,
and Fathers. Although it has pleased you in this your answer to lyken us to
certain of the old heretics, as to the Iouinians, Maniches, Valentinians, and
to Vigilantius, and such other. But this is your common practice, to cry out
Heretics, heresies. etc. whilst in the mean season you your selves, being
the very Heretics, and mayntainers of heresies, may the better escape. Much
like unto a false and subtle thief, who being pursued for his theft, and
running away, himself cries: Stop thief, that whilst the pursuers are
looking for the thief, (himself being the very thief) might thereby the
rather escape away.

So have I now (M. Fecknam) answered your Objections, and dout not, but hereby
to have sufficiently satisfied those, whose delyght is not in contention, and
whose strife is rather for the truth, then for vain glory.

But amongst other things in my Sermon (M. Fecknam) having by means of Peter's
words, to do with the living God, I found your dead bready God in your
Sacrament of the Altar: but thereof you speak never a word, which makes me
to think that you like not your quarrel therein, and so yield to the truth, and
therefore give it over in the plain field, or by your taciturnitie, consent
and yield to the truth, according to the old proverb: Qui tacet consentire
videtur, He seems to consent that which is objected, if that he hold his
peace.

And know ye also, that in that ye cannot away with the name of the living God,
but account those words to be the token of an heretic, whosoever accustomably
pronounces them, that hereby the plage which God threatened to the stifnecked
and Idolatrous Jews, is also come upon you Papists, prophesied by Jeremy. in
the.44. cha. thus: Ecce ego iuraui in nomine meo magno ait dominus. quia
nequaquam vltra vocabitur nomen meum ex ore omnis viri Iudei, dicentis, viuit
dominus deus. etc. i. Behold I have sworn by my great name, says the Lord,
that my name shall not be rehearsed through any ma^s mouth of Judah, saying
the Lord lives.

And now least you should think that I were infected with the heresy of free
will with you, if I should hold my peace and keep silence, and which to deny
you call heresy, in the first article of your aunswers, in these words: So
taught long before him (meaning me) the Maniches, and the Valentinians, denieng
freewill, which is the original of that heresy. Thus you call wholesome and
true doctrine heresy, and heresy true doctrine: And therefore justly fallen
into the curse of God by the Prophet Esaias. 5. Woe be to you, that call evil
good, and good evil, light darkness and darkness light. I will therefore prove
(by Gods help) this your doctrine of freewil to be manifestly against both the
word of God, and the doctrine of the catholic Fathers.

First, Gene. 20. God said to Abimelech the king of Gerare, concerning Abraham's
wife thus: Atque ideo cohibui te, quo minus peccares in me, nec permisi vt eam
tangeres. 1. I kept thee also, that thou should not syn against me, and
therefore suffered I thee not to touch her. And in the.50. chap. of the same
book Joseph has these words to his brethren: Be not afraid, can we resist
the will of God? You devised evil against me, but God turned it to good. And in
Exodus. 4. God says thus: Ego indurabo cor illius, I will harden his heart And
in the.33. of the same book he says: I will show mercy, and will have
compassion on whom it shall please me. Also Proverb. 16 Hominis est anima^
preparare, and domini gubernare linguam. A man may prepare his soul, but it
is God that governs the tongue Moreover Esaias. 63. says: Wherefore haste thou
led us out of the way? Wherefore have thou hardened our hearts, that we should
not fear thee? Jeremy in his.10. chap. also says thus: I know O Lord, that it
is not in ma^s power to order his own ways, or to rule his own steps or
goings. And Christ in Math. 16. to Peter says thus: Caro et sanguis non
reuelauit tibi, sed pater meus qui in coelis est. i. Flesh and blood has not
revealed this unto thee, but my father which is in heaven. Also John. 6. Nemo
potest ad me venire, nisi pater qui misit me, traxerit eum. i. No man can
come unto me, unless my father which sent me, do draw him. And S. Paul. To. 7.
Quod enim ago, non probo, non enim quod volo, hoc facio, sed quod odi, hoc ago.
i. I allow not that which I do, for what I would, that do I not, but what I
hate, that do I. And 2. Cor. 3. No^ quod idonei simus ex nobis ipsis, sed si ad
aliquid idonei simus, id ex deo est. i. Not that we are sufficient as of our
selves to think any thing, but our ablenes is of God. Again he says. Phil.
2. For it is God that woorketh in you, both to will and to do even of good will.
The Scriptures (M. Fecknam) are full of these. But let us see what the Fathers
say hereto. And first Chrysostom.

Chrisost. ser. j. domi. aduent. Ante peccatu^, liberu^ arbitriu^ habebamus
been opera^di. etc.

Before sin we had free will to work well, but not after. For not by our
own power can we escape out of the hands of the Devil. But like as a ship
when the Stern or Rother is broken, is brought even whether soever the tempest
dryueth her: So by the Devil we are led, from one sin to another. Neither
all that while can we do any thing, but even what the devil will have us to do.
And except that God with the mighty power of his mercy do deliver us, we shall
remain even unto death, in the chains of sins fast bound.

Hieron. Cont. Pelag. lib. j. No^ liberi arbitrij potestate, sed dei clementia
co^seruamur

Not by the power of freewill but by the mercy of God are we saved.

Ibidem. Frustra semper oramus, si in nostro arbitrio, est facere quod volumus.
i.

We always pray in vain, if it be in our own freewill to do what we will.

Idem super verbi Christi: Quos dedisti mihi. etc. Non dixit, dedi eis liberi
arbitrij potestate^, vt ipsi se suo labor saluarent, sed ego custodiui eos,
ego seruaui. etc. John. 17.

He says not, I have given them power of freewyll, that they by their own
labor should save them selves: But I have kept them, I have saved them. etc.

August. sem. de verb. Aposto. Verum est magnas arbitrij liberi vires, homo
accepit. etc

Truth it is, man when he was created, received great power of freewill: But by
sinnyng he has lost it again. He is fallen into death, he is made weak, he
was left among thieves half dead.

Bernard. de Natu. et gratia. cap. 23. Vt in peccatum iret, sufficit ei liberum
arbitriu^. etc

That he fell into sin, freewill is sufficient for him, wherewith he has
defiled himself. But that he may return unto ryghteousnes, he has need of a
Physician, because he is not sound. He has need of a reuyuer unto life,
because he is dead.

I will end with S. Augustine writing against Pelagius lib. 3. who says: Per
se ergo homo, lapsum facere potuit, quia voluit. Sed non sicut per se lapsus
est, continuo lapsu per se, id est per propriam voluntatem consurgere valuit,
nisi manu domini misericordissima qua^ do eius placuit pietati, fuisset
erectus. i.

Man therefore of himself, could make his fall, because he would. But yet as he
fell of himself, so was he not able straight ways of himself, that is, by
his proper will to rise from falling, except by the most merciful hand of the
Lord, when it pleased his heavenly goodness he had raised up.

Thus you see your heresy of freewill (M. Fecknam) most manifestlye
overthrown, and in deed you your selves found the very heretics. And it is
evident that this our doctrine is not revived from the old heresies of the
Maniches, Eunomius, Vigilantius, and Iouinian, but grounded upon the sacred
word of God, according to the saying of Paul Ephesians. 2. Iam igitur non estis
hospites. etc.

Now therefore your are not strangers and forryners, but Citizens with the
Saints, and of the household of God, and are buylt upon the foundation of the
Apostels and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the head corner stone, in
whom what soever buyldyng is coupled together, it grows unto an holy Temple
in the Lord.

I have also in this mine Apology and answer, confirmed my doctrine by the
fathers, not that we build our faith on them, but so far credit them, as they
shall agree with the sacred scriptures. For experience teaches us, that in
many points, and many times we shall find Hierom against Hierom, Ambrose
against Ambrose, Augustine against Augustine. etc. and therefore no farther to
be followed, then they with Paul follow Christ.

Now M. Fecknam, let us consider, who herein is to be believed, you yt says,
the law is possible to be kept, or S. Peter that says, that neither the
forefathers nor we, could ever keep it: You that say, that Saints are to be
prayed to, or the Saints or Angels that utterly refuse the same: You that say,
that faith does not only justify, or S. Paul yt says, that faith without the
works of the law does justify: You that say, that every sin (which is
equiuolent) is not mortal, or God that says, the soul that sins, shall
die.

You are fowlye disceiued (M. Fecknam) if you think that every word that
comes from you is an Oracle. Nay not so, S. John wylleth us, to try the
spirits, whether they be of God or no. We have brought your doctrine to the
toutch stone of Gods sacred word, and it is found copper, and not gold. And as
it is commonly said, all is not gold that shines: no more is all doctrine true
that comes from men, but that only, which being toutched, with the
toutchstone of Gods word, is sound and perfect. Cease therefore to bleare the
eyes of the simple and unlearned, with your gylted glistering copper, and give
place to the truth. Seek rather Jesus Christ, and the profit of his church,
then your own estimation. Prefer the kingdom of heaven, before your vain
glory and praise of foolish men. Sell not your birthright for a mess of
pottage.

God in his mercies give you humble hearts, not disdayning to learn, and open
your eyes to see his truth, and to yield to the same: That you may unfeignedly
seek Jesus Christ, his only glory, and the profit of his Church.

AMEN.

