THE GOD OF HEAVEN.

A Sermon appointed for the Cross, but Preached in the Cathedral Church of
St. Paul's in LONDON, upon Sunday the 23. of September, Anno Domini. 1638.

By JOHN GORE, Rector of Wendenlofts in Essex, and Preacher at St. Peter's
Corne-Hill in London.

Deus saveat.

Printed at London by Thomas Cotes, for Thomas Alchorn, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's Churchyard, at the Sign of the Greene-Dragon. 1638.

Jmprimatur, Tho. Wykes, October 9. 1638.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL, and most Renowned Knight, Sir PAVL PINDAR, the
Friend of the Church, the Father of the Poor, and the Honor of all his Family.
Right Worshipful,
WEre it not an Injury to desire, that goodness should hinder any man from Glory,
I dare say, that all that know you, would unfainedly wish you an immortality
in this present world, that you might live for ever to do good, having done so
much good while you live. Howbeit, as it is said of good Iehojada, 2 Chronicles. 24.
16. when he waxed old and died (though he were but a subject, yet) they buried
him among the Kings, Because (says the Text) he had done good in Israel, both
toward God and toward his House. Even so may it happen to you from the King
of Kings. God send you an honorable interment when yo^ die, and a Crown of
everlasting Glory when you are dead and gone.

Thus Prays Your poor unworthy Friend, JOHN GORE*

THE GOD OF HEAVEN.
PSALM. 73. 25. Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth,
that I desire in comparison of thee.
THis Text divides it self into two general parts; The first shows you, The
Refuge of a sinner; The second, The mind of a Saint. 1. The Refuge of a Sinner
is, when he fails on earth he flies to heaven, [Whom have I in heaven but
thee?] 2. The mind of a Saint is, to disprise and undervalue things below in
comparison of the God that is above [There is none upon earth that I desire in
comparison of thee.]

1. The Refuge of a Snner. It is observed in Nature, that for all weak
creatures God has provided several Refuges to run unto to hide themselves
in times of fear and danger: thus the child runs to the Parent for Refuge,
the Chickens to the Hen, the Conies to the Burrowes; the Fox to the Earth,
and the Sinner to heaven: The eternal God is thy Refuge (says Moses, Deuteronomy.
33. 27.) and his everlasting arms are underneath thee, (as it were) to embrace
thee, to hold thee, to keep thee up from the sink of sin, from the pit of
perdition, from despair of Grace, and from a downfall into hell. The Lord
will be a refuge for the poor, (says David, Psalm. 9. 9.) even a Refuge in due
time of trouble: mark that he says, A refuge for the poor; that is, for
such as are poor in Spirit, though they be not poor in purse, they that are
truly sensible of their own spiritual poverty, of their want of Faith, and
want of Grace, and want of true Religion and Virtue: They that are always
speaking supplications to God (as Solomon says, it is the proper language, the
natural Dialect of a poor man to speak supplications, to make his moan, and
make known his wants to every one that will give him the hearing) they that
are always plying of heaven with petitions, God will be a double refuge for
such (for so David ingeminates and doubleth the word) A refuge for their
bodies, and a refuge for their souls, a refuge for themselves, and a refuge
for their children, a refuge while they live, and a refuge when they die, a
refuge in the time of wealth, but a present refuge in due time of trouble, for
then he never fails. In the Singing Psalms, it runs thus, God is protector
of the poor; God is the poor man's protector, as David was the poor man's
Captain, 1. Sam. 22. 2. Every one that was in distress, and every one that
was in debt, and every one that was discontented, gathered themselves unto him
and he became a Captain over them. In like manner whatsoever your distress
be, whatsoever your debts, whatsoever your discontents, gather your selves to
heaven, address your suits to God, and apply your selves to Christ, and he
has promised in his holy Gospel. Ioh. 6. 37. Whosoever comes to me, be he
poor or rich, non eijciam for as, I will in no wise cast him out.

Oh what an encouragement should this be unto us at all times, especially in
the time of need, when the bucket is broken to go to the fountain, when any
thing is lost or amisle, seek to mend it, and make it up in God. As the man of
God answered Amaziah, 2 Chronicles. 25. 9. when he took care what he should do for
his hundred talents which he had given away, (says he) The Lord is able to
give thee much more than this; so believe it, there is no man so poor, but God
is able to make him rich; no man so sick, but God is able to make him whole;
no man so lost and cast down in the world, but God is able to restore and
raise him up: and whosoever he be that referres himself to God, that casts
and rolleth himself upon his mercy, he shall one day find that there is a
God in Israel, that will do every* man right, and in the end give every man
satisfaction. I say (in the end) for our life in this world is but just like a
Stageplay, where the matter is not great what part the Player acts, whether
the part of a King, or the part of a clown, the part of a Prince, or the part
of a beggar; the maine of all is, what share he shall receive when the play is
ended.

In like sort, God has appointed every several man his several part to act
in this world; some have a longer part, some a shorter, some act a poor part,
some a rich one: now God send us but a share in heaven when we come to die;
and let us act in this life what part soever shall please God to impose upon
us: knowing this, that if the worst come that can come, God will be our Lord to
protect us, Christ will be our surety to bail us, and heaven shall be our
refuge to relieve us.

[Whom have I in heaven but thee?] So much in general, I come now to
particulars, to show you the mystery, and the hidden meaning of the Text.

It may be taken in a four fold sense 1. As an expression of Faith. 2. As an
expression of Devotion. 3. As an expression of Love. 4. As an expression of
Fear and Reverence to God.

1 If we take it as an expression of Faith, and Affiance in God, then the
meaning is this, Whom have I in heaven but thee to rely upon.

2 Take it as an expression of Devotion and Piety to God, then the meaning is
this, Whom have I in heaven but thee to call upon.

3 Take it as an expression of Love and Affection to God, then the meaning is
this, Whom have I in heaven but thee to set my heart upon?

4 Take it as an expression of Fear and Reverence to God, then the meaning is
this, Whom have I in heaven but thee to fix mine eyes upon?

Give me leave to strike these several flints, to give you a touch or two upon
these several acceptions, and I hope in Christ, that each of them will afford
you a spark to enlighten the Text, and to kindle the zeal of God in the
souls of all that hear it.

1 In the first place, we will take it as an expression of Faith and Affiance
in God, according to this meaning, Whom have I in heaven but thee to rely
upon; I mean in Augustia, in a straight, for while a man prospers in sin,
and wants no earthly sustentacula, no friends nor means to underproppe and
shore him up, so long he does not know what it is to stand in need of God;
but let these proppes and shores be taken from him, these friends and means
begin to fail him, and sickness and sorrow come to seize upon him, the one
upon his body, the other upon his soul, he shall then know (as Naaman said to
Elisha) There is no God in all the world, but only the God of Israel, 2 Reg.
5. 15. if he had not a God to rely upon, he were undone for ever. His name
(says Solomon) is a strong tower, the righteous fly unto it and are safe,
Prove. 18. 10. Now you know what use there is of a Tower in a City that is
beleagured with the enemy; when all the out works are taken, the walls are
scaled, the houses left, and all fortifications forsaken and fled from, then
the Tower holds out last, and is a Refuge to fly unto in their last
extremity. Such use may thou make of God in thy greatest straits: if it so
fall out that thy out-workes be taken, I mean, thy goods consumed by fire, or
lost by sea, or suretiship; or thy walls be scaled, I mean, thy bodies health
endangered by a sudden or a lingering sickness; and thy house within, I mean
thy heart, left desolate and destitute of inward and spiritual comfort, then
fly to the Tower, gather upward to heaven, in-soule thy self into God, and
try what God will do for thy soul. There is a pregnant place for this
purpose, Esaias 50. 11. Who is there among you that fears the Lord, and yet
walks in darkness and has no light? It is a hard case (you will say) and a
sad condition, that a man that fears God, and obeys the voice of his
servants, should yet notwithstanding walk in darkness, and have no light,
(that is, live in discomfort and discontent, and have no joy nor pleasure:
well, but if it should so happen to such a man, what shall he do, what course
shall he take to relieve himself at such a time? (Says the Prophet) Let him
trust in the name of the Lord, and let him stay upon his God. Mark the phrase,
Innitatur in deo suo, Let him not flit nor fly away in a chafe, if he have
not present remedy, as Iehorams messenger did, 2 Reg. 6. ult. saying, Behold
this evil is of the Lord, what should I wait for the Lord any longer; but let
him rest, and rely, and stay upon his God: as a beggar does at a rich man's
door, thither he comes, there he stays, though he knows not whether he
shall have any thing or nothing, but only he is sure that there it is to be
had. In like sort, get thee to that same Ostium spei Door of hope, which the
Prophet speaks of, Hos. 2. 15. there take up thy stand, there rest thy soul,
and say as David did, Lord, there is mercy with thee, and with thee is
plenteous redemption: if thou have not mercy enough to forgive me, if thou
have not compassion enough to redeem me, if thou have not plenty enough to
provide for me, I am content to go without it; but I am sure there is no want
in thee, whatever there is in me. In a word, If ever thou come to be in such
a straight, that thou know not what to do, if mercy help not out, then
turn thy self to God, as Iehosaphat did, 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. and say, O Lord, I
know not what to do, but mine eyes are upon thee: First, let thine eyes be
upon God for service, (as the eyes of a maid are on the hands of her
Mistress;) and then, let thy eyes be upon God for succor, (as the eyes of the
Israelites upon the Brazen Serpent;) have thou an eye to God for service, and
assure thy self, God will have an eye to thee for succor. And so much in
brief for the first sense of the words, I come now to the second, and that is:

2 An expression of Devotion, Whom have I in heaven but thee to call upon? Oh
thou that hear prayer (says David, Psalm. 65. 2.) to thee shall all flesh
come: As if he had said, Thou Lord art that gracious Master of Requests, that
never did put by any suppliant that made petition to thee; Thy heavenly
Court, is that gracious Court of Chancery, where never any plaintiff went away
without relief; Thou art that great householder of the world, that give food
to all flesh, and have promised that all flesh shall see the salvation of our
God; to thee therefore, and to none but thee shall all flesh come; and so do I,
a fleshly carnal wretch amongst the rest: Oh let thy merciful ears be open
to the prayer of thy humble servant, and hear me whenever I call upon thee;
for thy Spirit is Conditor precum, the Enditer of Prayer; and Thou thy self
art Auditor precum, the hearer of Prayer: it is thy Royalty, it is thy
Prerogative, and none else but thou can hear it to our comfort: the Saints
of God, both these on earth, and those in heaven may be helpers in Prayer (as I
make no doubt but the yare (...), Co-workers, and Fellowhelpers in prayer to
God for us) but an hearer of Prayer there is none but God for certain; If the
Saints in heaven could hear the prayers of those that invocate them upon
earth, they would answer them, as Jacob answered Rachel, Genesis 30. 2. when she
cried unto him, Give me children, or else I die, Nunquid ego pro Deo? Am I in
Gods stead* Cry to God if thou meanest to have children, or any other comfort,
and not cry to man that cannot help thee. We see by experience, let a child
stand crying in the street, and twenty strangers go by, they mind it not,
they look not after it; but let the father of the child come by, and he
turns him to the cry of his poor child, and takes compassion of him, and
stills him; so deals our heavenly Father with us; He turns him to the
prayer of the poor destitute, and despises not their desire: He is that good
Samaritan spoken of in the Gospel, that takes compassion upon a wounded soul,
which the strangers of the world pass by and make no force of, and therefore
if you mark it, Ioh. 8. 48. when the Jews said to our Savior, Say we not
well that thou art a Samaritan, and have a devil? our blessed Savior denied
that he had a devil, but he did not deny that he was a Samaritan, No, no, O
blessed Lord, they spoke truer than they were aware of; it is we that be the
wounded Sinners, it is thou that art the merciful Samaritan that powrest in
the wine and oil of thy heavenly Grace, and healest us again, when we are
more than half dead in our sins: to whom then shall we go for mercy and
relief, but to this God of ours, who for our sins justly is displeased, and
at our prayers mercifully is appeased again? Call now and see (says Job) if
there be any that will answer thee, and to which of the Saints will thou turn
thee? Job 5. 1. A man that is in distress of conscience may turn from Saint
to Saint, as a door turns upon the hinges from side to side, and still
remain in the same estate of misery, and be as far from any hope of mercy at
night as he was in the morning: but if a man take unto him words, and turn to
the Lord and say, (as it is, Hos. 14. 2.) O Lord take away all iniquity, and
receive us graciously, he may assure himself, that if he have not his desire
granted at the first going to God, let him go again and again, and God will
surely grant it, either in the same kind or a better: Though once going about
Ierico did the walls no hurt, yet the going about them again, and again made
them fall to the ground; though one Cock-crowing wrought nothing upon Peter*
yet the crowing again and again melted his heart: so if once calling upon God
do not bring down mercy from heaven, let not that discourage thee, but call
upon him again and again; nay, (as David says) I will call upon God as long
as I live, and praise my God while I have any being.

Plutarke reports of the men of Athens, that when their city was visited and
long punished, as our city of London (God help us) is and has been, with a
dangerous and contagious sickness, they had recourse to the Oracle of Apollo,
to know what they should do to be rid of their mortality; the Oracle answered
(as Oracles usually did) in a doubtful way, If they would be freed of the
sickness, they must Duplare Aram, double the Altar: This they understood to be
meant in a literal sense, and thereupon went about to compass the Altar, and
to take the just proportion of it, to make it twice as big as it was before:
but the meaning of the Oracle was mystical; they should double the Altar, that
is, double their sacrifices and oblations upon the Altar. In like manner, the
best remedy that I can prescribe from God unto you, to be eased of this
affliction, and to be rid of this mortality, is to double the Altar, I mean,
to double your devotions, and your spiritual sacrifices to Almighty God; to
pray twice as much, to serve God twice as often, and twice as well as ever you
did before: and believe it, if there be any means under heaven to drive away
this Plague from the earth, this will do it. Let every man therefore in the
fear of God, buckle to his own task, and go in hand with his own cure, and
arise, and call upon his own God, professing and acknowledging (as David did
here) Whom have I in heaven, but thee O God to call upon? And so I come to the
third intention and meaning of my Text, which is;

3 An expression of Love and Affection to God, Whom have I in heaven but thee
to set my heart upon? The Lord and giver of life, who loadeth us daily with
benefits, even the God of our salvation, who gives all things richly to enjoy;
desires no other Boon, nor other Recompense for all his mercies, but only
this, that we love him with our hearts. My Son give me thy heart. Alas Lord,
(may some poor Christian say) Oh that I had such an heart as were fit to be
given to thee, that were but a fit token to be given and presented to so holy,
so heavenly a God, that it were but (...), worthy in any measure of thy
gracious acceptance, but I fear I have it not. The Scripture speaks of three
sorts of hearts. First, the best sort. Secondly, the worst sort. Thirdly, the
middle sort. 1. The best sort are clean hearts, pure hearts, hearts that be
without any guile, according to the Heart of God (as David's was said to be,)
these be fitting hearts to be given to the Lord, but alas, we have them not to
give. 2. The worst sort, are hard and stony hearts, proud and malicious hearts,
hearts that burn like an Oven (as the Prophet Hosea speaks) with the fire of
lust and hell, too many such hearts there be in the world, but it is a venture
whether God will own them if we should offer to give them. 3. Then there are
a middle sort of hearts which are, A broken and a contrite heart, a dutiful
and a thankful heart, an honest and a true heart, a tender and a loving heart
(though full of imperfections otherwise;) God send us but such hearts as these,
and no doubt he will accept them. It was an humble request of good S.
Augustine, Ecce cor meum, Deus meus, ecce cor meum, Behold my heart, O my God,
behold my heart, what an evil, what a naughty one it is; and thou that made
it, in thy good time mend it, and make it such a one as thou would have it.
Bone Domine (says devout Saint Bernard) amo te quantum possum, non quantum
debeo; da plus amoris, and plus amabo. O my good Lord, I love thee as much as I
am able, though not half so much as I ought, give me but more love, and I
will love thee more. Oh knit my heart unto thee (says David, Psalm. 86. 11.)
that I may love and dread thy Name: Vni cor meum, (as it is in the Hebrew)
Unite it and make it one with thee: As if he had prayed, and said; Lord,
break and dissolve the unlawful contract that is betwixt my soul and my
sins, or betwixt my heart and the world, and tie it to thy self in an
undissolvably union, that it may be preserved with thy heavenly grace, and
cantinue thine for ever. There is no one thing that does so alienate a man's
heart from God, as to set it upon the world: therefore the holy Ghost gives a
special injunction; If riches increase set not your heart upon them, Psalm. 62.
10. The increase of riches is no ways culpable, nor worthy of blame (for it is
the blessing of God upon our good endeavors,) but it is Positio cordis, the
setting on of the heart upon them, (as the Be sets on her sting) with the
greatest strength of our affections: the rocks that are in the sea, of
themselves do the ships no harm, but it is the rushing of the ships
against the rock that splits them: when it fares with a man, as did with the
Israelites, 2 Samuel 15. 6. when their hearts went after Absalom, they fell from
David their true King; so when a man's heart shall go after the world that he
falls from God; this is disloyalty to the King of Kings. In a word, let it be
our constant resolution, and the truth of our Religion, that though we must of
necessity sometimes set our minds upon the world for the dispatch of our present
business, yet let us do it evermore with such an abstraction, such a mental
reservation, that our hearts be not taken off from God. For that's the third
intention and meaning of the words, Whom have I in heaven but thee to set my
heart upon? I come now to the last, which is indeed the most needful, and
most agreeable to this present time, and that is;

4 An expression of Fear and Reverence to God, Whom have I in heaven but thee
to fix my eyes upon? Timor figens oculos, etc. what a man fears, he will be
sure to have a continual eye upon; and certainly, men had never more cause to
have a continual eye upon God then now; whether we consider it as a time of
Mercy in one kind, or a time of Judgment in another. In one kind, there never
was a more merciful Time, more Gracious, a more plentiful year known since
the memory of man: This is the year that God has crowned with his goodness
(as David speaks, Psalm. 65. 11.) other years before this, (God he knows)
were but poor, hungry, and beggarly years, (...), next door to famine, but
this is a Royal, a Princely, a Kingly year, a year that wears the Crown,
both for greatness and goodness too, (Thou crownest the year with thy
goodness:) Judge you then whether this be not a sitting time to fear God, and
his goodness, (as the Prophet speaks, Hosea 3. 5. In the later days they
shall fear the Lord and his goodness;) Oh that this Prophecy might be
fulfilled, that we had grace to make good that Promise of God, and to make it
appear that God meant it of us in these later days: Oh that God would frame
our hearts to fear him and his goodness, that we may never come to feel him
and his vengeance. There is mercy with thee (says David) that thou may be
feared; the meaning is, the more merciful God has been to us, the more
fearful should we be of him, and the more afraid of any breaches betwixt us
and our God. I remember it is recorded of Ionahs Mariners, that when the danger
was past, the sea was calm and all was quiet, Then (says the Text) the men
feared the Lord exceedingly, Jonah 1. 16. And why then? one would have thought
they should have grown jocant, and merry, and feared nothing, where they saw
nothing to be feared; Oh but they could not tell whether God would not send
such another storm, such another Tempest, such another Judgment upon them;
therefore they thought it their best and safest way to fear him then, yea to
fear him exceedingly.

Oh, that we Christians had the grace to learn this lesson of these Heathens,
namely, To fear God for his goodness: so that if God should be pleased (as I
trust he will) to stay his hand, to cease the sickness, to cause his
revenging Angel to pass over us, and to send a gracious rain upon his
Inheritance, now that it is weary and even spent with Drought; shall we fear
God the less for this, and care the less for his favor? God forbid: for why?
We do not know, but God may send such another Plague, such another Drought,
such another Judgment upon us, and do us more harm than ever he did us
good: And therefore, while we are well, and enjoy our peace, and live under
mercy, let us with fear and reverence look up to God, and say, Whom have I in
heaven but thee to fix mine eyes upon.

2 Again, secondly, look upon the judgments that be abroad in the world;
those doleful Epidemicall diseases that have overspread both City and
Country, so that as it was once in Egypt, There was not an house where there
was not one dead, Exodus 12. so it is now in England, scarce an house where
there is not one sick; nay, by credible and lamentable report, in many
Parishes, there are scarce found folks enough to attend the sick, nor
laborers to be gotten to Inn the Harvest. Oh, consider this, and see, how God
has watched upon the evil (as the Prophet Daniel speaks, Dan. 9. 14.)
Vigilavit Dominus super malum, The Lord has even watched upon the evil to
bring it upon us, and has picked out a Time of mercy to punish us in. And
shall we not fear God for all this? As that good Thief said to his fellow,
Luke 23. 40. (...)? Do not thou fear God, seeing thou art in the same
condemnation? Thou that art condemned, thou that art upon the Cross, thou that
art under such a judgment as well as I; Do not thou fear God? Do not thou
make conscience of thy words and ways? What a graceless wretch art thou? Yet
see, a wicked man will be a wretch, though he should go to hell presently;
and what a misery it is, that they that have most cause, should have least
grace to fear God, We read, 2 Samuel 6. 9. When David saw the fall of Vzzah, how
God struck him dead on the sudden, with his own immediate hand, and that (to
our thinking) for a well-meant error, that could not savor of any malicious
wickedness; the Text says, That David feared the Lord that day: not but that
David feared the Lord before, but he never feared him so much as he did that
day, when he saw such a visable testimony of Gods displeasure upon one of his
own servants. How many Vzzahs have we seen the fall of? How many men of Note,
men of Worth, and men (...) have we known and heard of to be (...) ^owne and
laid low by the hand of, God? And we unworthy wretches, remain yet escaped, as
it is this day. Let us not be like Ionathans Boy, 1 Samuel 20. that saw the
arrows and observed how they fell, some beyond David, and some fell short of
him, but he did not know the mystery and the meaning of them that they were to
foretell a danger hard at hand. In like sort, we cannot but see and observe
the Arrows of God, I mean, those mortal diseases that are shot from the bow
of heaven, and stick in the sides of the sons of men; we see how God
shootes sometimes beyond us, and hits our betters, sometimes short of us, and
hits our inferiors; sometimes on the right side, and hits our friends;
sometimes on the left, and hits our enemies; and all these (like Ionathans
arrows) to warn us, not to wound us. Oh therefore if ever we mean to fear
God, let us fear him now; and with one accord lift up our eyes to heaven and
say, Whom have I in heaven but thee, to stand in fear of. And so much shall
serve to be spoken for the four first expressions and meanings of the Text,
God prosper that which follows.

And now that I have given you thus much light into the Text (I trust, to your
content and satisfaction:) Give me leave to open another casement, and let you
see it in another kind, and present it to you in another manner; perhaps not
less profitable* I am sure no less painful to me than that you have already
heard. Let me entreat you therefore with patience to give attention to two
things more which naturally arise out of the Text. 1. The Honor of God, Th^^
he is in heaven. 2. The Tenure of the go^^, (...) though he be in heaven, yet
they have him here on earth, [Whom have I in heaven but thee?]

1 The honor of God, That he is in heaven. There is none like the God of
Ieshurun (says Moses, Deuteronomy. 33. 26.) that is, the God of righteous and
honest-hearted people (for that's the original meaning of the word) Who rides
upon the heavens in thy help. Mark how he sets out God. 1. By his Majestic,
that he rides upon the heavens. 2. By his Mercy, that it is not for his own
ends, but for thine, In ^ auxilium tui, for thy help. Though he rides upon
the heavens in a stately magnificent equipage, as it beseems so great a
Majesty as is the Lord; yet it is wholly for thy good; to give the spheres to
govern the Planets, to regulate the celestial Orbs; to see that the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, keep their appointed seasons, and perform the daily and
nightly taskes that he has set them; and all this is, for thy help. So that
if thou be a right Ieshurun, (i.) a righteous and an honest-hearted man to God,
thou may assure thy self, That God rides upon the heavens in thy help;
Thine (I say) in particular, as if he studied no bodies welfare but thine, and
had none else to help but thee. The time will not suffer me to expatiate and
enlarge this Point, which paradventure is of greater consequence than you are
aware of. I will therefore glide it over (for this once) and fall immediately
upon that which is the very Medulla, the Pith and Marrow of my Text, namely,
The tenure of the godly; which is, That though God be in heaven, yet they have
him here upon earth; [Whom have I in heaven but thee.]

Fides Deum individuat, (says a Father) True Faith impropriates and singles
out God to a man's self, as Thomas did our Savior, Ioh. 20. when he said, My
Lord, and my God, as if he had been no bodies Lord, no bodies God but only
his. One says well, that all the comfort of Divinity lies in these
possessive names of Mine, and Thine: Li-Atta, Thou art mine (says God, Esaias
43. 1.) which two words the Jews were wont to write, as a Motto upon their
Rings, as being the sum and substance of the whole Covenant, comprehending
all the Promises of mercy and salvation in it. Now when God shall say unto a
soul, Thou art mine, and the soul shall answer to God and say, I am thine;
This mutual Stipulation, this mutual Avouchment betwixt God and a good soul;
this makes up the match (as it were) and confirms the covenant, and gives a
man boldness toward God, that he is not afraid to claim an interest in God,
and say, as David did, [Whom have I in heaven but thee?] For mark it, one that
is an hypocrite, that bears no true faith to God, dares not make any
application of God to himself, but speaks of him, as of one that concerns
others and not himself. Pray to your God for me (says Pharaoh to Moses and
Aaron, Exodus 10. 17.) and so Darius, Dan. 6. 26. calls him Daniels God, not
his God: Their consciences told them that they were not the Lords, and
therefore they durst not seem to speak as if the Lord were theirs, nor claim
any interest or propriety in him; Quid nobis and tibi (said the devils to
Christ) What have we to do with thee Jesus thou Son of God? They that will
have nothing to do with God as his servants, can have but small hope that God
will have any thing to do with them as their Savior, or that God will ever
own them as his children, that would never honor him as a Father. The first
time that ever we read that God was called the God of one man more than of
another, was Genesis 9. 26. when Shem had acted that dutiful part toward his
despised Father in covering his nakedness: then Noah breaks out into this
Divine Benediction, Blessed be the Lord God of Shem. This (I say) was the first
time that ever God was appropriated to one man more than to another: And it may
serve for an everlasting encouragement to all that have Parents living, to show
their utmost respect and duty to them, because the first that ever God owned
was a dutiful child. Afterward, God enlarged himself to more (as you may
read, Exodus 3* 6.) where he proclaims himself to be, The God of Abraham, the
God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob: Now Abraham was a faithful man, The father
of the faithful: Isaac was a quiet man, that walked with God in private and
made no noise in the world: Jacob was a prayerfull, a powerful man with God,
one that wrestled with him for a blessing; put these three together, and they
intimate unto us, that there are three sorts of men that have the Lord for
their God. 1. He is the God of Abraham, that is, the God of all Faithful men.
2. He is the God of Isaac, that is, the God of all quiet men. 3. He is the God
of Jacob, that is, The God of all devout men. So that, if thou be either a
faithful man, as Abraham; or a quiet man, as Isaac, or a devoute man as Jacob,
Thou may be bold without presumption to make application of God to thy self,
to challenge him as thy own, and to say as David did, Whom have I in heaven
but thee?

More particularly, Though God be in heaven, yet his faithful servants may be
truly said to have him here on earth, in four respects. 1. To have him in
Possession. 2. To have him in Partnershippe. 3. To have him in Remembrance. 4.
To have him in Regard.

1. To have God in Possession two several ways: first, Inwardly in their
hearts, God is in you of a truth (says the Apostle) 1 Cor. 14. 25. Salvum sit
verbum Domini (as Saint Bernard speaks), God save that good word, and send us
to know the truth and to find the comfort of it: but how should we be sure
that God is in us? Answer, As by the sparks that arise out of an heap of
Ashes, we know for certain that there is fire within; so by the good motions,
good prayers, and good desires that arise, as so many heavenly sparks out of
the heart and soul, we may know for certain there is God within us. He is
(...), The God in the bosom, as Lazarus was said to be in the bosom of
Abraham, and John in the bosom of Jesus, and Jesus in the bosom of his
Father; so is God the father in the bosom of every child of his upon earth;
there he dwells, and there he makes his abode. Do but observe two phrases of
those two great Apostles, Saint John, and Saint Paul; in the one, we are said
to dwell in God, 1 John. 4. 16. He that dwells in love, dwells in God; He
is (as it were) Gods Inmate, Gods Inhabitant, and in that sense, God may be
said, to have us in possession. In the other God is said to dwell in us, 2 Cor.
6. 16. Ye are the temples of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell in
them, and walk in them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people;
and in this sense God is our Inmate, our Inhabitant, and we may be truly said
to have him in possession: now where there is this mutual cohabitation, this
mutual dwelling one within another, that we dwell in God, and God dwells in
us; that we have possession of God in one kind, and God has possession of us
in another kind; certainly this Tenure can never be broken, this Possession
can never be lost, we and our God shall never part, but after we have lived
and loved, and dwelt together on earth, we shall live, and love, and dwell
together in heaven.

2 Secondly, as they have an inward possession of God in their hearts, so they
possess him also outwardly in their Estates, in their Rents, and in all their
Revenues; for they have God in all these, and the influence of his blessing
gives them good of all that they enjoy. This is the difference that I observe
betwixt the blessings of Jacob and Esau, Genesis 27. The one had God with his
blessing, the other had his blessing without God. When Isaac blessed Jacob,
ver. 28. Thus he said, God give thee of the dew of heaven, and the fatness of
the earth, etc. Afterterwards, when Esau came and begged a blessing also, He
gives him in a manner the very same blessing that he gave to Jacob, but that
he makes no mention of God in it; but only said, ver. 39. Thy portion shall
be the fatness of the earth, and the dew of heaven from above: The very same
blessing, only with this difference: That God was in at the one, but out at
the other. Now look what an eye is without sight, or a well without water, or
a body without a soul; the very same is a portion without God. There is a
Tradition of Thomas Aquinas, that the Lord should call unto him from heaven,
and say* Quid tibi dabo Thoma? Thomas, what shall I give thee for all the good
service thou have done me? His answer was, Teipsum Domine, Give me thy self, O
Lord, and I desire no other gift, let me have but thee, I ask no more. This
is not much different, that divine ejaculation of a pious soul: Lord, let me
live out of the world with thee, but let me not live in the world without thee.
In a word, this is the happiness and the blessed privilege of a good and
faithful servant to God, though his estate and possessions be but mean and
small, he possesses his God which makes amends for all. And this is the first
way whereby they may be said to have God, though he be in heaven, that is,
Habere in possessione, to have him in possession; As if David had said, Whom
have I in possession but thee?

2 The next is, To have him in Partnershippe; and that two ways:

1. To take our part against our adversaries, as you see, Number. 12. 8. How God
took Moses part against Aaron and Myriam, when they murmured and rebelled
against him; How were you not afraid (says God) to speak against my servant,
against Moses: that is, to speak against any servant of mine, though never so
despicable and poor; but to speak against my chiefest and choicest servant,
against Moses, who is faithful in all my house; Quomodo non timuistis? How
durst you be so bold: how were you not afraid to do it? knowing that it
concerns the honor of my truth to take their part. And as it follows after,
when God had taken his part in word, he took h s part in deed, and did him
more right, and wrought him more revenge than Moses himself was willing he
should have done. Thus if thou be on Gods side, God will surely be on thy side:
if thou take Gods part against those that dishonor him, and abuse his blessed
Name, God will undoubtedly take thy part against those that dishonor thee, and
seek to do thee evil; yea, paradventure God will work thee a further
revenge than thou art aware of; that is, if any disease or any sickness be
upon thee, God will take it off, and lay it upon them that hate thee: It Is his
Promise, Deuteronomy. 7. 15. So that thy affliction shall go from thee to thy enemy,
as the leprosy of Naaman went from him to Gehazi. And this is one benefit thou
shall reap by having God in partnershippe.

2. God will bear a part in all thy adversities, Esaias 63. 9. In all our
afflictions, he is afflicted: Just as a Tutour that maintains a Scholar in
the University at his own charge, if he punish that Scholar in his purse,
he punishes himself; so deals the Lord with us; it is an affliction to God
to afflictus; and there is no affliction that falls upon us, but God himself
bears a part of it. As in all his commands, Quod jubet, juvat, what he bids us
to do, he helps us to do; so in all his chastisements, what he makes us to
bear, he helps us to bear; as Simon helped our Savior to bear his Cross.
Hence it is, That his yoke is easy, and his burden light, Mat. 11. Whether
it be meant of Iugum praecepti, the yoke of his Commandment, or Iugum crucis,
the yoke of his Chastisement; both may be said to be easy and light, because
we bear but with one shoulder, and God bears with the other; for it is said,
1 Chronicles. 15. 26. God helped the Levites to bear the Arc: The Arc of it self
was no great burden to bear, and yet as light as it was, God was feign to
help them to bear it; without the help of God, the lightest burden is
unsupportable; for it is said of Judah, Deuteronomy. 33. 7. His own hands shall be
sufficient for him, Si tu Dominus, If thou Lord do help him against his
enemies. no man's own hands, no man's own endeavors can be sufficient for him,
either for his defense, or for his maintenance, unless the God of heaven put
to his helping hand. We read, 1 Samuel 7. 12. That Samuel pitched a stone, and
called it Eben-ezer, The stone of help, and his reason was, Hitherto God has
helped us: Now mark the posture and situation of this stone; He pitched it
(says the Text) between Mizpeh and Shen: Mizpeh signifies sight or wisdom;
Shen signifies a Tooth, or strength: So the meaning is, that neither a man's
wisdom can help him on the one side, nor his strength help him on the other
side, unless Eben-ezer, The help of God come in between them. It was only
God in the Bush that kept the fire from burning; so it is God in affliction
that keeps the heart from despairing. Hence it is, that the most precious
blessing that Jacob could invent for his dear son Joseph was this, That the
good will of him that dwelt in the Bush might be upon him, Deuteronomy. 33. 16* for
then he knew, though he should meet with many Thorns, and many piercing
cares and crosses in the world, yet the good* will of him that dwelt in the
Bush, would be a shelter and a shield against them all. Let no man therefore
misinterpret Gods corrections, nor mistake the meaning of his chastisements,
for there may be Beneplacitum in Rubo, as well as in Regno: Though a man be (as
it were) in a bush of thorns, that is, perplexed on every side with cares and
crosses; yet the good will of God may be no less upon him in this Bush, than
if he were in a pleasant Arbor, in the most delightful condition that the
earth can afford. I will say it once again, If God bear a man good will,
though he should dwell in a very Bush (i.) in the very midst among his
enemies, yet may he lay him down in peace, and take his rest; for why? There
is one with him that will take his part against all his adversaries, and bear
a part in all his adversities; And this is the second privilege of all
faithful souls, that they have Deum in participationem, God in partnershippe.
As if David had said, Whom have I in partnershippe but thee?

3 The third way of having God, is to have him in Remembrance, and not to deal
with Gods Mercies, as Iehu dealt with Iehorams Messengers, to turn them behind
our backs when our own turn is served, to think no more of him, nor look
no more after him. God Almighty made an Order concerning the peoples ingresse,
and egresse at his Temple, Ezech. 46. 9. That he that came in at the
North*gate, must go out again at the South-gate; and he that came in at the
South-gate, must go out at the North gate; they might in no wise return by
the way of the same gate which they came in at, but go forth over against it:
One gives the Reason of it (and it is a singular good one) Ne propitiatorio
terga verterent, cum a templo exirent, least they should turn their backs to
the Propitiatory, or Mercy-seat, when they went out of the Temple; for that was
a thing that God could not endure, that when they had entreated and obtained
mercy, they should go unmannerly away, and turn their backs to his
Mercy-seat. Intimating unto us, That when God has showed himself propitious
and merciful unto us, and has granted us the desires of our hearts, and has
not denied us the requests of our lips; we must take heed we do not turn
or backs upon God when our turn is served, as beasts turn their backs to
the pond when their thirst is quenched. But as we do desire that God should
have us in Remembrance in our weakness and poverty, so let us have God in
remembrance in our wealth and plenty, Deuteronomy. 8. 18. Thou shall remember the Lord
thy God, for it is he that gives thee power to to get wealth. Mark this you
welthy men, and take it as an Item from God to thee in particular, if thou
be a man of wealth, assure thy self (as our Savior said to Pilat in
another case) Thou could have no power at all to get an estate, to gather
wealth, or to make thy self a fortune in the world, unless it were given thee
from above; Thou might have been as poor as he that begges at thy door,
had not God given thee a power to get wealth under him. This may be also a
Memorandum to us all (as Pharoahs Butler said) To call to mind our fault this
day, I mean, our unmindfulnesse and forgetfulness of God; it is not ones man's
fault, but all men's fault; and therefore the most usual name that is given to
a man in the Hebrew tongue, is Enosh, which properly signifies Oblivion, or
forgetfulness, as in that place, Psalm. 84. Lord, what is man that thou art so
mindful of him: in the Original, it is, Lord, what is forgetfulness, that
thou should Remember him. Hence it is that God has appointed Ministers to
be his Remembrancers, (so we are called Esaias 62. 6.) Rememorantes Dominum, Ye
that be the Lords Remembrancers, keep not silence (says the Prophet) give God
no rest, etc. Our Office is double: 1. To put God in remembrance of his people
by our prayers. 2. To put the people in remembrance of God, by our preaching;
or thus. 1. To put God in remembrance of his Mercy. 2. To put the people in
remembrance of their duty. God send us well to discharge both these Offices to
God, and to his people, for in these is contained the whole sum and substance
of our Ministerial function: And for your parts and duties, let me tell you,
that you have a double task as well as we, and you shall do well to give
heed unto it, for the comfort and discharge of your own souls in the sight
of God. 1. Put your selves in mind of God, as David did, Psalm. 63. Have I not
remembered thee, in my bed, and thought upon thee when I was waking? as if he
had said, if I have not done so, I am the more to blame, I have the more to
answer for, for I am sure it was my part and duty so to do. 2. And then in the
second place, put God in mind of your selves, as the same David, after he had
remembered God, he desires God to remember him and all his troubles, Psalm. 132.
1. In a word, Let this be thy Method in all thy private devotions. 1. To put
thy self in remembrance of God. 2. To put God in remembrance of thy self: and
let it be thy constant practice before thou go to sleep, to look back
into the day that's past, Remember Gods Mercies, and thine own sins, be
thankful for the one be humbled for the other; and then lie down in the
peace of Jesus Christ. And this is the third way of having God, Habere in
memoria, To have him in Remembrance; As if David had said, Whom have I in
Remembrance, but thee?

4 The fourth, and last way of Having God, is Habere in Reverentia, To have him
in Regard, and that three ways. 1. Have Regard to his Power. 2. To his
Precepts. 3. To his Presence. A word of each.

1. Have his Power in Regard, Who Regards the power of thy wrath (says
David, Psalm. 90. 11.) for ever thereafter, as a man fears, so is thy
displeasure. The meaning is, The more a man fears, the less is God displeased
with him; and the less a man fears the more is God displeased with him; so in
both respects, it holds true, Thereafter as a man fears, so is Gods
displeasure: And yet Lord, (says David (who regards the power of thy wrath?
Or who deals any otherwise with God, then the Frogs in the Fable did with
the block, which was thrown in to be their King; when he fell heavy upon
them, and made a dreadful noise in the waters, they were much afraid, and
shrunk into their corners; afterward when they saw him lie still, and let the
stream be calm about them, they regarded him no longer, but securely leaped
upon him. Even thus do carnal men deal with God, Regard him no longer, but
while he falls heavy and sore upon them with his judgments; let him but be
still, and let them be quiet; they regard him no more than the Frogs regarded
the block. Shall I praise you in this (says the Apostle) I praise you not.
Gods power must be had in Regard. (That's the first Point.)

2. His Precepts are to be had in Regard; Then shall I not be confounded (says
David, Psalm. 119.) When I have Regard or Respect to all thy Commandments. As
the Centurions servant in the Gospel, if a stranger or another man had bidden
him go and do such a thing, he might peradventure have gone and done it
himself; but when his Lord and Master did but speak the word, it was done,
because he had a Respect and a Regard unto him. In like sort; As we do desire
that God should have Regard to our Prayers, let us have Regard to his Precepts.
See and observe that place, Esaias 45. 11. Where God does so Regard the prayer of
his humble servants, that a Request from us is a Command to him, Praecipite
mihi, (they be Gods own words) Command ye me. Oh, what a gracious God have
we, that will abase himself to be commanded by his own Vassalls: so true is
that saying of an Ancient; Nulla creatura humilior Deo, There is no creature
more humbler than God, as it is said, Josh. 10. The Sun stood still at
Ioshuahs command, Deo obediente voce hominis, God yielding and obeying the
voice of man. Now shall God obey the voice of man, and shall not man obey the
voice of God? Shall God be willing to be at our command, and shall not we be
as willing to be at his command? Shall God have Regard to our Prayers, and
shall not we have Regard to his Precepts? Ne fiat, This must not be done, for
this will not be taken well at our hands. Gods Precepts must be had in Regard.
(That's the second Point.)

3 In the last place, have regard to Gods Presence, and all is finished.

1. In General, Consider with thy self that God is Omni-present, present in
every place, and that thou can go no where from his presence; He is about
thy bed, and about thy path, and espieth out all thy ways. And let this be a
means, (if thou have any Regard to God) to make thee walk Circumspectly in
the world, and (as Saint John's phrase is) (...), Convenienter Deo, answerably
and agreeably to the presence and approbation of that God before whom thou
walk. As Seneca advised Nero that cruel Tyrant, so to demean himself, Vt
facta superi semper co^probent sua, that the gods above might approve of all
his doings; but he like a dogged Atheist made him this wicked answer, Stulte,
verebor esse, cum faciam Deus, Thou doting fool, shall I stand thinking, or
fearing the Gods, when I go about my own designs. I will not apply it, but
only say, as the Apostle does, Some have not the knowledge of God, I speak
this to your shame, 1 Cor. 15. For if men knew what it were to live in the
displeasure of an angry God, they would have him in more Regard. For judge your
selves, durst men be so bold with God, yea, so impudent, and audacious, as to
sin, God in the very face, if they did regard him? As the Scripture says of
Nimrod, Genesis 10. 9. He was a mighty hunter before the Lord: not a Hunter of
beasts, but a Hunter of men (i.) a cruel oppressor, that made poor men weary
of their lives, and persecuted them to the very death; Such a Hunter he was
(and I would to God there were no more of his breed,) and where? Before the
Lord, (says the Text) (...), signifies before or against the Lord, as it were
in despite and defiance to God: He was so hardened in it, that he cared not
though God stood by and looked upon him; as if a woman should commit adultery,
Inspect ante marito, her husband standing by, and looking on. To this height of
wickedness are some men grown; that as Origin said of Lots daughters, Vereor
ne harum castior incestus siat; quam aliquaru^ pudicitia: I am afraid that
their Incest was more modest than somes Innocence. This would never be, if men
had God in any Regard; the^ very thought of his unavoidable presence would
detain, and deter them from it.

2. But to conclude; If men have little or no Regard to the general presence
of God abroad in the world; yet I trust, when they come into Gods special
Presence, into his Presence Chamber, into the Sanctuary, and House of Prayer,
they will show it there or no where. We see by daily experience; The King may
look out of a window, and see his subjects go by him too and fro upon their
own occasions, and show him no respect, nor no regard; and why? Because though
he sees them, yet they see not him, nor imagine that he is so nigh them; but
let these men come into his Chamber of Presence, or have any Petition to
present unto him; then they do their Homage, then they bow their knees, and
glad if they can be so accepted. Thus does God look down from Heaven, and
from his Throne, beholdes all the dwellers upon earth; we go on our ways and
mind him not, because though he sees us, we see not him: but when we come
into his Basilica, his own House, his own Palace (for so are Churches called,
specially the greater and Mother-Churches, are the Palaces of the King of
Heaven) and come to prefer our Prayers and Petitions to him; if we do not
then serve him, and observe him with the greatest Reverence, the greatest
Regard that our souls and bodies can express, How can we hope to be accepted
of him. When we come into the Presence of the Lord, (says David) into the
Presence of the Lord of the whole earth; what then? Why then worship him, In
decore sanctitatis, in the beauty of holiness (as the phrase is, Psalm. 110. 3.
Oh that same holiness is a beautiful thing, if a man had it; a thing that
makes a man comely and lovely, amiable and acceptable to God and his holy
Angels; but if a man have it not, but comes to God in his sins, as the
Prodigal came to his Father in his rags, will the Lord accept him? Nay, will
he endure him in his presence? Yes certainly, if he come in a penitent and
an humble way; for though the son have no clothing to cover his shame, yet
the Father has enough in his Wardrobe to bestead him, and to beautify him
too: Proferte stolam (says he to his Ministers, Luke 15. 22.) Bring forth the
best Robe, and put it on him, and put a Ring on his hand, and shoes on his
feet, and so make him comely and clean again. This will our heavenly Father
deal with his repenting children; He will take away from them the rotten rags
of their old sins, and cloth them a new with his heavenly Grace, and (as the
Prophet speaks) will give them beauty for ashes, and the garment of gladness
for the spirit of heaviness, Esaias 61. 3. We read in the Revelation of Saint
John of two women; one representing the false Church, the Whore of Babylon; the
other representing the true Church, which is the Mother of us all. Now mark
the difference of their clothing. She that represented the whore of Babylon,
Rev. 17. 4. Was arraied (says the Text) in purple, and scarlet, and decked
with Gold, and Pearls, and precious stones. Here was a goodly and a beautiful
array, but they were all terrena, all transitory, all earthly ornaments; there
was nothing at all of heaven in them: now mark the clothing of the true
Church, Revel. 12. 1. the text says, There appeared a wonder in heaven, a
woman clothed with the Sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head
a crown of twelve Stars: here was nothing at all of earth in this clothing,
but all heavenly. And this, oh this is the beauty of holiness, a celestial, a
heavenly habit. Now (as they prayed in the Gospel, when our Savior spoke of
the Manna that came down from heaven) Lord evermore give us this bread; so let
us pray to God in this behalf, Lord evermore give us this clothing; Lord
cloth us with thy grace from heaven while we live, and cloth us upon with thy
glory in heaven when we dye. And that for Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with
thee O Father, and the blessed Spirit, be given and ascribed all honor,
praise, and glory; be done and performed all service, obedience, and from this
time forth for evermore.

Amen, Amen.
FJNJS.

