The Composition or making of the most excellent and precious Oil called Oleum
Magistrale. First published by the commandment of the King of Spain, with
the manner how to apply it particulerly. The which Oil cures these disseases
folowi^g. That is to say, Wounds Contusio^s, Hargubush shot, Cankeres, pain of
the Raines, Apostumes, Hemerhoids, old Ulcers, pain of the Ioints and Gout,
and indifferently all manner of disseases.

Also the third book of Galen of curing of pricks and wounds of Sinowes.

A method for curing of vvounds in the joints, and the manner how to place them.

A breef gathering together of certain errors which the common Chirurgians
daily use. Very profitable and necessary for all Chirurgians and all other
which are desirous to know the right method of curing.

Faithfully gathered and translated into English by George Baker Chirurgian.
1574.

de Vere coat of arms VERO NIHIL VERIVS


TO THE RIGHT honorable Edward de Vere Earl of Oxford, Vicount Bulbeck, Lord
of Escales and Badlesmere and Lord great Chamberlain of England, his singular
good Lord and master, George Baker wishes health, long life with much
increace of virtue and honor.
IT IS NOT vnknowene to any (right honorable) which have been but meanly
conversant in good learning, how far the Gretia^s did surmount all the nations
of the world in renown of virtue, learning, politic government and noble
victoryes. For what nation does not reverence their sages? what people does
not embrace their studyes? what City does not desire their government? what
province was not subject to their Empire? yea was not Grecia the Theater,
Spectacle and light of the whole world? were there not in it many famous
Cities whose people and inahbitants for civility, whose laws for policy,
whose edifices for magnificence might seem Angelical, divine, and celestial?
as Athens and Thebes. etc.

But none more famous the^ the City of Sparta, which by the space of vij.
c. years excelled all the Cities of Grecia when they most flourished, hoth in
renown of glory and equity of laws, and when they were subdued: this one
city Sparta by defending them selves from forain invasion atchiued more honor
then whole Graecia did ever win by enlargi^g their Empire. For when Philip of
Macedonia (in his conquest of those Ilandish Cuntreyes and his son Alexander
after him at the winning of Thebes (were proclaimed Emperors of Sea and land,
the Spartanes consented not thereto nor would be come tributoryes.

What should be the cause that this one City should less fear the force of
Alexander then all other? how became it so inexpugnable? was it so strongly
fortified with walls and Bulwarks and warlike munition? not at all. The
courage of the Citizens was their only wall of defense. Did the name of
Hercules (whose progeny they were) defend them? nay rather the good counsel
of Licurgus made them invincible? who among other things exhorted them to
indeuer to excel the whole world in renown of virtue and glory of valiantnes as
their proginitour Hercules did, which if they did not: it were but vain to
vaunt of their petydegree. Can it be said that the multitude of Citizens made
the^ strong that when by continual war the number was greatly diminished and
their force much wekened? Surely by concord they were preserved.

Such is the strength that the observation of good laws does bring to common
welths, such fruits, kindly branches (not degenerating from a virtuous stock)
do yield, such commodyties proceed from virtue, and contrary effects from
contrary causes as may appeer in those same Lacedaemonians which afterward by
degeneratio^ were brought to the like thraldom that their neighbors were in,
being at length more ashamed, then proud of their pety degree, more fearful,
the^ glad of their long resistance. Such alteration followed the change of
government when no jot of Licurgus laws, nor any other steps of their
proginitors virtues remained among them, but each man neglected his oath given
to the commonwealth, each man as he was able most to prevail exercised tirany
over his own Citizens, each man accounted that liberty to do what liked him,
to live riotously and licentiously, each man studied to enrich himself, to
fortifye his own house and to fether his own nest. But in the mean time the
strength of the common wealth decayed and their foreign enemies increaced, and
at length they found by experience how pernicious a thing it is to abrogate
good laws, to change the countenance of a well governed state. To race out
the memory of their noble progenitors.

Which example (right Honorable) I wish to be marked of all noble families and
famous Cities, that therein they may consider that by virtue they are preserved
and by degeneration they fall.

Yet do I not wright these things to your honor by the way of exhortation: but
rather as a testimony of that which is already apparent to all men, namely to
your honors study carefully to join the commendation of virtue with your
nobility of blood and lineage, whose desire it is (with noble Themistocles) so
to advance the glory of your country (whereby your own honor is the more
excellent) that no barbarous Siriphian may vpbraid your honor as though it
depended only of the nobility of your country and family, when as if
opportunity would serve your honor I dout not would be found in noble attempts
and valiant acts nothing inferior to Themistocles.

In the mean time among infinite tokens: this is one espetial sign of your
honors heroical mind, that is in courage, actiuitie and Chiualry, you your
self seek to express Achilles and other noble personages, so also your honor
does heartily embrace all such as excel in any worthy virtue, whether it be to
commend and adorn her with her semly colors as Homer. etc or to attend like
handmaids on her as Hipocrates or Galen with their needful art of Chirurgiry,
neither does your honor suffer them to pass unrewarded, as may appeer by the
most part of the^ which your honor has entertai^ed into your service as I
myself have had experience since it pleased your honor to entertain me (though
far unworthy) for my profession in the art of Chirurgiry since the which time
I have accounted both my self and all my labors whatsoever, to be due unto
your honor. So that if by continual study I might happily inue^t, or by daily
practice in the art of Surgery find out any mystery which other before me
had not obtai^ed. I was fully purposed to co^secrat and dedicate the same unto
your name, not that I am so foolish to think that by any my inuentio^s and
labors any thing should be added to that huge hepe of your heroycal virtues,
but partly because (as I have said) I might transfere them to any other, being
owing unto your honor, and partly because the renown of your honors name
might obtain grace for my boldness, and bring credit to my labors.

But in the mean time till I shall be able of mine own knowledge to ad some
thing to the perfection of the Art and open some good rule to the releef of my
countrymen: I have adventured to interpret one small work of the fatherly both
Physician and Surgeon Galen, which I judged most necessary for our time,
having joined the same with other treatises, no less fruteful then profitable.

Which woork although it agrees nether with the dignity of your noble name,
nor paraduenture is answerable to your honors oppinion and expectaon of me,
and (which I must needs confess) is superfluous to your honor, who can both
read and understand the same in the first tungs wherein the Authors have
written: yet be cause other may be releued thereby, I thought I might both
easily obtain pardon, and also be bold to use your honors patronage in this
behalf, seeing the same your honors curtesye and clemencye is usually extended
to all men which does not use to esteem such gifts as this according to the
value, but accepting willingly the good meaning of the person.

Thus beseeching your honor to take in good part this testimony of my
thankful heart such as it is. I beseech also the Immortal God to uphold the
renown of your Honors name in the noble lineage of your noble Progenitors.

Your Honors humble and obedient Servant George Baker.

To the Reader.
THere are two instruments as well in Surgery as in all other Arts whereby a man
is directed to the scope or purpose which he intends, namely reason and
experience.

Reason is occupied about method, and method as Galen in the first book De
method medendi teaches, is a contrary thing to experience rashely made and at
adventure, and proceeds a sure way taking iudications of the complexion of
the body, of the nature of the deseased part, of the causes and differences of
the diseases and so orderly passes from iudication to iudication applying apt
remedies such as certain experience has taught to have virtue correspondent to
such purpose as learned method prescribes, til at length health (which is the
scope and end of the art) be obtained.

By this description of method: ye may see plainly and distinctly the use and
necessity both of reason and experience, but here must you understand by
reason such learned judgment as proceeds by discretion and certain knowledge
of the iudications abooue mentioned, and afterward makes apt choice of
experiments.

Experience also whereof Galen speaks is a thing of more perfection then the
rude observations of indiscreet pratisers of our time, but if they would read
Galen his second book, De simplicium medicamentorium facultatibus. cap. x. they
should learn better what appertained to experience how they try and examine
their medicines and to judge truly of their virtues. And reason applied to true
method is the cause of certainty in Physic or Chirurgiry, so on the other
part when it is used at randon without discretion and not derived from true
iudication but as fantasies do feed the idle brain, it is a thing (as Galen
witnesses) full of great danger. And therefore he wished the unlearned
practisers of his time rather to use the experience which they knew warely,
then to busy them selves with devising every man a method after his own way,
which thing passed their capacity.

Such was the method of Thessalus before Galens time, and such is the method of
Paracelsus in our time, but what peril did ensue of ye rash method of
Thessalus: is by Galen in sundry places declared and how great harm has been
done and daily is committed by the Paracellistes both learned Erastus and
Desenius with others do witness by their writings and daily experience it
self teaches.

And although the common practizers do by their experience hele many diseases:
yet as Galen says in the same first Book of his method they the^ selves must
needs confess that the end of their labor depends upon the pleasure of
fortune. For since experience is but the observation or remembrance of the
success had in particular things as Galen him self defines it, and that
neither art nor science consists in particularities: it must needs follow ye
naked experience makes no art. And then for as much as those which be healed
are healed either by art or by chance, then it must needs follow that those
which cure by experience without method: do heal by chance and not by art,
and therefore are they well termed of Galen to await the pleasure of Fortune.

Thus may thou loouing Reader perceive what great difference there is betwixt
him that cures artificially observing the learned method and order: and the
unskillful practizer which after some fantastical devise bred in the brain of
the unlearned or by indiscreet experyence proceeds to the same.

So far does the one of these differ from the other, as light from darkness,
knowledge from ignorance, order from confusion, and to conclude: certainty
from uncertainty or blind chance. Now let the sick man be judge, whether is
for him the more safety tobe heled orderly, artificially and surely: or to
depend upon the hasard of blind Fortune, happy or not happy, at adventure
whether yea or nay. But if ye believe Hipocrates. Age re foeliciter est agere
prudenter et agere infoeliciter est agere imprudenter, to be happy is to be
skilful, and to deal vnluckely is to deal unskillfully. Therefore have many
observations of the daily practices of many men perceiving yea almost daily
great errors committed in many things concerning mine art of Surgery for
lack of true method, and that most of all in the wounds of ioints and Sinews
or Sinewy, or musculous places which require peculter and distinct method and
order of cure from the common wounds of other fleshly places, and the same
being more painful, and for the greatness of the accidents which follow them
being of far more danger do require therefore the greater care and more
artificial handling then any other.

I have therefore for love I bear to my faculty, which I wish void of infamy,
and for the hearty desire I bear to the profit of such as be hurt and diseased,
endeavored to set forth some thing in our english tung, as those which are
willing to learn: might thereby be instructed and directed to the true method
and trade of curing the said wounds of Sinowes. etc.

And as Aristotle requires in Philosophy: the same I think also in Surgery
most necessary. Vt exempla sunt non chaerilia sed homerica, that is, not to
follow the practice of bunglers or the unskillful sort, but to learn at the
best learned.

Then for as much as Galen by the Judgment of the learned of all nations has
excelled all other that have written in Physic but cheefely in his method: I
thought good to translate into our native tung, his third Book of the
composition of medicines according to places, wherein both learned and
abundantly he teaches the curing of these wounds which my labor taking for
the furtherance of such as be willing to learn to do well, if it be on thy
part (most loouing Reader) well accepted: I have the^ heerin my desire as for
the wilful ignorant I leave to them selves.

And thus beseeching God to bless the handy woork of such as faithfully and
charitably deal in the affairs of ye sick and diseased: I rest to trouble
thee any longer from the reading both of the composition of the most precious
Oil called Oleum Magistrale: and also of Galen him self.

From my house in London the xv. of March 1574.
The Preface to the Book.
IN the Realm of Spain there inhabyted a people called in the Spanish tung
Moriscus, of the which nation this Oil was first practiced, unknown to the
Spaniards: which afterward came to their knowledge and understanding by the
baptized Affricans, of the which nation there are a great number in Granado and
Arogan, and as yet they follow the orders of the Turks, both in their meats,
apparel and language, and have no affinity with the Spaniards, but only that
they be baptized and become Christians. And although they be not as yet grown
so subtle and crafty as ye said Spaniards: yet nevertheless it has been well
proved and seen by experience that they have had more knowledge then the said
Spaniards, both in the secrets of nature, and also in the properties of herbs
and generally in the art of curing.

In this said nation, there was one named Aparice, the which about the year of
our Lord, 1566. did take his dwelling place at Madrid a town situated in
Castille la neufeue, 12 legues from Tolleta, at the which place the court is
most commonly kept: where he did think best to be for his profit, and there did
begin to practice the art of Surgery and to cure Wounds, Contusions,
Hargubush shot, Canckers, pain of ye Rains, Apostumes, Hemorhoids, old Ulcers,
pain of the gout, and indifferently all manner of diseases, so that within short
time he did such cures worthy of praise that the people (having intelligence of
his marvelous experience) resorted unto him three score miles about, to the end
that by his help they might receive their health. And after that he had healed
them: he dealt so favorably with them, that most commonly he took less then
they did offer unto him, and healed them in viij. days which the Chirurgians
of the Town could not do in iij. weeks.

In so much that he was esteemed of all men, as well for the excellency of his
art: as also for his great curtesy which he showed unto them.

Yet nevertheless as we see that science and virtue is never peaceable (although
that the common people were well certified of his labor and service) yet the M.
Chirurgians of the town (feeling their particular profit and authority to
decay by this aforsaid Aparice) began to be at great strife with him, and
su^moned him to appeer before the Alcaldes, which are the Judges of the
aforesaid town, saying that he did them great injury and wrong in meddling with
the art of the which he had no knowledge, which art did pertain only to them
being sworn to that faculty, and that they would bring in good proof in the
commonwealth, that he did more harm then good. So that their desire was to
have him imprisoned, to the intent that if he should fear any thing in the
mean time, to absent him self, and also laying many heinous crimes against
him. The Judges could do no less then commit him to prison.

Upon whose imprisonment: certain gentlemen and others (which having by his
means received their health of great hurts and diseases, and regarding the
profit of the commonwealth, and also seeing the great wrong which the said
Chirurgians used against the said Aparice, being so honest and upright in his
dealing, concerning his art, and that nothing which was laid against him could
be approved: thought among them selves that he deserved a better reward then
he received at their hands.

Whereupon they made with one consent a Supplication in his behalf for the
bayling of him out of prison, the which (by reason of his long being sick in
prison) they obtained upon that condition that he should meddle no more with
any cures, until such time as he were authorized.

Yet nevertheless many diseased persons being afflicted with diverse greefs,
would not abstain from him, but resorted unto him daily, the which he would not
by any means meddle with for because of his great charge that he had to the
contrary, yet not withstanding the importance of the people was so great: that
he was constrained secretly to minister unto them.

The which at length was disclosed unto the Chirurgians of the town, and
immediately after they made their complaint to the aforesaid Judges and declared
unto them that the said Aparice had done contrary to ye order yt was made
whereupon he was committed to prison again, which caused that the whole assembly
of the town both Gentlemen, Burgesses and merchants (in his behalf) complained
to the Judges, in so much that in the end it came to the kings ear, which
being a wise prince and desiring the profit of his commonwealth: was desirous
to know the aforesaid Prisoner, and the true and right cause in all things.

And when he understood the just cause and that which the said Aparice did,
was by the virtue of a simple Oil: he was desirous to know the composition of
it. The which the said Aparice (what for the greef of his wrongful imprisonment
and the discourteous dealing of the Chirurgians) refused to declare, saying that
it was the means whereby he did get his living, so that if it were commonly
known: it would be an occasion that he should be no more sought unto.

When the King perceived that he could not obtain it: he offered unto him (in
consideration that he should show the receipt) a thousand Ducats, which the
said Aparice refused, saying that he did hold him self better content with his
science then he could with gold and Silver.

So that immediately following the said Aparice (being very sore handled with his
foresaid sickness, and partly for the greef that he took of his wrongful
imprisonment) ended his life, for the which many noble personages did much
lament, thinking that with his dead carkas: this noble treasure should have
been buried, and also the king him self was very sore grieved for the loss of
such a rare and precious science.

Nevertheless the said Aparice having married a Spanish woman (by the which he
had certain children) declared the secret of this precious Oil unto her as
shall be showed here after.

Immediately after the death of the said Aparice, the king being very sorry
because he could not get the knowledge of such a science: made a diligent search
to know if their were any of his friends which had this secret medicine, and
also to know whether his wife had it, to the which they all answered that
there was none other that ever had the knowledge thereof but only he him self,
and that he kept it from his own wife, for fear lest she should (being a
woman) disclose it and make it common although she dressed patients in her
husbands absence, and also whilst he was prisoner.

At his last imprisonment, he feeling him self not like to live because of his
disease, and considering that he should leave his wife and Children but in a
woeful state: discovered this secret unto her, and did leave it unto her for a
precious treasure and there withal gave her a great charge that she should not
disclose it to any man, what soever should be offered unto her for it.

But as in the end all things come to light, she (for to get her own living
and her poor Childrens) began to entermedle for to cure secretly with the said
Oil and sold it unto them which stood in need of it, saying that it was of ye
same Oil that her husband had made.

Not wtstanding ye people (perceived that it lasted very long and that it could
not be chosen but that she must have the receipt) offered unto her for the
composition thereof, five hundred ducats, but she answered that she had it not,
and said if she had it: she would rather dye then declare it.

For the cause of the which sharp answer: she was expressly inhibited from
curing with the said Oil, neither to sell it for any manner price. By ye which
menes (what with the council of her friends and necessity constrayning her)
she offered to declare the the secret, in consideration that she might have the
thousand Ducats, but in the end she was constrained to take five hundred
Duckes, whereunto the King granted in the presence of certain Physicians and
Chirurgians which were appointed, unto whom she declared the secret and showed
by experience the composition and the manner how to make it.

And they to prove whether it were the same or no: applied it to many diseased
persons, and it was found of the same virtue and effect of that that her
husband had made. And then was named by the Physicians and Chirurgians the Oil
Magistrale, esteeming it to be the best and most precious among all others.

So that when they had justly approved that it was the very same secret that
her husband left unto her: they delivered unto her the five hundred Ducats
which the King promised unto her.

Then by the commandment of the King: the Physicians and Chirurgians of the
Town had the perfect knoweledge of it, in such sort, that at this present day
almost all the whole Realm of Spain uses none other medicines, what manner of
hurt or wound so ever it be, which is a most excellent and approved
Mitigatiue or appeaser of pain, and is a very good secret necessary tobe known
in a commonwealth.

And as for my part: I would it were as well known and experimented in this
Realm as it is there. Therefore for the good will and affection the which I
bear toward my country (to the which I am bound to serve to the vttermoste
of my power) I thought good to write this secret and to bring it to light,
although I know that there be some which will not be well pleased heerwith, and
paraduenture will demand of me the experience of it, for the which I do not
force seeing that I have the truth on my side, and that it is not unknown to
a great number (which have traueled in the Realm of Spain) the notable and
singular virtues of this Oil, the which they do daily sell to all other
Nations, and I my self having seen the notable virtues thereof approved upon
diverse of our own nation, at the hands both of Merchants and Marryners which
brought the said Oil from thence.

And now chauncing with the Copy of the making of the said Oil, and being so
well assured, that it is the right and perfet order, and for the which I will
answer: I thought it my duty to disclose such a noble secret, for the profit
of so many as I know shall receive aid thereby, rather then to please some
particular persons.

The composition of the Oil called Oleum Magistrale invented by one named
Aparice.
FIrst you shall take a quarte of the best and oldest white wine yt may be
gotten, Oil Olif of the oldest iij. pound then put thereto these flowers and
herbs following, to wit. The flowers and leaves of Hipericon half a l. Cardus
benedictus, a quarter of a l. Valerian a quarter of a l. of the least Sage a
quarter of a l. of every one of these you shall take the leaves and flowers if
it be possible. Then let all these steep xxiiij. hours in the aforesaid wine
and Oil, the next day boil them in a nealed pot or in a copper vessel, upon a
soft fire until such time as the wine be al consumed, always stirring it with
a Spattle.

After you have thus done: take it from the fire and strain it, and to the
strayning: put a l. and a half of good Venice Turpentine, then boil it again
upon a soft fire the space of a quarter of an hour, then ad thereto Olibanum v.
ounces, Mirrah iij. ounces. Sanguis draconis. one ounce, and so let it boil til
the Ince^ce and the Mirrah be dissolved, then take it of and let it stand til
it be cold, then put it into a glass Bottle and set it viij. or x. days in
the Sun and keep it to your use.

The manner to apply the said Oil according to the qualities of the vvounds or
diseases, does consist in these vi. things following.
To the patient, to the preparatife, to the wound, or disease, to the plaster
and to the diseased part.
FIrst the hurted and afflicted party must use this Regiment following, that is
to say, to keep no straight diet, neither in eating nor drinking for fear of
weakening the body and hindering of his health. So that he may eat and drink, as
he was accustomed to do before he was hurt. As for example, he may eat to his
dinner new laid Eggs, Mutton, wild foul of the woods, principally when they
have bled, and likewise at night ye may roste any of these, and if he were
accustomed to eat gross meats in his health, as Porke, Onions, Garlic and such
like, he need not to forbere them but to use them according as his apetite will
serve him and also to drinck wines, if he have used them before he was hurt.

Yet nevertheless if he be a body filled with humors, and given to a Fever or
any other inconvenience: he must use his meats and drincks with discretion, and
if he drinck any wine it must be delayed with water. Notwithstanding Aparice
did never forbid any kinds of meats to his patients which they were accustomed
to use in their health.

Secondly, if the wound be great: the patient ought to keep his bed, if he
cannot keep his bed: yet at the least he must keep his Chamber without taking
any air which might anoy him.

Thirdly, he must keep an order in his lying, that is to say, he may not
always lie on one side: but often turn from one side to an other, as well upon
the wunded part as otherwise, and espetially an hour before he be dressed, to
the end that the humors may descend to the greef, which ought to be used in
wounds as well with cuts as with pricks as shall be said in his proper place.

Fourthly, he must endure the Oil as hot as ever it can be possible, for it is
the nature of the Oil tobe applied seething hot, for the hotter he is applied:
the stronger he is in operation. It is needful also that he abstain from the
company of women for because yt it would bring great inconveniences unto him,
and not for the time of his healing: but also xx. days after, and principally
if the wound were great.

A Preparatif.
TO prepare the wound before the applying of the Oil, you shall take good white
wine and boil it with one handful of Encence, (which is only to comfort) with
the which you shall wash the wou^d as hot as the Patient can suffer, both
within and without, then wipe it very well with a clean linen cloth before that
you apply the Oil, which shall be showed hereafter, the occasion and the time how
to apply it: and when the before said washing shall not be used.

Of the Oil.
THe said Oil, the more older it is: the better it is* and of the greater
effect. And you shall remember (as before has been said) to apply it as hot as
may be, for by this means he shall the finelier perce and heal the wound the
sooner.

The time of dressing of the wound.
IT is necessary that if the wound come by any bitings or broosings: that he
be dressed twice a day, and likewise to all other as shall be said hereafter.

That is to say, in winter at viij. of the clock in the morning, and at three
of the clock at night. And in Summer at ix. of the clock in the morning, and at
iiij. at night, because they be the most convenient hours. But if they be
green wounds: after the first dressing you shall not need to change it again
until the next day.

The differences of diseases.
THe wounds and diseases do differ, for some are old and some are new, some
in one part and some in an other, as in the head, arms or legs, and other
places, for the which the wounds do differ, as shall be showed hereafter of
every one particulerly, and also the manner and usage to apply the said Oil
according to the manner, and greef of the diseased part.

The use of the Implaister that is to be applied with the Oil upon the
diseased part.
FIrst for wounds of the head, you shall shave away the hear ij. or iij.
fingers breadth round about the wound.

And then stay the blood with lint or tow being dipped in the said Oil, with
the which you shall fill the wound, and upon that apply a linen cloth ij. or
three double, which shall cover all the place, (as far as the here has been
shaven away) being steped in the prepared wine before mentioned, and
afterward wrung out then role it up. This is it that ought tobe applied at the
first dressing. Also this is tobe understood, that at ye first dressing: the
prepared wine ought not to be used for fear of causing the flux of blood.

Also you shall note that if the wound be very great, or in a dangerous place,
by the which means there might ensue a flux of blood: you shall dress it but
once a day at the first and second dressing, and from that time foreward, at
every dressing you shall wash the wound with the prepared Wine aforesaid both
within and without, the^ wipe it very clean with a fine linen cloth that the
wound may be made clean within and without, for it is very needful.

Then afterward you shall fill the wound with Oil and cover it with lint
steeped in the same, and upon that again apply a linne^ cloth ij or iij. double
round about being dipped in the said said Oil.

And then upon that again lay an other cloth moistened in the said Wine and
wrung as aforesaid.

This is the particular order of all manner of wounds and must be used til such
time as you perceive the wound is upon healing, and then you shall heal it up
with this Unguent following.

The manner to make the Unguent and how it ought tobe used.
TAke of the said Oil Magistrale, Venis Turpentine and new Wax, of each like
quantity, set it on the fire in a little pan, always stirring it the space of
a quarter of an hour. Then take it from the fire and let it cool, and when it
is cold: put it in a box and keep it to your use.

And when you shall have occasion so use it: it will serve both for the
Unguent, and the Implaister. You shall apply the Unguent upon Lint and lay it
to the greef, and afterward a little dry Lint upon that, and then apply upon
that again an Implaister made with the forsaid Unguent,

Here follows the particular orders how to apply this Oil Magistrale in every
disease
FOr wounds of the head, you must have a good consideration whether it were
done with stone, staff or fall, or such other like accidents which are
commonly called contusions. So that if the wou^d be healed up, and that there
be ingendered any Apostume or accidents (which may chance by contusion or
brusing of ye vessels or breking of the bones) it would be a great offense to
the brain.

Wherefore to avoid such inconveniences, you shall order it in this sort, that
is, you wall shave the hear of the place round about it, and then wash it very
well with the said Wine, then wipe it very clean, and anoint it round about with
the said Oil, and lay round about it linen clothes steeped in the said Oil,
and upon that again other linne^ clothes steeped in the said wine, which shall be
used for the space of v. or vi. days or according to the greef of the place.

For vvounds of the legs.
IF the wound be in any of the legs, and the muscles or sinewye parts, being
cut overthwart: it must be stiched according to the bigness of the wou^d, or if
there be any dislocatio^ of ye bone: you shall place him in his due order after
the best manner. Then you shall wash the wound both within and without with the
said wine, and if you fear any accidents which might happen by the offense of
the wou^d; you shall wash the whole member with the said wine. As if it be in ye
arm, from the shoulder to the fingers ends, and if it be in the thigh: down to
the ends of the toes. Afterward anoint the whole member with the said Oil and
say round about it a linne^ cloth steeped in ye said Oil, and upon yt another
double cloth being steeped in ye aforsaid wine and wrung. And the^ role it in
such sort yt it be neither to straight nor to slack, and as for ye rest of ye
cure: you shall finish it in such order as has been showed before in the
wounds of ye head, but if it chance that the wound be very great and that there
be loce bones which must be had out: you shall apply a tent in the lower part
of the wound, for fear lest the wound should shut up to soon, and by that
means might fall to some inconvenience. Therefore you shall keep in the tent
til such time, as you have taken out all such things as is against nature.

Of wounds made with Hargubush and thrusts with Swoords, Pikes, and such other
like.
FIrst it is necessary to stay the flux of blood as before has been said in
wounds of the head, then wash the wou^d with the foresaid wine and wipe it very
clean. And if it fortune that the wou^d perce through the member: you shall
tent both sides of the wound, according to the length thereof, to the end that
you may purge the wound of Contusion or bruised blood, which might remain in it
and so to be dressed twice a day. And you shall dress both sides of the wound,
as before has been said, both in the washing and anointing. And if it be so
that the wound perce through ye body: you shall tie ye tent with a thread lest
it should slip into the body and so anoy the Patient. And also day by day as
occasion shall serve to shorten the Tent.

Of svvellings and Apostumations.
IN what part of the body soever there chance any Apostume or swelling whether
that it will come to matter or resolve: you shall has the grieved place with
the aforesaid wine, being warmed and lay thereon linen clothes (being steped
in the said wine and wrong) a good breadth round about the place, as before
has been said. And if you see yt it resolve: apply the said Oil and wine
until such time as it be whole. And if it come to suppuration: you shall use it
as before has been taught.

For the Hemerhoids.
YOu shall wash them with the foresaid wine, and then apply your Oil with
linen clothes, as before said and pvon that your prepared Wine.

For cold Gouts.
FIrst you shall anoint all the whole grieved place with the said Oil, then
apply linen clothes upon that, being steped in scalding water, and wrung very
hard. This done three or four times: shall cease the pain.

For Cankers.
IF the Canker be not opened: the washing with the said Wine, and the pledgets
steeped in the said Oil and applied will cause him to open, and when be is
opened, you shall prosecute the cure as before has been said.

For pain in the Raines.
YOu shall anoint the Raines very well with the said Oil from the ridge of the
back to the belly, then upon that apply a linen cloth being steped in
seething water and wrung hard as before has been said, and upon that again
great pledgets of Towe, and you shall wrap his legs very warm with hot
clothes and let him lie down upon his bed and cover him warm, then will he
begin to sweet, which sweat will be an occasion of his health.

For old Ulcers.
YOu shall first cut the lips of the Ulcer with a very sharp Razur, then wash
it very well with the foresaid wine and so finish the rest of the cure as before
has been said.

Finis.
Galenes third Book of the composition of medicens.
GAlen (the father and light of Physic) seeing the great abuse which was in
his time in the curing of wounds and hurts of Nerves or Sinews: thought it
necessary (in this his third Book of the composition of medicens) generally to
entreat and write the method or manner of curing wounds in ye Nerves or Sinewye
parts, which cure before Galenes time was much abused, and many patients
suffered both terrible torments with loss of their limbs and also grievous
conuolsions and painful cramps, not without dangerous fevers and great
putrefaction, hastening untimely death.

So that there was none that had the perfect cure thereof, for at the beginning:
they used conglutinatiue and knitting medicines, The errors which have been used
before Galens time.
which they ought not to have done. And if there chanced any inflammation: then
they fomented the afflicted place with hot water, and applied Cataplasmus of
whete meal, boiled with Hedraelaeum, that is to say Oil and water boiled
together, in the which was a great error and contrary to all true method, for
in so doing: the diseased part quickly corrupted, and came to putrefaction,
by reason of unnatural heat and to much moisture, Hot and moist inge^dreth
putrefaction and corruption.
which are the only and cheifest causes of putrefaction.

Nevertheless it does not follow that at all times drying and cooling things
ought tobe used, because that the cold is an enemy to the Sinews, Hip. lib. 5
Aphoris 20.
as Hippocrates testifies, wherefore there must be used drying things tempered
with mode rate heat, or at the least more declyning to heat then to cold,
which ought tobe of a subtle and percing substance, for heat alone does not
engender putrefaction, except it be mixed with abu^dant moisture.

And after these things being well considered: there must be diligent regard
whether the Sinew be uncovered or not, Method for the cure of Nerves.
for if the sinew be uncovered: the medicen ought not to be so strong, for in
such a case, gentle and mild medicens are most meet where the Sinew is bare
otherwise it will bring most perrillous accidents.

These medicens that are here rehearsed are of a thin subtle substance or
nature, as Succus cerenaeus, The qualities and faculties of Simples, which must
be used in these medicens.
Succus medicus, Sagapenum of the East Euphorbium of the West, and the iuce of
Tithimales. Of minerals or medicens which are found in the Earth, some be very
subtle as Aphromtru^ id est Nitri spuma, the frothy part of Nitrum, which
easily will dissolve or be melted in water. Like wise these are subtle, Nitrum
beronicum and Asia Petra, the flower of which among all earthly medicens is the
most subtle. Of metalls Lorpin and Sulphur be both subtle and hot. After these
Misy, verdigrece and Chalcitis a mineralls of Lime, the which be very hot and
somewhat astringaunt.

Therefore in the compounding of such subtle medicamentes: we commonly burn or
at the least wash and such like to mitigate the sircenes of their corosiue and
fretting nature as Chalcitis. And next to this are placed Spodium, Pompholix,
Psoicum and Chrisocolla, medicens of subtle substance, without any smarting
heat. And of the like qualities are Succus laurinus and Cedrinus, that is to
say the iuce of Bays and Cedre. Nevertheless the Bay is not so subtle as the
Cedre. And of the like qualities and kinds is the licour or water of Lixiuii
which the Greeks call Stacta, and yet Oil of Cedron is of a greater and more
excellent virtue, although that the said Lixiuii be made of subtle things most
finely and artificially burnt.

The composition of this said Lixiuii.
Is of a wild Fig tree, which the Greeks call Erineon, and of Tithimales
burnt. The best of ye said Tithimales is yt which the Greeks call Characias,
which is the male and the greatest moouer. The Corn which the Greeks call
Sitera that is to say Whete, and Eruus or Orobus is the most suttlelest,
considering that they have no great faculty to heat.

You shall understand that the most part of Simples which are subtle and
fine are hot. And those which are of grocer substance, cold, the reason is
evident, for the heat is subtle and light, and the cold: thick and heavy, and
does both repress and bind togithers.

Yet for all that some cold Simples have a sharp quality with subtle
substance, yet in operation it is cooling, as Vinagre, Cold is an agent
quality as well as heat.
for among all the Simples it is most suttlest.

Therefore it is necessary to have good knoweledge in the nature and qualitye of
simples, Method for the knoweledge and faculty of Simples and how they must be
used.
whereof medicens have their being. For without the knowledge thereof: it is not
possible to do any thing in this art, and especially in the cure of Sinews
worthy commendation. It suffiseth not to have great store of Receipts, except
ye know the particular nature of every simple. And with having knowledge: he
shall be able to frame his composition him self, according as the nature of the
greef shall require.

The parfit knoweledge of Simples is in three things, that is to say, of
plants, of metalles, and of living things, and it is not sufficient to see them
once or twice: Every this in his time
but you must mark and behold them often, as in their beginning, growing,
state, and declination. All things are kept in their place out of the which as
soon as it is removed it is ye more subject tobe corrupted.
For by this beholding: you shall know in what time it is best to gather them,
if they be not gathered in their due time: the heat of the Sun will burn and
take away their virtue. And also the place where they must be kept ought tobe
temperate in heat and moisture, for fear of chau^ging their nature or virtue,
for without the knowledge thereof it is not possible for a Chirurgian to have
the true understanding and method to compound medicens nor to govern well the
curation of diseases.

So then it is necessary to know the nature and facultye of Simples which is
amply showed in many good Books and especially by Galen in his Book of
Simples.

I find a certain history in the foresaid Author the which I think may well and
fitly be rehearsed in this place, The history for an example of the co^tusio^ of
ioints.
to make this more plain to ye reader. Upon a certain time there was brought to
Galen a child, having a co^tusio^ or broose upon the first ioynte of his
middle finger in such sort yt the whole joint began to putrifye and corrupt,
the^ Galen applied to the putrified part a Cataplasme or Pultise, made with
Barley mele and wax, and fome^ted it with the Lixiuii round about the afflicted
place, but where there was grief and pain: he made fome^tation with hot Oil,
and then after the moisture was drawn out, by the applying of dry wul, he used
a medicine made with Oil, wax and Euphorbium, by the which means he preserved
the joint. The like he did to an other which came to him in winter which had
great cold with pain in his Knee continually, the which he cured in like manner
with Oil and Euphorbium, for the Sinews and tendones The tendones are dryer
then the sinews
do receive all one curation, and the accidents that chances to the one:
chances to the other. For the names of such passions or greefs it is no
matter, for because it is not the names that do either good or harm. But it
is the faculty of the medicines which does all. Let us return to the cure.

Afterward the said Childs finger began to putrify more and more, and he
began to feel pain and greef upward in the whole places. Then Galen in the
place of Barley mele: ye tenth day, did use the mele of Orobus with the said
Lixiuii, or Stacta wherewith the Patient began to amend, Stacte was made of
stilled wild Fig leaves
and within iij. days was eased of his pain, saving that there remained in ye
bruised place, a certain Neruous or knotty substance much like unto a great
tendone ye which was ready to fall, and after being half rotten: fell all
togithers, which did make many think, seeing this knotty substance: that the
Sinew had been altogithers rotten, which was for lack of the knoweledge of
their Anothomy, and for lack of that knowledge they did not consider how the
Tendones The tendones and their cituation.
or Cords are covered with the said Nerves, Membrana as defensatiues, not only
throughout the inside of the hand: but from thence go in order to all the
fingers.

Then after that Galene had taken away that which was putrified from the said
broose: the cord was very sound and clean, and then he used Trosis dissolved
in Sapa, and applied it in ye foresaid Neruous part, and made particular
unction again and in like manner used the Pultis, and the anointing with
Euphorbium as before said. And when he had thus done: the fourth day, did think
with him self what medicin that were best then to apply, and considering that
if there were no inflamatio^ or diste^perance: it were best to apply skinning
things, but if there were any inflammation: then he thought best to use moderate
drying things with out Cicatrising or skinning.

And when he did see there was inflammation: he used the medicament that is
called the green Plaster of Epigoni, which the Greeks call Isis. The which
Emplaister you shall find in his second book of composition of medicines in
general, then afterward for to finish the cure: he used an other medicine
composed as follows.

Rec. of wax, drachmas 150. Tereben thinae, dram. 200, Seui vitulini,
drachmas. 50. Galbani, drachmas 24. Manne thuris, drachmas 24. Salis amoniaci,
drachmas 12. Aeris vsti, drachmas 12. Aloes, drachmas. 12. Squame aeris,
drachmas 24. Alluminis rotundi, drachmas 24. Alum plu^, drachmas 8, Chalchitis
drachmas. 8. Miseos. draehmas 8. Apopenex, drachmas 8. Erui, drachmas 6.
Ammoniaci, drachmas. 6. Mineii rubi, drachmas 6. A ceti, drachmas, 3. Olei
hemi. 2. consequently when Galene had thus used it: the^ he came to
sicatrisatises and for the outward part he applied Euphorbium mingled with
Wax and Rosin in form of an Emplaister.

Method for the curation of the wounds of Nerves or Sinews and of what
faculty the medicines which must be applied ought tobe.
GAlen in his method of wounds of Nerves, did use Liquid medicines and sometime
Emplaisters. And without the wound about the place, he applied very soft Wul
with hot Oil. Sometimes also he used Oil with a little Vinagre. Vinagre is an
eneto sinews.


But in such sort that the cold virtue of the Vinagre was without offense,
nevertheless the suttlenes or persing virtue did remain, and two or three
times a day did unbind the wou^d to see if the medicine did make any fretting
in the Ulcer or sore. And if it caused any greef or pain: then he fomented it
with Oil as hot as the patient could endure.

All cold things are contrary to the Nerves
For if it be but warm: it will do more hurt then good, and much worse if it
be cold, for the cold does stop and hinder out breathing of the member. But
the heat does resolve and make thinner. etc

As for the use of water: it must be in such sort used that at no time in the
curation it touch ye Ulcer. Therefore when it does chance yt there remains
any cluttered or congeled blood tobe taken away out of the wound: it must be
done with Oil.

And for an example: Galen recites an history of one which being hurt, An
history to prove, that al cold is contrary to ye wounds of Nerves.
was four days without the feeling of any pain, and when he did see that
there was no inflammation: he went abroad about certain ernest business which he
had to do, the wether being very cold and tarried somewhat long: then he
returned to his house with great greef and pain, even to the very nape of his
neck. Then Galen being called after that he did see the pain that the Patient
was in: made fomentation with hot Oil all about the pained place, and applied
great quantity of wul moistened in Oil, and the liquid medicines made with
Euphorbium and Castorum, and by this means the pain was eased, and after that
he had slept: all the accidents did cease.

Therefore it is very profitable to apply the Wul very warm, and so continue
it whether it be applied with Oil, or Oil and Vinagre, which may well be done,
if you apply also upon it dry Wul.

And if it be in the Winter: the patient must keep his house until the fifth or
sixth day of his greef. For if he be free from inflammation until the seventh
day, and that he feel no manner of pain or greef then he is without danger.

Also you shall keep in memory that in this manner of cure, cold Oil and
astringent is contrary. But there must be used the suttlest Oil that may be
gotten, as very old Oil, for lack of the medicine that is made of Euphorbium
or Vinagre, or other such proper medicine: Galen does teach to take in their
rowme, Propolis being very new, liquid and fat, and very old Leven, or else of
the iuce of Tithimall, with new Leven, or Propolis liquified in Oil with
Leven, dissolved in very sharp Vinagre, and the Oil must be very old.

The Flowers that are tobe used to make Pultasis or Cataplasemus of: The flours
for to make Cataplasmus.
are Farina, Fabaru^, Orobi, id est erui Lolii. Ciceris vel Lupinorum, Amarorum
polenta, made of Barley with Oximel, these Cataplasmus be not only good in
boisterous people: but also to all others, whether there be any inflammation or
no.

For lack of these aforesaid medicines you may use these Cataplasmus following,
that is to say Propolis being new, Liquid and fat, and apply it upon the
wound, sometime with Leven alone and sometimes with both, and sometimes with mele
of Orobis and Leven, but the Leven must be very old, and contrariwise the
Propolis must be new. If it be old: you must soften it with Oil by the fire,
or in the Sun, or else you may use the iuce of Tithimales mingled with Leven or
Oxelam, the Vinagre must be very sharp wherewith the Oxelam is made.

These be medicens which may soon be had in a redines for lack of others,
Medicine which are easy tobe prepared.
which at necessity Galen did use in wounds of Nerves. By this you shall note
then that the medicines which be applied in wounds of Nerves, in what manner so
ever it be: ought tobe actually hot, and for the punctures or prickings of
Te^dones, the medicen which is made of Euphorbium and old Oil, in the form
of a Liquid cerat is very good and proper.

And with the said medicin Galen did heal one which was hurt in a tendone,
within the space of four days.

Then there was one yt seeing the good success that he had with the Euphorbium
and Oil) thought to take an example by the said curation, and did use new
Euphorbium whereof did follow great heat and pain with corrosion in the Ulcer
in so much that he was constrained to call Galene to remedy it, the which by
fomentation of Oil and Vinagre did appease the pain and diminish the accidents,
wherefore it does appeer (as before has been said) that you must not neglect
to have the knoweledge of the faculties and kinds of approved medicines, and
of them which will soon loose their strength, Note this will.
from the others which do keep and maintain long time. For Euphorbium
Euphorbiu^ to know whether it be old or new.
is one of these kinds yt will loose his heat very soon, which is easy (by the
color) tobe known. For if it be new: it is of an asshie couloure. But if it
be old: it is of a pale or yelowe color, and for that cause it is very dry,
and will hardly be dissolved in new Oil, for in ye mingling it does drink up the
Oil incontinent, wherefore to dissolve it well: The manner how to dissolve the
Euphorbium and the nature and quality.
it must not be mingled together with Oil all at one time, but labored in a
mortar by little and little for fear of running togithers.

Euphorbium is one of the Simples which will soon loose his heat, and does not
keep long, which is known easily only by the colors without tasting of it.
Euphorbium is hot in the ii ij. degree.


Truly when it is old, it is not of an Asshye color as it is when it is
new, but it does decline toward a pale or yelowish color, and if it be new:
in the tasting of it, it will be so hot that it will burn the tung But if it be
old: you shall feel no great heat in it, nevertheless, Euphorbiu^ does keep
his virtue longer then Tapsia, for Tapsia in i. year loses his strength very
much and in ij. years loses his strength utterly and is good for nothing. But
Euphorbiu^ if he be good when he is new, yt is to say if he be hot and burning
as safore said: he will last three years, sometimes four years and to the
fifth, but the he does vi. loose all his force and strength.

For which cause Galen did use often times old Oil without wax, for be cause
that the Euphorbium was of five or six years of age. So that the use of the
Euphorbium cannot be comprehended by weight, for when it is new: ye must put
twice so much Oil, and three times so much Wax, and if it be old, the more
Oil shall be put to it and the less Wax.

Wherefore if you will make the forsaid medicament in form of a Liquid cerat:
The manner how to use the Euphorbium whether it be old or new
you shall put four times so much Oil as Wax. But if you will make it in
form of a Plaster: you shall put thereto as much Oil as Wax, and principally
if the Wax be old and dry. For if the Wax be new: you shall not need so much
Oil, and less in Summer then in Winter.

For to make Emplastrum Carotodes.

That is to say a Cerat or Ciroene, you shall take of the best wax, liquid it
in Oil, then ad to the vi. part of Euphorbium, and temper it, as aforesaid,
or else as follows.

Rec. Euphorbium, drachmas. 1. wax, drach. 6. Oil, drach. 5. or 6. And for
because that the Wax is not so cleaving and viscus as Rosin or Pitch is ye
shall ad to either of the Cerats, Pich or Rosin, The qualities and differences
of Rosins.
or of both, and then ye shall not need so much Oil as you should have done,
if it had been made only with Wax. And this is to be noted that you ought to
have a diligent regard to the moisture or drynes of the Rosins, for you have
so^e more dryer then other some, and others again be more liquid. Of the dryest
of these kinds is that which some call Fricta, and others Colophonia. After
the same kind does follow, that which is brought in erthen pots, which is
vnclarified, and when it is clarified: it is like the fore named Fricta.

There is an other kind which is called Pityinon phisema, that is to say
German Pich which is more dryer then the other two aforsaid, the which Galen
did judge not tobe used in this cure because of his vncleenes but did use the
(aforesaid) Fricta.

There be diverse kinds of these (as before has been said) of the which some
will remain more liquid the^ other some, The quality and faculties of Rosins
according to their degres
for the Turpentine will remain most liquid, the other does soon dry, as
Strobolina and Abiotina, and of these two, the hottest is Strobolina, and next
unto them in heat: is Turpentine.

As for the Rosin of Cipres I do not reken, for Galene never durst nor would
use it in any Plasters to be applied to Narues, because it is astringant. The
b^st and principal of all these kinds of Rosins: is Turpentine The Turpentine
is the most principal of all Rosins.
not for his heat, for Strobolina and Abietina (as before has been said) are
hotter.

The which Turpentine Galene did use by experiments, the great vtillitie that
was in it to mundify, to resolve, and to draw, and is very comfortable to the
Nerves: witnesses also thereunto Dioscorides and Anabarzeus.

And when you will have the Cerat very cleaving: you shall put to the more Rosin
(as is before said) and mix it according with the Oil and wax.

The Emplaister which Galen did use.

YOu shall take of Turpentine, and put thereto three times so much wax. Then ad
to them the xij. part of Euphorbium, if you know not whether the Euphorbiu^
be exactly hot or no: you must prove when the medicine is made by this means,
that is, ye shall strike a little of it upon a linen cloth, and apply it upon
the thigh or arm, and there let it remain for a certain time, and if you
perceive that it does somewhat warm: then is the midicine temperat, and if it
do cause no manner of sensible heat, Note this well.
or else that he give more fervent heat then he ought: it is certain yt the
medicine is either to weke or to strong. The heat may be diminished by adding
the more of Oil and wax, and also it may be augmented by adding to of the
Euphorbium, for the confection of these kinds of medicines, the Propolis is ye
best and most conuenible among all other kinds of Rosins, The vtility and
commodity of Propolis.
but it ought tobe new and fat, because it will the better draw to the
outward part, the thick vapors, and superfluous humors, but Rosins are to
be mingled with Wax, only to give thicknes and form to plasters, and are not
so conueniable in this curatton as Propolis is.

Therefore you shall note that in tender and soft complexions: ye medicines ought
not tobe so strong, as in strong and boisterous complections. For ye Cerat
which is mingled with old Oil is very conueniable in some, and likewise
Fermentum, that is to say Leven, is very good so it be old, for the older it
is the better, be cause it does both resolve and attract more then new,
moreover Sulphur Viuum is very good in these before said compositio^s, and it
may be used with Tetrapharmacu^. Also Aphronitrum may be used and Beronictum
litrum, so that it be not gravely, which may also be mingled with
Tetrapharmacum.

Arsenicum which is called in the Attique tung, Quenched Lime.
Arenicum, being mingled with Tetrapharmacu^ is profitable, and for lack of
these you shall use Sandaracha as of Lime quenched and unquenched, Metalla lo
tione et adustione fuit mitiora.
washed and unwashed. But there must be less of the unwashed then of that
which is washed: for because that it is more sharper then that which is
unwashed.

Now then to have the perfect knoweledge to heal wounds of Nerves, This ought
to be known in the cure of Nerves.
it is needful to know the end and intention of the cure, likewise the
faculty of simple medicines the which in this cure ought to draw and resolve
without excessive heat and without great sharpnes or biting. And likewise it is
needful to know and understand perfectly the Anathomye. Note.
And the nature and complexion of the members of the body, and perfectly to
understand and the difference between the Tendones membranes and ligamentes for
when occasion shall serve to stich any wound: you must not touch the te^dones,
for the Tendones and the muscles have coniuncion togithers, therefore when the
muscles be separated: there must be very good heed taken in ye stitching of
them, lest ^ou cause pain, for if they do endure any pain: it causes
conuulsion, and then afterward turns to putrefaction, and so all the parts
there abouts does suffer the like accidents, yet nevertheless the musculous
flesh may well be stitched as shall be hereafter said. Therefore to have perfect
knoweledge of the Tendons, this is to be understood, that therbe two kinds:
that is to say, the one round like unto acorde, for which cause the ancient
writers have so called them: the others be flat like unto membranes, whereof
some pass along by the thighe near unto the knee. Also they are within the
palms of the hands and the souls of the feet. Of tendo^s their ^^^de ^ormes
and situations


Now we will return to the matter, in wounds of Nerves you must not make
fomentation with hot water, as the Physicians before Galenes time did: nor yet
use Cataplasmus made with wheat meal, and boiled with Hidrelaeum, for Galen made
only fomentation with Oil, and the medicines aforsaid, by which menes he
healed many. And being but of the age of xxviij. years, at which time he
came from Alexandrin into his owe country, did invent and devise the manner to
cure the wounds of Nerves: A note of Galen.
and since that time has been many goodly cures, by the method and midicines
aforesaid. And now for an example mark this history which is recited.

Upon a time (among others) there was a certain Captain af war, the which had
a wound in his thigh, transuersales, the which wound was of a great deapth,
that the one side was drawn upward and the other downwarde toward the knee,
and for to heal the said wound: Galen did not dout to stich it in the
musculous parts. Nevertheless he gave good respect in touching of any Tendon,
for he knew that the muscles might well be stitched without danger and not the
tendones, albeit that some ancient Physicians do stich but only the upper
lips of the skin, though the wound be never so deep, for they did fear to stich
ye muscles, and there were others which would stich the fleshey parts of the
muscles, but they were of the upper part of the wou^d and not in the depth.

Wherefore when there did chance any deep wound being transuersales: he did
boldly stitch the musculous parts. As for the other wounds made according to
the length of the member: it is not needful to stitch them, for with good and
convenient rolling the musculous parts may well be agglutinated.

Therefore they which be ignorant in the Anothomy, do fear to stich the
membranes with the muscles, but Galen being learned in that matter, did stiche
them safely and without danger, although that the large Tendones are much like
the membranes, yet for all that, there is difference, for the Tendones be more
hard and of a grocer substance, then the said membranes be. The difference
between the tendo^s and membranes.
Except it be in the muscles of Abdomen, which the Prince Auicenna calls
Mirac, for in yt place they be very tender and subtle, as the membranes be in
all points, except it be in the straight muscles.

By this it appears that the iij part of Physic which the greeks call
Chirurgia that is to say, the which is exercised by handy operation.
Pharmaceutice, that is to say by medicines as to ye Apothecary. Diaitetice, by
regiment of the life, have need one of the other: wherefore he which does take
upon him this profession: ought exactly to be exercised in these iij. Note this
place well.


After that he first has had the perfet knoweledge of the Theorick, that is to
say speculatiue, in the which is taught the method to cure by reasons and
Demonstrations, and if he be ignorant in any of these: he is not worthy to be
called a good Surgeon, and shall never be able to do any thing, which
shall be to the profit or easement of his Patients.

The composition of medicines for wounds of the Nerves made of metalles.
AMongst the metalls you must avoid them which are astringant, and principally
in the prickings of the Sinews. The substance of metalls.


But the abstersiues, as Aeris squama, and others are profitable. And this must
be noted yt all metalls are partly of a groce and terrene substance, because
that there does contain in them, much earthy nature, wherefore they do require
to be prepared, to the end that they may be more subtle. One way to prepare
them is this.

To prepare the metals.
First the said metalls ought to be labored in a mortar, only with very strong
Vinagre, which has a pearcing faculty, and ought to be so labored very long.

There be some of the said metalls that will not well be beaten, although they be
very long labored. Nevertheless they may easily be dissolved as Chalcitis,
misy and such like, but others may be beaten and redused into poulder, as Aeris
Squama and such others. And this you shall note, that Chalcitis and Erugo if
they be burnt: they have less sharpnes in the^, wherefore the greater quantity
may be occupied when any medicine is made.

The Pastils or Trocis of Andronis Poluidas and Pacion, be right excellent and
conueniable in wounds of Sinews, so that they be dissolved in Sapa as they
ought. Excellent pastils.


Sapa is made of Must, Sapa and whereof it is made.
that is to say sodden Wine, but the said Must ought to be made of sweet
Raysons, and not of sower, which are Abstersiues and of the latter running of
the Tub, the which wine must be boiled unto the consumption of the half, and
with the said Wine the Pastils may be dissolved, to be applied unto the Nerves
which lie bare. But when you use them, you shall take that kind of Polidas,
for they be most temperate, and principally in these bodies which are
temperate and tender, in which bodies all ye kinds of Pastils ought not tobe
used, but medicines according, which we have al ready spoken of, and will speak
hereafter, for all bodies be not of one temperature, for they differ in three
things, that is to say, as for their temperature, secondly in the augmentation
of their age, and last in their states and exersises, as they which woork
much, or live idly. Wherefore it follows that no medicine can be convenient,
A method worthy to be noted.
in all bodies. And for this cause you must have two sorts of medicines, the
one strong: and the other weke, and then when necessity does require,
According to the temperature of the body ye midicine ought to be compounded,
prepared and applied.
the mixtures may be according to the temperature of the body.

Medicines for strong and boisterous people.
Rec. Aeris squama part. 3. Misyos crudi parts. 2. Chalciteos cruda part 1.
Cerae part. 12. At the beginning when Galene prepared this medicament: he did
put to it Arsenicon, and after that when he saw that it was superfluous: he
left it out.

Medicine for delicate and tender complexions.
Rec. Misyos combusti, Chalcitidis vsti ana, part, 1. Aeris squamae parts. 4.
Cerae, part, 18.

Medicin for mean complectio^s which Galen did often use.

Rec. Misyos vsti. Chalcities vstae, Erugini vstae ana, part, 1. Aeris squamae
part, 3. Cerae, part. 5.

For to make these medicines, the quantity of the Oil ought to exceed the
quantity of the Wax, Note that Galenes pound is but xii. ounces.
as if there be viij. ounces of Wax, you shall put xij. ounces of Oil (which is
a pound) and the Oil must be like the Oil of Sauen, that is to say, of a
subtle substance, and not astringant, and the old Oil is best. Wherefore new
Oil which the Greeks call Homotribes, is neither good nor convenient.

After that the metalles have been well beaten long time with Vinagre: you
shall ad to of Thus, but it must be white and good, then again you shall beat
it with the metalls, before yt you ad to the Cerot, but the quantity of ye
Thus shall be the half of the medicines, for to make the medicine in a mean
temperature. And if you will make it more weak: you shall ad to more then the
half of Thus.

And if you will have the medicin more sharper: you shall not put to the half
of Thus in the forsaid medicine. It is expedient that ye mingle some Rosin with
the Wax and Oil, nevertheless you ought to consider, that if you do put to it
Strobolina, that ye medicin will be more stronger and sharper, and if you put to
it of Terebenthine: the medicin will be more softer and mean in sharpnes, and if
you will have it between both: you shall put to it Abietine or Benjamin larix,
The faculty and quality of Larix.
which is one of the moistest Rosins, and is of substance like unto liquid
Pich, which some merchants and Factors sell for Terebenthine, to them that
know it not, nor can discern the one from the other.

Yet not withstanding there is great difference which may be easily kowen by
the taste and by the sharp smell which he has more then Terebenthine,
nevertheless their strength does not differ much.

Wherefore if you will make your medicine in form of an Emplaster: you shall
mingle with your Wax, the vi. part of the said Rosin, which is for a pound of
wax: ij. ounces of Rosin, and if it be liquid and fat, half an ounce shall
suffice. And when you will not make the medicin in form of an implaister: you
may leave out the said Rosin, but you may ad to of Galbanum so^times as much as
of Thus according as need does require. For when you put to as much Galbanum as
Thus: the medicament is the gentiller, and when you will have it more stronger:
you shall put to it but half so much Galbanum, and sometimes the lesser weight
or quantity, as if there be iiij. dragmes of Thus, and iiij. drams of
Galbanum: This is meant because the Galbanu^ is more liquid then the Thus.
the medicine shall be the more mitigatiue and gentle. But if you put to but ij.
drams of Galbanum: the medicine will be somewhat stronger. Wherefore in sensible
and tender bodies or Cacochime it is expedient to have the medicine tobe
prepared with the more quantity of Galbanum. Then when you will make your
medicine tobe applied to the Nerve being bare or discovered: you shall not put
in so much Galbanum for fear of causing pain, for the Sinews being bare may
not abide any strong medicine.

Among the simples, Vinagre is sharp and very painful, and for that cause Oil
is applied with it, and also sometimes Galbanum, and for lack of Galbanum: you
may take such greaces that are of fine and subtle substance, as of wild
beasts, that is to say, of Lions, wild Bores, Leopards or Bears.

Likewise of flying fowls, as of wild Ducks and such other like, The choice
of the best greaces.
in their sted you may take of Cocks, Hens or Chikens, but this is tobe noted
that the greaces of wild flying fowls and which do live abroad in the
feelds, Note this for they which do not exercise the body does engender
humores groce and cold and vndisgested
are better then of them which be nourished about the houses, for those which
be nourished within or about any houses: are more heavy, and their fat is of a
more gross substance and more moist, for because that they are shut up, and
have no scope to fly or run as the others do, for the exercise and stirring
of their bodies does lighten and make fine their gross humors.

When you will have your medicin of the thicknes of a Cerot: the^ must be added
to the third or fourth part of Wax, or if the grease be very moist: you may
put to the one half of Wax, and so after such sort as shall be thought good, but
if the grease be mean between both, that is to say neither to dry nor to
moist: you shall ad to the third part of wax, the which Cerot shall be
proffitable for many purposes, and is called Diasteaton, that is to say made
with Talow and grease.

The Medicine which is called Dieuphorbium.
WE have spoken heertofore of the quality, nature and faculty of the
Euphorbium, and after what sort it will keep, and how in time he loses his
strength and how he must be known by his color and substance. Now we will
entreat of the medicines which are compounded with the said Euphorbium, and is
made as follows.

Rec. Euphorbii, part, 1. Cerae parts 3. Olei, parts, 4.

To the composition of this medicine the wax ought tobe triple, that is to say,
iij. times so much in respect as of the Euphorbium and the Oil the fourth
part, but the Euphorbium must be new and good. The use of this medicine is
profitable in the punctures of Nerves, The virtue of this medicine.
and especially when it is feared yt the wou^d will close up, therefore it is
necessary to have a respect to the stre^gh of ye medicin, for if it be to weke
ye quantity of Euphorbiu^ may be augmented, sometimes there may be added to the
half of Euphorbium, and sometimes as much as of wax or more. Namely if the
Euphorbiu^ be old, for it must be according to the strength of the patient.
But if the medicine be to strong: you may weaken it by adding to of some Oil,
or else to make an other more weaker according to the form and manner aforesaid.
And if you will know when the medicine is to strong: you shall mark these
signs that follow, that is to wit, if the Patient feels great heat with
Erosion, Signs for to know whether that the medicine be to strong.
or if the parts about it be hotter then they were before, or if the pricking
pain be more raised up then it ought to be, or if the side of ye said prick
have any inflammation.

Therefore for to choose apt and convenient medicines: it is needful to make the
composition in the which there is put iij. times so much wax as new Euphorbium,
the which is more stronger then the other. If there be v. times so much Wax:
the composition shall be more weke and gentle. And if there be iiij. times so
much wax: the composition shall be mean between both. And if you will have your
Unguents such as the Physicians call Acopa, Without labor. Vnguentu^ Acopa.
that is to say taking away of werines or pain: you shall put to iiij. times so
much Oil as Wax. But if you will have it in form of a liquid Cerot: you shall
put to double of Oil to the Wax and if the Wax be dry: you shall put to of
Oil ij. parts and a half, which is to say, for one pound of Wax, ij. pound
and a half of Oil. And if you will make it plaster wise: there must be added
as much Wax as Oil, namely if the weather be temperat. And if the wax be to
old and dry, and that the weather be cold: there must be somewhat more Oil
then wax. But if the wax be new and moist, and the weather hot: there must be
somewhat more Wax then Oil, that is to say, for one pound of wax: xiij. ounces
of Oil, and in the composition of the medicine, for the better mingling of the
Oil and Wax together: you shall ad to some Rosin and principally of
Terebenthine or in sted Colophonia, and if you do ad as much of it as of Wax:
the Pich does make the consistance of the Cerot, and note, that which is most
liquidest: is the best, even in like sort as of the Rosins. And if the Rosin
be liquid, as is the new Terebenthine: it shall suffice to put in the third
part, in respect of the Wax.

When Galen did compound any medicine, wherein is Rosin and wax, it is to be
understood that he meant not that which was dry and old: but such kinds of
Rosin and Wax that were of a meant substance, for else being mingled with the
others will soon dry and loose their strength, and that for two causes. The
first by the intemperature of heat of the weather, and secondly by the reason
of being to long kept. As for Propolis: it is no other thing but white Wax,
and it is more conueniable in plasters and Cerots then Rosin or Pitch. And
more Galene does account Terebenthine among the Rosins, and is most
convenient of all the Rosins in the fore said plasters and Cerots.

Medicines made of Simples which will dissolve.
THese Simples which follow are liquible, that is to say, which will dissolve
upon the fire, and whereof Cerots and Plasters be made, and may be boiled with
moist things as with water, Wine and Vinagre.

The simples, which are these that follow, Propolis, Wax, Rosin, Ladanum and
Senum, that is to say, Talowe, and Galbanum, which must be prepared in a
double vessel commonly called Balneum Mariae, which is as much to say, in
putting of the foresaid simples within some vessel, and then to set it in a
Cauldron of water upon the fire. There are also simples yt will as well dissolve
without fire as with fire, in moist things as Gutta Ammoniaci, ye licour of
Sagapeni, Panacis, Cerapion and Oppoponax.

Rec. Oppoponacis, Galbani, Terebenthine, Propolis, ana part. 1

You ought to take good heed tbat your Propolis be neither dry nor old, but
for lack of the other: you may put in such as may be gotten, but it must be
double in weight and the other Simples must be new and liquid.

Another of the same effect.
Rec. Aseti sexta 1. Picis. 1, pound. Oppoponacis 4. ounces, the Pitch must be
boiled with the Vinagre. Et fiat.

The use and facultit of these medicines.
These medicines before named are good in punctures of Nerves, and for biting of
mad Dogs, and principally for a wound made by any venomous beast, by the reason
that they are percing, and do keep the sides of the wound from shutting
together by the which means the venim which lies within: shall the more
easily be drawn out. But for because that the said medicines are strong: you
must use them in strong and boisterous bodies.

And if the said diseases, do chance in tender and delicate people, as women
and little Children: then they must be liquified with some kind of Oil, or
resolutiue Unguent, namely Amaricum and Oppobalsamum.

Then afterward with Irinum and Comagenum, and in sted of these Susinum and
Ciprinum, or if these be not to be had: you shall take Oil. Or if it be in
Alexandria, you shall take Oleum recinum and Rhaphaninum, for surely there is
abundance of this aforesaid in Alexandria, and also through all Egypt. But
there is not tobe found Oleum sinapinum but with great disicultie, the which
Oil if it be put in the before said medicament: there is no dout but that it
will be much more stronger and better to keep open the punctures of the Nerves,
and if you have no Oppoponax to make the said medicin withal: you may take
Sagapenum dissolved in Vinagre, Rosin or Propolis, or some greaces, The greaces
which are most requisite in this medicine.
being very old so that they be sharp, and of a subtle substance, as of a
Lion, Leopard, Bear or Fox or else of wild Ducks.

Or else these greaces following being very old, of a Bull or of a Got. And
this is to be noted, that the older the greaces be: the more sharper, and
namely the grease of a Hog the which is more soft and moist then all the
aforesaid. And of the like nature is Wine and Vinagre and Mary, but of all
Maryes: the best is the mary of a Heart, or of a Calf. Of these aforesaid
medicines Galene does counsel to have in a readiness, the which he did
always use in punctures of Nerves, wherewith he had good success.

The use of Pigeons dung.
FOr because that Pigions dung is sharp: it must be used in the stead of
Euphorbium, nevertheless it is of a more subtle substance the^ Euphorbium,
wherefore it is more convenient in strong and boisterous people, as rusticall
bodies dried with labors, Galen sometimes did mingle metalls togithers beaten
in Vinagre in the form (as before has been said) and by that means the
medicine was made more sharp, even as though he had put in Verdegrece.

Of Medicines called Diabotanum, that is to say, made of herbs.
GAlen the interpreter of Physic and learned in all things: would omit nothing
which did appertain to the curation of wounds of Nerves, for which cause he
has taught diverse manners of curations, to the end that if the one should
fail: they should have others at all times when need required, and also when
upon the sudden a Chirurgian is called to visit any Patients, whereas the
Simples requisite cannot be gotten, therefore Galen right wisely has taught the
way to compou^d medicines for wounds of Nerves with herbs in stead of the
mettalls aforesaid.

First the said Galen did compound medicines for wounded Nerves of those herbs
which were of a subtle substance, Herbs and roots for the composition of
medicines.
that is to wit of Dictamus, Amaracus, and Malus terrae which is
Aristolochiae, moreover he did make some in the which he did put in Marou
amaricum, which is Margerum, Polium argemonae, which is called Aigrimony,
Chamapitis id est vina artetica centaurium Radicis omnium, Aristolochiarum,
Draconculi, Ficus agrestis, Brionia, Althea, Iridis, Acori mei, Asari phoud est
Valeriana, Gentiana and Panacis. All the which herbs and roots before named
Galen has written and declared in his Books of Simples. And this you shall
note, that because they have a bitterish taste without abstersion or immoderate
sharpnes: they are convenient in wounds of Nerves, and how they ought tobe
used mark this that follows. The manner for to compound medicines with the said
herbs.


First they must be dried, then stamped and beaten very fine, then searced
through a fine searce. For if it be of a groce substance: it is not convenient
in wounds of Nerves, which does require the most subtle and finest that may
be, (as before has been said) then after that these herbs and Roots be
finely poudred: they must be mingled with Wax and Oil, in such sort as we
have said of Euphorbium.

Compositio^s for wounds of the Nerves, which the Greeks call Politeleis, that
is to say sumpteous,
IT is not only profitable to have the knowledge to compound medicines of the
simples aforesaid: but others sumpteous and of great price, for although yt
they be but seldom used, yet nevertheless it fortuneth sometimes, that if you
have a great number of medicines: you shall scant please the Patient, for he will
have them made of such Simples as are very sumptuous. As for an example Galen
makes mention of a very rich man which he does not name, in his first Book
of the knowledge of the judgment of the pulse, and this third Book. The which
rich man did by all the menes possible he could, approve to heal a malign
Ulcer upon one of his servants, then when he did see that he could not heal
it: he did commit it into Galens hands, and after that he perceived that Galen
An history of a cure which Galen did on a malign Ulcer.
had healed it: he did desire him to give him the receipt of the midicine
wherewith he did heal his foresaid servant. The said rich man did not consider
that there are many kinds of malign Ulcers: but thought with one medicine to
heal all manner of ulcers, yet nevertheless Galen did give to him the foresaid
receipt. But when he had the composition: he said go thy ways and give thy
receipt to beggars, and let me have an other more costlyer and of richer
Simples.

And also at a another time when he could not heal a Child that had a certain
infirmity about his ear (with his own medicine which he used without
method) did send him to Galen, and afterward he met with one by chance, of
whom he did understand that the said Child was healed: he was very desirous
to know what manner of medicin Galen used.

Then considering that he had seen many that have been wounded, both in Nerves
and other places, and having their fingers cut with putrefaction, and some of
them have dyed, and others lamed. And contrary wise he did understand that none
of them which Galene did dress dyed, nor were in danger of death, but that
speedyly did help them: he demanded the receipt of same manner of sumptuous or
odorifferous Unguent for wounds of Nerves, An excellent method to cure wounds
of Nerves.
then Galene did give to him many receipts faithfully dispensed, with the
which he healed many that had wounds in the Nerves, for the which he gave
Galen great praise, and gave him most hearty thanks for giving of the^ so
liberally, for which cause he did present Galen with a present, the receipts
which he gave him were these that follow.

Rec. Cinamomi, Dictamni, Mary, ana drach. 40.

Certainly these Simples are odorifferous and subtle, he would not put in
Amaracum, because it had not a good smell, also at Rome it was very hard to be
found, as of Marum. You must beat these Simples very fine and serce them as
before has been said, and then temper them with the Cerot made of very good
Oppobalsame, and Tyrrhenique Wax, which Cerot is made of viij. parts of Wax,
and x. parts of Oppobalsame.

The composition of the receipt is thus.
Rec. Cerae, part. 8. Oppobalsame, parter. 10. ad to of the best Turpentine
part 1. the Terebenthine is added to in the end, and if you will have the
medicine cleaving, and of a reasonable form: you may ad to also of precious
Mirrh.

Where the Nerves were bare Galen did use the Cerot which the Greeks call
Mirepsice, and the Unguents The manner to prepare Unguents.
which the Romans call Vnguentum spicatum, and Phuliatum, in adding to the
xij. part of Pompholigoes washed, which must be prepared with Terrhenique, Wax,
and burnt Nardus in a double vessel, which is vulgarly called Balneum mariae,
and all Unguents ought tobe prepared after the like sort.

In punctures of Nerves the most sharpest medicines are most convenient
because they keep the wound open, but in wounds of nerves discovered, A note of
punctures and wounds of Nerves discovered.
it is convenient to use medicines which have a mean astrictio^ with resolute
virtue, and without biting, as Amomum. spicanardi, and Folium Malabathri.

The composition of Medicines by other Physicians which Galen makes mention of.
THere was none before Galens time which did write the reason and manner to cure
the wounds of Nerves, nevertheless some have since his time, but without
distinction and good order. Among other a Physician of his time did prepare one
as follows.

Rec. Cerae. 6, ounces. Olei. ounces. 9. Myseos. ounces. 6. Chalcitidis. drach. 1.
Aeris squama. ounces 2. and a half. Thuris half an ounce. Galbani 1. ounce.

The Simples which may be liquified, that is to say, the Wax and the Galbanum
after that they be resolved: you shall mix them with the mettalls. first being
beaten very fine with strong Vinagre. Galene never knew the Author of this
composition, and says that he never found it neither in Asclepiades
Apothecary, nor in Petron, nor in Andromacus. Albeit that the ancient
Physicians did compound good medicines.

Another of Adromachus.
The which is good as Asclepiades does write for wounds in Nerves and
Muscles, contusions and gallings, and for any member being broken, there may
be made with it also Collires, for diseases of the eyes, and is a good remedy
for pain of the head and for all greefs.

Rec, Argenti spuma, Alius. 18
Cerae ana drach 144 Ammoniaci drach. 72. Terebenthine drach. 36. La^oe
succidae combustae drach. 12. Aeris squamme, Thuris, Aristolochiae ana drach,
8. Olei ricini hemi. 3.

The manner to prepare it is thus. First you shall boil the Oil and the Litarge
together, after that ad to the Wax and the Turpentine, and when it has boiled
till it come to a reasonable consistance: you shall ad to Ammoniacum. Note that
this medicine The faculty and usage of this medicine.
is not conueniable in punctures of Nerves: for because it is astringant.
Nevertheless it may be used where the Nerves and tendones be discovered. And
if there be any inflammation: it must be liquified with Oil of Roses, and if
there be none: it may be liquified with old Oil, Recinum chamamelium and
others which are for soft and tender bodies, and for the strong and boisterous:
you shall use strong Oil as Oleum radicis, ^icus, Aggrestis, Brioniae, Asari,
Dracunculi, Aristolochiae and Panacis, but the Aristolochia and Panacis ar more
strong then the others.

Another composed by Claudius Philoxenus Surgeon for the foresaid greefs.
Rec. Argenti spumae, Cerae ana drach 160. Ammoniaci, drach. 80. Propoleos
drach 40. Alius. 18.
Terebenthine, Resine, Siccae, Thuris, Squame aeris, ana drach. 16. Lanae
succide* co^bustae, Squamae Stomomatis, ana, drach. 8. Oppoponacis dra. 4. Olei
ricini hemi. 3.

A reddish medicine of Halieus.
Rec. Argenti spumae, Cerae ana. drach 100, Alius. 100
Terebenthinae, Mannae, Thuris, Galbani, Minii Cinoptici, ana drach. 8 Olei
sexta. 1.

This implaister The vtillitie of this Emplaister
is good in green wounds, and for wounds of the Nerves, and for Ulcers of the
eyes, which be hard to cicatrice. And to resolve all hardness and principally
of the Dugs. It is likewise good for biting of mad Dogs, and for the stinging
of Dragons, and the venimouse fish called in Greek Trigon Thalassia, and in
Latin Pastinaca Marina, Asclepiades does write that it is only for wounds,
and makes no mention for punctures of Nerves although it will serve in both.

Another catagmatique medicin composed by Moschion.
Rec. Argenti spumae, minam. 1. which is 160. drach. Picis aride drach. 160,
Seue vitulinae dra. 160. Resine Terebenthine drach. 80. Manne thuris drach. 80.
Cerae drach. 40. Eruginis oppoponacis, Galbani ana drach 8. Olei ricini hemi 1.
Aceti hemi. 1. Licorice cicamini hemi, 1. Picis liquid, ciath. 3.

The manner to boil this Unguent is thus. First you shall boil the Litarge and
the Oil together, then ad to the Calves grease, and after that the Manna and
the Thuris, let them be stirred continually til they be incorporated, the^ you
shall put to it the Pich, the wax and the Turpentine, and consequently the
others, which must be boiled in form of an Emplaister, after that you shall
ad to the Galbanum, Eruge and Oppoponax, dissolved in Vinagre, then ye shall
take the licour of Cicamini, and the liquid Pich, and boil them in another
vessel, and when they be melted together, and somewhat thick: you shall mingle
them with the others, and set them on the fire again, til they come to a perfect
consistance.

Then you shall let it stepe in white Wine the space of iij. days, after you
may strike it upon a linen cloth to use as an Emplaister.

This Emplaister The virtues of this Emplaister
is very good in green wounds, and for cutting and contusion of Nerves, for a
Fracture with a wound and with convenient ligature does cause calls to
engender in bones, it is likewise good in the beginning of an Hidropsye, for
contufion of the Testicles, for Rhagadies, for Tumors of the Throat called of
the greeks, Bronchocilas, to be breef this is a right excellent medicine.

FINIS.
The curation of wounds of Nerves, Tendons and ioints,
THe cause of solution of continuitie the whole and sound parts in Nerueus
places, may chance diverse ways, that is to say, by contusions, as blows with
Stones, Staves, Hammers, Clubs, Hargubush, Crossebowes, bitings and such other
like. Likewise it may come by sharp and pricking Instruments. As a Bodkin,
Spear, Dart, Thorn or venimouse Beast, or such like. Also by cutting with a
sword, or Knife. Of the which wounds some be made acording to the length of
the Tendone, Nerve or Sinew, Membrane or Caul, and others according to ye
breadth with great incision, and some mean or lesser, of the which hurts these
accidents may follow.

As pain, vehement fluxion, inflammation, Fever, loss of reason, Sinope,
Apostume, Gangrena, and mortification of the whole part, and often times death
by reason of the communication and consent that they have with the Brain and
other noble parts.

Moreover it is to be understood, that when the Nerves or Tendones be but
half or little cut, the wound is more dangerous, then if they were cut quite a
sunder.

That which covers the Scul.
And so is it with the Periosten, pericranium and membranes, or because that the
portion or part that is cut does draw him self to his beginning, which
causes conuultions and Cramps, but when they be wholly cut: there follows no
accidents. Insomuch that they have no contrariety when they retire, the which
is manifestly seen in the wounds of the head, for where the Pericranium is but
half cut: the accidents are more vehement then when it is wholly cut, as we may
daily see by example, when we make incision to apply the Traepan.

And amongst all the hurtes of the Nerves, the prickings brings most
pernicious and terrible accidents, by reason that the orifice is so small, that
the humor cannot issue out, but remains within and there gathers a
sharpnes, which drincketh into the Nerves and Tendons, and does cause them to
swel, and by the swelling they are shortened, whereof comes such pain, that it
causes most painful cramps, and such other like accidents as before has been
said.

The cure of punctures of the Nerves.
FOr the curation, there are two things to be considered, that is to say, to
appease the pain, and to defend the part afflicted from fluxions and
Apostumation: for the accomplishing of the which, you shall apply upon the
wound at the beginning a dessiccatiue medicine, of a thin and subtle substance,
to the end it may penetrate more easy the botom of the prick, and consume the
moisture therein, which other wise would cause an egre sharpness (as before said)
which sharpnes would bring great pain and accidents. Wherefore you shall apply
Oil of Turpentine, with a little Aquauitae well rectified, or Euphorbium and
Sulpher poudred and incorporated together, and applied very warm, or else Oil
of Vitroel and Aqua vite, and round about the place this Cataplasma following.

Rec. Farine hord. and orrob. ana ounces 2. Sirup. acetosi, ounces 3. Flor.
Camomil two handfuls. Lixiuii qui sufficien. fiat Cataplasma.

If by this order the pain does not cease, and that there be any contraction
of Nerve: you shall apply speedily hot seething Oil with lint being dipped in
it, as well at the botome as the edges of the wound, which must be done two or
three times at one dressing, for by this kind of Cauterization: you shall
cease the pain, by reason of the burning of the Oil, the Nerves or Tendons
does loose their sensible feeling.

Of the wounds of the ioints.
THe wounds of the joints are for the most part mortal by reason of their
deneruations or Tendones and membranes, with the which is mingled Nerves, for
the which cause they have greater feeling, for the Nerves being mingled with
them: causes more pain, which pain brings this aforesaid accidents, and
especially if they be in the interior parts, as under the arm holes, the
bought of the arm, in ye wrists or in the hammes, or groynes. By reason of the
great Veins, Arteryes and Nerves which are in those parts, and by the means
of solution of continuitie, that are in those parts, causes great pain, flux
of blood and other like accidents.

For the ordering of the which: you must persevere according to the nature of
the said accidents, in staying the flux of blood and appeasing the pain as much
as you can possible, and if the wound be great: you shall stitch it leaving an
Orifice in the lower part thereof for to give issue to the matter, this being
done: you shall apply this poulder following the space of ij. or three days to
preserve the stitches.

Rec. Thuris sanguinis draco. Boli armenici, terrae sigil. ana drach 2. Aloes,
mast. ana drach. 1. fiat puluis subtilis.

The which poulder you shall apply upon the seem, and round about the joint a
defensive made of the whites of Eggs, Oil of Roses, Bol, Mastick and Barley
meal. And if you apply any tent: he must be short and not to big, lest he
should cause pain, which tent shall be applied with a disgestiue made with the
yolk of an Egg, Oil of Roses and a little saffron.

Also if the said wound be little and straight (rather then to fall into these
aforsaid accidents) you shall enlarge it to the end that the humors which be
come to the part (by reason of the pain) may have a large issue.

Moreover the afflicted part must have rest and be kept from cold, and also
from medicines which does relax, soften or moist, but contrary wise they must
be astringant and dry as this Cataplasma following.

Rec. Furfuris maciris, farinae hordei, et fabar. ana ounces. 4. Flor. Camomille
Melliloti ana half an handful. Terebent. ounces 3 Mellis communis ounces 2. Olei
mirh ounces. 1. Oximel sump. vel Oxicrat, vel Lixiuij. qui suff. fiat Cataplasme
ad formam pultis.

Or else this. Rec. the lies of wine, wheat Bran, Cipres Nuts, Galls and
Terebenthine, with this make a Cataplasma, many such other like may be made,
but this shall suffice.

For those that be applied on these parts must restrain, dry and corroborate or
strengthen the ioints, this doing you shall cease the pain, and keep the
humor from the afflicted part.

Moreover, this is to be noted, that neither within the wound nor without, you
shall apply any Oilly or greasy medicine, for as much as it relaxeth the
substance of the muscles, membranes and Nerves: by the which means it does
make the place more apt to receive defluxions. And also it does so relax and
moisten the wou^d, that it is a great hindrance to the consolidation.

Therefore the medicines (which ought to be used in this cause) must be
desiccatiue and astringant as this that follows, which is both astringant,
desiccatiue and glutinatiue.

Rec. Terebint. venic. ounces 2. Aqua vitae parum. Pull. aloes. Mast. mirh, Bol
armene ana. 2. scrupples. And so applied as need shall require, or some other
good Balm, being applied with desiccatiue poulder, so that the poulder be
without any sharpnes, and if there come any accidents: it shall be remedied by
medicines contrary to the same, according as need shall require.

And this is a principal thing to be looked unto, that you keep the wound
from cold, the which is all together contrary both to wounds and ulcers, by
the which menes a great number have perished as Hippocrates Hippo. 5. Aphoris.
20
testifies, saying that to all ulcers the cold is biting, it hardens the
skin, it causes pain and keeps wounds from suppuration, (for as much as it
does choke ye natural heat, which should bring suppuration) and causes the
place to be evil colored: with shakings, fevers, conuolsions and extentions. So
that the excrements which do avoid is a glitti^g Musceledge, thin or watrish
humor, which does commonly follow in these kinds of wounds, for because it is
a proper humor that flows out of these wounds, for every place does give his
proper humor: as for example the bone being broken, the nourishment of them
engenders a Calus.

Now this humor which commonly issues out of the neruous places, is mixed
with cold, which causes extreme pain, and resists ye medicines, although
they be potentiall hot.

To appease the foresaid pain, and to correct the intemperature of the cold
humor: you shall apply warm things, not only potentially: but also actually,
as a Bullocks bladder being half filled with some resolutiue medicin and
warmed, or of Bricks being made very hot and then quenched in Wine, and so
applied about the joint, and to heat them as often as need shall require.

By this actual heat, nature is helped to digest and resolve the humor
contained in the place, and does strengthen it, for because that the joints
have but little heat in them: for the which cause there be few medicines that
will profit, except they be actually hot. Wherefore I will conclude that the
offense of the iointes is increased rather of cold then of heat.

For the which cause the Methodicall Chirurgian, must have a great respect to
these wounds, in taking his Iudication of things natural, not natural and
against nature. And moreover he must have the knowledge how to place the
wounded ioints, which shall be showed here following.

The situation of the wounded Joint.
IF the wound be in the fore part of the shoulder: This is meant by great
wou^des in the ioints.
you shall lay under the arm hole a Boulster and carry your arm in a Towel
bearing up the elbow to the end that you may raise and hold up the bone, and
so to keep him in his right place, for by this means, the glutination and
consolidation, shall the better and sooner be done.

And if the wound be in the lower part, then when you see that nature
begins to engender flesh, and that the lips of the wound begins to close:
you shall have good respect to cause the Patient often to lift up and down his
arm, for if you do forslewe this, and that the Cicatrice be once made: the
patient shall never lift his arm hye, but with great pain.

The situation of the Elbow.
IF the wound be in the Joint of the Elbow, you shall situate the arm in a
mean form, that is to say, neither to straight, nor to much bowing in, for
if the arm be healed in a mean form: the diseased party shall have the use
of it a great deal the better, then otherwise he should have had if it had
been to straight or to much bowing in.

The situation of the VVrists.
WHen the wound is in the outward or inward part of the wrists, or in the
ioints of the fingers. The hand and the fingers must be situated half bowing
and you shall put within the hand some round Ball or compressor, for because
that if he keep his hands and fingers in a straight form and nothing bowing:
they will remain without any office, for because that the action of the hand is
to take. Wherefore you shall observe the form to the half bowing, and having
the said form, he shall be able somewhat to help him self, in ha^dling of many
things as a sword, Pike, Halbart and the bridel of his Horse and such other
like, which is done by the action of the hand.

The situation of the Hip.
IF the wound be in the Hip, you shall use such order that the Os femar. do
not come out of his place, the which may be done by compressours and ligatures,
and so to place the Patient upon his back until such time, as it is grown to a
perfect Consolidation.

The situation of the Knee.
IF the wound be in the Joint of the Knee, the Leg shall not be kept straight
out: but a little bowing, for if he remain straight: the Patient shall go very
il, also if it be to much bowing in: it will be to short.

The situation of the Foot or Toes.
IF the wound be in the Joint of the Foot or Toes: the Patient shall keep them
out straight, and not crooked for if they be any thing bowing: the Patient shall
never go so well as when they be straight.

FINIS.
A breef gathering to gither of certain errors which the common Chirurgians
use: very necessary and profitable for all Chirurgians, which are desirous to
have the right method of curing.
The first error which they use: is touching the dissease called in Latin, Lues
Venerea, and in English the French Pocks.
THe errors which be used at this present (touching the Venerian dissease) are
very great, principally at the beginning, for when it begins it appears in
the yard with inflammation, Ulcers and excoriation of the conduict of the Urine,
which comes from the neck of the Bladder. And after that commonly follows
Apostumes of the groynes, with pusshes and such other like discouloured
Pimples according to the infected humor, for the cure of the which, they begin
with vehement or strong medicines, as Colocinthis, confection of Hamech or such
like. And the next day following they open a Vain in the right or left Arm
(respecting not that there may follow a Lask of their vehement purgation) and
then minister their Unctions and suffumigations which is certainly a manifest
error.

By the which means they draw the infectious blood and humors to the noble
parts, and feeling the inward anoyance of the same: sends it to diverse
outward parts of the body. The which does inge^der hard tumors as knots and
kernels not easily curable and most sharp and fretting (rebellions against
curation) botches with such other like.

And so by the malitiousnes of the humor: it corrupts and eats the bone,
with such pains and torments that the poor patients are so afflicted: that
they know not where to rest, and especially more in the night then in the day.
Therefore at this present, I have thought good according to my little skill: to
teach a method for to bring these errors into a perfect order.

At the beginning of this contagious dissease: you shall first begin this
curation by euacuating of the body with gentle Lenitiues, which do both cool
the boiling rage of the blood: and also make it thinner, in mundifying the
blood, this must be used according to the temperature of the body,

The which shall be done after that the body is prepared, to the end that the
solutiues may the better work upon the aforesaid humors. For in this case,
nature must rule the Surgeon, and not the Chirurgian nature. Then after
that: it is necessary and profitable to open the Anckle vain, in the right or
left foot, according as ye Apostume does appeer and if therbe no apostume:
according to ye discretion of the learned Surgeon, this done: you divert or
pull back ye aforesaid infectius humors, from the principal parts. And upon ye
Apostume, you shall apply continually mollifying and drawing medicines, in
doing what may be to bring him to suppuration. This Indicatio^s being
accomplished: you shall use of the potion made with Ebenum and Guaiacum,
prepared according to the temperature of the humors, which shall be used the
space of a month or there abouts.

And although that some learned men have an opinion, that the decoction of
Guaiacum ought tobe used without any other medicines, yet never the less it
has been found by experience, that the use of other Simples with it, (being
fit and agreeing to the diseases) has a great deal more profited, and been
found of better effect then if it had been ministered alone, for in a compound
dissease: a Simple remedy is not requisite.

Although that Alphonsus Ferrus has written to the contrary, the which
Alphonsus uses this decoction of the wood in a manner to all disseases (whose
oppinion is not to be followed) which decoction is used in Pthisi. etiam si dies
placuerit in senio Philippi.

Moreover they have greatly erred, which have set forth the Radix chim being a
root very deer, unprofitable, and all togithers without taste, and the greatest
error of all is committed among them, which have brought in use, the diet of
the decoction of Box tree, which is an astringant wood, stinking and an enemy
to all the principal parts. And if you will have a wood which is most
agreeable to the Guaiacum: you shall use of Fraximus, the which opens
obstructions of the Liver, of the Melt and of the Rains, for I have known many
which by the use thereof have recovered their health.

The second error touching the said dicease when it comes to suppuration.
WHen this disease has been once taken in hand and evil handled, either by
Ignorance of the Chirurgian or the negligence of the patient: The common
Chirurgians use commonly new errors, that is, in giving solutiues with out
preparing of the evil humors. By the which means they take away the best and
leave the worst behind, whereof ingendreth Nodes, old and cancard fores, and
such like. Then they (as evil or rather wursse) apply their unctions or
suffumigations before that the ulcers be made clean or the Nodes taken away,
and sometimes leave the bone foul. By the which menes they purchase to them
selves both shame and infamy, for with in four or five months the ulcers open
with great corruption of the bone.

Moreover they commit an error touching the unction, for they anoint the head,
the Region of the heart, and other noble parts, against all reason. And also
all the whole body over, which is the occasion of many a man's death.

Therefore to amend these errors (when you see that this dissease is confirmed,
and that there are hard Ulcers, hard swellings or Nodes) it is the most surest
way to mundifye the said Ulcers and to open the Nodes with a cawstick, then you
shall make incision in the node unto the corruption of the bone, and then apply
Praecipitatum, or else pledgets with Basilicon and Presipitatum mingled
together, this done: you shall take away the corruption of the bone.

And then after that you may safely use your unctions made with Axungia Gummes,
Mineralls, Oiles and Mercury, also if you ad thereto of fine Treacle or
Mithridatum, it will be the better.

You shall anoint the shoulders, the muscles of the back, the Loins, ye Hips,
the Thighs, the knees, and all the outward members, as Legs and Arms.

But you must take very good heed that you touch not the head, the region of
the heart, the Stomach, nor the ridge of the Back. Also ye must have a good
respect to cease your anointing, in such order that you bring not to much
accidents to the mouth, whereby the Pacient might utterly lose the use both of
his tung and teeth.

Because that so many ignorant Chirurgians, have taken upon them this cure
(without either discretion in applying the unction, or ordering of ye patient)
I have thought good to write ij, or three words touching the ordering of the
Pacient.

When the body is prepared of his humors, with apt and meet medicines, as well
Sirups, Decoctions, purgings, and opening of the Vain according to the
disposition of the body: the patient shall be placed in a place naturally hot or
else otherwise made warm, which must be free from all cold, having the
doors, windows and other open places closely stopped, for the cold air is
very hurtful both for the Sinewy parts, and also for the woorking of
medicines, for it will deminish and hinder the actions thereof. And in this case
there are many which commit great errors, which are worthy of reprehencion, for
as well in the winter as in the Summer: they anoint the Patients in great and
large Chambers, where very much air enters.

Wherefore at ye beginning of this cure (if the place be not very close and
warm) you shall make a Pauilion with Couerings and such other like round
about a fire, by the which means you shall keep the cold air from the
Patient. But if it be possible: it is better to have a little chamber close and
warm, and also continually a pan with Coals in the midst of it.

If it be so that the Patients be so weke that they cannot abide the heat of
the fire, or would be loath to be seen naked (as women or maids) you shall
anoint them lying in their beds. First the patient shall put out one Arm, and
then the other, and so the rest of the parts shall be anointed one after an
other. And you shall use the Patients from time to time according to the
dissease.

The third error is concerning wounds pearcing into the Breast.
IT fortuneth often times, that the wounds pearce the holownes of the breast, so
that great quantity of blood does fall down into the bottom of the same, and
there does stay upon the Diaphragma, Diaphragma (...) two muscles which go
(...) the ^^^st and seperateth the heart from the Liver.
also the heuinesse of the said blood oppresses the Diaphragma, and putrifieth
and ingendreth an evil qualtitie. The which putrefaction sending vapors to
the heart: causes a continual fever, and commonly death within ^ days. Of the
which the common Chirurgians have no consideration or else by their ignorance
they know not the cause, and so the Patient is destitute of all help.

Wherefore when you see that the wound perceth into the Thorax or breast you shall
take good aduiseme^t, in searchi^g out diligently, whether the blood be
descended into the lower part of the Diaphragma, the which may be known by
the stinking of the breath, and by the relation of the Patient, which does
feel the blood quiuering or shaking inwardly. And also commonly his face will
be of a reddish or hie color, by reason of the vapors which assend up.

And note that at the which side the blood does most remain in lying upon
the same side: the patient shall feel less pain then upon the other, because
that the said blood oppresses the Lungs and the Diaphragma, the Chirurgian
ought to have a good respect to ye signs above written, and whilst that the
strength of ye patient is yet remaining: it shall be needful to make way for
the said blood to be Euacuated, between the fourth and v. rib, a hand breadth
or a little more from the Ridge of the back, and your incision knife shall be
very sharp, also you shall do it by little and little very gentlely in cutting
Mesopleuria or ye muscles between the ribs, it ought to be done toward the
lower part of the said muscles, for the vain which nourishes them and the
ligaments which gives them their moving and feeling: are placed more abooue
then below.

After that the incision is made: you shall let out the corrupted blood by
little and little, according to your discretion, and it shall suffice to
euacuate every dressing v. or vi. ounces, this done: it shall be very profitabe to
use the wunted potions which you shall find in the writings of learned
practitioners which have largely written of the said potions, and by this
means abooue written: I healed four in one year. The which Cures, without
the aforesaid remedies: could never have been helped, for the which I give
unto God most hearty thanks.

The fourth error touching the applications of the Traepans Terebelles, for
fractures of the head.
IN the fractures of the Skul: there are committed great errors touching the
applycation of the Traepan, principally when the bone is broken in many parts,
for they have no consideration of the shiuering of the skul, but apply the
Trapan, by the which means, they press down the shiuers of the bone upon the
Dura matter, and rent or tere it in such order that it brings great and
grievous accidents, whereby commonly death ensues. Wherefore in this case: you
shall have a good consideration, before that you apply the Traepan, for it is
better (if it be possible) in this case to use other instruments as
Eleuiatories, Cisers, Lenticulj or such other like, to make way for the bruised
matter which depresseth the Duramater, it shall be ye better and less danger for
the Patient. By this means I I have many times forborne the applying of the
Traepan, to the profit of my Patients and my good name and estimation

Moreover there be many Ignorant Chirurgians which without consideration apply
the Traepan, upon all parts of the head as well upon the comistures or seames: as
other places, which is the cause of the death of many Patients.

Wherefore they ought to have a great consideration, and to be very diligent in
this respect, and for to use their art according to the true method.

The fifth error touching the punctures of Nerves.
WHen it chances that any is hurt by the punctures of Nerves, if he be not
speedily helped by some cunning and expert Chirurgian: he is in great danger
to fall into conuolsions, which is the occasion of many a man's death which
commonly chances to them that be dressed by the Ignorant and common
Chirurgians, for when they begin the cure: they make fomentation, with hot
water, wherein has been boiled Mallows, Violets and such like, then after the
fomentation they apply an appeaser of pain, made with the crummes of white
Bread being mingled with the yolke of an Egg, Oil of Camomil and Oil of
Roses. The which things are altogether contrary to the Punctures of Nerves.

For as much as their application does moiste^ to much the Neruous places and
retains or keeps in the matter which is all ready come to the place, and if
there be any apostume it does augment and increase him, and causes the matter
to assend up to the brain, whereby ensues conuolsion and finally death.

Wherefore to avoid this danger, and to follow the cure methodically: you
shall have first a regard to the Euacuation of the body, and if the strength
of the patient be good, to use Flebetonice Reuolsiue or according to the cause
of the greef. Then (to take a way that which is ready conioinct) you shall
enlarge the Orofice, to the end that the medicin may the better penetrate to
the bottom, and take away the sharpnes of the humor. In this case I have found
very profiitable the Oil of Hippiricon prepared in this form that is to say
with Venice Turpentine, and for one ounce of the said Oil, you shall take half a
scrupple of Euphorbium, which shall be applied very hot with pledgets, and upon
that a Plaster made with Propolis, Gum ammoniack and Wax as much as shall
suffice. By this means the matter (which is drunk into the Nerves or tendons)
shall be drawn out to the outward parts.

Also for this intent I have found profitable Linseed Oil and Enphorbium of
each like much, with the xx. part of Sulpher being very finely poudred, with
Perosin and wax as much as shall suffice to make an Unguent.

This Unguent does heat moderatly, attract and dissicate and is of a subtle
faculty, with the which (by the help of God) the Chirurgians shall get both
honor and profit,

The sixth error is touching the abuse of the runners about called cutters for
the stone and Ruptors.
AMong the common Runnees about (which use to cut for the stone and Ruptures)
is used a great abuse and to be lamented of any christian heart, for under this
cure of cutting the Hernyes they do miserably take away the stone as well in
the Hernia aquosa or ventosa as in all the rest, the which is unmanly and
against the will of God, and they do not only use it in men, but most of all
in little Children, therefore it should be very good for the parents which have
their Children in any manner of ways troubled with any kind of Hernies, that
before they commit their Children to leese their stones, and some times lives,
by any of these that be Runnagates, (for so may I well term them) that they
show them to some learned Chirurgian to the end that he may see what kind of
Hernies they have, and so to discern the Aquosa or Ventosa, from Intestinale
or Omentales.

For certainly I have seen Hernies in children which came by the relaxasion or
division of ye Peretoneu^, have been perfitly healed by the apt applying of
glutinatiue medicines and such otherlike, without cutting or taking away of the
Testicle. But such is the couetouse desire of these Runners which make the
parents believe that it cannot be helped without their butcherly cutting, and
for to intrapmony, for they be as greedy after it as any living thing is after
their pray, not having the fear of God before their eyes, but like greedy
gripers catch what they may for the time, and care not what become of them
afterward, whether they live or die, we have had it by experience of them
what harm they have done both by the murdering cruelly and also laming with
continual pain, for when they come rushing into England and have such a great
name at their first coming. But after when their works be tried and then the
proof of them seen: the people for the most part are weary of them, and many a
fatherless child and widow which they have made: may lament the time that
ever they knew them, and many others (which is not a few) bide torments and
pain by the dealing with them. I dare affirm they never did any cure in this
Realm but that there be English men which have done the like and greater.

Such is the folish fantasyes of our English nation that if he be a
Stranger: he shall have more favorers then an English man, though the English
man's knowledge do far pass the others as experience therein has showed, and
this I will stand to the proof that there be English men that shall in all things
do as much both by learning and experience as any of them all. Paraduenture
you will object and say, that there be Strangers which have done cures which
some English men have refused, I will grant that it may be so, for there be a
great many of unlearned Chirurgians which take upon them the art, and look what
they do it is by blind chance, and so through their blindenes some are
marred, whereby after it falls to a strangers chance to do it, and then it is
given out that all the Chirurgia^s in London could not do it, and so the whole
company is defamed and evil thought of, but I could show to the contrary,
where the strangers have left and could not do, English men have done it
diverse times: which if need be I can bring the proof and no small sort, which
to name I will omit til another time more meet. And now to return to the
matter, see how long any of these cutters do tarry in a place, some a quarter
of a year, some half, and none scant a year, for it will be to hot for them:
for after their beastlines is once known: then they must seek a new place, for
if they should tarry in one place they would be hated like mad Dogs, and that
they know well enough. Now for because that they shall not deceive the common
people with their fair promises: I will write all the kinds of Ruptures or
burstings and how to know every one of them to the end that if any Chirurgia^
which has not the knowledge, may straight at the first sight know what may be
done, and so to inform the parents of the Children the truth of it, and what
the Cutter may do in it, for most commonly they be so ignorant that they
know not the one from the other, therefore as I have said before, it is
needful for the Patients to have an expert chirurgia^ to aprooue him and see
whether he be able to fulfill that which he promises or no. Now I will begin
to treat of the kinds of Ruptures and first I will begin with the division of
them in general and then perticulerly.

Of the viij. kinds of Hernies.
THere be eight kinds of Hernies or Ruptures whereof so^e have their proper
names: and the others by similitude, the proper Hernies do most commonly come
by the relaxasio^ or Rupture, of the Pretoneu^, insomuch that the Intestines
and Epiploco^ or zirbus does loose their natural place, and of these are vij.
kinds, that is Enterocele otherwise called Hernie Intestinale, Epiplocele or
Hernie Zirbale, Bubonocele or Hernie Inguinale, the hernies by similitude are
when there is some tumor against nature in the Cods or in some part of the
Groin, without the coming forth of the Intestines or Zirbus, and of these
there are v. kinds, the first is called Hernie Aqueuse and of the Greeks
Hidrocele, the second hernie Charneuse or Sarcocele, the third: Variquese, the
fourth Venteuse which is called of ye Greeks Pneumatocele, ye fifth Humorale,
which shall be spoken of pertitulerly in order, and first we will begin with the
proper kinds.

Of the hernie Intestinale.
FOr because that the hernie Intestinale is the most conuenientest, I will
speak first of it. This kind is no other then a certain descending down of
the Intestines in Scrotum, the cause of the which is when the Peretoneum is
broken or relaxed in the place where the Spermatike vessels do pass, which
co^s commonly by some vehement strain, as by vehement running, leaping,
lifting, or vehement crying, and such other like, the signs to know when the
Intestines is descended into Scrotum, is when he lies, they will easily be put
up again without any manner trouble, or may be reduced the patient standing
with ones hands, and in the redusing you shall hear a gurguling or noise, and
by this you may know it from Zirbus because that when the zirbus is put up it
makes no noise, and also it is not so painful: the other signs shall be
declared when we come to speak of the hernie Zirbale.

When this kind is not very far gone, and that it be not complet: the best
way is to cure it by medicines, as well to be taken inwards: as to be applied
with out, that is to say with emplaisters and so by convenient trussing and
boulstering stipt in the Iuce of herbs convenient for Ruptures which are of
astringa^t and glutinatiue faculty. I have seen many by these before said
medicines have been perfectly cured, yet nevertheless if for the oldenes of it
yt it be not tobe cured by these menes: then you must come to the last remedy
which is by cutting, for the executing of the which I wish all men to choose an
expert woorkman, and not to trust to much to these runners about, and as for
this kind it may be cut without taking away of the Testicle.

Of hernie Zirbale.
HErnie Zirbale which the Greeks do call Epiplocele, is a another thing then
the falling of zirbus (which is a greece that covers the Guts) into Scrotum
the which most commonly falls within Didimes, but yet so^times by the
breaking of the Didimes it falls out, the causes as well inward as outward are
the same which cause hernie Intestinale, for look how the Peretoneum is broken
or relaxed in the other: even so does it in this, the signs are much like
also, saving that it is much more softer, for in the touching it handles like
wul, and is also less painful, and it is more difficult to put up the^ the
hernie Intestinale, and in the redusing makes no noise, this kind is less
dangerous then the others by reason that the pain is less and also for because
that the excrement is not in it as it is in the hernie Intestinale.

Now here is a special thing tobe noted in this kind, which the common
cutters do use, that is, they do use to cut away the zirbus which is
descended within Didime without either tying or cautrising, and so there
follows a flux of blood which having no issue but is retained in the belly
there does corrupt which causes most perilous accidents and most commonly
the death.

Of the relaxacion of the Peretonium called hernie Inguinale.
HErnie Inguinale is a descending of the Intestines or zirbus into the Groynes,
which the Latins call: Inguina, the which sort does never go further then the
Groin, for when the Intestines or zirbus does pass through the Peretoneum:
then is it either Intestinale or zirbale, for this kind is nothing but a
relaxacion of the Peretoneum. The causes are as of the others aforesaid, and it
is easily to be known by the roundnes, and it will be more easily reduced then
any of the others, you may know when the Intestins is descended by noise that
it will make, though not commonly: yet most oftennest as has been said of
Enterocele, but if it be the zirbus it makes no noise, and is much more softer
and not so great pain.

Of the kinds of Hernies which be by similitudes or improperly called.
HEertofore we have spoken of those three kinds of hernie which are properly
called, now it remains to speak of the five kinds which are by similitudes,
and first we will begin with the Aquose, which is no other thing then a certain
watrish tumor of Croton increaced by little and little, and for the most part
lies between heritroides and ye Spermatike vessels, how beit some times it may
be contained between Dartos and heritroides and between Dartos and the Scrotum
as many learned men have written, the signs are, that the Scrotu^ does wax big
by little and little and for the most part without pain, and the tumore is
heavy and glistering and hard principally when the Scrotum is filled: it waxes
in length and does not return as does the Intestinale and zirbale but remains
at one stay.

This kind if that the water, have long line there and so corrupted the
Testicle: it must be taken away.

Of hernie Charneuse.
HErnie Charneuse which ye Greeks do call Sarcocele is a tumor against nature
in ye Scrotum which there does grow to a certain scireuse flesh, and does
much resemble the Verequeses or swelled Veins, the causes of the which are by
the gathering togithers of abundance of gross humors, which nature cannot rule
because of the weakness, the signs are an vnequable hardenes, and inflation
which does always remain in the part that is to say the Dideme, and does
always increace with pain being unequal and not even, wherefore Guido says
that this kind and Vanqueuse ar very dangerous.

Hernie Verequese,
HErnie Verequese is an appeera^ce of Veins not accustomed about the Testicles
and other parts contained with in Scrotu^. The causes ar gross humors gathered
togithers as melancolike blood and such like, which nature cannot disparce
because of wekenesse. The signs are, replecion of the veins about like to the
Twigs of Vines with softnes of the Testicle or Dideme.

This kind if it be not very great and far gone it may be healed by solutiue
medicines.

The hernie Ventose.
HErnie Ventose is a tumor of the cods increaced of a windines, the cause is of
the imbesility or weakness of the part, and is known by the swelling of the
Coddes and yard, and glistereth like unto a slikt paper, which comes sudainly
and is round and light, so that there be not another humor adjoined with it,

This is to be cured with Carnificatiues as Oleum nucum, Oleum Anethinum,
Costinum etc. and there may be added to of Seeds and herbs, as Semen, anisi,
Carui, Faeniculi, Agni casti, Ruta, Calaminta, Origani. etc.

Hernie Humorale.
HErnie Humorale is an Apostume contained likewise in the cods which is
engendered of humors hot and cold not much declining from his natural habit,
which may lie between Scrotum and Dartos or between heritroydes and Dartos or
only within heritroydes, as for the causes, signs and curation are like to
other Apostumes.

Now that I have declared the definition, causes and signs of hernies: it
shall not be amiss to expound in few words those parts which must be opened
when any of these kinds must be cured by handy operation, and this is tobe
noted first, that the Testicles are covered with three Tunicles, the first of
them takes his original of the skin and is called Scrotum or pursse, the
second which takes his original of the Peretoneu^ and is called Dartos, the
third which is proper to the said Testicle and is called Heritroydes, these
two last do not only cover the Testicles but also the Spermatike vessels,
as well they which bring the substance where with the Sperme is made which are
named Preparans: as the^ which bring the Sperme to the neck of the bladder
which is called Eiaculatoires or expelling, the which goes up to Osepubis.

The declaration of the waights and mesures used in Surgery.
Here gentle Reader I thought good to declare certain waights and mesures for
the better understanding of this book of Galens and all other of his woorks to
the end that yung Studients in this art should have none occasion of let from
the perfect understanding of it, and first I will show you how they were called
in ye old time of the Greeks and also of the Romans and as near as I can how
much every one does contain according to our measure. And as for the names of
ye simples: I thought it good to write them in the Latin as they were, for by
the searching of their english names: the Reader shall very much profit, and
another cause is that I would not have every ignorant ass to be made a
Chirurgian by my Book, for they would do more harm with it then good.

First Mina which ye Greeks call Mna, there are of diverse sorts, for some are
Romain others Attique, others Egiptienne, others Alexandrine, but Romans is
according to Paulus Aegineta and Galens 16. ounces.

The pound according to the Romans is 12. ounces.

The Attique and Egiptienne is.16. ounces.

The ounce which is the 12. part of a pound is 8. Drams.

Deunx is 11. ounces, which are.264. Scrupples, that is, 2. third parts and 1.
fourth part of a pound.

Dextans is the half and the third part of a pound, that is to say 10. ounces
and 240. Scrupples, Vitruuius in his third Book says that it is the measure
of ten Inches.

Dodrans is the half and one quarter of a pound, which is 230. Scrupples,
Vitruuius in his Book before said does call Dodrans the measure of 12. Inches.

Bis is 2. third parts which is 8. ounces and 240. Scrupples.

Sextunx is 1. half and 1. twelf part that is 7. ounces and 168. Scrupples.

Selibra is half a pound or Semis, and 144. Scrupples.

Quincunx is 5. ounces.

Triens is the 3. part of a pound which is 4. ounces and 120. Scrupples.

Quadrans is the 4. part of a pound which is 3. ounces and 72. Scrupples.

Sextans is the 6. part of a pound which is 2. ounces and 48. Scrupples.

Vnsia is to say an ounce which is 8. Drams.

Semiuncia is half an ounce.

Denarius or Dram is the 8. part of an ounce and is 3. Scrupples which the
Greeks call Grammata that is xxiiij. letters in the Greek, and the ounce has as
many Scrupples as the Greek has letters.

Scrupple is as it were the beginning of all waights as an introduction and is
2. Oboles, an Oboles is 2. Siliques, and a Silique 2. Chalces, and the Chalces
is 8. Grains.

The pound of liquid things as Wine, Oil, and such like, was in Room measured
by a vessel of Horn which had xij. rundels about it, and every one of them
did signify an ounce, and was called a mesured pound, Galen makes mention in
his first book Decom. medic. secundum genera, in the making of the white
plaster.

Amphora of the Italy measure, does contain 72. pound of Oil, and of Wine 80,
and of Hunny 108. the Hunny is the 4. part more heuyer then is the wine, and
the half more then Oil

The Ceranium is of Wine and Vinagre 80. pound, and of Oil 72. pound, and of
Hunny 120. pound.

The Vrne is of wine and vinagre 40. l. of Oil 36. l. and of Hunny 60. pound.

The Conge is of Wine and Vinagre 10. pound, of Oil 9. pound, and of Hunny 15.
pound.

The Sestier is of Wine and Vinagre 1. pound. 8. ounces, of Oil, 1. pound, and
of Hunny 2. pound

The Hemine is of Wine and Vinagre 10. ounces of Oil. 9. ounces, and of Hunny 1.
pound.

The Cotile is of Wine and Vinagre, 10. ounces of Oil 9. ounces, and of Hunny 1.
pound.

The Oxibaphus is of Wine and Vinagre 18. Drams, of Oil 18. Drams, and of
Hunny 27. Drams.

The Acetabule is of Wine and Vinagre.18. Drams, of Oil 18. Drams, and of
Hunny 27. Drams.

The Ciath is of Wine and Vinagre 12. Drams and 4. Scrupples, of Oil. 18
Drams, and of Hunny 20. Drams.

The Cheme is of wine and Vinagre 3. Drams and one Scrupple and of Oil 3.
Drams, and of Hunny 5. Drams.

The end of waights and measures of the ancient writers.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
Note whereas you find this letter (a) that does signify the first side of
the leaf, and this letter (b) the second side.

In the first page, read (the third Book of Galen of the composition of
medicines in general). Then in the first page of the Epistle to the Reader the
xij. and xvi. lines, for iudications read (indications).

In the 11. leaf a. the xiij. and xiiij, lines read (drachmas) for drachmas,
and (Opoponacis) for Apoponax.

In the 14. leaf a. and the xix, line read (the sixth he does) for he does
vi. loose.

In the 26. leaf a. and the vi. line read, (Maron) for Maron. And in ye xij.
line of the same read (phou idest) for phoud est

In the 27. leaf a. the xviij. line. red (the childs parents did send for
Galen) for, did send him to Galen.

In the 30. leaf a the first line read (Paps or Breasts) for, Dugs.

In the 31. leaf a. the iiij. and v. line leave out, the whole and sound parts.

In the 33. leaf b. the xv. line read (Olei mirtiles) for, Olei mirh.

In the 36 leaf a. the iij. line read (bowing for, lowing.

In the 38. leaf a. the xvi. line read (no apostume in ye groin: then acording)
for Apostume: according.

In the 41. leaf a the iiij. line read (quality) for, qualtitie. And in b. the
xxiij. line (read wou^d potions) for, wunted potions Fo. 47. line.6. read, is
none other thing,

Gentle Reader I shall most heartily desire thee that if in the reading this
work other faults you find then here is noted not rashly to condemn the
Author for assure your self that by his will none should have escaped, and
though the Printer be never so careful, yet in the printing some will escape.

Vale
FINIS.
Imprinted at London at the long Shop adjoining unto Saint Mildreds Church in
the Pultrie, by John Alde.

Octostichon Ioannis Banisteri Nottinghamiensis medicae and Chirurgicae artis
professoris in laudem medicinae.
Miramur crebro medicos molimine claros,
corpora praeceptis nostra iuuare suis.
Ecce quot assidue scribu^t hinc inde libellos,
in lauds artis docte Galene tuae.
Hanc et maiores, hanc et coluere minores,
hijs confert magna part, Bakerus opem
Cuius ab ingenio prodit, vigilique labor,
vtilis iste liber, dignus and ipse legi.
Hanc artem docuit, vasto qui presidet orbi,
saepius hanc laudat filius ipse dei.
Haec visum caecis, mutis parat ista loquelam
hac audit surdus, claudus et hac graditur.
Hac redit in vitam, vitali lumine cassus,
viuere qua vidi, qui moriturus erat.
huic ergo fauea^t, iunctis vmbonibus omnes
et simul huic himnos voce stiloque ferant.
Tetrastichon eiusdem in librum Bakeri.
Mistica magnopere quicunque Chirurgica
huc debes posita saepe venire mora.
Hac studij fructus: doctissima multa videbis captas
abdita quae longo delituere die.
At nunc sic lucent, vt si laudare pararem,
in mare tunc videar, fu^dere ineptus aquas
Ergo Bakere tuum superabit sidera nomen,
atque aliqua semper part superstes eris.
Gulielmi Clowei, Chirurgi Londoniensis carmen encomiastichon ad suum studiosum
Georgium Bakerum.
Laudibus egregiis efferri pulchra solebant,
nec praeclara, sua laud carere decet.
Quantos idcirco poscat Bakerus honores,
hoc opere exacto, dicito musa mihi.
Te tua sedulitas transfert ad laudis honore^,
Et tua te virtus inclyta ad astra vehit.
Tu magni Hippocratis reseras tu tecte Galeni
A tantis ad nos nobile ducis opus.
Anglia, quas frauds tibi nunc smalkaldia ferret
Bakeri clarum si latuisset opus.
Ergo quisquis Apollinias sectabitur arts,
Bakerum celebret, nocte dieque meum.
G Good cause of praise you do deserve,
E euertly to set forth:
O Old woorks of Fathers wise and grave,
R report does show is troth.
G Give forth the same with speedynes,
E incline your whole indeuer:
B Behold you not what praise it is,
A a man to live for ever.
K Knowing that so the wise do wright,
E earth though they truly be:
R Revive again by Books in sight,
who so will read may see.
quod William Clowes Chirurgian.


