AN EXPOSITION OF THE Song of Solomon: called CANTICLES. Together with
Profitable OBSERVATIONS, collected out of the same.

Perused and published by WILLIAM GOVGE, Preacher of Gods Word in Blackfriars,
London.

Acts 8. 13. How should I understand, except some man should guide me?

LONDON, Printed by JOHN BEALE dwelling in Aldersgate street and are there to
be sold. 1615.

TO THE AVTHOR OF THIS WORK The Publisher thereof wishes Grace in this world,
and Glory in the world to come.
RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL,
IT pleased you as a testimony of your love, to bestow these your labors on
me written with your own hand: they being mine by a free donation on your
part, I think I have power to do with them what I will. Wherefore I have been
bold to publish them; knowing that they are well worth the publishing, and that
thorough Gods blessing they may bring much spiritual comf^rt, and profit to
Gods Church. Long continued custom requires that they should have a Patron.
What better Patron can they have then the true proper parent? who for eminency
of place can add great countenance unto them, and for excellency in learning
can maintain them. For mine own part I acknowledge my self many ways much
indebted unto your Worp. In testimony of my duty and thankfulness, I return
that publicly unto you, which privately you were pleased to bestow on me.

Blackfriars London. 25. April 1615. Your Worps. to be commanded in the Lord,
WILLIAM GOVGE.

To the Christian Reader.
A Great privilege it is, that the Lord has committed unto us his divine
Oracles: Romans 3: 1. ^
but unto those, to whom the tongue wherein they were written is strange and
unknown, or the mysteries themselves obscure and hard to be understood, what
is the benefit of that favor, if the language be not interpreted, and the
mysteries opened? shall not these Oracles be as the words of a sealed book?
Read Isa. 29: 11, 12.
It is needful that as the letter of the Scripture be interpreted, so the
mystery thereof unfolded. Every book of holy writ requires a faithful and
learned interpreter: but some more then other: among and above those some, this
Song of Solomon: and that in regard of the excellency, and of the difficulty
thereof. Two things commend the excellency of it: First, the Author; Secondly,
the matter. The principal Author is the same that by inspiration gave the
whole Scripture: ^. Tim. 3. 16
the immediate Penman of it was a King, 1. King. 4. 29. 30, etc.
the most wise and learned King that ever was. The matter is concerning Read
this Exposition Chap. 1. Ver. 1.
a blessed, and sweet conjunction between Christ and his Church, one of the
most comfortable mysteries of our Christian faith. Two things also argue the
difficulty of it. 1. The very phrase and style, which being poetical is the
more obscure. 2. The many Rhetorical allegories, and hyperbolicall metaphors
which are hard to be understood and rightly applied. The A Song of Songs which
is Solomon's.
title of this Book points out all these points. 1 Plainly it is said to be
Solomon's. 2 A Song is a kind of Poesy, and Poesies are commonly adorned with
allegories and figures. 3. For the Bern. pro sui excellentia hoc carmen merito
Cantica canticorum appellatur sicut is quoque cui canitur Rex Regum.
excellency of it, it is termed a Song of Songs. i. a Song that surpasses all
other songs. In Midr. Romans 3. 2
The Jews (to whom the Oracles of God were first committed) termed all the
books of the Scripture holy: but this the holy of holies: whereby they
intimated the excellency of it. Hier. in proaem: in Ezech. nisi quis apud ^os
aetatem sacerdotalis ministerij.i. trigefimum annum impleuerit, Canticu^
canticorum legere non permittitur.
They permitted none to read it alone till he were thirty year old: whereby
they implied the difficulty of it. Is it so difficult? surely it needs a
learned interpreter. Is it so excellent? Surely it deserves the best pains of
a faithful interpreter. Herein therefore (good Reader) thou art much
beholding to the learned Author of this book, who has taken so good pains in
expounding this rare Song. Such is the Author, such the work, that neither
father nor child need to be ashamed of one another. The Author is a man of
great place and note in the Commonwealth; his humility will not suffer him to
have his name made known. Though by profession he be not a Divine; yet in
knowledge of those learned tongues wherein the Scriptures were written, and in
understanding of the mysteries contained in them, he is a very deep and
profound Divine. The many learned treatises which he has made, some in Hebrew,
other in English some heretofore published, other still lying by him, are
evidences of more then I have said. As for this present Treatise, I observe
six worthy points in it to commend it unto thee. 1. A true interpretation of
the Hebrew text. 2. A sound exposition of the sense and meaning of the words.
3. A fit application of the Metaphors, and allegories. 4. A fruitful
collection of doctrines, and observations. 5. Perspicuit^e. 6. Brevity. These
two last seldom meet together; Hor. - breu^s esse laboro Obscurus fio.
for some, laboring to be brief, are obscure; other, laboring to be
perspicuous, are taedious: when they meet together they are admirable helps
to understanding, memory, affection and all. Thus I have showed thee (Christian
Reader) that this Song of Songs is worthy to be expounded; yea that
necessary it is, it should be expounded: that the Author of this work is
well able to perform so weighty a work; and that he has taken good pains
in performing it. Do thou use his pains for thine own good. If thou ask me
why I meddle so far in it, as to publish it, I answer, For thy good; had it
not been for me, thou had not seen it: for it should seem that the Author
long since wrote it, and let it lie in his study, not minding to publish it, I
being of late with him about other business, espied it: and reading it desired
him to publish it: he utterly denied me. I then entreated him to bestow it on
me; he gave it me. Thus it was mine. But should I keep such a pearl of so
good use to all that will use it, close and secret to my self? Then might I
justly be censured, as envious of thy good. I envy it not: I would I could do
thee more good; thou should be sure to partake thereof. But that, while I
seek to avoid the blame of Envy, I may not seem ambitious, know that in
this whole work there is nothing of mine, but all is the Authors own. He has
also by him, a like Exposition of the Prophecy of Hosea; and other treatises:
I hope to prevail with him for the publishing of them, when ^e shall see the
fruit of these his labors. The recompense which I desire is, that thou help
both the Author of this book, and the Publisher thereof with thy prayers to
God.

Thine in the Lord, WILLIAM GOVGE.

AN ADVERTISMENT to the Reader.
Solomon's Song is twice run over in this book: first, the sense is
delivered, then observations collected from thence.

In expounding the Text, the Author has held himself close to the Hebrewe.

In dividing the Chapters he has had more respect to the dependence of
matter, then to common custom, for which he has the example of learned men.

In the latter part of this book he has not set down the whole entire Text,
but only so much as served to show whence the observations were gathered;
because they were at large set down in the former part: If in reading the
Observations thou be desirous to see the whole Text, turn to the same place in
the Exposition.

Read the several sections both of the Exposition and of the Observations, so
as if they were joined together without any interruption of the Text: for
sometimes the beginning of one Section depends upon the latter end of another.

There is one general point omitted thoroughout the whole book viz. the
setting down of such words, as were needful to be added in the Text for sense
sake and propriety of our tongue, in a differing letter; it cannot now be
amended. I pray thee therefore more diligently mark them: blame not the
Author; who, I am sure, would have seen this and other faults redressed, if he
had reuised the sheets before they had past the press.

Such faults as may seem to hinder the sense, are in the next following page
set down.

Errata.
PAge 5 line 2^ read larges p. 7 l. 21 these paths, p. 9. l. 9. 10 friends p.
17 l. 18. thee could, p. 20 l. 1^ he remoneth, p. 29 l. 2^ (...), p. 23. l. 15
is my, p. 39 l. (...) own hurt, p* 4 l. 5 what should you ^ell him? p. 55 l.
14 lonely, Chap. 18. verse 2. l. 1. bu^^^ in it, p. 80 l. 29 is rapt.

AN EXPOSITION of the Song of Solomon, called CANTICLES.
CHAP. I.
VERSE. 1 A Song of songs, which is Solomon's.

THe Books of Solomon the Jews compare not unfitly to the Temple which he
built Whereof this song of songs, or most excellent song resembles the holy of
holies o^ the most holy place: Being a declaration of the blessed and sweet
conjunction between Christ and his Church, and of the contract, and espousels
made between them, whilst the Church is now militant upon earth. All which
time is as it were a bidding of the banes until by his second coming from
heaven our spiritual marriage with him shall be solemnized and made up.

The Author Solomon, peaceable, for so his name does signify, a figure of
Christ the Prince of peace, and the builder both of the earthly Sanct^arie, and
of this heavenly frame, was, no doubt, whatsoever otherwise his false might be,
an elect vessel of God. 1. Because all the Prophets (of which number he was
one) are in the kingdom of heaven Luke 13. 28. for howsoever it pleased God
sometimes to speak by the wicked as he did by Balaam, and to wring out of
their mouth contrary to their heart, that which might serve for the glory of
his name: yet he never used the service of any but vessels of election, to be
the penmen of his Spirit. So the Apostle 2. Pet. 1. 19. 20. teileth us, that
those which by divine inspiration wrote the prophetical Scriptures, were all
of them holy men of God. 2. The holy Ghost does always speak well of Solomon
after his death, and makes in all places an honorable mention of his name,
which it never does of the reprobate. 3. His ways are commended, and Rehoboam
has his worthy praise for walking in them 2. Chron. 11. 17. 4. God, whose
counsels are constant, loved him and cleped his name Iedidah, beloved of the
Lord. 2. Sam. 12. 24. 25. 5. He himself is said again to have loved God. 1.
Kings 3. 3. Which being true and unfeigned (otherwise the Holy Ghost would never
have spoken of it) was impossible to be lost. And this very book if it were
written before his fall is an undoubted argument how sincere, earnest, and
vehement his love was, and what a feeling he had of the love of Christ. If
after his fall, it argues then most certainly a sincere, and true repentance.
6. And lastly the book of Ecclesiastes does manifestly euince it, written when
he was old, after he had seen so much and had so long experience of his
own vanities and corruptions. The title whereof, A (...) Ko. heleth As if you
would say (...) understanding soul, or some such substantive.
soul (an humble, and grieved soul) reconciled to the Church, from whence he
was before cast out for his offenses: or, A soul speaking, and making
confession, in the Church, shows his repentance.

The manner of writing is that which we call active, or representative, that is
wherein Persons only are brought in speaking, the Author himself saying
nothing: and the persons here are Christ, the Church, and sometimes, but very
rarely, the friends of them both: In all which the Church, burning with a
desire of Christ longs, and is impatient till she be joined unto him. For
hither tend all her passions, exclamations, testifications of her love,
commendations of her spouse. Christ again by kind gentle and loving speeches
comfort and cheereth up the Church with certain hope of that happy and
blessed time: for hither tend all his commendations of her present, and promise
of future graces, the accepting of her unfeigned repentance, and the assurance
of purging, pruining, and making her more holy and fit for him. Till she be
taken up unto him without spot or wrinckle.

The Book has two parts. Whereof the first comprehends all that time that
Christ and she are friends, before any falling out, in the four first
Chapters. The Churrh longing to be joined to Christ. Chapt. 1. Acknowledging
the benefits and comforts of life, pleasure and all good things which he
bestows upon her. Chapt. 2. And lastly desiring to see Christ in his heavenly
glory. Chapt. 3. Whom Christ most sweetly comfort. Chapt. 4. The second
part, in the four last chapters, is a falling out of these two lovers thorough
the Churches fault and unkindness to him. But this falling out is a renewing of
their love. In her by repentance Chapt. 5. in him by a gracious accepting of
her into his favor again, as dear as ever she was before. Chapt. 6. Whence
arises all thankfulness from the Church and promise to amend Chapt. 7. verse
1. 2. 3. 4. with a noble demonstration of her zeal unto him; testified by her
longing, first for his own coming in the flesh. Chapt. 7. verse 5. to the end
of the Chapter. Secondly for the drawing of others that as yet were strangers
and aliens from the common wealth of Israel to the fellowship and
participation of Christ, and for the whole Israel of God (Jews and Gentiles)
to be knit and joined together in one holy society. Chapt. 8. And so this
second part contains three most excellent prophesies. One of the words
incarnation, an other of the calling of the Gentiles, the third of the
conversion of the Jews and their access in the last days unto the Church of
Christ. But let us now hear themselves speak, and with their own words to
utter their own affections.

CHVRCH.
VERSE. 2. O let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, for thy Loves are
excellent better then wine.

The Church (whose heart the Spirit of Christ had before knit unto him)
begins to woo her love: and crying out in a passion, desires his
embracings: That he would be present with her, join himself unto her, and
remain hers for ever. This vehement desire, this ardency of affection she
shows to be most just and reasonable, and fortifieth the equity, the honesty,
the necessity, the fruit, and commodity thereof, diversely and many ways.
First the excellency of this love is wonderful, above all the pleasures and
delights of the world: especially if it come not single but accompanied with a
large nesse and a bounty from him, that it may be called Loves in the plural.
What wine so pleasant to the taste?

VERR. 3. Because of the smell of thy good ointmens thy name is as an ointment
powered forth. Therefore the Virgins love thee.

What ointment so fragrant to the smell? Was that which shead upon Aarons head,
trickled down his beard, and wet the hemmes of his garment? or the costly
ointment, that Alablaster box of pure Nard, the Spickenard which she powered
upon our Savior Christ, that filled all the house with the sweetness of the
smell? Take which you will, and the best ointments else, they are not worthy to
be named, when thine ointments, the joy of gladness wherewith God has
anointed thee above thy fellows, and which thou powrest forth to the comfort
of the world, and the refreshing of thy Saints that have any sense, and
spiritual smell, are talked of. I speak not of my love as present with me
when I enjoy his sweet self, and have him in mine arms. No. Eye has never
seen, ear has never heard, heart cannot conceive the sweetness of those
delights. But I speak of the very remembrance of him, absent and away. Thwit
me not here with any carnal love, or love to steal my heart from God; far
be that from my thoughts: I mean nothing but that which is holy, chaste, pure,
maidenly, and virgin-like, free as well from bodily pollution and uncleanness;
as from spiritual fornication against my spouse.

VERSE, 4. Draw me, after thee will we run. Let the King bring me into his
priu^e chambers. We will rejoice and be glad in thee. We will record thy loves
better then wine. They shall record them who in all rightnes do love thee

They that will follow vain vanities and forsake their own mercy, let them
do it. But I will eleaue to thee. This coming, and eleauing unto Christ, is I
confess a divine work, the work of God himself, and steps beyond the reach
of man, which no humane foot can tread, no wit can climb unto or comprehend,
unless it be framed and fashioned from above. A work which of all others we
are most untoward to, of such difficulty that we must be drawn, and haled,
and violently pulled out of our selves, before we can once settle about it,
having neither power, nor so much as will unto it; for what find I in my self
to egg, and provoke me thereunto? Whatsoever I have within me, or without me,
from the top unto the toe, from the head unto the heels, is an utter enemy,
and does oppose and set it self against it; yet I desire thorough the working
of his holy spirit (for even the desire and first thought does come from him,)
not only to walk in the paths, (which notwithstanding O happy men that so
do, and how few there be that find the same) but to run in them with all my
might and maine, with faith, hope, patience, and obedience to follo^ thee: O
let my feet be shod and made nimble for to do it. But who (think you?) is
the person whom thus I love, and am so enamoured with? Verily the King himself
our Sovereign Lord, CHRIST, the God of glory, worthy to be loved of all, able
to draw a^l unto his love, and to make all the gates, and doors of our heart
to be set open to him. What may be the place whether we run so fast, and
would so feign hie our selves unto? It is his own privy chambers, his Church,
and house here, and after this his heavenly tabernacles, where better it is to
be one hour then in the Palaces of all other Kings a thousand years beside.
The fruits and effects that come from it, are admirable, and divine: joy in
the holy Ghost, spiritual mirth and gladness. For the having whereof where,
or who is he (show me the man, if he be a man and not a very beast) that would
not bid all the Iolity of the world adieu. It is a joy cannot well be hidden: it
will show it self and fill our mouths with the praises of his name, with
Psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs, all too little, too too litttle for him.
Neither will I (my self alone) take pleasure in this duty, I and mine, all my
friends and followers, whosoever they be that love thee, will incessantly
perform the same: you profane get you farie away. The praises of God beseem
not your mouths. These precious Jewels, such pearls are not for swines
s^outes. So holy a work belongs to holy men: It is for them whose hearts are
clean, pure, sanctified, which waike in all integrity and in the
righteousness of their ways. These our God does call; their tongues he fines
and fi^es, to be the trumpetters of his glory:

Thus, and by those arguments (twelve in number) the Church sets forh,
amplifieth, and enlarges the sum of her most holy desires.

VERSE 5 I am black, but comely, O daughters of Jerusalem: Like to the Kedarenes
that dwell in tents: but I am also like to those that dwell in the curtains of
Solomon.

Now because it is the property of true love to be desirous that others also
may have a liking of the thing beloved, she remoueth the lets and hindrances
that may keep her friend and fellows (in Gods election members of the Church)
from coming unto CHRIST, confessing there is nothing outwardly in her to be
seen that can give concontent or make her be liked, but inwardly, in the
hidden man she is amiable and full of beauty: for this daughter of the King is
all glorious within, foul in her self and black, even cole black, as black as
any black-more, or if any thing be more black then it, through sin, both
original and actual, that makes her to com short of the glory of God, and to
be subject to death and condemnation: but through CHRIST, and the
righteousness she has in him, she is goodly and glorious as Solomon's courtly
train.

VERSE. 6. Look not upon me because I am blackish, because the Sun has cast
his beams upon me, because the sons of my mother incensed against me, have
made me a keeper of other vine-yards: mine own vineyard I have not kept.

Three things indeed there be which lay her open, though washed, though
justified, though sanctified through CHRIST, to ignomie and reproach. All which
notwithstanding she is not to be despised, since none of them, nor they all
are able to obscure the brightness of Gods glory in her; first the remnants of
sin that still cleave unto her, and are so many foul spots in her fair
face: making her blackish, though not cole black. Secondly afflictions, as it
were the schorching of the Sun. Lastly her infirmity, that thorough the
peevishness of some which bear the face of brethren, not able to endure
wholesome doctrine, and the sweet yoke of JESUS CHRIST'S, but making stirs and
discords in the Church, and teaching instead of Christ's lores their own
fantasies, and pleasures, she has in weakness been driven to yield in many
things contrary to the duty and place which God has set her in.

VERSE. 7. Show me O thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest, where thou
make flock to lie down at noone: for why should I be as one that pitcheth
her tents by the flocks of thy companions.

Wherefore she says she will go to the Archbishop, and chief sheppard of
her soul, of him to learn how to carry her self in the Church, which is the
house of the living God, to be ordered by those Laws only that he himself
the most wise house-holder has prescribed. Hereupon she turns her speech to
Christ, telling him, he only is her delght. All his ordinances she accounts
right in all things, and that she hates every lying path. And therefore
prays him to teach her where he feeds with his Word and Sacraments, where
at noone day he makes his sheep to rest: for both feeding and resting, wholly
and in all things her desire is to be at his direction. And even then when
others repast themselves and take their meals, she can not be in quiet
unless she be with him. That so ranging her self among his other sheep she
may be kept from having any thing to do with strange shepherds, that in name
participate with CHRIST, but in truth are none of his.

CHRIST.
VERSE. 8. If thou know not O thou fairest among women, get thee out from going
in the steps of yonder flock, and feed thy kiddes above the tabernacles of
those shepherds.

To this Christ makes answer; first satisfying her demand in that wherein
she was not fully before informed. Bidding her by any means to take heed of
the worldly profane and heretical teachers, and such as are corrupted by
them, that she tread not in their steps, but to fe^de her little ones, the
faithful flock, with the food of heavenly doctrine in all sincerity and
truth, lifting them up, out, and from above the world.

VERSE. 9. Unto the troop of horses in the chariots of Pharaoh do I liken
thee, my fellow friend.

By this occasion they fall to congratulate one unto an other, the good things
that are in them: CHRIST he praises his own gifts bestowed upon the Church,
in regard of the dignity of her person, by his word affirming, and by the power
of his spirit making her like to the horse of Pharaohs Chariot, brave, stately,
and courageous, excellent for all good services.

VERSE. 10. Thy cheeks are comlie, as with rewes of small stones: thy neck as
with collars.

And in regard of the ornaments of the spirit, whereby her cheeks and neck, the
principal seats of beauty, are set forth with rewes of precious stones,
gemmes, collars, and gorgious things, as horses of those countries were wont to
be.

VERSE. 11. Borders of Gold we will make unto thee, with specks of neat silver.

And not content therewith promises that the Father Son and the holy Ghost,
the blessed and glorious Trinity, will further bewtifie, and let her out with
all rich graces and ornaments of the spirit, with a continual grouth of
sanctification, as it were pure gold, bewtified with the silver specks of a new
increase of holiness, being made more and more glorious by the reflection of
his glory.

CHVRCH.
VERSE. 12. Whilst the King is in his circute, my spicknard does give forth
his smell.

The Church, resoundeth the praises of her CHRIST, for the sweet and fragrant
odours that from him come down upon her by his Word, and the power of his
spirit, those holy things that make her so sweet her self, and to spread her
sweetness far and near to other: And that even now whilst this Lord and
King sits in the round globe of the highest and most glorious heavens,
absent in the flesh; how much more when CHRIST which is her life, shall appear
and reveal himself in glory?

VERSE. 13. My beloved is as a bundle of mirrh unto me that lodges between my
breasts.

The cause of all is, Christ's dwelling in her heart by faith, which makes her
both gracious, and sweet as a nosegay of mirrh in a weomans bosom,

VERSE. 14. My well-bel oued is unto me as a cluster of Cypres in the
vine-yards of Hengedie.

And as a cluster of Cypres full of berries within his white flower, when the
same is planted in fruitful gardens, such as Hengedie was.

CHRIST.
VERSE. 15. Behold thou art fair my fellow friend, behold thou art fair, thine
eyes are doves eyes.

This mutual gratulation Christ shuts up with exclamations, setting forth
her bewty, the bewty she has in him without spot, and glorious, also her
charity and doue-like simplicity, that will not cast one eye upon any
superstitions

CHVRCH
VERSE. 16. Behold thou art fair my well-beloued: also delectable: also our bed
is green.

The Church shuts up with commendations of the bewty and amiablenesse of her
love, ^ Brutes, as the Hebrew word is, which Pliny al^o does retain in the 12
book of his natural history Chap. 17 signifies rare, plea^ant and special
woods.
and the fruitfulness of their bed, begetting many children unto God.

CHRIST and CHVRCH both.
VERSE. 17. The beams of our houses are of Cedars, our walks of brute trees.

They both conclude with commendations of the preciousnesse of their houses,
and of the walks wherein they visit one onother that is of Christ's habitation
in her by the communion and fellowshippe of the spirit.

CHAP. II.
CHRIST.
VERSE. 1. I am the rose of Shar^n was a place of l^w pasture grounds, between
Basha^ and mount Leb^non, as appears 1. Chron. 5. 16 and 27. 29. So that
(...) rose of Sharon, he means a ro^e growing in a fruitful and sunnie
place which is allwa^^s of swe^test savor.
Sharon, the Lilly of the valleys.

THe Church and her spouse not satisfied with their former praises, and the
mutu^ll commending one of an other, fall afresh unto it. He commends his
own sweet virtue, which he has not for himself alone, but by his spirit
does communicate to his Church.

VERSE. 2. As a Lilly among thorns, so is my fellow friend among the
daughters.

Whereby the same as far excels all other companies and assemblies through
the righteousness and glory she receives from him, as the Lilly does the
thorns: for all are no better then thorns take them as they are, but
specially if they be compared with her.

CHVRCH.
VERSE. 3. As an aple-tree among the trees of the forest, so is my wel-beloued
among the Sons: under his shadow I desire that I may sit: for sweet is his
fruit unto my pallat.

The Church again praises him for his fruitfulness, and the sweetness both
of his shade and fruits. Such and so great, as she desires no only to rest
under the shadow of his grace and righteousness, thereby to be kept from the
scorching heat of the wrath of God, the curse of the Law, death, and
condemnation, being reconciled by him to his Father: but to taste of the dainty
fruits, the fullness of joys that are at his right hand.

VERSE. 4. He brought me into the banqueting house, and his banner over me was
^oue.

Here is the great desire and longing expre'st, which she has for Christ,
enlarged narration-wise, by two most sweet and notable fruits that proceed
from him unto his Church. First life, safety and deliverance from all evil:
then pleasure, comfort, joy, peace of conscience, and the fruition of all good.
The former she sets forth, first by the effici^nt cause, his only love shed
in her heart by the holy Ghost: whereby he kept her as fast unto himself, as
Soldiers are kept about the colors of their General, that nothing could pull
her from him. Secondly by the place where this was done, the banqueting house of
the congregation of his Saints, where all dainties and iunketing dishes, all
pleasures and delights were to be found in him.

VERSE. 5. Stay me with these flagons, hold me up with these apples, for I am
sick of love.

Thirdly, by her fainting for the desire of Christ. So sick she was with
spiritual love. Fourthly, by her great desire, expressed by turning her speech
to his servants that stood round about the Table, the ministers of the Word to
stay and hold her up, and to keep life within her, by an holy use of the Word
and Sacraments, which are as refreshing apples, and as bottles of wine, out of
the which we suck the swcete promises of the Gospel.

VERSE. 6. His left hand is under my head, and his right hand does embrace me.

Fifthly, by Christ's doing a great deal more then we should require: Even
himself as a kind husband will do unto his wife, taking her in both his
arms, and so falling with her into a sweet rest and slumber from the cares of
this present world.

VERSE. 7. I adiureye ye daughters of Jerusalem, tarry without with the roes,
or with the hindes of the field. Stir not up nor waken this love until he
please.

Sixthly, by adiuring all Christians to abide in their place and standing, that
is to say in some honest and lawful vocation, as Rachell that looked to her
fathers herds, and not either thorough idleness, or disorderly walking and
following after sinful pleasures to grieve the spirit, and to give Christ
cause, when they may have and hold him, to disioint himself from them. And so
she lives and breaths in him thorough that sweet and happy conjunction she
has with her head.

VERSE. 8. It is the voice of my well-beloued. Behold this same, he comes
lepping upon these mountains, skipping upon these hills.

But that is not all. She thus resting in quiet sleep, and he going into the
country to the pleasant fields to prepare and set things in a readiness,
returning again heapeth upon her favors and pleasures that cannot be
expressed, which she with a joyful heart setleth her self to entertain.
First, he speaks unto her, she hears his comfortable voice. Secondly he
comes, she sees him coming a far of. Thirdly, he is present and at
hand, no hills, nor hillocks, no offenses, great or small, heinous sins or
meaner imperfections are able to stay his coming.

VERSE. 9. My well-beloued is like a roe, or a young Heart. Behold this same, he
stands behind our wall, looking forth of the windows, showing himself
cheerfully thorough the grates.

Hereupon she cries out for joy, compares him with the hindes and young roes
for his swiftnes, with goodly flourishing trees for his sweetness, and the
pleasure of his countenance. Only this is her grief, that he looks but as
it were through the grates, stands behind the walls, and does not as she
would, communicate his presence with her.

VERSE. 10. My well-beloued spoke and said unto me, Arise my fellow friend, my
fair one, and come thy way.

Then thus prepared to hear and to receive him, he speaks to her heart: and
pouring forth a golden shower of kind and gracious words, with silver streams
of eloquence (manifesting his affection) inuiteth her to the fruition of those
good and excellent things which by his Word and spirit he is ready to bestow
upon her.

VERSE. 11. For behold the winter is past, the rain is over, it is gone.

Drawing arguments from her present state and condition compared with her
former misery that was in the time of her ignorance, whilst she lay dead in
sin and trespasses, and was a stranger from the life of God: al which time
was as the winter season, foul and tempestuous, full of storms, of horror of
mind, terror of conscience, fear of death and desperation.

VERSE. 12. The flowers appear in the earth, the time of the chirping of birds
is come, and the voice of the Turtle is heard in our land.

VERSE. 13. The Fig Tree has put forth her green figs and the vines with
the tender grape give forth a smell. Arise my fellow friend, my fair one, and
come thy way.

But this now com in the place of it is as the pleasant spring, all green,
fresh, and flourishing. Such are the pleasures that the enjoying of Christ does
bring. That done here moves two maine objections that evermore trouble the
Saints of God, and hold them as it were amazed.

VERSE. 14. My done that dwell in the clefts of the rocks, in the f^eety
den; show me thy countenance, make me to hear thy voice: for thy voice is
sweet, and thy countenance comely.

One, the conscience of their own infirmity and weakness, which makes them
like silly doves to hide themselves in corners, in the clifts of the rock,
under the grices of the stairs, in secret places, flying the fight of men, and
not to dare to show their faces. This he remoueth with the consideration of
Gods eternal election, and of his deep and unsearchable counsels, a rock of
strength to comfort her in her weakness: a sure hold and inaccessable den,
whereunto no evil can approach, a fort impregnable, under the which she
rests, and shall rest safe for ever. And thereupon he bids her to take
heart of grace, to come unto him, to walk before him, and to be upright to
talk with him, to make him hear her voice in Prayers and the praises of her
God. For that in Christ be accepts her and is well pleased with her, both her
person, and those spiritual sacrifices and fruits of her faith.

VERSE. 15. Take us the foxes, the little foxes which spoil the vineyards, and
that whilst our vineyards are bringing forth the tender grape.

The other thing that troubles is the opposition of wicked and ungodly men,
not the cruel tirants of the world only, but false teachers which nippe the
Church in the head, and are the instruments of Satan's malice when it first
begins to peep, for then Satan is ever busiest to seduce us in the first
birth of Christ in our hearts, waiting to kill and to destroy us. These also
he says he will take order for, by sending workmen into his vineyard that
shall spare none, not the least evil but by drawing forth the sword of holy
discipline shall cut off all evil, and all means and occasion of evil, which
here exhorting he promises, and in promising he exhorts his servants the
ministers of the Church not to be slack to do, that so she may enjoy perfect
peace and pleasure, and all kind of happiness.

VERSE. 16. My well-beloved is mine, and I am his who feeds among the Lillies.

Upon all which she concludes: glorying first of her fellowship and communion
with Christ; who as a good shepherd feeds his with satiety of pleasures and
delights that are at his right hand for evermore.

VERSE. 17. Till that day breath and these shadows fly away, return, be like,
my well-beloved, to the roe or to the young heart upon the By Severed mountains
he means Mount Gilead, which was s^ue^ed by the river Jordan from the rest
of Judea, 2. Sam. 2. 29. and was the best place for course and for hunting.
severed mountains.

And then wishing his gracious presence that he would come quickly to her, and
not depart one heates breadth from her to the day of his last most bright
appearance, when we shall perfectly be received unto the communion of Christ,
and of all good things in him: that so by his blessed presence and the
assistance of his Spirit, she may pass thorough and overcome all the mists
and shadows of sin, ignorance and affliction that come in her way whi^est
she is in this present world.

CHAP. III.
VERSE. 1. In my bed anights I sought him whom my soul loves: I sought him,
but I found him not.

VERSE. 2 Therefore I said, I will rise now and go about the City by the
streets, and by the high ways, I will seek him whom my soul loves. I sought
him, but I found him not.

YEt once more the Church expresses her affection and longing after Christ:
the wonderful desire she has to cling nearer and to cleave faster to him:
and that in a more passionate manner then ever she did before; thinking she
had lost him, when most she did enjoy him.

By night and by day, upon her bed and when she was up; at home and abroad,
within in the City by the streets, and by the lanes, without in the fields;
with her self alone in the secret meditation of her heart, and by conference
with others. First, godly brethren (as she met them in every corner) her
fellows and familiar friends exercised in the like temptations.

VERSE. 3. The watchmen which go about the City found me. to whom I said,
did you see him whom my soul loves.

Then the public watchmen of the City, the Lords remembrancer, swhom he has
set over thy walls O Jerusalem, that all the day, and all the night they might
not be silent of him: every where and at all times, using all the means, from
the lowest to the highest, she seeks Christ, and can hear no tidings of him.
That is she cannot find him present as she does desire, and to her hearts
liking in her own sense and apprehension, though indeed he be always most
present with her.

VERSE. 4. It was but a while ere I had past from them, ti when I found him
whom my soul loves. I took hold of him, not to let him go, till I shall
have brought him into my mothers house, and into the chamber of her that
conceived me.

At the last when she least looks for it, and has passed all the means,
that the excellency may be from God and not from them, she finds her hearts
joy, him whom her soul loves. She claspeth him, and lays fast hold upon
him, with purpose not to let him go till she have brought him into her
mothers house (like an honest and shamefast maiden that will do nothing in
such cases without her mothers priuitie) that is, till the happy time that the
whole Catholic Church shall grow up in one body, to be presented as a pure
virgin, glorious unto Christ.

VERR. 5. I adjure you, ye daughters of Jerusalem, tarry without with the roes,
or with the hindes of the field. Stir not up nor waken this love until he
please.

VERSE. 6. Who is she that should come up out of the wilderness, as it were
becensed with smoke that is raised up; becensed with mirrh and incense better
then all Apothecaries poulder.

And now resting in his arms, she desires to remain there so long as he
shall please, that is to say for ever

But the upon the view and muster of his graces, she corrects her dullness, and
rapt with admiration, O, says she, what do I mean? Am I so foolish to tie
Christ unto my sleeue, to wish that he might abide here with me in the
wilderness of this world, which is so crooked and empty of all goodness? Should
not I my self rather (though I know the wicked world looks after no such
matter) labor to be taken up from hence by faith into his home and dwelling
place, and unto his spiritual marriage bed, the heavenly glory of Gods
Kingdom, and Jerusalem that is above. For the sweetness of it most fragrant
and odoriferous, as all becensed with mirrh and incense of holiness, glory,
immortallity, better then the best perfumes.

VERSE. 7. Behold his bed is better then Solomon's, which threescore strong men
stand about, of the valiant men of Israel.

VERSE. 8. All of them dravving svvord, expert in war, each has his svvord
by his side for fear anightes.

For the safety, price, preciousnesse of matter, and work that exceeds the
matter, far beyond Solomon's wedding bed, though it were most curious: for
there indeed stood a continual guard of threescore valiant men, with their
swords by their sides to keep the chamber door for fear of danger in the
night* But he has a thousand thousand standing before him; yea ten thousand
thousand ministering unto him; Thrones, Dominions, principallities, powers,
other manner of persons in strength and valor.

VERSE. 9. Better I say then the bed which King Solomon made him of the trees of
Lebanon.

VERSE. 10. Whose pillars he made of silver, the beddesteed thereof of gold, the
couerlet thereof of purple. The midst of it paued with love, by the daughters
of Jerusalem.

True it is, that bed was made for a King, but this for the king of Kings,
and Lord of Lords: the frame there was of Cedars of Lebanon. the pillars
silver, the bedsteed gold, the couerlets purple. But here the very streets, the
market place is all of pure and beaten gold, shining as clear crystal. Where
of shall we think (by that reckoning) that the bed and furniture thereof is
made. There the midst was paued most lovely with needle-worke, here the
ornaments and hangings are the shining glory of God and the Lamb, that the
daughters of Jerusalem did work; this the Father of heaven. Thus does the place
where we shall enjoy Christ excel*

VERSE. 11. Go forth and look ye daughters of Sion, upon King Solomon, with
the Crown, wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals, and
in the day of gladness of his heart.

But if you compare person with person, ones joy with the others triumphs,
your own eyes will tell you when Solomon was at the highest, how infinitely he
did come short. Solomon indeed had a Crown that royally set him forth; but
Christ has many Crowns and diadems upon his head; Solomon in his excellency
and the crown of his glory was a spectacle worthy to be looked upon and
admired, but Christ to be worshipped, honored, and adored, not of the maidens
of Jerusalem only, but of the whole host of heaven; Solomon's heart leapt for
joy the day thht he was contracted, but Christ is anointed with the oil of
gladness above his fellows, with a heap and variety of gifts and graces, more
then all men or Angels. So far is he to be preferred.

CHAP. IIII.
CHRIST.
VERSE. 1. Behold thou art fair my fellow friend, behold thou art fair: thine
eyes are doves eyes from between thy locks: thy hair is like a flock of
Goats, which sheare upon mount Gilead.

CHRIST here comfort the Church against that anxiety of mind, which
appeared in the former Chapt. showing how gracious she is unto him, how
beautiful in his eyes: not for any bodily, but for her spiritual bewty.
Whether you consider her wholly and entirely, being all fair, or her members
and lineaments one by one: eyes, hair and locks, teeth, lips, temples, her
neck and both her breasts; all in that comeliness and proportion, as is fit
both for the discharge of the great duty of the ministry, and the common duty
of christianity. Her eyes first, how chaste they are? how simple? how douclike?
if you consider either the faithful Minister, the eyes and lights of the
Church, whose care is to present us chaste and pure virgins unto Christ, or the
eye of judgment in every Christian, which makes the whole body lightsome, and
keeps them single and sincere in all things. Again how comely they are
within her locks, seemelily turned up: for such is both the Churches decency,
rejecting all toyish ceremonies, and the grave and sober carriage of every
Christian. And this hair so goodly shining smooth, as of fat Goats that feed
in fruitful pastures; these ceremonies, this carriage orderly, sober, decent,
bring that reverence to a Christian, that comeliness to a Church, as make them
both gracious.

VERSE. 2. Thy teeth are like a flock of even shorn sheep, that come up from the
washing, which all of them do bring forth twins, and there is not a
miscarrying one among them.

VERSE. 3. The lips are like a thread of skarlet* and thy talk is comely: thy
temples within thy locks are as a piece of pomegranet.

VERSE. 4. Thy neck is as the tower of David, built for armories: a thousand
targets hang therein, all shields of mighty men.

VERSE. 5 Thy two breasts are as two young hindes, the twins of a roe which feed
among lillies.

Go unto her teeth, they are equal, shining, dowblerewed, whereby she cheweth
the meat of heavenly doctrine, both for her self and others. The Law of grace
is in her skarlet lips, speaking things comely and for edification. Temples
like a rose to see to, and of the hew of a Pomegranet, bending beyond the
hair. So natural is her bewty, and her face her own: for what needs she
the dyings or colorings of worldly glory to set forth her spiritual bewty? or
of humane wisdom to adorn the simplicity of the Gospel? Is her face only
and the parts thereof worthy to be commended? do not the rest as well excel?
her neck of holy discipline, and government to assist the ministry of the Word,
and that complete armor of proof which every christian fights with, holds
her up and keeps her steady, more strong then all the weapons of any tower or
armourrie can do. Lastly her pappes plumpe, round, fair, are ^full of all
good nourishment of the sincere milk of the word of God, that flows as from a
stream out of both her breasts of that old and the new Testament.

VERSE. 6. Till that day breath, and these shadows fly away, I will get me
unto the Mountain of Mirrh, and to the hill of frankinsense.

This description done, and made an end of, now to satisfy her request he
promises that notwithstanding till the marriage day do come, when the mistes
of sin, ignorance, and afliction that are cast in this world before the eyes
of the Church shall fleet away, he must keep his residence and aboade in
Jerusalem that is above, where are his friends, who perform unto him duties
sweeter then mirrh and frankincense.

VERSE 7 Thou all fair my fellow friend, and not a spot in thee.

VERSE. 8. With me from Lebanon, my spouse with me from Lebanon shall thou
come, thou shall look down from the top of Amana, from the top of Shenir, and
Hermon, from the dens of Lions, from the mountains of Leopards.

Yet he will ever be present with his Church by his Word and the power of his
spirit, sanctifying and cleansing the same, until being all fair without any
spot or wrinckle in her, and so fitted and made ready for the wedding day, he
do receive her as his spouse, (that is to say a wife joined and married to her
husband, for so he is bold now to call her, in regard of that prefixed time)
into everlasting life, and crown her with glory and immortality. At what time
he says he will redeem her (wholly and every part, so as not one whom the
Father has given unto Christ shall perish) from the most remote places and
borders of the Land, and out of the claws of Lions and Leopards, her most
cruel, fierce, barbarous and savage enemies.

VERSE. 9. Thou have ravished my heart, my Sister Spouse. Thou have ravished my
heart, with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck.

The remembrance of this day, and of the perfection she now has in his
judgment and estimation of her, and then shall actually have by his benefit
bestowed upon her, makes him to cry out in the passion and vehemence of his
love, calling her Sister, as being of one nature, also his married spouse,
professing she has ravished his heart with the bewty of her looks, with the
ornaments of her graces, that are as chains about her neck, yea with one look
of faith, with that one grace of his sanctifying spirit in her:

VERSE. 10. How fair are thy loves, my sister spouse? how good are thy loves?
better then wine, and the smell of thine ointements better then all spices.

Amplifying with exclamations the excellency of her love better then wine, and
the sweet savor of her ointements (the anointing of his spirit, sealing her
up to the day of redemption) better in sense and feeling, then all spices.

VERSE. 11. Thy lips, my spouse, drop the hony-combe, Honey and milk are under
thy tongue, and the smell of thy garments is as the smell of Lebanon.

Thus having declared the feruency of his love unto her, he does by many
figures and forms of speech, express the sweetness and the ornaments of her
faith and of the fruits that proceed from it. Thy lips (says he) both of
them, that is, in the public ministry, in private speech drop the honey and
the hony-combe, sweet and heavenly lessons and instructions, comforts and
consolations. Out of thy tongue that milk of the Word is ready to come forth:
thy smell is odoriferous, thine outward carriage and behavior sweet amiable,
and full of grace.

VERSE. 12. A gardaine enclosed my sister spouse, a spring shut, a fountain
sealed up.

Thou keep thy self most chaste unto me,' and thy fruits sound and entire as
a gardai^e closed, as a spring shut up, as a fountain sealed: for in thee is
the cestern of that wholesome and fauing doctrine, whereby the parts of the
field, or gardaine of my Church, the beds and plants. (particular
congregations) are all watered, and which no stranger can have access unto: for
none enters thither but in and thorough me.

VERSE. 13. Thy plants are as of an orchard of pomegranets, with fruit of
precious things: as Cypres with Spicknard.

VERSE. 14. Spicknard and Safron, sweet Canes and Cinnamon, with all trees of
Frankincense, mirrh, and Santales, with all the chief spices,

To conclude thy plants (meaning the fruits of faith) are most precious, as an
orchard stored with all precious and delicate fruits.

CHVRCH.
VERSE. 15. O fountain of the gardains, O Well of living waters, and flowing
more then the waters of Lebanon.

The Church ioying in her spouses thus gracious accepting of her, does first
modestly attribute all she has to him. Do thou call me a spring and
fountain? give thou me the name of a gardaine? Vouchsafest thou me such
honor that my fruits should be esteemed, as sweet spices? O but how soever I
may in some sort disperse unto mine the waters of life, yet thou in truth art
the only fountain, from whose fullness we all receive. I water, but from
thee, thou art the only well of living water, out of the which I do draw;
thou art the wind and comfortable air that purgest thy gardaine, make
seasonable times, rain and fair weather, as is most commodious and best for
the manurance of it. I, whatsoever I have, meat, drink, or any thing else, it
is all of the gift of thy hand; my life and saving health I have, and hold from
thee.

VERSE. 16 Awake O North, and com O South, breath upon my gardaine. Let those
waters ouerflow the spices of it. Let my well-beloued come unto his gardaine,
and eat his dainty fruits.

Wherefore, says she, deny not these two things unto me, bless me yet more
with all spiritual blessings: Let thy winds blow upon my gardaine, and those
living waters over flow my beds and spices. Secondly, come and dwell with me,
feast and make merry in the midst of my soul and conscience: for even here
also (as well as in Heaven) thou have, as thou say, a gardaine?

CHRIST.
VERSE. 17. I am com into my gardain, my sister spouse, I gather my mirrh with
my spice, I eat my hony-combe with my honey, I drink (...) wine with my milk.
Eat fellow friends, drink, and be drunk O ye my well-beloued.

O no, says he, you know not what you ask; that were nothing good for you,
and hurtful to many other: for yet til the marriage day do com, my place is
to be in heaven with the infinite thousands of holy Angels and spirits of the
righteous that are deceased: where I in them, and they in me take incomparable
pleasure and delight; and where I welcome and entertain most lovingly with all
dainties and delightfulness, the faithful souls whom I daily take out of
this transitory world, into everlasting glory,

CHAP. V
CHVRCH.
VERSE. 1. I being asleep, but my heart awake, heard the voice of my
wellbeloued, bounsin^, open to me, my sister, my fellow friend, my dove, my
undefiled one, for my head is filled with de^^e, my locks with the drops of
the night.

WE come now to the second part of this book, which is the falling out between
Christ and his Church. The fault whereof is first of al laid where it was, in
the Churches unkindness to him, which she her self stic^eth not to acknowledge
that it grew from her own drowsinesse and carnal security: Although thus
far to be excused, that it was thorough weakness and humane frailety,
against her own heart and liking; not with that full swing of sin that the
wicked give themselves scope to run into, nor with all her heart and soul.
The spirit being always ready to do his part, though the flesh were weak.
Her faith was smothered, it was not put out: yet this one sin (as the nature
of such things is) went not alone, it was accompanied with a multitude of other
sins: rejecting him so scornefully, who with his own lacred v^ice spoke unto
her to arise from the sleep of sin, and to awake unto righteousness, and
yet could not prevail. What might be done that he did not to reclaim, and
bring her home? For the manner of his coming, it was not only knocking, but
bounsing at the door of her heart by the ministry of his Word, vehemently,
ernestly, and more then once. The thing he did desire small in it self, so
easy for her to grant, as nothing could be more: only to open and to let
him in. He spoke so kind^ly, so lovingly, in such a gentle and so earnest a
manner, as might have moved a heart of flint; gave her such and so many, so
sweet and so honorable titles all with one breath, my sister, my friend, my
dove, mine undefiled one, bestowed such care and diligence to compass his
desires, as if it were his own good that he sought, and not hers. He (bearing
all the infirmities of our nature, and the inconveniences of this life,
compared to the night in regard of the life to come) refused to undergo no
peril, nor wearisomenesse, or incommodity of weather, no toil or trouble for
her sake; to go by day or by night, early in the morning, or late in the
evening, in fair of foul weather, in the dew and in the rain, his head and
his hair, his skull and his locks, all beesprinckled and wet; that what heart
(not made of stone) could be so unkind to let him stand without, in the rain
and in the dangers, and hazards of the night?

VERSE. 2 To whom I answered, I have put off my coat, how should I put it on? I
have washed my feet, how should I foul them?

Yet for all that, every vain pretense, every fond and frivolous excuse, was
enough to keep her from admitting Christ, and from opening the door unto him;
that door of her heart whereby through a true and lively faith, Christ does
make an entrance and is received, and more and more fruitfully applied unto us.
A manifest argument what small account sh^e made of him, and how little she
set by the inestimable good that he came to bring unto her: preferring a little
ease and daintines, before the pleasures that are in him. She thought it (for
sooth) a matter of no small ado to put on her coat again, and rise when once
she was abed, for fear of catching cold: she was loath to touch the ground
with her feet now they were washed, lest she should beray them, that is to say,
she was loath to give ear to every call of Christ, for fear of disquieting
her self, of drawing upon her dangers, troubles, fears and losses if she
should follow him in all things: as if these or ten thousand greater
discommodities then these could any way counterpeize, or lie in the balance
with the infinite blessings we have by Christ. O flesh and blood how wise art
thou to find out a reason unto thine own heart? and to have some blind
excuse or other for that thou would feign do?

VERSE. 3 My wellbeloued let down his hand from the keyhole, when as my bowels
earning within me,

VERSE. 4 I rose to open to my well-beloued, and my hands dropped Mirrh, and my
fingers soft Mirrh in the handles of the lock.

But the end and effect hereof was fearful. Christ so repulsed went his
wa^e: so she lost her love and could no more find him: and then all too late
her heart began to earne; she fell then to have a compunction of soul,
remorse of her offense: and then (fool as she was) when he was gone she
rose to open unto him: Yet so at the last disposing and framing herself unto
his call, the very touch of the handle of the lock, where Christ departing, had
left behind him such fragrant steps and impressions of his favor by the
blessing and sweet smelling savor of his Gospel, brought her to a
consideration of her most unworthy fact.

VERSE. 5. I opened to my well beloved, but my well-beloued withdrewe himself,
he passed away: I fell into a sound because of his speaking, I sought him, but
I could not find him, I cried on him, but he answered me not.

And was enough now to make her to arise and open unto him, (departed and gone
away) whom present before and requesting it, she had rejected. O then what
would have been the comfort if when he was at the door he had been let in
and entertained? Well, she opens now, but her love is gone. Then struck with
a conscience of her sin, she falls into a swowne to think of his kind
and loving words, which she so scornefully set at naught: she seckes him by
meditation of the Word, by calling to mind the promises of the Gospel, and
his former mercies, but she cannot find him she cries upon him with prayers,
tears, weepings, and lamentations, but he will not answer.

VERSE. 6. The watchmen that go about the City found me, they smote me, they
wounded me; the keepers of the walls took my veil from me.

Yet she supported by his Spirit, not casting off her faith, continues to
seek him still, and passes petills past belief. The Min^sters themselves and
watchmen of the Church of God, ^ hose part it was to guard her, were the first
that did her wrong, smote, and wounded her tender conscience: and in steed of
speaking a word in due time to the wearied and distressed soul, did even take
her veil from her, and beat her from holding fast her reverend obedience and
subjection unto Christ.

VERSE 7 I adjure you, ye daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my wellbeloued,
what you should tell him: that I am sick of love.

Wherefore finding no comfort where in reason it was most to be expected, she
gets her to the maidens her friends and fellows, though not so well
acquainted with Christ as she. To them she is more bold to impart the ardency
of her affection; asks them after Christ, adiureth them, both themselves to
take knowledge of it, and to let her love understand how she does affect him.

The Maidens the CHVRCHES friends.
VERSE. 8. What is thy well-beloued above an other well-beloued, O thou fairest
among weomen? what is thy well-beloued above an other well-beloued, that thus
thou do adjure us?

CHVRCH.
VERSE. 9. My well-beloued is white and ruddie, fitted for a standard bearer
above ten thousand.

They wondering at her passion, as unacquainted with such moods enquire what is
in her love above other loves, that she does so long and thirst after him.
Whereupon she takes occasion to describe her love; First, by the bewty and
excellency of his color, (signifying his holiness and perfect happiness)
white and red mixed together, with that temper that is in the best and
strongest complexions, enabling him to do any feate of actiuity above ten
thousand other. For who but he can sustain the fury of the battles of God,
and yet go away with the honor and glory of the field? or of whom but of him
alone can it be said, that he has a crown given unto him, and goes forth
ouercomming, and must overcome?

VERSE. 10. His head excellent gold, fined; his locks curled, black as a raven.

Secondly, by the members and lineaments of his body, head, hair, cies,
cheeks, lips, hands, breasts legs, look, palate, and to conclude his whole
self. His head, (wherein the grace of his humane nature stands) precious as
the most excellent gold, pure, bright, shining, as gold fined seven times: for
even in his humanity, he is the engraven form of the person of his Father,
and the resplendence of his glory. His hair, first black as a raven, then
colored and crisped; so fair he is in the very least ornaments of nature,
more then the sons of men.

VERSE. 11. His eyes as doves eyes by the streams of waters, washed with milk
it self, set in cunningly.

His eyes have a threefold quality to commend them by: First amiable as the
doves, as the neat and the dainty doves by the water side, in the gracious and
comfortable look which he casts on his Church. Secondly, white as milk,
and shining with white, because he is more pure of eyes then that he can
behold iniquity. Thirdly, set in the hollow places as fit, and with as great
art and cunning, as a stone by the artificers hand is set into a ring; so
guiding and directing his sight to look perfectly into all things, yea into
the depth of the secret of men's hearts.

VERSE. 12. His cheeks like a bed of Spice, grown plants of perfume, his
lips to Lillies, dropping soft mirrh.

His cheeks goodly and flourishing with a fresh and sweet beard, like a bed
of spices, like grown plants that serve for perfume: Such a grace and gravity
does he carry. His lips in themselves as lillies, redolent for the smell,
comely in proportion: to us full of heavenly grace and sweetness, of most
comfortable doctrine which droppeth from him, as liquid or softmirrh.

VERSE. 13. Upon his hands are rings of gold, set with Chrysolite, in his bowels
is a shining, as of Iuory, ouerlaide with Saphires.

His hands are set forth with all ornaments precious and shining rings of gold
set with the Crysolite, to note that not his person only but al his actions
(done by the instrument of the hand) the whole government and administration
of his kingdom, is full of majesty and glory. His breast and all his body (for
that is to be understood by the bowels that are within) has a shyning like
Iuory, covered over with Saphires: for of a weak and corruptible body he has
made his own, and will make ours in him glorious and incorruptible.

VERSE. 14. His legs are pillars of Marble, set upon sockets of fined gold:
his countenance as of Lebanon, choice as the Cedars.

His legs are pillars of marble, leaning upon sockets of the choicest gold, to
show his power and majesty, being able to tread all his enemies, and whatsoever
sets it self against him, in pieces under his feet, and to make the rage
of men to turn unto his glory. The look and show of his person, goodly as
Lebanon, choice as the Cedars.

VERSE. 15 His palate most sweet, and all of him most to be desired. This is
my well-beloued, and this my friend, O dauhgters of Jerusalem.

His pallat (that is his speech and the words that come from him) (for there,
there lies his sweetness, from thence is all our comfort, and therefore this
that so delights and refreshes all our senses, it does her good once again
to speak of it) is most sweet and pleasant. What should I say more? he is
wholly bewtifull, and all to be desired.

The maidens the Churches friends.
VERSE. 16 Whether is thy well-beloued gone, O fairest amongst weomen? whether
has thy well-beloued turned his face? that we may seek him with thee.

This description does so affect them, that they long to know of her, where her
love is become, burning with a desire to seek Christ as well as she. That is
the fruit of the conference of Gods children.

CHVRCH.
VERSE. 17. My well-beloued is gone down into his gardaine, to the beds of
spice, that he may feed in the gardaines and gather Lillies.

VERSE. 18. I am my well-beloueds, and my well-beloued is mine, who feeds
among the Lillies.

To whom she answers, that he is gone to Jerusalem which is above, there to
repast with his friends as himself had said; and concludes with an
exclamation, that whatsoever calamity her own sin had brought upon her, yet
the affection to her Jove is firm and constant; and so she assures her self
his is to her, though absent in Heaven. And by this means she nourishes that
holy desire of seeking Christ both in her self and others: and together with
her temptation finds, by the goodness of GOD, an issue and way to come out
of it.

CHAP. VI.
CHRIST.
VERSE. 1. Thou art fair my fellow friend, as Thirtza, comely as Jerusalem,
terrible as an army with banners.

CHRIST here comfort his Church against all the fears and terrors which
the conscience of her own sin might justly pull upon her; telling her that
having by faith and the tears of true repentance washed away her former spots,
she was now as fair in his eyes, and as amiable as ever she was before: all
bewtifull and fair (being justified and sanctified thorough Christ) as
Thirtza, Ieroboams stately City: seemly as Jerusalem the glory of all the
Cities of the East, built as a City compact and knit together, wherein are all
those worthies of the Lord of hoastes, Pastors, Teachers, etc. in a most
comely order and government of the Church: terrible in the Church-ministery
and discipline, which is a rod to keep in subjection every thought, and to
revenge all disobedience: yea, terrible against Satan and all the powers of
hell. And howsoever she had caught asore below, which might seem to be an
argument of her cowardlinesse, yet in truth she was of an invincible faith and
courage, and fearful to her foes.

VERSE. 2. O turn thine eyes over against me, that they may left me up. Thine
hair is as of a flock of Goats that sheareth on Gilead.

VERSE. 3. Thy teeth like to a flock of sheep which come up from washing, which
all of them do bring forth twins, and there is not a miscarying one amongst
them.

VERSE. 4. As a piece of pomegranet are thy temples from between thy locks.

And therefore (says he) be of good comfort, look upon me, have faith in
the promises of the Gospel: That shall be my joy, and the crown of my glory,
who have always a sense and a fellowfeeling of thy miserys, and am like
affected to thee, mourn when thou mournest, and am glad when thou reioycest.
If thou doubt whether thy bewty still continue, whether it remain fresh and
constant, I assure thee it does; and no fault or infirmity of thine can make
it for to fade: for it wholly rests in my grace and goodness. Thy hair, thy
teeth, thy temples, all thy parts and members are every one as comlie, as
fair, as well featured as before. Thy bewty does excel.

VERSE. 5. Let there be threescore Queens, and fourscore Concubines, and
maidens without number.

Think not, because there be so many that glitter and flourish in the world,
living in all wealth and ^ollity, and at their hearts ease, when it is ill with
thee, when thou art humbled and fightest with many difficulties, have wars
without, and terrors within, that their condition is better then thine own:
as if they only were happy and to be admired, thou base and contemptible* No,
if they were every one a Queen, or Concubines, and Ladies, never so many that
attend upon them, yet thou only do excel.

VERSE. 6 That one, my dove, mine undefiled one, that one with her mother, that
pure one with her that bare her: as soon as the maidens see, they shall account
her blessed; the Queens and Concubines shall praise her, saying,

VERSE. 7 Who is she, goodly as the morning, fair as the Moon, clear as the
Sun, terrible as an army with banners.

For thou art mine own, most dear unto me, (with whose judgment it is fit
thou content thy self more then with all the glittering show and pomp of the
world) elect and chosen out of all kindred, nations, and tongues to be my
peculiar inheritance: Innocent, simple, chaste, sincere, and upright before me.
Who though now thou have thin abode on earth in this sinful and wretched
world, yet do cleave so close to thy mother the heavenly Jerusalem, that the
whole world has thee in admiration. Such a star of glory and excellency
shines in thy forehead, for inward sanctity, and outward majesty in the
ministry and government of the Church: Insomuch as there is none of all these
brave and gallant Ladies, but though they think not as thou think, nor
walk as thou walk, yet in their consciences they are all convinced that the
truth is with thee alone. Thee they will admire, as soon as they do behold
thee; to thee they will give the prize, and count thee only blessed; attribute
as much unto thee, and say as much of thee as I have said and attributed: for
bewty, pruity, virtue, continually increasing.

VERSE. 8 To the pruined gardaines I went down to see the geene plants of the
valley: to see whether the vine flourished, the pomegranets budded.

And albeit I left thee for a while, yet with everlasting mercies will I resort
unto thee: I did indeed withdraw my self, but it was not for any mislike or
indignation conceived against thee: The truth is, I had a longing to see how
near the time approached of our joyful and happy marriage, and therefore
betook me to my place of glory.

VERSE. 9. When I discerned it not, my mind set me upon the chariots of my
free-hearted people, to say,

But perc^iuing that day was not yet at hand, I came back with speed unto thee,
together with all my people, and retinue: by the ministry of those my
free-willing servants, with all speed and earnestness to give thee comfort.
And now mark and lay up in thy heart what I shall say,

VERSE. 10. Return, return O Shullamite: return, return that we may behold
thee. What, behold you in that Shullamite? as the daunse of the Machanaijmites.

Thou have indeed gone astray: that had almost marred thee: but in me is thy
health and safety. Return, return unto me, that I and mine, all the Angels of
God, may have joy in heaven to see the fruits of thy faith spring anew. For
notwithstanding thy slippes and fales, I esteem thee most perfect in mine
eternal counsel and decree, and putting all the robes of mine innocence and
righteousness upon thee, do now so make thee by the power of my Word and
spirit, my friends here and fellows being judges. Look upon her, tell me how
you find her: Is she not most brave, glorious, and gallantly attended? Verily
when I do behold her, and all her troops coming forth to meet me, me
thinks I am in the midst of the Tribes of Israel, and of all those worthies,
that skipping and lepping with songs and daunses, and all kind of holy
meriments, came to receive David at Machanaim, when God brought him back into
his kingdom.

VERSE. 11 How bewtifull are thy feet with these shoes, O daughter of a
Prince? The compass of thy thighs are like browches, the work of the hand of
a cunning workman*

And yet the nearer I come unto thee, the more I admire thy bewty from the
top unto the toe, from one end unto an other. To begin at the lowest, and
so to ascend. Thy feet shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace. Thou
daughter of a Prince! O thou of noble birth! borne not according to the flesh,
but by the faith of the promise. The girdle of pure truth above thy hippes,
framed by the most cunning workman, the Spirit of God himself.

VERSE. 12. Thy navel like a round bowl. Let not the Liquor of it fail. But
let thy belly be as a heap of wheat, hedged about with Lillies.

Thy navel round as a bowl, a token of thy fruitfulness. O let it never be
drawn dry; but as a full cup wanting not any liquor; let thy womb be
always fruitful, and thy fruit precious and fragrant as a heap of wheat
hedged about with Lillies: So great a desire I have of thine increase.

VERSE. 13. Thy two breasts are like two young roes, the twins of a hind.

VERSE. 14. Thy neck like to a tower of Iuorie: thine eyes to the fish-pooles
made with art at the populous gate: thy nose like to the tower of Lebanon, that
looks toward Damascus.

Thy two breasts as two hindes, fit to nourish and give suck. Thy neck, the neck
of discipline straight, and steddie, like unto a tower to bear up the
ministry as it were the face of the Church: and white and bewtifull as a
tower of iuory for the order and gravity thereof. Thine eyes bright and clear,
as the fish-pooles made with great art at Jerusalem in the broad gate of the
flocks, (for such is the ministry of the Church, placed where the godly do
flock into the Lords assemblies) which shine as the clear waters in the pond,
for judgment and knowledge: for delivery of doctrine are as the flowing of
those waters: for wisdom in searching and waighing, preparing and fitting of
it, may be compared unto the workmen by whom those pondes were artificially
made, and to their cunning workemanshippe. Thy nose straight and comely; as
quick a judgment in discerning doctrines, as the nose has in discerning
smelles.

VERSE. 15. That which on thy head is put upon thee, is like to crimson, and the
fillet of thy head is like to purple, a King might be tied to these walks.

The ceremonies, as it were the ornaments of thy head, both the haire-lace and
the borders, and all thy whole attire are for comlines and good order of
special account, and a great grace unto thee: no less then skarlet and
purple. There is no King in the world but might find in his heart to be tied to
these walks, and to be held prisoner in the sight of thee, and of the bewty of
thy assemblies. So great is thy glory in comparison of all the vain pomp of
this present world.

VERSE. 16. How fair thou art, and how delectable O Love with these pleasures.

I cannot hold, but I must cry out with an admiraon of thy bewty, that thou art
exceeding fair and amiable, not thy self only, but all that is about thee: O
love only to be beloved.

VERSE. 17. This thy stature is like a palm tree, and thy breasts like clusters
of grapes.

Thy whole body straight, strong, and of a comely stature. Thy Teates as
berries.

VERSE. 18. I say I will get up upon the palm tree, I will take hold of her
branches, and thy breasts shall now be like the clusters of the vine, and the
smell of thy nose like apples.

But I will not leave thee so, I give thee my word for it, (and that I promise
be sure I will perform) I will prune and purge thee that thou shall be all
fruitful, redolent, and fragrant. Thy teates as the clusters of grapes, full
of the sweet iuce of the milk of the Word of God. Thy nose shall both give
and receive a smell of apples, that thou may be as well meat as drink unto
the soul.

VERSE. 19. And thy pallat as wine of the best smell, frisking, lively, upright,
making the lips of those that are asleep to speak.

Yea thy tongue (the preaching of the Gospel) shall be as pure, strong and
pleasant wine of the best smell and savor, sprinckling, and leaping lovely,
frisking in the cup; whereby even those that sleep, and are dead in their
sins and trespasses shall be awakned, and with new lips and words sound
forth thy praise.

CHAP. VII.
CHVRCH.
VERSE. 1. I am my well-beloueds, since his desire is toward me.

THis comfortable speech of Christ unto his Church does so refresh her, that
first she breketh forth into thankfulness for his mercy: In regard whereof
she professes she is wholly his, whose affection she finds to be so
wonderful toward her, that he loved her, when she cared not for him: followed
her, when she refused him: called her back, when she ran away from him:
pardoned her, when she offended him: gave himself anew unto her, when she had
forsaken him: seated her in Heaven, when she was in the lowest hell.

VERSE. 2 Go to, my well-beloued, let us go forth into the Country, let us
lodge by the Cypres.

Then she rouseth up her dull and h^auy spirits praying him, not alone, and by
himself apart to spend his hours in observing of the time of their spiritual
marriage, as he said before he did: since she also had a care and longing to
have the same consummate as well as he.

VERSE. 3 Let us get up early to the vine-yards: let us see if the vine budde,
the first grape open, the pomgranets sprout, there will I give my Loves to thee.

Promising withal not to be found henceforth unready, not to be any more so
drousie, so sluggish, so wretchlesse as she was: but hereafter night and day
to watch and attend that hour: and to enquire and learn after all the signs
and tokens, when she may come to be perfectly knit to Christ.

VERSE. 4 These lovely flowers that give a smell, and about our gates all
precious things, new, and also old, my well-beloued I keep in store for thee.

In the third place she consecrateth all she has unto him, and undertakes
in the mean time against the solemnization of that marriage, to provide all
manner of presents, flowers, garlands, and the like, which men at such times
are wont to straw at the thresholds, and in the entries. That is, to furnish
her self with spiritual graces, and to lay up in store plenty and variety of
heavenly treasure, things both new and old.

VERSE. 5. O that thou were as a brother unto me, sucking the breasts of my
mother: finding thee without I would kiss thee, also I should not be despised.

But because there rest two great works to be accomplished before that time
can come, the manifesting of God in the flesh, and the calling of the Gentiles,
in them both she shows her ardent affection, and therein the abundance of
her love and zeal to Christ.

Fourthly therefore you have her desire, which was the desire of all the
prophets and holy men, to see the day of Christ, the day of his coming in the
flesh: that he might be her brother and suck the breasts of her mother;
naturally of the virgin, spiritually of the Church universal, where Christ is
borne in the hearts of the faithful by his Word and Spirit: for so coming
among his own, she, his own and his only own, would kiss him and receive
him, both by faith and sense when she should see with her eyes that Word of
life, and behold him, and her hands should feel and handle him. So should she
be free from the scorns of wicked men, their contumelies and despites that
reproach the steps of Gods Messiah, and vex and molest the Church, whilst
she is in the expectation of that happy day.

VERSE. 6. I would lead thee, I would bring thee into the house of my mother
which teaches me: I would give thee to drink of spiced wine, of the juice of
the pomegranets.

Then (says she) there should be no delay: this, this should be the marriage
day. I would even now without more ado bring you into my mothers house, which
teaches and instructs me in all piety and good offices to you-wards, into
the Catholic Church of God: that all growing up into one body, whereof my
spouse is the head, I might at the last be presented as a chaste and pure
virgin, glorious to the Lord. Then would I give him pleasures and delights for
a King, and entertain him with a most royal banquet of the graces of Gods
spirit.

VERSE. 7. His left hand under my head, and his right hand embracing me,

VERSE. 8. I adjure you, ye daughters of Jerusalem, why should you stir up,
or why should you waken this love until he please?

I have sweet fellowshippe and rest with him: neither whilst thus I were in
his arms, and under his embracings, should any the least offense be given to
him, I would be careful to shun all occasions of any more displeasing my
love, or of causing him to retire from me.

VERSE. 9. Who is she that comes up out of the wilderness, ready to join her
self to her welbelo^ed? under the very Appletree I waken thee, where thy
mother was in labor of thee, where she was in labor that bare thee.

Having thus set forth her desire of Christ's incarnation, now she bestows
many sweet and gracious words to express and amplify the vehemency of this
love. First, by the duties she will perform unto him: great in themselves,
but greater if you compare these duties of hers, with those that are to be
looked for from other women. Was there ever (says she) any woman in the
world, that would endure those labors, and take upon her such perils as I do
to join herself to her beloved? But I by faith overcome all difficulties to
come to thee. It is a small thing in mine eyes, which to others seems so hard,
to put off the old man, to renounce this present wicked world, wherein is no
pleasure nor sound delight, but a very wilderness and a desert, that I may
find thee out, and present my duties to thee: even in that sweet and blessed
place where thy mother (after the manner of other women, sin excepted) fell
in travail of thee. Let me for the certeinety and secret of this wonderful
hidden mystery once again speak it, where she fell in travail that did
bear thee. This labor, this toil may be an argument what and how great my
love is unto thee.

VERSE. 10. O set me as a seal on thy heart, as a seal on thine arm: for love
is strong as death; zeal, hard as the grave. The Coals thereof are Coals,
nay a fire of the flame of Iah.

O do thou love me again, for this love should be mutual. Have me in thy
mind, with an earnest and continual remembrance of me, set me before thine
eyes, imprint me upon thine hand, as an inseparable ornament of thy glory, so
as the wife is to her husband.

The second amplification of her love, is by the properties adjoined to it, set
forth by many elegant and apt similitudes. It is most vehement, most ardent,
most constant, like to death which deuoureth all, or as the dominion of death
which overcomes all. God himself (the mighty IAH) has kindled it in our
hearts by the powerful light of his holy spirit never to go out.

VERSE. 11* Much waters cannot quench this love, nor the floods drown it. If a
man would give all the substance of his house for this love, it should utterly
be contemned.

It is firm and invincible, that neither force, ^raud, nor promises, troubles
and persecutions, pleasures or commodities, no height or depth, things present
or things to come are able to prevail against it.

CHAP. VIII.
CHVRCH.
VERSE 1 We have a sister, a little one, and she has no breasts: what shall we
do for our sister in the day that she shall be talked of?

FIfthly, the Church of Solomon's time, as maimed and imperfect till the
fullness of the Gentiles should com in, which then were a few, and rarely
called, and without any ministry of their own (as it were) breasts to give
suck, consulteth with Christ what course to take when the mystery so long kept
secret shall be reucaled and made known for their conversion. How she may
behave her self in helping and administering unto them: what Christ will be
pleased to do in giving an increase and blessing. And thus she does further
testify her love to Christ, by her love unto their common sister. Sister to
her, by the seed of the same spirtit whereby they are both begotten unto God:
sister to Christ, by his assuming of the same nature to him.

CHRIST and his CHVRCH both.
VERSE. 2. When a wall is to be built we will build it in a palace of silver.
When as a gate is to be fenced, we will fence it about with board of Cedre.

Christ and she make answer, telling what they mean to do: that since when
that time shall be, it is not possible to contain the Church within the narrow
bounds of Jerusalem, which of a particular Church of the Jews shall then be
made the Catholic Church of all the world; a new manner of City must be
built: wherefore plucking down the mid wall of partition, a new wall, and new
gates shall be made to enlarge the City: a new government and discipline,
new officers, pastors teachers, etc. to administer it. New, not in substance,
which has always been the same, even among the Jews, but newly stablished,
be w^ified, and translated to the Gentiles. Neither shall this be any disgrace
to the now Jerusalem, every thing shall be then so far more glorious and
more excellent. A house of saints shall be erected by the preaching of the
Gospel, to be the Palace of the great King: a stately and magnificent
palace, all of silver, which is the precious graces of Gods spirit: the Gate,
the ever lasting gate of this Palace, where the King of glory does come in,
the gate of our heart, shall be seeled with faith more precious then Cedre, by
which only we receive him and make him ours.

CHVRCH.
VERSE. 3. I being a wall, and my breasts as towers, then shall I be in his
e^^es as one that finds peace.

To this the Church (in the sixth and last place) replyeth that she is so far
from enuving this great good unto her sister, as contrariwise when she (the
Church of the Jews) shall herself become of the same society, and by the
communion of the Spirit, grow up with the Gentiles into one City embracing
Christ, whom so long they shall have rejected, and making one glorious part,
both for government and doctrine of the heavenly Tsion, Jerusalem which is
above, she shall then obtain a great part of her desire, and be in a manner
perfected, not being far from that rest and happiness which she longs after,
to be received into the perfect communion of her spouse: For these are every
where called the last days.

CHRIST.
VERSE. 4. Solomon had a vineyard in a fruit full place; he let out the
vineyard to keepers. Every one brings for the fruit of it a thousand pieces
of silver.

Christ again shows how precious the Church is in his eyes, and how much he
does regard her, for this and all other her excellent parts: and that by a
comparison in this wise; There is no King (says he) and take Solomon the
wisest, that if he have a vineyard in a fruitful place, is able himself to
dress and to manure it, or to take all the fruit, but must be driven to let it
forth to others: And though his tenaunts and farmours pay him a rent for it,
yet some part they look, and so reason would, they should keep unto themselves.

VERSE. 5 My vineyard which I have, is still before my face. I receive both that
thousand of thine, O Solomon, and also the two hundred pieces of those that
keep the fruit of it.

But I (says Christ) neither let out the Church, my vineyard, nor suffer any
part of the profits to go from me: for all grow up into that body, whereof I
am the head* I purse up all the rent, and that also that Solomon's lessees were
to have: So jealous I am of mine inheritance, and have mine eyes always upon
it, being ever present with it, and in the midst of it.

VERSE. 6. O thou, she that set in these gardaines, to the fellows which
attend unto thy voice, preach me.

Hereupon he concludes leaving this commandment as his last farewell to all the
Churches, which are his gardaines wherein he walks and makes his plants to
grow, that in season, and out of season they preach the gospel to all that
have a mind to attend unto the wholesome doctrine.

CHVRCH*
VERSE. 7. Fly to us my well-beloued, and he thou like to the r^e or young
heart, Othou that dwell in the mountains of spices.

She shuts the book up, undertaking to do that which he enioyneth: but
knowing her own inability prays him to be present with her, to give her
strength to do it from his throne of glory, which is in the highest heavens,
and spedily to accomplish all his promises by his last and glorious coming.

Amen. Even so come Lord I^svs.
OBSERVATIONS on the Song of Solomon for the comfort of every true Beli^^er.
CHAP. I.
VERSE. 1. [A song etc.]

THis excellent Song concontaineth a description of the state of a Christian
man after he is once united unto Christ, during our whole life, whilst we
walk here by faith, and not by sight. This is the sum of the Book. The
parts are two, One the state of such a Christian when his faith and holiness
of life are at the highest, his sign in the Appogaeon or midst of Heaven,
that it cannot alter any point but it must decline, when he saileth with wind
and weather, and has the Sunshine of Gods favor to go before him; that is
whilst he enjoys peace of conscience, quietness and tranquillity of mind,
and is free from those great offenses that make a kind of separation between
Christ and him, in the four first Chapters. The other part sets forth the
state of a true Christian, coming to himself after that earth linesse and
worldly pleasures have seized upon him, when the clouds and mistes of of his
own sinfulness, of drowsiness and carnal security, do ouercast the face of
the heavens, and darken and eclipse the brightness of his glory, in the four
last Chapters. The state of a Christian living in peace and quietness of a
good conscience, has three excellent steps. First his love of Christ, in the
first Chapter. Secondly the benefits here ceiu^th from him, in the Second
Chapter. 3. A desire to be made perfect Chap. 3. Whereunto Christ gives
answer, in the fourth Chapter.

The love of a Christian soul to Christ (which is not possible to be in any
till Christ have first loved him, and wrought in his heart a feeling of that
love) the holy Ghost does thus describe.

O) First the vehemence of his affection, noting true z^ale. For this love is
all fiery, and kindles and enflameth the very bowels of the heart.

Let him ^^sse, etc. Secondly a desire to be knit unto him as near as is
possible to enjoy his sweet and blessed conjunction.

For thy loves are excellent, better then wine.] Thirdly a preferring of the
love of Christ before all worldly things, and above all the pleasures and
delights of this present life.

Because etc.] Fourthly, a magnifying and extolling of Christ, whose very name
and the only remembrance of him is most sweet and fragrant, which draws the
Christian heart unto a love, and in love to an admiration of him.

The virgins.] This love if you consider the quality thereof, is chaste, holy,
pure, and they only love Christ who keep themselves undefiled from worldly
pollution and uncleanness.

Draw mee] The efficient cause is not in our selves, it comes from Christ
alone, who speaking to our heart by the ministry of the Word, and the sweet
allurements of his spirit, pulls us out of this present evil world, and
draws us after him.

Then will we run.] Hereby strength is put into us, which makes our feet
nimble, and shod with the preparation of the Gospel of peace to run after
Christ, and with might and maine to perform all holy duties to him,

Let the King] Whereunto we are enabled by the corroborating spirit of Christ,
into whose hands God the Father has committed all things, and given him all
power in Heaven and upon the earth, making him both Lord and Christ the King
and ruler of his Church.

Bring me into his primie chambers.] Who in his favor and princely bounty
communicates unto us more and more the rich graces and treasures of his
Spirit, makes us more inward with him, and and leads us as it were by the
hand into his privy chambers, those goodly rooms and parlours, where are all
the Jewels and precious things laid up for his people,

We will rejoice, etc.) This draws from us joy in the holy Ghost, glorious
and unspeakable.

We will record etc.) It makes us never to satisfy our selves in setting
forth and publishing unto other the sweet comforts we have in him.

They shall etc.) Whom also we desire to be made pertakers hereof, and to
love Christ as well as we.

Who in all rightnesse do love thee.) For such men only, the holy and
righteous are the silver trumpets fit to sound forth Gods praises in his
sanctuari^. O if we ever felt how sweet a thing it is to have his praises in
our mouth, let us not commit by word and deed, that through our own folly and
looseness so great a comfort should be taken from us.

I] Lastly we are carefully to remove all lets and impediments that may
hinder their approach to Christ.

(...)) Conflicts we have great and grievous with our own souls, many a pluck
and wrestle; but by faith we overcome them all.

black) We confess our own wretchedness of ourselves more black then any
blackamore, and therefore unworthy to be matched with so great a King: for we
are borne in sin and conceived in iniquity, and are by nature the children of
wrath, even we that live in the Church, and are borne within the outward
covenant, as well as other men. Ephesians. 2. Gal. 2.

but comlie.) But being purged and washed by the lauer of the new birth, we
are gracious and pleasing unto Christ, more amiable and bewtifull in his eyes
then Solomon with all his bravery could be to the eye of any mortal creature.

Look not upon me) True it is, the world sees not this honor which Gods
children have because it is spiritually discerned: it acknowledges not us
because it knows not him.

Yet the Christian man comfort^th himself himself in the testimony of his
own conscience, and and in Gods judgment and estimation of him.

because I am blackish) Though he carry about many remnants of sin, the
relics of his old Adam, and is manifoldly assaulted with the pricks and
temptations of the fle^^* For sin is in us as the spots are in the Leopard,
not by accident, but by nature, which no art can cure, no water wash off,
because they are not in the skin, but in the flesh and bones, in the sinowes
and in the most inner parts.

By this means it comes to pass that even a regenerate man falls many
times, and falls grievously and fearfully, lofeth of his hold, and of the
bewty that God has given him.

Howbeit the seed of God abiding in him makes that he cannot sin finally
and totally: for the oil of Gods spirit where with he is anointed, sets
the colors, which are of his own tempering, so sure on, and makes them
cleave so fast together, that it is impossible he should ever return to his
old hew, to be black, all black, coaleblack as he was before.

The holiness therefore of a Christian is always mingled with sin, his
silver with much dross, not as chafe is mingled with corn, but as wine is
mingled with water, or as when two colors, black and white are mingled
together, that there is no part white but it is blackish also.

Because the Sun has cast his beams upon me) Hence it is that a Christian
is subject to much affliction, anguish and distress, as it were to the
scorching of the Sun, which turn all his moisture into the drought of Somer.

Because the sons of my mother incensed against me) Especially his sins and
infirmities expose him to the taunts and reproaches of the wicked, open men's
mouths against him, and against the holy truth of God for his sake, who upon
every slip are ready to take advantage to scandalize the Gospel.

Hereby a christian is exceedingly humbled, and cast down, and driven to
renounce and for sake arms. Neither can he ever, satisfy his own soul, but
d^^reth always to rest there, without any the least interruption.

It is the voice) The cause of all comfort to the Church is the voice of
Christ, speaking to her heart, and moving and persuading her by his Spirit.

His dealings are by degrees, and he uses not (ordinaryly) to utter all his
favors at once.

of my well-beloued:) First is his power supporting us, that in our spiritual
sickness the spirit be not quenched.

Behold him,) Then he speaks a far of, whispering as it were in our heart.

he comes) After he comes neeror, at the length he is himself present.

Lepping, skipping) When he comes, his coming has four excellent
properties. First it is hastily and with speed.

Upon these hills, upon these hillocks,) Secondly, no sins of ours, no
unworthiness, can hinder his approach: all things, high or low, great or
small offenses, are too little for to stay him.

Stands behind etc.) Thirdly, he does not com so to our senses as we desire:
he communicates not* his whole presence with us, but stands as it were
behind the wall: so as there is a space between him and us to keep him from
us: He looks but out of a casement, or as it were thorough a Lattice: for
now we see but darkely, and in a riddle.

Showing himself cheerfully.] Yet never the le^^e (which is the fourth thing)
this fight of his is most cheerful, most sweet unto the soul that loves
him: no p^ant, no tree, no flower, so delightful to the outward senses, as
Christ is to the true believer.

My well-beloued spake] But the dull heart of a Christian man had need of the
continual voice of Christ, that he should call and cry unto us, speak, and
speak again,

arise, etc.) (And the same words again elegantly repeated in the end of the
thirteenth verse) Yea v^e all art and eloquence that may be to stir us up to
seek him,

my fellow friend, my fair one) And speak with all kindness unto us, that we
may the better be persuaded he does it for our good.

And here is the honor a Christian man has, that Christ calls us not any
more servants, but his friends, and fellows.

It is Christ that speaks in the ministry of the Word. And we must hear the
messengers whom he does send, as if Christ by them besought us: be reconciled
unto God. 1. Cor. 5.20.

For behold,) The cause why Christ withdraws himself is our own security
and negligence in seeking to him, our slacknes in prayer and other holy
exercises.

The winter etc.] The time whilst we lie in sin is a heavy and
discomfortable time; there is no pleasure to be taken in the base service of
such a master: for what fruit can we have of those things whereof we must be
ashamed? the whole life of a wicked man, what is it else but a sea of misery,
full of fears and terrors, and expectation of the judgment to come? which
should make us hastily and with speed to labor to wind out of it.

The flowers appear etc.) Contrariwise a Christian man's life (whatsoever the
world deem) is the only sweet and comfortable life, like to the pleasant
spring that refreshes all the senses: as having all things fresh and green,
and flourishing to the eyes: all dainty to be cut and pruined with the hands:
all cheerful to the ears in the melodious noise and singing of the birds:
all fruitful and sweet to the taste: all odoriferous and pleasing to the
smell: For a Christian man has peace of conscience that passes understanding,
which the world has not, nor knows what it means: a Christian man is full
of joy wrought in him by the holy Ghost, whom the world cannot receive: a
christian man whatsoever his estate be, good or bad, strengthens himself in
his God, as David did when his City was spoiled, 1. Sam. 30. 6.
only the bare walls left, both his wives carried away captives, and the
people ready to stone him to death: for well he is assured that nothing falls
out but for his good, and in love and mercy to him; a Christian man has
access to God in all his troubles and adversities, familiar conference and
communication with him, and goes boldly unto the thron of grace: a christian
man is endued with spiritual glory and wisdom, which doubleth the beauty
of his countenance, and makes his face to shine: a Christian man has the holy
Angels of God, those glorious and most renowned creatures, to be as it were his
servants, for they serve Christ, with whom he is one: Lastly, a Christian man's
honor is not in regard of this life only, but as a crown of future
excellency, he has fastened in his heart the anchor of hope to stay and
quiet his mind in all the stonnes and tempests here, till he arrive at the
haven of all his rest.

Arise)^ Now the more these things excel, the more we must enforce our selves
to follow after them: to pursue them speedily, to go out of our selves and to
come to Christ: by any means taking heed that the pleasures of Sodom, the
filthy pleasures of our former life, and of this wicked world, make us not
look back unto them, but to cast them off with all our might, and to fly
aware from them.

My fellow-friend, my fair one etc.) There is not any so effectual an
argument to provoke men hereunto, and to stir us up to godliness, as the
consideration of Gods mercy, and of the dignity we have by Christ.

My Dove that dwelleft in the cliftes, etc.) But though the state of a
Christian man be such and so excellent as before has been described, yet to
humble him that he be not proud, God leaves, as it were, pricks and thomes
in his side, as he did to the Israelites, manifold infirmities, which make him
to blush for shame, and not to dare to show his face: thinking in very truth
most basely of himself, and that he is of all the world the meanest: not
worthy to come almost in the sight and press of men: how much less into the
glorious sight and presence of God?

Show me thy face make me hear thy voice:) Notwithstanding the testimony of
his conscience; walking in simplicity and sincerity as before the Lord,
makes him (emboldned by the word of God) to lift up his head to come before
him, and to call upon his name.

For thy voice is sweet, and thy face comely.) Which the Lord graciously
accepts, and is well pleased with: accounting his person holy, and his
prayers, and other the fruits of his faith, sweet and acceptable through
Christ.

Foxes,) It is the perpetual lot and condition of the Church to nourish in her
bosom secret enemies, that closely undermine the good of it: for all that are
in Israel are not of Israel; and many are among us that are not of us: but
God in his good time will discover hypocrites; how foxe-like soever they carry
themselves.

Take us, etc.) Some men's sins are manifest afor^hand, going before unto
judgment, and some men's follow after; but those that are of this sort cannot
be hidden. The sword of discipline is to be drawn by the Ministers, and other
into whose hand God has put it, for the cutting off of known offenders, and
removing of all offenses.

The Foxes,) Great ones are not to be spared though they be as jolly foxes, as
Herod was.

The little Foxes;] The small cubbes are not to be neglected, though they can
but nibble at the Vines.

Which destroy the Vines:) All evil, and occasion, and show of evil is to
be removed: so much the more carefully, because from little beginnings grow
great proceedings: and a small offense in the Church of God, many times,
turns men away from the love of the truth before they be settled in it.

Whilst our Vines are bringing forth the first grape.) Satan also is ever
busiest to seduce and draw us from the faith, when Christ is first borne
within us: waiting to eat up, and destroy the children of the Church as soon
as she is delivered.

Hereby the use, the excellency, the necessity of discipline is seen: it
restrains offenses that they break not forth, it staieth them where a breach
is begun.

My Well-beloved,) After many conflicts with our own soul, God makes us in
the end of feel more lively our fellowship with Christ.

Is mine, and I am his,) The root and fountain of all our happiness, is our
conjunction, and communion with him.

Who feeds in Lillies:) The fruits coming from it, excellent: for CHRIST
our Shepherd feeds his flock in most sweet and delicate pastures.

Till that day breath*) The two principal things which a Christian is to wish
for, and desire after, are perfection in heaven by the coming of Jesus Christ,
and constancy and perseverance unto that day.

And these mistes fly away.) In this life many mistes and shadows are cast
before our eyes, much ignorance of God and of holy duties: which that bright
and glorious coming of our Lord and Savior, (as the rising of the Sun,)
will scatter all away.

CHAP. III.
VERSE. 1. 2. In my bed anightes, etc.

THe child of God has many times great unquietness of mind for lack of the
feeling of Christ.

Being so affected as a man desolate and without comfort, he seeks after him
in all places and at all times, in the night and by day, a bed and when he is
up, at home and without doors; in the City, by the streets and the lanes,
and abroad in the fields; by prinate prayer and meditation with his own soul:
by using the help, counsel, and advise of godly brethren; by seeking for
comfort at the hands of the Ministers of the word. Such is his desire and
vnwear^ed travail for the finding of Christ.

Here is the use we should make of being private: and this is a holy spending
of our time, when we employ it in stirring up our souls to be assured of the
mercies of God in Christ: not, (as the world for the most part does), in
studying how to wreake our malice, or to compass other wicked desires, neither
yet in idle and fruitless pastimes.

himself, to go out of himself, and to be no body in his own e^es.

But yet he looks unto Christ, whose garments of righteousness are broad,
and large and wide enough to cover all imperfections: and who of his free grace
is pleased to accept him, and to bestow upon him the ornaments of his Spirit,
whereby howsoever in much weakness and in the midst of many fraileties,
yet in the truth and soundness of his heart, being sincere and upright before
him, albeit the least of these things were enough to discourage him from ever
coming unto Christ, or having any more to do with him, yet neither for other
men's reproaches, nor for all the conscience of his own infirmities he leaves
to seek unto him, to call and cry upon him, for whither else should he go
but to things that cannot profit?

have made me a keeper of other vines, etc.) There comes yet a further
mischief; home-enemies, borne and bredde in the bosom of the Church, which as
vipers eat out the bowels of their mother, and make natural rents, and
breaches among their own brethren.

For God evermore leaves in his Church some unquiet spirits to gall them, for
the trial of the faith of his children, that the approved among them may be
known.

And let men pretend what they lift, set what face they will upon it, it is the
hatred of the truth, and of the professors of the truth, that makes them so to
stir: because worldly minded men cannot abide the sincerity of the Gospel,
that fights against their pomp, pride, and ambitious designs.

And howsoever they lay the fault from themselves, and cast it upon Gods
children, that stick close to the ordinances of God, as wayward and conceited
persons: yet in truth they are the factious, and those that make diffention in
the Church.

Howbeit the best men that are, the holiest Churches, and most reformed
assemblies, are often times turned out of the right way, partly mislead and
seduced through a vain al^urement of humane wisdom, partly carried away by
the violence of the storms and tempests that these men raise against them.

Yet we must not please our selves in the deformities of the Church: our care
must be to have al according to the pattern that was showed in the mount.

Show me where thou feedest, etc.) To this purpose we are wholly and throughout
to submit our selves to be ordered by the chief shepherd and Bishop of our
souls, for he only must direct all necessary things in his Church by the
wisdom of his Word: from him we receive the food of sweet and heavenly
doctrine: he it is that orde^eth our labor and our rest, even at noone day,
the whole government and guidance of his house.

O thou whom my soul loves.) The sins of Gods elect, through his wonderful
wisdom that brings light out of darkness, and good out of evil; turn
unto their comfort, make them more to call and cry upon Christ, to love him
more with all their soul, to desire more earnestly to be joined unto him, and
to use all holy means of attaining thereunto.

Atnoone) And that with such affection, that when other are resting, or taking
their repasts, the christian man can have no comfort, nor eat his mea^e
unless he be with Christ.

Thou feedest, thou make thy flock to l^e, etc.) This means of coming unto
Christ is the ministry of the word in the Church and Congregation of Saints,
which are, as it were, one fould under one Shepherd, feeding with the food of
life.

For why should I be as one that pitcheth her tents by the flock of thy
companions) Herein great care and circumspection is to be had, that we join
not our selves to false teachers which com under the name of Christ's
shepherds, but inwardly are ravening wolves.

If thou know not) In which behalf the faithful man though he be in Christ,
and shine in the graces of the Spirit, yet labors of much ignorance, and is
many times overtaken, and therefore had need to be instructed and set into the
way:

Get thee out, etc.) Which is to try the Spirits when(...) they be from God,
for the touchstone of all doctrine is by the word, if it be heavenly and
celestial, not savoring of the world.

Unto the troop, etc) And being so, as many as walk according to this rule,
the b^dge of the Israel of God, peace is upon them and mercy, such a man's
person is accepted to God, the graces and ornaments of the Spirit in him are
sweet and pleasing.

Borders of gold we will make, Yea God, the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost, the most blessed and glorious Trinity, will dock and set him forth more
and more, and bestow more good things upon him; and more enrich him with all
heavenly blessings, transforming him from glory unto glory.

My Spicknard gives forth his smell.) These promises comfort the Christian
soul, and bring a sweet refreshing to the senses.

My Welbe loved is as a bundle of myr^h,) Acknowledging all to come from
Christ, and from the virtue of his power.

Whose excellency we must consider not simply, as it rests in himself, but
as by the sweet influence of his graces, he makes us pertakers of it.

And since he vouc^a^eth to bestow these sweet things upon us ^u^n now whilst
we are strangers from him, and walk h^^^eby faith and not by sight, what and
how great things must those needs be which then we shall enjoy when Christ,
which is our life shall reneale himself from heaven?

Behold th^^ art fair and^.) In the joyful expectation of which happy and
blessed time that we faint not nor be discouraged, Christ does still confirm
his love unto us: and by his Word and the comfort of his spirit assures us how
pleasing we are in his sight: both thorough our imputed righteousness, which
makes us fair, all fair before him: and for the fruits of holiness and
sanctification in a doue-like chastity, and simplicity without any guile.

Behold thou art etc.) We again return the praise of all this unto him who
is our only righteousness, and through whom alone it is that we bring forth
fruit always fresh and flourishing, and acceptable unto God through the
communion we have with Christ, dwelling and walking in the midst of us as in
his house and temples.

The bewty of our houses etc.) The excellency of Christ's glory is to be seen in
the public assemblies: we must not look for it in civil Courts and meetings,
at faires and at markets, in pastimes and sports; in banqu^ting and feastings,
though all these in their time and place be lawful. But if we will see Christ
in his bewty we must go to the Church and congregation of his Saints, where
the same shines and shew^th it self in the ministry of the Word and
Sacraments.

CHAP. II.
VERSE. 1. I am the Rose etc.]

All the good we have comes from Christ, who is most sweet himself, and the
author of sweetness unto others.

As a Lilly.) The Christian thus formed and fashioned by the mighty operation
of his spirit, excels all the world beside: for in them only are all sound
virtues to be found; Piety, Justice, chastity, temperance, prudence, for
titude, magnanimity, which either are not at all in the wicked, or at the least
they have but a shadow of them: dead and dry stalks only, the flower and
blossoms are in the godly.

among th^rnes.) All men before they be in Christ are but thorns: not only
unprofitable and void of good, but noxious and hurtful, replenished with all
evil.

As the Apletree etc. so is my well-beloued,) The Christian man never
satisfies himself with the magnifying of Christ,

under his shadow etc.) The shade of whose bowghs does so refresh his soul,
that he delights to dwell and have his aboade under it for ever: for he
only it is that with his sweet shadow fenceth us from the burning wrath of God.

For sweet is his fruit etc.] Being renewed by the holy Ghost he conceiueth
an incomparable delight in those good things that are so wrought within him: In
comparison whereof he despises all the gew-gawes, that the world so admireth
and doateth after.

He brought me into his banqueting house,) The author of our vocation,
regeneration, justification, sanctification, and salvation is Christ, whose
own most sacred hands lead us to this sweet and delightful feast.

ha^ing love) The cause hereof is not in us, but from himself, first loving
us, and by his love as by a banner set before us, drawing us to love him
again, and to range our selves under his colors.

Yea, keeping us so near about him and so fast unto him, by the power of his
Spirit, that it is impossible any should pull us out of his hands, or that so
much as one of those should perish, whom God the Father has given unto Christ.

Stay me, hold me up.) The isntrumental cause he uses is the preaching of the
Word by his ministers and servants.

with these flagons, with these apples:) The Word I say of reconciliation,
which is the joyful and glad tidings of our peace made with God, sweeter then
the honey and the honey comb, and therefore compared here to wine and apples:
not the doctrine of the Law, which is the ministry of death and condemnation.

The assemblies of the Church where this heavenly Gospel sounds, are
excellent helps to quicken our dullness, and to make us feel a greater
measure of the love of Christ:

For I am sick of love.) For the heart of a faithful man, even when it is best
affected, is subject to many qualmes, to much vexation and disquietnesse of
mind: to be even sick as it were, for the love of Christ because he cannot
enjoy him as he would. And then is the word preached most sweet unto his
soul.

His left etc) The whole virtue and power of the ministry comes from Christ:
they water and plant, but he only gives the increase, they do their worthy
endeavor to stay and underprop our faith, but that notwithstanding, we shall
shall soon fall to the ground, if Christ put not to his hand to keep us up.

Left hand, right hand.) Yea such is our vntow. ardnesse, the natural
corruption that is in us, so great, the work of our new birth so marvelous,
so hard to be brought about, and to go through with, that we had need of
both the hands of Christ to be about us, to claspe and hold us fast, least we
fall away.

I adjure etc.) The believer is wrapped with an exceeding joy and comfort when
once he feels himself to have Christ, and to lie as it were in his I
sought:) The conferences of Gods children, their confession of sins one unto
another, and mutual prayers for each other, whet one an other, as iron
whetteth iron: and it is a sweet thing to converse with such, by whom we may
this way receive comfort.

The Wath-men etc.) Especially the holy Ministry shines most, and is the
sanctified means to bring us to Christ.

Yet God delayeth his comforts many times, even to those that with upright
hearts and consciences from the bottom of their soul seek after him:

That we may learn nor to depend upon the means, but upon God, and to
attribute all to his grace and virtue.

Christ therefore is not always to be found to our mind, nor in our sense
and feeling, though we use all good and holy means for it.

Howbeit, for all that, he is indeed always present with his people.

did ye see him whom my soul loves?) The love of Christ cannot be concealed:
a man may sooner keep in the wind with his fiste, or stay the ointment of his
right hand from bewraying it self (as it is Prou. 27. 16) then not to utter
his love to Christ, whomsoever he meet, fitly withal. I spoke of thy Law
before Princes (says David) and was not ashamed.

I found him, etc.) Christ being sought carefully and diligently, will at the
length be found according to his promise; Seek and ye shall (...), etc. he
never returns the desires of his servants empty.

When I had past but a little from them) This he does many times when there is
least hope, and when all means have been used and do not prevail: for even
the seed of the word brings not forth fruit by and by, but lurketh and is
buried under the cloddes of the earth till the time appointed for it to shoot
up and to show it self.

whom my soul loves.) He is then sweetest to us when he has seemed for a
while to absent himself, and to have no mind of us. And that makes him so often
to withdraw the comfortable beams of his glorious presence, that so he might
whet our affections, and set an edge upon them.

I took hold on him,) For thus when he shows himself again unto us, we
begin to have our faith revived, we lay faster hold upon him, and with all
the powers of our soul, cleave as near unto him as ever we did before.

So we come to be possessed of spiritual joy and gladness, then we are
brought abedde (as it were) in a sweet sleep of the peace of conscience, and
then our heart is lifted up to heaven with holy prayers and meditations.

not to let him go till, etc.) The faithful man, with purpose of heart
cleaves to the Lord, (as Barnabas did exhort, Act 11. 23.) and has a holy
purpose, and Christian resolution never to part from him unto the end.

I adjure you etc.) When a Christian comes to have a feeling and apprehension
of Christ, (especially after he has once found what it is to lack him) he is
careful to avoid all occasions that may give Christ cause to depart.

Come up,) The thing that above all other affects a Christian man's heart is
the love and meditation of the heavenly glory;

Out of the wilderness,) In comparison whereof he esteems this world as a
wilderness in regard of fruitful and pleasant fields. And longs to come out
of these rough and desert places into the Lords champions.

Who is she) It is indeed a hard piece of work to leave the world, to deny
ungodliness and worldly vanities, and to lift a man's heart and affection up to
heaven:

Becensed with Mirrh, etc.) None can attain unto it, but those whose eyes God
shall clear to see and behold the excellency of that place.

For the heavenly glory does incomparably excel: there is all safety to the
person:

All sweetness to the senses:

All precious things and riches, all pleasures and delights.

The glory of all the earth, Solomon himself in his greatest bravery, is not
to be compared to it.

The glory, the pleasures and delights, which God gives here to the sons
of men, for their comfort and rejoicing, must affect our hearts with a holy
meditation to think how far more excellent those things be that are above:
and make us thereby the more earnestly to seek after them. This is the holy
use we are to make of the lawefull pleasures of this life.

Comeforth and look ye daughters of Tsijon,) It is the duty of a Christian
man to stir up other to this heavenly meditation, as Christ by his Spirit has
stirred him.

CHAP. IIII.
VERSE. 1. Behold, thou art etc.]

CHrist much delights to see a Christian so affected as is set forth in the
former Chapter, and renders therefore due commendations: praising him for the
graces that himself has bestowed upon him, and so crowning his own gifts in
him: with all, making him to see what is his blessed estate both in this life,
and in the life to come.

Fair,) The true belieuer thorough faith in Christ, is most perfectly holy and
righteous, both wholly and in every part: as having in him obtained by
imputation the whole righteousness of the law.

The virtues which a Christian is most to labor for, and which beseem him
best are,

thine eyes are Doves eyes,) First, Judgment and singleness in all his
actions, to have his eyes in his head as Solomon speaks; Ecclesiast. 2. 14.

Thy heart is like etc.) Secondly, sobriety and a comely carriage.

Thy teeth, etc.) Thirdly, holding fast the truth of God by meditation and
chewing of it.

Thy lips, etc.) Fourthly, Gracious speech, that our words be powdered with
falt, for the profit and edification of the hearers.

Thy temples.) Fifthly, to affect more spiritual graces then worldly things.

Thy neck is as a Tower, etc.) Sixthly, Constancy in the waics of godliness,

A thousand Targets hang, etc.] And to have always in a readiness the
complete armor of Christian Soldiers.

Thy two breasts, etc.) Seauently, To long after the sincere milk of the word
of God that we may grow up by it. 1. Pet. 2. 2.

I will get me etc.) Christ is always present and at hand to every true
believer, even now whilst he is in the pilgrimage of this world to comfort
him in all his necessities.

These shadowes] The holiness and sanctification which we have wrought within
us in this life, is weak and imperfect, subject to much ignorance, and many
shadows, so as we are never here to dream of purity or perfection.

Fly away.) But the time shall certainly come when we shall put off these
r^gges and be clothed with immortality.

Thou art all saire, etc.) Our holiness now imperfect and mingled with so much
corruption shall be made perfect that no spot or wemme shall be left in us.

With ^e shall thou come] None shall perish of those whom God has given unto
Christ.

From Lebanon, from the top of Amana, from the top of Sheuir and Hermon,) The
furthest and most remote places cannot keep them: the craggedest and roughest
thickets cannot detain them; the height nor depth cannot conceal them:

From the dens of Lions: From the mountains of Leopards,) The cruellest and
most savage enemies of the Church shall not be able to hurt them: nor hell
gates to prevail against them. Here is the comfort of Gods people.

But this we must arm our selves for, that whilst we continue here, we are
to live amongst Lions and Leopards, barbarous and fierce enemies, Tyrants and
oppressors: we must look for banishments and imprisonments, to wander in the
mountains, to be thrown in holes and dens, to be afflicted, persecuted,
diftressed (as you have examples of it, Heb. 11.) This is the perpetual
condition of the Church of God.

By how much the more we are to wait for that happy time, when as in the
year of Iubile we shall all return unto our possessions again: when we
shall hear no more the voice of the exactor, and when the servant shall be
free from his Master.

Thou shall look down from, etc.) This shall heap up joy upon joy to us,
that we shall then look over these men, that is, triumph over them, that now
so dominier over us: when not only out selves shall be in heaven in the place
of all happiness, but have before us and in our eyes the sight of their misery.

Thou have ravished etc.) God is not only delighted, but in a manner ravished
with a love of his graces in us.

my sister) For he does behold us as the brethren of Christ: brethren both by
unity of the same nature, and communion with one heavenly Father.

Spouse) Yea nearer then brethren, being even here espoused and betrothed to
him.

How fair etc.) And kept by the anointing of the spirit, that we cannot fall
away, but abide and continue his for ever,

Which gives us more contentment and heartsease, then all pleasures that are
earthly.

Thy lips drop the honey comb: etc) The tongue of every Christian (not only of
a minister in the pulpit, though that especially) and the dropping of his
lips, even in his private and familiar discourses, is sweeter then the honey
or the honycombe, as that which gives grace to the hearers:

the savor of thy garments, is as the savor of Lebanon.) Such an one is most
pleasing to God, of as fragrant a smell as the smell of Libanus.

My sister spouse is) The Church of God has two singular prerogatives above
all other companies and societies of men.

as a gardaine etc.) First it is the pillar and ground of truth: for there
only are the plants of the Lords own setting there is the well head, and
there only flow the sweet streams of pure doctrine. It is vari^ty, error,
superstition and deceit whatsoever comes not from hence.

shut, sealed up,) Secondly it is holy, no polluted or unclean thing can enter
or have aboade in it.

spring, fountain,) The preaching of the Word is as a spring that warereth and
makes to increase all the beds and plants of the Church of God.

A Christian man knowing his fruits to he most sweet unto God,

Is desirous to bring forth plenty, and acknowledging al to com from God,
continually prays to be inspired and breathed upon by his good spirit to
perform it.

fountain of the gardaines) Christ is the only fountain that watreth all the
parts of the Church his gardaine: the ministers are only his instruments, and
can do nothing but water and plant: all the increase comes from Christ.

O well of living waters, etc.) The graces he bestows upon his Church are
abundant and infinite, as living waters that continually spring and flow
abroad.

O North, O South, etc. Let those waters ouerslow the spices of it.) He never
denies his spirit to those that ask it with a true faith, but is ready to
grant the desire of his servants to make them fruitful, and abundant in
every good grace.

Let my wellbeloued come, etc.) And the thing which a Christian man above all
the world desires, is the presence of Christ.

I am come into my gardaine etc.) Yet there being somewhat always corrupt in
our desires, it is many times good for Gods faithful children to go without
the things, even the spiritual and heavenly things, which they most long after.

^^te my fellow friends etc.) The Spirits of the righteous deceased, do now
enjoy in heaven everlasting happiness.

This is our comfort against death; that thereby we change the miseries of this
life with unspeakable and endless pleasures.

CHAP. V.
VERSE. 1. I being asleep,]

A Christian man, even the best, is many times overtaken with earn all
security, falls into a trance or slumber, forgets himself and his
heavenly calling, and is lulled a sleep with the pleasures and delights of
this present wicked world: Not keeping that watch over his own soul which he
ought: ( Matthew 25. They all slept: the wise virgins as well as the foolish)

but my heart awake.) Yet his faith (for all that) gooth not quite out but
lies hid and covered under the ashes, it is smothered, but not extinct; as may
be seen in Peter, of whom our Savior bears witness, I have prayed for
thee, that, in the midst of that most dangerous fall, thy faith should not
fail.

Here is one maine difference between the children of God and others: One
sin of infirmity, the other wilfully: all sleep indeed, but the godly do
but slumber or wink, when the wicked sleep soundly, sleep heart and all,
they sleep that they snort again, the wicked commit sin with all their
heart, from the very soul (as the Prophet (...) children have a resistance
within, and strive and sight against it in some sort, even then when they are
most overtaken with the (...) of the flesh: their heart is sound with God:
sin dwells, but reigns not in them: they groan^ under the burden of it,
mislike it as touching the inner man: there is a strife within them in their
very bowels, as beetweene Rebeccaes twins (a type of the Church, and of
every faithful man.) To conclude, in the godly there is a striffe between
their heart and their heart, but in the wicked only between their heart and
their conscience.

I being) The Christian delights to make consession of his sins, to
acknowledge his own wretchedness and unworthiness, that God may have the
greater glory. He sticks not himself to have blushing checkes, so honor
and praise may come to God and is not ashamed to be the trumpe^or of his own
reproach. This is true repentance.

asleep etc.) One mark there of is a holy anger and (...) against ourselves,
amplifying and enlarging all the circumstances of our (...), to make it more
odious, and to bring us unto a greater loathing of it.

but my heart awakel) But the Christian though before God and men he make
confession of his ^ault, and it be the property of true repentance for a man to
aggrauate, not to lessen his offense, as not satisfying his own soul with a
detestation of his wicked ways; yet he uses also a holy excuse and defense,
that Satan by his ouercharging of himself (to use the Apostles phrase 2. Cor.
2. 5.) take not advantage to cast him down further then is meet, and to drive
him into despair: He therefore wrestleth with his own soul to gather all
arguments that may be to his conscience, that these his offenses were done of
frailety and through infirmity of the flesh, that his heart is sincere and
upright to God; that his faith, though sore shaken was not quite battered and
overcome etc. This is the wisdom of a sound Christian: And here is a noble
example of that other mark of repentance which the Apostle (2. Cor. 7. 11.)
calls an Apology or clearing of ones self.

the voice of my well-beloued,) True repentance comes not from our selves, it
comes by the preventing grace of Christ: not only that repentance which is
our first conversion to God, but the raising of us up, when being converted we
fall into any sin.

The principal cause of this our conversion is the Spirit of Christ knocking at
the door of our heart.

The means is his voice speaking to our outward ears, specially by the
ministry of the Word and sacraments, as principal: but further also in a
secondarie degree, by chastisements and corrections.

Bounsing,) We have need that God should call upon us earnestly, vehemently,
and in most effectual manner. So carnal are we of our selves, and so untoward
to hearken to him.

Yea, we had need again and again to be beaten upon, and all little enough.
So you have the truth of that which Elehu tells Ioh, God speaks once and
twice, and a man does not discern it. Job. 33. 14.

We are speedily to turn to God, and not to put off our repentance: for So
much also does the word bounsing import: Signifying all three that is to say,
earnest, and often knocking, and a desire speedily to be let in.

Open] Of our selves and by nature we are held prisoners and captives of
Satan, as it were under lock and key, till Christ open the door and let us
loose by his word and the power of his Spirit.

God cease not to use all good means that possibly may be devised to draw
us home unto him. What, how many, and how gracious arguments does he bring in
this place? Taken first from the easiness of the thing, it is but to open the
door.

Tome) Secondly, from his own person, open to me; not your enemy, but your
friend, your lover, one that seeks your good.

My sister etc.) Thirdly, from our person that should not stick to do a
greater matter then that.

My fellow-friend, my Dove, my undefiled one,) Fourthly, by the manner of his
speaking with all the sweet and kind words that can be imagined, speaking to
our heart (as he says he will, Hos. 2. 14.) and beseeching as it were when he
may command. As if Christ besought you by us (says the Apostle) 2. Cor. 5. 20.

For my head is filled with dew: my locks with the drops of the night.]
Fifthly, by comparing his own cares, labors and travails taken for us, whom
we may be ashamed so unthankfully to requite, that we will do nothing for
him again. Thus he leaves no means unattempted, no arguments, no persuasions
to call us back when we go astraie.

The love of Christ wherewith he has loved us ought to be a special motive
for us to love him again. So Paul teaches, 2. Cor. 5. 14. 15. For the love of
Christ constrains us, judging this, that if one died for all, then were all
dead. And he died for all, that they which live, might no more live unto
themselves, but unto him which died for them etc.

To whom I answered,) Sin goes not singly and alone, one and no more: but
the nature of it is for one sin to draw many other after it.

How should I etc.) Sin for the most part is joined with hardness of heart;
and where sin has once seized, without a great mercy of God, it stops
all the passages from admitting of the voice of Christ.

I have put off my coat^ etc. I have washed my feet etc. how should I etc.)
Where sin possesses the soul, Satan is strong and forcible, to cast mistes
before us, to make every babble, not worth the naming, to seem a great matter
in our eyes, and sufficient to hold our Christ.

Put it on, foul them.) A little case and carnal pleasure, with those that
have not their hearts effectually touched, prevails more then all the ioies
and delights that are to be found in Christ.

My well-beloved let down, etc We must receive Christ when he offers
himself unto us: for it we refuse him, he will not always continue knocking.
Seek the Lord vvhilest he may be found. Esaias 55. 6.

But the ease, pleasure, and commodities of this life, are great impediments to
hold us back, and to make us seek all manner of delays.

The Word and all other outward means profit little, unless it please God by
his spirit to make the same effectual. Therefore in Hoshea 2. 14. with the
Word and with afflictions is joined his own persuading of us by the inward
working of his Spirit, without which the other avails nothing.

The ministry of the Word brings not forth fruit always at the instant: but
many times the sweet impression that it leaves behind, even then when it
seems to fall by the way side, is at the length, in his time, effectual to
draw men unto God.

My bowels earning within me) God suffers not his to lie still in security,
as he does the wicked: (which is an other difference between these two) but
one time or other awakneeth them out of the sleep of sin, how long soever
they continue in it.

The two degrees of repentance are here to be observed; First, an earning of
the heart, compunction of soul and spirit, coming from a sight of our sins,
and preaching of the Law. So it is said, 1. Sam. 24. 8.
David's heart smote him when he cut off the lap of Saul's garment, to think
he had so dallied with that monster of sin. And Ier. 31. 19. brings in
Ephraim saying, After I shall be made to know my sin I will clap on my thigh,
in token of mourning. As contrariwise of the wicked the same Prophet says,
Ier. 8. 6. There is none that says, What have I don?

I arose to open to my wel-beloued.] The second is a conceiving of comfort, a
raising up of our selves by the sweet promises of the Gospel. for both see
Acts 2. 37, 38, 39.

My hands dropped mirrh, and my fingers soft mirrh in the handles of the lock.)
The very sweetness that Christ leaves behind him, when to our feeling he
departs from us, and as it were the shadow of his presence, does marueilously
ravish a Christian man: This appears by the joy and comfort that the people
of God took in the Arc, the Temple, and other symboles, which Phineas wife
showed when she so bewailed the taking of the Arc, that she called her sons
name, I chabod, The glory is departed. 2. Sam. 4. 21.

How much more sweet then must it be to receive Christ himself, to enjoy his
own presence, which brings all good things with it.

I arose to open etc.] A third note of repentance which the Apostle speaks
of, (2. Cor. 7. 11.) is here also to be seen, study, or care and diligence;
that is to say, a framing of our heart and disposition to awake from sleep,
and to seek after Christ,

I opened etc.] And a putting of the same in execution.

my well-beloued withdrew himself, he passed awey,)

Christ for our incredulity and hardness of heart, does sometimes after a sort
leave us for a while, withdrawing all comfortable sense and feeling of his
grace. This is that spiritual desertion that Gods children may fall into, and
is one of those heavy judgments that God punishes their sin withal.

I fell into a swoune) A fourth note of repentance is zeal, to faint for the
absence of Christ, and to be sick of love for him.

I sought him, I cried on him) A fifth also, to seek him, to call and cry upon
him, to wander up and down after him: finally to leave nothing undone till we
find him, which the Apostle calls a longing, or desire after him.

because of his speech:) The meditation and calling to mind of the word of
God, of that which we have heard in the public congregations and assemblies,
is very profitable for the quickening and raising up of our souls.

but I could not find him, but he answered me not.) Christ to try the faith
of his children seems many times to deal very hardly and unkindly with
them: the fountain of mercy, to have no drop of mercy in him. So he dealt
with the woman of Canaan, Mat. 15. 22. etc. First when she cried upon him, he
made himself deaf, he would not answer one word, but turned himself away,
and when his disciples besought him to speak, how untowardly and techely (as a
man with reverence may say) does he seem to answer her' I was not sent but
to the lost sheep of the house of Israel: She for all that humbling her
self yet more, and falling at his feet, in what reproachful manner does he
use her, calling her a dog, or rather for more disgrace a whelpe. How must
not this wound her very soul? He that bids all men learn of him, because
he is meek and lowly in heart, to be so rough to a poor silly weoman so
deiecting herself before him? but wherefore did he so? to discourage or drive
her from him? No; but that her faith being tried in the furnace, might come
forth purer then the gold, and after many a pluck and wrestle, like a true
Israelite supported by his Spirit, she might prevail with God: and so at the
length he suffers himself to be ouercom by the greatness of her faith.

The watchmen that go about the City found me.) A Christian truly repenting
will not think much to throw himself into never so great perils and hazards
for the recovery of Christ. And so is expressed the sixth mark of repentance:
consisting in a revenge or taking the peny-worths of our selves for our former
transgressions, not shrinking now for any danger, but running thorough thick
and thin (as we say) in the night, among the watch, to come unto him.

All this shows the fear that a Christian man has, least he should be
overtaken with drowsinesse, as he was before, which is an other and the last of
those seven notes of true repentance, mentioned 2. Cor. 7. 11.

And so have you in this Chapter, (besides the falls and infirmities of Gods
children, and how and wherein they differ from other men,) a worthy example of
the cause, the means, the parts, the steps and degrees, and lastly of the
notes and marks of their repentance.

they smote me, they wounded me,) An other punishment of our sins is
affliction, outward trouble and persecution, which God is wont to send upon us,
to chastise and correct us, and to make us come to him.

the keepers of the walls tooke] Those that should be the greatest friends
unto us for the truths sake, prove many times our greatest enemies, such as
carry the name of watchmen in Gods Church, whose office it is to encourage and
protect us in well doing, none more then they do oppose themselves and
discourage us in the ways of godliness.

my veil from me.) This is a great offense and stumbling block to Gods
children: who by reason hereof lose their veil, that is the hold of their
purity and integrity, and begin a little to decline, and to wax fainter in the
serving of God:

I adjure you] Till by the company of Gods children in the communion of Saints,
they begin to take heart again, and to recover their spirits, and so afresh
follow after Christ.

ye daught^rs of Jerusalem) The society of the godly is an excellent means to
stir men up, and to kindle in them the holy fire of the love of Christ: for
with them we may boldly confer of such things as the world sauoureth not,
nor has any relish in.

if ye find etc.) Yea, though they be not come so far as we in comprehending
the length, breadth, and depth of the excellency of the love of Christ.

What is there in thy well-beloued? etc.] If to those that dwell in the Church
it be strange to see the passions that many of the godly are exercised with in
their longing and thirsting after Christ, what shall we think of other men?

White and ruddie, fit to hear the banner above 10000 his head, etc. The
things which we are specially to consider in Christ, are, First his spiritual
glory and power, shining even in his humanity:

His eyes as doves eyes etc) Secondly, The eyes of his providence, or the
perfection of the graces of the Spirit dwelling in him, whereby he pearceth
every where and enters into men's hearts, seeing the things, that are most
secret.

his lips, his pallat, etc.] Thirdly his doctorshippe, or Prophetical office.

Upon his hands etc. his lagges are pillars of marble, etc.) Fourthly his
government and administration of the world, in glory, maiestly and power,
chrushing to pieces the wicked and ungodly, and whatsoever does set and oppose
it self against him.

in his bowels is a shining, as of iuory, covered with Suphires: his look as
of Lebanon etc.) Fifthly The glorifying of his humane nature, which he has
purchased by his death and sufferings.

that me ^ay seek him etc.) The fruit of a Christian man's temptations is, that
other by our vehemence are stirred up to seek Christ.

My well-beloued in gone down etc. I am my wellbeloueds etc.) Christ in the end
is found of those that seek him, though he absent himself for a time, as he
was of the woman of Canaan, Mat. 15. 28.

And this is our comfort, that God is faithful, who will not suffer us to be
tempted above our strength, but in every temptation, how great soever, will
give us a means how to come out of it, 1 Cor. 10. 13.

By mutual conference and communication of of our faith, we have the same
strengthened, and nourishe and kindle in our selves a holy longing after Christ.

CHAP. VI.
VERSE. 1. Thou art fair etc.]

TRue repentance washes off all the spots and deformities that our sins
bring upon us.

terrible as an army with banners.)

The life of Christian is a warrefare upon earth: For the enabling of him to
fight the Lords battles, God infuseth into his heart an heroical and noble
courage: for though he fall, yet he rises up again: though he be
overtaken, yet he gets out and recouereth his, strength,

Which makes Satan to fear the faith of a Christian, because he knows it
is built upon that rock which the gates of hell cannot prevail against.

O turn thine eyes ouer-against me,) Our slippes and falls must not
discourage us: but we must look up to Christ with a lively faith and be of
good comfort,

that they may lift me up.) For Christ glories and takes pleasure in the
faith of his people: it rejoices his heart, and he thinks himself the
better for it, being affected with their miseries, and is glad when they are
comforted.

Thy hair is etc.) The holiness and righteousness of a Christian is not lost
by the manifold infirmities he falls into. But it remains firm and
constant in every part; because it wholly rests in the power and grace of God.

Let there be 60. Queens, etc.) All the glory and excellency in the world, the
courts of Princes, and their pompous train are not to be compared to the
happiness of a Christian.

That one etc.) There is but one company and society in the world, where
salvation is to be had: that is the Church of God, which is one, because there
is no more but she, one because she is only and entirely beloved of God.

my done,] One because she is elect out of all the world.

mine undefiled one,) One because she keeps her self one and the same unto
her spouse, pure, chaste, and undefiled.

that one with her mother) To this Church every Christian man joins himself,
and professes to be a member thereof, never making rent, schism, nor division
from it: those that go out from it, it is a token they were, in truth, never
of it.

as soon as they see etc.) God in his Church vtereth all his glory, Psalm. 29.
That is, he graceth his people with such blessings of his spirit, as makes
them an admiration to the world. This is the privilege of those that dwell in
the Church of God.

the maidens shall account her blessed, the Queens and Concubines shall praise
her.) The profane worldlings are forced to prefer the state of Gods children
before their own, and to wish they were like unto them. As Saul, Pharaoh,
Balaam and other did.

Goodly as the morning, fair as the moon, pure as the Sun.) The way of a
righteous man is like the Sun shining, that shines still more and more unto
the steddie day, Prou. 4. 18. Or, as Paul says, ( Romans 1. 17.) we go from
faith to faith, our faith continually growing as the morning does, and from one
degree of perfection to an other: from the beauty of the moon, to the
cleerenesse of the Sun.

To the pruined gardaines,) The kingdom of God, the glory of the heavenly
Jerusalem is that which we ought always to meditate of, and to have the eyes
of our souls fixed and bent upon: being like the gardaines that are kept
dressed, most pleasant and goodly to the eye, and that yield all sweet and
delectable fruit.

I went down,) Christ himself by his example inuiteth us to take pains to
watch and observe the time of his coming: whereunto he does exhort. Math. 24.
42.

To see the green plants of the valley: to see if the Vine flourished, if the
Pomegranets budded.) By earthly things we must learn to meditate on heavenly:
and if we be able to discern of the times and seasons of the year, that when
we see the trees to put forth leaves, we know Summer is near, is it not a
shame to have a less insight into those things that are the signs and
forerunners of the coming of the Son of God to judgment? This wisdom our
Savior teaches us. Matthew. 24. 32. 33.

There be many signs of this glorious coming of Jesus Christ: for which, see
that whole chapter. Matthew 24.

When I discerned it not my mind set me) Christ loves not to be longer absent
from us then needs he must.

upon my free hearted,) Christian men are freehearted people, and of a willing
mind: serving Christ cheerfully, ioifully, readily Psalm. 110. not of
necessity or constraint.

peoples chariots.) In such does Christ delight to dwell, to be borne up by
them, and to have them for his chariots. 2. Corinthians. 9. 7. God loves a
cheerful giver.

Return,) The voice and calling of Christ is the means of our conversion.

Return o Shull etc. return, return) Who calls us earnestly and
continually to come unto him, and not to delay nor put it off: for that does
the doubling and trebling, and four times repeating of the word return,
import.

O Shulamite] Yea, he uses all manner of kind and loving speeches to persuade,
as O my Shullamite, or my perfect one: for all which see before Chapter 5. 1.

A Christian man is perfect by the imputation of Christ's righteousness:
perfect also with an Evangelical, not a legal perfection: (that is to say, of
a sound and upright heart longing for perfection) even in regard of their
renewed holiness or sanctification.

that we may behold thee) Sin obscureth Gods graces in us, and makes that
Christ has no delight to look upon us: but faith and repentance restores us
to his favor.

What behold you in that Shulamite? as the daunse of the Machanaijmites) Christ
comfort his soul by the beholding of our holiness and righteousness.

How bewtifull etc.) Yea he boasts and rejoices of it: so is there joy in
heaven for sinners that repent. Luke 15. 7.

O daughter of a Prince.) The excellency of a christian stands in this, that
he is born again, and by faith become the son of the great king: that life
of the spirit incompatably more excelling the life of a natural man (take the
godliest and the gallantest) then that excels the life of a brute beast.

Let not etc.) There is not any thing more pleasing to him, then the spread of
the Church of God, and a continual increase of the fruits of it, which are as
glorious in his sight as a heap of wheat hedged about with I^illies.

Let not the liquor fail. But let thy belly be etc. The duties required of him
are,

First, Faith continually fructifying.

Thy two breasts etc.) Secondly, A teachablenes to suck the milk of the word
of God.

Thy neck etc) Thirdly, Constancy to hold up the truth of God.

Thine eyes etc. thy nose etc.) Fourthly, Judgment to weigh and discern of
doctrines.

That on thy head is like skarlet, etc.) Fifthly, Gravity, and a wise carriage
in all our actions;

A King might be tied, etc.) Which good graces being in us and abounding, not
only knit men's hearts unto us,

How fair etc.) But make God himself to love, and to admire us.

I say etc) The word of Christ ought to be an assurance to us, that we shall
be sanctified more and more: howsoever when we look on the one side to the
resistances that are against us, and on the other side to our own weakness and
corruptions, we have just cause to despair. But he that said, the Word is
able for to do it, as casie it is for him to make us all whole, as it was to
say, take up thy bed and walk. Ioh. 5. 8.

I will get up upon the Palm Tree, take hold of her branches, etc.) The best
man that is has need of much hand, to be continually pruined, and lopped, and
to have his superfluous branches shred from him to make him fruitful.

I will etc.) This must be the work of Christ himself: Who, as else where he
is compared to a Vine, so here compares himself to the Husbandman, that
takes us in hand to trim and look unto us: Without him we can do nothing.
Ioh. 15. 5.

Thy teates shall now be like the clusters of the Vine: and the savor of thy
nose like Apples.) The fruit of Christ's presence with us, and of his taking us
in hand is excellent: it makes us sweet before him, fragrant, acceptable, and
comfortable unto other.

Thy pallat as wine making to speak the lips of those which sleep.] The
preaching of the Gospel, is that which raises men out of the sleep of sin,
and makes them to speak with new tongues to the praise of the glory of God.

CHAP. VII.
VERSE 1. I am my Welbeloueds, since his desire is toward me.

THe mercies of God in pardoning and forgiving our sins and taking us to his
favor, are so far from opening a window of liberty unto us, that
contrariwise it joins and knitteth our souls more near unto him, makes us
more entirely to love him, and rowzeth us up from drowsinesse and negligence to
a greater watchfulness over our ways, and a care to please him.

That is true repentance which grows from a consideration of Gods mercies and
of his love: not that so much, which the fear of wrath and of his judgments
does wring from us.

Let us go forth etc.) True repentance is seen by walking in a quite
contrary course to that we walked in before: therefore it is called a turning;
as if a man whose face is bent Westward, should wholly turn himself and set
it unto the East.

Let us lodge by the Cypres: let us rise in the morning, etc.) It is the
certain note of the child of God to wait with all watchfulness and
observation for the glorious coming of Jesus Christ:

The day of whose coming is that happy time of our spiritual marriage, and
most straight and near conjunction with Christ: for then shall we enjoy him
fully and perfectly, and see him as he is.

These lovely flowers etc.) To him we must consecrate our selves and all we
have; for whatsoever he has given us, all the graces of his Spirit, all the
good things we do enjoy, are not too good to be bestowed upon him, to
entertain Christ the better; that is the true use of the blessings of God.

O that thou were as a brother unto me etc.) A Christian man is impatient for
the desire of Christ, and longs that even this day before too-morrow were the
time of our perfect enjoying of him.

Finding thee without I would kiss thee) Our love to Christ where it is
sincere and sound, will manifest it self to all, and by all means.

I should not be despised.) The perpetual state of Gods children is to be
vexed, scorned, and despised of the world.

But against this we must comfort our selves with the remembrance of that time,
when all tears shall be wiped from our eyes.

I Would bring thee into the house of my Mother which teaches me,) In the
Church the word of God is to sound, and there it is that men are to be taught
and informed in his ways.

I would give thee to drink of spiced wine etc.) There is nothing we have or
can come by, that is too costly or sumptuous to be bestowed upon Christ.
Wherefore the woman in the Gospel has her just commendation for pouring the
Alablaster box of Spicknard, most costly ointment upon the head of our Savior
Christ, though Judas the traitor repined at it.

His left hand under etc. I adjure you, etc. Our former offenses and the
fearful effects coming from them, must teach us when we have Christ again
to make more of him, and to take heed that by our looseness and negligence he
withdraw not the comfort of his presence.

Who is she that comes out of the wilderness ready to join her self to
her well-beloved.

There is no sound pleasure to be found but in true piety: all the delights of
the world without that, are but as the wilderness in comparison of pleasant
and fertile soil.

A Christian must deny himself and forsake this wicked world; it is a hard
piece of work, and a matter of no small difficulty thus to do, and such, as
none has any heart or stomach to perform, save but those that are borne anew:
yet every one must enforce himself unto it; and so doing we have the same as
a sure argument of hearty and sound repentance.

True valor in despising dangers is only to be found in the child of God,

whose faith overcomes all difficulties, and the tediousness of this world.

under the very apple tree I awaken thee) For faith as it has wings to fly
up to heaven, to the very seat of glory, and there to apprehend Christ,
sitting at the right hand of his father: so in his humility here it beholds
that excellency which the world is not able to conceive.

Where thy mother was in labor of thee.) Christ vouchsafes to account
himself as one of us: a child of our mother, that is to say, one of the
Church, being the head of it and we his members.

O set me) The faith, zeal, and repentance of Gods children, though it merit
nothing at the hands of God, yet gives us assurance of obtaining good things,
and makes us with boldness to crave favor, and a blessing again. To love us
as we love him. So our Savior has taught us to pray, Forgive us our
trespasses as we forgive etc.

True repentance makes us more zealous, and more to love Christ then we did
before.

A Christian above all things in the world desires to be joined to Christ as
nearly, and by as straight a bond and conjunction as may be.

as a seal on thine heart,) God has us always as a seal upon his heart, and
in his mind; how is it possible he should forget us?

as a seal on thine arm,) He has us always as a seal upon his arm, Who
can pull us from him?

Being upon his arm we are continually in his sight, his eyes are upon us
always, and his providence watches over us wheresoever we ^oe become, what
evil can betide us?

Love, zeal etc.) Zeal is the proper virtue of a Christian, wherein he can
never satisfy his own soul.

strong as death etc.) True zeal breaks through all difficulties, as death,
and as the grave that subdue all, and cannot themselves be overcome.

a fire of the flame of Iah.) It is kindled in us by the Spirit of God, and is
the peculiar work of his grace.

Much waters cannot quench etc.) A Christian is endued of God with the gift of
constancy and perseverance.

Many temptations assault a christian man to shak his faith; pleasures,
afflictions, promises, hopes, rewards: but he remains unmoved in them all.

If a man would give all the substance of his house,) Wicked men spare no cost
to draw men from Christ: how much less should we be sparing, or think any
thing too dear, to stire up men to love him?

We are to take most heed of those that come with fairest shows and
pretenses to us: for under the sweetest flowers lie commonly hid the most
venomous serpents.

it should utterly be contemned.) A man must learn to despise the wicked,
notwithstanding all their wealth. This among other is one note of him that here
shall soiourne in Gods tabernacle, and hereafter dwell in his holy hill. Psalm.
15.

CHAP. VIII.
VERSE. 1 We have a sister, etc. and what shall we do to our sister etc.)

THe love of God toward us, his mercy in hiding and covering our offenses,
should make us to love not only him again, but our brethren for his sake: and
by all means to seek their good.

The Church of the Jews so careful for the calling of the Gentiles, teaches
how earnest we should be to commend their conversion unto God: whereof we
have here a promise, and all the Prophets and Apostles so gloriously do
speak; Esaias, Chap. 4. and 26. etc. Dan. 12. Ezech. 37. etc. Hosh. 3. and 13.
Zach. 12. etc. Paul Romans 11. and 2. Cor. 3. John in the Revelation Chap. 20,
etc. and our Savior, Matthew 24.

a little one, and she has no breasts,) The Church of God before the coming of
Christ, was shut up within narrow bounds, the Gentiles being then aliens and
strangers from the covenant.

in the day, when) God has the moments of time and seasons numbered before him,
and a certain day prefixed when he will accomplish his counsels.

she shall be talked of.) Faith only makes men famous. The Gentiles before
their calling were never talked of amongst Gods people: though for learning,
arts, valor, they were the men of name in the world, and accounted the
worthies of the earth: but it is indeed more honorable to be famous in Gods
Church, then to have all the fame and estimation in the world beside.

True fame is in piety, and the fear of God only.

Men must beat their heads and cast about how to perform the work of God in
the best manner.

Gods children must bend their speeches to extol and set forth those that
truly fear God, and to make them famous, to honor and prefer them before
worldlings, howsoever they glitter and shine in the eyes of men. So did Elisha
set light by the King of Israel, notwithstanding all his greatness, in
comparison of the good and godly King Iehoshaphat, 2. King. 3. What have I to
do with thee? Get thee to the Prophets of thy Father etc. Again, As Iehoush
of hoasts lives, in whose sight I stand, if it were not that I regard the
presence of the King of Judah, I would not have looked toward thee, nor have
seen thee.

When a wall is to be built, when a gate is to be fenced.) Wisdom is required
in the builders of Gods house, to frame every thing for the greatest bewty and
ornament unto it.

of silver, board of Cedre.) But all for any substance of religion, or
necessary part of Gods service, must be according to the rule of the Word,
that it may be as silver, and as the choice Cedre, precious in his sight:
Exodus 25. 40.
See thou make all things according to the pattern was showed thee in the Mount.

A palace,) The Church of God is the Palace of the great King, There he does
dwell, and has his residence and aboade for ever. Psalm. 132. 13, 14

a wall, a gate.) The discipline of the Church is as a wall and a gate, to
keep that no unclean person or execrable, enter in, to hold in those that are
entered, the free burgesses and Citise^s of that Citi^.

I being as a wall, and my breasts as towers,) There is in the Church a
communion of Saints, whereby the graces of God bestowed upon one member, turn
to the general good of the whole body.

then shall I be) Thereof it is that a true Christian is so far from envying
the blessings of God in other, that he rejoices in them as in his own
happiness and perfection.

as one that finds peace.) When the heart of the Jews shall turn unto the
Lord, in the general call of that whole nation, then come the days of peace,
joy, happiness, and comfort, as much as can be upon earth, through the bright
beams of the glorious Gospel, shining most clear.

Solomon had a vineyard,) Christianity and providence in worldly matters stand
well together.

in a fruitful place,) It is a good duty of a Christian to forecast to have
things most beneficial and commodious for him. His vines in fruitful places
etc.

he hired out his viney ards to keepers.) And when he is so sitted, well to
occupy and manure them to his most advantage: That which he cannot keep in
his own hands, yet to provide it be so let out as may be for his profit.

every one brings for the fruit of it a thousand pieces of silver.) It is not
only the rule of charity, but true christianity to consider in reasonable
sort, of those that travail for us, that they labor not, nor sweat for
nothing: but taking part of that gain which comes by their service, it may
give them cause to bless us.

We may with good conscience observe a due proportion, and are not to be bl^med
though the best morsels fall into our own mouth. Solomon may well purse a
thousand shekels, and leave two hundred only to come to his lessees share.

The Anabaptistical communion hereby falls to the ground.

My vineyard is still before my face,) God is jealous of his Church, and
lets it not forth to others, but himself takes the care of it; for though
it be said in the parable, that a man planted a vineyard, and let it forth to
husband men etc. that is an other kind of letting, then that which Solomon
here speaks of: For by it is meant the ministers whom God raises up from
time to time for the good of his people, and commends them to their care.
Among whom he himself is, not idle, but walking in the midst of those
golden candlesticks, and evermore present by the assistance of his Spirit: so
as all comes from his virtue and power, and he does not rule his Church by
deputies or farmours.

I receive both these 1000 of thine, O Solomon, and also the 200 pieces of
those that keep the fruit of it.) Nothing for substance of religion must be
done in the house of God but by his own express pleasure: all is his, not the
least farthing or dodkin in this kind is to go an other way.

O thou she) Christ gives to his Church Pastors and Teachers as it were
Husbandmen to dress his Vine.

That set) Himself being the Arch-shepheard that takes care of all the
Vines: every such Minister has a chair which ought to be the chair of truth:
for so our Savior reasons, In the chair of Moses sit the Scribes and
Pharisees; therefore whatsoever they teach, (according to the law and doctrine
of Moses, which only is to sound in that chair) do etc.

To these God himself reaches a cushion, and places them in the chair of
authority in his Church: as the Scribes and Pharisees are said to sit in Moses
chair, and Paul that he sat at Corinth a year and six months and taught
the word of God among them. Acts 18. 11. So Ministers have their Seas by Gods
own appointment.

This ordinance of God is perpetual to the worlds end;

And they must sit, that is with all diligence and faithfulness attend unto
the flock whereof the holy Ghost (...) them over seers.

In these Gard^i^e^,) Every particular congregation is a several gardaine of
the Lords:

to the fellows) Wherein the Ministers are not to dominier over Gods heritage,
but to live as examples to the flock, who are their brethren and fellows.

Which) We must not give that which is holy to dogs, nor cast our pearls
before swine. Matthew. the seventh, and the sixth. The precious treasure of the
Gospel is not to be communicated to all, but to those that have ears boared
through of God, and hearts to receive it: as for other, we are commanded to
shake off the dust of our feet against them.

Attend thy voice) We must hear the Ministers of God, teaching us in his
ways: and not hear only, but hear with diligence and continually attend
upon their doctrine.

And that is one of the marks of the child of God so to attend on the word.

Preach) Feeding of the flock is a special argument of the love that a
Minister bears to Christ: Joh. 21. 15.
Peter love thou me? feed my Lambs; it is the duty that God calls and
cries unto us for: an intolerable coldenesse and lack of love to Christ, to
leave them at six and seven.

Preaching is the ordinary means of bringing men to Christ; Romans 10. 17.
faith comes by hearing.

The thing preached must be Christ, the whole substance of the Gospel, and in
whom all the the promises of God are Yea and Amen.

Flee to us, etc. and be like the Roe, etc. O thou that dwell in the
Mountains of spices.) The Minister that will approve himself faithful must
never be weary of feeding his flock to the coming of Jesus Christ.

And herein it is his duty carefully and diligently to impl^re Gods
assistance, that he may go through with it, and for a blessing upon his
labors.

This meditation both of Christ's presence and assistance, of his bright and
last appearance, and of the weight of glory laid up in heaven, where Christ
now is, and where we shall be together with him, must be always before their
eyes as effectual arguments to stir them up unto this duty: which they are
to oppose and set against all the tediousness and difficulties of their
function on the one side, and all the glittering pomp of the world on the
other.

It is a special note of the child of God to desire still the coming of
Christ.

And to meditate on the glory of Gods kingdom.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by John Beale, dwel^ing in Aldersgate street 1615.


