A true discourse of all the Sallyes which the Soldiers of the City of Grave
have made since the siedge: And in what manner the Admirant, with a great Host
of Horse and Foot, with diverse Wagons laden with Ladders, Powder, Shot, and
other necessaries of relief, came to relieve the City, the 22. of August,
Stilo Nouo in the night: But was (by Gods Providence, and his Excellencyes
valor) driven back, and forced (in the night) to fire his own Tents, and to
take a shameful flight. Translated according to the Copy, Printed at Delfe,
by Jacob Cornelison Uenn^l.

LONDON. Printed for William Ferbrand, and are to be sold at his shop in
Pope's Head Alley, over against the Tavern door, near the Royal Exchange.
1602.

A true discourse of all the Sallyes which the Soldiers of the City of Grave
have made since the Siedge: and in what manner the Admirant with a great Host
of horse and foot, with diverse wagons laden with ladders, powder, shot, and
other necessaries of relief, came to relieve the City, the 20. of August,
(...) (...) in the night: But was by Gods providence and his Excellencyes
valor, driven back, and forced in the night to fire his own Tents, and to
take a shameful flight.
AFter that his Excellency Prince Maurice of Nassaw, had trained his whole Army
through Brabant, and lastly laid siedge to the strong City of Grave: at his
first arrival, he busied his Soldiers, in continual raising of his Trenches,
as well for his defense against the sallyes which might be made out of the
City, as also to prevent the incursion of the Archdukes Camp: the which he
knew was very strong, and would very shortly attempt the Cities rescue, which
indeed so fell out, for that in a very short time, the Admirant of Aragon,
with the Archdukes Army, was heard to be marching thetherward: yet by the
careful diligence of his Excellency, and his Commanders, the whole Camp was
so strongely fortifyed, and walled about with deep Trenches, that the Admirant
coming thither, and perceiving that there was but small hope left, of making
any breach through his excellencyes Trenches: Pitched his whole Army less then
a half hours going from our Camp, lying within sight thereof, without any
aparant signs of the least a^t^mpt.

His Princely Excellency with his whole Regiment, lies on the other side of
the Mase, near Kuycke: the Lord Count William, with his Forces lies on the
side of the Heath: and Sir Frances Veare with his English Forces, lies on the
higher side, on the side of the river Mase: the other Regiments are placed
accordingly, in such order, and maintained with so gallant Martial
government, as it does ones heart good that beholdes it: their Watches and
Sentinels so warily and carefully ordered, that they seem a common wealth:
Also, many valiant and resolute enterprises are performed, even under the City
walls.

The Citizens perceiving the Archdukes Camp to be near hand, and trusting to
be by their approach, better furthered and relieved, then afterward they
found themselves, began to show themselves somewhat bolder then before, by
diverse signs of bravery, and some sallyes in the night upon our Camp,
howbeit to their loss, for that they still lost more (by far) then we did,
which is contrary to common chance, where the ^allyes of Cities (which they
never proffer but upon espied advantage) happen for the most part to the
damage and loss of the besiedgers.

Before the enemies approach, the Citizens kept themselves very quiet, and now
hoping of rescue, they made sundry fires in the City to the Camp: the which
out of the Archdukes Camp were answered with the like signs, without that
ought else have ensued thereof.

In the enemies Camp there is great want of victuals, by reason whereof, many
Italians come over into his Excellencies Camp.

The 18. of August there came above four score Italians into our Camp, some
of them were whole Corporalships, with all their weapons and furniture: His
Excellency using them very kindly, victuals them, and to every man he gives a
Gilden in money, with a Pasport to return into Italy: with them he sendes a
messenger to advise the States, that where they pass, they should be
victualled, and so sent forwards.

At the same time the Citizens made a salley upon our Trenches, but being
prevented and not daring to come on any farther then their own counterscarpe,
it is not known whether they lost any men or no.

The 19. of August, there came again into his Excellencyes quarter, above 150.
of the enemies revolted Soldiers, most of them Italians, some of them with
their weapons and furniture, and othersome without: they were all well used and
each man given a Gilden in money, and so shipped away.

The 20. of August, there came over to our Camp, a Horseman with his horse,
and al his whole furniture, with two Horsemen without their horses: also two
Spaniards which would receive no Pasport, but would remain in his Excellencies
service.

The 21 of August, there was a Jesuit or Seminary Priest taken prisoner, and
carr^ed into his Excellencyes quarter: also certain revolted Italians came to
our Camp this day.

At the same time there were brought nine prisoners which were taken in the
skirmish near unto the Sconce which his Excellency took from the enemy at his
first coming before the City, being on the other side of the Mase. In this
Sconce (whilst the enemy held it) there was but a Corpse de Guarde, but it is
now a strong three square Sconce: howbeit, there is no Ordinance thereon, but
only one great murderer, which casts balls of fire-worke into the City:
also, they shoot great pieces of blewe square stone, and other great stones
out of it: of such bigness, that a man (with all his power and strength) is but
able to lift one of them. These stones (making way wheresoever they fall)
breaking through Churches and houses, the people do cry very pitifully, when
the said piece is shot off, which can easily be heard out of the said Sconce.
The balls of fire which they shoot, are filled with Musket Shot, and do lie
still on the ground, about half a quarter of an hour before they work: and
then the flame is seen above all the houses of the City, insomuch (for as much
as can be perceived, and is most apparent and likely of truth) those of the
City, do more fear these fire balls and these great stones, which are shot
out of the said Sconce, then all the rest of his Excellencies great Ordynance,
which he has in four batteryes.

Between the 21. and 22. of August, the enemy attempted to put about 2000. men
into the City, together with 400. horse, furnishing them al with ladders,
dealeboords, shouels, pickaxes, and other instruments, to break in upon the
Redu^s or Courts of Guarde that lay between the quarters of his Excellency and
Count William, but having intelligence that his Excellency was ^irring up and
down with 4000. Horsemen and many foot, they resyred back, leaving their
wagons whereon their abouesaid Instruments were laden: some ladders were
(that night) brought into his Excellencyes Tent.

The same night there was taken a horsemans boy, who was found swimming from
the City, and was carried before his Excellency, but they could gather nothing
by him, because he showed himself as if he had been drunk or simple: and the
self same night, the uttermost Sentinels at the ^ase side were at a bickering
totogether, wherein two ^f the townsmen were slain.

Our Soldiers do d^ly get many fair horses and prisoners: als^ three
horse-mens boys got nine fair horses of the (...).

The 22 of August, those of the City issued out twice upon their
Coun^^^scarpes, but it cannot be known whether any of them were slain or
not: for our part, (praise unto God) we lost none. This day our Horsemen took
another Jesuit Prisoner.

Between Thursday and Friday in the night, being between the 22. and 23. of
August, the enemy set fire on all his Tents and Cabbins, which did so flame, as
if the whole Country had been on fire, and there withal, breaking up his Camp,
he went away very quietly without any noise: next day were found many wagons
with weapons and furniture, besides many sick men, the which his Excellency
caused to be carried away, upon his own costs and charges. The enemy took
his way upwards along the Mase: and his Excellency followed him with 1200.
horse, and some foot: but being that the 23. day of August, there was a very
thick mist, he lost the enemy, not knowing which way he was gone. In the
quarter of his Excellency the speech was, that he was gone toward Rhynebercke.
After in the Mase were found many dead bodies driving with the stream, as also
many arms and legs that were shotten off.

Extract of a Letter, written by a man of worship out of Nimingem, the fist of
September, to his friend in London.
Worshipful Sir, it was reported here by some, that Sir Frances Ueare, being
in a skirmish before the Grave (shot through the head) should have dyed near
unto Dor^b: howbeit, in the Camp was no certain^ye th^reof, and was since said
only to be but hurt in the ^ck. Also, Captain Meetkerek was dead^y wounded.
The quarter and Regiment belonging unto Sir Frances Veare in this Siedge, is
given unto Prince Henry of Nassaw his Excellencyes youngest brother. The enemy
lies between Uerb and Ruremond, seeking by all means to assure those two
towns with stronger Garrisons: but the towns would as feign keep them out,
and enjoy a newtrall freedom: the approaches of the siedge go daily forward;
his Princely Excellency intending, not any more to put his Soldiers to the
adventure of any assaults, but endeavors to win the town with Myning, (a
costly and new winning of towns) for the town is very strong, and the shot
does but little harm upon the wall. From this town we can both hear the
report, and see the smoke of the Artillery. In the Camp is good hope that it
will be shortly recovered: I shall peradventure take occasion to go see the
Camp, in company of others, that from hence do daily resort thither, both
men, women and children, for the Camp is wonderfully well stored of victuals
and other necessaries: having been there, I will as then relate further unto
you the true estate of all, as near as I shall be able to collect them. Until
which time I commit you to God.

By letters of the 29. of August, according to our computation, there is
certain news, that Sir Frances Veare was yet living, and on the mending hand;
howbeit his hurt was very sore and dangerous.

Your loving friend E. D.


