ALCIDA GREENES Metamorphosis, Wherein is discovered, a pleasant
transformation of bodies into sundry shapes, showing that as virtues beautify
the mind, so vanities give greater stains, than the perfection of any quality
can raze out: The Discourse confirmed with diverse merry and delightful
Histories; full of grave Principles to content Age, and sawsed with pleasant
parlees, and witty answers, to satisfy youth: profitable for both, and not
offensive to any. By R. G.

Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit vtile dulci. LONDON, Printed by George
Purslowe. 1617.

To the Gentlemen Readers, HEALTH.
FAlling (Gentlemen) by chance amongst a company of no mean Gentlewomen: after
supposes and such ordinary sports past, they fell to prattle of the qualities
incident to their own Sex: one amongst the rest, very indifferent, more
addicted to tell the truth, then to self conceit, said, That women that had
favors, had most commonly contrary faults: for (quoth she) beauty is seldom
without pride, and wit without inconstancy. The Gentlewomen began to blush,
because she spoke so broad, be sure, and blamed her that she would so fondly
foil her own nest. She still maintained it, that what she had spoken was
true: and more, that she had forgotten their little secrecy. Whereupon there
grew arguments: and a Sophistical disputation fell out among the Gentlewomen,
about their own qualities. I sat still as a cipher in Algorisme, and noted
what was spoken: which after I had perused in my chamber, and seeing it would
be profitable for young Gentlemen, to know and foresee as well their faults as
their favors, I drew into a fiction the form and method, in manner of a
Metamorphosis: which (Gentlemen) I present unto your wonted courtesies, desiring
you not to look for any of Ouids witty inventions, but for bare and rude
discourses: hoping to find you, as hitherto I have done, whatsoever in
opinion, yet favorable and silent in speech. In which hope setting down my
rest, I bid you farewell.

Yours ever, as he is bound, ROBERT GREEN.

Authoris ad librum suum carmen Ouidianum, cum diutina febri rure laboraret.
Parue (ne^ inuideo) sine me liber ibis in vrbem:
Hei mihi, quod domino non licet ire tuo.
Et palma tu dignus, and hic, and quisquis in altam,
Pluribus vt prosit, doctus descendit arenam.
R. A. Oxon.
In praise of the Author.
THe busy Be, that rises with the Sun,
Hies forth her hiue, to end her daily task:
With weary wings she plies into the fields,
And Natures secrets searches by her skill,
From flower to flower her careful way does fly:
To suck her honey from her native sweet;
Laden, she rich bestirres her to her home,
And there she works and tilles within her hiue:
Not for her self thus busily she romes,
But for us men, that feed upon her combs.
So GREEN has sought into the depth of Art,
With weary labors toyling at his books
For fruits, such as the learned Authors yield;
Searching the secrets that their wits have penned,
Tossing amongst their learned principles
Their Rhethoricke and deep Philosophy:
Gathering the sweet that every Science gives,
To carry pleasant honey to his hiue.
Not for himself alone the Author looks,
But for such men as daigne to read his books.
Sic vos non vobis melli ficatis apes. Ed. Percy.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Sir Charles Blount, Knight, indewed with perfections
of learning, and titles of nobility: Robert Green wishes in crease of honor
and virtue.
AChilles, the great Commander of the Mirmidones, had no sooner (Right
Worshipful) encountered the hardy Trojan with his Courtelax, and registered his
valor on the helm of his enemy, but returning to his tents, he pourtraied
with his pen the praise of Polixena, joining Amors with Armors, and the honor
of his Learning with the resolution of his Lance. In the Olympiades the
Laurel striued as well for the Pen, as the Spear: and Pallas had double
Sacrifice, as well perfumes of torn papers, as Incense of broken truncheons.
Entering (right worshipful) with deep insight into these premises, I found
blazoning your resolute endeavors in deeds of Arms, and report figuring out
your euer-intended favors to good letters: presuming upon the courteous
disposition of your Worship, I adventured to present you, as Lucius did Caesar,
who offered him an Helmet topt with Plumes in wars, and a book stuffed with
precepts in peace, knowing that Caesar held it as honorable to be counted an
Orator in the Court, as a Soldier in the field. So (right worshipful) after
your return from the Low Countries, (passing over those praiseworthy
resolutions executed upon the enemy) seeing absence from arms had transformed
Campus Martius to mount Helicon, I ouerboldned my self to trouble your
Worship, with the sight of my Metamorphosis: A pamphlet too simple to patronage
under so worthy a Maecenas, and unworthy to be viewed of you, whose thoughts
are intended to more serious studies. Yet Augustus would read Poems, and write
Roundelayes, ^her to purge melancholy with toys, then for any delight in such
trifles. So I hope your Worship will, after long perusing of great volumes, cast
a glance at my poor pamphlet: wherein is discovered the Anatomy of women's
affections: setting out as in a mirror, how dangerous his hazard is, that sets
his rest upon love: whose essence (if it have any) is momentany, and effects
variable. If either the method, or matter mislike, as wanting scholarisme in
the one, or gravity in the other: yet if it shall serve your Worship as a
trifle to pass away the time, and so slip with patience, as a board Jest, I
shall be less grieved: if any way it please, as to procure you delight, I
shall be glad (...) satisfied, as having gained the end of my labors: but
howsoever, hoping your Worship will pardon my presumption in presenting; and
weigh more of the well affected will, then of the bad labored work, I wish
your Worship such fortunate favors, as you can desire, or I imagine.

Your Worships to command, Robert Green.

TO THE AUTHOR HIS FRIEND.
WEll have thou painted in thy learned Prose,
The perfect portraiture of women's works:
How many scapes they shadow with a gloss,
What mortal faults amongst their favors lurkes.
How if they have a virtue to entice,
A cooling card comes following with a vice:
Beauty does grace, and yet is stained with pride,
Fair is abas'd by being ouer-coy:
It is a gemme, but if inconstant tried,
Account it for a trifle and a toy.
Constant and kind are virtues that do grace:
But babbling dames such glories do deface.
Virtue thus set opposed unto their vice,
Gives us a light to settle safe our loves:
To fear lest painted shows may us entice,
Subtle are women, then it men behoues
To read, sweet friend, and ouer-read thy books,
To teach vs'ware of women's wanton looks.
Bubb Gent.

In ROBERTI GRENI Metamorphosin, carmen ENKOMIASTIKON.
BEllica pacificae concedat lancea (...),
Seu tibi prosa magis, seu tibi metraplacent.
Saepe D^es inter laudem meruere Poetae,
Hostibus in medijs arma virosque canunt.
Inter Philosophos laudem meruere Poetae,
Qui leuibus miscent seria me^ra ^ocis.
Bella Ducum, and cl^ros multi scripsere triumphos,
Inter quos primas Maro Poeta tenet.
Sunt qui mutatas studuerunt dicere formas,
Quales quae quondam Naso Poeta dedit.
Post Metamorphosin Nasonis, carmine scriptam,
Mutatas formas carmine nemo dedit.
Grenus adest tandem, rhetor bonus atque Poeta,
Qui sua cum prosis carmina iuncta dedit.
Sicupis ingratae poenas persoluere amicae,
Hic exempla legas, moribus apta suis.
Orabis Uenerem (solet exaudire precantem)
Inque nouam formam vertet amica Venus.
Dura est? in saxum: leuis est? in Chameleontem:
Inque rosam vertet, garrula si fuerit.
G. B. Cant.

In laudem Roberti Greni Cantab. in Artibus Magistri.
OLim praeclaros scripsit Chaucerus ad Anglos,
Aurea metra suis patrio sermon refundens:
Post hunc Gowerus, post hunc sua carmina Lydgate,
Postque alios alij sua metra dedere Britannis.
Multis post annis, coniungens carmina prosis,
Floruit Ascamus, Chekus, Gascoynus, and alter
Tullius Anglorum nunc viuens Lillius, illum
Consequitur Grenus, prae^larus vterque Poeta.
ALCIDA GREENES Metamorphosis.
LOosing from Tripoly, to make for Alexandria, as we thought to cross the Seas
with a speedy cut, our Ship had not long gone under sail, scarce past two
hundred Leagues upon the maine; but, whether our unhappy Fortune, the
frowardness of the Fates, the Constellation of some contrary Aspect, or the
particular destiny of some unhappy Man had so decreed: when the calm was
smoothest, the sea without storm, the sky without clouds; then Neptune, to
show he was God of the seas, and AEolus master of the winds, either of them
severally, and both of them coniointly, so conspired, that they first drew a
foggie vale over Phoebus face, that the heavens appeared all gloomie, the
Trytons daunced, as foreshewing a rough sea; and AEolus setting his winds at
liberty, hurled such a gale into the Ocean, that every surge was ready to
overtake our ship, and the bark ready to founder with every wave: such and so
miserable was our estate, that we struck all our Sails, weighed our Ankers,
and let the ship hull at wind and weather, from our handy labors falling to
hearty prayers. Thus looking every hour to commit our Souls to the gods, and
our bodies to the seas, after we had floted by the space of five days without
hope of life, our bark by chance fell upon the coast of Taprobane, an Island
situated far South, under the pole Antarticke, where Canapus the fair star
gladdeth the hearts of the inhabitants: there we suffered shipwreck, all
perishing in the sea, except my unfortunate self, who count my misfortune
greater in surueying the rest, than if I had been partner with them of their
destinies. Well, the gods would have me live to be more miserable, and despair
I would not, lest I should prove guilty of mine own mishap, but taking heart
at grass, wet and weary as I was, I passed up into the Island, which I found
inhabited and fruitful, the air passing temperate, the situation pleasant,
the soil abounding with trees, herbs, and grass, fowls and beasts of all
kind, the Champian fit for corn and grain, the wood-land full of thickets,
the meades full of springs and delightful fountains: that the soil and the
air equally proportioned, the I Will seemed a sacred Eden, or Paradise: much like
that fair England, the flower of Europe, stored with the wealth of all the
Western world, which as ex opposito is contrarily placed far North, under
the pole Articke. Well, crept up the clyffes into the maine continent of this
Island, I wandered far, and found no village, til at last, under a hill I spied
a little cottage, at the door whereof sat an old woman decrepit, ouer-worne
with years, her hair as white as the Down found upon the shrubbes of Arabia,
her face full of wrinckles, furrowed so with age, as in her visage appeared the
very map of antiquity; yet might I perceive by the lineaments of her face,
that she had been beautiful and well featured; and that she was descended
from some good parentage, such sparks of Gentilitie appeared in her
countenance. Musing at this old Matron, that sat passing melancholy, my teeth
for cold beating in my head, I saluted her in this manner.

Mother: for this Title I may use in respect of your age, craving pardon if I
impart not what reverence belongs to your estate, in that I am a stranger, I
salute you, wishing as many good fortunes may end your days, as you have past
ill fortunes in the course of your life. My name, or Countries, little auailes
now to reveal, time being too short, and my state too miserable: let it
suffice, I am a stranger that have suffered shipwreck on your coast, my fellow
consorts drowned, ending their sorrows, I escaped, reserved to great
misfortunes. The weather is cold, and I am wet, might I crave harbor this
night, I should be bound to make such requital as distress can afford,
which is thanks, and pray to the gods that you may die as fortunate as the
mother of Cleo^is and Byron. The old beldam lifting up her head, and seeing me
stand shaking for cold, uttered not a word, but taking up her staff, and me
by the hand, confirmed my welcome with silence, and led me into her Cottage,
where stumbling about on her three legs, she made me a lusty fire, that
cheered my half dead limbs, and revived what the Sea had half mortified.
After she perceined I began to wax warm, and that my color grew to be fresh,
she began to make me answer in this manner.

Since now that the fire has made thee frolic, and the warmth of my poor
Cottage has been as good as household Physic to cure thy weather-beaten
loins, let me say as thou shall find, that thou art welcome: for I hold it a
religion to honor strangers, especially dis^rest, since comfort in misery is a
double gift. I know not thy degree, nor I recke not: suffice I use thee as thou
seem, and entertain thee as my abiliti^ can: thy estate may be great, for
the H^d makes not the Monk, nor the apparel the ^an. Mercu^ie walked in the
shape of a Country Swain, Apollo kept Midaes sheep, and poor Philemon and
Bawcis his wife, entertained Jupiter himself, supt him and lodged him, they
honored an unknown ghest: he not ungrateful to so kind an Oast, for he
turned their Cottage to a Temple, and made them Sacrificers at his Altars. Thus
I may be deceived in thy degree, but howsoever, or whosoever, this cottage, and
what is in it, is mine and thine, less thou shall not find, and more in
conscience thou can not crave. Son, I speak thus frankly, for that I am
old, for age has that privilege, to be private and familiar with strangers,
for were I as I have been, as beautiful as now I am withered: as young as I am
old, I would be less prodigal and more churlish, lest with Phillis I might
intertaine Demophon, which did make account of the trothlesse Trojan, or with
Ariadne tie my self to the proportion of Theseus. But age has put water in
the flame, and many years turned the glowing sparks to cold winds. Time
(son) is like the worm Tenedes, which smoothly lying on the bark of the
tree, yet eats out the sap. It steals on by minutes, and fares like the
Sun, whose shadow hastes on, yet cannot be perceived, but letting this parle
pass, seeing thou art weary and hungry, two fruits that grow from shipwreck,
rest the^ till I provide Supper, which how homely soever it be, yet must thou
account it dainty, for that it is my delicates, and accept it as a prodigal
banquet, for that every dish shall be sauce^ with welcome.

With this she rose from her stool and went to provide supper, leaving me
amazed at her gracious reply, making me to conjecture by her words, that as she
was wise, so she had been well brought up, and was descended of no small
Parentage: I sat in a muse till she had made ready our rates: which being set
on the table, we fell to make trial of our teeth, as before we had done of our
tongues, that we began and ended supper without any great chat. Well, our
repast taken, the old woman seeing me fitter for sleep than for prattle, gave
me leave to go to bed, where I past away the night in golden slumbers, lying
so long in the morning till Phoebus glimmering on my face, bade me good day.

Awakt by the summons of the Sun, I arose, and found mine old Oastesse
sitting at her door in her old melancholy mood, sighing and sorrowful: an
interchange of salues passed between her and me, I with thanks for my great
and courteous intertainment, and she with often repetitions of welcomes, taking
a stool and si^ting down by his old dame, seeing she fell again to her
dumpes, I began to be thus inquisitiue.

Mother, if I may without offense presume to use a question, I would inquire
what I muse at, and be absolved in a dark Enigma that I have found in your
cottage: but rather had I still hold my thoughts in suspense, than be offensive
either to your age, or to so courteons an Oastesse. The old woman smiling at my
fear, or at my folly, bade me say on: and I boldly prosecuted my purpose thus.

Since my arrival in your Cottage, I have noted your thoughts to be
passionate, and your passions to be violent: I have seen care lurking midst
the wrinkles of your age, and sorrow breathed out with broken sighs. I do not
deny but age is given to melancholy, and many years acquainted with many
dumps: but such far fetched groans, the hecalts of griefs, such deep sighs
the Ambassadors of sorrow, make me think either you grieve at your sins with
repentance, or else recount some great forepassed misfortunes: this is the
doubt, and here lies the question.

I had no sooner uttered these words, but the old woman leaning her head
against her staff, fell into such bitter tears, as did discover a multitude
of sorrows and perplexed passions: insomuch as taking pity of her griefs, I
lent her a few luke warm drops, to show how in mind I did participate of her
unknown ^olours. After she had filled the furrows of her face with the
streams of her tears, ending the catastrophe of her passions with a volee of
sighs, she blub^ered out this reply. Ah son, ill have those painters
deciphered time with a pumice stone, as rasing out both joys and sorrows with
obliuie: seeing experience tells me, that deep conceived sorrows are like the
Sea Iuie, which the older it is, the larger roots it has: resembling the
Eagle, which in her oldest age renews her bill. Passions (my son) are like
the arrows of Cupid, which if they touch lightly prove but toys, but
piercing the skin, prove deep wounds, as hardly to be rase^ ^ut as the spots of
the Leopard: I was, son (and with that she entered her narration with a deep
sigh) once young and buxsome as thou art, beauty discovering her pride, where
now a tawny hiew pulls down my plumes: the lineaments of my fac^ were leueld
with such equal proportion, as I was counted full of favor: and of so fair a
Dye had Nature stained my cheeks, that I was thought beautiful: yea (son)
give me leave a little to savor of self love, I tell thee I was called the
Venus of Taprobane: my parentage did no whit disgrace what nature had imparted
upon me, for I was the daughter of an Earl. To be brief (my son) as well
the qualities of my mind, as my exterior favors were so honored in Taprobane,
that the Prince of the ^and called Cleomachus took me to wife, and had by me
four children, one son and three daughters: and with this she fell afresh to
her tears, pouring forth many passionate plaints, til at last the sorrow of
her tears stopping, she went forward in her tale: My Husband in the prim^ of
years dyed, my son succeeded in the government, and I and my daughters
courted it, as their youth and my direction would permit. Living thus
contentedly, and as I thought armed against fortune, in that we foregarded all
our actions with virtue, the Fates, if there be any, or the destinies, some
star or planet, in some unfortunate and cursed aspect, calculated such ill hap
to all my daughters natiuities, as they proved as mis^able, as I would have
wished them happy. And here multiplying sigh upon sigh with double and trebble
reuies, she ceased: but I desirous to know the sequel of their misfortunes,
asked her the cause and manner of their mishaps: she replied not, but taking
me by the hand, she led me from her cottage, to a valley hard by, where she
brought me to a marble pillar, fashioned and pourtraied like a woman, which
made me remember Pigmalions picture, (...) he (...) with his hand and doted on
with his heart. No sooner were we come to the stone, but Alcida (for so was
the old ladies name) taking it in her arms, kissed it, and washed it with her
tears. I amassed at this strange greeting of Alcida and the stone, drew more
nigh, and there I might perceive the Image to hold in either hand a table. In
the right hand was depainted the protraiture of Venus, holding the ball that
brought Troy to ruin, and under were written these verses.

When Nature forged the fair unhappy mould,
Wherein proud beauty took her matchless shape:
She ouer-slipt her cunning and her skill,
And aimed to fair, but drew beyond the mark;
For thinking to have made a heavenly bliss,
For wanton gods to dally with in heaven,
And to have framed a precious iem for men,
To solace all their dumpish thoughts with glee,
She wrought a plague, a poison, and a hell:
For gods, for men, thus no way wrought she well.
Venus was fair, fair was the queen of love,
Fairer then Pallas, or the wife of Jove;
Yet did the Gigglets beauty grieve the Smith,
For that she brau'd the Creeple with a horn.
Mars said, her beauty was the star of heaven,
Yet did her beauty stain him with disgrace:
Paris for fair, gave her the golden ball;
And bought his, and his fathers ruin so:
Thus nature making what should far excel,
Lent gods, and men, a poison and a hell.
In her left hand, was curiously pourtraied a Peacocke, clad glorio^y in the
beauty of his feathers; under was written as follows:

The bird of Juno glories in his plumes,
Pride makes the Foul to prune his feathers so,
His spotted train, fetched from old Argus head,
With golden rays, like to the brightest sun:
Inserteth self-love in a silly bird,
Till midst his hot an glorious fumes,
He spies his feet, and then lets fall his plumes.
Beauty breeds pride, pride hatcheth forth disdain,
Disdain gets hate, and hate calls for revenge,
Revenge with bitter prayers urges still:
Thus self-love nursing up the pomp of pride,
Makes beauty wrack against an ebbing tide.
After I had viewed the pictures, and read the poesies, I grew to be more
desirous to know what this imagement, entreating Alcida to discourse unto me
what this portraiture did mean: she sitting down at the foot of the stone,
began to tell her tale in this manner.

ALCIDA, her first History.
WHile I lived in the Court, honored of all, as mother to the Prince and loved
of every one, as one that laid the method of my sons happy and virtuous
government, being princely wedded to the higher, and affable to the lower, a
Mother to them that were in want, and a Nurse to the distressed; I co^ed my
glory the more, and my fortune the greater, in that I was guarded with my
three daughters, Uirgins adorned so with excellent qualiti^ both of mind and
body, I mean as well exterior favors, as interior virtues, that fame made
report of their honors, not only through all Taprobane, but through all the
Islands adjacent, especially of my el^ daughter, called (for her beauty in her
cradle) Flordespine: Nature had so inricht her with supernatural beauty, that
she seemed an immortal creature, shrouded in a mortal carcass, in so much
that if her times had been equal with Troy, Paris had left Greece, and come to
Taprobane for her love. Living thus loved and admired of all: selfe-houe the
moth that creeps into young minds, so tickled her with the conceit of her
own beauty, that she counted no time well spent which she bestowed not in
setting out that more glorious by Art, which Nature had made so absolute and
excellent: no drugges from Arabia, that might clear the skin, were unsought
for: no herbs nor secrets that any Philosopher in Physic had found out,
which might increase beauty, but she made experience of: following Venus every
way in such vanities, and playing the right woman: for, to confess the truth,
their sex cares more for the tricking of their faces, than the tearing of
their souls, spending an hour rather in righting the tresses of their hair,
than a moment in bending their thoughts to devotion. The foulest must be fair,
if not in deed, yet in conceit: and she that is fair must venture her soul to
keep her beauty inuiolate: but leaving off this digression, my daughter
Flordespine being thus self conceited, was more curious than wise, and could
sooner afford a pound of pride, then an ounce of humility: for diverse Noble men
resorted from all the bordering Island to be suitors unto her, but her beauty
made her so coy, that happy was he that might have a glance of her perfection.
So that many came joyful in hope to have favor, but departed sorrowful,
answered with disdain. For as none pulls up the barran root, but he is
stifled with the savor: as none looks into the poole of Babylon, but he
hasardeth his health: as none gaseth against the Cockatrice, but either he
loses his sight, or his life; so none took view of the beauty of Flordespine,
but they returned either frantike in affection, fond with fancy, or pained with
a thousand perplexed passions. Yet she taking delight in their griefs,
resembled the Crysolite, which the mere it is beaten with hammers, the harder
it is, and as the Palm tree can by no means be depressed, nor the Margarites
of Europe wrought into no other form, than Nature has framed them: so no
prayers, promises, passions, sighs, sorrows, plaints, tears nor treaties
could prevail, to make her show some favor to any of her suitors. In so much
that the poor Noble men finding themselves fettered, without hope of freedom,
seeing their liberties restrained within an endless labyrinth, and no
courteous Ariadne to give them a clew of thread to draw them out of their
miseries, cried out against love, against Venus, against women, as merciless
monsters, hatched to torture the minds of men: and at last spying their own
follies, shaking off the shackles of (...) with disdain, went home, and at
their departure pronounced with Demosthenes, that they would not Poenitentiam
tantiemere. Cupid seeing how his scholars florked from his school, thought
he would retain some one, with whom to dally; and therefore pulling forth a
fierce inflamed arrow, he struck the son of a Noble man here in Taprobane
to the quick, that he of all the rest remained fast snared in her beauty: his
name was Telegonus, a Youth every way equal to Fiordespine, except in
parentage, and yet he was no meaner man than the son of an Earl. This
Telegonus (omitting his proportion and qualities, for that it shall suffice to
say they were excellent) having had a sight of Fiordespine, stood as the Dear
at the gaze, swallowing up greedily the inuenomed hook that Venus so subtly
had baited for him: for after the Idea of her person and perfection had made a
deep impression in his mind, and that he had passed three or four days in
ruminating her excellency, and debated in his bed with many lewtene slumber how
sweet a saint she was, he fell from liking to so deep love, that nothing but
death did raze it out.

And thus he marched under the standard of fancy, being but a fresh water
soldier to abide the alarums of affection, feeling a restless passion that
fretted his mind, as the caterpiller the fruit, he could not tell on which
care to sleep, but builded Castles in the air, and cast beyond the moon:
first, he began to consider with himself, how many brave Noble men of sundry
Islands, rich in possessions, honorable in parentage, in qualities rare, in
property excellent, had sought her love, and yet missed. When he had made
comparison between himself and them, despair began with dark persuasions to
dissuade him from attempting such high loves, knowing, that Aquila non capit
muscas: Ladies of great beauty look not at mean (...): that Venus frowned on
the smith with a rinkle on her forehead, when she smiled on Mars with a dimple
on her (...).

These premises considered, poor Telegonus sad, nipped on the pate with these
new thoughts, resembling the melancholy disposition of Troilus, for the
inconstancy of Cressida, yet after he had mused awhile, and past over a few
dreaming dumpes; Hope clad in purple suited robes, told him that Cupid had but
one string to his bow, one head to one arrow; that Venus greatest number was
an unity, how the heart could harbor but one fancy, and one woman be wedded
but to one man. Therefore though they mist, as either unfortunate, or crossed
by some contrary influence, since loves fee simple was registered in the court of
their destinies, there was no cause of his despair, but that he might be the
man that should enjoy Fiordespine, and set up the trophee of love, maugre all
the sinister determinations of Cupid, Floting thus between despair and hope;
he passed over three or four days melancholy and passionate, taking his only
content in being solitary: so that at last finding himself all alone, feeling
the fire too great to smother in secrecy, he burst forth into these flames.

Ah Telegonus, miserable in thy life, and unfortunate in thy loves: is thy
youth blasted with fancy, or the prime of thy years daunted with affection:
can thou no sooner see Paphos, but thou must provide sacrifice for Venus?
Can thou not hear the Sirens sing, but thou must bend thy course to their
music? may not beauty kindle a fire, but (...) must straight step to the
flame: will thou dally with the fly in the candle, sport with the Salamander
in the heat of AEtna, and with Troilus hazard at that which will breed thy
harm? know thou not love is a ^rantike frenzy that so inforceth the minds
of men, that under the taste of nurture, they are poiso^ed with the water of
Stix: for as he which was charmed by Laon, sought still to hear her
inchauntment: or as the Dear after he once brouseth on the Tamariske, he will
not be driven away until he dies: so Lovers have their senseless senses so
besotted with the power of this lascivious god, they count not themselves
happy, but in their supposed unhappiness: being at most ease in dis^uiet; at
greatest rest, when they are most troubled: seeking contentation in care,
delight in misery, and hunting greedily after that which always breeds
endless harm. Yea but Telegonus, beauty is therefore to be obeyed, because it
is beauty: and love to be feared of men, because it is honored of the gods.
Dare reason abide the brunt, when beauty bids the battle: can wisdom win the
field, where love is captain? No, no, love is without law, and therefore above
all law: honored in heaven, feared in earth, and a very terror to the
infernal ghosts: Bow then unto that Telegonus, whereunto lawless necessity
does bend: be not so fond, as with Zeuxes to bind the Ocean in fetters: fight
not with the Rascians against the wind: bark not with the Wolves against the
Moon: seek not with them of S^yros to shoot against the Stars: strive not
with Thesides against Venus: for love bring on lewd looks, to command by
power, and to be obeyed by force: truth Telegonus, for Juno strove but once
with Venus, and he was vanquished: Jupiter resisted Cupid, but he went by the
worst. It is hard for thee with the Crabbe to strive against the stream, or to
wrestle with a fresh wound, lest thou make the sore more dangerous. Well
Telegonus, what of all this prate? thou do love: thou honor beauty as
supernatural: thou say, Venus amongst all the goddesses is most mighty: that
there is no Island like Paphos, no bird like the doves, no god like Cupid: what
of this? but why do you love no meaner woman then Fiordespine, the daughter of
the Prince, the fairest in Taprobane? Ah Telegonus, derogate not from her
beauty, the fairest in the world: unhappy man in recounting her beauty, in
reckoning her perfections, thou do imblaze thine own misfortunes: for the
more she is excellent, the less will be her love, and the greater her
disdain. Can the Eagle and the blind ^syphage build in one tree: will the
Falcon and the Dove covet to ^t on one perch: will the Ape and the Bear be
tied in one tedder: will the Fox and the Lamb be in one den; or Fiordespine,
who thinks her self fairer then Venus, stoop to the lure of one so base as
I? No, for the more beauty, the more pride, and the more pride, the more
preciseness. None must play on Ormenes harp, but Orpheus: none rule Lucifer
but Phoebus: none wear Venus in a tablet but Alexander, nor none enjoy
Fiordespine, but such a one as far exceeds thee in person and personage.
Tush Telegonus, enter not into these doubts: Sapho a Queen loved Phao a
Ferri-man; she beautiful and wise, he poor and servile: she holding a
scepter, he an Oar; the one to govern, the other to labor. Angelica
forsook diverse Kings and took Medon a mercenary Soldier: Love Telegonus has
no lack; Cupid shoots his shafts at randon; Venus as soon looks at the
sun, as at a star. Love fears a Prince as soon as a peasant, and fancy has
no respect of persons.

Then Telegonus hope the best: Audaces fortuna ad^at: Love and fortune favors
them that are resolute. The stone Sandastra is not so har^, but being heat in
the fire it may be wrought: nor Iuory so tough, but seasoned with Zathe it may
be engraven. The gates of Venus temple are but half shut: Cupid is a churl
and peremptory, yet to be entreated: women are wilful, but in some means they
may be won: were she as full of beauty as Venus, or as great in Majesty as
Juno. Hope then the best and be bold: for (...) are admitted to put in no plea
at the bar of love. Telegonus having, by uttering these passions, disburdened
some part of his pains, and yet not in such sort, but his temples were
restless, his grief much, his content none at all, his care in his sleep
incessant, his mind melancholy, so that his only delight was to be in dumpes;
in so much, that he gadded solitary up and down the Groves as a Satyr
enamoured of some Country Nymph. Cupid seeing his art did well, thought to
shows him some sport; for on a day as he walked, contemplating the beauty of
Fiordespine, being sore athirst with inward sorrow, he went to a fountain hard
by to cool his heat, where he found his heart set on fire with a great ^ame:
for there he espied Fiordespine, and her other two sisters sitting solacing
themselves about the spring: which sudden sight so appalled his senses, as if
he had been appointed a new Judge to the three goddesses in the valley of Ida:
yet seeing before his eyes the mistress of his thoughts, and the saint unto whom
he did owe his devotion: he began to ^ke heart at grass, thinking that by
this fit opportunity, Love and Fortune began to favor his enterprise: willing
therefore not to omit so good an occasion, he saluted them in this sort.

Muse not, fair creatures, if I stand in a maze, since the sight of your
surpassing beauties makes me doubt, whether I should honor you as earthly
ladies, or adore you as heavenly goddesses: for no doubt Paris never saw fairer
in Ida. But now noting with deep insight the figure of your divine faces; I
acknowledge your honors to be sisters to our prince, whom I reverence, as
allied to my sovereign, and offer my sernice, as a servant ever devoted to
such fair and excellent saints.

The ladies hearing this strange and unlooked for salutation, began to smile:
but Fiordespine frowning, as half angry he should presume into her presence,
with a coy countenance returned him this answer.

If sir Telegonus, for so I suppose is your name, your eyesight be so bad,
perhaps with peering too long on your books, or your self so far beside your
senses, as to take us for Nymphs: I would wish you either to read less, or to
provide you a good Physicion, else shall you not judge colors for me: and yet
since I would you should know, we count our penny good silver, and think our
faces, if not excellent, yet such as may boot compare.

Telegonus taking opportunity by the forehead, and thinking to strike the iron
at this heat, made reply.

Maiden, he might be thought either blind or envious, that would make a doubt
of Venus beauty, and he be deemed either frantike or foolish, that cannot see
and say, as you are superior to most, so are you inferior to none. Pardon
Madam, if my censure be particular, I mean of your sweet self, whose favors
I have ever loved and admired, though unworthy to set my fancy on such glorious
excellency.

Fiordespine hearing her self thus praised, was not greatly displeased, yet
past she over what was spoken, as though her ears had been stopped with
Ulysses: but Eriphila, the second, who was as wise as her sister was
beautiful, desired Telegonus to rest him by them on the grass, and that they
would at their departure ask him as a guard to the court: Telegonus as glad of
this command, as if he had been willed by the gods to have been chamberlain to
Venus, sa^e down with a mind full of passions, having his eye fixed still on
the beauty of Fiordespine: which Eriphila espying, thinking to be pleasant
with Telegonus, she began thus to prattle.

Your late passionate speech Telegonus, to my sister Fiordespine, makes me
think that Venus is your chief goddess, and that love is the lord, whose
livery you wear: if it be so, neighbor take heed (for fancy is a Shrew)
many like, that are neu^r loved: Apollo may cry long after Daphne before she
hear him: and Troilus may stand long enough on the walls before Cresida wave
her glove for a salve. I speak Telegonus against our selves: take heed, we be
coy, and wily: we with our looks can change men, though Venus will wear the
target, and Mars the distaffe, Omphalo handle the club, and Hercules the
spindle: Alexander must crouch, and Campaspe look coy: women will rule in
loves, howsoever men be l^fty in courage. Indeed Madam, quoth Telego^us, him
whom no mortal creature can control, love can command: no dignity is able to
resist Cupids deity. Achilles was made by his mother Thetis invulnerable, yet
wounded by fancy: Hercules not to be conquered of any, yet quickly conquered
by affection: Mars able to resist Jupiter, but not to withstand beauty. Love
is not only kindled in the eye by desire, but engraven in the mind by
destiny, which neither reason can eschew, nor wisdom expel: the more pity
I confess Madam, for poor men, and the greater impiety in the gods, that in
giving love free liberty, they grant him a lawless privilege; but since
Cupid will be obeyed, I am contented to bow: especially, seeing I have
chanced to set my affection on so excellent a creature.

And who might that be, I pray you (quoth Fiordespine) (taking the matter in
dudge^, that Telegonus should make report) that is of such great excellency?
dwells she in Taprobane? In Taprobane Madam, replied Telegonus, but with
such a peale of sighs, bewraying his loves in silence: that Eriphila smiling,
said; I see fire cannot be hidden in the Flax without smoke, nor Musk in the
bosom without smell, nor love in the breast without suspicion: I perceive, in
faith neighbor, by your lips what lettice you love: the saint that you
account of such excellency, whose perfection has so snared your senses, is my
sister Fiordespine. I, quoth Fiordespine, filling her Iuory brows full of
Shrewish wrinkles, I hope the young lord Telegonus knows what Suitors I have
shaken off: and therefore not inferring comparisons, because they be odious, I
may give him his answer with an etc. There are more Maids then Maulkin, and
more birds for the Faulcon to perch with, then the Eagle: the Lion is a bloody
beast, for that he knows his strength: I will not conclude: but lord
Telegonus, if I be the woman you mean, cease from your suit, for in faith so
well I do love you, that you cannot more displease me, then in seeking to
please me: for if I knew no other cause to mislike, yet this might suffice,
that I cannot love. At this flat and peremptory answer, Telegonus sat nipped
on the pate, like to them which taste of the fish Mugra, whose operation makes
them for a time senseless: which Eriphila espying, thinking to iumpe even with
the Gentleman, pitying his passions, in that Fiordespine was so coy to so
courteous a Youth, said: You may see now Telegonus, that Venus has her
frowns, as she has smiles: that Cupid has arrows headed with ^ead to
procure disdain, as well as with gold to increase love: hear me that am a
Uirgin, as dutiful to Vesta, as reverent to Venus.

The pains that lovers take, for hunting after loss, if their minds were not
confirmed with some secret enchantment, were able to keep their fancies for
being inflamed, or else to cool desire already kindled: for the days are
spent in thoughts, and the nights in dreams: both in danger, either of
beguiling us of that we had, or promising us that we have not. The head
fraught with fantasies, fiered with ielosie, troubled with both: yea so many
inconveniences wait upon love as to reckon them all, were infinite: and to
ta^te but one of them were intolerable, being always begun with grief,
continued with sorrow, and ended with death: for it is a pain shadowed with
pleasure, and a joy stuffed with misery. So that I conclude, that as none ever
saw the altars of Busiris without sorrow, nor banqueted with Phoebus without
surfeiting: so as impossible it is to deal with Cupid, and not either to gain
speedy death, or endless danger. As I was ready in defense of love to make
reply, there came a little page from their lady mother, to call them home to
dinner: whereupon they all rose, and would have taken their leave, but boldly I
stood to my tackling, and told them: Ladies you pass not so; for construe my
meaning how you please, or accept of my repay how you list, I will not be so
discourteous to leave you so slenderly guided, as in the guard of this little
page: and with that I conducted them unto the court, and there with a loath to
depart, took my leave, having a courteous farewell of all but of Fiordespine,
who parmning like Juno, in her mai^stie gave me a niggardly A dio with a nod:
which notwithstanding, love commanded me to take as a prodigal courtesy.
Well, Telegonus thus left alone, fearing too much solitariness might breed
intemperate passions, went home, musing on the strange qualities of his
mistress: where c^sting himself on his bed, he began to consider, that as she
was beautiful, so she was proud; and that her exterior favor was blemished
with an interior disdain: that Venus was as much despised for her lightness,
as honored for her deity: that the black violet was more esteemed for her
smell, then the Lilly for her whiteness: that the darkest Topas was held more
precious then the brightest Crystal: and women are to be measured by their
virtues, and not by their beauties: And why do thou urge this Telegonus, for
that she has not fawned on thee at the first meeting, given over the fort at
the first assault, and consented to thy love at the first motion? would tho^
have her so light, fond youth, as to stoop to the lure at the first call.
Helena was wanton, yet was she long in wooing: Paris courted her before he
caught her: if a straggler made it strange, blame not her that is virtuous and
a Uirgin, if she be somewhat coy: resting in this hope, he somewhat appeased
his passions, driving away his melancholy and despairing humors, by setting
his rest on this point. But love that is impatient, was in the day his
companion, and in the night his pillow: Venus commanded her son to be beaten
with Roses, which as they are fair colored, and savor sweet, so they are
full of pricks, and pierce the skin: Love, thus hammering in the head of
Telegonus, he was doubtful what to do, or how best to prosecute his purpose:
to repair to the court, and there to court her, was to attempt an adventure
very perilous and half impossible: to seek means to parle with her, was to
offer blank papers to Venus: therefore he resolved to write unto her, and
thereupon entering into his study, he took pen and paper, and sent unto her
in this effect.

Telegonus, to Fiordespine, health.
THey (honorable Fio^despine) that are inu^nomed with the Hidaspis, if they
presently discover not their pain, perish: such as are stung with the
Tarantula, must have music at their ear before the poison come at their
heart: Venus temple is never shut: Cupids register ever unfolded, and the
secrets of love, if they be concealed, breed either danger by silence, or
death by secrecy: I speak this by experience, for the deep impression of your
divine beauty, counited with the admiration of your excellent virtues, have
printed such a character in my thoughts, since first I saw your sweet self,
as either must be confirmed with your mercy, or I shall be confounded with
misery: where Cupid strikes, there no salues can prevail, where love serves
his writ of command, there a Supersedeas of reason is of no avail.

Beauty forces the gods, and therefore may fetter men: but perhaps your honor
will say, that the Fox is no phere for the Lion: none so mean a man as I
worthy to gaze at so glorious a personage, so that I may rather be counted
impudent, than passionate, in attempting that which so many my betters have
missed.

To this objection give me leave ^o say, that Venus (...) not the robes, but
the mind: not the parentage, but the mind: not the Parentage, but the person:
not the wealth, but the heart: not the honors but the loyalty: if then faith
in fancy, not possessions, are to be respected, I hope, as Nature by her
secret judgment has endewed al creatures with some perfect quality, where
want breeds mislike: as the Mole deprived of sight, has a wonderful hearing:
the Hare being very fearful, is most swift: the Fish having no ears, has
most clear eyes: so I, of parentage mea^e, of wealth little, of wit less; yet
have I given me, by nature, such a loyal heart, as I hope the perfection of
the one shall supply the want of the other, coveting not to rule as a Husband,
but to live dutiful and loving ever to the Lady Fiordespine.

Blame me not Madame, if I plead with my pen, for ever since I fell into the
labyrinth of your looks, I have felt in my heart, as in a little work, all
the passions and contrarieties of the elements: for mine eyes (I call the gods
to witness, I speak without fayning) almost turn into water, through the
continual streams of tears, and my sighs fly as wind in the air,
proceeding from the flaming fire which is kindled in my heart, as that without
the drops of your pity, it will turn my body into dry earth and cinders.

Then Fiordespine, since your beauty has given the wound, let it like Achilles
spear, cure the same sore: covet not to set out the trophe of disdain, where
already you are conquered: strive not for life, since you have any liberty, but
fetch water from the fountain of Alcidalie, ^ples from the hill Erecius, con^
from the temple of Venus, to appease that passion that otherwise cannot be
cured: render but love for love, yea Madame, such love as time shall never blot
out with ob^iuion, neither any sinister fortune diminish. So that if the world
wondered at the loyalty of Petrarch to his Lawra, or of Amadis to his Gryance,
they shall have more cause to marvel at the love of Telegonus to Fiordespine,
whose life and death stands in your answer, which I hope shall be such as
belongs to the desert of my love, and the excellency of your beauty.

Yours, if he be Telegonus of Taprobane.


TElegonus having finished his letter, caused it to be delivered to Fiordespine
with great trustiness and secrecy, who receiving it with a frowning look, as
half suspecting the contents, yet unripped the seals and read it: which when
she had thoroughly perused, drove her into such a fury, that she in a rage
rent it, and flung it into the fire, saying: There end his letters and his
loves. But as the Sea once hoysed with a gale, calmeth not till it has passed
with a storm; as the stone Pyrites once set on fire burns in the water: so a
woman's stomach once stirred, cease not to be discontent, till it be glutted
with revenge: for, Fiordespine not satisfied with tearing the letter of
Telegonus, could take no rest, till either she had breathed out some hard
speeches with her tongue, or set down bitter taunts with her pen, seeing
therefore no fit means for the one, she stepped in great choler to her
standish, and wrote to him thus satyrically.

Fiordespine to Telegonus.
THough Vulcan with his polt foot presumed to covet the queen of beauty:
though Ixion adventured to attempt the love of Juno: yet lord Telegonus, no
offense to your person, these paltring presidents are no conclusions that
persons unworthy should disgrace, by their impudent and worthless motions, the
honors of excellent personages. How I am grieved at your letters, guess by my
sharp reply: how I like of your lines, examine in my writing: how I disdain
them both, time shall put you in evidence. My beauty, you say, has made an
impression in your heart: a man of soft metal, that so soon takes the stamp;
a lover of great conceit, that is fixed at the first look: but since it is
your gentle nature to be so full of fancy, I would have the gods to make you
either Venus chamberlain, or Cupids chaplain, or both: because being so
amorous, you should not want offices: you forestalled me in red letters, with
an objection that many your betters have courted me and mist: then good lovely
lord Telegonus, think not, if I delighted not to gaze at stars, that I mean
to stumble at stones: if I vouchsafe not to smell to most fragrant flowers, that
I mean to make me a nosegay of weeds. If honorable princes offered to Venus,
and could not be heard, and sought for my favors but found them not, I think:
suppose the rest, for I list not be tedious, lest I should weary my self, and
grace thee with writing so much. For thy loyalty keep it for thy equals: for
thy love, lay it not on me, lest as I disdain thy person, so I revenge thy
presumption. And so my hand was weary, my eyes sleepie, and my heart full of
contempt, and with that I went to bed.

Her own Fiordespine of Taprobane.

THis letter was no sooner sealed, but (as women are impatient of delays) it
was conveyed with all possible speed to Telegonus; who receiving it, kissed and
(...) it, as coming from the hands of his goddess, changing color often, as
one between fear and hope: at last vnripping the seals, he read such a
corasiue, as cut him to the heart. The Aspis stingeth not more deadly, the
serpent Porphirius inuenometh not more deeply, neither did ever the sight of
Medusas head more amaze a man, than the contents of this satyricall letter did
Telegonus: yea it drove the poor Gentleman into so many passions, that he
became half lunaticke, as if he had eaten of the seed of sputanta, that
troubles the brain with giddiness: he fell to exclaim against Venus and her
deity, blaming the gods that would suffer such a gigglet to remain in heaven,
repeating her lawless loves with Adonis, and her scapes with Mauors. Cupid he
called a boy, a fondling, blind in his aim, and accursed in hitting the mark:
rages against women, saying; they were merciless, cruel, unjust, deceitful,
like unto the Crocodile in tears: in sight, they seem to be Carnations; in
smelling, Roses; in hearing, Sirens; in taste, wormwood: in touching, nettles:
Thus he rayled and raged casting himself on his (...), and there forging a
thousand perplexed passions, one while accusing love as a lunacie, and then
again saying: Beauty was divine, and the rich^ jewel that ever nature
bestowed upon men. Lingering a day or two in this frenzy, he thought not to
give over the Castle at the first repulse, nor to prove so lewd a Huntsman as
to give over the chase at the first default, therefore he once again armed
himself with his pen and paper, and gave a fresh alarm to his friendly ^oe in
this manner.

Telegonus, to fair Fiordespine, of Taproban^.
Honorable Lady, the Pysicians say, salues seldom help an once long
suffered sore, and too late it is to plant Engines to batter, when the walls
are already broken. Autumn showers are ever out of season, and too late it is
^o dislodge love out of the breast, when it has infected every part of the
body. The sore, when the settering fistulo has by long continuance made the
sound flesh rotten, can neither with lenitiue plasters, nor cutting corasiues
be cured: so love craves but only time to bring the body and mind to ruin.
Your honor seeing how deeply I am deu^ted to your beauty and virtue, has sent
me pills of hard digestion, to assuage the force of my love, and qualify the
flame set on fire by fancy; but as the biting of the Uiper rankleth, til it
has brought the body bitten to bane: so your exquisite perfection has so
pierced every veins with the sting of love, that neither your bitter reply, nor
^atyrical innectiue, can in any wise prevail, only the mild medicine of your
mercy may salve the sore, and cut away the cause of my careful disease.

The extremity of my love, and the violence of my passions, has forced me to
hazard my self on your clemency: for I was never of that mind to count him
martial, that at the first shoot would yield up the keys of the City: for
the more hard the rebut is, the more hautie is the conquest; the more doubtful
the fight, the more worthy the victory; the more pain I take about the
battery, the more pleasure to win the bulwark of your breast, which if I should
obtain, I would count it a more rich prize, then ever Scipio, or any of the
nine Worthies won by conquest, and that these words be verily, and not
vanity; troth, and not tri^ing: I appeal to your good grace and favor, minding
to be tried by your courtesy, abiding either the sentence of consent unto
life, or denial unto death.

Yours, even after death, Telegonus of Taprobane.


THis letter finished and sent unto Fiordespine, so troubled her patience, for
that Telegonus was importunate, that she fared like the frowns of Bacchus,
half mad at this secret motion, swearing revenge, if either her self or her
friends could perform it: and in this humor she sent him by her Page, these
few lines.

Fiordespine to Telegonus.
I Had scarce read thy letters before I rent them, esteeming thy papers and thy
love a like; for as I mislike the one, so I disdain the other. Has overmuch
folly driven thee into a frenzy, or has want of manners made thee impudent?
Will thou brag with Irus the beggar amongst Penelopes suitors, or seek with
the smoky Cyclops to kiss Venus hand? look on thy feet, and so let fall thy
plumes: stretch not so high, unless thy sleeue were longer: for Fiordespine
scorneth so much as to look at Telegonus in respect of love, as Juno did to
jest with the father of the Centaures.

If I knew thy passions were as great, as thou decipherest thy grief, and thy
thoughts as fiery as the hills in Sycily, I would laugh at the one, as ioying at
thy sorrows, and put oil in the flame, as delighting to aggrauate thy
miseries. Since then thou see my resolution to be so regorous (ouer-rash
youth) betake thee to thy dumpes, and fare how thou list: for know, I mislike
thy suit, and hate thy person, and will live and dye thine enemy, if for no
other cause, yet for that thou have dared to court Fiordespine.

Thy mortal enemy, Fiordespine of Taprobane.


AFter that Telegonus had read this letter, saw^ed with such peremp^ory
disdain, he fell in a trance, lying in his bed as a dead carcass: but when he
was come to himself, he fell into such extreme passions, that his father and
his friends coming into the Chamber, thought him possessed with some spirit:
the Physician felt his pulses, and found he had a sound body, whereupon they
did conjecture it was love: and to verify the same, after he had raised
himself up in his bed, with a ghastly look, he cried nothing but Fiordespine,
fetching such grievous groans and deep sighs, that all the chamber fell into
tears: whereupon the old Earl, having his hair as white as snow, came
himself trudging to the Court, telling the ex^me pas^ion of his son, entreating
Fiordespine that she would so much as vouchsafe to come to his house, only
with her presence somewhat to mitigate his sons passions: but such was the
pride and disdain of my daughter, that neither theteares of the old Earl, the
entreaty of my son, nor my command could prevail with her, insomuch, that the
old man returned comfortless and sorrowing. Well, Telegonus lying thus
distressed by the space of a week, at last faining himself to amend, would
needs walk abroad that he might be solitary, and stumbled weak as he was
into this vale, and to this place, where sitting down he fell into these
pa^ons: Unfortunate Telegonus, whose stars at thy ^irth were in some cursed
aspect, why did thou not perish at thy birth, or how did fortune frowns. that
thou were not (...) in thy swaddling clothes? now grown to ripe yeetes, thou
feel more miseries than thou have lived moments: ah love, that labyrinth
that leads men to worse dangers then the Mynotaure in Greece: love that
kindlest desire, but allowest no reward: inconstant Venus, whose sacrifices
savor of death, whose laws are tyrannous, whose favors are misfortunes!
strumpet as thou art; (for I disdain to call thee goddess) thou and the
bastard brat thy son, show your power, your deity: revenge my blasphemies
how you can; for how great soener your choler be, my calamity cannot be
more. Merciless women, whose faces are lures, whose beauties are baits, whose
looks are nets, whose words are charms, and all to bring men to ruin. But of
all, cruel Fiordespine, borne of a Tiger, and nursed of the she Wolves in
Syria: whose heart is full of hate, whose thoughts are disdain, whose beauty
is ouerlaid with pride. Let Venus, if she have any justice, or Cupid, if he
have the equity of a god, make thee love where thou shall be mislik^. Alas
Telegonus, cease not with these prayers, the revenge is too easy, but cry to
the bitterness of thy passions, that they quit thy revenge against
Fiordespine: and with this his speech ceasing, he beat himself against the
ground in such pitiful sort, that the gods took compassion, and resolved a
revenge. But while he lay thus perplexed, his father mist him, and taking some
of his Gentlemen with him, sought him, and found him in this Malley, passionate
and speechless. The rumor of Telegonus distress came to the Court:
whereupon, I, and my son, with my other two daughters so entreated
Fiordespine, that she granted to go see the Gentleman: walking therefore to this
place, here we found him accompanied with his friends, all signi^ying with
tears, how they greeue^ at his mishap. Telegonus no sooner saw Fiordespine,
but turning himself upon the grass with a bitter look, he first gazed her
on the face, then lifting up his eyes to heaven, gave a great sigh, as though
his heart strings had broke: which Fiordespine percei^ing, tri^mphing in the
passions of her lover, she turned her back and ^miled. Scarce had she framed
this scornful countenance, but Mercury sent from the gods in a sh^pheards
attir^, struck her on the head with his Caduceus, and turned her into this
marble picture, which we amazed at, and Telegonus noting, turning himself on
his left side, groned forth these words, the gods have revenged, and I am
satisfied: and with that he gave ^y the ghost. The old Earl greened at the
death of his son, taking up his body, departed: I sorrowing at the
Metamorphosis of my daughter, wept: but to small effect: for ever since she
has remained, as thou see a wonder to the world, and a perpetual grief to
me.

Thus (son) have thou heard the discourse of my daughters misfortune, which
has not been so delightful for thee to hear, as grievous for me to reveal:
but seeing I am entered into the discoueries of their ills, no sooner shall we
have taken our repast, but I will show thee what fortuned to her second sister
Eriphila, for I know the nature of men is desirous of novelties: and with that
taking me by the hand, we went home to her Cottage.

The second Discourse.
W^e had no sooner diued with our homely delicates, tempring our times with
prattle of Fiordespine, but Alcida rose up, and walked to a Grove hard by, a
place inter seamed with shrubbes, but placed between two hills, like the
supposed entrance of hell, as there seemed that melancholy Saturn ^ad erected
an Academie. Entering into this Grove so thick as Phoebus was denied passage,
wandering awhile by many uncouth paths, at last we came into a fairs place,
where was a goodly Spring, the situation round; environed with (...); hard by
this fount stood two Cedars, tall and straight, on whose bark was curiously
(...) certain (...) Embleames; on the one was (...) Mercury throwing feathers
into the wind, and under was written these verses,

The richest gift the wealthy heaven astords,
The pearl of price sent from immortal Jove,
The shape wherein we most resemble gods,
The fire Prometheus stole from lofty skies:
This gift, this pearl, this shape, this fire is it,
Which makes us men, bold by the name of wit.
By wit we search divine aspect above,
By wit we learn what secrets science yields,
By wit we speak, by wit the mind is ruled,
By wit we govern all our actions:
Wit is the Load st^rre of each humane thought,
Wit is the tool, by which all things are wrought.
The brightest Iacynth hot becomes dark,
Of little steeme is Crystal being crack^,
Fine heads that can conceit no good, but ill,
Forge of that breeds ruin to themselves:
Ripe wits abused that build on (...) desire,
Do burn themselves like flies within the fire.
On the other ^edar was cut very cunningly Cupid, ^idwing bladders in the air,
the poesis under written was this:

Love is a lock that linketh noble minds,
Faith is the key that shuts the spring of love,
Lightness a wr^st, that w^ingeth all aw^y,
Lightness a plague, that ^ancie cannot brook:
Lightness in love, so bad and base a thing,
As foul (...) to greatest States do bring.
As I was reading these v^rses, from the thicket there came a bird flittering,
of color gray, which houered over the head of Alcida, as though she had
saluted her with her wings; I marvelled at the familiarity of the foul, and
with that she changed colors, from gray to white, and then to read, so to
green: and as many sundry shapes, as enery Iris blazed in the Firmament: so
that by the changing of hiewes, I perceived it to be Cameleon: As thus I stood
musing at the bird, Alcida took me by she hand, and sat down at one of the
roots of the Cedars, bidding me be attentive, and she would discourse the
evil fortune of her second daughter, Eriphila, the which I willingly consented
unto: she began her tale in this manner.

The second History of ERIPHILA of Taproban^.
AFter that my daughter Fiordespine was metamorphosed by the gods, in revenge
of her cruelty to Telegonus: time having rooted out some part of my sorrows, I
began to ^ace my self with the other two daughters, Eriphila and Marpesia.
This Eriphila was as witty, as her sister was beautiful, so that she was
admired in Taprobane, and all the bordering regions about, accounted (though
not in years, yet in wit) a Sibil: being able to answer as dark an Enigma,
as the subtillest Sphinx was able to propound: and I tell thee, son, as she
was favored by Pallas, so Venus was not behind in her favors: for she was
beautiful, insomuch, that these gifts co-vnited, made sundry Suitors come from
sundry coasts, to be wooers to such a wily Minton.

Amongst the rest, by fortune, there arrived in this coast, embarked in a small
Pinace, the Dukes son of Massilia, called Meribates: who coming on shore
for fresh water, came to see the Court of Taprobane: where being greatly
welcomed by my son, falling into talk with my daughters, he found Eriphila
so adorned with a supernatural kind of wit, as he was snared in the
sweetness of her answers: swallowing down the conceit of her wisdom with
such greediness, that he lay drunks in the remembrance of her qualities;
finding several delays to make stay in the country covertly: causing his
Mariners to crack their tackling, to vnrigge their Ship in the night, that
they might have just cause to lie there the most part of that Summer. Love
beginning to make this youngster politic, caught him so fast by the heart,
that Mars was never more feately entangled in Vulcans net, nor the forerunners
of Jason more subtly wrapped in the labyrinth, then Meribates wa^ in the
snares of fancy: for what he talked, even amongst the meanest of his Mariners,
was of Eriphila: his thoughts, his musing, his determinations, his resolutions,
his days watchings, his night slumbers were of the excellent wit of Eriphila,
insomuch that love lodged the Nouice under her Canapie, where he breathed out
these passions.

Unfortunate Meribates, whom the envious Fates have scorned to make
unfortunate! Have thou manned thy self in a Bark to scour the Seas, and in
this quest art thou like to lose thy senses? Soughtest thou to abide the
pleasure of Neptune, and art feign to stand to the courtesy of love? Have thou
found flames amidst the waves? Fire in the water, and fancy where no affection
was meant? well now I see, that as the Be that flies from flower to flower,
having free choice to choose at liberty, is at last taken by the wings, and so
fettered: In like manner^, my fancy taking the view of many a face, has a
restraint of his freedom, and is brought into bondage with the wit of a
stranger: But Meribates, w^it thou love so lightly? shall fancy give thee the
foil at the first (...)? Shall thin cares be the cause of thy misery? Will thou with Ulysses hear the Sirens sing, listen to their melody, and run unto
endless misfortune?

Eriphila is wise, so was Helena, yet she played the wanton with Paris: she
answers like the Uirgin at Delphos, and her words are as Nectar. Roses are
sweet, yet they have pric^es: the purest hunny. Be is not without his ^ing:
wit in a woman is like Dyle in the flame, which either kindle^h too great
virtue, or extreme vanity: Well Meribates, howsoever it be, wit cannot be
placed so bad but it is precious? What is beauty but a color dashed with every
breath, a flowrenipt with every frost, a favor that time and age defaceth:
whereas wit increases by yecres; and that love continues longest, that is
taken by the ear, not by the eye: yield then Meribates, when thou must needs
consent; run when thou art called by command: Pallas is wife, and will not
be ungrateful to her votaries: say none, but Eriphila: for sure, if ever thou will bestow thy freedom, she is worthy to have thee captive. If thou meanest
to marry, thou can not have a meeter match: yea, but how if her heart be
placed, and her mind settled upon some Gentleman in Taprobane? then were I a
great deal better to wayle at the first, then to weep at the last: to be
content with a little prick, then a deep wound; to (...) at the brimme than
at the bottom.

The Scorpion, if he touch never so lightly inuenometh the whole body: the
least spark of wilds fire will set an whole house on flame: the Cockatrice
kills even with his sight: the sting of love wounds deadly: the flame of
fancy sets on fire all the thoughts; and the eyes of a lover are counted
incurable.

Fearfulness ( Meribates) in love is a virtue: have thou turned over so many
books of Philosophy, and have thou not quoted Phocas precept to be fruitful?
that lovers should proceed iu their suite, as the Crabbe, whose pace is ever
backward; that though love be like the Adamant which has virtue to draw, yet
thou should be sprinkled with Goats blood, which resists his operation.
If the wit of some Pallas Nymphs have enclosed thy mind, yet thou should
take the Dyle of Nenuphar, that cools desire: what Meribates, will thou
become a precise Pythagoras, in recounting of love? No, let not the precepts of
Philosophy subject the will of nature; youth must have his course: he that will
not love when he is young, shall not be loved when he is old: say then
Meribates, and never gainsay, that Eriphila is the mark thou shoot at: that
her surpassing wit is the Siren, whose song has in^ chanted thee: and the
Cyrces cup which has so so^ed thy senees, as either thou must with Ulysses
have a speedy remedy, or else remain transformed. Consider Me^bates the cause
of thy love, lest thou fail in the effects. Is the foundation of thy fancy
fixed upon her feature; think with thy self, Beauty is but a blossom, whose
flower is nipt with every frost: it is like the grass in India, which
withers before it springs: What is more fair, yet what more fading? What
more delightful, yet nothing more deadly? What more pleasant, and yet what is
more perilous?

Beauty may well be compared to the bath in Calycut: whose streams flow as
clear as the flood Padus, and whose operation is as pestilent, as the River
Ormen: I but Meribates, what more clear then the Crystal, and what more
precious? what more comely then cloth of Arras, so what more costly? what
creature so beautiful as a woman, and what so estimable? Is not the Diamond of
greatest dignity that is most glistering: and the pearl thought most precious,
that is most perfect in color?

Aristotle says, they cannot be counted absolutely happy, although they had
all the virtues, if they want beauty: yea, Apollonius (an arch-heretike, and a
professed enemy against the sacred laws of beauty) is driven both by the laws
of Nature, and nurture, to confess that Virtue is the more acceptable, by how
much the more it is placed in a beautiful body: but what long digressed
discourse is this thou make of beauty, Meribates? it is not upon such a
^ckle foundation thou buildest thy love: but upon her wit, which only parts
with death: and therefore whatsoever Philosophy, or learning wills, I will
consent unto nature, for the best Clerks are not the wisestmen: whatsoever
wisdom wills, I will at this time give the crimes of beauty to my amorous
passions; for he that makes curiosity in love, will so long strain courtesy,
that either he will be counted a solemn suter, or a witless wooer:
therefore, whatsoever the chance be, I will cast at all.

Meribates having thus debated with himself, re^ed on this resolution: that he
would moderate his affection, until he found opportunity to discourse his mind
to Eriphila: who on the contrary side noting the perfection of Meribates, was
more enamored of his person and qualities, then Phillis of Demophon, or Dido of
the false and unjust Trojan: for he was so courteous in behavior, so liberal
not only of his purse, but his courtesy, that he had won all their hearts
in Taprobane.

These considerations so tickled the mind of Eriphila, that she fell thus to
debate with her self. What means (Eriphila) these strange and sudden
passions: shall thy stayed life be compared now to the Camelion, that turns
her self into the likeness of every object? to the herb Phanaros, whose budde
is sweet, and the root bitter? to the Ravens in Arabia, which being young,
have a pleasant voice, but in their age a horrible cry? Will thou consent unto
lust, in hoping to love? Shall Cupid claim thee for his captive, who even now
were vowed a vestall Uirgine? Shall thy tender age be more virtuous then thy
ripe years? What, shall the beauty of Meribates inchant thy mind, or his
filed speech be witch thy senses? Shall the property of a stranger draw thee
on to affection? If thou should hap to like him, would he not think the
Castle wanted but scaling, that yields at the first shot? That the bulwark
wants but battery, that at the first parley yields up the keys? Yes, yes
Eriphila, his beauty argues inconstancy, and his painted phrases deceit: and if
he see thee won with a word, he will think thee lost with the wind: he
will judge that which is lightly to be gained, is as quickly lost.

The Hawke that comes at the first call, will never prove steadfast on the
stand. The Niese that will be reclaimed to the fist, at the first sight of the
lure, will bate at every bush: The woman that will love at the first look,
will never be charie of her choice. Take heed Eriphila, the finest scabbard
has not ever the brauest blade; nor the goodliest chest has not the most
gorgeous treasure: the Bell with the best sound has an iron clapper: the
fading apples of Tantalus have a gallant show, but if they be touched, they
turn to ashes: So a fair face may have a foul mind; sweet words, a sour
heart: yea rotten bones out of a painted sepulcher; for all is not gold that
glisters. UUhy, but yet the Iemme is chosen by his hiew, and the cloth by his
color: condemn not then Eriphila, before thou have cause: accuse not so
strictly without trial; search not so narrowly, till thou have occasion of
doubt.

Yea, but the Mariners sound at the first, for fear of a Rock: the Surgeon
tainteth betimes, for his surest proof: one fore-wit is worth two after: it is
not good to beware whon the act is done: too late comes repentance: what is
it the beauty of Meribates that kindles this flame? who more beautiful then
Jason, yet who more false? for after Medea had yielded, he sacked the fort, and
in liew of her love, he killed her with ^indnesse. Is it his wit? who wiser
then Theseus, yet none more traitorous?

Beware Eriphila, I have heard thee say: she that marries for beauty, for
every dram of pleasure, shall have a pound of sorrow: choose by the ^are, not
by the eye. Meribates is fair, so was Paris, and yet fickle: he is witty, so
was Corsiris, and yet wavering: No man knows the nature of the herb, by the
outward show, but by the inward juice; and the operation consists in the
matter, not in the form.

The Fox winnes the favor of the Lambs by play, and then deuours them: so
perhaps Meribates shows himself in outward show a demi god: whereas who
tries him inwardly, shall find him but a solemn saint. Why, since his
arrival in Taprobane, all the Island speaks of his virtue and courtesy: but
perchance he makes a virtue of his need, and so lays this baulmed hook of
fained honesty, as a luring bait to trap some simple Dame.

The cloth is never tried, until it come to the wearing, nor the linen never
shrinkes, till it comes to the wetting: so want of liberty to use his will, may
make a restraint of his nature: and though in a strange place he use faith and
honesty to make his marriage, yet she perhaps that shall try him, shall either
find he never had them, or quite forgot them: for the nature of men (as I have
heard say) is like the Amber-stone, which will burn outwardly, and frieze
inwardly: and like the bark of the Myrtle trees that grew in Armenia, that is
as hot as fire in the taste, and as cold as water in the operation.

The dog biteth sorest when he does not bark: the Onix is hottest, when it
looks white: the Sirens mean most mis^hiefe when they sing: the Tiger then
hydeth his crabbed countenance, when he means to take his prey: and a man
does most dissemble when he speaks fairest. Try then Eriphila ere thou
trust, especially since he is a stranger: prove ere thou put in practice:
cast the water before thou appoint the medecin: do all things with
deliberation: go as the Snaile fair and softly, haste makes waste: the malt
is ever sweetest, where the fire is softest: let not wit overcome wisdom, nor
the hope of a husband be the hazard of thine honesty: cast not thy credit on
the chance of a stranger, who perchance may prove to thee as Theseus did to
Ariadne: wade not too far where the f^rd is unknown: rather bridle thy
affections with reason, and mortify thy mind with modesty: that as thou have
kept thy Uirginitie inuiolate without spot, so thy choice may be without
blemish: know this, it is too late to call again the day past: therefore keep
the memory of Meribates as needful, but not necessary: like him, whom thou
shall have occasion to love, and love where thou have tried him loyal: until
then remain indifferent.

When Eriphila had uttered these words, she straight (to avoid all dumpes that
solitariness might breed) came to me and her sister, and there passed away
the day in prattle. Thus these two lovers passionate, and yet somewhat patient,
for that hope had ministered lenitiue plasters to their new wounds, passed over
two or three days only with glances and looks, bewraying their thoughts with
their eyes, which they could not discover with their tongues: Venus taking
pity of her patients, found them out so fit occasion, that as Eriphila with
her sister Marpesia were walking alone in the garden, gathering of flowers, at
that instant (guided by love and fortune) Meribates went into the garden to be
solitary, where straight he espied his mistress walking with her sister: now
Meribates was driven into an (...), with the extreme pleasure he conceived in
the sudden sight of his goddess: insomuch, as he stood amazed for fear, and
necessity found a deadly combat in the mind of Meribates: he doubted if he
should be over bold, to give offense to Eriphila, and so spill his pottage. But
the law of necessity (says Plato) is so hard, that the gods themselves are
not able to resist it: for as the water that by nature is cold, is made hot by
the force of fire, and the straight tree pressed down grows always crooked,
so nature is subject to necessity, that kind cannot have his course: and yet
if there be any thing which is more forcible then necessity, it is the law of
love, which so incensed Meribates, that casting all fear aside, he offered
himself to his mistress, with this courteous parle.

Gentle women, if my presumption do trouble your muses, yet the cause of my
boldness deserves pardon, (...) where the offense proceeds of love, there
the pardon ensues of course: I stood in a maze at the first ^ght, for me
thought you resembled Pallas and Juno, departing away from Venus, after she
had won the ball: you Madam Eriphila, like the one for wit, and Marpe^a like
the other for majesty: but hows^euer (sweet saints) you grace this Garden with
your presence, as Diana does the Groves, and honor me, in admitting (...)
unworthy a man into the company of such excellent personages. Eriphila hearing
Meribates in these tearmes^, giving a glory to her face, by staining her
cheeks with a vermillion blush, both sharply and shortly made this reply.

It is never presumption (lord Meribates) that fortune presents by chance, and
therefore no pardon, where is no offense: our musing was not great, only
gathering flo^res which we like by the hiew, but know not by the virtue:
herein resembling lovers, that aiming at the fairest, often stumble on such as
are little worth: If you have made us any fault, it is in giving us so kind a
^umpe, with your unlikely comparison: I being as unlike to Pallas in wit, as
Vulcan to Mars in property: and she as far different from Juno in majesty, as
old Bawcis was to Venus in beauty: but you Gentlemen of Massilia have the
habit of jesting, and therefore since it is a fault of Nature, we brook it,
and bear with it.

Meribates hearing so courteous and witty an answer, swilled in love as
merrily as ever Jupiter did virtue: so that delighting to hear his mistress
prattle, he prosecuted his talk thus.

As I am glad, Madam, that my rashness was no occasion of offense, so I am
sorry you take what I uttered in earnest, to be spoken in sport: my comparison
as I i^erred it, so by your pa^ience I ^re maintain it, if not able by
reasons, for that I ^no Scholar: yet by love, for that I shall draw mine
arguments from fancy, which has set on fire a poor strangers heart, that he
deemes your sweet self not only like Pallas, but Pallas her self: so that had
I in this humor been Judge for Paris in the vale, wit (not beauty) had gotten
what they strove for.

I but sir (quoth Marpesia) from whence will you draw your arguments to prove
me in majesty like Juno? you dare not say, from reason, in regard y^ the
persons are without compare; and from love if you argue, you prove your self
double faced like Ianus, and double hearted like Jupiter, to have two strings
to a bow, and two loves at one time.

Yes Madam, quoth Meribates, my common place in this Enthymema shall be also
from love, for in affecting so dearly your sister, I cannot but deeply honor
you, if not in love as my Paramour, yet in friendly affection as her sister.

You harp still, answered Eriphila, on one string, which is love: if you be in
earnest, look for a frown, as I gave you a favor: believe me, lord
Meribates, there is nothing easier than to fall in love, nor harder than to
chance well; therefore, omitting such serious matter as fancy, for that I am
vowed to Vesta, tell me, will you provide you, as we, of a Nosegay? And if you
be so minded, tell me, of all flowers which like you best? Those, Madam, that
best fit with my present humor. And what be they, quoth Marp^sia? Penses,
Madam, answered Meribates, for it is a pretty flower, and of sundry colors,
seeding the eye with variety, which is the chiefest pleasure to the sight:
especially I like it for the agnonimation, in that the word coming from
France, signifies fancies. Now how I am contented with fancies, I would you
could as well see, as I feel.

One while imagination presents unto me the Idea of my mistress face, which I
allow with a fancy: another while a thought of her beauty wakens my senses,
which I con^ with a ^ie: straight her virtue says she is most excellent,
which I gratify with a fancy: then to seal up what may be said, her ra^e
and supernatural wit says, her conceits are divine, which auowed with a
catalogue of solemn oaths, I set down as a maxim, with a fancy.

Thus are my thoughts sed with fancies: and to be brief, my life is lengthned
out by fancies: then Madam, blame me not if I like Penses well; and think
nothing, if I set no other flower in my nosegay. And truly lord Meribates,
answered Eriphila, you and I are of one mind, I mean in choice of flowers, but
not sir, as it is called a Pense, or as you descant on fancy: but as we homely
Huswiues call it, Hearts-ease, for of all contents I think this the greatest;
for in naming this word Hearts-ease, I banish (as with a charm) the frowns of
fortune, and the follies of love, for the party that is touched by the
inconstancy of the one, or the vanity of the other, cannot boast he means
hearts ease: seeing then it ^eedeth such rest unto the mind, and such quiet to
the thoughts, we will both wear this flower as a favor, you as a Pense, bat I
as Hearts-ease.

As these two lovers were thus merrily descanting upon flowers, I came into the
Garden, and found this young lord and my daughter at chat, no whit displeased,
in that I knew the honor of his house, his great possessions and parentage, I
winkt at their loves, and after a little ordinary parle called them in to
dinner: where there was such ^anding of ^es and amorous looks, between
Meribates and Eriphila, as a blind man might have seen the creeples hault:
well, dinner being ended, as Meribates entered into the conu^deration of
Eriphilaes wit; so she more impatient, as the horse that never having felt the
(...), runs at the first prick; so she never having felt before the like
flame, was more hot, and (...) weary, than if before she had been scorched
with affection.

Now she called him in her thoughts beautiful, saying; that the fairest and
(...) herbs have the most secret operation: she said he was well
proportioned, and so the reddest Margarites had the most precious virtues: that
he was (...), and then she called to mind the old verse:

Gratior est pulchro veniens e corpore virtus. But when she weighed his wise
and witty arguments that he uttered in the garden, how they not only sauored
of wit, but of mirth: then

Omnia vincit amor, and nos cedamus a^ori. She could not but in her conscience
swear, that he should be the saint at whose shrine she would offer up her
devotion. These two lovers thus living the more happily, for that they rested
upon hope, it pleased my son and me to walk abroad into a park hard ^ining
to the Court, and with us my two Daughters, and forget the strangers we could
not: pacing thus abroad to take air, when we were in the green meades,
Meriba^s and my daughter had singled themselves, and he taking time while she
proffered opportunity, began boldly to court her in this manner.

It is an old saying (Madam) holden as an Oracle, that in many words lies
mistrust, and in painted speech deceit is often covered. Therefore I (sweet
mistress) whose acquaintance with you is small, and credit less, as being a
stranger, dare use no circumstance for fear of mi^rust, neither can I tell in
what respect to bring a sufficient trial of my good will, but only that I wish
the end of my love to be such, as my faith and loialtie is at this present,
which I hope tract of time shall try without (...). Thy wit, Eriphila, has
bought my freedom, and thy wisdom has made me captive, that as he which is
hurt of the scorpion, seeks a salve from whence he received the ^ore, so you
only may minister the medicine which procures the disease. The burning fever
is driven out with a hot po^on, the shaking palsy with a cold drink: love
only is remedied by love, and fancy must be cured by continual affection.

Therefore, Eriphila, I speak with tears outwardly, and with drops of blood
inwardly, that unless the mi^ing showers of your mercy mitigate the fire of my
fancy, I am like to buy love and repentance with death: but perhaps you will
object, that the beasts which gaze at the Panther, are guilty of their own
death: that the mouse taken in the trap, deserves her chance: that a lover
which has free will, deserves no pity, if he fall into any amorous
passions. Can the straw resist the virtue of the pure Iet, or flax the force
of the fire? can a lover with stand the brunt of beauty, or freeze if he stand
be the flame, or prevent the laws of nature: weigh all things equally, and
then I doubt not but to have a just judgment: and, though small acquaintance
may breed mistrust, and mistrust hinders love: yet tract of time shall infer
such trial, as I trust shall kindle affection. And therefore I hope you will
not put a doubt till occasion be offered, nor call his credit in question,
whom neither you have found nor heard to be halting: what though the
Serpentine powder is quickly kindled, and quickly out? yet the Salamander stone
once set on fire, can n^uer be quenched: as the sappie Myrtle tree will
quickly rotte, so the Sethim w^ will never be eaten with worms: though the
Polype changes color, every hour, yet the Saphyr will crack, before it will
consent to disloyalty. As al things are not made of one mould, so all men are
not of one mind: for as there has been a trothlesse Jason, so there has
been a trusty Troylus, and as there has been a dissembling Damocles, so
there has been a loyal Lelius. And sure Eriphila, I call the gods to
witness, without fayning, that since thy wit has so bewitched my heart, my
loyalty and love shall be such, as thy honor and beauty does m^rite. Since
therefore my fancy is such, repay but half so much in recompense, and it
shall be sufficient. Eriphila hearing this passionate speech of Meribates,
made him this answer.

Lord Meribates, it is hard taking the foul when the net is descried, and ill
catching of fish when the hook is bare, and as impossible to make her believe
that will give no credit, and to deceive her that spieth the fetch. When the
string is broken, it is hard to hit the white, when a man's credit is called in
question, it is hard to persuade one. Blame me not ( Meribates) if I urge you
so strictly, nor think nothing if I suspect you narrowly: a woman may knit a
knot with her tongue, that she cannot untie with all her teeth, and when the
signet is set on, it is too late to break the bargain, therefore I had rather
mistrust too soon, then mislike too late: I had rather fear my choice, then
rue my chance: for a woman's heart is like the stone in Egypt, that will
quickly receive a form, but never change without cracking. If then I fear,
think me not cruel; nor scrupulous, if I be wise for my self: the Wolf
has as smooth a skin as the simple sheep the sour Elder has a fairer bark
then the sweet Juniper: where the sea is calmest, there it is deepest, and
where the greatest color of honesty is, there oftentimes is the most want:
for Venus vess^ls have the lowdest sound, when they are most empty: and a
dissembling heart has more eloquence then a faithful mind, for truth is ever
naked: I will not, Lord Meribates, run from my particular comparison.

Thus I cast all these doubts, and others have tried them true, yet am I forced
by fancy to take some remorse of thy passions. Medea knew the best, but yet
followed the worst in choosing Jason: but I hope not to find thee so wavering.

Well Meribates, to be short and plain, thou have won the castle that many
have besieged, and have obtained that which others have sought to gain: it is
not the shape of thy beauty, but the hope of thy loyalty which inticeth me:
not thy fair face, but thy faithful heart: not thy parentage, but thy manners:
not thy possessions, but thy virtues: for she that builds her love upon beauty,
means to fancy but for a while: would God I might find thee such a one as I
will try my self to be, for whereas thou do protest such loialtie, which
suppose it be true, yet shall it be but counterfeit respecting mine, be thou
but Admetus, and I will be Alcest, no torments, no travel: no, only the loss
of life shall diminish my love, in liew thereof remain thou but constant, and
in pledge of my protested good will, have here my heart and hand to be thine
in dust and ashes.

Here (son) may thou judge into what quandary Meribates was driven, when he
heard the answer of his mistress so correspondent to his suit: the prisoner
being condemned hearing the rumor of his pardon, never reioiced more then
Meribates did at this pronouncing of his happiness. Well, these lovers thus
agreeing, broke off from their parle for fear of suspicion, and joined with
company, where falling into other talk, we past away the afternoon in many
pleasant devices. Eriphila and Meribates thus satisfied, living in most happy
content, honoring no deity but Venus, determined as well as opportunity would
minister occasion to break the matter to me and ^er betime: but in the mean
while my Son proclaimed for his delight, certain Iustes and Turneyes,
whither resorted all the brauest Noblemen and Gentlemen in Taprobane, where
they performed many worthy and honorable deeds of Cheualry. The Iustes
ended, my son bade them all to a banquet: where, to grace the board and to
honor the company, was placed my daughters, Etiphila and Marpesia: gazed on
they were for their beauties, and admired for their honorable behavior.

Eriphila, whose eye walked about the troop of these lusty Gallants, espied a
young gentleman midst the rest, called Lucidor, the son of an Esquire, a man
of personage tall and well proportioned, of face passing amiable, of behavior
well n^rtured. This Gallant furnished with these singular qualities, so set on
fire Eriphilaes fancy, that as if she had drunk of the fountain in Ardenia,
her hot love was turned to a ^ld liking. Now her heart was set upon Lucidor,
which of late was vowed to Mer^ates, in such sort that her stomach lost the
wonted appetite, to feed the eyes with the beauty of her new lover, as that
she seemed to have eaten of the herb Sputania, which shuts up the stomach
for a long season. Yea so impatient was her affection, as she could not for
bear to give him such looks; that the Gentleman perceived she was either
resolved to outface him, or else affected toward him. Well, the dinner ended,
and the Gentlemen all departed, Eriphila getting secretly to her closet, began
to fall into these ^earm es.

Unfortunate Eriphila, what a contrariety of passions breeds a confused
discontent in thy mind? what a war do thou feel between the constant
resolution of a lover, and the inconstant determination of a lecher, between
fancy and faith, love and loyalty? Will thou prove Eriphila, as false as
Venus, who for every effemi^ate face has a new fancy and faith, love and
loialtie? Will thou prove Eriphila, as false as Venus, who for every
e^feminate face has a new fancy? as trethlesse as Cre^da, that change^ her
thoughts with her years; as inconstant as Helena, whose heart had more lovers,
than the Camelion colors? will thou vow thy loyalty to one, and not prove
^edfast to any? The Turtle chooses, but never changes: the L^on after that he
has en^red league with his mat^, does never co^et a new choice: these have but
nature for their guide, and yet are constant, thou have both nature and
nurture, and yet art moveable: breaking thine oath without compulsion, and thy
faith without constraint, whereas nothing is so hated as perjury, and a woman
having cracked her loyalty, is half hanged. Ciuillia being betrothed to
Horatius secundus, chose rather to be rackt to death, than to falsi^e her
constancy.

Lamia a ^oncubine, could by no torments be haled from the love of
Aristogiton, what perils suffered Cariclia for Theagynes? Let these examples
Eriphila, move thee to be constant to Meribates: be thou steadfast and no doubt
thou shall not find him straggling. Caustana, when she came into the Court to
swear tha^ she never loved Sudalus, became dumb, and after fell mad: beware
of the like reward, if thou commit the like offense. Tush, they that would
refrain from drink because they heard Anacreon dyed with the pot at his head,
or that hates an egg, because Appeyus Sauleyus dyed in eating of one, would
be noted for persons half mad: so if I should stand to my peny-worth, having
made my market like a fool, and may change for the better, because other in
like case have had ill hap, I may either be counted faint hearted or foolish.
What Eriphila, Jupiter laughed at the perjury of lovers. Meribates is fair,
but not second to Lucidor: he is witty, but the other more wife: well what of
this, but how will thou answer Meribates? tush, cannot the Cat catch mise, but
she must have a bell hanged at her ear: he that is afraid to venture on the
Buck, for that he is wrapped in the briars, shall never have hunters hap: and h^
that puts a doubt in love at every chance shall never have lovers luck: well,
howsoever it be, Lucidor shall ^e, he shall have my heart, and This, or else I
will sit beside the saddle: and thus having debated with her self, she rested
perplexed, till she might have a sight of her new lover; which was not long:
for Lucidor no sooner got home, but calling to mind the amorous glances of
Eriphila, and noting both her beauty and her wit, although her honor was far
beyond his parentage, yet presuming upon her favors showen him at the banquet,
he boldly, as loves champion, ventured to win what Cupid had set as a prize:
so that he began to frequent the Court, and became a Courtier, first brauing it
amongst the Lords, then by degrees creeping into favor with the Ladies, where
in time he found opportunity to parle with Eriphila, whom for fashion sake at
the first he found somewhat strange, but in short time became so tractable,
that there was but one heart in two bodies; in so much, that not only Meribates
and my son, but all the whole Court saw how Eriphila doted on Lucidor,
whereat my son began to frown, but Meribates would not see it, lest his
Mistress should think him jealous, but smothered up the grief in secrecy, and
thought either time, or the persuasion of her friends, or his continued
affection would dissuade her from her follies. Well, Eriphila had not fa^ored
Lucidor long, but there came to the Court another young Gentleman, called
Perecius. Who likewise was enamored of Eriphila, and she of him, that she
proved more light of love, then she was witty; yet she excelled in wit all
the Uirgins of Taprobane.

To be brief, so many faces, so many fancies, that she became as variable in
her loves, as the Polype in colors: which so perplexed the mind of Meribates,
that falling into melancholy and grievous passions, he exclaimed against the
inconstancy of women, who like Fortune stood upon a globe, and were winged
with the feathers of fickleness: yet not willing to rage too far, till he had
talked with Eriphila, he would not stay till opportunity would serve, but
early in a morning stepped into her bedchamber, where finding her between
half sleeping and waking he saluted with great courtesy; being resaluted
again of Eriphila with the like private kind of familiarity: after a few
ordinary speeches, Meribates taking Eriphila by the hand, began to utter his
mind in these words.

Sweet mistress, I feel in my mind a perilous and mortal conflict between
fear and love, by the one, doub^g in discovering my mind, to purchase your
disfavor, by the other forced to hewray what I think, lest I perish, through
my own secrecy: hoping therefore you will take that comes from me, as from
your second self; give me leave to say that greeues me to repeat: How I doubt
(Madame) of your constancy, what vows there have past between us, what
protestations, what promises, I refer to your ^wne conscience: What unseemly
favors you have showed to Lucidor, what extreme fancy to Perecius, all
Taprobanc wonders at, with sorrow, that so witty a lady should prove so light:
and I especially, whom the cause touches at the quick, and paineth at the
heart, feel more miserable passions for your disloialtie, than I did receive
joys in hope of your constancy. As Meribates was ready to have prosecuted
his parle, my daughter broke off his discourse in this manner.

And what of this, lord M^ribates, may not a woman look, but she must love?
are you jealous, forsooth, before the wedding? well, suppose I favored Lucidor
and Perecius; Si natura hominum sit nouitatis auida, give women leave to have
more fancies than one; if not as we are lovers, yet as we are women. Venus
temple has many entrances: Cupid has more arrows than one in his quiver, and
sundry strings to his bow: women haus many looks, and so they may have many
loves.

What, lord Meribates, think you to have a woman's whole heart? no, unless you
can procur^ Venus to make her blind, or some other deity deaf; for if either
she see beauty or gold, or hear promises or passions, I think she will keep
a corner for a friend, and so will I. But Madam, the glorious frame of the
world consists in unity, for we see that in the firmament there is but one
sun: yea, quoth Eri^ila, but there be many stars. The Iris or Rainbow Madam
(quoth. he) has but one quality. Truth answred my daughter, but it has many
colors: but to come to a familiar example, replied Meribates: the heart has
but one string; yea but, quoth Eriphila, it has many thoughts, and from these
thoughts spring passions, and from passions, not love, but loves: therefore
content you, sir, for if you love me, you must have riuals: and so turning her
face, as in ch^ller, to ye other side of the bed, she bade him good morrow: he
passing away out of the chamber in great melancholy, began as soon as he was
alone to exclame against the inconstancy of women: saying, they were like
marigolds, whose form turns round with the sun: as wavering as wethercoks,
that move with every wind: as fleeting as the Northwest Islands, that flote
with every gale: witty, but in wiles: conceited, but in inconstancy: as
brittle as glass, having their hearts framed of the Polipe stones: their faces
of the nature of the Adamants, and in quality like the Iacinth, which when it
seems most hot, is then as cold as Iron: carrying frowns in their foreheads,
and dimples in their cheeks: having their eyes framed of Iette, that draw
every beauty in a minute, and let them fall in a moment. Thus he exclaimed
against women: but such was his fervent affection toward Eriphila, that he
would neither rage against her openly nor secretly, but smothered his passions
in silence, which growing to the extreme, brought him into a fever, wherein
lingering awhile, he dyed: but in such sort, that all Taprobane said, it was for
the inconstancy of Eriphila. Well. his Gentlemen and mariners mourned and
sorrowed, in that their Pynace should bring him home dead, whom they brought
forth alive: al jointly praying, that the gods would be revenged on Eriphila:
who as she was then attending with me and her brother on the dead corpse to the
ship, suddenly before all our sights was turned into this byrd (a Camelion.)
whereupon the mariners rejoiced, hoising up sails, and thrusting into the
maine, we scowred and returned home to the court.

Thus (Son) thou have heard the misfortune of my two daughters, the one for
her pride, the other for her inconstancy: it is late, and the setting of the
sun calls v^ home with the Be, to our poor hiue: therefore we will now to
our cottage, and to morrow at thy breakfast I will satisfy thee with the hard
fortune of Marpesia: with that I gave the Countess Alcida great thanks, and
accompanied my courteous Oastesse to her cottage.

The third Discourse, of MARPESIA.
NO sooner was the day up, and Phoebus had marched out the greatest gates of
heaven, lighting the world with the sparkling wreath, circled about his head,
but old Alcida got up, and called me from my bed: ashamed that old age should
be more early then youth, I start up to wait upon mine Oastesse, who being
ready with her staff in her hand, carried me forth into the fields hard
adioining to the Sea side, where we came to a tomb, on which lay the picture
of a Gentleman very artificially carved: by him hung two tables without any
simbole, emblem impressed, or other Hierogliphicall caracter, only there were
written certain verses to this effect.

The Graces in their glory never gave
A rich or greater good to womankind:
That more impall's their honors with the Palm,
Of high renown then matchless constancy.
Beauty is vain, accounted but a flower,
Whose painted hiew fades with the summer sun:
Wit often has wrack by self-conceit of pride.
Riches is trash that fortune boasts on.
Constant in love who tries a woman's mind,
Wealth, beauty, wit, and all in her does find.
In the other table were set down these verses.

The fairest Iem often blemished with a crack,
Loses his beauty and his virtue too:
The fairest flower nipt with the winters frost,
In show seems worser then the basest weed.
Virtues are often far ouerstain'd with faults,
Were she as fair as Phoebe in her sphere,
Or brighter then the paramour of Mars,
Wiser then Pallas daughter unto Jove,
Of greater majesty then Juno was,
More chaste then Vesta goddess of the Maids,
Of greater faith then fair Lucretia:
Be she a blab, and tattles what she hears,
Want to be secret gives far greater stains,
Then virtues glory which in her remains.
After I had read over the verses; Alcida said: (son) I perceive thou do
muse at this tomb, set in so uncouth a place, hard by the steepe-downe cliffes
of the Sea: especially, furnished with Enigmaticall posies: yet have thou not
considered what after thou shall find, and therefore let us sit down under
the shadow of this Rose tree, which thou see ^orished in this barren place
so fair and beautiful, and I will drive thee out of these doubts, by
discovering the fortune of my daughter Marpesia. I desirous to hear what the
meaning of this monument seated so prospe^iue to Neptune, should be, sat me
down very orderly under the Rose tree, and began to settle my self very
attentive to hear what old Alcida would say, who began in this manner.

The third History of MARPESIA of Taprobane.
MY two daughters being thus metamorphosed, and transformed for their follies
into strange shapes: I had left me only my youngest daughter Marpesia, in
face little inferior to her eldest sister Fiordespine, for she was passing
bea^ll: wise she was, as not second to Eriphila, but other special virtues she
had, that made her famous through all Taprobane: and as the burnt child dreads
the fire, and other men's harms learn us to beware: so my daughter Marpesia,
by the misfortune of Fiordespine, feared to be proud, and by the ^nister chance
of Eriphila, hated to be inconstant, insomuch, that fearing their natiuities to
be fatal, and that hers being rightly calculated would prove as bad as the
rest: She kept such a strict method of her life and manners, and so foregarded
all her actions with virtue, that she thought she might despise both the fates
and fortune.

Living thus warily, I and her brother conceived great content in her modesty
and virtue: thinking, though the gods had made us unfortunate by the mishappe
of the other two: yet in the fortunate success of Marpesias life, amends
should be made for the other mishap. Persuaded thus, it fortuned that my son
entertained into his service the son of a Gentleman, a bordering neighbor by,
a youth of greater beauty then birth, for he was of comely personage: of face
lovely, and though but meanly brought up, as nusled in his fathers house: yet
his nature discovered that he was hardy in his resolution touching courage:
and courteous in disposition, as concerning his manners.

This youth, called Eurimachus, was so diligent and dutiful toward his lord,
so affable to his fellows, and so gentle to every one, that he was not only
well thought on by some, but generally liked and loved of all. Continuing in
this method of life, he so behaved himself, that in recompense of his
service, my son promoted him not only to higher office and some small
pension, but admitted him into his secret and private ^amiliarity. Living thus
in great credit, it chanced that Venus seeing how my daughter Marpesia lived
careless of her loves, and never sent so much as one sigh to Paphos for a
sacrifice: she called Cupid, complaining that she was atheist to her deity,
and one opposed to her principles: whereupon the boy at his mothers beck,
drew out an inuenomed arrow, and leuelling at Marpesia, hit her under the
right pappe, so nigh the heart, that giving a groan she felt she was wounded,
but how, or with what, she knew not; as one little skillful in any amorous
passions: yet she felt thoughts unfitting with her wonted humor, for noting
the person of Eurimachus, which she found in property excellent, and admiring
the qualities of his mind, co-vnited with many rare and precious virtues,
which she perceived to be extraordinary, she fell to conceive a liking, which
for the baseness of his birth, she passes over as a toy: but the blinded
wagge, that suffers not his wounds to be cured with easy salues, nor
permits any lenitiue plasters to prevail where he pierces with his
arrows, put oil in the flame, and set fire to the flax, that she felt her
fancy scarce warm, to grow to such a scalding heat, as every vein of her
heart swet passions: feeling this new lord, called love, to be so imperious,
she stooped a little, and entered into deeper consideration of Eurimachus
perfection, and so deep by degrees, that although she coueted with the Snaile
to have her pace slow, yet at length she waded so far, that she was over her
shoes: so that feeling her self passing into an unknown form, she fell
into this doubtful meditatiou.

What flame is this Marpesia, that over heateth thy heart? what strange fire
has Venus sent from Cipres, that scorcheth thee here in Taprobane? has
Cupids bow such strength; or his arrows such flight, as being loosed in
heaven, he can strike here upon earth? a mighty goddess is Venus, and great
is Cupid that work effects of such strange operation: make not a doubt (
Marpesia) of that is palpable: dream not at that which thou see with thine
eyes, nor muse not at that which thou feel with thy heart: then confess and
say thou art in love, and love in thee, so deeply as Pumice-stones of reason
will hardly raze out the characters. In love? thou art young Marpesia, so is
Cupid, a very child? a maid, so was Venus before she lost her Uirginitie, and
yet for her lightness, she was the goddess of love: but with whom art thou
in love? with Eurimach! one of base birth, and small living; of no credit, a
mean Gentleman, and thy brothers servant?

Consider Marpesia, that love has his reasons, and his rules to settle fancy,
and govern affections: honor ought not to look lower in dignity, nor the
thoughts of Ladies gaze at worthless persons: Better is it for thee to perish
in high desires, then in low disdain: oppose thy self to Venus, unless her
presents be more precious: say love is folly, except her gifts be more rich:
count rather to dye in despising so mean a choice, then live in liking so
unlikely a chance: what will thy mother, thy brother, thy friends; nay all
Taprobane say: but that thou art vain, careless, and amorous: but note this
Marpesia, love is a league that lasts while life: thou art in this to feed
thine eye, not thine humor: to satisfy the desire of thy heart, not the
consideration of their thoughts: for in marying, either a perpetual content,
or a general mistike is like to fall to thy self: what though he be poor, yet
he is of comely personage: though he be base of birth, yet he is wise: what
he wants in gifts of fortune, he has in the mind: and the defect of
honors is supplied with virtues.

Venus her self loved Adonis: Phoebe stooped from heaven to kiss a poor
Shepherd, AEnone loved Paris, as he was a Swain, not as the son of Priamus:
love is not always companion to dignity, nor fancy ever lodged in kings
Palaces. Then Marpesia, look at Eurimachus, for he is courteous, and love him
as he is virtuous; supply thou his want with thy wealth, and increase his
credit with thy countenance: but how dare he motion love, that is so low? or
enterprise to attempt so great an assault? Never stand in doubt Marpesia, give
him thou but favors, and love and fortune will make him bold.

Marpesia having thus meditated with her self, sought by all means possible,
how to make him privy to her affections: she used in her salutations affable
courtesy, and somewhat more then ordinary: her looks were full of favors, her
glances many and mild; he used no exercise but she did commend, nor performed
any thing, which she said not to be excellent. The young Eurimachus was not
such a Nouice, but he could epsy a pad in the straw, and discern a glowing
coal, from cold cinders: he noted her glances, her looks, her gestures, her
words, examining every particular action, in the depth of his thoughts, finding
by the touchstone, that all tended unto mere love, or extreme dissimulation;
for whatsoever she did was in extremes. Well, hope put him in comfort that she
was too virtuous to dissemble; and fear, that she was too honorable to love so
base a man: yet supposing the best, he took her passions for love, and had a
desire to return a liking with affection: but the consideration of his
parentage, of his small possessions, of her honor, his lords disfavor, and
the impossibility of his suit, was a cooling card to quench the hottest flame
that Cupid could set on fire with his enchanted brand: but Venus had pitied
the fondling, gave him such precious comfortiues to encourage her champion,
that he resolved to attempt whatsoever his fortune were: thus in suspense he
began to debate with himself.

It has been an old saying Eurimachus, sucked from his mothers ^eate, that it
is good to look before thou leap, and to sound the Ford before thou venture to
wade too far, since time pa^ cannot be recalled, nor actions performed,
revoked, but repented; gaze not at stars, lest thou stumble at stones: look
not into the Lions den, le^t for thy presumption, thy skin be pulled over
thine ears. In loves, thoughts are to be measured by fortunes, not by desires,
for Venus tables are to be gazed at with the eye, not to be reached at with the
hand. In love, Eurimachus? why, it fif^eth not with thy present estate: fancy
is to attend on high lords, not on such as are servile: it were meeter for thee
to sweat at thy labors, then to sigh at thy passions: to please thy lord,
then to dote on thy mistress: busy then thy hands to free thy heart: be not
idle, and Venus charms are to a deaf Adder.

Cedit amor rebus, res age tutus eris. But Eurimachus, Phidias painteth love
young, and her garlands are made with the bads of Roses, not with withered
flowers: Youth holds the fire, and fancy puts in the oil; but age carries
the cold cinders: now that heat of young peers has yielded; therefore if
thou refuse to love, when will thou find time to fancy? wrinkles in the face,
are spelles against Cupid, and Venus starteth back from white hairs: then now
or else never, ^oue is a greater lord then thy master: for he has deity to
counteruaile his diguitie. Thou tattlest Eurimachus of love, but say who is the
object: thy thoughts aim at no less, nor no lower than Marpesia, sister to
thy lord, a Princess by birth, fair and beautiful, full of honorable and
virtuous qualities, sought by men of high parentage; to say all in one w^rd,
the flower of Taprobane: fond fool, think thou the Kite and the Eagle will
pratch on one tree? the Lion and the Wolf lie in one den? Ladies of great
worth, look on such worthless pesants? No, think her disdain will be
greater then thy desire: and assure thee this, if thou presume, she will
revenge: why? is Cupid blind, and shoots he not one shaft at random? may he not
as soon hit a Princess, as a Milk-maid? truth, but his arrows are matches:
he shoots not high with the one, and low with the other: he ioynes not the
Mouse and the Elephant, the Lamb and the Tiger, the Fly and the Faulcon, nor
sets not honor in any servile room: yet Omphi^a the queen of the Indians
loved a Barber: Angelica Medes, a mercinary soldier. Yea Venus her self those
a Blacke-smith.

Women often resemble in their loves, the Apothecaries in their art: they choose
the weed for their shop, when they leave the fairest ^owre in the garden: they
often respect the person, more then the parentage, and the qualities of the man,
more then his honors: fee^ing the eye with the shape, and the heart with the
virtues, howsoever, they live discontent for want of riches: but build not
Eurimachus, on these uncertain instances, nor conclude on such premises, lest
thy foundation fail, and thy Logike prove not worth a lowse: what reason have
thou to persuade thee ouce to aim a thought at Marpesia, such as Venus if she
heard them pleaded, would allow for Aphorisms? if favors be a sign of fancy,
what glances have I had that have pierced deep: what looks, as discovering
love: what courteous speeches to my face: what praises behind my back? Nay,
what has Marpesia done of late, but talk of Eurimachus, and honor Eurimachus?
what of this, young Nouice, are not women Arch-practisers of flattery and
dissimulation? lay they not their looks to entrap, when they mean to keep
the foul for tame fools? have they not desire in their faces, when then have
disdain in their hearts? did not Helena kiss Mene^aus, when she winked on
Paris? did not Cresida wring Troylus by the hand, when her heart was in the
tents of the Grecians? every look that women lend, is not love: every smile in
their face is not a prioke in their bosom: they present Roses, and beat men
with Nettles: burn perfumes, and yet s^ifle them with the black: speak fair
and affable, when, God wot, they mean nothing less: If then Eurimachus, thou
know their wiles, fear to make experience of their wits; rest thee as thou
art: let Marpesia use favors, cast glances, praise and dispraise how she list,
think all is wanton dissimulation, and so rest.

In this melancholy humor he left his loves, and went to his labors. Love
espying how in the day he withstood her face with diligence, she caused
Morpheus to present him in his sleeps with the shape of his Mistress, which
recording in the day, he found that where fancy had pierced deep, there no
salve would serve to appease the Malady: that from these light pains, he fell
into extreme passions. As he could take no rest, he sought always to be
solitary, so to feed his thoughts with imaginations, that like Cephalus, he
delighted to walk in the Groves, and there with Philomela to bewail his loves.

Cupid pitying his plaints, sent opportunity to find her, who brought it so to
pass, that as (on a day) he walked into a place (hard adioining to the park,
having his Lute in his hand, playing certain melancholy dumpes, to mitigate
his pinching humor) Marpesia with one of her Gentlewomen, being abroad in the
lanes, espsed him thus solitary: stealing therefore behind him to hear what
humor the man was in, heard him sing to his Lute this mornefull madrigall.

Rest thee desire, gaze not at such a Star,
Sweet fancy sleep, love take a nappe a while:
My busy thoughts that reach and rome so far,
With pleasant dreams the length of time beguile.
Fair Venus cool my ouer-heated breast,
And let my fancy take her wonted rest.
Cupid abroad was lated in the night:
His wings were wet with ranging in the rain:
Harbor he sought, to me he took his flight,
To dry his plumes: I heard the boy complain,
My door I oped to grant him his desire,
And rose my self to make the Wagge a fire.
Looking more narrow by the fires flame,
I spyed his quiver hanging at his back:
I feared the child might my misfortune frame,
I would have gone for fear of further wrack;
And what I drad (poor man) did me betide,
For forth he drew an arrow from his side.
He pierst the quick that I began to stat,
The wound was sweet, but that it was too hie,
And yet the pleasure had a pleasing smart:
This done, he flies away, his wings were dry,
But left his arrow still within my breast,
That now I grieve, I welcomed such a ghest.
He had no sooner ended his sonet, but Marpesia perceiving by the contents,
that it was meant of her, stepped to him, and drove him thus abruptly from his
passions.

If you grieve Eurimachus, for intertaining such a ghest, your sorrow is like
the rain that came too late: to believe, love is such an unruly tenant, that
having his entrance upon courtesy, he will not be thrust out by force; you
make me call to mind the counterfeit of Paris, when he was AEnones darling: for
Phidias drew him sitting under a Beech tree, playing on his pipe, and yet
tears dropping from his eyes, as mixing his greatest melody with passions: but
I see the comparison will not hold in you, for though your instrument be
answerable to his, yet you want his lukewarm drops, which shows, though your
music be as good, yet your thoughts are not so passionate: but leaving these
ambages, say to me Eurimachus; what may she be that is your Mistress?

Eurimachus amazed at the sight of his Lady, more then Priamus son was at
the view of the three goddesses; sat still like the picture of Niobe turned
into marble, as if some strange apoplexy had taken all his senses. Gaze on her
face he did: speak he could not, in so much that Marpesia smiling at the
extremity of his loves, wakened him out of this trance, thus:

What cheer man, has love so witched thy heart, as all thy senses have left
their powers? is thy tongue tied, as thy heart is fettered, or has the fear of
your mistress cruelty driven you into a cold palsy? if this be the worst,
comfort your self, for women will be true: and if she be too hard hearted,
let me but know her, and you shall see how I will prattle on your behalf; what
say you to me, what makes you thus mute?

By this Eurimachus had gathered his senses together, that rising up and doing
reverence to Marpesia, he thus replied: Madam, it is a principle in Philosophy,
that Sensibile sensui superpositu^ nulla fit sensasio, the color clapped to the
eye, hind^h the sight, the flower put in the nostrill, hinders the smell: and
what of this Philosophical Gnigma, quoth Marpesia? I dare not madam, quoth
Eurimachus, infer what I would; but to answer more plainly, Endimion waking,
and feeling Phebe grace him with a kiss, was not more amazed, than I at your
heavenly presence, fearing, if not Acteons fall, yet that I had committed the
like fault: for at the first blush your excellency drove me into such a maze,
that I dreamed not of the Lady Marpesia, but of some goddess that had solaced
in these woods, which supposition made me so mute.

You fly still (quoth Marpesia) from my demand, playing like the Lapwing that
cries farthest from her nest. I asked who it was that you loved so, as to
honor her with such a sonet.

It was, Madam, to keep accord to my lute, not to discover any passions, for
all the amordelayes Orpheos (...) on his harp, were not amorous, nor every
sonet that Arion warbled on his instrument, vowed unto Venus. I am too young to
love, for fear my youth be ouerbidden; fancy being so heavy a burden, that
Hercules (who could on his shoulder sustain the heavens) groned to bear so
weighty a lode.

If then, Madame, I strive above my strength, especially in love, I shall but
with the Giants heap Peleon upon Ossa, passions upon passions, so long till I
be ^rooken to death with loves thundering bolt: therefore, Madame, I dare not
love.

Marpesia, who determined to sound the depth of his thoughts, took him before
he fell to the ground, and made this reply: Trust me Eurimachus, your looks,
your actions, your sighs and gesture, argues no less than a lover: therefore
seeing we are alone, none but we three, I Will have you once in shrift, and
therefore I conjure you by your Mistress favor and beauty, to tell me
whether you be in love or no.

You strain me so hard, Madam, (quoth Eurimachus) that I am in love, and love
so far in me, as neither time nor fortune can raze out: the name of my
mistress, Madam, pardon, for in naming her I discover mine own presumption,
having aimed so by the means of aspiring love, as her excellency crosses all
my thoughts with disdain: For Madam, give me leave to say (making no compare)
that the Graces at her birth did agree to make her absolute: I having soared so
high, as the sun has half melted my feathers, I fear with Icarus to fall
into the Ocean of endless miseries; for be her disdain never so great, yet my
desire will never belesse, scorn she I should look so hie; affection will not
bate an ounce of his maine: but seeing the dice be in his hands, will throw at
all.

But Madam, so far I am out of (...) to have but one favor at her hands, as
I pass every day and hour in as (...) perplexed estate, as the ghosts greened
by the infernal furies: and with this the water stood in his eyes, which
Marpesia not able to brook, began to salve thus.

I will not Eurimachus, be inquisitiue of your Mistress name, since you have
yielded a reason to conceal it, but for your loves that are lodged so hie,
fear not man; the Blacksmith dared to covet fair Venus; the little Sparrow
pecketh sometimes wheat, the Eagle takes stand; and the little Mouse feeds,
where the Elephant has eaten hay: love as soon stoopeth to visit a poor
cottage, as a Palace: to dare, I tell thee Eurimachus, in love, is the first
principle: and Helena told Paris:

Nemo succenset amanti. Thou must then to Paphos, and not use bashfulnesse in
Venus temple: sacrifices serve at her altars, as a thing unfit for lovers; and
be she as high of degree as any in Taprobane, court her Eurimachus, and if thou
miss, it is but the hap that lovers have. As she should have prosecuted her
talk, her brother who was stalking to kill a Dear, came by, and espying them
at so private and familiar chat, frowned, commanding Eurimachus (as half in
anger) to get him home: he leaving his sport, accompanied my daughter to the
court.

These lovers thus parted, were not long ere they met, where Eurimachus
following the precepts of Marpesia, began very boldly to give the assault, she
very faintly, for fashion sake, making a woman's resistance, but the battery
was so freshly renewed, that Marpesia yielded, and there they plighted a
constant promise of their loves: vowing such says and loyalty as the troth of
two lovers heart? might afford.

In this happy content they lived along while, till Marpesia blabbing the
contract out to a gentleman of the court, it came to her brothers and her
mothers ear, who taking the matter grievously, had her strictly in
examination. Marpesia confessed her loves, and maintained them: on the contrary
side, they persuaded with promises, and threatened with bitter speeches: but in
vain, for Marpesia was resolved and told for a flat conclusion, Eurimachus
was the man, and none but he. Whereupon, my son seeing no means could
prevail to remove her affection, he thought by taking away the cause, to raze
out the effects: and therefore he sent for Eurimachus, whom after he had nipped
up with bitter taunts, he banished from the Court.

This being grievous to the two lovers, yet the assurance of each others
constancy, and the hope in time to have the Prince reconciled, mitigated some
part of their martyrdom: and Marpesia, to show to the world she was not
fleeting, whatsoever her friends said, discovered the grief she conceived by
his absence openly, for she went apparelled in mourning attire. Well,
Eurimachus thus banished, went home to his father, who for fear of ye prince,
durst not entertain him, which unkindness had doubled his grief, that he
fell almost frantike, and began to leave the company of men as a flat Timonist:
in which humor, meeting with the Gentleman that bewraid their loves, he fought
with him and slew him, and buried him so secretly as the care of his own life
could devise.

Well, Cleander was mist, but hear of him they could not; Posts were sent
out, messengers through all Taprobane, but no news, so that diverse did
descant diversely of his departure; some said he was upon secret displeasure
between him and the Prince, passed out of the land: others, that he was slain
by thieves: some that he was devoured by wild beasts. Thus debating of his
absence, he was generally lamented of all the court.

But (leaving the supposition of his death) again to Marpesia, who taking the
exile of Eurimachus to her heart, began to grow into great and extreme
passions, and for grief of the mind, to bodily disease, that she fell into a
Quartaine, which so tormented her, as the Physicians said, there was no hope of
life, nor no art to cure her disease unless her mind were at quiet: whereupon
her brother fearing his sisters life, recalled home Eurimachus, admitted him
into great favor, and gave free grant of his goodwill to their marriage.

Upon this, Marpesia growing into a content, in short time amended. After she
had recovered her health, she daily used the company of Eurimachus very
privately and familiarly, but she found him not the man he was before: for
before he was exiled, no man more pleasant nor more merrily conceited; now none
more melancholy nor fuller of dumps, uttering far fetched sighs, and
uncertain answers, so that it discovered a mind greatly perplexed. Marpesia
noting this, being on a day all alone with Eurimachus in his chamber, she
sought with fair entreaties and sweet dalliance, to wring out the cause of
his sorrows, protesting, if she could, even with the hazard of her life
redress it: if not, to participate in grief some part of his distress.

Eurimachus, that loved her more than his life, although he knew women's
tongues were like the leaves of the Aspe tree, yet thinking her to be wise,
after a multitude of mortal sighs, he discoursed unto her, how he had ^aine
Cleander, and that the remembrance of his death bred this horror in his
conscience.

Marpesia hearing this, made light of the matter, to comfort Eurimachus,
promising and protesting to keep it as secret as hitherto she had been
constant. But she no sooner was parted from her best beloved, but she was
with child of this late and dangerous news, laboring with great pains till
she might utter it to her Gossips: where we may note, son (I speak against
my self) that the closets of women's thoughts are ever open, that the depth of
their heart has a string that stretches to the tongues end, that with Semele
they conceive and bring forth often before their time: which Marpesia tried true,
for sitting one day solitary with a Lady in the court, called Celia, she
fetched many pinching sighs, which Celia marking, desired her to tell her the
cause of that late conceived grief, as to a friend, in whose secrecy she might
repose her life. Marpesia made it somewhat coy and charie a great while,
insomuch that Celia began to long; and therefore urged her extremely. Marpesia
could keep no longer, and therefore using this preamble, began to play the
blabbe.

If I did not, Madam Celia, take you for my second self, and think you to be
wise and secret, I would not reveal a matter of so great importance, which
touches me as much as my life to conceal: Women, you know, having any thing
in their stomach, long while they have discourst it to some friend: taking you
therefore for my chiefest, and hoping all shall be trodden under foot, know
Madam, that Eurimachus has slain Cleander, and that is the cause that makes
him thus melancholy. Mary, God forbid (quoth Celia.) It is true Madam, quoth
Marpesia, and therefore let whatsoever I have said be buried in this place.
With that I came into place, and they broke off their talk.

Celia longing to be out of the chamber, that she might participate this news
to her Gosips, as soon as opportunity gave her leave, went abroad, and meeting
by chance another Gentlewoman of the Court, calling her aside, told her, if
she would be secret, and swear not to reveal it to any one, she would tell
her strange news: the other promising, with great prot^station, to be as
close as a woman could be, Celia told her, how Eurimachus was the man that
^lew Cleander, and that her author was Marpesia.

They were no sooner parted, but this news was told to another, that before
night it was through the whole court, that Eurimachus had slain Cleander:
whereupon, the Prince could do no less (though very loath for his s^sters
sake) but cause him to be apprehended and cast into prison, then assembling his
Lords and Commons, produced Eurimachus, who after strict examination was found
guilty, the greatest witness against him being the confession of Marpesia. The
verdict given up, the prince could not but give judgment, which was, that
within one month in the place where he killed Cleander, he should be (...).
Sentence given, Eurimachus took his mis^ortune with patience. News coming to
Marpesia of this tragical event, she fell down in a sound, and grew into
bitter passions, but in ^aine.

My son, to show how he loved Eurimachus, caused a Caruer to cut out this
sumptuo^s t^mbe in this form, wherein after his death, he resolved to bury
him, so to grace him with extraordinare honor. All things provided, and the day
of his death being come, Eurimachus clad all in black velvet, came forth
mourning in his (...), but merry in his countenance, as one that sorrewed for
the fault, but was not daunted with death. After him followed my Son, the
Earls, Lords, and Barons of the land, all in black: and I and my daughter
Marpesia, and the ladies of the court, covered with sable vails, attending on
this condemned Eurimachus: being come to the place, the deaths-man having laid
the block, and holding the axe in his hand, Eurimachus before his death
uttered these wor^s.

Lords of Taprobane, h^re I slew Cleander, and here must I offer my blond as
amends to the soul of the dead Gentleman, which I repent with more sorrow,
then I performed the deed with fury: The cause of his death, and my misfortune
is all one: he slain for bewraying my lo^es, I executed for discovering his
death: but infortimate I, to bewray so private a matter to the secrecy of a
woman, whose hearts are full of holes, apt to receive, but not to retain:
whose tongues are tru^pets that set open to the world what they know: Foolish
is he that commit^ his life into their lappes, or ties his thoughts in their
beauties: such is the nature of these f^ndlings that they cannot cover their
own scapes, nor strain a veil over their (...) faults: their hearts are so
great, their thoughts so many, their wits so fickle, and their tongues so
slippery: the heart and the tongue are Relatiues, and if time serves they
cannot paint out their passions in talk, yet they will discover them with
their looks: so that if they be not blabbes in their tongues, they will be
tatlers with eyes: the gods have greatly revenged this fault in men, letting it
ouer-slip in women, because it is so common amongst that sex. Mercury, for his
babbling turned Ba^tus to an Index or touchstone, whose nature is to bewray any
metal it touches: and Tantalus for his little (...) in bewraying that
Proserpina ate a grain of the Pomegranate, is placed in hell, up to the chin,
in water, with continual thirst, and has apples hang over his head, with
extreme hunger, whereof the Poet says:

Quaerit aquas in aquis, and poma fugatia captat Tantalus: hoc illi garrula
lingua dedit. But why do I delay death with these friu^lous discourses of
women: suffice they are blabs? and so turning to the deaths-man, laying his
neck on the block, his head was smitten off. The execution done, his death
was lamented, and his body solemnly intombed as thou see, all exclaiming
against my daughter Marpesiaes little secrecy, who in penance of her fault,
used once a day to visit the tomb, and here to her loves soul, sacrifice
many sighs and tears: at length Venus taking pity of her plaints, thinking
to ease her of her sorrow, and to inflict a gentle and meek r^uenge, turned her
into this Rose tree.

As Alcida had uttered these words, there was a ship within kenne, whose
streamers hanging out, I judged by their colors they were of Alexandria,
whereupon I waued them to leeward: the Mariners (more than ordinary courteous)
struck sails, and sent their cockhotes a shore: the shippers were no sooner a
land, but I knew them to be of Alexandria, and for all my misfortunes, basely
attired as I was, the poor knaves called me to remembrance, and their
reverence done; asked if I would to Alexandria: I told them it was mine intent,
whereupon, taking leave of my old Oastesse, the Cauntesse Alcida, with many
thanks for my courteous entertainment, she very loath to leave me, went with
the Mariners toward the boat.

The poor Lady, seeing her self alone, fell to her wonted tears, which the
gods taking pity on, before my face turned to a fountain; I wondering at
their deities, ^ntred the boat, and went to the ship, where welcomed and
reverenced of the Master, and the (...), h^ng up all our sails, we made for
ALEXANDRIA.

FINIS.

