ARBASTO. The Anatomy of Fortune. Wherein is discoursed by a pithie and
pleasant discourse, that the highest state of prosperity, is often times the
first step to mishappe, and that to stay upon Fortunes lotte, is to tread on
brittle Glass. Wherein also Gentlemen may find pleasant conceits to purge
Melancholy, and persit counsel to prevent misfortune. By Robert Green Master
of Art. Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit vtile dulci.


AT LONDON, Printed by H. Iackson, dwelling in Fleetstreete, beneath the
Conduite, at the sign of Saint John Evangelist. 1589.

To the right honorable and virtuous Lady, the Lady Mary Talbot, wife to the
Right honorable Gilbert, Lord Talbot: Robert Green wishes increase of honor
and virtue.
MYRON that unskillful Painter of Greece, never drew any picture, but the
counterfaite of Jupiter: saying, that if it were ill wrought, his woorthines
should countenance out the meanenes of his work, if well, commend the
perfection of his art.

In like manner fares it with me (right Honorable) who having unskillfully
shadowed with bad colors, the counterfeit of Fortune, presume boldly to shroud
it under your Ladyships patronage, as able to defend it, be it never so mean,
and to countenance it, were it never so good, being of Decius mind, who
thought himself safe under the shield of Caesar.

Poor Irus coming into the Temple of Pallas, seeing her pourtraied with a
Spear in the one hand, and a Book in the other, noting thereby as well her
inward virtue, as her outward valor: said, despightfull poverty, thou shall
not keep me from honoring Pallas, though from giving her presents.

So hearing of your Ladyships exquisite perfection, as well in outward shape,
as in virtuous qualities, drawn with a deep desire, to show what a dutiful
affection I owe to such noble and virtuous personages: although want sought to
hinder my will, yet I thought rather to fault in the defect of ability, then
not to show in effect the forwardnes of my desire, which wishing to bring
forth a Mountain, have scarce performed a Moul-hill, and willing to show your
honor Alexanders Picture, is far unable to present you with Agrippas shadows.

But I hope your Ladyship will deal with me as Caesar did with his young
Soldiers, who accepted of their service, not only when they performed what
they should, but when they practiced what they could. Thus resting assured of
your Ladyships courtesy, praying continually for the increase of your honor,
with all things that you would wish or imagine, I end.

Your Ladyships most dutiful to command, Robert Green.

To the Gentlemen Readers health.
ALexander, whether wearied with Bucephalus pace, or desirous of novelties, as
the nature of man delights in change, rode on a time on Euphestions horse,
for which being reprehended by one of his Captains, he made him this answer:
Though all (quoth he) cannot have Bucephalus courage, yet this is a Horse.

So Gentlemen, if some too curious carpe at your courtesy, that vouchsafe to
take a view of this imperfect Pamphlet, I hope you will answer, though it be
not excellent, yet it is a Book: being herein of Agustus mind, who being
demanded why he red Ennius and not Virgill, answered: why quoth he is not
Ennius also a Poet. Though none but Apelles was famous for his Art, yet others
were counted Painters. All might not wash with Homer, yet diverse dipped their
fingers in his Basin. I affoorde not Gentlemen what I would, but what I can,
trusting so you will think of me, and accept of my work. And in this hope I
rest.

Yours to use, Robert Green.

Arbasto, the Anatomy of Fortune.
Sailing toward Candie, after that I had long time been tossed with
unfortunate tempests, forced by wind and wave, our course not well guided by
our compass, happily arrived at the City of Sydon, where being set on
shore, I straight with my Companions went to offer incense to the Goddess of
prosperity, which the Citizens call Astarte. Whither being come, my devotion
done, and my oblations offered up, desirous to take a view of the ancient
Monuments of the Temple, I passed through many places, where most sumptuous
Sepulchers were erected: which being seen, as I thought to have gone to my
lodging, I spied a Cell, having the door open: whereinto as I entered, I saw
an Archflamin sitting (as I supposed) at his Orizons, for so was the Priest of
the Goddess termed, who being clothed in white Satin Robes, and crowned with
a Diadem of perfect Gold, leaned his head upon his right hand, pouring forth
streams of watrish tears, as outward signs of some inward passions, and held
in his left hand the counterfaite of Fortune, with one foot trod on a Polype
fish, and with the other on a Camelion, as assured badges of her certain
mutabilitie. Driven into a dumpe with the sight of this strange devise, as I
long gazed at the unacquainted gesture of this old Flamin, willing to know
both the cause of his care, and what the picture of Fortune did import, I was
so bold as to waken him out of his passion, with this parle.

Father (quod I) if my presumption be great in preasing so rashly into so
secret and sacred a place: yet I hope weighing my will, you will somewhat excuse
my boldness, for I have not presumed as thinking to give any just occasion of
offense, but as a stranger, desirous to see the Monuments of this ancient
Temple, which as I narrowly viewed, happening by chance into this your Cell,
and seeing your old age perplexed with strange passions, stayed as one willing
to learn what disaster hap has driven you into these strange dumps, which if
I without offense may request, and you without prejudice grant, I shall find my
self by duty bound to requite your undeserved courtesy.

After I had uttered these words, staying a good space to hear what the old
Man would answer, seeing that he did not so much as vouchsafe to give an ear
to my parle, or an eye to my person, but still gazed on the picture of Fortune.
As I was ready to course him from his harbor with a deeper blast, I saw a
present Metamorphosis of his mind: for from tears he fell to trifling, from
lowering to laughing, from mourning to mirth, yet never casting his eyes from
Fortunes counterfaite, till at last after he had long smiled (as I thought) at
the picture, he as in despite cast it from him, taking his Lute, played a
dumpe, whereto he warbled out these words.

WHereat ere while I wept, I laugh,
That which I feared, I now despise:
My victor once, my vassaile is,
My foe constraind, my weal supplies.
Thus do I triumph on my foe,
I weep at weal, I laugh at woe.
My care is cured, yet has no end,
Not that I want, but that I have,
My chance was change, yet still I stay,
I would have less, and yet I crave:
Aie me poor wretch that thus do live,
Constraind to take, yet forced to give.
She whose delights are signs of death,
Who when she smiles begins to lowre,
Constant in this, that still she change,
Her sweetest gifts time proves but sour.
I live in care, crossed with her guile,
Through her I weep, at her I smile.
The old sire having with sighs sobbed out this sorrowful dittie, I was
driven into a maze what the contrary contents of these verses should mean,
until at last casting his eye aside, and seeing me stand so solemnlie, he
burst forth into these chollericke terms.

Friend, quoth he (if I may so term thee) thou have either not heard much, or
learned very little, either thy courtesy is small, or thy conditions too
currish, that seek to come to counsel before thou be called. If the
secrecy of my Cell, or the reverence of my age, or thy small acquaintance with
me, were not sufficient to hold thee from preasing so nigh: yet seeing me thus
solemnly perplexed, thou might (for modesty sake) have left me to my secret
and sorrowful passions. If it be the custom of thy Country to be so
discourteous, I like not the fruit of such a soil: If thy own reckles folly
to be thus rash, I crave not to be acquainted with such a bold guest: but
whether it be, as thou cammest in without my leave, I wish thee to go out by
just command.

He had no sooner uttered these words, but he was ready to take up the
picture, if I had not hindered him with this reply.

Sir (quod I) where the offense is confessed, there the fault is half
pardoned, and those facts that are committed by ignorance, always claim them
pardons by course: I grant that I have been much too rash, but I repent, and
therefore hope you will take the less offense, and the sooner excuse my
folly: faults committed by will, gain often times but a check, then mine done
by ignorance, shall I hope escape without a mate. Penalties are enjoined by the
will more than by the work: and things done amiss, (says Tullie) ever
ought to be measured by the intent, and not by the mere action. Which
considered, if my presence has been prejudicial to your passions, I hope you
will think I offended as a stranger, and will pardon me, as one sorry for so
rash an enterprise.

The old man very attentively hearing my talk, having somewhat digested his
choler, rising up from his seat, made me this friendly answer.

Friend (quod he) all is not gold that glisters, the smoothest talk has often
times the smallest truth: the Sun when it glistreth most bright, then
breeds ye greatest shower, when the Bore lays down his bristles, the^ he
means to strik. The Painter casts ye fairest color over the foulest board,
and strangers flatterings are often times but mere fallacions: yet whither thy
talk be truth or tales: whither thou come to note my passions as a spy, or
have by chance hit into my Cell as a stranger, I care not: for if thou envy
me as a foe I force thee not, in that I fear not the spite of Fortune: if
thou muse at my sudden motions, as one desirous to be acquainted with my
case, it shall little avail thee to hear it, and be a great grief for me to
rehearse it.

O sir (quod I) if my credit might be such, as without desert to obtain so
much favor: or if the Prayer of a poor stranger might prevail to persuade
you to unfold the cause of these your sudden passions, I should think my
former travels counteruailed with this your friendly courtesy.

It is good indeed (quod he) by other men's harms to learn to beware: Phoebus
had never been so wary of Vulcane, if Mars his mishap had not bid him take
heed: Ulysses had not so wisely eschewed Circes charms, if he had not seen
before his fellows trans-formed, and perhaps the hearing of my former cares
may free thee from ensuing calamity.

I have been my self a Prince, which am now subject unto power: alate a
mighty Potentate, and now constrained to live under a servile law: not
contented ere while with a princely Palace, now sufficiently satis-fied with
a poor Cell, and yet this present want exceedes my wonted weal. I then had
too much in penury, and now I lack in superfluity, being cloyed with
abundance, yet having nothing, in that my mind remains satis-fied. Fortune,
yea Fortune in favoring me, has made me most unfortunate. Syrenlike hiding
under music misery, under pleasure pain, under mirth mourning, like the
sugared Honicombe, which while a man touches he is stoong with Bees. She
presents fair shapes, which prove but fading shadows, she proffereth
Mountains, and perhaps keeps promise, but the gains of these golden Mines
is loss and misery. None rode on Seianus horse, which got not mishap. None
touched the gold of Tholossa, whom some desaster chance did not assail:
neither has any been advanced by fortune, which in time has not been crossed
with some haples calamity. I speak this by experience, which I pray ye gods
thou never try by proof: for he only is to be thought happy, whom the
inconstant favor of Fortune has not made happy. The Picture which thou see
here, is the perfect counterfaite of her inconstant conditions, for she like
to the Polype Fysh, turns herself into the likeness of every object, and with
the Camelion takes her whole delight in change, being sure in nothing but in
this, that she is not sure. Which inconstancy after I had known by too much
proof, I began to arm my self against her guiles, and to count her fauning
flattery, and her frowns of no force, not to accept her as a friend, but to
despise her as a foe, and in despite of her fained deity, to oppose my self
against her fickle power, which I have found the greatest shield to shrowde me
from her secret injuries. I have left my Palace, and taken me to a simple
Cell, in the one I found often displeasure, but in the other never but
contentation. From a Prince of the earth, I am become a Priest to the Gods,
seeking only by this obscure life to please my self, and displease Fortune:
whose picture when I see, I weep that I was so fond, as to be subject to such
a servile Dame, and I laugh, that at last I triumph both over mine own
affections, and over Fortune. Thus friend, since thou have heard the cause of
my care, cease off to enquire farther in the case, pass from my Cell, and
leave me to my passions, for to procure my grief, and not thy gain, were to
offer me double loss. After he had uttered these words, perceiving by his
parle that he was a mighty Prince, I began with more reverence to excuse my
rashness, framing my talk to this effect.

I am sorry (quod I) if sorrow might be amends for that which is amiss,
that my hasty folly has offended your highness: and that my poor presence
has been prejudicial to your princely passions, but since the fault once
committed may be repented, but not reclaimed, I hope your highness will pardon
my unwitting wilfulnes, and take (had I will) for an excuse of so sudden an
offense, which granted, the desire I have to hear of your strange hap, does
make me pass manners in being importunate with your Majesty, to hear the
tragical chance of this your strange change.

Well (quod he) since thy desire is such, and time allows me convenient
leisure, sit down, and thou shall hear what trust there is to be given to
inconstant Fortune.

Arbasto.
Until I waxt weary of my diadem, (quod he) I was king of the famous Country
of Denmark, wherein, after Bosphorus deceassed, for so was my father called, I
reigned in happy prosperity, coming to the Crown at the age of one and
twenty years, being so honored of my Subjects for my virtue, and so loved
for my courtesy, as I did not only gain the hearts of mine own Countrymen,
but also win the good will of strangers. I could not complain of lack, in that
my greatest want was store. I feared not the force of foreign foes, for I knew
none but were my faithful friends. I doubted no misfortune, for I could see
no way for me to mishap: nay, if I had been wise, I might ye more have feared
misery, in that I was so fully pampered up with felicity. But I poor
wretch was not daunted with any dread, because I saw no present danger: I
thought the sea being calm, there could come no tempest: that from the clear
air could ensue no storm, that quiet ease was not the mother of dissension,
and that where Fortune once tuned, in the strings could never be found any
discord.

But O fond and unfortunate Arbasto, for so is my name, and therefore
unfortunate in that thou art Arbasto, thou now have tried though by hapless
experience, that when Nilus fills up his bounds, ensues a dearth: when the
Angelica is laden with most seed, then he dies: when music was heard in
the Capitol, then the Romans were plagued with pestilence: when Circes
proffered most gifts, she pretended most guile, and that when Fortune has
deprived thee of most care, then she means to drown thee in the greatest
calamity: for as thus I safely floated in the Seas of security, and bathed
in the streams of bliss, Fortune, thinking at length to give me the mate,
began thus to prosfer the check. I having but one only brother called Tebaldo,
whom forced by nature, I most entirely loved and liked, who soiourned in
Frannce, as one desirous to see the manners of strange Countries, and to
furnish himself with al qualities fit for a worthy Gentleman, I unhappily
received news, that he was cowardly without cause slain in the French Court,
which so appalled my senses, as nature most cruelly exclaimed against Fortune,
in so much, that scorched with the flame of speedy revenge, contrary to the
counsel of my nobles, with a resolute mind, I determined to invade France,
and either to bring ye whole realm to ruin, or else to hazard life and limme
in the battle: well, no persuasion being able to drive me from this settled
determination, I caused my Ships to be rigged, and with as much speed as might
be, sailed into France with a great navy, where I had no sooner landed my
soldiers, but as a professed foe craving no other recompense for my brothers
death but their destruction, I burnt their borders, fired their forts, rased
their Towns and Cities to the earth, using no mercy but this that having
deprived them of their possessions, I also bereaved them of their liues^
Pelorus hearing with what violence I had invaded his land (for so the French
king was called) fearing yt he was not able to withstand my force, seeing that
Fortune so favored my enterprise, passed speedily with his whole host unto
Orleance, whither I hasted being not greatly resisted, laying valiantly a
strong siege to the city, which after I had diverse times assaulted, and had so
shaken ye walls with Cannon shot, that they were forced to strengthen them with
new counter mures. Pelorus half daunted with my desperate attempts, coueted
secretly to conclude a peace: to color therefore this his intent with a false
shadow, he speedily dispatched an Heralde, to entreat a truce for three
months, which being unhappily granted, and therefore unhappily because
granted, it was lawful for them of Denmark peaceably to pass into the
City, and for them of Orleance quietly to come into our Camp. While thus the
truce continued, I being desirous to take a view of the French Court,
accompanied with my Nobles, went to Pelorus, who willing to show his martial
courage by using courtesy to his foe, gave me very sumptuous and courteous
entertainment. But alas, such desaster hap ensued of this my fond desire, that
death had been thrice more welcome the^ such endless distress. For Pelorus had
only two daughters, the eldest called Myrania, the youngest named Doralicia, so
fair and well featured, as Venus would have been jealous if Adonis had lived
to see their beauties. But especially lovely Doralicia, and therefore more
lovely, because I so entirely loved, was so beautified with the gifts of
nature, and so adorned with more then earthly perfection, as she seemed to be
framed by nature to blemish nature, and ye beauty had skipt beyond her skill, in
framing a piece of such curious workmanshippe, for that which in her
(respecting her other perfections) was of no price, would be counted in others
a pearl, her greatest want would in others be thought a store, so yt if any
thing lacked in her, it was not to be sought for in any earthly creature. This
Doralicia, being appointed by unjust Fortune to be the instrument of my fall,
accompanied with her sister Myrania and other Ladies, came into the Chamber
where her father and I was at parle, whose gorgious presence so appaled my
senses, that I stood astonished, as if with Perseus shield I had been made a
senseless picture, not knowing from whence this sudden and uncertain
passion should proceed: yet this fond affection I felt to rule my fancy, that
as the Dormouse can not shut his eyes as long as he lies in the beams of the
Sun, as the Dear can not cease from braying where the herb Moly grows, so
could not I but stare on the face of Doralicia, as long as her beauty was such
an heavenly object. She narrowly marking my gazing looks, straight perceived
that I was galled, and therefore to show how lightly she accounted of my
liking, passed out of the Chamber with a coye and courtly countenance, but
Myrania as one perceiving and pitying my passions, seemed with her looks to
say in heart, Arbasto, farewell.

These two Goddesses being gone, feeling my mind somewhat perplexed, I took
my lean of Pelorus, and departed. Coming home to my Tent, fraught with a
thousand toyish fancies, I began to conjecture what should be the cause of
these contrary motions, the effect I felt, the occasion I could not find,
applying therefore a contrary salve to my sore, it did rather increase, than
cure the malady, for company was a corsiue, not a comfort: thinking Music
should be a preservative, I found it a poison: and to be solitary, I found
it the sinck of all sorrow: for then strange thoughts, unacquainted passions,
pinching fancies, waking visions, and slumbering watchings, disquieted my head.
Me thought I saw the counterfaite of Doralicia before mine eyes, then the
harmony of her speech sounded in mine ears, her looks, her gestures, yea,
all her actions were particularly deciphered by a secret imagination. Wrapped
thus in a laborinth of endless fancies, when reason could not suppress will,
nor wisdom control affection, but that wit (though inueagled) yet disdained
the use of a guide. I then cast my cards, and found by manifest proof, that
the lunatike fit which so distempered my brains, was that frantic passion
which fools and Poets call love, which known, blaming my self of cowardice,
that beauty should make me bend, I fell at last into these terms.

Why Arbasto (quoth I) art thou so squemish that thou can not see Wine, but
thou must surfeit: can thou not draw nie the fire and warm thee, but thou
must with Satyrus kiss it and burn thee: art thou so little master of thy
affections, that if thou gaze on a picture, thou must with Pigmalion be
passionate: can thou not pass thorough Paphos, but thou must offer incense
to Venus? do thou think it injury to Cupid to look, if thou do not
love. Ah fond fool, know this, fire is to be used, but not to be handled:
the Baaran flower is to be worn in the hand, not chawed in the mouth: the
precious stone Echites is to be applied outwardly, and not to be taken
inwardly: and beauty is made to feed the eye, not to fetter the heart, will thou then swallow up the bait which thou know to be bane? will thou hazard
at that which can not be had without harm? no, stretch not too far, wade not
too deep, use beauty, but serve it not, shake the tree, but taste not of the
fruit, least thou find it too hard to be disgested. Why, but beauty is a God,
and will be obeyed: love looks to command, not to be conquered: Juno strove
but once with Venus, and she was vanquished: Jupiter resisted Cupid, but he
went by the worst, it is hard for thee with the Crabbe to swim against the
stream, or with the Salamander to strive against the fire, for in wrestling
with a fresh wound, thou shall but make the sore more dangerous. Can beauty
fond fool be resisted, which makes the Gods to bow: Love himself yielded to
the feature of Psyche, and think thou thy fancy of greater force? yea but
what fondness is that Arbasto to soothe thy self in thy folly. Thou did
come a Captain, and will thou return a captive: thy intent was to conquer,
not to be vanquished, to fight with the Lance, not to be foilde with love, to
use thy spear, not thy pen, to challenge Mars, not to dally with Venus. How
do thou think to subdue France, which can not rule thine own
affections: Art thou able to quail a kingdom, which can not quell thine
own mind? no, it will be hard for thee to go in triumph, which art not so
much as Lord of thy self. But Arbasto, if thou will needs love, use it as a
toye to pass away the time, which you may take up at thy lust, and lay
down at thine own pleasure. Love, why Arbasto, do thou dream, whom
should thou love? Doralicia? what thy foe, one that wishes thy mishap, and
partly prays to the Gods, for thy misfortune, no sure thou art not so fond.

And with that, as I uttered these words, such thoughts, such sighs, such
sobs, such tears assailed me, as I was stricken dumb with ye extremity of
these hellish passions, scarce being able to draw my breath for a good space,
til at last recovering my senses, I fell to my former sorrow in this sort.

Yes alas Arbasto, it is the lucklesse love of Doralicia, and therefore the
more lucklesse because thou loouest Doralicia, that has thus inchaunted thy
affections. She is not thy friend whom thou may hope to get, but thy foe,
whom thou art sure not to gain: for do thou think she will requite thy merit
with meed, or repay thy love with liking? no, she hates thee Arbasto, as
sworn Pelorus foe, and her enemy. Can she love thee which seek her fathers
life: nay, did she love, yet could she think thou do like, which layest siege
to her City: no, unless by love she were blinded with too much love. Since
then to fancy thy foe, is with the Cockatrice to peck against the steel,
subdue thy affections, be master of thy mind, use will as thy subject, not as
thy sovereign, so may thou triumph and laugh at Cupid, saying: Fond boy I
was in love, what then.

I had no sooner sealed up these secret meditations with a sorrowful sigh, but
least being solitary I should fall into farther dumps, I went out of my Tent to
pass away the time with some pleasant parle, thinking this the fittest means
to drive away idle fancies, hoping that hot love would be soon cold, that the
greatest bauin was but a blaze, and that the most violent storm was ever least
permanent.

Well, to see how Love and Fortune can play false when they list, I was not so
drowned in desires toward Doralicia, as pore Myrania burned with affection
toward me. For Venus willing to show she was a woman by her wilful
contrarieties so fiered her fancies with ye form of my feature, as the poor
Lady was perplered with a thousand sundry passions, one while she sought
with hate to raze out love, but that was with the Dear to feed against the
wind: another while she devised which way to obtain her desire: but then alas
she heaped coals upon her head, for she saw no spark of hope to procure so
good hap. Driven thus into sundry dumpes, she fell at last into these terms.

Alas Myrania (quod she) happy, yea thrice happy are those maids which are
borne in the I Will Meroe, which in their virginity are suffered to see none but
him whom they shall marry, and being wives are forbidden by the Law to see any
man but their husband, until they be past fifty. In this Country Myrania
beauty is used as a natural gift, not honored as a supernatural God, and they
love only one, because love cannot force them to like any other: so that they
sow their love in joy, and reap it in pleasure. Would God thou had been
borne in this soil, or brought up in the same sort so should thou have
triumphed over beauty as a slave, which now leads thee as a servile captive.

O unfortunate Myrania, and therefore unfortunate because Myrania, have thou so
little force to withstand fancy, as at the first alarm thou must yield to
affection: can thou not look with Salmacis, but thou must love: can thou
not see with Smylax but thou must sigh: can thou not view Narcissus with
Echo, but thou must be vowed to his beauty. Learn learn fond fool by
others mishaps to beware: for she that loves in have, often times, nay always
repents at leisure. The Hippians anointing themselves with the fat of ye Fish
Mugra, pass through most furious flames without any perrill. The people called
Psilli, as long as the sacrifice unto Vesta, can be hurt with no venomous
Serpents. Telephus as he wore the counterfeit of Pallas shield, was
inuulnerable, and thou as long as thy mind is fraughte with the chaste
thoughts of Diana, can never be fired with the haples flame of Venus: arm
thy self with reason, and thou may pass through Cytheria without danger:
let thy will and wit be directed with advised counsel, and thou may say:
Cupid, I defy thee.

Ah Myrania, things are soon promised, but not so casilie performed: it is
easy to sound the victory, but passing hard to obtain the conquest: all can
say, I would overcome, but few or none return with triumph. Beauty is therefore
to be obeyed, because it is beauty, and love to be feared of men, because
honored of the Gods. Dare reason abide the brunte, when beauty bids the
battle: can wisdom win the field when love is Captain. No, no, love is
without law, and therefore above all law, honored in heaven, feared in earth,
and a very terror to the infernal Ghostes.

Bow then unto that Myrania, whereunto lawless necessity does bend, be not so
fond as with Xerxes to bind the Ocian Sea in fetters: fight not with the
Rascians against the wind: seek not with them of Scyrus to shoot against the
stars: contend not with Niobe against Latona, nor strive not with Sapho
against Venus, for love being a Lord, looks to command by power, and to be
obeyed by force.

Truth Myrania, but what then, to love is easy, and perhaps good, but to like
well is hard and a doubtful chance: fancy thy fill (fond fool) so thou bend
not thy affection to thy fathers foe: for to love him who seeks his life, is
to war against nature and Fortune. Is there none worthy to be thy pheere but
Arbasto, the cursed enemy to thy Country? can none win thy good will but the
bloody wretch, who seeks to breed thy fathers bane? can the Eagle and the
bird Osiphage build in one tree? will the faulcon and the dove covet to sit on
one perch: will the Ape and the Bear be tied in one tedder, will the fox and
the lamb lie in one den: no they want reason, and yet nature suffers them not
to live against nature: will thou then be so wilful or witles, as having
reason to guide nature: yet to be more unnatural then unreasonable creatures,
be sure if thou fall in this thou striuest against ye gods, and in striving with
them look for a most sharp revenge.

Tush I know this, but has not love set down his sentence, and shall I appeal
from his censure: shall I deny that which the destenies have decreed: no, for
though Cydippa rebelled for a time, yet she was forced at last to make suit to
Venus for a pardon, and I may seek to hate Arbasto, but never find where to
begin to mislike him. And with that, such fiery passions oppressed her, as she
was feign to send forth scalding sighs somewhat to ease her inflamed fancy,
which being sorowfullie sobbed forth, she had begun a fresh to pour forth her
pitiful complaints, if her sister Doralicia being accompanied with other
Gentlewomen had not driven her out of these dumps, whom she no sooner spied,
but leaving her passions, she waxed pleasant, covering care with conceits, and a
mourning heart with a merry countenance, least her sorrowful looks might give
the company occasion to conjecture somewhat was amiss. But I alas which felt
the furious flames of fancy to broile incessantly within my breast, could not
so cunningly dissemble my passions, but al my Peers saw I was perplexed: for
whereas before this sudden chance, Pelorus misfortune procured my mirth, now
the foil which I reaped by affection drove me to a deeper misery. In the day
(to the increasing of my care) I spent the time in sollitarie dumpes, in the
night affected thoughts and visions suffered me scarce to slumber: for alas
there is no greater enemy to the mind, than in love to live without hope, which
doubt was the sum of my endless sorrow, that in seeing my self fettered, I
could see no hope at all of my freedom: yet to mittigate my misery, I thought
to walk from the Camp toward the City, that I might at the least feed my
eye with the sight of the place wherein the Mistress of my heart was harbored,
taking with me only for company a Duke of my Country called Egerio, unto
whom I durst best commit my secret affairs, who noting my unaccustomed
passions, coniecturing the cause of my care by the outward effects, coveting
carefully to apply a salve to my sore, and to drive me from such drowsy
thoughts, wakened me from my dumps with this pleasant devise.

Sir, quoth he, I have often meruailed, and yet cannot cease to muse at the
madness of those men, whom the common people think to honor with the glorious
title of lovers, who when rashly they purchase their own mishap in placing
their affection, where either their disabilitie or the destinies deny success
to their suites, do either pass their days in endless dolor, or prevent
misery by untimely death. If these passionate patients listened a little to Venus
allurments, as I to Cupids flatteries, few men should have cause to call the
Gods unjust, or women cruel: for I think of love as Mylciades the Athenian
did, who was wont to say, that of all the plagues wherewith the Gods did afflict
mortal men, love was the greatest, in that they sought that as an heavenly
bliss, which at last they found their fatal bane.

Hearing Egerio thus cunningly and covertly to touch me at the quick, thought
to dally with him in this wise.

Why Egerio (quod I) do thou count it a madness to love, or do thou think
him rash which yields unto affection: know thou not that love is divine,
and therefore commands by power, and that he enioyneth by destiny and cannot
be resisted. I am not of that mind with Mylciades, that love is a plague, but
rather I think he is favored of the gods that is a happy lover.

Truth (quod he) but who is happy in love? he that has the happiest success?
no: for I count him most unhappy which in love is most happy.

Why then Egerio (quod I) thou think him unhappy in that he loves.

Or else may it please your highness, quoth he, I should think amiss: for
shall I count him fortunate which for one dram of prosperity reapeth a whole
pound of misery? or shall I esteem that lover happy, whose greatest gain is
but golden grief: nay that is never to be called pleasure, which is sauced
with pain, nor that good luck whose guerdon is loss.

Since Egerio (quod I) thou do thus broadly blaspheme against Cupid, tell me
why thou think ill of love.

Because sir, quoth he, it is love, being such a frantic frenzy which so
infecteth the minds of men, as under the taste of Nectar, they are poisoned
with the water of Stix, for as he which was charmed by Lara sought still to
hear her enchantment, or as the Dear after once he brouseth on ye Tamariske
tree, will not be driven away till he dies: so our amorous lovers have their
senseless senses so besotted with the power of this lascivious God, that they
count not themselus happy but in their supposed unhappiness, being at most ease
in disquiet, at greatest rest when they are most trobled, seeking contentation
in care, delight in misery, and hunting greedily after that which always
brings endless harm.

This is but your sentence Egerio (quoth I) but what reasons have you to
confirm your censure?

Such (quoth he) as your highness can neither mislike nor infringe: for the
first step to love is the loss of liberty, tying the mind to the will of
her, who either too curious, little respects his suit, or too coy smally
regards his service, yet he is so blinded with the vale of fond affection,
that he counts her sullennes sobernes, her vain charines virtuous chastity:
if she be wanton he counts her witty, if too familar courteous, so besotted
with the drugs of doting love, that every fault is a virtue, and though every
string be out of tune, yet the Music cannot sound amiss: resembling Tamantus
the Painter, who shadowed the worst pictures with the freshest colors.

The pains that Lovers take for hunting after loss, if their minds were not
charmed with some secret enchauntment, were able either to keep their fancies
from being inflamed, or else to cool desire being already kindled: for the
days are spent in thoughts, the nights in dreams, both in danger, either
beguiling us of that we had, or promising us that we have not. The head
fraught with fancies, fiered with jealousy, troubled with both: yea so many
inconveniences wait upon love, as to reckon them all were infinite, and to
taste but one of them intolerable, being always begun with grief, continued
with sorrow, and ended with death: for it is a pain shadowed with pleasure, and
a joy stuffed with misery: so that I conclude, that as none ever saw the
Altars of Basyris without sorrow, nor banqueted with Pholus without surfeiting:
so as impossible it is to deal with Cupid and not gain either speedy death or
endless danger.

As I was ready to reply to Egerios reasons, drawing to a small thicket of
trees, which was hard adioining to the City, I spied where some of the French
dames were friendly sitting about a clear fountain, of whom after I had
taken a narrow view, easily perceived they were three Ladies (accompanied with
one Page) namely Myrania, Doralicia, and their Nurse called Madam Vecchia,
which sudden sight so appalled my senses, as I had been appointed a new Judge
to the three goddesses in the valley of Ida: yet seeing before my eyes the
Mistress of my thoughts, and the Saint unto who^ I did owe my devotion, I
began to take heart at grace, thinking that by this fit opportunity, love and
Fortune began to favor my enterprise, willing therefore not to let slip so
good an occasion, I boldly paced to them, whom I saluted in this sort.

Fair Ladies (quod I) the sight of your surpassing beauty so dazeled mine
eyes, as at the first I was in doubt, whether I should honor you as heavenly
Nymphs, or salute you as earthly creatures: but as I was in this dumpe, I
readily called to mind the figure of your divine face, which being at my
coming to your fathers Court, by some secret influence most surely imprinted
in my fancy, I have hitherto without any spark of forgetfulness perfectly
retained, feeling ever since in my heart, such strange passions, an unaccustomed
devotion to your beauty and virtues, as I would think the Gods and Fortune
did favor me, if either I might find occasion to manifest my affection, or
live to do you service.

Doralicia hearing me thus strangely to salute her, although she saw her self
in the hands of her fathers foe: yet as nothing dismayed, with a coy
countenance, she gave me this crabbish answer.

Sir, quoth she, if at the first look ye took us for Nymphs by the
perfection of our divine beauty, it seems unto us that either your women in
Denmark are very foul; or your sight sore blemished since your coming into
France: for we know our imperfections far unworthy of such dissembled praise.
But Diomedes smiled most when he pretended greatest mischief: Scyron
entertained his guestes best, when he meant to entreat the^ worst: Lycaon
feasted Jupiter when he sought to betray him: the Hiena ever fauneth at her
pray: the Sirens sing when they mean to enchant: Circes is most pleasant, when
she presents poison: and so you, in praising our beauty seek to spoil our
blood: in extolling our perfection, to make us most imperfect, in wishing
openly our weal, secretly to work our death and destruction. For your
service you offer us, we so much the more mislike it, for his sake that makes
the proffer: for we are not so inueigled with self love, nor so senceles to
conceive, but that we think he little favors the stems that cutteth down
the old stock, he little respects the twig that tendereth not the root, and
he lightly loves the child, that deadly hates the father, Polixena counted
Achilles a flatterer, because he continued ye siege against Troy. Cressid
therefore forsook Troylus, because he warred against the Grecians, and we
cannot count him our privy freende which is our open foe.

Why Madame (quod I) did not Tarpeia favor Tantius, though a foe unto Rome:
did not Scylla respect Mynos though he besieged Nisus?

Truth sir, (quod Myrania) but the gains they got was perpetual shame and
endless discredit, for the one was slain^ by the Sabynes, the other rejected by
Mynos. The young Faunes cannot abide to look on the Tiger: the Halciones are
no sooner hatched, but they hate the Eagle. Andromache would never trust the
fair speeches of Pyrrhus, nor Dydo laughe when she saw Hierbas smile: where
the party is known for a professed foe, there suspicious hate ensues of
course: and fond were that person that would think well of him that proffereth
poison though in a golden pot.

Madame, quoth I, I know it is hard where mistrust is harbored to infer
belief, or to procure credit where his truth is called in question: but I
wish no better success to happen to my self, than in heart I do imagine to you
al, swearing by the gods that I do honor your beauties and virtues so much,
that if I had won the conquest, and you were my captives, yet I would honor
you as my sovereigns, and obey you as a loving subject.

But I pray God, quoth Madame Vechia, you have never occasion to show us such
favor, nor we cause to stand to your courtesy: for I doubt we should find
your glowing heat turned to a chilling cold, and your great promises to small
performance.

In the mean time (and with that she took Myrania and Doralicia by the
hands) we will leave you to return to the Camp, and we will repair to the
City, willing to give you thanks for your good will, when we find you a
friend, and not before.

Nay Madame, quoth I, not so, for construe of my meaning how you please, or
accept of my company how you list, I will not be so discourteous to leave you
so slenderly guided, as in the guarde of this little Page. And with that,
taking Doralicia by the hand, willing not to let slip so fit opportunity, I
began to court her on this manner.

The choice is hard Madame Doralicia (quoth I) where the party is compelled
either by silence to die with grief, or by unfolding his mind, to live with
shame, yet so sweet is the desire of life, and so bitter the passions of love,
that I am enforced to prefer an unseemly suit before an untimely death.
Loath I am to speak, and in despair I am to speed: in the one showing my
self a coward, in the other weighing mine own case. For considering what love
is, I fainte, and thinking how I am counted a foe, I fear. But since where love
commands, there it is folly to resist, so it is Madame, that intending to be
victor, I am become a vassale, coming to conquer, I am caught a captive,
seeking to bring other into thrall, alas I have lost mine own liberty. Your
heavenly beauty has brought me into bondage, your exquisite perfection has
snared my freedom, your virtuous qualities has subdued my mind, as only your
courtesy may free me from care, or your cruelty cross me with calamity. To
recount the sorrows I have sustained since I first was in^eigled with thy
beauty, or the service I have vowed unto thy virtue, since thou do count my
talk, though never so true, but mere toys, were rather to breed in thee an
admiration then a belief. But this I added for the time, which the end shall
try for a truth, that so faithful is my affection, and so loyal is my love,
that if thou take not pity of my passions, either my life shall be too short,
or my misery too long.

Doralicia hearing attentively my talk, often times changed color, as one in
great choler, being so inflamed with a melancholic kind of hate, as she was
not of a long time able to utter one word, yet at last with a face full of
fury, she burst forth into these despightfull terms.

Why Arbasto (quod she) art thou of late become frantic, or do thou think
me in a frenzy: have thou been bytten with the Serpent Amphisbena which
procures madness, or do thou suppose me fraught with some lunatic fits,
for thy speech makes me think, either thou art troubled with the one, or that
thou countes me combred with the other: if this thy poisoned parle were in
jest, it was too broad weying the case, if in earnest, too bad considering the
person: for to talk of peace amidst the pikes, shows either a cowarde or a
counterfeit: and to sue for love by hate, either frenzy or folly. It is a mad
Hare Arbasto that will be caught with a Taber, a greedy fish that comes to a
bare hook, a blind Goose that runs to the Foxes sermon, and she a loving
fool that stoopeth to her enemies lure. No no, think me not so fond, or at
least hope not to find me so foolish, as with Phryne to fancy Cecrops, with
Harpalice to like Archemerus, with Scilla to love Mynos, with careless Minions
so far to forget my honor, my honesty, my parents, and my Country, as to love,
nay not deadly to hate him which is a foe to the least of these: for
experience teaches me, that the fairer the stone is in the Toades head, the
more pestilent is the poison in her bowels, the brighter the Serpents scales
be, the more infectious is her breath, and the talk of an enemy, the more it
is seasoned with delight, the more it sauoureth of despite, cease then to
seek for love, where thou shall find nothing but hate, for assure thy self,
if thou did fancy as faithfully, as thou do flatter falsely, yet the
guerdon for thy love should be only this, that I will pray incessantly to the
Gods, in thy life to pesture thee with earthly torments, and after death, to
plague thee with hellish tortures.

Although these bitter blastes of Doralicia, had been a sufficient cooling
card to quench fond affection, yet as the water causes the seacoale to burn
more freshlie, so her despightfull terms far more inflamed my desire, that I
made her this friendly reply.

Alas (Madame) weigh my case with equity: if you hate me, as I am foe to
Pelorus, yet favor me as I am a friend to Doralicia. If you loathe me as a
conqueror of your Country, yet pity me as I am a captive to your beauty. If
you vouchsafe not to listen to the lure of your enemy, yet hear the
passionate complaints of a perplexed lover, who leading others in triumph, yet
he himself lives in most haples servitude.

If I have done amiss Doralicia, I will make amends: if I have committed a
fault, I will both requite it and recompense it: as I have been thy fathers
foe, so I will be his faithful friend, as I have sought his bale, I will
procure his bliss: yea, I will go against the hair in all things, so I may
please thee in any thing.

But as I was about to make a longer discourse, she cut me off in this wise.

In faith sir, quoth she, so well do I like you, that you can not more
displease me, than in seeking to please me: for if I knew no other cause to
hate thee, yet this would suffice, that I cannot but dislike thee: be therefore
my fathers friend or his foe, like him or hate him, yet this assure thy self
that I will never love thee. And with that she floong from me in a great
chafe. Reply I could not: for by this we were come to the gates of the City,
where (though unwilling) I took my leave of them in this sort.

I am sorry Ladies that such is my luck, and so unhappy is my lotte, that in
offering my self a companion, I have greatly offended you with my company:
yet since I cannot strive against chance, I think my self happy that Fortune
has honored me with the fruition of your presence, hoping when time shall
try my words no tales but truth, you will at last make me amends with crying
peccaui: in the mean while I commit you to the tuition of the Gods, praying
Fortune rather to plague me with all mishap, then to cross you with any chip
of mischance.

The thanks I had for this my friendly courtesy, was a coy disdainful look of
Doralicia, and a churlish vale of the old trot Vechia, but Myrania as one
stoong with the prick of fancy, bad me farewell, with a more courteous gloze.

If sir (quoth she) the secret intent of your friendship had been agreeable to
the outward manner of your courtesy, we had without rubbing our memories ere
this yielded you great thanks for your company: but since you greet us with a
Judas kiss, we think we have small cause to gratify you for your kindness:
notwithstanding, least you should accuse us wholly of discourtesie, we say we
thank you, whatsoever we think, and with that, she cast on me such a loving
look, as she seemed to play loath to depart. Well, they now returning to the
Court, and I now retiring to the Camp, feeling my self deeply perplexed, yet
as much as I could, dissembled my passions, willing in love not to be counted a
lover, jesting therefore with Egerio, I thus began to draw him on.

How now Egerio, (quod I) has not the beauty of these fair Ladies brought
you from your fond heresy: will you not be content for blaspheming of Love,
in pennaunce to carry a burning Faggot before Cupid? me thought your eyes were
gazing, wheresoever your heart was gadding: but tell me in good troth, is not
Doralicia worthy to be loved?

Yes sir, quoth he, if she were not Doralicia, for as she is beautiful, she
is to be liked of all, but as she is Pelorus daughter, not to be desired of
Arbasto, least in seeking to gain her love, he get that which he least looks
for.

Why Egerio, quoth I, what ill luck can ensue of love, when I mean not to
venture but upon trust, nor to trust without trial.

Such (quoth he) as happened to Achilles by Polexena, and yet he feared
Priamus. But alas sir, I sigh to think, and I sorrow to see that reason should
yield to affection, liberty to love, freedom to fancy, that Venus should
bear the target, and Mars the distaffe: that Omphale should handle ye club,
and Hercules the spindle: that Alexander should crouch, and Campaspe be coy:
that a warlike mind should yield to a little wavering beauty, and that a
Prince whose prowess could not be subdued, should by love become subject at
the first shot.

What Egerio, quoth I, know thou not that he whem no mortal creature can
control, love can command, that no dignity is able to resist Cupids deity:
Achilles was invulnerable, yet wounded by fancy: Hercules not to be conquered
of any, yet quickly vanquished by affection: Mars able to resist Jupiter, but
not to withstand beauty. Love is not only kindled in the eye by desire, but
engraven in the mind by destenie, which neither reason can eschew, nor wisdom
expel.

The more pity (quoth he) for poor men, and the greater impiety in the
gods, that in giving love free liberty, they granted him a lawless
privilege. But since Cupid will be obeyed, Arbasto is willing to be obedient,
would God love had either aimed amiss, or else had not made Doralicia the
mart.

I not unwilling that Egerio should be privy to my passions, told him that
what I spoke was in jest, and that if ever I did fancy, as yet I knew not what
it meant: I would use love as the Persians did the Sun, who in the morning
honor it as a God, and at noone-tide curse it as a devil. Concealing thus my
care, the covered sparks burst into great flames, that coming to my Tent, I
was forced to cast my self upon my bed, where I sobbed forth sorrowfully
these words.

Alas Arbasto, how art thou perplexed, thou both live in ill hap, and love
without hope: thou burnest in desire, and art cooled with disdain: thou art
bidden to the feast by love, and art beaten with the spit by beauty. But what
then, do thou count it care which thou suffer for Doralicia, who shameth
Venus for her hue, and staineth Diana for her chastity. Yea but Arbasto, the
more beauty she has, the more pride, and the more virtue, the more
preciseness. None must play on Mercuries pipe, but Orpheus: none rule Lucifer,
but Phoebus: none were Venus in a tablet but Alexander, nor none enjoy
Doralicia, but such an one as far exceeds thee in person and parentage:
thou see she has denied thy suit, disdained thy service, lightly respected
thy love, and smally regarded thy liking, only promising this, while she lives
to be thy professed foe. And what then fond fool, will thou shrink for an
April shoure? know thou not that a denial at the first is a grant, and a
gentle answer a flattering flo^^e: that the more they seem at the first to
loathe, the more they love at the last. Is not Venus painted catching at the
ball with her hands, which she seems to spurue at with her feet? Does not
the Mirre tree being hewn, yield no sap, which not moo^ed, pours forth
sirop: and women being woed, deny that, which of themselves they most
earnestly desire.

The stone Sandrasta is not so hard, but being heat in the fire, it may be
wrought: no Iuory so tough, but seasoned with Sutho, it may be ingraue^, no
hawke so haggard, which in time may not be called to the lure: nor no woman so
wilful, which by some means may not be won. Hope the best then and be bold,
for Love and Fortune cares not for cowardes.

Nay tush Arbasto, what need thou pine thus in hapless passions, or seek
for that with sorrow, which thou may obtain with a small suit, raise up thy
siege, grant but conditions of peace, show but a friendly countenance to
Pelorus, and he neither will nor dare deny thee his daughter Doralicia. Do
this then Arbasto, nay I will do it, and that with speed, for now I agree to
Tullie that it is good: Iniquissimam pacem iustissimo bello anteponere.

Well, being resolved upon this point, I felt my mind disburthened of a
thousand cares, wherewith before I was clogged, feeding my self with the hope
of that pleasure, which when I enjoyed should recompense my former pain.

But alas, poor Myrania could not feel one minute of such ease, for she
incessantly turned the stone with Sysiphus, rolled on the wheel with Ixion,
and filled the bottomless tubs with Belydes, in so much, that when she could
find no means to mittigate her malady, she fell into these bitter
complaints.

Ah Myrania, ah wretched wench Myrania, how art thou without reason, which
suffer reason to yield unto appetite, wisdom unto sensual will, and a
free mind unto servile love: but I perceive when the Iuie rises, it wreatheth
about the Elm: when the Hop grows high, it has need of a poale, and when
virgins wax in years, they follow that which belongs to their youth. Love,
love, yea but they love expecting some good hap, and alas both love and live
without all hope, for Arbasto is my foe, and yet if he were my friend, he
likes not me, he looks only upon Doralicia. Since then Myrania thou art
pinched, and have none to pity thy passions, dissemble thy love though it
shorten thy life: for better it were to die with grief, than live with shame.
The sponge is full of water, yet is not seen. The leaf of the tree Alpina
though it be wet, looks always dry^^ and a wise lover, be she never so much
tormented, behaueth herself, as though she were not touched. Yea, but fire
cannot be hidden in the Flax without smoke, nor Musk in the bosom without
smell, nor love in the breast without suspicion. Why then seek some mean to
manifest thy love to Arbasto: for as the stone Draconites can by no means be
polished, unless the Lapidarie burn it, so thy mind can by no medicine be
cured, unless Arbasto ease it: alas Arbasto, sweet Arbasto. And with that she
fetched such a groaning sighe, that one of her Maids came into the Chamber, who
by her presence putting her from her passions, sat so long by, till tired with
drousie thoughts she fell into a slumber.

Fortune frowning thus upon her (as I supposed) and fawning upon me, I set my
foot on the fairest sands, although at last I found the^ most fickle, thinking
I must needs tread the Mesures right, when Fortune piped the dance, but
though I threw at all, yet my chance was hard, for Pelorus trifling for truce,
pretended treason: making a show of fear, fought subtly how to overthrow me
by deceit, saying, that in ruling of Empires there is required as great
policy as prowess, in governing an estate, close cruelty does more good
than open clemency: for the obtaining of a kingdom, as well mischief as
mercy is to be practiced: that better he had commit an inconvenience in
breaking his oath, than suffer a mischief by keeping his promise: setting down
the staff therefore on this secure perjury, thus it fell out.

After two or three days were passed, accompanied only with Egerio, and a
few of my guarde, I went to Orleance, determining both to conclude a peace,
and to demand Doralicia in marriage: where no sooner I arrived, and was
entered in at the gates of the City, but I found Pelorus and al his men in
Arms, which sight so appalled my senses, that I stood as one trans-formed,
fearing that which presently I found true: for Pelorus having his force
inflamed with furious choler, commanded his Captains to lay hold on me, and
to carry me to close prison, swering that no less than the loss of life
should mittigate his fury.

And raging in this choler, after he had lodged me up in Lymbo, he went with all his Army to the Camp, where finding my soldiers secure, as men little
doubting of such mysfortune, he made such a monstrous and merciless slaughter,
as of fifty thousand he left few alive, those which remained he plagued with all kind of slavery, returning home with his shameless triumph, he commanded
that in the mids of the City there should be made a great scaffold, whereupon
within ten days I should be executed: these heavy and hapless news being
come to mine ears, such sorrowful passions perplexed my mind, as after floods
of brinish tears, I burst forth into these bitter terms.

O unfortunate Arbasto (quoth I) and therefore the more unfortunate, because
Arbasto, art thou not worthy of this mishap, which wilfully sought thine own
misery? can thou accuse the Gods, which did strive against the Gods? can
thou condemn Fortune, which have warred against nature, and Fortune: No no, in
suffering reason to yield unto appetite, wisdom unto will, and wit unto
affection, thou have procured thine own death, and thy Soldiers destruction.
Love, yea love it is that has procured thy loss, beauty that has bred thy
bale: fancy has given thee the foil, and thine own witless will that has
wrought thy woe: the more is thy pain, and the less thou art to be pitied:
was there none to like but Doralicia? none to choose but thy foe? none to love
but thine enemy? O vile wretch fraught with careless folly.

And with that, as I was ready to exclaim against my curssed destenie, I
heard the prison door open, where I saw presently to enter Myrania, Doralicia,
and Madam Vecchia, who seeing me sit in such sorrowful dumpes, began to smyle
at my dolor, and to laugh at my mishappe, which wilfully thrust my self into
such misery, thinking therefore to agrauate my grief by rubbing a fresh my
sore, Doralicia began to gall me on this sort.

Hearing Arbasto (quoth she) that you were come to prosecute your suit, playing
the good Captain, that for the first foil gives not over the field, I
thought good to give you a smiling look in recompense of your flattering love,
least if I should not be so courteous to so kind a Gentleman, the world should
account me ungrateful.

It is truth sister (quod Myrania) it seems he is a passing amorous lover: but
it is pity he has very ill luck: he chooses his chaffer well, but yet is
an unskillful chapman, for if he buy at such an unreasonable rate, he is like
(sell how he can) to live by the loss.

Tush (quoth Madam Vecchia) he plays like the Dragon, who sucking blood out
of the Clephant, kills him, and with the same poysoneth her self: so Arbasto
seeking to betray others, is himself taken in the trap: a just reward for so
unjust dealing, and a fit revenge for so rechles an enemy.

And yet (quod Doralicia) his purpose has taken small place: for whatsoever
his mind was, his malice has wa^ted might, wherein he resembles the Serpent
Porphirius, who is full of poison, but being toothlesse hurts none but
himself. Surely whatsoever his chance be, he has made a very good choice:
for he prefers sweet love before bitter death, and the hope of everlasting
fame before the fear of momentarie misfortune: he shall now for his
constancy be canonized in Denmark for a saint, and his subjects may boast and
say, that Arbasto our King died for love.

Egerio seeing that extremity of grief would not suffer me to utter one
word, not able any longer to abide these frumpes, crossed her with this
chollerick reply.

Gentlewoman (quod he) although I so term you, rather to show mine own
courtesy, than to decipher your conditions, it seems Nurture has taught you
very few manners, or nature affoorded very small modesty, that seeing one in
distress, you should laugh at his dolor, and where the party is crossed with
mishap, you would with bitter tants increase his misery: if he be your foe, he
has now the foil, he is taken in the snare, his life hangs in the balance.

Though your father be without piety, yet in that you are a woman be not
without pity. Hate him if you please as he is your enemy, but despise him
not as he is Arbasto, a king, and your haples lover: we are captives, not to a
worthy conqueror, but to a wretched caitife: not vanquished by prowess, but
by perjury, not by fight, but by falsehood: who in our lives to thy fathers
loss, won continual fame, and by our death to thy fathers discredit shall
purchase unto him perpetual infamy.

Doralicia, not willing to suffer him wade any further, cut him short in this
manner.

Sir (quoth she) if bragges could stand for payment, I am sure you would not
die in any man's debt: but if your prowess had been as good as your prattle,
you needed not have daunced within so short a tedder: crauen Cocks crow
lowdest: fearful curs bark most, and a hartlesse cowarde has always more
tongue than a hautie Captain. But I hear with you, for I doubt the fear of
death and danger has driven thy Master into a cold palsy, and has made thee
either frantic, or lunatic, the one showing his melancholy, the other
bewraying thy choler, willing therefore as a friend you should pass over
your passions with more patience, we will leave you as we found you, unless
you mean to be shriuen, and then I will send you a ghostly father.

Our confession good Mistress (quoth Egerio), requires but a small shrift: for
we have very little to say, but that Arbasto repents that ever he loved such a
perverse Minion, and I that ever I trusted such a perjured Traitor.

The Gentlewomen took this for a farewell, passing merrily to the Palace, and
leaving us sitting sorowfully in the prison, bewayling our mishap with tears,
and exclaiming against Fortune with bitter curses, what our complaints were, it
little avails to rehearse: for it would but drive thee into dumpes, and
redouble my dolor. Suffice this that we were so long tormented with care, that
at last we were past cure, counting this our greatest calamity, that living,
every hour we look to die.

Well, as thus we were drowned in distress: so poor Myrania had her mind
doubtfullie perplexed. Nature claymed by due to have the pre-eminence, and leave
sought by force to win the supremacy. Nature brought in Pelorus aged hairs
to make the challenge, and Love presented Arbastoes sweet sweet face to be
the Champion: tossed thus with two contrary tempests, at last she began thus
to plead with her passions.

Ah thrice unfortunate Myrania, what strange fits be these that burn thee with
heat, and yet thou shakest with cold? thy body in a shiuering sweat and in a
flaming Ice, melting like wax, and yet as hard as the Adamant: it is love?
then would it were death: for likelier it is thou shall loose thy life than
win thy love.

Ah hapless Arbasto, would to God thy virtues were less than thy beauty, or
my virtues greater than my affections: so should I either quickly free my self
from fancy, or be less subject unto folly.

But alas I feel in my mind fierce skirmishes between reason and appetite,
love and wisdom, danger and desire, the one persuaded her to hate Arbasto as
a foe, the other constrained him as friend: If I consent to the first, I end
my days with death, if to the last, I shall lead my life with infamy. What
shall I then do? Ah Myrania, either swallow the juice of Mandrake, which may
cast thee into a dead sleep, or chewe the herb Carysium, which may cause thee
to hate every thing, so either shall thou die in thy slumber, or dislike
Arbasto by thy potion.

Tush poor wench, what follies be these? will thou with the Wolf bark at the
Moon, or with the young Gryphons pecke against the stars? Do thou think
to quench fire with a sword: or with affection to mortify love?

No no, if thou be wise, suffer not the grass to be cut from under thy feet,
strike while the iron is hot, make thy market while the chaffer is to sale.

Now Arbasto is thine own, now thou may win him by love, and wear him by
law: thou may free him from misery without thy fathers mishappe: thou may
save his life without thy Fathers loss: thou may grant thy good will unto
love, and yet not falsify thy faith unto nature.

Can Arbasto which is so courteous, become so cruel? but he will requite thy
love with loyalty, thy faithful fancy with unfeigned affection.

No no: he will and must love thee of force, since thou have granted him his
life of freewill: he will like thee in thine youth, and honor thee in thine
age: he will be the port of prosperity wherein thou may rest, and the haven
of happiness, wherein thou may harbor without harm: so that thou may say
of him as Andromache said by Hector, Tu Do^ minus, tu vir, tu mihi frater eris.

Yea but Myrania, yet look before thou leap, and learn by other men's harms
to beware. Ariadne loved Theseus, freed him from the monstrous Mynotaure,
taught him to pass the Laborinth, yea forsook Parents and Country for his
cause, and yet the guerdon he gave her for her good will, was to leave her a
desolate wretch in a deserte wilderness.

Medea saved Jason from the danger of the Dragons, and yet she found him
trothlesse: Phillis harbored Demiphoon, and Dido Aeneas, yet both repaied
their love with hate.

Tush the fairest flower has not the best sent: the Lapidaries choose not the
stone by the outward color, but by the secret virtue: Paris was fair, yet
false: Thiestes was beutiful, but deceitful: Vulcan was carved in white Iuory,
yet a Smith.

The precious stones of Mansaulous sepulcher could not make the dead careasse
sweet. Beauty Myrania is not always accompanied with virtue, honesty and
constancy: but ofttimes fraught with vice, and perjury. What then? if some
were Traitors, shall Arbasto be trothlesse? if some were false shall he be
faithles: no, his beauty and virtue has won me: and he himself shall wear
me: I will forsake Father, friends and Country for his cause: yea I will
venture lim and life to free him from danger, in despite of froward Fortune
and the destinies.

Myrania being thus resolute in her opinion, began to cast beyond the Moon,
and to frame a thousand devises in her head to bring her purpose to pass,
fearing every shaddowe, doubting every wind, stumbling at the least straw,
yet at the last pricked forward by fancy, she thought to prevent all cause of
fear in this wise.

The evening before she meant to atchiue her enterprise, she secretly sent for
the Iaylor by one of her maids, to whom she durst commit her secret affairs,
who being taught by her Mistress to play her part cunningly, brought the
Iaylor into Myranias chamber by a posterne gate, so that they were neither
seen nor suspected of any: where he no sooner came, but he was courteously
entertained of the young Lady, who faining that she had to debate with him of
weighty affairs, called him into her closet, were treading upon a false
boorde, he fell up to the shoulders, not being able to help himself, but
that he there ended his life.

Myrania having desperately atchiued this deed, she strait sought not to rob
him of his coin, but to bereave him of his keys, which after she had gotten,
and conveyed his carcass into a secret place, she went in her night gown,
accompanied only with her Maid to the prison.

Arbasto and Egerio hearing the doors open at such an unaccustomed hour, began
straight to conjecture, that Pelorus sought to murder them secretly, least his
own people should accuse him of cruelty: but as they looked to to have seen
the Iaylor, they spyed Myrania in her night gown: which sudden and unlooked
for sight so appalled their senses, as they were driven into a maze till
Myrania wakened them from their dumpes with this sugared harmony.

I perceive Arbasto (quoth she) that my presence does make thee to muze, and
my sudden arrival has driven thee into a maze what strange wind should land
me in this coast. In truth thou may think either my message is great, or my
modesty little, either that I take small care of my self, or repose very
great trust in thee, who at a time unfit for my calling, have without any
guarde come to a stranger, a captive, yea and my fathers fatal foe. I confess
it is a fault if I were not forced: but since necessity has no law, I think I
have the less broken the law. But to leave off these needless preamples where
delay breeds no less danger then death: know this Arbasto, that since thy
first arrival at my fathers Court my eyes have been so dazeled with the beams
of thy beauty, and my mind so snared with the view of thy virtues, as thou
only art the man who^ in heart I love and like: seeing thee therefore drowned
here by adverse fortune in most hapless distress, willing to manifest the
loyalty of my love in effect, which I have protested in words, I have rather
chosen to hazard both my life and honor, than not to offer thee peace if thou will agree unto the conditions. As my father has wrought thy woe, I will work
thy weal: as he has sought thy bale, I will procure thy bliss: from penury
I will set thee in prosperity. I will free thee from prison, from danger, yea
from death it self, I will in yielding to love, dissent from nature to leave
my father, friends, and Country, and pass with thee into Denmark. And to
cut off speeches, which might seem to savor either of flattery or deceit:
as thou art the first unto whom I have vowed my love, so thou shall be the
last, requiring no meede for my merit, nor no other guerdon for my good will,
but that thou will take me to thy Wife, and in pledge of my truth, see here
the keys, and all other things provided for our speedy passage.

Myrania had no sooner uttered these words, but my mind was so ravished, as I
was driven into an ecstasy for joy, seeing that the terror of my death was
taken away with the hope of life, that from heaviness I should be restored to
happiness, and from most careful misery, to most secure felicity, I therefore
framed her this answer.

Ah Myrania, the purest Emeralde shines brightest when it has no Oil, and
truth delights when it is apparrelled worst. Flatter I will not, faithful I
must be, willed from the one by conscience, and driven to the other by your
courtesy, which by how much the less I have merited it by deserte, by so much
the more I am bound to requite it by duty. To decipher in colored
discourses, and to painte out with curious shadows, how humbly I accept of
your offer, and how greatly I think my self beholding to the Gods, for
blessing me with such an happy chance, what my loyaltia and truth shall be,
were but to prove that which your Ladyship hoping of my constancy has not
put in question. The guerdon you crave for your good will is such, that if your
courtesy had not forced me to it by constraint, yet your beauty and virtues
are so great, as fancy would have compelled me by consent. Myrania, what
thou can wish in a true and trusty Lover, I promise to perform, swearing
unto thee, that the floodes shall flow against their streams, the earth shall
mount against his course, yea my carcass shall be consumed unto dust an ashes,
before my mind shall be found disloyal, and to this I call the Gods to
witness, of whom I desire no longer to live, than I mean simply to love.

Oh Arbasto (quoth she) would God I had never seen thee, or that I may find
thy works according to thy words, otherwise shall I have cause to wish I had
been more cruel or less courteous. But love will not let me doubt the worst,
but bids me hope the best: yet thus much I may say, when Jason was in danger,
who more faithful, when Theseus feared the Laborinth, who more loyal, when
Demophon suffered shipwreck, who more loving: but I will not say what I think
Arbasto, because thou shall not suspect I fear.

Madame (quod Egerio) Arbasto is my sovereign, and I both honor and fear him
as a subject, yet if he should but once in heart think to be disloyal to
Myrania, the Gods confound me with all earthly plagues, if I would not of a
trusty Friend, become his mortal foe.

It is easy to persuade her Egerio (quoth she) who already is most willing to
believe, let us leave therefore these needelesse protestations, and go to the
purpose, delay breeds danger, time tarrieth no man, speed in necessity is
the best spur, let us haste therefore till we get forth of France, least if
we be prevented, if breed my mishap and your fatal misery.

Upon this we stayed not, but shutting the prison close, got covertly out of
the City, passing through France with many fearful perrils, which to
rehearse, were either needless or bootlesse: suffice this, we at last happily
arrived at Denmark, where how I was welcomed home with triumphs, were too
long to relate. But how Pelorus was perplexed after he knew of our happy
departure, though (God wot) most haples unto him, I refer to thy good
consideration to conjecture. The old father fretted not so fast in his
melancholy, but Doralicia chafed as much in her choler, blaspheming bitterly
both against me and her sister Myrania: but as words break no bones, so we
cared the less for her scolding, fearing not the noise of the piece as long as
we were without danger of the shot. Well, leaving them to their dumpes, to us
again which floted in delight. Fickle Fortune having now hoysed us up to the
top of her inconstant wheel, seeing how careless I slumbered in the cradle
of security, thought to make me a very mirror of her mutabilitie, for she
began a fresh to turn my typpet on this wise.

As daily I flattered Myrania, for fancy her I could not, promising with
speed to call a parliament for the confirmation of the marriage, I still felt
the stumpes of the old love I bare Doralicia to stick in my stomach, the more
closely I covered the sparks, the more the flame burst forth, I found absence
to increase affection, not to decrease fancy: in the day my mind doted of her
virtues, in the night I dreamed of her beauty: yea, Cupid began to encounter
me with so fresh canmizados, as by distance my distress was far more
augmented, such sighs, such sobs, such thoughts, such pains and passions
perplexed me, as I felt the last assault worse than the former battery. If I
loved Doralicia in France, I now liked her thrice better being in Denmark. If
in presence her person pleased me, now in absence her perfection more
contented me. To conclude, I swear to my self with a sollemne sighe.
Doralicia was, is, and shall be the Mistress of my heart in despite of the
froward destinies, yet amazed at mine own folly, I began thus to muse with my
self.

O foolish Arbasto, nay rather frantic fondling, have thou less reason then
unreasonable creatures? the Tiger flees the train, the Lion escheweth the
nets, the Dear auoideth the coyles, because they are taken with these
instruments, and art thou so mad, as having escaped pikes, wilfully to thrust
thy self into perrill. The child being burnt hates the fire, but thou being
an old fool, wilt with ye worm Naplitia no sooner come out of the coals, but
thou will leap into the flame. But alas what then: I see the measure of love
is to have no mean, and the end to be everlasting: that to love is allotted to
all, but to be happy in love incident to few: why, shall I be so mad to love
Doralicia, or so fraught with ungrateful perjury, as not to like Myrania, the
one has crossed me with bitter, girds, the other courted me with sweet
glaunces: Doralicia has rewarded me with disdain, Myrania entreated me with
desire, the one has saved my life, the other sought my death. O Arbasto thou
see the best, but I fear like to follow the worst. Alas, I cannot but love
Doralicia, what then? what rests for me to do, but to die with patience,
seeing I cannot live with pleasure: yea Arbasto, die die rather with a secret
scar, than an open scorn, for thou may well sue, but never shall thou have
good success. And yet Lions fawn when they are clawed: the most cruel Tigers
stoop when they are tickled: and Women though never so obstinate, yield when
they are courted. There is no Pearl so hard, but vinegar breaks: no Diamonde
so stony, but blood molifieth, no heart so stiff, but love weakeneth: what
though Doralicia sought thy death, perhaps now she repents, and will give thee
life: though at the first she cast thee a stone, she will now throw thee an
Apple. Why then Arbasto assault her once again with a fresh charge, seek to
get that by Letters which thou could not gain by talk, for one line is of
more force to persuade, then a months parle, for in writing, thou may so set
down thy passions, and her perfections, as she shall have cause to think well
of thee, and better of her self, but yet so warily, as it shall be hard for
her to judge whither thy love be more faithful, or her beauty amiable. I
have thus determined with my self, though as covertly as I could to conceal
my affairs, least either Myrania or Egerio should spy my halting, conueying
therefore my affairs as cunningly as I could, I privily sent an Ambassador
to Pelorus, to entreat for a contract between us, and also to crave his
daughter Doralicia in marriage, promising to send him Myrania safe upon this
consent, and with all, I framed a Letter to Doralicia to this effect.

Arbasto, to the fairest Doralicia, health.
SUch and so extreme are the passions of love (Doralicia) that the more they
are quenched by disdain, the greater flames is increased by desire, and the
more they are galled with hate, the more they gape after love, like to the
stone Topazon, which being once kindled, burns most veheme^tlie in the water.
I speak this (the greater is my grief) by proof and experience, for having
my heart scorched with the beams of thy beauty, and my mind inflamed with
thy singular virtue, neither can thy bitter looks, abate my love, nor thy
extreme discourtesie diminish my affection. No Doralicia, I am not he that
will leave the sweet Eglantine because it pricks my finger, and refuse the
gold in the fire because it burnt my hand, for the mind of a faithful loouer
is neither to be daunted with despighte, nor afrighted with danger: but as the
Loadstone, what wind soever does blow, turns always to the North, so the
love of Arbasto is ever more bent to the beauty and virtue of Doralicia,
whatsoever misfortune happens. Yea, it fares with me as with the herb
Basil, the which the more it is crushed, the sooner it springs, or the pure
spice, which the more it is pouned, the sweeter it smells, or the Camomil,
which the more it is trodden with the feet, the more it florisheth, so in these
extremities, beaten down to the ground with disdain, yet my love reaches to
the top of the house with hope. Since then Doralicia, thy beauty has made
the sore, let thy bounty apply the salve, as thy virtue has caused my
malady, so let thy mercy give the medicine, repay not my constancy with
cruelty, requite not my love with hate, and my desire with despite, least
thou procure my speedy death and thy endless infamy. Thus hoping thou will
have some remorse of my passions, I attend thy friendly sentence and my fatal
destiny.

Thine ever, though never thine, Arbasto.


As soon as I had written my Letter, I dispatched the Messenger as speedily and
privily as might be, who within the space of three weeks arrived at Orleance,
where delivering his Embassage to Pelorus, and my letter to Doralicia, he
stayed for an answer the space of ten days, in which time, Pelorus
consulting with his Counsel, was very willing to grant me his daughter in
marriage, but that by no means he could win the good will of Doralicia, seeing
therefore no persuasions could prevail, he dispatched my Messenger with
denial, and Doralicia returned me this froward answer.

Doralicia to Arbasto.
WHere did thou learn fond fool, that being forbidden to be bold, thou
should grow impudent, that willed to leave off thy suit, yet thou should
be importunate, do thou think with the spaniell by fawning when thou art
beaten to make thy foe thy friend? no, let others deem of thee what they
list, I will count thee a cur. Do thou think I will be drawn by thy
counterfeit conceits, as the straw by the Iet, or as the gold by the mineral
Chrisocolla: no no, if thou seek to obtain favor at my hands, thou do
strive to wring water out of the Pumniice, and do work the means to
increase thine own shame and severity: for as by instinct of nature there is a
secret hate between the Uine and the Cabbish, between the Box and the
Goord, and between the iron and the Theamides, so in my mind I feel a secret
grudge between Arbasto and Doralicia: cease then to gape for that thou shall
never get, and take this both for a warning and an answer, and if thou
prosecute thy suit, thou do but persecute thy self, for I am neither to be
woed with thy passions whilst thou live, nor to repent me of my rigor when
thou art dead. For this I swear, that I will never consent to love him, whose
sight (if I may say with modesty) is more bitter unto me than death. Short I
am though sharp, for I love not to flatter, take this therefore for thy
farewell, that I live to hate thee.

Willing after death if it could be thy foe, Doralicia.


After that the Messenger was returned to Denmark, and that I had received and
read the Letter, such sundry thoughts assailed me, that I became almost
frantic: fear, despair, grief, hate, choler, wrath, desire of revenge,
and what not, so tormented my mind, that I fell to raging against the Gods, to
railing at Doralicia, and to cursing of all womankind, conceiving such an
extreme hate against her, as before I loved her not so heartily, as now I
loathed her hatefullie, counting my self an ungrate wretch toward Myrania,
and calling to mind her beauty and virtue, her bounty and courtesy, I fell
more deeply in love with her than ever with Doralicia, so that I could not
spare one glaunce from gazing upon her person, nor draw my mind from musing on
her perfection. A sudden change, but alas a sorrowful chance.

For Myrania seeing me soused in these sorrowful dumps, began straight without
casting any water, to conjecture my disease, and to shoot at that which
indeed she hytte without any great aim. But as love is most suspicious, so
she began to doubt the worst, fearing that as yet the beauty of Doralicia was
not blotted out of my mind, searching therefore narowly what she could either
hear or learn of my secrets, at last she found out that which wrought her
final mishap, and my fatal misery. For by lucklesse chance, leaving the
door of my closet open, Myrania thinking to find me at my Muses, stumbled on
the copy of my Letter, which I sent unto Doralicia, and upon the answer which
I received from that ruthles Minion, which after she had read, perceiving how
traitorously I had requited her love with hate, she conveyed herself covertly
into her Chamber, where, after she had almost dimmed her sight with floods of
tears, and burst her heart with blowing sighs, she fell into these complaints.

O unfortunate Myrania, O haples Myrania, yea, O thrice accursed Myrania, whom
Fortune by spite seeks to foil, whom the destinies by fate are appointed to
plague, and whom the Gods by justice will and must most cruelly revenge. Thou
have been a paracide to thy father, in seeking to destroy him by thy
disobedience: thou art a traitor to thy Country, in saving the enemy of the
Commonwealth, and thou art a foe to nature, in loving disloyal Arbasto: and
can the Gods but plague these monstrous injuries? no no Myrania, thou have
deserved more mishap then either Fortune can or will afford thee. Ah cruel and
accursed Arbasto, I see now that it fare^h with thee as with the Panther, which
having made one astonished with his fair sight, seeks to deu^ure him with
bloody pursuit, and with me poor wench, as it does with them that view the
Basiliske, whose eyes procure delight to the looker at the first glimse, but
death at the second glance. Alas, was there none to like but thy foe: none to
love but Arbasto: none to fancy but a perjured Dame: none to match with but a
flattering mate. Now has thy lawless love gained a lucklesse end: now thou
tri^st by experience, that the tree Alpina is smooth to be touched, but bitter
to be tasted: that the fairest Serpent is most infectious, the finest color
soonest stained, the cleerest glass most brittle, and that lovers, though they
bear a delicate show, yet they have a deceitful substance: that if they have
honey in their mouths, yet they have gall in their hearts: the more is the
pity, in thee to trust without trial, and the greater impiety for him to be
a traitor, being so well trusted.

Is this the courtesy of Denmark toward friends, to entreat them so
despightfullie: is my good will not only rejected without cause, but also
disdained without color: Alas what shall I do to this extremity, being a
forlorn wretch in a foreign Country: which way shall I turn me, of who^
shall I seek remedy. Pelorus will reject me, and why should he not: Arbasto
has rejected me, and why should he? the one I have offended with too much
grief, the other I have served with too great good will: the one is lost with
love, the other with hate: Pelorus, because I cared not for him: Arbasto,
because I cared for him but alas too much. And with that she fetched such a
sigh, as witnessed a heart pained with most intolerable passions, yea care and
grief so fiercely and freshly assaulted her, as she fell into a Fever,
refusing all sustenance, wishing and calling for nothing but death.

While she thus pined away with grief, I thought to search out her sore, but
I could not perceive the cause of her sorrow only I did conjecture this, that
she doubted my Nobles would not consent to our marriage: to rid her therefore of
this care, I presently called a parliament, where without any great
controversy it was concluded.

This news being come to the ears of Myrania, it no whit decreased her dolor,
but did rather far the more augment her distress, which made Egerio to muse,
and drove me into a great maze: so that accompanied with my Nobles, I went to
comfort her, and to carry her news, that if she could but come into the
Chamber of presence, she should there be crowned Queen. But alas, when I came
and saw her so altered in one week, wasted to the hard bones, more like a
ghost than a living creature, I began thus to comfort her.

Ah Myrania (quod I) more loved of me then mine own life, and more dear unto
me than my self, would God I might be plag^ed with all earthly diseases, so I
might see thee free from distress: how can Arbasto be without sorrow to see
Myrania oppressed with sickness? how can he but sink in calamity to see her
but once touched with care: alas unfold unto me thy sore, and I will apply the
salve, make me privy to thy malady, and I will procure a medicine: If want of
wealth work thy woe, thou have the kingdom of Denmark to dispose at thy
pleasure: if absence from friends, thou have such a freende of thy loving
spouse Arbasto, as death it self shall never dissolve our love.

I had no sooner uttered this word, but Myrania as one possessed with some
hellish fury, start up in her bed with staring looks and wrathful
countenance, seeming by her raging gestures to be in a frenzy: but being
kept down by her Ladies, she roared out these hateful curses.

O vile wretches (quod she) will you not suffer me in my life to revenge my
self on that perjured Traitor Arbasto, yet shall you not deny me but after
death my ghost shall torment him with gastlie visions. O thrice accursed
caitife, do thou seem to help me with thy scabbard, and secretly hurt me
with thy sword: do thou offer me honey openly, and privily present me with
gall: do thou say thou will cure me with love, when thou seek to kill
me with hate? have I redeemed thee from mishap, and will thou requite me with
misery: was I the means to save thy life, and will thou without cause procure
my death: have I forsaken my Country, betrayed my father, and yet will thou
kill me with dyscurtesie. O haples Myrania, could not Medeas mishap have made
thee beware: could not Ariadnes ill luck have taught thee to take heed, could
not Phillis misfortune have feared thee from the like folly: but thou must
like and love a straggling stranger. Aie me that repentance should ever come
too late: for now I sigh and sorrow, but had I wist comes out of time: folly
is sooner remembered than redressed, and time may be repented, but not recalled.

But I see it is a practice in men to have as little care of their own oaths,
as of their Ladies honors, imitating Jupiter, who never kept oath he swear to
Juno, did thou not false Arbasto protest with sollemne vows, when thy life
did hang in the balance, that thy love to Myrania should be always loyal,
and have thou not since sent and su^d secretly to win the good will of
Doralicia, did thou not swear to take me to thy mate, and have thou not
since sought to contract with her a new match: thou did promise to be true
unto me, but have proved trusty unto her: what should I say, thou have
presented her with pleasant drinks, and poisoned me with bitter potions, the
more is my penury, and the greater is thy perjury. But vile wretch, do thou
think this thy villainy shall be unrevenged. No no Egerio, I hope the Gods
have appointed thee to revenge my injuries, thou have sworn it, and I fear
not but thou will perform it. And that thou may know I exclaim not without
cause, see here the Letters which have passed between this false traitor and
Doralicia.

The sight of these Letters so galled my guilty conscience, as I stood as one
astonished, not knowing what to do, excuse my self I could not, confirm my
love I durst not, yet at last the water standing in mine eyes, clasping her
han^e in mine, I was ready to crave pardon, if she had not prevented me with
these injurious speeches.

Clear thy self traiterous Arbasto thou can not, persuade me thou shall
not, forgive thee I will not, cease therefore to speak, for in none of these
thou shall speed. Egerio, I saved thy life, then revenge my death, and so
content I die, yet only discontent in this, that I cannot live to hate
Arbasto so long as I loved him.

And with that turning upon her left side, with a gasping sigh she gave up the
ghost: which sight drove me into such a desperate mind, that if Egerio and the
rest had not holden me, I had sent my soul with hers to the grave. But being
carried by force to my bed, I lay for certain days oppressed with such
sorrow, as if I had been in a trance, cursing and accusing my self of
ingratitude, of perjury, and of most despightfull disloyalty, I lay perplexed
with incessant passions.

Well, this heavy and hapless news being noysed in France, Pelorus taking
the death of his daughter to heart, in short time died, leaving Doralicia the
only inheritour of his kingdom.

But yet see how Fortune framed up this tragedy, who meant to cast Doralicia
from most happy felicity, to most hapless misery: for she seeing that no
sinister chance could change my affection, that neither the length of time,
nor the distance of place, the spite of Fortune, the fear of death, nor her
most cruel discurtesie could diminish my love: musing I say on this my
inviolable constancy, Cupid meaning to revenge, seeing her now at discouert,
drew home to the head, and struck her so deep at the heart, as in despite
of Vesta she valed bonnet, and giving ground sobbed forth secretly to
herself these words: Alas I love Arbasto, and none but Arbasto.

Venus seeing that her boy had so well plaide the man, began to triumph over
Doralicia, who now was in her dumps, striving as yet between love and hate,
till fancy set in her foot, and then ye yielded up the bulwark in these
peaceable terms.

Why how now Doralicia (quoth she) do thou dream or dote? Is it folly or
frenzy: melancholy or madness, that drives thee thus into dumps, and so
strangly distresseth thee with dolor, what fond thoughts, what unacquainted
passions: what slumbring imaginations are these which perplexeth thee: do
thou now feel fire to spring out of the cold flint? heat to fry amids the
chilling frost? love to come from hate, and desire from disdain? Do thou
fare as though thou had been drenched in the River Iellus in Phrigia? which
at the first breeds sorrow through extreme cold, but forthwith burns the
sinews through raging heat. Has Venus now in despite of Vesta made thee
vale bonnet: the more (poor wenche) is thy mishap, and the worse is thy
fortune: for love though never so sweet, cannot yet be digested without a most
sharp sauce: faring like the gold that is never perfect till it has past
through the furnace.

Love Doralicia, but whom do thou love, Arbasto: what the man whom even now
thou did so deadly hate? have thou so little force over thy affections, as
to fancy thy foe. No no fond fool, Arbasto is thy friend, and one that
honors thee as a Saint, and would serve thee as his sovereign, that loves
and likes thee as much as thou can desire, but more than thou do deserve,
who being bitterly crossed with discurtesie, could never be touched of
inconstancy: but still remains like to Aristotle's Quadratus, which howsoever
it is turned, always stands steadfast. Thou can not then of conscience
Doralicia but repay his love with liking, and his firm fancy with mutual
affection: he is beautiful to please the eye, virtuous to content the mind,
rich to maintain thy honor, of birth to counteruaile thy parentage, wise,
courteous, and constant, and what would thou have more.

Yea but alas I have rejected his service, and now he will not respect my
suit, I have detested him, and now he will despise me, I have requited his
good will with cruelty, and he will revenge me with contempt.

Better had thou then conceal it with grief, than reveal it to thine own
shame: for if thou aim at the white and miss the mark, thou shall be
pointed at of those that hate thee, pittred of those that love thee, scorned
of by him, and falked of by all: suffer rather the^ (poor Doralicia) death by
silence, than derision by revealing thy secrets, for death cutteth of all
care, but derision breeds endless calamity.

Tush, do thou think Arbasto can so harden his heart, as to hate thee, so
master his affections as to flee from fancy, that he will become so proud as
to refuse thy proffer. No if thou sendest him but one line, it will more charm
him than al Circes enchantments: if thou lendest but one freendly look it will
be more esteemed of him than life. Why, but Doralicia? and with that she sat
still as one in a trance, building Castles in the air, hanging between fear
and hope, trust and despair, doubt and assurance: to rid her self therefore
from these dumps, she took her Lute, whereupon she played this dittie.

IN time we see that silver drops
The craggy stones make soft:
The slowest Snaile in time, we see,
Does creep and clime aloft.
With feeble puffes the tallest pine
In tract of time does fall:
The hardest heart in time does yield
To VENUS luring call.
Where chilling frost alate did nip,
There flasheth now a fire:
Where deep disdain bred noisome hate,
There kindles now desire.
Time causes hope to have his hap,
What care in time not easde:
In time I loathed that now I love,
In both content and pleased.
Doralicia having ended her dittie, laid down her Lute, and betook her to her
former passions, wherein she had not long plodded, but she determined to
write unto me with as much speed as might be, framing her Letters to this
effect.

Doralicia to Arbasto health.
WEighing with my self ( Arbasto) that to be unjust, is to offer injury to
the Gods, and that without cause to be cruel, is against all conscience: I
have thought good to make amends for that which is amiss, and of a fained
foe, to become thy faithful friend: for since the receipt of thy Letters,
calling to mind the perfection of thy body, and perfectnes of thy mind, thy
beauty and virtue, thy courtesy and constancy, I have been so snared with
fancy, and fettered with affection, as the Idea of thy person has pinched me
with most hapless passions.

If I have been recklesse of thy good will, I repent me, if ruthles through
cruel speeches, I recant them, as one loving now that of late I loathed, and
desiring that which even now I despised, which as often as I call to mind, I
can not but blushe to my self for shame, and fall out with my self for anger.

But the purest Diamond is to be cut before it be worn, the Frankencense is to
be burnt before it be smelt, and lovers are to be tried before they be trusted,
least, shining like the Carbuncle, as though they had fire, yet being touched,
they prove passing cold, for the mind by trial once scowred of mistrust,
becomes more fit ever after to belief: so that Arbasto as I have pined
thee with bitter pills, I will now pamper thee with sweet potions: as I have
galled thee with cruelty, I will heal thee with courtesy, yea if thy good
nature can forget that which my ill tongue does repent, or thy most constant
kindness forgive that my unbridled fury did commit, I will counteruaile my
former discurtesie with ensuing constancy, I will be as ready after to take
an injury, as I was to give an offense, thou shall find my love and duty
such and so grett, as either Doralicia can perform, or Arbasto desire. And
thus committing my life and my living into your hands. I attend thine answer,
and rest more thine than her own.

Doralicia.


The Messenger by whom she sent this message, making speed to perform his
Mistress command, arrived within few days at Denmark, where delivering me
the Letter, I was greatly amazed at the sight thereof, musing what the contents
should be, at last vnripping the seals, I perceived to what Saint Doralicia
bent her devotion, but the shower came too late when the grass was withered:
yet I stood for a time astonished, houering between love and hate. But at the
last such loathsome misliking of her former courtesy so incensed my mind, that
to displease her, and to despite Fortune, I returned her speedily this hateful
answer.

To Doralicia, neither health nor good hap.
I Received thy Letter Doralicia, which no sooner I read with mine eye, but I
threw into the fire with my hand, least by viewing them I should grow into
great fury, or by keeping them show thee any friendship. For we shun the
place of pescilence for fear of infection, the eyes of the Catharismes because
of diseases: the eyes of the Corkatrice for fear of death: Cyrces drinks are
dreadful charms, and Sirens tunes doubting enchantments: should I not then
eschew thy alluring baits, when thou have galled me with the hook: yes I will,
and must, least I be intrapped with thy subtlety, or entangled with thy
sorcerie. Truly Doralicia that once I loved thee I cannot deny, that now
being free I should fall to such folly I more than utterly refuse, for as
before I liked thee in constant hope, so now I leath with hateful contempt,
comparing thy cursed nature to the herb Basil, which both ingendereth
Serpents, and kills them, so the show of thy virtue inflamed me with love,
but the trial of thy vanity has quenched it with hate. Hate, yea, I more
then hate thee, most cruel and ungrateful Monster, whose beauty I hope was
given thee of the Gods as well to procure thine own misery, as others mishap,
which if I might live to see, as Infortunio did by Eriphila, I would think I
did lead my haples life to a most happy end. Thus thou see I account of thy
love and accept of thy Letters, esteeming the one as filthy chaffer, and the
other as forged charms, and saying to them both, that proffered service
stinkes. Waste more wind I will not, to spend more time is most ill spent,
therefore take this as a farewell, that if I hear of thy good hap, I live
displeased, if of thy misfortune, content, if of thy death, most sorrowful,
that the Gods did not give thee many days, and much distress: so wishing thee
what spite either Fortune or the Fates can afford. Adieu.

Sworn thy foe till death. Arbasto.


Doralicia having received these Letters, and read the contents, was so
impatient in her passions, that she fell into a frenzy, having nothing in her
mouth but Arbasto, Arbasto, ever doubling this word with such pitiful cries
and scriches, as would have moved any but me to remorse: she continued not in
this case long before she died. But I alas leading a loathsome life, was more
cruelly crossed by Fortune, for Egerio, conspiring with the Peers of my
Realm, in short time by civil wars dispossessed me of my crown and
kingdom. Forced then to flee by mine own Subjects: after some travail I
arrived at this place, where considering with my self the fickle inconstancy
of unjust Fortune, I have ever since lived content in this Cell to despite
Fortune, one while sorrowing for the mishappe of Myrania, and another while
ioying at the misery of Doralicia, but always smiling, that by contemning
Fortune, I learn to lead her in triumph. Thus thou have heard why in mean
estate I pass my days content: rest therefore satis^fied, that thus I have
lived, and thus I mean to die.


