THE BREAD OF LIFE, OR Food of the Regenerate. A Sermon preached at Botterwike
in Holland, near Boston, in Lincolnshire. By THOMAS GRANGER, Preacher of Gods
word there.

JOHN 6. 48. J am the Bread of Life.
LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Thomas Pauier, and are to be sold at his shop in
Yuie lane. 1616.

TO THE WORSHIPFUL, and my very good friend, Master EDWARD LEVENTHORPE,
Son of Sr. JOHN LEVENTHORPE Knight: T. G. wishes increase of all true
happiness.
Worshipful Sir:
THe remembrance of former times when I lived at Shingle-hall, the house of the
good Knight Sir John Leuenthorpe your Father, where above my desert, J found
gracious acceptance, and entertainment, has moved me, as in duty to your
self I am also bound, to make special choice of you, to whom I might dedicate
this little work, but most precious matter, The Bread of life, Earnestly
beseeching the Lord that as you are a flourishing Olive branch originally
sprung from a noble root, and truly honored stock, so it would please his
goodness so to water you with the dewes and raines of spiritual graces, and
with this lively bread so to strengthen and increase you, as that you may
accordingly bring forth fragrant and pleasant fruits plentifully to God our
heavenly father. Amen.

Your worships to command in the Lord, THOMAS GRANGER.
From Botterwike in Holland, near Boston in Lincolnshire. 1615.
THE BREAD OF Life.
JOHN 6. 27. Labor not for the meat that perishes, but for the meat that
endures to eternal life, which the Son of man shall give unto you: for him
has God the father sealed.
IN these words two things are generally to be considered: the Occasion, and
the Scope. Concerning the Occasion. Our Savior Christ had done a cure upon a
man, that had been diseased eight and thirty years; and that upon the Saboth
day. Hereupon the envious Jews took occasion to accuse him of the breach of
the Saboth: but after some reasoning with them, he went over the sea of Galile,
or lake of Genezaret, together with his Disciples. And seeing a multitude, to
the number of five thousand, following him, he asked* Philip (to prove him)
where bread for such a multitude might be had. He answered, that two hundred
penniworth would scarcely afford every one a little. Then Andrew spoke and told
him of a Boy in the company that had five loaves and two fishes. These Jesus
commanded to be brought, and having given thanks, he gave them to the Disciples
to give to the people, and every one being satisfied, there remained twelve
baskets full of broken meat. The people seeing this miracle, said, of a truth
this is the Prophet that should come into the world. Wherefore they consulted
to make him King; but he withdrew himself into a mountain alone, leaving his
Disciples, who when even was come, went over a corner of the lake, by ship,
toward Capernaum. And when they had rowed about three miles or more, he
appeared to them walking on the sea, and after that he ascended into the ship
they were by and by at land.

Now the people remained on the further side all the night, waiting for his
coming from the mount: but seeing neither him, nor his Disciples, they also
went to Capernaum the next day, being sure (as they supposed) that Jesus was
behind, unless he passed by them inuisibly. And when they had found him
there, they said unto him flatteringly, Master, whence came thou hither? By
which words they intimate unto him, that they had in admiration the manner of
his coming thither; which they knew to be either by flying in the air, or by
walking on the sea. This they said by insinuation, to sooth him, and to procure
his good will, as though Christ respecting his own worldly glory, by the fame
of his miracles, should have been respective, and also beneficial toward his
welwillers and furtherers in that behalf, and so consequently to them. But
Christ not arriding this clawing insinuation, as sinful men use to do, that
are tickled with the itch of vainglory, in stead of a favorable countenance,
and pleasing answer, gives them a sharp reproof, in the discovery of their
hypocrisy, verse 26. Verily, verily, I say unto you, ye seek me not because
of the miracle (that thereby you might have been moved to believe in me, and
to hunger after the Gospel) but because (that by means of the miracle) you
ate and were filled. But, labor not for meat that perishes.

Concerning the Scope. These words are the proposition or substance of the
Sermon of Christ, in the words following to the end of the Chapter: And it has
two parts, viz. a Dehortation and an Exhortation. The dehortation is in the
former words, Labor not, etc. wherein three things are to be considered, the
Order, the Matter, the Equity.

Concerning the Order. It has a sharp reproof before it, and a gentle
exhortation after it. The one shows his hatred of their sin; the other
declares his love to their persons. First he corrects their hypocrisy,
because they sought him not for himself, but for some other thing than
himself, as it is the nature and very essence of hypocrisy to make profession
of following Christ, not for the love of Christ, as Mary Magdalen followed him,
but either for fear of loss, or hope of gain, which the Gospel brings
with it, or for some worldly advantage, which may be occasioned by the Gospel,
or wrought out of the profession thereof. Therefore in time of temptation and
day of trial (as God does sundry ways prove the hearts of all men living)
they vanish away as smoke, all their former profession being but as a blast of
wind. Yea, for the most part such wicked hypocrites become utter enemies of
the Gospel, and professors thereof when time serves, like to Judas and
Alexander the Copper-smith.

Secondly, having showed his hatred of their sin, he seeks redress and
amendment thereof; therein showing his pastoral care, by dehorting them from
that carnal course and practice of theirs, and also his love to their persons,
by exhorting them to be renewed in mind, in heart, in conversation, by faith in
him, and obedience to his Gospel. This is the course, order, and method of
Christ in teaching.

Hen ce we learn what ought to be the practice of every faithful shepherd.
First, to discover sin, and hypocrisy: the mind of man is full of darkness,
that is, of the ignorance of God, of his will, and ways. The heart of man is a
world of evils, it is deceitful above all things, who* can know it? It is the
fountain and seed of all evil; yea, from this little handful of corruption,
proceed Mark 7. 21. 22.
all the evils that are done under the Sun, Mark. 7. 21. 22. The conscience
of man is large and broad, having little feeling or remorse for sin in it,
and selfeloue covers all sins: Therefore the word of God is to be applied
in particular, that therein, as in a glass, not only all men, but every man
in particular, may see his deformity, which otherwise cannot be detected, by
reason of the blindness of our minds, and hardness of Heb. 4. 12.
our hearts. Heb. 4. 12.

Secondly, in that after discovery or reproof, he dehorteth them from the love
of this world, we learn by his example what we are to do, after that we have
laid open the corruptions of the times in general, and those particular sins
which particular people are subject unto; namely, in brotherly love to dehort
them from sin, and those especially which are then reigning and ruling, and
to exhort them to the practice of the contrary virtue. And herein ought we
chiefly to insist: For though the discovery of sin be necessary to bring men
to the knowledge of themselves, and their miserable estate, and dehortation be
likewise necessary to draw men into the dislike, and hatred of sin, yet
exhortation prevails most to their conversion, and edification. The reasons
hereof are these: First, sinful men being too partial and favorable to
themselves, are apt to deem the worst of their Pastor discovering and
reproouing sin. And hereupon, either of themselves or by Satan's suggestions,
they presently frame an argument of resistance or personal segestion; This is
spoken of malice, or of some false informations, or of secret evil will, etc.
therefore notwithstanding those great words, and near searching of us, we will
not be persuaded to think the worse of our selves, or former courses.
Secondly, there is in man a gain*spurning spirit, whereby taking himself to be
opposed, when he is reproved, and dehorted, he presently, out of dislike falls
a making secret contrary oppositions: so that much reproouing and dehorting,
does kindle and increase this corruption in him; and so in the end he is rather
made worse than better. Those resistances proceed of pride, and self-love:
Again, they that are humane, that is of ingenious and free disposition, are
hereby provoked to dislike and to anger. To this purpose the saying of Paul,
Ephesians. 6. 4. may fitly be applied, Fathers, provoke not Ephesians. 6. 4.
your children to anger, etc. As if he should say, do not daunt and discourage
your children with too much severity, and rigor, least they being provoked to
wrath through your unjust austerity, fall to irreuerent murmuring, and to
contemn your admonitions and threatenings, and to harden themselves against you.

On the other side, exhortation presupposes love. Now whereas the hearers are
persuaded of the Ministers love to their persons, as also of his knowledge, and
judgment, they are by and by made welwilling, attentive, and teachable.
Again, whereas we are better acquainted with vice, than with virtue, it being
natural, familiar, and easy with us, exhortation does not only move us to
practice, but also teach us what we ought to do, bringing us to the knowledge
of our duties, and to the remembrance and more serious thinking thereof.
Reprehensions teach not, unless obscurely, and by consequence; but they
especially and plainly vnteach. Contrarily, exhortations as they do plainly
and chiefly teach us what we ought to do, so do they also as plainly teach
what we should not do. For as soon as we are taught the virtue, we can
apparently and of our selves discern the contrary vice: but being reprehended
for vice, we cannot so easily discern the contrary virtue, because the one is
natural, and the other is of Grace, and gotten by industry. Thus much of
Christ's method, or order in teaching.

The matter of the dehortation is Meat, (Labor not for meat,) the Greek word
is (...), that is, work not, take no pains for: And it signifies also the
work of the soul, study not, care not, take no thought for, Mat. 6. 31.

Meat, signifies first bodily sustenance, that is, whatsoever we receive into
our bodies for the increase and reparation of the same, till the appointed time
of our dissolution.

Secondly, Meat signifies personal maintenance, that is, all things
outwardly belonging to the body, and person of a man, as apparel, buildings,
riches, honors, pleasures, and all worldly ornaments and gracements.

Thirdly, meat signifies natural wisdom, knowledge of arts, and moral
honesty: All which things appear so glorious in the eyes and imaginations of
worldly men, that some in the ample possession thereof, have thought themselves
to be Gods, and many have forgotten themselves to be but men: Notwithstanding
all these do putrify and rot in the grave, there is no virtue or power in
them to deliver the body from the grave, or the soul from hell.

These meats are declared by their adiunct or property (perishing:) The quality
of this meat affords matter of contempt, and consequently of dehortation.

First, bodily meat or sustenance is perishing in two respects: First, unless
corporal food be mortified it is no meat, therefore it cannot feed: But that
it may be meat it must be altered from it own nature and property, and be
changed into the nature and substance of our bodies. The bodies of beasts,
fowls, and fishes (that they may be meat) must be mortified: I. By the
shedding of their blood, and other actions pertaining to that trade, separating
the grosest impure from the pure. II. Their flesh must be further mortified by
water, and fire, and other actions pertaining to that trade. III. Their flesh
must be further mortified by mostication, or chewing in the mouth. IIII. They
must be mortified by general digestion in the common stomach, and from thence
must they pass into innumerable parts of the body: All which do mortify the
meat that is sent unto them, separating the impure from the pure; converting
the one into their own substance and property, but expelling the other, as an
unprofitable excrement. So that man's body is the grave, and destruction of all
things, though in another consideration it be the perfection of all things; for
as much as it is the Center of all things, and for the sustenance and
maintenance whereof, the world, with the fullness thereof, was created.
Secondly, bodily sustenance is mortal, and corruptible of it own nature:
without the body, therefore is the pureness thereof mortal, in, and with the
body. So that meat, with the body, and the body with meat, is perishing: For if
meat without the body were immortal, then should it be so in the body, and
mortality should be swallowed up of immortality, the stronger transforming the
weaker into his own nature. In these two respects, and therefore in all
respects, bodily sustenance is perishing.

Secondly, personal maintenance is perishing* Riches, honors, pleasures, the
estate that is most firmly settled Psalm. 119. 96.
by strength, or policy, or both, are flitting and subject to dissolution.
Psalm. 119. 96. I have seen an end of all perfection, but thy commandment is
exceeding large. In another place. The heavens shall wax old, as does a
garment, and as a vesture shall thou change them. Nothing there is in this
world, that lasts always, but the word of God. Innumerable examples hereof
might be brought out of the Scriptures, and profane authors, but every man's
own knowledge and experience may teach him that these things are also
perishing.

Thirdly, natural wisdom, devices, and policies, are Psalm. 146. 2. 3.
perishing and vain. Psalm. 146. 2. 3. O put not your trust in Princes, nor in
any child of man: for there is no help in them: for when the breath of man
goes forth, he shall go again to his earth, and then all his thoughts
perish. In another place he says, The Lord casts out the devices of Princes,
and brings the counsels of the wicked to naught. Job. 5. 13.
Job 5. 13. He takes the wise in their craftiness, and the counsel of the
wicked is made foolish. Infinite examples hereof may be brought out of the
Scriptures and profane authors, but it were needless, seeing that every day
we may see with our eyes the fall of these things. Therefore seeing that this
world, and the lusts thereof are vanishing, flitting and perishing, let us not
too much love nor labor for the things thereof.

Our Savior Christ dehorteth from caring and laboring for bodily meat, by two
maine arguments. The one is drawn from Gods providence, Mat. 6. wherein he
shows that God has not care only of great matters, as (some foolish
Philosophers dreamed) but even of the least things: For every thing that has
breath and every living thing, is fed of his bountiful hand, who like the good
master of an household gives meat, drink, and all necessaries to every
servant, and child in his house, in due measure and season. More than that,
there is not a sparrow that falls on the earth, without his knowledge; yea,
the hayres of our heads are numbered. The second maine argument of dehortation
is drawn (in this place) from the mortal and frail nature of all things
within us and without us. Now, if God in his providence do supply unto us all
needful things by such means as he offers to us, and lays before our eyes
continually, which he has commanded to use, and none other, and that all
farther cares are superfluous and vain, not adding one jot or title to our
estates; and if so be that those things when we already have them, be
corruptible and perishing, and therefore cannot free us in the use of them from
corruption, let us not vex and disquiet our souls with care and thought, let
us not toil and weary our bodies with labor and travail as the heathen do,
that know not God, nor yet know by what means the soul (though they confess
it to be immortal) is fed and sustained to eternal life. Thus much of the
matter of the Dehortation.

Concerning the equity thereof. It is not to be understood that Christ here
dehorteth us from labor and travel in a lawful calling, seeing that God has
given every man some gift for the same purpose, and has provided both means
and place for the exercising of the same: But his meaning is that we should not
so much carke, and care, labor and travail, for bodily sustenance, and
maintenance, busying the faculties of the divine and immortal soul, and
spending the strength of the body about earthly and perishing things, as though
God had made all things for us, and us for our bellies, and our bellies to live
for ever.

Again, he would have us hereby to know, that as all things are created for
the sustenance and maintenance of man's body, so the body is made to be a
vessel and receptacle of the soul, and the soul is made an immortal and
spiritual vessel, or receptacle of the virtues, gifts, and graces of the holy
ghost, which the soul is to show forth by the bodily members, that so God may
be glorified both in the soul and in the body, therein beholding his own
image, and likeness with joyful complaeence, even as the father rejoices in
the son; and that he may be glorified by the soul, and Mat. 5. 16.
by the body, his power, his wisdom, his goodness, his mercy, shining therein
before men. Mat. 5. 16. and Angels. Ephesians. 3. 10.
Ephesians. 3. 10. For which cause he has redeemed and 1 Pet. 2. 9.
sanctified us, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Ye are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an
holy nation, a peculiar people, that you should show forth the virtues of him
that has called you out of darkness into his marvelous light. Therefore we
must not set our minds on earthly things, to satisfy the lusts and inordinate
desires of the flesh therewith, like bruit beasts that have none understanding,
but we must with godly care, diligence, labor, and patience, seek and get our
living by such good means, and in such a calling as God has given us power
and ability to discharge, knowing and remembering always this, that perishing
meat is not the end of our labors, endeauours, and proiects, but serves only
for the building and maintaining of this Tabernacle of clay, wherewith the
soul is clothed, and to which it is united.

The gathering together of wood, stone, lime, iron, lead, etc. and the building
of our houses therewith, is not the chief end that we aim at, but habitation,
making the house to serve for our uses, and not our selves to serve it: even
so, meats of what kind soever, are but the matter and ornaments of our
natural buildings, which is not the chief end, but the souls habitation or
dwelling, which makes her house, even the body, to serve for her use, and not
her to serve the body. The body is nothing else but a shop furnished with sundry
instruments: the great World, that is, the Firmament, and the Elements, with
all things therein contained, serve but to afford matter for the building,
making, and maintaining of the shop with the tools and furniture thereof. Now
the soul is Gods Apprentice, Servant, or workman, doing the works of God in
the same, and with the instruments of the same. And the works of God are.
First, that we believe in him. Ioh. 6. 29. that is, know and acknowledge him to
be our master, and Lord, creating, redeeming, and sanctifying us. Secondly,
that in this shop and with these instruments, members and faculties, we do his
will, even those things, not which we our selves have a lust unto, because we
are not our own. Romans 14. 8 but his. 1 Cor 6. 19. but what he himself has
commanded. Romans 6. 13. Give not your members as instruments Romans 6. 13.
of unrighteousness unto sin, but give your selves unto God, as they that
are alive from the dead, and give your members as instruments of righteousness
unto God. 1 Cor. 6 13. The 1 Cor. 6. 13.
body is not for fornication, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body.
Though fornication in this place does properly and specially signify unlawful
carnal copulation, yet it may and does also signify the alienation of man's
heart from God the creator, Deuteronomy. 31. 16. and the setting of his affections on
the creature. Colos. 3. 5. This he does when he makes his belly, that is,
himself, his Idol. Phil. 3. 19. Loving only himself, and all things for
himself; serving himself, even of God, and of all his creatures, blessings
and benefits; kissing his hand, Job 31. 27. that is, magnifying and delighting
himself in his own conceit, for his own wisdom, and providence. Ezech. 28.
2. 3. 4. 5. 6.

He that is thus alienated in his heart from the Lord, is a fornicator,
diuorcing himself from the Lord, adulterating and polluting all the creatures
and gifts of God. In which kind of usage both he and they are accursed, even as
the Serpent was accursed, whom Satan abused to tempt our first parents to
sin, Genesis 3. 14. and as the brazen serpent was broken in pieces, being abused
by the Israelites, 2 King. 18. 4. In which sense and for which cause they are
called wicked Mammon.

But the body is for the Lord. Even for God and Christ, who in him, and by him,
and through him, has reconciled, begotten, and married us his Church to
himself, that being separated from our selves, and from the world, Psalm. 45.
10. 11. we should only believe in him, only hope in him, only love him, and
all things for him; yea, that we should be so ravished with the love of his
presence as that we should neglect all worldly things, and even forget to eat
our bread.

Hereby we are taught to bridle our inordinate desires, and to moderate our
cares, and laboring for worldly things, which are frail, uncertain, and
corruptible: and to busy our selves, not so much in the getting of abundance,
with continual vexation, disquietnesse, fears, and sorrows, as to seek
continually to the Lord to sanctify and establish our hearts with his good
spirit, to grant us patience, and contentation with that which comes to us
from his hand, and to give us wisdom, and discretion to order our affairs,
and so to dispose of the same, as may be most for his glory, the good of us,
and ours, and of others, especially the godly, the care of whose things
pertain to us also. 1. Tim. 6. 8.
To this purpose let us always bear in mind the words of the Apostle. 1 Timothy 6.
8. When we have food and raiment, let us be therewith content. Verse. 9. For
they that will be rich fall into temptations, and snares, and into many foolish
and noisome lusts, which drown men in perdition and destruction. Verse. 10. For
the desire of money is the root of all evil, which while some have lusted
after, they have erred from the faith, and pierced themselves through with many
sorrows. Verse. 17. Charge them that are rich in this world, that they be not
high minded, and that they trust not in uncertain riches, but in the living
God, which gives us abundantly all things to enjoy. Verse. 18 that they do
good, and be rich in good works, etc.

Secondly, seeing that our bodies are but the vessels and houses of our souls,
2 Cor. 5. 1. And that all things serve only for the sustentation and
maintenance thereof; we are hereby taught to make a separation of the
spiritual soul from the earthly body, and to be joined in spirit to the
Lord, not living, to, and for the body, nor having any care to please and
satisfy it in the lusts thereof; but living in, to, and for the Lord, subduing
and beating down the rebellious flesh, crucifying every thought, imagination,
and lust: bringing them into bondage and homage to the Lord, that the virtues
and graces of his spirit may shine forth in our words, works, and even in our
persons, as the light appeared out of darkness, and gave shine unto the
world. 1 Cor. 9. 24. 25. 26. 27. Math. 5. 14. Phil. 2. 15. Prou. 4. 18.

But alas, how short we come of those duties, and how nearly, and dearly we
are addicted, lincked and bound to the body, may easily appear, if we enter
into impartial judgment with our selves, examining our daily practice, and
the continual course of our lives. And comparing our selves as we are, with
our selves as we should be, we shall easily see that we are flesh, and not
spirit; that our souls are the drudges of our bodies, and our bodies the
drudges of our meat* seeing that for the large possessions, and plenty of
outward things, many have no regard to the body, to the safety, or health
thereof. Eccles. 4. 8.

In the practice of this multitude that followed Christ, we may behold as in a
glass the nature and condition of all earthly men. For we are all of one
earth or clay, descended of earthly Adam, our minds are full of darkness,
our wills froward, our affections sensual, there is none righteous, none
understands, none seeeketh after God. Romans 3. 10. 11. All our labor and
travel is to satisfy the flesh in the lusts thereof. And therein are our
pains endless, and our desires boundless. But when we come to take view of
our inner man, the spiritual and regenerate part, we can see nothing, our
fowls are dead, or sick and feeble, for there is no spiritual hunger and
thirst in us, after the bread of life, the word of God, there is no appetite,
desire, care, laboring for that; because the sensual body has brought the
soul into captivity, and subdued it to the flesh, that with the powers and
faculties thereof it should serve the flesh.

In the tillage, and sowing of our ground, what pains do we willingly take?
How readily do we plow, and root up briers, thistles, and other weeds,
least they ouer-grow and suck up the fat of the earth, wherewith our corn
should be fed? How patiently can we endure the cold of Winter, the stormy
blasts of the Spring, and the broyling heat of Summer in doing our necessary
businesses? And when we have done all; what have we got, save only a little
perishing meat for our mortal bodies? But contrarily, how little pains do
we take in breaking up the fallowes of our hearts, in rooting out the thorns
and briars of sin, which our nature does as plentifully and willingly bring
forth, as the earth does weeds? We can well enough endure that the strength
of soul and body, should be eaten up, and devoured of the canker-worme of
sin, which should bring and show forth the fruits of the Spirit. A corrupt,
and weedy soil we are, and therefore we are apt to receive Satan's tares, and
to cherish the same in us; but the word of life can make little or no
impression in us, our cold, waterish, and heartlesse fowls can not nourish the
seed of God to bring forth any fruit for his use.

In the time of harvest, with what joy do we reap the fruits of the earth?
the very sight of our commodities so glads our hearts, that hunger, thirst,
sweat, ache, want of sleep, nothing troubles us. We love to be always in the
fields, redeeming the fair season with loss of our pleasures and ease, which
otherwise we know we should want afterward. But how careless are we in
reaping the spiritual food of our souls? How little pleasure have we
therein? We think we stand in no need thereof; therefore we go dully and
heavily to that field, where the same is to be gathered, as though we came
thither by compulsion of law, rather than of a willing mind. Many exeuses and
causes of delay do we find; long is it ere we come, and when we are come,
we have forgotten to bring our haruest-tooles with us, our minds, hearts,
affections, memories are at home, and on our worldly affairs; therefore we
think the time long, and unless short work be made, many will shorten the
time with sleeping, and the rest of the day shall be spent in vain pleasures,
foolish talking, ungodly iangling and ieasting, and doing many kinds of
businesses which we conceive we may do without any great danger of Law,
being like to young children, which delight to play in Sand-heapes, dunghills,
and miry puddles, but to be set to the School of nurture and learning, it is as
bitter as gall and wormwood unto them.

Again, how do we carke and care, labor, and cast about, and even break
our brains with study, and plotting how to compass, and purchase Farms,
Houses, Lordships, Offices, and places of preferment? But how naught worth and
vile do we esteem this precious Pearl, the Kingdom of God? The kingdom of
Heaven is not worth the caring for, it is not worth the labor, we imagine
that it may be purchased with any trifle, with any supposed good thought, a
word in the hour of death. How brutish and sottish are many great and wise
worldlings, which seeing an earthly Lordship so long in purchasing, do
notwithstanding think to purchase the kingdom of God in a moment, yea, to
have it at command when they list: Believe well, and hope well from the teeth
forward, is all that they will give, and this can they give at any time,
without the least hinderance to their sinful lusts in any thing.

We will travel by Sea and Land into far countries, passing by dangerous
gulfes, Rocks, Robbers, Pirates, Tempests, and amongst these will we hazard
goods, and life it self, for the increase of our goods, and when we have
gotten all we can, we can make naught but meat, drink, and cloth of it, but
whatsoever we make thereof, it is but a perishing and corruptible toy, having
matter of contempt, yea, of sorrow and grief in it. For what troubles do
riches often times bring to the owners thereof? Eccles. 5. 12. But as for those
true and immortal riches, feign would we have them, but we will not wet our
foot for them, nor abide the cold air to breath on our faces, we will not
undergo the least displeasure of any man for them, nor sustain the smallest
loss of any thing, nor hazard the least thing that we have. In traveling into
far Countries, we are altogether unsure to return again, yet shall not that
hinder us. If we sustain any great loss, we will once try again, the later
voyage may chance to save it self, and recover the other. But there is no such
traveling for these everlasting treasures: And though we be sure with labor
and diligence to find and obtain the same, yet will we hardly stir to the
door, yea, though they be brought, offered and even enforced upon us, yet
will we not pull the hand out of the bosom, so drowzie, so lazy are we.

If proclamation should be made in time of dearth and famine, that such a
Prince had sent a thousand quarters of Corn for the poor, and so many pounds
of gold and silver to be distributed among the poor indebted, and that he
would send shortly to every port a vessel laden with wheat, and if it were but
Beans, what running, and flocking together would there be? what striving?
contending? complaining? laying open of our wants? of our debts? of our charge
of children? what watching, and looking for that, which were to come? what
running to the Seashore? climing up of steeples? and cheering of our hearts in
hunger, with hope of expected food? In Esaias 55. This proclamation Esaias 55.
is made with a loud, and high voice; Hoe, Every one that thirsts, come to the
waters, come, buy Wine, Milk, Honey, Bread, without money. In extremity of
bodily want, we would give all that we have for bread, and water: In our
spiritual want we are called to come and take freely without money, or
mony-worth, but who comes? who moves, or listens to the voice of the crier?
This spiritual food is not worth the coming for, it is not worth the labor,
though we may have it freely. They that love the hippes, hawes, roots, and
mast of this world cannot abide this heavenly food, it is no more meat for
them, then Pearls for Swine. The Onions, Garlickes, and Leekes of Egypt, even
the fruits of this, earth is the fittest for them, and sauoureth best to their
taste: they are like young children that delight to lie groueling in the ashes,
eating coals and clay, thus are they bereft of understanding, like to
Nabuchadnezar, Dan 4. the wild Woods, Forests, and company of beasts is
fitter for them then the communion and fellowship of Saints. The civil
flickering harlot, and stew-house does best befit the Whoremonger, and
adulterer: the Alehouse is fittest for the sottish Drunkard: the kitchen for
the greedy glutton: the dunghill for the muddy Mamonist: a puffed and windy blast
of vainglory for the proud and rotten flesh of pride. This proclamation is
also made, Prou. 8. 3. Wisdom cries besides the gates before the city, Prou.
8. 3.
at the entry of the doors; Ver. 2* Omen I call to you* etc. Ver. 6. Give ear,
for I will speak of excellent things. Ver. 18. Riches and honor are with me,
even durable riches, and righteousness: my fruit is better than gold, even then
fine gold, and my revenues than fine silver: yet for all this, she is not
heard; for folly does not comprehend wisdom, neither are incorruptible
treasures received of corruptible and mortal bodies.

How eagerly do many hunt after promotion, the windy titles of honor, and how
glorious and wise are they, if they can creep into favor, and special
respect with Princes? What a world of contentment, pleasure, and joy is the
advancement of their houses Hest. 5. 11. 12.
unto them? Hest. 5 11. 12.

What hot pursuit, even to the last gasp, do many make after earthly
preferment; but to seek to be in favor with God, with Christ, with the
Angels, to be honored of God, to be heirs with Christ, to be fellow
servants with the Angels, who almost much regards?

Moreover in our hot pursuits after the profits, and prerogatives of this
world, we will go on forward with a constant and steady course, and tread
down under foot every thing that hinders. Whatsoever the world think or
say of us we care not, if we may but accomplish our desires. If men count us
covetous, ehurlish, vainglorious, high-minded, we regard not their speeches:
If the poor curse us, and brand us with the marks of oppression, cruelty, and
tyranny, yea, if we have but some great person to back us, we will care
almost for no man: but how inconstant in a good profession are we? How
fearful? How soon offended? How soon weary of well-doing? How
faint-hearted? If the world frown on us, as it always has done on the
children of God, we are ready to give over, to dissemble, and conceal our
selves with Nicodemus, as though we were ashamed of Christ, whereas we should
rather show our selves to be ashamed of their wickedness, and our own
spiritual cowardice.

The Seruing-man will be diligent and faithful in his Masters domestical
businesses, and outward employments, he will carefully observe and note his
Masters disposition and nature, what things delight and please him, what not.
And if his master be of a right generous disposition, that he use to prefer
good servants, then will he serve him diligently many years; and the doubtful
hope of uncertain preferment gives life and courage to him, to undergo
joyfully and willingly any pains: heat, cold, wet, dry, night, day, are all
alike to him; and he is ready to hazard limme and life in his masters
quarrel. But what is the harvest of his labors? Some preferment by his
Master, or Masters procurement: yet is his Master but a man, and therefore
unconstant; he is but a man, therefore he may leave his former goodness; and
because he is but a man, the flower of grass; he may dye before the time,
therefore says David, Psalm. 146. Psalm. 146. 2. 3.
2. 3. O put not your trust in Princes, nor in any child of Man, etc. But
howsoever, Service is no heritage: but the Lords service is heritage, he has
no sons, no daughters, no kinsfolks, but his only Son, which he gave a
ransom for us, the price of our redemption, and adoption, that we might be
his Sons, and coheyre, with his own Sons of the Kingdom of glory. Now,
will the Seruingman do this and that; nay, he cares not what, upon uncertain
hopes of trifles, and shall not we much more joyfully and faithfully serve the
Lord, enduring with patience the afflictions of this present time, seeing that
we have a Master that is most good, most merciful, most true, who has
promised plentifully to reward his Servants, and is most willing, and most able
to perform his promises. Why does not the hope of this reward encourage and
give life unto us, faithfully to serve him, and joyfully to suffer for him? It
is because infidelity lurketh in the heart, it is because we are not his
Servants, we have no delight in such kind of service* nor in serving such a
Master. And forasmuch as we are carnal, we will in such sort serve bodily
Masters for the good of our bodies, but we will not serve the Lord for the both
temporal, and everlasting felicity of body and soul. Such like bruit beasts
are sure that they have bodies, and they daily feel that they require
maintenance, therefore are they so labourious for the time present, and so
provident, and careful for the time to come: but whether they have souls they
are not very sure, neither whether they be immortal, neither what shall become
of them do they much regard. From whence then proceeds this bodily
niggardship, and spiritual prodigality and dissolutenes, that for a crust of
bread they will sell the kingdom of heaven, but from Infidelity and Atheism?

Lastly, the poor man, that about ten, twelve, or twenty years hence, or he
knows not how soon, shall have a Lordship befall him, or some great living;
can in the mean space far more patiently endure poverty, the hope of
inioying the same before his death, does rejoice his heatt in the greatest
want, and though he be doubtful whether he shall live, and have the benefit
thereof, yet is it no small comfort to him, that his posterity shall be raised
out of the dust. But we poor and miserable wretches, being sure that the
inheritance promised is not far off, death making a passage, and entrance to
the same, are little or nothing comforted therewith, yea, though the time of
life be almost expired, that one foot is even in the grave already, though (I
say) we be so near to our inheritance, yet have we no rejoicing therein;
because we are more in love with this nasty and muddy cottage, than with the
glorious palace of heaven: distrust, infidelity, and the love of this world,
does so deeply possess our dead and dark hearts.

Thus much of the dehortation*

But labor for the meat that endures to eternal life, which the Son of man
shall give unto you, for him has God the Father sealed.

These words contain the Exhortation. The matter of the exhortation is (meat)
which is declared, 1. By the effect or efficacy proceeding from the immortal
nature thereof, [which endures to eternal life.] 2. By the Author or Giver,
[which the Son of man shall give unto you.] This Authority and Office of the
Son is confirmed, by the primarie or principal cause thereof, that is, the
Assignement and Designement of the Father, according to the everlasting decree
of his counsel, in calling him, [for him has the Father sealed.

But for meat.] Meat, in this place, is quite opposite and contrary to the
former, signifying metaphorically in general all things belonging to newness
of life; in special the doctrine of the Gospel. For as the body is fed with
meat, so the soul is fed by the word of God, through the efficacy and virtue
of the spirit, which begets Faith in the soul, whereby the soul is
quickened, for of it self it is dead: therefore seeing that faith is the life
of the soul, that is well compared to meat which increases and preserves
faith, and that is the Gospel only. 1 Pet* 1. 23. Also the same Apostle
says, 1 Pet. 1. 23.
as Babes desire the sincere milk of the Word. It is a known principle in
Philosophy, ex quibus nascitur aliquid, ex ijs pascitur: Whereof we are bred,
thereof are we fed. Now our bodies are bred, or created, out of the great
world, that is, the firmament, and the elements, therefore are we sustained,
maintained, and preserved by the same, till the appointed time of our
dissolution: even so our souls are regenerate, and borne a new of the word,
and the spirit, not to temporal, but to eternal life.

Which endures to eternal life.] These words are the effect of the Gospel.
The Gospel is such meat, as it makes the soul immortal, working in the
soul, faith of the promises therein contained, and an assured hope of the
performance thereof in due season. This meat being immortal, makes the soul
immortal, but the other is perishing, therefore it cannot free the body from
corruption. And herein appears the difference of these meats.

First, the virtue and strength of bodily food, wherewith it feeds, is
natural, being infused into it in the creation, and continued till the end by
generation, and production: But the virtue and strength of this meat, is the
spirit of regeneration, descending from above, inlightning, and sanctifying
whom he will: And as meat without the natural strength thereof, is but a
dead corpse, and cannot feed: so the Gospel without the spirit which is the
life thereof, is a dead letter to him which receives the same, which kills,
but feeds not; for then is it lively in op^ration, when the receiver thereof,
that before was dead, is now raised from death by the spirit, which as it gave
life to the first Chaos, or Mass in the creation, so it gives life to the
second confused Mass, the natural man.

Secondly, bodily meat must be mortified by the body, which separateth the
impure from the pure, converting the one into his own substance and nature,
but expelling the other as excrements: but contrarily, the meat of the soul,
which is the Gospel, is not mortified of the soul, but it does mortify the
soul with all the powers and faculties thereof, converting the soul into the
nature and property of it self. It destroys nature, it casts a man out of
himself, separating himself from himself, as a corrupt refuse, or excrement.
As for example, Paul counted all things loss for the knowledge of Christ, and
judged them to be but dung, that he might win Christ, and be found in him.
But what things are they? His Jewish privileges, whereof he makes an
enumeration in the former verses, and diverse other things wherein he excelled
many of his own nation: For he was of excellent education, perfectly
instructed in the laws of the Fathers, skillful in diverse languages, by
profession a Pharisee, not lukewarm, but zealous, touching virtue, and
righteous living, according to the Law, unrebukable.

Here is nothing wanting to Paul, as he supposed, he had made his salvation
so sure, that if he were not saved, he thought none could be saved. But this
proud and dead flesh that is without feeling, must be launced, cut, and eaten
away. For when as, in blind zeal, riding toward Damascus he was thrown
beside his horse, being affrighted and astonished with the sudden light that
shone about him, and the voice that spoke unto him, he was thrown beside
himself also. He fell a Jew, he rose a Christian; his fall was his spiritual
death to his former Iudaisme, the miraculous light and voice of Christ his
spiritual resurrection. From hence-forward he glories not in worldly
prerogatives, and Jewish privileges, he counts them but loss for Christ, and
judges them to be but doung; but he rejoices and glories in afflictions for
Christ's sake, yea, he is content to suffer any thing, scourgings,
imprisonments, shipwracks, perils of waters, of robbers, of the Jews, of the
Gentiles, of false brethren; in the City, in the wilderness, in the sea; to
suffer weariness, painfulness, watching, hunger, thirst, cold, nakedness,
stonings, fire, sword, if so be that by any means he might attain to the
resurrection of the dead.

Therefore this spiritual meat cures not, for we are past cure, there being
nothing in us for medicine to work upon, to recover us withal. It mends not,
for these mildring muddy walls of ours, can sustain no new matter, no more
then old vessels can contain new wine, or an old garment retain the new
piece of cloth. It repayres not, for this ruinous building must not be built
upon, but pulled down, yea, the foundation thereof must be razed. All man's
understanding, wisdom, reason, imaginations, will, affections, and all his
goodness, must be cast up, as unprofitable rubbish, good for nothing, but as
unsavory salt, to be cast into the streets for men to tread upon, and a new
foundation must be laid, whereon he must build a new, even Jesus Christ, on
whom he must be founded, and out of whom he must grow, even as the building
does artificially grow from, and out of the foundation. And all other things,
what show soever they have of wisdom, godliness, zeal, devotion, yet are
they but sin, because they arise not from the true foundation, which is
Faith: Therefore this meat transformeth and renueth, non superinducens, sed
inducens nouam formam, not putting upon us, but putting in us a new form or
shape, which must transform and change the whole man, and life of man* out of
natural into spiritual, out of corruptible into incorruptible, out of earthly
into heavenly, out of temporal into eternal.

Thirdly, bodily meat is mortal, therefore it cannot preserve the body for
ever, but both come to destruction: but the word of GOD is immortal, seeing
that the spirit which is the life and strength thereof is immortal; so
mortality is swallowed up of immortality. And now Death where is thy sting?
Sin, where is thy strength? Despair, where is thy worm? Hell, where is thy
victory?

This is the true Philosophers stone, that turns iron even iron hearts into
gold, mortal into immortal, death into life, even as Lazarus was raised from
death to life, and as the dead and dark eyes of the blind man were changed
from darkness into light.

Fourthly, corporal meat must be mortified, and prepared by our labor and
Art: but spiritual meat, which is the Gospel, is as gold, purified seven
times in the fire, separated from all impurity, much more then gold can be by
the skill of the cunning Alchimist, mortifying and preparing us, to convert us
into the nature of it self. We serve our selves of bodily food, but this
meat must serve it self of us, else we do adulterate the same, applying it
carnally to our condemnation, even as the Jews adulterated this miracle of our
Savior, making no other use thereof, than to serve their bodily turns of it,
the filling of their bellies.

Note this well, for it is the nature and very essence of hypocrisy and
carnal gospelling, which in these days is as rife as ever it was, and that in
the highest degree. For in these days as there is much knowledge, so is there
great abuse of knowledge by hypocrisy and sophistry. For men are not only
politic to cover and hide their filthiness by dissimulation, and apish
imitation of certain words and terms, and counterfaite shows of profession,
as they are subtle to defend and excuse their wicked and most ungodly doings,
having Scripture and reasons as ready at command as Arrius the heretic, and
as the Devil the Father of cauils and lies.

Satan never played his part, his Devils part so kindly, as when he drew
arguments of persuasion out of the Scriptures, thereby to induce Christ to
sin, contrary to the Scriptures. Neither do hypocrites play their parts so
kindly, that is, imitate their Father the Devil so naturally, as when they
transform themselves into the children of light even as he transformeth
himself into an Angel of light, to deceive. This hypocrisy has taken such
deep rooting, and is become so habitual, that men are now as skillful to
deceive their own hearts, as heretofore they have bin to deceive others. Let
such sophistical hypocrites take heed how they carnalize the Gospel, and
profession of religion, that is, serve their own turns of it, either for
profit or vaineglory, as the common practice is. And as men count themselves
the wiser, as they deepelier dissemble, and blind the world, so much more
foolish are they, even the Devils fools, not considering how that by this
way, he serves himself of them. Now to conclude this point. Bodily food,
yea all worldly things that serve but either to feed and sustain the body, or
to glorify the person of the outward man, do no more but bring the body to
the grave, or earth, from whence it was taken: but contrarily, spiritual
food, the word of God, does feed and preserve the soul to eternal life, and
bring it into the hands of God again who made it, and infused it into the body.

Secondly, this spiritual food is declared by the Author and giver thereof
[which the Son of man shall give unto you.] He calls himself the Son of
man, not purposely to signify unto them, that he is the Son of Adam, Abraham,
David, Mary, but hereby he intimates his godhead unto them, recalling them
from the view of his manhood, to the consideration of his Godhead, and of
both in the one person of Christ. In Math. 9. 6. he says, The son of man
has power on Math. 9. 6.
earth to forgive sins. Now to forgive sin is proper to God alone: Here
therefore he plainly confesses himself to be God on earth. Again, John 3.
13. he says; No man ascends into heaven, but the son of John 3. 13.
man which is in heaven: here he manifestly shows that he is man in heaven.
This amazeth the eyes, and astonisheth the understanding of the world, how he
is God on earth, and man in heaven, at one and the same time. That he was man
on earth, the world saw, yea with contemptuous, and scornful eyes, looking
only on his outward appearance. Mat. 13. 35. And that God is in heaven it
knows, but it neither sees nor knows, how the God head should be on the
earth, and the manhood in heaven, much less how they both should be united in
the one person of Christ. This difficulty is thus manifested and declared.

First, the body of Christ was formed of the sanctified substance of the
Virgin, and without the knowledge of man, that his reasonable soul might come
to an undefiled vessel, instrument, or body, and that which Solomon speaks
of himself, Wisd. 8. 20. hyperbolically, is truly spoken of Christ; yea,
rather being good, I came to undefiled body.

Secondly, the humane soul of Christ was sanctified and replenished with the
gifts of the spirit above measure, to be a fitting instrument for the
Godhead. And the Godhead took the manhood unto it, thus preparing,
sanctifying and furnishing it. So that the Godhead and manhood, without
confusion of the one with the other, do make one person, without division of
the one from the other. Now by virtue of this union, and communication of the
two distinct natures, that is, of the Godhead, and manhood, with their
properties and actions in one person, he being man on earth, may be said to be
in heaven, that is, in respect of the person to which the Godhead is
inseparably communicated, which is in heaven, and every where. And this is
Christ the son of God on earth, and Christ the Son of man in heaven; which I
further illustrate by this similitude.

First, the light was, before the star of the Sun was made: For three days
and three nights were already passed, and the stars were made on the fourth
day, Genesis 1. 14. So the Godhead of Christ was before the manhood, which was
incarnate in the year of the world. 3962.

Secondly, the light assumed, and took this star to it, which both make one
Sun, yet is the star one thing, and the light another; but by indivisible
union of their substances they make one Sun: even so the Godhead took the
manhood unto it, which both make one Christ, yet is the Godhead one thing, and
the manhood another, but by union of both in one person, they make one Christ.

Thirdly, the body of the Sun is little, at least in our eyes, but the light
is unmeasurable, comprehending and filling both the Sun, and all things, to
the utmost circle of the highest world: so the body of Christ is for quantity
like to ours, but his Godhead is infinite, comprehending, and filling both the
manhood and all things infinitely.

Fourthly, though the body of the Sun be in the firmament, yet we may say,
that the Sun is here or there, because the light thereof is in this or that
place, yea the vital power also, whereby every thing does live and move,
which is not separable from the Sun, but being rooted in the same, is
derived and extended thence into all places; yet we say not, here or there is
the star of the Sun, not making the star, but the Sun to be in every
place: Even so, though the manhood of Christ be now in heaven, yet is Christ
in earth, and all places, as himself says, Wheresoever two or three be
gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst. Again, Lo, I am with
you till the end of the world. Not that the manhood should be with them on
earth, as them it was; which being ascended and glorified, must be contained
in heaven, till the day of judgment, but that Christ (...) should be with
them. So that to conclude this point, Christ, God and man, in respect of his
Godhead, is every where, and Christ, God and man, in respect of the manhood,
is in heaven, and no where else. Thus much of the author and giver of this
food.

Moreover, this authority and office of the Son is confirmed by the
principal cause thereof, [for him has the Father sealed.) God the Father
decreed in his everlasting counsel the office of mediation of the Son, and
called him heereunto with an everlasting calling, as he is the Son of God,
but from the womb of his Mother as he is man. This is the character, seal,
and express image of God, wherewith the Father has sealed him, even all
authority and power, with all infinite, celestial, and spiritual gifts. Now
this everlasting calling, which is executed in, and by the manhood, appears
to the world by his doctrine and miracles, the authority, power, and majesty of
the Godhead shining in his person, being the splendor and brightness of the
glory of his Father.

Seeing that Christ alone is the spence or storehouse of spiritual food, we
learn whether we are to repair for bread in our spiritual hunger and
thirst. He alone is the bread of God that came down from heaven, and gives
life to the world. Other bread there is, but it is not living bread. This great
world is Gods spence or storehouse, which affoordeth corporal bread, or rather
matter of bread, which we gather out of the same, and by our Art and industry
work it into immediate food, which so soon as it comes into the stomach,
is fet from thence into every part of the body, for the nourishing and
sustaining thereof: but this natural bread is perishing.

Again, this world affords meat for the natural soul: For it is Gods
temple or building, and all the creatures therein contained, are his living
vessels, or instruments, doing and working his will; And in them appears his
own omnipotency, majesty, power, wisdom, goodness, justice, mercy. Here
is matter for the reasonable soul to work and feed upon: but this is animal
bread; enduring but to temporal life, not quickening, or reviving the soul to
eternal life.

Therefore there can no bread of life be gathered out of this world, but the
living bread must come down from heaven, that must quicken and sustain the
soul to eternal life. It is living bread, not only because it has life in
it self, but also because it gives life unto us which are dead, which worldly
bread cannot do. For other bread must come to a living stomach, as the matter
to the workman, but this living bread comes to a dead stomach, to give not
only food, but life also to the same, which it does by the spirit which
quickneth whom he will. And he that has the spirit, has life, from whence
proceeds spiritual hungar, and thirst, and consequently spiritual digestion
of Christ, the living bread: but he that has not the spirit, has not life,
therefore though Christ be offered to him, yet is he not quickened, nor fed
therewith, for the word of God is to him but a dead letter, even as
restoratiues, and nourishing meats are to a liuelesse corpse.

Therefore let us not labor for bodily meat, pampering and fulfilling too
much the brutish appetites of those corruptible carcasses, which are a burden
and wearisomnesse to the sanctified soul. Let us rather labor to suppress
the intemperate and inordinate desires, and lusts thereof, least that obeying
them in the lusts thereof, we be transformed into the nature of evil beasts,
or civil Epicures, as very many are in these latter evil days, wherein there
are not so many converted from Popery to Protestancy, as do revolt from true
Christianity to manifest Pharisaisme, to Ethnicall ciuility, Epicurisme and
flat Atheism, the Devil catching more this way, then escape out of his hands
the other way.

Labor not for the preferments, promotions, pompes, and vain flourishes of
this transitory world, all which things are but momentary; and being persecuted
with envy, and accompanied with inseparable grief and sorrow, afford no true
felicity, nor yet hearty rejoicing to the possessours thereof. Let us rather
labor to curb these high aspiring thoughts, moderating these flying and
groundless imaginations with sobriety and sad wisdom. Labor not for worldly
wisdom and knowledge: For the wisdom of God in his works is unsearchable,
neither can the ground of his works be found out. So that when we have done
all, this is all that we have learned, namely, that we now know nothing,
whereas being unlearned, we thought we knew, or might know something, and
have only gotten some discerning of our ignorance, and want of knowledge.
Moreover, whatsoever it is, it dies and perishes together with the brain,
not helping forward the soul one hair breadth toward the attainment of
eternal bliss; for otherwise Satan might have cause of hope, at least some
mitigation of endless despair.

But let us labor for the meat that indureth for ever, whereby our souls and
bodies are preserved eternally. Let us labor, that we may attain to the
knowledge of God, in the salvation of our souls, by faith in Christ: This is
true wisdom. Let us labor for the spirit of Regeneration, that we may be
delivered from the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the
sons of God: This is true liberty. Let us labor for the assured hope of our
eternal inheritance in the kingdom of heaven: This is an everlasting and true
kingdom. Let us labor that we may be truly persuaded of the forgiveness of
our sins, and that we are in the favor of God: This is true comfort, joy,
delight and pleasures. Let us labor to know God to be our God, and protector,
which is our safety both from our temporal and spiritual enemies. Let us
labor to be partaker of all spiritual blessings from above, which proeeed
from the Father of lights. Let us labor for this meat, that is able to make
our souls and bodies immortal; not like unto Manna which our Fathers have
eaten, and are dead, but he that eats this meat shall live for ever. It is
the precious balm that will preserve our souls and bodies from corruption,
that they shall never see death. Which meat, the Son of man, Jesus Christ
has given unto us, even the Son of God incarnate and made man, he is the
spence and storehouse, out of which we must receive this everlasting food:
for all the treasures of the Father are hid in him, of whose fullness we shall
receive, and our souls shall be satisfied with God.

The Law affords no meat* unto us; it is a destroyer, not a Savior; the Leaven
of the Pharisees, even Popery, which is a mass, and the head of all heresies
and Satanicall policies is no meat, but poison. And as for bodily meat, and
drink, which passes by the mouth into the belly, it is of short continuance.
Neither the Law, nor the prudent, nor the wise, nor the Scribe, nor the
disputer of this world can afford any part of this everlasting food unto us.
These are dry, barren, hungry, and fainty deserts. But Christ is the true
Manna that came down from heaven, which who so eats shall not hunger any
more. He is the rock, out of which do flow the waters of life, and he that
drinks thereof shall never thirst any more. For thus has God the Father
decreed in his everlasting counsel, and called him from all eternity, that
through the assumption and mediation of the manhood, he should convey this
immortal meat, and spiritual treasures unto us. Therefore the bread of life
can we have from none but from the Son; for the decree of the Father cannot
be altered, neither can the calling of the son be in vain. There is no
wisdom, knowledge, salvation elsewhere to be found, save only in the Son:
the truth of all which things may appear outwardly unto us by his miracles,
which no man could work, but he that was sent of God, who hereby testified
of his Son, that by believing in the Son, we might have life through him,
not through our selves, nor any other.

FINIS.

