MEDITATIONS AND DISQVISITIONS upon the Lords prayer.

By Sr RICHARD BAKER, Knight.

PSALM. 119. 90. Tby Testimonies O God, are my meditation



LONDON, Printed by ANNE GRIFFIN, and are to be sold by ANNE BOVLER, at the
sign of the Marigold, in Paul's Churchyard.

1636.

(...) sweetest Influence: for by it, the fear which is due, to the greatness
of your Majesty; is turned into a reverence of the Majesty of your virtues.
With this reverence, I humbly present this Treatise, to your Royal hands:
which though it inform you of nothing, you knew not before; yet it may put you
in mind of something, you might else forget: and a good Remembrancer, is none
of the meanest, amongst a Princes Officers: But leaving this high work, to
Apostolical men of whom your Majesty has many about you; and some, more
eminent, as Pillars; I only with low Zacheus, climb up into this Tree of
Devotion: to make me in the contemplation of your virtues, the fitter to pray:
that all the blessings on mount Gerizim, in this life; and in the next, all the
blessings which Christ preached on the Mount; may be multiplied upon your
sacred Majesty, in your own Person, and in your Posterity; in our most
gracious Queen MARY; in our most hopeful Prince CHARLES; and in all the rest
of your Majesty's most royal Issue. Thus prays

Your Majesty's most humble and prostrate Subject,

RICHARD BAKER,

To my loving and learned friend, and sometime Compupil at Oxford, Sr. RICHARD
BAKER, Knight.
SIR,

I Conceive that you have been pleased out of our ancient friend ship (which
was first, and is ever best elemented in an Academy) and not out of any
valuation of my poor judgment, to communicate with me your Devine Meditations
upon the Lords Prayer in some several sheets which have given me a true taste
of the whole. Wherein I must needs observe and much admire the very Character
of your Style, which seems unto me to have not a little of the African Idea
of St. Augustines age; full of sweet Rapture, and of researched Conceits;
nothing borrowed; nothing vulgar; and yet all flowing from you ( I know not
how) with a certain equal facility. So as I see, your worldly troubles have
been but Pressing-yrons to your Heavenly cogitations. Good sir, let not any
modesty of your nature; let not any obscurity of your fortune smother such an
excellent employment of your erudition and zeal: For, it is a work of light,
and not of darkness. And thus wishing you long health that can use it so well:
I remain

Your poor Friend to love and serve you,

HENRY WOTTON.

HE ARE O HEAVENS; HEARKEN Esa. 1.1.
O EARTH; Our Savior vouchsafes to be our Schoolmaster, and meaning to finish
our Redemption in his Death, by delivering us Heb. 2.9.
from death, the effect of our sin: He begins our redemption in his life,
by deliveriug us from Ignorance, the cause of our Sin. We were created in
light by the Creator of light: but the Prince of Darkness came informing us,
that our Lig^t was darkness: whose mistie persuasions making us, first, doubt
of a truth; and then resolve of a falsehood: brought us in the end to that
pass: that our Eyes indeed were opened; but our sight was blemished: we saw
more afterward, then we had done before; but we saw worse afterward then we
did before. For, taking the Seducer for our leader; and not seeing our way,
till seeing our selves out of our way; The Light which shined in us, as refused
of us departed from us: so that, creeping now being our Esa. 59.10.
best pace; and using, as it were our Hands for Eyes: we could rather keep
our selves from falling in the wrong way; then give our selves direction, to
return unto the right. Clowded thus with Ignorance; the Light came to visit
us; and being thus strayed out of our way; the Way it self, descended Mal. 2.8.
to direct us; that, if we be not, as disobedient auditors to Doctrine of
obedience; as we were Obedient hearkners to Counsel of Disobedience: He will
teach us to make advantage of our loss; and to climb the higher by the Fall
we have taken. Great was the loss, which in our selves we sustained; and of
all loss; the greatest, that we had lost the feeling Ephesians. 4.19.
of our losses; and therefore very Divine was it requisite should be our
repairer who, before he could restore to us the power of our senses, must
qui^ken in us the sense of our weakness. Great was the dar^nesse, we had
brought upon our selves; being become, not only ignorant but dull: and
therefore very heavenly was it needful should be our instructor; who before he
should give us a lesson to learn, must give us an aptness whereby to learn.
This being a work of as high a value as our Creation; could not be performed
at a lower rate, then our redemption: and therefore, He which was above the
Angels, and equal with God; brought himself beneath the Angels, and equal
with man; that as to Gods infinite Justice, there might be an infinite
satisfaction; so for our Fleshes infinite Offense, there might be in our Flesh
an infinite desert. Thus sweet Jesus have thou purchased to us, a Power of
Access to the Throne of Grace: and thou have purchased to thy Fph. 3.12. Heb
4.16. Heb. 8.9. ^oh.16.14.
self, a Throne of Grace, to have power to say: Hitherto ye have asked
nothing in my Name; Ask, and ^eeshallreceive: and now, having given us a ri^ht
to ask; thou here instructest us, how to ask aright; least otherwise we
have the Event foretold us by Saint James; Ye ask and receive not, because
ye ask amiss. ^.
And indeed, None could so perfectly have informed us, how God must be prayed
to; None could so well have taught us, how man must be prayed for, as He; who
being God, as being the Son of God; and Man, as being the Son of Woman; had
both Colos. 2.3.
the fullness of Wisdom dwelling in him; and the Temptations of the Flesh
making assaults upon him. Certainly, O Lord, Thou were not only fittest: but
only fit to discharge this Office; being nothing agreeable for any to open his
mouth against sin; but for thee against whom sins mouth is stopped: and
only agreeable for thee to teach us, what words to say to thy Everlasting
Father; who art thy Fathers Everlasting Word. Often he gave ear, and Ier. 8.6.
Deuteronomy. 1.45. Zach. 7.13. Ier. 11.11. Esa. 1.15.
so foolish were we, that we spoke not: Often we spoke; and so offended was
he, that he gave no ear: but so divinely have thou performed thy office of
Mediation; making him, first Gracious to Hear; and now, us wise to speak:
that being offended with all but Thee; He is Reconciled to all, in Colos. 1.20.
Thee: and having through our transgressions (though never unmercifully just)
as it were no use of his Mercy: he has now, thorough thy satisfaction, (though
never unjustly merciful) as it were no work for his Justice.

O Immeasurable Bounty! there is not any thing so great but thou biddest us, to
ask it: and not any Mat. 21.22. Esa. 51.16.
thing we ask; but thou promisest us to grant it; and now, least we should
fear to ask; as not knowing how to ask: thou put words in our mouths;
and framest an Oration for our Tongues: that we can no longer doubt of the
speeches accepting; since the Prince that must hear it, is the Orator that
did pen it: and seeing thou can be no less gracious to the words of thy
mouth when thou hear them; then theu were to the works of thy hands when
thou beheldest them; we may be assured, thou can not choose but say, It is
exceeding good. Hear then, O Thou which hear where no sound is, the sound
of our souls sighing: and receive O merciful Father, in thy Fatherly Mercy,
the words which our tongues deliver, but our Hearts send: that seeing there
comes nothing to thee from us; but what came from thee to us; thou may
vouchsafe to hear, what thou art pleased we should say; and contented to
grant, what thou art willing we should ask.

If inquisitive thoughts; O my soul, shall curiously call in question: since
spoken to God, why so much? Since spoken from man, why no more? say thus unto
them: something to be said is needful, because from man, who is full of
need: much were superfluous; because to God, who knows all, and yet, as
(though never so short) his wisdom is such; it could not be obscure: so,
(though never so long) his graciousnesse is such, it should not be tedious.
With the length, or Elegancy of our Prayers; as he is not wearied; so he is
not delighted: but Devotion is the length: and Faith is the Eloquence which
while with persuasions they importune him; with importunity, they persuade him.

There is no set time appointed us, for the saying Luke 18.1
it; as well, be cause no time is to God more grateful as because, all times
are for us, most needful: It never comes out of season to him, with whom all
seasons are present at once: It never goes out of time from us; who never want
so much, that we have need, to say more, nor ever want so little, that we
have cause to say less: like to the Israelites Omer of Manna; which, how much
soever they gathered, Exodus 16. 8.
there was nothing over, and how little so ever, there was no want, But why
thould we talk of set times, for the saying of that, which it seems by St.
Paul is to be said at all times? For Christ says, When ye pray, 1 These. 15.17.
say thus, and St. Paul says, Pray continually. But what? shall our tongues
never lie still? and must we do nothing else, but pray? Such indeed, were the
Euchitae, who labored to maintain this opinion; but have the opinion of
Heretics for their labor. For, we may observe; St. Paul says not, Pray
continually with the Tongue; as though, that should never lie still: but Pray
continually; meaning, with that part, which does indeed, never lie still,
unless we be still borne; and that is the heart: for, as the heart, is in a
perpetual spiritual motion; and if that once cease, we have no longer any
life in our bodies: So it must be, in a perpetual spiritual motion; for if
that once cease, we have no longer any life in our souls. And think not this
an impossible matter for, as the perpetual corporal motion of the heart, is
the ordinary work of our Generation; so the perpetual spir tuall motion of
the heart, is as ordinary a work of our Regeneration. And this, was well
figured in the old law; where, though they did not continually offer
sacrifices; yet Fire, was continually burning upon the Altar, and never went
out: So, though we Levit 6. 12.
do not continually offer to God the calfes of our lips; yet the Fire of
devotion, and spiritual fervency must continually be burning in our hearts,
and never go out.

But seeing God understands the heart, as well as the tongue; and hears our
thoughts, as well as our words: what use is there of our tongues at all? or
what need we to say, any vocal Prayers? Yet there is great need, to use words
also; and many Reasons, if not all of absolute necessity; yet all, of necessary
congruity, to induce us to it. For, shall not words be acceptable to him, who
is himself the Word? God used words himself, in making the world for us; and
will he not expect words from us, in making our Petitions to him? But this
Reason, may be thought transcendent: we may therefore descend, and fly St.
Paul's pitch, that, as he says, The woman ought to cover her head, in the
Church, because of the Angels, so we ought 1 Cor. 11. 10.
to discover our thoughts by words, because of the Angels: for, Angels know not
our thoughts; but they hear our words; and when they hear our tongues, they
hope of our hearts; and in that hope, they rejoice: and we shall do well, as
much as we can, to give them cause of rejoicing: seeing they rejoice at no
cause so much, as at our well-doing. And if this reason still, be thought too
high: we may take another, as much too low; that we shall do well, to use
vocal pravers: if it be out only, to fright the devil. For, he sees not our
hearts, but he hears our tongues: and when he hears our words, because he
knows not our hearts; he fears they come from our hearts, and in that fear
he trembles: and we shall do well, as much as we can; to keep him under our
Fear: seeing he endeavors, as much as he can, to bring us under his Power.
But if these seem rather, Collateral benefits, then direct reasons, for using
of vocal prayers: yet this reason is without exception, that we must therefore
use them, because God himself requires them: as he says by Ezechiel Ezekiel
36 37.
to the Israelites, That he will be sought, and required of them, to perform
his mercies to them: and how should they require it of him, but by their
prayers? and the Prophet Hosea, to leave no place at all for doubt: delivers it
in plain terms: Takeunto you words, and Hosea 14. 3.
return unto the Lord, and say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive
us graciously: so shall we render the calfes of our lips. For, our words are
our calfes; and if we shall refuse to offer to God, our words in praying; it is
as much, as if in the old Law, they should have refused, to offer their calfes
in sacrificing. And there seems great reason for it. For, whereof is it fitter
to make the sacrifice; then of that, for which we make the sacrifice? and
therefore because our living bodies commit the sin: Saint Paul would have us
to offer up our Bodies, a living sacrifice: and seeing by words we commit
offenses: It is fit that b^ words we should seek forgiveness: and as the
hands are not washed but by the hands: so the tongue is not cleansed but by the
tongue. David praised God upon an Instrument of ten strings: and he would
never have told how many strings there were: but that, no doubt, he made use
of them all: God has given us Bodies, as it were Instruments of many strings:
and can we think it Music good enough for God to strike but one string? It
is said, where two or three are gathered together in thy Name, thou will grant
their requests: and we cannot make three, unless to our thoughts and actions
we join our words: and therefore David says: As well the Singers, as the
Players on Psalm. 87.7.
Instruments shall praise thee: that is, both our tongus and our hands;
meaning, both our words and deeds for, only these two appear to men, the
other which is the Heart, appears only to God: and this not unfitly may be
called Gods Consort: when the still sound of the Heart, by holy thoughts, and
the shrill sound of the tongue, by godly words: and the loud sound of the Hands
by pious works, do all Psalm. 10^.1.
join, and are gathered together to make a Music. Wherefore, O my soul,
since thou have so often said: O Lord open our lips, and our mouths shall show
forth thy Praise: Let others think it sufficient to think their Prayers: but
do thou keep company with David, and say, my lips shall speak thy Praise,
and my mouth shall entreat of thy word: and therefore Psalm. 87.7.
to be sure he would not be mistaken, he distinguishes them and says; O God,
my Heart is prepared, so is also my Tongue: I will sing and give praise. But
above all, the Example of Christ, is peremptory for it, who so commonly used
words in praying: that his very words are often recorded: and that, not praying
in public (where some misconceive, that words are only necessary) but even in
private and praying by himself alone.

And now O Lord, since thou have framed us a Prayer: of which we are assured,
that thou art pleased with the hearing it: gran^ unto us, that we may be
delighted with the saying it: and that our Zeal toward it, like true love,
which grows by the enjoying, may increase by the practicing; that the oftener
we say it, the more we may love it: and the more we love it, the oftener we may
say it; that whilst more meditation breeds more knowledge; and more knowledge,
more love; more love may bring forth more delight; and more delight, more
meditation. And whether our hearts b^e endyting a good matter, or whether our
tongues be the Pen of a ready writer: whether our spirits cry to thee in
silence: or whether our mouths deliver a vocal message: Vouchsafe O Lord, to
send unto us, as a token of thy gracious acceptance, the sweet blessing of a
steadfast faith, least failing in hope, we fail of our hope: and least
doubtfully praying, we be certainly denied: Iam. 1.6.
for as much, as what our faith presents not, thy mercy entertaines not, and as
thou art infinitely trusty, being absolutely trusted: so do thou certainly
fail being once suspected: and as ^elying on thy goodness, thou art better
then ou^ ^ope; so mistrusting thy kindness, thou art worse then our fear.

In delivering to us this pattern of praying: Thou teach us, first of all,
To whom to pray; Considering, that as the mark is the shooters level so the
hearer, is the speakers mark: and that Prayers offered to a wrong power, are
the great^st wrong that can be offered to the right Power; so far, from
procuring blessings, that they are the next way, to draw down curses. If there
were any power in Heaven or in Earth, that could challenge a share with thee:
thy Justice, I know, is of too just a measure to take all to thy self: and if
there were any, that could stand us instead, besides thy self alone: thy
wisdom, I am sure, is too infinite to have it hidden from thee, and thy
kindness, too gracious, to keep it hidden from us: and therefore, seeing thou
tellest us, but of one, I assure my self, there is no more: and seeing, thou
take it all, to thy self alone; to thee alone, will I give it all. In thee
only, is my confidence reposed; from thee only is my happiness expected: and
therefore, to thee only shall my vows be paid, and my prayers be directed.
When David says, Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and I require non^in in
Earth, besides thee: Do we think he speaks it as though he meant to be
singular by himself, and that none else should say it but he: or does he not
speak it rather in the person of all the faithful? and though there be in it
a private zeal of himself: yet is there in it also, a public Rule for us
all: and lest he should be thought to obtrude it to us, upon his bare word: he
remembers himself, and in another place, gives this reason: For, thou h^arest
prayer, therefore to thee shall all flesh come. Psalm. 65.2.
Thou hear prayer, as able to hear it: and thou hear prayer as willing
to hear it: Not only of us, not only here, not only now, but of all
persons, in all places, at all times, and all at once: which no power can do,
but only his power who is Omnipotent, God, which is all power: which, no love
will do, but only his love, whose love is his will: God, who is all love.

Thou have poasted me over to no Deputy, for the hearing it, neither requirest
that I should bring a spokesman, for the presenting it, but have commanded me,
to come my self: and to come to thee thy self. I cannot therefore rec^on the
doing it presumption, but duty: the not doing it, humility, but injury: and
account the Publicanes behavior, to be recorded, as well for our example, as
for our learning: who, though he thought himself unworthy to lift up his eyes
to heaven; yet he thought himself worthy Luke 18.13.
enough, to lift up his voice to God, and though the Pharisee were blamed for
presenting his works, yet the Publicane was not blamed for presenting his
prayers himself to God.

It is the glory of Princes, to have titles to express their greatness: but
it is thy glory, O God, to have a title to express thy love, and therefore
thou have given thy self a name, respecting more the subject, then the Prince:
and least it should be too big for us; thou have made it, too little for thy
self. Thou would not Psalm. ^4.10.
say, King of glory, least as beggars we should be out of countenance at thy
Majesty: nor Lord of Psalm. 84.1.
Hosts, least as enemies we should tremble at thy power; nor Judge of the
world, least as guilty we Psalm. 94.2.
should fear thy sentence: but thou call thy self, our Father: the lowest
name, that humility could descend unto, and yet the highest, that love could
aspire unto; to give us as being thy children, as well courage to ask as
assurance to speed: and to read us a lesson, as well of boldness to approach
to thee, as in approaching to thee of reverence.

The dear bargains, wherewith thou have purchased this name, are evident
tokens of the dear account, wherein thou hold it: and it is an easy labor
to find, how much thou do make of man; if we do but look how much thou
did labor to make man: for there went more, to Faciamus hominem, then to the
making of all the world besides. And as thou did show more love by more
labor, in thy creating us; so thou have showed more love by more cost, in thy
redeeming us: for, thou gave thy begotten son, to make us thine adopted
sons, and were contented he should call us Brother, to the end, we might call
thee Father, and sentest him, of a message into hell, to provide us of a
passage into heaven.

As thy mercy was infinite, of enemies to make us children; so thy bounty is
immeasurable, of children to make u^ heirs: and though not all, heirs in an
equality; yet all, with so unpartiall a partition, that none shall have so
much, to leave less for the rest; nor none shall have so little, to desire
more from the other: None shall be so exalted, to envy others as mean: nor
none shall be so mean, to envy others as exalted; but every one to be owner
of so goodly an Inheritance, that to survay the greatness, we must have
cleerer eyes: and to conceave the excellency, diviner hearts. Thou have
vouchsa^ed us the honor, to be thy children; Vouchsafe us the Grace also, to
be thine obedient children; that as thou gloriest, in expressing thy love to
us, so we may glory in performing our du^ies to thee; and that, though our
fore^athers gave thee cause, to repent thee of creating man; yet we their
posterity, may give thee no cause to repent thee of adopting man.

But why say we, Our Father? as though this prayer, were made only to be said
in company? for if we say it, by our selves alone, what reason is there, to use
the word of number? as though we meant to make God believe, that many of us
come sutours to him at once; when it is none, but our selves alone. Or may we
think, that Christ taught this prayer to his Di^iples, as they were together,
and they being many, he was necessarily to use a word of number: but if he had
taught it to one alone, he would have taught him to say, My father, and not Our
Father? But is it not that prayer, and specially this prayer, is not a common,
or rather is not a private speech; but must be said, as well in charity as in
faith: and charity can abide no singular numbers; it is against her nature, to
be without company; and company she will find to join with her in pra^ing,
th^ugh she say her prayers by her self alone. Indaed prayer without company,
is like Samy^ Without his hair; it is not strong enough to break the cords of
sin, with which we lie bound. And what is this company but the Communion of
Saints? of whom, we have not always the corporal presence, but always the
spiritual: and though they be often disioyned from us in place, yet are they
always joined with us in love and charity: and to express this Communion, and
to communicate this charity; we are justly commanded to say, Our Father: as,
then our prayers being most effectual for our selves, when in them, we show
our selves most affectionate toward others. And as in our charity we desire,
that God will hear our prayers in behalf of others: So in our hope, we may
expect, that God will hear the prayers of others, in behalf of us: and then,
do but consider the benefit of this word, how infinitely by it, our charity
returns multiplied unto us: for when we say, Our Father, including our
brethren: Our brethren, that is, the whole Church says, Our father, and
includes us. Let no man therefore presume to come to God, with saying, My
father, as though he meant to engrosse God to himself, and to enjoy him alone:
but let us in communion of Saints, say Our Father; that praying as we are
taught, we may be heard as we are promised.

And as we have this reason, out of the bond of love to draw us: so we have a
stronger reason, out of the bond of necessity, to compel us to say, Our
Father: for as charity will not be without her fellows: so faith cannot be
without her Master, and this Master is Christ, whom we must take along with us
in our prayer: or else all praying will be in vain. For we are not naturally
the children of God: God knows we are far from it: we are all by nature, the
children of wrath: Christ only is his natural son: and it is a natural
son only, that has right, originally to say Father: Adopted sons have
their right, but derived from him: We therefore, that are only adopted in
Christ, have no right to call God Father, but only in Christ: and as in him we
have received the honor of our adoption: so from him, we learn the use of our
adoption; for as he has made us to become children, so he teaches us, what
becomes us to do as children; that if we will obtain any thing at Gods hands,
we must ask it in his Name, in whom we are adopted and made children: and
where, in all this prayer (in which we ask all things) do we ask any thing
in Christ's name, but only in these words, by saying, Our Father? for if we
come with saying, My Father; we leave Christ clean out, and come not at all in
his Name, and so, have neither warrant to call God Father, nor promise to
receive his blessing: but when we say Our Father; as we challenge the adoption,
so we acknowledge the Author, and in these two only words, we express the
three great virtues, Faith Hope, and Charity: In the word Father, our Hope: In
the word Our; our Charity: and in the words Our Father, our Faith in Christ, in
whom he is our Father. Let no man therefore presume upon saying, My Father, as
though he came to God in his own right: and stood upon his own greatness
with him: bu^ let us come in the Name of Christ, by saying Our Father; that,
praying in his Name as he has taught us, we may obtain for his sake, as he
has promised us.

But is God then, Our Father in general: and as it were in Gross, and is he
not the Father of every one of us in particular? I believe, that I am a child
of God; and must I not believe that God is my Father? No doubt you must; and
you must not doubt it: but it is not all one, to believe that God is my Father,
and to pray to God, by saying My Father: for my believing is only in Faith,
but my praying mast be also in Charity: neither yet can I pray in faith, by
saying, My Father: seeing my faith, that God is my Father, is only in Christ,
and Christ is between God and me: so I cannot come to God, and say My Father,
unless I put Christ by: for, if I take Christ with me, I must needs say Our
Father: and therefore, when Christ taught this prayer to his Dis^iples, though
in the sentence before, he said Mat. 6. (...).
as speaking to one alone, Pray unto thy Father: yet when he delivers the
prayer, he alters the number, and bids them say, Our Father: so, I may truly
say, I pray unto my Father; but I do not duly pray, if I say not Our Father.

We have not done with saying Our Father, until we have said, Which art in
Heaven, that so, his humility may bring us to his Majesty, his love may lead us
to his bounty: for, as before he abased himself in Name, to exalt us; so here
he streightens himself in Place to enlarge us: and to make us desirous of
Heaven, as of the only home, for his children; he restrains himself to
Heaven, as to the only mansion of his being. But is not this word Heaven, as
strangely placed here amongst these words; as Heaven it self is placed above
in the height of the Firmament? For, what words of greater neerenesse, then
Father and Children? yet what words of greater separation, then Heaven and
Earth? who nearer to us, then Our Father? what further from us, then to be in
Heaven? but, least these words Our Father, should breed too great a familiarity
in us; these words Which art in Heaven; are justly inferred, to make us keep a
distance. And yet in truth, it is such a distance as does not so much divide
us, as (that which is strange) the very familiarity does estrange us. For as
considering God in heaven, we have just cause to be astonished with admiration,
at the greatness of his Majesty: So, considering him our Father; we have
iuster cause to admire him with astonishment, for the greatness of his love:
and so, while familiarity, where it finds effects of defect, breeds cause of
contempt: Here, where it finds cause of admiration, it breeds effects of
Respect.

And may we not find, some other treasure wrapped up, in these words: Which art
in Heaven? For when we say, Our Father; It carries the mind in an ambiguity:
and if we apply it to God; This is yet a transcendent, and gives no period to
our understanding: but when we add, Which art in Heaven; This both determines
the ambiguity, and limits the transcendency, and so the mind has something now
in certain, whereupon to fix it self: which though it afford not a visible
symbol, to represent Gods person to our sight; (which the Israelites sought so
grossly, in their golden Calfe: and many since do seek as vainly, in their
painted and carved Images:) yet it affords the visible place of Gods presence;
and this serves sufficiently, both to elevate the mind; and also to fix the
understanding: for, we no sooner have a thought of God, but the mind has
presently recourse to Heaven, as fixing it self upon the place, where he is
visible: seeing upon the visibility of himself, it cannot.

And is it not another cause, why we say, Which art in Heaven; to make us know,
that God is no where to be spoken withal but in Heaven? For, if our thoughts
when we pray stay grovelling about the earth, and our words rather fall from our
mouths, then rise from our hearts: hough God (no doubt) may hear such prayer,
by the extent of his Power: yet he hears it not graciously, by extending his
grace: for Earth is not the place, where he gives Audience; but he has placed
his Throne in Heaven, where he sits both in Majesty and in merc^: and though
his mercy continually descend to us, yet his Majesty requires, we should come
thither to him: For, as to pray to any but God, is Coram non Iudice: so to pray
any where but in Heaven, is Coram non Tribunali. Although therefore, our feet be
fastened to the earth, and cannot ascend; yet our hearts, are at liberty, and
may: and must indeed I am. 3. 41.
ascend, if we will truly pray: for this ascending of the soul in praying is
the soul of praying; which puts a life into our words and thoughts, and carries
them thither, where it is it self: and as the brethren of Joseph; could find
no favor, without bringing their brother Benjamin with them: so, our hearts
are the Benia^in, we must bring to God; without which, neither our words are
gracious, in his hearing; nor our selves, acceptable in his sight. Wherefore, O
my soul, when thou go to pray; put away from thee all carnal cogi^ations,
and raise thy self up by ascending into heaven; Fixing thy self steadfastly
upon the Throne of God: and never once offer to open thy mouth, until thy
heart be first fixed there: that thou may present thy suit unto him, pure and
freed (as in earthen Vessels it can) from Earthly mixture: and then, as thy
heart has ascended up to Heaven, so the blessings of Heaven shall descend upon
thee, and either bring with them, the things thou prayest for, or greater: for,
never any Heart did knock at Heaven gate, which had it not opened, nor sought
any thing in Heaven, which it did not find: For, though his Majesty make his
mercy, to keep state, yet his mercy makes his Majesty to become gracious: and
he never denied the suite of any, that came so far as Heaven to ask it.

But thou art not, O Lord, in Heaven only; who art in all places, wholly: and
though no Psalm. 139. 7.
where as contained, yet every where as present; and though thou take up no
room, with thy being and power; yet thou fillest all rooms, (...) 23 24.
with thy power and being. But when we say, Which art in Heaven, we must not
stay, at the Heavens, where we see with our eyes, the two great Eyes of Heaven,
the Sun and the Moon: nor yet at the starry Heaven; though, that be the
uttermost object of our sight: but there are other Heavens, which Solomon calls
the Heavens of Ch^o. 2. 6.
Heavens: whose height is so great, that it may rather be admired, then can be
conceaved: yet are they not high enough to hold God: but David is feign to go
higher, and says, He is exalted Psalm. 57.5. Ephesians. 4.10.
above the Heavens: and though the highest Heavens have their bounds; yet this
exaltation has none, but how high soever we conceave, it is still higher, then
that we conceave. And why then do we say, Which art in Heaven? Not that he is
no where else, but that he is no where else in so great glory. And is he not in
as great glory on Earth? seeing it is said, as well of Earth, as of Heaven:
Heaven and Earth are full of the majesty of thy glory. Nay, is he not in hell
also in great glory? seeing David says; If I go^ dow^ into Hell, thou art
there also: and God is no where without his glory; but is glorified, in the
punishment of the damned, as he is in the happiness of the Angels. We may
therefore understand it, that God is therefore said to be in Heaven, because
he is there visibly present, and amongst his most glorious Creatures. And this
is a reason, why not only properly; but properly, only, God is said to be in
heaven: seeing in this manner, he never was on earth, nor can be: for, No man
can see God and live, much less can he be in this manner, in Hell: for, how
can the vision of God, (which is the cause of all happiness) be had there,
where nothing is had but anguish and torment? but in Heaven it is had: for, not
only the Angels but the Saints of God, behold his Face: and this is that,
which makes the heavens, to be a heaven of heavens: (for, the heavens which his
hands made, shall be dissolved: but the heavens which his Face makes, shall be
for ever) and were able to make even hell also, to be a heaven; if that were
capable to receive it.

But how do we know, that God is any more in heaven, then any where else? or
that he is in heaven, or any where else at all? O my soul, take heed of
coming so near, to be the fool that David speaks of though thou say not in
thy heart, There is no God yet to let thy tongue, but make it a question. For
does not David tell us Psalm. 19.1.
that the heavens tell ^s: The Heaven^ declare the glory of God, and the
Firmament shows his handyworke^ as much as to say, The heavens declare, that
there is a glorious God, and the Firmament is a work that shows him to be
the workman The heavens indeed declare it so plainly, by Romans 1.20.
the heavenly bodies, that in them, as in plain letters, and characters, we
may even read not only that God is, but that he is there. But if the heavens
declare it never so plainly, and we will not take notice, or believe their
declaration; what are we the better? For, will thou believe that the Stars,
which thou see as small as sparks; are bigger, yea much bigger, then the
whole earth? and then, what a world of worlds must there be in the starry
heaven, which yet are all as nothing, compared to the magnitude of the greater
heavens? Will thou believe, that the motion of the Sun, which yet seems to
stand still; is swifter, yea manifold swifter, then a ^let from a Canon? and
yet is slownesse, compared to the swiftness of the Primum Mobile? Will thou
believe that the earth as great as it is, is yet but a point or center to the
starry heaven? and that the starry heaven is so high above us; that though the
sight of our eyes, can reach unto it, in an instant; yet the swiftnes of a
hundred miles a day, cannot reach unto it, in a thousand years? and yet is
hard by, compared to the distance of the highest heavens? All which and many
the like, though they exceed our capacity, yet they exceed not our knowledge;
and though they be so strange, that theymake both art suspected, and nature,
astonished; yet are they so certain, that they are demonstrable. And this is a
great ascent from earth to heaven, and yet an easy one: for, we know these
wonders of the heavenly bodies, as perfectly, b^ing on earth, as if we were in
heaven to see them. But it is a far greater ascent, from heaven to God, and
yet a far easier: For, who can choose but know, the first cause to be
omnipotent; which has made second causes, so excessively potent? Who can choose
but acknowledge the Creator to be infinite, who has made Creatures, that to
our capacity, are themselves infinite? And therefore, the author of the Book
of Wisdom, speaking in proof of the Wisd. 13.50.
deity, waiveth all other reasons, and insists upon this, That by the
greatness of the creatures, and of their beauty, the Creator being compared
with them, may be considered. God indeed, has reserved the sight of himself,
until our eyes shall put on Immortality; but the sight of his dwelling, he
has afforded to our mortal eyes: that, though in it we cannot see his person;
yet by it, we may be assured of his being; and of his being there. For, as when
we see a building, of invaluable value, we presently conceive it, to be the
Palace of a Prince: so, when we see the Frame of heaven, so full of wonders;
(where S^arres are but as dust, and Angels are bu^ Nah. 3.1.
servants; where every word is unspeakeable, and ever^ motion is a miracle) we
may plainly know it, to ^e the dwelling of him whose name is Wonderful. For,
who is fit to inhabit such a house, but he only who inhabiteth eternity? and
who fit to be Master of such servants; but he who was a Master, before he had
servants; that is, he only, who only is?

But why does God write himself of heaven; which how glorious soever it be, is
but of a late building? For, no doubt, God had a dwelling, and a place to be
in, before he made heaven; and he should rather write himself of his ancient
mansion place, then of his new seat. But, O my soul, be sober: For, where
thou think, that God had a place to be in, before he made heaven; thou art
even in that deceived: for, how could he have a place to be in, when place it
self had yet no being? For, as heaven and earth were twins, created both at
once; so time and place were twins, made both together; and all of them for
the use of the creatures; none of them, for any use to God: for, God being
eternal, has no use of time: and being infinite, can have no place: but out
of eternity, by his omnipotent Power, he produced Time: and out of
infiniteness he produced place; for, no use to himself, but in relation to
his creatures. If therefore thou would comprehend where God was, before he
made heaven; thou must comprehend infiniteness, which were not infinite, if it
could be comprehended. And yet as no place is great enough to hold God, so none
is small enough to exclude him: for he is place to himself; he is place
himself; as David Psalm. 32.7.
says, Thou art my place to kide me in: and it is one of the names which the
Jews attribute to God; that he is called, Maquom; that is to say, Place. Yet
it is happy for us that God writes himself to be in heaven, because we know
now where to find him; least otherwise we might wander infinitely, in the
search of him, and be never the near: not, that heaven limits Gods ubiquity;
but that it regulates our capacity: for, as one said well, in another sense,
Qui ubique est, nusquam est: so certainly, if we knew nothing of Gods being
any where; but that he is every where; we might easily fall into the error, to
think he were no where. Justly therefore does God write himself of heaven;
now that he styles himself Our Father: seeing he therefore made heaven,
because he intended to be our Father, that there might be one House to hold
both Him and his Children; and that where he is, we might be Ioh. 14.3.
also: for to be with God, where God was, before he made the world, or where he
now is; above, or without the world, is utterly impossible, for men or Angels
to attain to.

But why say we, Our Father which art in heaven, and say not rather, Our
heavenly Father? seeing by that we tell only where God is; but by this we
might tell what he is: By that, we name only his place, but by this we might
name his substance. But we must not be so hasty, in expounding of Gods word;
much less, in determining of his Nature: for, where in many places of the
Gospel, he is called, Our heavenly Father; It intends no more then that which
is here said, Which art in Heaven: for to express the substance of God is
absolutely impossible for man to do, or rather is absolutely impossible to be
done, for man to conceive: for if it could have been done: It is likely, God
would have done i^to to Moses, when (being sent of his dangerous message) he
asked him his name: for to ask him his name is to ask him his nature, and his
substance. Yet God told him nothing but this, I am that I am: shewi^g thereby
only that he is, and has abeing; and that he only is and has a being: and
farther then this, we cannot go in expressing his substance. But when we say,
that God is, and has a being; we must not think it, to be such a being as
ours is; but his being is intimated, by his Name Jehovah: which therefore the
Jews justl^ conceive to be unspeakable; because it would speak that, which
is unconceivable; for this word, in three letters, (...) ( Iod, He, and Vau,)
expresses the three times of being; Fuit Est, and Erit; all which in Gods
being, are in being at once, and therefore Gods Est, is a participle, as St.
John makes it, (...): and the Hebrews Hove: because it partaketh both of Fuit
and Erit: for as it never leaves Fuit; so it never tarries for Erit: but both
Fuit and Erit; (was and shall be) are still present in Gods Est; as they are
all within the compass of his Name Jehovah. But with us, it is nothing so; our
being is expressed by Est; a plain verb. It partaketh neither of Fuit, nor of
Erit: for, Fuit is already dead; and Erit is not yet alive, and so our being,
God knows, hangs but by a slender thread: It has not three times at once; for
it has no time at all: it is only in Instanti, and Instans is no more Tempus
then Punctum is linea. But if our being, be so near a not being; how is then
the soul immortal? Not with that true immortality, which keeps Fuit in
possession still; and has Erit always to come, yet always present: but our
immortality, is only by the motion and succession of our Est, moved forward
continually, by the immortal Psalm. 66.9.
hand of God: for if God should not continually and every moment move forward
our Est: both our immortality, and even our being, would instantly be at an
end, as it is justly said; In him we move and have our being: or rather, as the
word indeed is, In him ((...)) we are moved, and continue being. That it is no
marvel, St. Paul says of God, that he only is immortal; seeing his
immortality is, from and in himself: our immortality, from and in him: yet as
his immortality cannot cease because it is his Essence; so our immortality
shall not cease, because it is his pleasure. But all this while, we are no
further in the discovery of Gods substance, then where we began, that he only
is, and has a being; so that hi^herto we might be heathen Philosophers, for
they could call God Ens En^ium; and for ought appears yet, we go no further.
And indeed, if we shall seek to go further: shall we n^r perhaps, not go so
far? For, God has given us a skantling of his Nature, when he says, I am
that I am: and this skantling we must maintain: unless therefore we can find
something, that has as great a latitude as being; we cannot justly give it
place in Gods Nature. And such something, we cannot find: for, To be
Eternal: to be Insinit: to be almighty: have great latituds, the greatest we
can conceive; and greater then we can conceive: yet none of them, nor all of
them, have so great a latitude as to be: and therefore whatsoever we shall add
to his being, will but diminish the extent of his being; and there must be, no
Terminus Diminuens, in expressing Gods Nature, if we do him right. And if we
go another way to work, and call him good: do we not leave the best, for some
other? and if we call him best; as the ancients called him Optimus Maximus;
does not this imply, some other must be good; which Christ says, there is
none? And if we think to mend the matter with abstracts; and say, He is
goodness it self, and he is wisdom it self; shall we not in so doing, make
him a substance of Qualities? Or can we fix qualities, and make them to become
substances at our pleasures? that seeing our capacities, cannot reach so high,
as God; we will pull God down as low as our capacities? And why is all this?
but because, we will be giving him Names of our own devising: as though we
could do with God, as Adam did with the Creatures: give them Names expressing
their Natures? God has given himself a Name, and spoken it peremptorily; that
Exodus.(...).15: and 15.3.
it should be his Name for ever: and because it is a word made all of
Consonants; we cannot pronounce it: and because it is a Noune made all of
verbes, we cannot conster it; and what can we think is meant by this? but
that his Name is therefore accounted unspeakeable, and therefore unconstruable;
that his nature may be conceived unconceivable, and acknowledgd unsearchable.
So that still we are no further in discovery of Gods Nature; then where we
began: that his Name is Jehovah: that is, that he only is, and has a being;
and further then this, it seems we cannot go. And indeed, what hope can there
be, of finding out his Nature; when that, by which we look to find it; is it
self the means, to hide it from us? for, we have a little light to see it by;
and it is light only that makes it invisible to our sight: as David says, He
covers himself Psalm 104. 2.
with light, as with a garment. O great God, how miraculous is thy Nature, who
art hidden with light, obscured with glory, seen in invisiblenesse, and
understood only, by passing all understanding.

But though we have no capacity, to find out the substance, and Nature of God;
yet God has revealed unto us, some miraculous secrets of his Nature; that we
may hereafter know him, and here admire him. And first, that incomprehensible
mystery, of the Trinity in Unity, that he is Three, and yet but One. For, that
he is but One, Zach. 14.9.
appears plainly by his answer to Moses. For, when there are many of one
kind, names are necessary to distinguish them: but when there is but one,
there needs no name; the very Essence is name sufficient: when Moses therefore
asked God his Name, he returned him answer by his Essence, I am that I am.
And that he is more then one, may justly be gathered from his own speech:
Faciamus hominem ad Imaginem nostram: which plainly implies, not so much, a
singularity of Majesty; but much rather, a plurality of Persons. And being more
then One; that they are but Three, and that Three they are; is revealed also to
us, by St. John, where he says, There are three bear record in Heaven; The
Father, the Word, and the holy Ghost: and these three are one. And but for
fear of profaneness, I could here borrow an Argument, from some
Philosophers, who thought God a Number. For certainly, if he be a Number, He
must needs be the first perfect Number, and that is Three. For, One is no
number; being less, multiplied by it self; then added to it self, and Two is
but imperfect, being but equal; whether multiplied by it self, or added: but
Three is more, multiplied then added, which is the true Perfection of a Number.

One other Miraculous secret in Gods Nature, seems revealed to us by St. John,
where he says, that God is love: for certainly, if he be love, he is all
love: seeing God is not any thing in part; and is not this miraculous? we may
conceive that God is just and that he is merciful; and we may perhaps
conceive, that he is justice it self; and that he is mercy it self; but to
conceive, that he is all justice, and yet all mercy; that he is all wisdom,
and yet all power; that he is totally so many things, and yet distinctly but
one thing; this is that, we cannot conceive, yet this we must conceive before
we can conceive what the Substance of God is. What have we then to say here,
but as Christ said: With man it is impossible, but with God all things are
possible; with man, whose understanding is only perpendicular, and measures
all things by straight lines; It is impossible: but with God, with whom circles
Esa. 42. 16.
are straight lines, and straight lines are Angles; both this and all things
else are possible. And what remains then for us to do; but seeing we know God
now, but in Aenigmate; and shall know him hereafter, Facie ad Faciem; that we
beat not our brains to expound this Riddle before the time, but that
contenting our selves to sit in the cloud, till he remove it up and shine upon
us: we acknowledge him to be infinite; and not to be measured, to be eternal,
and not to be comprehended: to be all wisdom, and not to be understood, to be
all mercy, and not to be conceived; to be all power, and never to be enough
magnified; to be all glory and never to be enough adored.

But may we not make some further use of these words, Which art in Heaven?
that knowing now where God is: we may seek and strive to go thither, if we
desire to be with him. It is enough for God, that he has descended into
Heaven, as David says, It is a descent to him, to see the things Psalm. 113 6.
in Heaven: we must not look that he will come any lower: It is our turn now,
to ascend up to him. It is true, he sent once his only son to us on earth;
but his entertainment was so ill, that he had not one pleasing day in his
whole life, but was Vir Dolorum a man of sorrows, all Esa. 53.3.
the time he was amongst us: but it shall not be so with us in going to
heaven; for if once we come there, we shall desire to continue there still and
never to come from thence any more. For this is the true Hic whereof Peter
spoke, when he spoke in Ecstasy, Bonum est esse Hic; It is good being here; let
us make three Tabernacles, one for Christ, another for Moses, and another for
Elias. Not Hic: here on Earth; the being here, God knows, is not so good, to
be worth making Tabernacles: Nor Hic: here on the Mount, as it were between
ler. 51.53. lob 20.6.
earth and heaven: for, though we mount never so high; It is but as an
apparition; there is no stability in it: but Hic; here in heaven; where Christ
has a Tabernacle, not made with Heb. 9. 11.
hands; sufficient to hold, both Moses and Elias, and us all. And it may be
mervailed how Moses and Elias were ever gotten to come from thence; to meet
Christ on the Mount; but that we may consider, they did not wholly leave heaven,
when they came to visit the Lord of heaven; in whose presence are the joys of
heaven. And yet perhaps a further matter in it; that seeing the Law, and the
Prophets reach to Christ's suffering, It was fit that Moses and Elias,
representing the law and the Prophets, should come to Christ, before his
suffering: or rather, seeing Christ was to be Author of a new Testament, and
was shortly to have it sealed: It was fit that Moses and Elias representing the
Old Testament, should come in person, and make their surrender. Enough has
been said, to make us long to be there: but how shall we do to get thither?
For there seems as great a space to be passed; as the Gulf between Dives
and Abraham's bosom. This must be the work of the Petitions following: for if
we can follow them well; we shall quickly overtake Moses, whatsoever we do
Elias; and come to heaven (in body) as soon as he; though he be gone so many
hundred years before us.

Here offers it self a note, which though it may seem of small note; yet
because nothing is small in the Word of God; whereof one jot shall not pass:
It may not be passed over without observing: that, where it is said: Which art
in Heaven; and where it is said, In Earth as it is in Heaven: in both places we
have in our translation, but only the singular number: whereas in the
original, and in most other languages, the first is put in the plural number:
which expression, may not perhaps be without some mystery; seeing one heaven
holds all Angels, but all heavens cannot hold one God: or rather, seeing the
Angels are in heaven, as defined by place; but God is in the heavens; as being
in all places, but defined by none: which our language might express also, if
it pleased: but that it follows the mother tongue, which cannot express it,
if it would: the word for heaven in the Dutch tongue, having no plural number:
as in the Hebrew Tongue it has no singular number.

It is a great honor, to be the son of a Prince; and the greater the Prince
is, the greater the honor, to be his son: O^hen, my soul what honor is it
to thee, t^ be the son of him, who is the Prince of Princes; whose Kingdom
is everlasting, and po^er i^init? Can thou think this, and not with Paul be
^apt ^p into the third heaven, in an ecstasy? Can thou ^ay this, and not with
Zachary be stru^n dumb with amazement? God, the Almighty and Incompreh^n ible
God, the God of all Glory and Majesty, (...) our Father? The Angels were
created in great glory, yet are but ministering Spirits: We, Job 4. 19.
Dust and Ashes, and dwell in houses of clay: and for us, to be the children
of him, whose dwelling is in heaven! O most admirable promotion to us, if it be
not more admirable unworthiness in us, that we admire it not which is so
admirable. But it may be no question why we admire it not: because without
question, we apprehend it not: for, if we did truly apprehend what it is, to
be the sons of a Father, which is in heaven: we could not choose but skorne
all humane things, as mean; all earthly things as base: and think it a shame
for them, who shall one d^y come to fit with him in his Throne, to lie always
grovling about his Footstool. Re^. 3. 21.
But the Angels apprehended it, and therefore admired it; and as holy as they
were, some of them could not choose but envy it: and from our rising, took
their fall. Which fell out well for ou^ experience: for, by the consideration
of their falling, we come to conceive a certainety: to see plainly a
probability of our own rising. For, why is it more s^range, that heavy things
should ascend, then that light things should descend? that men who are of
Earthy mould, should be lift^d up into the high^st Heavens; then that Angels
who are of Heavenly substance, were cast down into the nethermost earth?
unl^sie we think, that Gods love toward children, is not so powerful, as his
anger against servants? or that his arm is not so strong, in lifting up, as in
casting down? Wherefore, O my soul; if thou wonder, how it will be possible,
for ^his heavy body of thine to be raised out of the dust; and to rise to so
high a place as heaven; thou may leave thy wondering, if thou do but consider
how it was possible that the light substances of the Angels were cast down
into so l^w a place as hell? For as God brought a grossness upon the
lightness of their su^stances which made them descend; so he will bring a
lightness upon the grossness of our bodies which will make us ascend.

But it was after the fall of Angels, that God said to man: Earth thou art and
to earth thou shall return: but not a word spoken of his coming to heaven. It
is true: for, those words were spoken by God, as a Judge: Our coming to
Heaven, is not spoken by him, but as a Father; and those words, are reserved
for his Son, the Word it self, to deliver to us: and indeed the word delivered
them to us in Deed, when the word was made flesh: for, when the Son of God,
^ook upon him our flesh, then our flesh took notice of being made the sons
of God, and then the Kingdom of heaven was preached to all believers: and this
dignity of our Nature, is a maine object of the devils envy: for, why else
should the devil, bear more malice to men then to all other creatures, as we
see apparently he does? for he will never go into swine; if he can possibly'
get into men: and when he does go, it is but to hurt men, that when he cannot
hurt them in their persons; he will yet like lame malice do them what hurt he
can in their goods. Thus the greatness of this dignity, which we cannot see
in the light; we may discern in the dark: for, how can we choose but know it,
to be exceeding great which nourishes malice even in devils? For certainly if
the devils knew nothing, of any such dignity ordained for men in the world to
come: they would never do as they do; never trouble themselves so much, to
trouble men so much in this present life, thereby to hinder them from the glory
to come. And are not some men beholding to the devil, in this? who seeking to
hinder us from the glory to come in the life hereafter, makes it manifest, that
there is a glory to come in a life hereafter, from which we may be hindered.
Which if some men otherwise will not easily believe; yet this way at least they
can hardly deny. And even this were enough to breed this faith in an Infidel;
that there shall be certainly a life after this, seeing we may be sure the
devil would never take such pains for nothing; he is not so idle, to be so
busy for trifles: and he would never be so violent in seeking to draw men into
sin: if there were not some great matter to be gotten by their sinning. And
what can the devil get, by the sins of men, but only the satisfying of his
own malice? and how is his malice satisfied, but in their miseries? and what
miseries have wicked men in this life, who are rather the favorites of the
world, and as David says, They are not in trouble as other men, neither are
they plagued like Psalm. 73. 5. lob 21. 7, 8.
other men. There must therefore undoubtedly be another world, where wicked men
shall be miserable, and where the devils malice shall take effect. For, though
the hurt of the devil, be all taken in this life; yet it is not fully felt
till another life, which if there were none, It should be skarce felt at all.
For, as a man that is wounded in his heat, feels not the wound till he come
to be cold: so we skarce feel the wounds of the devil as long as the heat of
life is in us, but when we come to be cold, and are laid in the cold earth,
then begins the smart of his wounds: and then we feel it when we seem to be
past all feeling: and if this were not so, there should be none in the world
more happy then the wicked, there should be none more miserable then the
godly; there should be none a verier fool then the devil: we may therefore be
as affured, that there is a life to come after this; as we are assured that the
devil is no f^ole, that godly men are not miserable; that wicked men are not,
nor can be happy. And though it be no thank to the devil that we learn this
from him; yet it will be worth thanks if we can learn it: for, who that is
truly persuaded of a life after this, where the godly shall be happy, and the
wicked miserable; will not endeavor, and with all earnestness endeavor to
lead his life so, that he may die the death of the righteous; and not suffer
the transitory things of this world, which are but as a mess of Jacobs Potage;
to withdraw his mind from the respect of his Birthright; which is to sit with
Christ at his Fathers Table.

But for all this, are we indeed satisfied in our consciences, that God is our
Father, and that we are his Children? may we not be mistaken as the Jews were,
who thought themselves sure enough that Abraham was their father; yet Christ
Ioh.8.39.
proves plainly they were deceived: For if (says he) ye were the children of
Abraham, ye would do the works of Abraham: which because they did not do,
they could be none of his children, for all their boasting. And does not God
say the same to us? If I be your father, where is my love? ^.
and to love God, in Gods own exposition, is to keep his Commandments. If
therefore we do as God commands us, we may be bold to call him Father: but if
we keep not his Commandments, we may look us out another father; we shall
be but Terrae filii at the best, and never be admitted into the number of
Gods Children. And were not this a miserable negligence to loose the honor of
so divine a Parentage as to be Gods Children; and to loose the hope of so
glo^ious an Inheritance, as to be heirs with Christ, only for want of loving
him? Consider then, O my soul the great cause St Paul had to be so resolute;
and do thou join with him in resolution; that neither life, nor death, nor
Angels, nor Principalities; nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor death, nor any other cre^ture, shall be able to separate us from the love
of God, which is in Christ.

But O my soul, if thou will indeed be resolute to do it; can thou do it?
Can thou love God when thou listest, and at thy own pleasure? It is a plain
Argument indeed of Gods love to us; that he is our Father: but it is no
argument of our love to God, that we be his Children: seeing experience has
made it a Proverb; That love does descend but not ascend. Gods love comes
easily to us because it descends; but how should our love come to God, which
against its nature must ascend? St. John indeed, in saying, We love Ioh. 4 19.
God, because God loved us first; seems to show a reason for it; but Christ
gives the reason of it, where he says, No man can come unto me, except Ioh. 6.
44.
the Father draw him. St. John shows the motion of a motive, but Christ gives
the force of a cause; and less would not serve: for our love to God is very
Iron; and were never able to ascend if Gods love to us were not a most perfect
Adamant.

But what say the children of Belial? God says Deuteronomy 13.13. Mal. 1.6.
to us, If I be your Father, where is my honor? that is, where is our
honoring of him? and may not we say to God, If we be his children, where is
our love? that is, where is his love to us? For, when men are constrained to
eat their bread in the sweat of their brows, where is the loving kindness of
a Father? Nay, when men are feign to beg from door to door, where appear
their childrens portions? Nay, when men lie in prisons, ready to sterve with
cold and hunger; what likelihood is there of their being heirs? These things
are often so indeed: yet are such men never the further off from being the true
Children of God: For, St. Paul labored with his hands to get his living; yet
no man doubts but he was undoubtedly a dear child of God: And Lazarus lay
begging at Dives gate among the Dogs: yet he was approved to be a child of God;
by being received into Abraham's bosom. What shall we say then? Is the love of
God a ^ree that bears no better fruit? Or, are these the Inheritances he
provides for his Children? But, O my soul, thou must remember what thou have
said Our Father which art in Heaven. For we shall wrong both God and our
selves, if we expect our inheritance in a wrong place; for, where our Father
is, there must our inheritance be expected: and seeing our Father is in heaven;
we must look for an inheritance in heaven, and not on earth. And certainly,
when men are so hasty to receive their portions, in this life: It is a very
presaging sign, they have none to receive in the life that is to come. For,
what did Abraham tell Dives was the cause he could not be recei^ed into his
bosom? but because he had received, Bona sua, his portion in his life time.
But was Abraham a fit man to tell him so? who had received more goods, then
ever he had done; yet he could come, not only to be in heaven himself, but to
be himself a heaven for others to be in. We must therefore know that Abraham
though he received more riches, or more honors; yet he received them not, as
Bona sua: they were things he looked not much after, nor set his heart upon
them; the goods he looked and longed after was Videre Diem Domini; to see the
day of Christ, and he saw it: and in that was all his joy. And indeed, seeing
we are bu^children children adopted in Christ, and to be heirs with him; there
is no reason we should look for an Inheritance here where he himself had
none; for the son of man had not where to lay his head: for, that Inheritance
Esau kept still, though he sold his birthright.

Yet this makes some men be of opinion, that he is then careless of his
children in this life, and looks not after them; but very injuriously. For,
may we not think that as in the earth there are Hills and Dales, high
Mountains and low Valeys; which seem to us to make a great inequality in the
even roundnesse of the earth; yet compared to the heavens to which it is but as
a Center, they make all, but evennesse: so these fortunes of men, Riches and
Poverty, Honor and Baseness, Health and Sickness; they seem to us to make a
great inequality in men's estates, yet to God who being Eternal reduces all
things to Eternity, they appear indifferent, and we our selves also when we
attain to our Eternity in heaven shall think so too, and shall wonder at our
selves that ever we could be so simple to think otherwise. In the mean time
we can place our thoughts, whereand how we list, and why can we not make our
thoughts, to place us: where and how they list? This indeed is an Angelical
cunning, and if we could (as by faith we may) aspire unto it; It would easily
make an equality of all fortunes, and turn a Dungeon into a Palace; a pallet
of Netles, into a bed of Roses. And let not this be thought impossible for a
Christian to do in faith, when the Heathen could conceive it possible in the
only contemplation of virtue to say upon the Rack, Quam suave est hoc? And
never slight it by saying, that this at most were but imaginary: (for, faith
will take it in great skorne to be matched with imagination; though even
imagination, if we give faith to Philosophy can do no small wonders:) but
seeing the world is all, as I may say, for the pleasures of that part of the
Noune, which may be Seen, Felt, or Heard; give us leave at least to be for the
pleasures of the other part, which may be understood: that if you say of our
pleasures they are without sense, we may say of theirs, They are without
understanding.

But what say we then to Moses his blessings? Blessed shall thou be in the
City, and blessed in the Field: Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and
the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy Cattle. These are all Earthly
and sensible blessings; and were not these promised to the children of God? No
doubt they were, but as Moses himself, had a veil over his face; so Moses his
words, had a veil over their meaning; and by this means, Blindness came upon
Israel. For, they took that for their Iourneys end which Moses intended, but
for a bayting place: He allowed them liberal baytes at first, to make them the
more cheerfully go on their Journey: but they, like foolish Travellors that
make a dwelling of their Inn: took such pleasure in their baytes, that they
never once thought of going any further: Ezekiel, 20.25.
As therefore God said, of the ceremonies he appointed to the Jews: that he
had given them Statutes, that were not good: (not good indeed to them, that
understood them not; nor could observe them:) so we may perhaps say of these
baytes: that God had given them blessings, that were not good: (not good indeed
to them that understand them not; nor can tell how to use them.) But now the
veil is laid aside, the baytes clean taken away; and those blessings of Moses
removed a form lower: for, they were to them the very face of the promise;
but are to us only the backeparts; they were to them as the first fruits, but
are to us as only gleanings after the Vintage; and therefore though David in
the old Testament never saw the Psalm 37.25.
righteous forsaken, nor their seed begging their bread: yet Christ in the new
Testament, could tell us of one Lazarus, who for all his being righteous was
feign to lie begging his bread at Dives gate. God in his goodness is willing
to try always, to see if any way he can bring us to goodness: He allowed
liberal baytes at first, to make them the more cheerfully go on their
journey: That succeeded not: he has taken away those baytings now, to ma^e us
the more intentive to our journeys end. Those blessings were promised by the
mouth of Moses, a servant: Our blessings are promised by the mouth of Christ, a
son: They trusted to the blessings promised to the person of Abraham; we
trust to the blessings promised to the seed of Abraham: as it is said, And in
thy seed shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed. This is that seed, by
virtue whereof, we stand here as Gods Children; and have the honor to call him
Father: and by which we are borne again to a new hope of recovering our old
inheritance, though that be long since removed up to heaven; as appears by the
words of Christ, to the Thief on the Cross; This day thou shall be with me
in Paradise: that we can never hope to have a Paradise here on earth any more.

And now, O my soul, seeing thou dwell in a house, whose windows are made
to look upward: make use of those lights, and afford not the Earth so much as
a look, but stand gazing to see Christ, Ascending into Heaven; whither he is
gone not only to take possession himself, but to Ioh. 14.3.
provide a place for thee in that Inheritance: and give not over gazing until
an Angel assure thee; that this Jesus which is taken up from you, shall so
come as ye have seen him go into heaven: and till then possess thy self in
patience; and let these meditations be thine ankers: that if thou dyest in thy
youth; thou do but go the sooner to God, that thou may be the longer
with him: If thou die for hunger, thou do but go fasting to God, that thou
may have the better stomach to the heavenly Banquet: if thou sterve for want
of clothes, thou do but go naked to God, that thou may be the readyer
for putting on the Wedding Garment: If thou die with torment; thou do but
follow Christ to God; that having followed him here, the Sheep before the
Shearer, Isa. 13.7.
thou may follow the Lamb wheresoever he goes. And seeing thou desire to
be a Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, thou must first be contented to be a Lazarus
at Dives gate: and as thou tremblest to think of being a Dives in hell, to
want a cup of water, to cool thy tongue; so thou may tremble as much to be a
Dives on earth, to fare deliciously every day. And as for the fawning pleasures
of the world: consider the fearful judgments that are passed upon them, Woe
unto you rich men: for, ye shall howl and mourn. Luke 6.24. Wis. 6.6.
Woe unto you great men, for the mighty shall be mightily tormented: Woe unto
you that live in pleasures; Revel. 18.7.
for how much ye receive in pleasures here, so much shall be added to your
torments hereafter. Wherefore, O my soul, close up all with this Corollary;
that the forbearing thy portion in this world with Christ; gives thee right in
Christ, to have a portion in heaven, and that the enduring of miseries, which
cannot long endure; is a way to pass to that felicity, which shall never pass
away.

A little has been said of infinite much that may be said concerning the
Preface. It follows now, to speak of the Prayer it self, which is digested
into a structure and composition, so absolute, and yet so rare, that whilst it
stretches it self to all; it is comprehended but of a few; whilst the
simplest in it may see their defects; the wisest by it may amend their defects;
and if understanding be necessary to learn other lessons Psalm. 19. 7.99. and
130.
this Lesson is necessary to learn understanding.

If a man shall think of mending the Penning of this prayer; he may as well
think of mending the framing of the world: which, if he should go about to
make proof of in particular; he would in general make himself ridiculous.
For, if he should add any thing, he would make it superfluous; if diminish,
defective; if alter, deformed: Ec^lef 18. 6.
and such a one would he prove, that should presume upon mending these
Petitions; seeing there is nothing that concerns either the life present, or
the life to come: nothing that concerns either Grace or Glory: nothing that
concerns either Antidote, or Physic for either soul or body, but it is all
here; and all so fully and perfectly here, that whatsoever the wit of man shall
devise further to these ends, will be but as branches out of these roots, or as
deductions out of these principles; and may add in bulk, but not in weight.
And he should not err, that would affirm that Christ showed himself as
perfectly to be God, by making this Prayer, as by doing his miracles. For (to
let pass the many causes of admiration in it, that it is so compendious, and
yet so copious; that it is so plain, and yet so intricate; that it is so
familiar, and yet so sublime, that it is of so few parts, and yet so complete:
all which are characters of Divinity) who could have given warrant to the
sons of men, to call the God of heaven, their Father; but he only who is the
Son of God, and God himself? we call God, Almighty, by his own warrant to
Abraham; and we call him Jehovah, Psalm 83. 18,
by the same warrant to Moses; but we cannot call him Father, but only by this
warrant from Christ: who purchased the name for us, and bestowed it upon us. It
is true, God offered himself to the Jews, that he would be their Father, and
they should be his sons; but it was with relation and presupposition of
receiving Christ; whom because they rejected, they never went further then
their Father Abraham: Neither indeed (to our understanding) had God power in
himself to communicate his Name of Father to us, but only in Christ; seeing
Christ had in him the whole interest of his Father, as being his only Son.

And now in making Essays upon the Petitions following: if I shall seem unto
any, and thereupon be blamed, that I am not constant in any one certain,
either explication or application of them: he may know, that these petitions
have something like in our understanding as the Planets have amongst
themselves; which alter their forces and even their natures, according to the
diversity of their Aspects. And if he complain for want of order; he may also
know, that though Art uses method; yet meditation uses none; but receiving
her Company as they come; makes use of them in Troop, and not in Files.

God finished the world in six days: and Christ finished this Prayer in six
Petitions: that so the works which God formed for man, and the words which
Christ framed for man, may may have a correspondence. But is not here a fault
at first? Is it not presumption to come to God, with so many suits at once, and
think to speed in them all? were it not modesty, to do as David did, for he
made but one Petition; Vnum Petii a Domino: One thing have I asked of the Psalm.
27. 4.
Lord: and Christ himself in another place, told Martha as much Vnumest
necessarium: One thing Luke 10.42.
is needful; so that, either there he comes short in his account: or here he
makes more a do then needs: for if but one thing be necessary; One Petition
might well enough have served: and most of all, it may seem strange in Christ
who ever used rather substraction then multiplication; as of ten Commandments
he made but two: and now, that of one Petition he should make six? But O my
soul, Be it far from thee to have such thoughts, to raise such scandal:
For, the Commandments are duties, and duties are burdens; and in abridging
them he performs his promise, Come unto me and I will ease you: and well he
might abridge them to us, who has indeed performed them for us: but the
Petitions are graces; and the more Graces, the more grace: the more Graces we
receive from God, the more grace we are in with God: and Christ will not only
substract burdens, but as well also multiply graces: although in truth these
six Petitions are all in effect but one Petition: that having called God Our
Father, we here desire to be his Children: but we must observe a difference in
being Gods Children, and being children of men; for here we are children first,
and afterward we do our Math. 5.45.
duties; but there we do at least some duties first, and afterward we are
children: as it is said: John 1. 12. Romans 8.14.
As many as received him, to them he gave power to be the sons of God. And
indeed, though Christ dilate it to us here in six Petitions for our
understanding, yet presently after the delivery of them, he seems to reduce
them again, to One petition, where he says; How much more shall Luke 11.13.
your heavenly Father, give the Holy Ghost to them that desire him? for to
desire the Holy Ghost is all in effect that we desire in these six Petitions;
which therefore some would have to be seven: that so they may answer to the
seven spirits, which St. John speaks of, to represent the Holy Revel. 11.4.
Isa. 11. 2.
Ghost. Indeed the three last are properly and bare ly petitions, but the three
first are as Christ said of John Baptist, that he was a Prophet, and more then
a Prophet: so these are petitions, and more then petitions; for they are, both
Hallelujahs and Hosannaes: For we glorify God by the first, that he is our
Father; By the second, that he is our King: by the third, thathe is our Master:
and they are petitions also: the first, that we may be his obedient Children:
the second that we may be his loy all subjects: the third, that we may be his
dutiful servants: And from these three first, grows a confidence unto us, of
obtaining the three last, which therefore seem subordinate to them, that asa
Father, he will give to us his children bread and sustenance; and as a King he
will grant to us his subjects, a pardon of our trespasses; and as a master, he
will not lay upon us his servants, greater burdens then we can bear.

But may not this Paraphrase be opposde? has not this Prayer, a correspondence
rather, with the fall of Angels? and does it not make a resemblance of our
condition to theirs? but that they were cast down all at once: and we here
fall down by degrees, for at every petition we take a fall. At the first we
seem to set out in a high hand, and as though we needed nothing in our own
behalf we ask all for God. In the second, we fall to asking for our selves:
but yet; no less then a Kingdom. In the third, we are glad of the condition
to be servants: In the fourth we fall to the state of plain beggars: In the
fifth we fall yet lower, and come to be in debt: In the last we fall to the
lowest, to be in prison, and that under satan. And now we are fallen as low as
the Angels that fell: or rather so much lower as we are under them. This indeed
is the progress of our condition in our selves; but Christ our Redcemer, who
having put out the hand writing that was against us, and fastened Colos. 2.14.
it to his cross, descended into hell, to set open the prison doors, to let us
out; He has put Revel 1. 18. Psalm 142. 7. Esa. 42. 7.
another nature into these petitions; and made them to resemble rather the six
days of creation: as David said, Create in me, O God, a clean heart: which is
but this very prayer in a lesser volume. Psalm. 51.10.
For, as every day in the Creation, had particular works; so every petition in
this Prayer has particular graces: and as it is said, that Eccles. 18.1.
God made all things at once; yet the making of each creature, is ascribed to
some peculiar day; so this prayer is the supplication of the whole body of the
Church and of every Member thereof: yet each petition seems to have some
special relatiou to some peculiar Member. For, the first petition may not
unfitly be thought, the prayer of Angels: the second, the prayer of the Saints
departed: the third, the Prayer of the Faithful, living: the fourth, the
prayer of all creatures: the fifth, the prayer of penitent sinners: the sixth,
the prayer of Infants.

And now having thought these petitions to be for such most proper: let us
conform our selves accordingly to them: when we say, Hallowed be thy Name; let
us lift up the voices of our hearts, as if we were now jovning with the Angels,
in singing their Halleluiah: When we say, Thy Kingdom come; let us raise our
thoughts, as now offering to set our hands to the petition of the Saints in
heaven. When we say, Thy will be done: Let us fix our minds wholly as in the
solemnity of dedicating our selves to God, with all the faithful upon earth.
When we say, Give us this day our daily bread; let us humble our selves as
being in state of other creatures, and are glad to join with them in their
common suite. When we say, Forgive us our trespasses; let us think our selves
enrolled in the company of penitents: and as the greatest sinners, chosen
spokes-men to present their supplication. And when we say, Lead us not into
temptation: let us acknowledge our selves in the number and weakness of
little children, and are glad to join with them, in crying for help: that the
Angel of infants, which always beholds the face of God; may be employed by
him to work our deliverance. And thus we shall not only go on the right way,
in making our petitions, but we shall have company also to be affistants in
preferring our petitions. And does not such orderly ranking of the petitions,
show Christ to have been a most skillful Herald in spiritual matters? seeing
they all take their places, according to the worth and dignity of the speakers.

In the first place, are the Angels; that as at the fall of the first Adam,
Angels were set at the Entrance of Paradise, to keep us out; so at the coming
of the second Adam; Angels are set here, at the entrance into Heaven to let us
in. As therefore this Petition, is as the Porter to let in all the other
petitions; So holy Reverence must be porter at our mouths, to let in
thispetition. For when it is said; Hallowed be thy Name; may it not justly be
thought the prayer of Angels? of whom it is said: that they say, and sing
continually; Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Sabbath; not only say it, as their
prayer; but sing it, as their Psa^me, and chief Delight. David did well, in
offering God, to build a Temple, to his Name; but by whom was Gods Temple built?
Not by David, a man of blood; but b^ Solomon, a Prince of Peace: so it is well
done of us to say; Hallowed be thy Name: but by whom do we say, it must be
Hallowed? Not by us: Non vox hominem sonat; for how should we Hallow his Name,
who have profaned his Image? It is a work for Angels: fit only for them, to
Hallow his Name, who have kept ^oly their own Nature; for, without a nature of
holiness his Name can never be truly hallowed. And if we understand it of
our selves; will it not prove a work of supererogation? seeing we desire to
do more then is commanded? for the Commandment is only, Not to take his Name
in vain; and here we desire, It may be hallowed. Unless it be, that the
commandments being Negative, they get something by Christ's resolving them,
into Affirmatives: Or is it to show how much the Law is improoved by the
Gospel? seeing it is no more in the Gospells phrase, to hallow Gods Name; then
it was in the Laws; not to take it in vain.

But what if God have no Name at all? then indeed the Commandment will be
easily kept; but the Petition will be hardly granted. The Name is but a shadow
of the Nature; as therefore a Body which were Infinite could have no shadow, the
shadow not beginning, but where the Body ends; so, a Nature which is
Incomprehensible, can have no Name; the Name being not possible to be given;
but where the Nature is comprehended. But though God have no Name, or no known
Name to express him; yet he is not without Name, to distinguish him: And what
is then his Name, we desire may be Hallowed? his Name of Essence: or his Name
in Relation? his Name, as it is in himself: or his Name, as it is to us? Not
his Name of Essence: for how can we hallow that, until we know it, and how can
we know it, until the riddle be expounded? seeing we know him now, but in
Aenigmate, but his Name in relation; and as it is to us: his Name of Father,
that is it which seems most fitly, to be here intended: For, when we say Our
Father, does not God, by the Prophet Malachie, seem to interrupt Mal. 1 (...).
us and say; If I be your Father, where is my honor? for to Hallow him, as a
Father, and as an Heavenly Father; Is to honor him, to fear him, to love him,
to obey him, to reverence him, and to adore him.

But what should be the cause, that in the three latter petitions; we seem to
be altogether for our selves; as appears by our saying, Give us, Forgive us,
Deliver us: but in the three former there is no mention of Us at all, as though
we were no parties to them? Is it not that we are or ought to be more jealous
of Gods honor, then careful of our own benefits? and therefore when we say,
Hallowed be thy Name; we dare not say, Of us, least we should make God a
Music of too few voices. And when we say, Thy Kingdom come; we dare not say,
to us: least we should assign his Kingdom too small a Territory. And when we
say, Thy will be done; we dare not say, by us: least we should stint God, in
the number of his servants. But we say; Hallowed be thy Name, and stop there:
that so no mouth may be stopped from hallowing it: we say, Thy Kingdom come,
but Name not whither: that so it may be intended to come every whither: we say,
Thy will be done in earth, but tell not by whom in earth; that so it may be
done by all in earth.

By Hallowing Gods Name; we mean, not to make it holy; for it is holiness it
self: Nor to make it more holy, for it is infiniteness it self: Nor to keep
it holy, for it is eternity it self; but to join with the heavens in
declaring his glory: and with the firmament in showing his handy-worke; as,
then only hallowing his Name, when we name him only holy; and therein
consisting our work of sanctifying him, when in him we acknowledge, our works
to be sanctified.

To hallow the place wherein it pleased God to stand; Moses put off the ^hooes
from his feet: to hallow the day whereon it pleased him to rest, the Jews put
off the works of their hands: and to hallow the Name which he vouchsafed to
take, we must put off from our tongues all unreverent discourses; and from our
lives all profane conversation. And as Gods Name is Vnguentum Effusum, has
many dispersions in our understanding: so our hallowing it must have Linguas
dispertitas; Cloven tongues to convay it to his hearing: his Name of Father
must be hallowed by love; of Lord, by obedience; of judge, by uprightness; of
almighty, by fear: and of everlasting, by constancy.

But is there no service we can do, that will serve Gods Name, but only our
hallowing it? we have love, and glorifying, and admiring; and will none of
these serve the turn? If we should say, loved be thy Name; that would be too
little: for God himself allows us to love our neighbors; and indeed every
creature of God, that is useful to us, deserves our love. Or if we should say
Glorified be thy N^me, that would not be enough; seeing St. Paul tells us, that
one Star excels another in glory: and indeed the heavens in showing the glory
of God, deserve themselves in some sort to be glorified. Or if we should say,
Admired be thy Name, that Judge. 13.18.
would not be sufficient; seeing an Angel told Manoah, that his Name was
admirable. And indeed the Angels are Creatures of so transcendent eminency,
that they justly deserve our admiration. But when we say, Hallowed be thy Name,
this sets it apart, and sets it above all other names: and it is so properly,
that it is only belonging to the Name of God; and altogether incommunicable to
any creature. For, though we may say of Angels, that they be holy; yet we
cannot say to any of them, Hallowed be thy Name; seeing their holiness is
only in dependence and a quality: Gods only independent, and a substance; and
it was an inscription upon the Myter of Aaron, as not only due to God, but due
to him in the highest place, Holiness to the Lord. O Lord God, so sanctify
the faculties of my soul, that I may love thee for thy goodness; and glorify
thee, for thy love; and admire thee for thy glory: and hallow thee in them all.

But can we find nothing in God, more worthy of hallowing, then his Name?
seeing names are often changed, always changeable; seldom true, never
certain? Our first parent was named Hevah; as being the mother of all living;
and yet she proved to be brought a bed of death. The son of Solomon was called
Rehoboam, signifying an enlarger of his people; and he enlargde them fairly,
brought twelve Tribes to two. Simon was called Peter, as being a Rock
unmovable: and yet he was shaken with the weak blast of a maids mouth. But,
O my soul, consider; the Name of God is not as the names of creatures: for
their natures are mu^ble, and therefore their names deceitful; but in God
there is no mutability nor shadow of change. Creatures have a nature, and a
name; but Gods Nature is his Name; his Name is himself; for whatsoever we can
rightly name of God, is the Name of God: that we may be sure we have his
Optimum, when we have his Totum; the best in him, when the whole of him: not
that any thing in God is so best, as though one thing in him were better then
another, who is Totus sine partibus; and Optimus sine gradibus: but that he is
Totum unum, and Totum Optimum; and both Vnum and Optimum; totum, Nomen: nothing
but his Name: Or to speak it in plainer terms, that the nature of his Name,
is not only far beyond the compass of expressing, but infinitely above the
reach of understanding.

And indeed what can be thought so high: as that, which brings us so low, even
upon our knees? and not us only but the Angels themselves: as it is savd, At
the Name of God all knees shall bow: b^th of things in heaven and things on
earth: and if this be thought impossible, because Angels have no knees; you may
thereby know there is more honor due to God then is possible to be given him.
Yet must even Angels, find such knees to bow down as God finds eyes to look
on; and by this we may make up a true hallowing of Gods Name; if we can join
the knees of our bodies as men; and the knees of our souls, as Angels,
together: and bow them all down to do him reverence. These indeed, the bowing
down our knees with Daniel; the holding up our hands, with Moses: the lifting
up our eyes, with Stephen: are all good expressions, but they are but only
outward: It will not be a perfect hallowing, until we come to Psalm. 103. 1.
that of David, My soul. praise thou the Lord; and all that is wit^in me,
praise his ^oly Name. For, that which is within must under^roppe that which is
without: or elle, the bowing our knees to the ground will fall to the ground:
and these outward hallowings will soon be profaned. And therefore David
accounted the lifting up his eyes to heaven, a good expression of hallowing
Gods Name; because in him the proppe of it was faith and considence in Gods
mercy, which always look upward: but the Publicane accounted the casting
down his eyes (a clean contrary motion to that of David's) as good an
expression: because in him the prop of it, was humility, and sense of his own
unworthiness, Which always look downward: For even this also is a kind of
hallowing Gods Name: when we acknowledge the prophanenes of our own natures.

But why should the hallowing of Gods Name be accounted so great a virtue;
when the sin of not hallowing his Name can be but nominall? and nominall is
much inferior to that which is real: and seeing it is made so great a matter,
may we not justly ask, Cui bono? what good get we by it? Indeed a most
ungrateful question for the tongue to make, seeing this is the chief thing
for which our tongues were made. Could Philosophers find cause enough in
virtue, to love it for it self, though to themselves there came no benefit:
and cannot we find cause enough in Gods name to hallow it for it self, though
to our selves there should come no profit? Could they find brightness in a
beam of the Sun: and cannot we find brightness in the Sun it self? For,
what is virtue but as it were a beam of that eternal and uncreated light,
which is the very essence of God? and by what can we more express the essence
of God, then by his name? For, when we say, Hallowed be thy Name, we say as
much as hallowed be thy Majesty, thy Eternity, thy Glory, thy substance, thy
self, thy all in all. And yet perhaps it may be said, we hallow Gods name, not
so much for our selves to get, as that God may not lose: for what greater
loss, then disparagment of name? which, if we that be worms and no men, make
so great account of, what may we think of God: for the sun of whose glory,
all the stars of heaven cannot make one beam? Our names are but accidental
things, and there was a time when they were not ours: but Gods name is
essential to him, and it was his before time it self was. And if we should
say, that not only his name was, but that it was hallowed before there was
either Man or Angel to hallow it; though this be more then we can conceive,
yet it is no more then whereof we find a parallel: for why is it more
strange, that his name should be hallowed, when there was none to hallow it:
then that his voice was obeyed when there was nothing to obey it? as when he
said, Let there be light, and there was light. But lastly, if men be so set
upon their profit that they will do nothing without a fee: Is not this fee
enough for them, that by it they are admitted into the Quier of Angels? but
much more, that by it they attain to their perfection? for if every thing be
then perfected when it attain^s its end; then certainly are our tongues, and
indeed our souls perfected when they hallow Gods name, for this is their end.
Wherefore, O my soul, let not offenses, belonging only to the name of God, be
slighted as only nominall: but let them be accounted, as indeed they are, of
all other the most real: and as it is the first petition in thy prayer, so let
it be the first care in thy heart; that thou speak nothing by which his name
may be profaned: that thou do nothing by which it may be blasphemed: For,
though God require a strict observance of all his Commandments: yet he
professes not so punctually; to hold the breakers guilty in any as in this:
and therefore, when in two notorious crimes, adultery and murder, he spared
David; yet in this, that through them his name was blasphemed; he would not
hold him guiltless; but made him pay for it with the death of his dear Son.

And indeed if we mark this petition well, we shall find a peculiar Majesty;
an extraordinary Pre-eminence in it above all the other: For, it is not only
the Primum Mobile, from which all the other have their motions: but it is the
center also to which all the other bend their motions. For, when we say, Thy
Kingdom come: It is but to come, that we may hallow Gods name: and when we
say, Thy will be done: it is but for this, that we may hallow Gods Name: and
when we pray for daily bread, it is but to strengthen us, that we may hallow
Gods name: and when we say Forgive us our trespasses, it is but to cleanse us,
that we may hallow Gods name: and when we say, Lead us not into temptation: it
is but to remove impediments, that we Psalm. 8.
may hallow Gods name: O Lord our God, how excellent is thy Name in all the
world! And where we have a trivial yet true saying amongst us, A good
beginning makes a good ending: it can in nothing more lively be exemplified,
then in the marshalling of these petitions: for he that makes his beginning, at
the hallowing of Gods name, may be sure to make his ending in the deliverance
from evil: and though it be a blasphemous fable of the Jews that Christ
learned in the Temple the name of God; by the virtue whereof he wrought all his
Miracles, yet from this blasphemy, we may draw this verity; that it is indeed
the name of God, by the transcendent power whereof all miracles are wrought. O
Lord our God how excellent Psalm 118. 12.
is thy Name in all the world! It was this name in which, when David's enemies
came about him like Bees: yet i^ this name they were exstinct. It was this name
in which when devils possessed both souls and bodies of men, yet in this name
they were ejected. It was this name for whose sake the lsr^lites were preserved
in the wilderness: the three children in the fiery Furnace: Daniel in the
Lions Den: and Jonas in the Whales belly. O Lord our God, how excellent is
thy Name in all the world! It is this name at the sound whereof, the Mountains
smoke the foundations of the earth are shaken; the devils in hell tremble. It
is this name by virtue whereof, the bodies of the dead are raised; the souls
of the Saints are glorified; the happiness of the Angels is eternised: O Lord
our God, how excellent is thy Name in all the world! that if we were as James
and ^ohn: and had voices like Thunder; yet we could never hallow this name
loud enough: If we were as Methusalem; and had breathes like eternity; yet we
could never hallow this name long enough: If we were as Solomon, and had the
tongues of Angels; yet we could never hallow this name worthily enough. O Lord
our God how excell^nt is thy Name in all the world! Wherefore, O my soul, do
thou by this name of God, as David (in the 119 Psalm) does by the Law of God;
whereof he seems so jealous and so loath to leave it, that the word is no
sooner out of his mouth, but he fn^heth it in again; and there is ^ot so short
a sentence in all this long Psalm, but the Law of God is a word in it. And so
do thou by the name of God, let it evermore be in thy mouth, but ever; more be
in thy heart; that thou make it not a common name, but keep it holy: for if
thou take it not in vain to Gods dishonor; thou shall be sure not to take it
in vain to thy own benefit; for God will plentifully bless it, and the next
news thou shall hear of, will be the coming of his Kingdom.

And that we may know Gods Name to be a substance rather than a Word; or a
Word of substance; we shall find it to be hallowed or profaned, by Actions
rather then by words; or by words that make Actions: as Abraham hallowed Gods
Name, when he offered his son Isaac: because he believed, that he was
faithful, that had promised: but Moses hallowed it not at Meriba; when he said
to the people: Now ye Rebels, Number. 20.10.
shall we bring you water out of this Rock? Not that Moses himself doubted,
but that he spoke unadvisedly Psalm. 106.33.
with his lips; and made the people doubt; he doubted: and so whilst God
honored him, by manifesting his new Name of Jehovah; he forgot to honor God,
by magnifying his old Name of Saddai. And if Moses, for want of perfitnesse in
this Petition; were hindered from entering into the Number. 20.12.
Terrestrial Canaan; was it not to be a Type for us, that we for want of
perfitnesse in it, may be hindered from entering into the Heavenly Canaan? O
then, my Tongue, make thee perfect in repeating it; and O my heart, make thee
perfect in recording it; and O my life, be thou perfect in acting it: that when
ye have done with saying, Hallowed be thy name, in Earth amongst men: ye may
be admitted to say: Holy, Holy, Holy, in heaven amongst Angels.

If Gods Name were to be hallowed with multiplicity of words; there are men of
Incessant Tongues; like the Priests of Baal; that stood bawling to their Idol,
from morning till night: that were likely to do it: Or if it were, to be
hallowed with eloquence of words: there are men of curious language, that would
be as fit to do it; as the old Orators were, to make their Panegyricks to
Princes: Or if it were to be done with great and mighty words: there are
roaring men in the world, might be as able to hallow it, as Goliath the
Philistine, was to blaspheme it: but none of these have coals from the Altar:
and the hallowing of Gods Name, is a sacrifice: and must be done with fire; a
fire of fear and reverence, b^rning in the heart: and sending forth flames, of
holy and devout thoughts in the mind: of godly and sanctified communications
in the tongue; of lowly and chaste aspects in the Eyes, of Innocence and deeds
of charity in the hands: and when every part both of body and soul, has thus
contributed its heat: there will then be made as perfect a sacrifice to hallow
Gods Name, 1 Kin. 8. 65.
as the sacrifice of peace offering, which Solomon offered at the (...) of the
Temple.

It is a (...) ^couragement to men, for doing of anything whither can see
apparent reasons wh^ they ^oe it: ^us what reasons do we see he^re, for
hallowing of Gods Name? O my soul, art thou so blind of sight, so dull of
understanding? Have thou said, Our Father which art in Heaven; and do thou
consider his love, as being our Father: his Majesty, as being in Heaven: and
do thou complain for want of reasons to hallow his Name? as a Father, he
has created, and begotten us: he has Elected and Adopted us: he has
preserved and redeemed us: and have we not reason then, to hallow his Name, as
creatures as living creatures, as reasonable creatures, as servants, as
children, as heirs, as bondmen freed, as leapers cleansed, as dead men revived
and borne anew: and if we should set our selves to reckon them up all: It is
not the stars of heaven that would be counters enough to sum them. And if his
love afford us so many reasons: does not his Majesty afford us, as many more?
he is in heaven, not with in heaven; within it, but not contained; contained,
but not defined. He is in heaven, and that makes the Sun so bright: which
without his being there should have no brightness: He is in heaven and that
makes the heavens so glorious, which without his being there should have no
glory. Do we see how bright the Sun is, and do we not consider how great
his brightness is, that made the Sun? Do we see how glorious the heavens are,
and do we not consider how great his glory is that made the heavens? He is in
heaven, that he may look down in mercy upon us on earth: and he is in heaven,
that we may look up in faith to him in heaven: he is in heaven, to let us
down the Angels ladder from heaven: and he is in heaven to draw us up to be as
Angels in heaven: and if we should stand to find out all the reasons, which
may be drawn from the consideration of his Majesty, for the hallowing of his
Name: It would not be be a work for time, but for eternity: for, as we know
not where to begin, in that which is incomprehensible; so we should never know
how to end in that which is infinite. O my Lord God, so enlighten my
understanding, that I may see the reasons of hallowing thy Name: so sanctify
my nature, that I may above reason be able to hallow it.

We say here, Hallowed be thy Name: but might we not say better with David:
Laudate Dominumomnes Angeliejus: Praise the Lord all ye Angels? For so, we
should commit Gods honor to the care of Angels, who we may be sure, would
always be careful of it; whereas now leaving it indefinite; while it is
committed to none, it may be omitted by all. But is it not that David could go
no higher then Angels, for hallowing of Gods Name; In concreto: but Christ
teaches us here, to go higher, in Abstracto: for creatures, how eminent
soever, are yet but limited: and limited as well in action, as in essence:
where the hallowing of Gods Name, is in it self, unlimmitted: and therefore we
justly abstract it from all matter of the instrument, which necessarily
infers a restraint: and leave it indefinite, which is capable of being
infinite.

But is this petition, seated only on mount Gerizim, to warrant David to say,
If any man seek the Lord, and P Sal. 40.16.
love his salvation: let him rejoice always, and be glad; and say continually,
The Lord be magnified? and does it not as well reach to mount Eball: and
warrant the Church to proclaim: If any man with Goliath, defy the armies of
Israel, and vilify Gods power; let him be Anathema: For Hallowed he thy Name.
If any man, with Rabsakeh, seek to withdraw the peoples hearts, from trusting
in the living God; let him be Anathema: for Hallowed be thy Name. If any man
with Julian shall say in d^rision of Christ, Vicisti Galilaee: let him be
Anathema; for Hallowed be thy Name. And let Anathemaes be still proclaimed,
against all the blasphemers of Gods Name, till there be no more left: that two
Mountains, at last may meet Eball with Gerizim; and Hell it self be forced
with grief to houle, what with joy it cannot sing; Hallowed be thy Name.

We have thought this petition most proper to be said of Angels, but may we not
appropriate it to our selves; and exclude the Angels from saying it at all?
Indeed as it is here placed, perhaps we may. For having called God Our Father,
and this petition coming so immediately upon it; we seem to pray, that his Name
of Father, may be hallowed by us: and if we understand it so, what have the
Angels to do to say it? They may say; Holy, holy holy, Lord God of Sabbath: and
so hallow him in his Name of Lord, as Servants; but to hallow him in his Name
of Father, as Sons, they cannot. Not, but that the Angels are the Children of
God by creation, and grace of holiness; but that they are not the Sons of God
by regeneration and grace of ^option: this dignity is only proper to men, as
being members ^.
of Christ; who took our nature upon him, and not that of Angels. But seeing
David has brought into Psalm. 148.
this Quier, not only the Angels in Heaven, but the Heavens themselves; not
only the Trees and Cedars of the Mountains, but the Mountains themselves; not
only beasts and creeping things of the earth, but the earth it self: Let not
us so streighten the Name of God, as that we leave out Angels; (who are our
sweetest Quiristers) nor yet other Creatures, (who are our loudest voices;)
seeing loudness also has a place in this Music, as David says, Sing ye
loud unto Psalm. 118.
the Lord, all the earth least seeking to ^ncrease our own dignity by propriety
of the song; we detract from Gods glory, by restraint of the fingers. And enter
not O my soul into the shame to think, that where all other creatures do
directly sing it, we only do but make suit to sing it, and it is thought in
us a good degree of doing it; if we can but only pray to do it.

And indeed we have need to pray to do it, seeing praying to do it, is all in
effect we can do of it, to any purpose. For our hallowing can be, but as our
understanding is: and our understanding can be but as it gets ground from our
senses to stand upon. And what ground can our understanding have for this, from
any sense of ours? we cannot hear him so much as to call to us by our names,
as Samuel did: we cannot see him so much as flaming in a bush and not consuming
it, as Moses did: we cannot touch so much as the wounds of Christ's side, as
Thomas did: and from whence then should our understanding take its rising? It
is true, we see the heavens, and they declare the glory of God, but we slight
them through too much familiarity: we hear his words in the Law and the
Gospel, and in them is eternal life; but we regard not them, as having them
but at the second hand; and they but touch us, as it were, at the bound: but if
we could hear God speaking himself, as the Israelites did in Sina: Or if we
could see but the backparts of God, as Moses did in the rock: but most of all,
if we could see Exodus 33.21.
the face of God, which all his Saints and Angels behold in heaven; then indeed
we should not need this prayer any longer: for the very sight would work in us
the effect of the prayer: and as Peter, at the only transfiguration of Christ's
humanity was so astonished, that he spoke he knew not what; yet thus much was
even extorted from him by the glory of the sight to say, Bonum est esse hic: so
when we shall come to enjoy the vision of God, and to see one sitting upon the
Thron, like a Jasper stone: though we shall be never so much Revel. 4.3.
astonished at the glory of the fight; yet this will even be extorted from us,
to say with the 24 Elders, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and
honor, and power: Revel. 4.10.
and we shall fall of our selves into the song of the Angels; Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God almighty, and not only say it, but never cease to say it: for
seeing our beholding will be cause of our admiring; and our admiring cause of
our saying: we shall never cease to say it, because never cease to admire it;
and never leave admiring it, because never leave be holding it. And indeed till
we shall come to see his face; we shall never perfectly hallow his Nam; and
therefore what we want in ability, we must supply with prayer: that seeing our
words do but halt after our understanding, and our understanding after his
glory; with our hearts we may adore him, but adore him as incomprehensible; and
with our hearts we may hallow him, but hallow him as uns^eakable. When we pray
for the hallowing of Gods Name, we pray implicitly for all things necessary
and conducing to it: we pray for the agent, and for the instrument; we pray for
the time and for the place; we pray for the speaker and for the hearer; and in
one word, we pray for the propagation of the Gospel, that doors may be opened
to all men of faith, that so the building may go up of the new Jerusalem: That
laborers may be sent into Gods harvest, that so theweeds may be plucked up, and
the good Corn brought into the Barn: that there may be Joy in Sion, and peace
within her walls: that, not the Trumpet of War, but the Trumpet of praise and
thankesgiving may be heard amongst us: that all ears may be circumcised, and
all tongues touched with Coals from the Altar; that so nothing be spoken, nor
any thing be heard; but tending all to the honor and glory of Gods Name.

This petition stands nearest unto God of them all; and makes us stand nearest
to the Angels, and gives us seisin as it were of what we shall be hereafter;
when we shall be sensible of the sweetness of it: though now, Flesh and blood
find little relish in it; having tongues to say it, but not to taste it;
until they shall put on incorruption. For, as little account as men make of it
here, this very hallowing of Gods Name is the highest step of the Angels ladder
to happiness: and under an Angel none can climb it. And it may be called the
petition of sanctity; for, by it we are reduced Ad similitudinem Dei; Be ye
holy as I am holy. And it is proper to this petition, that this only is
eternal; and as it is our first petition here on earth, so it shall be our
last ^ there petitions shall have an end. For though Hosannaes shall cease with
the ceasing of faith and hope: yet Halleluiahs shall continue with the
continuance of charity, and not only continue, but be continual.

But may we not think, that these words, Hallowed be thy Name, are not
properly a petition; or any part of our prayer: but rather a complement and
solemnity attending upon the Name of God? as the Jews manner is not only wh^
they name any of their famous ancestors, the^ always add some words of
Benediction, as speaking of Moses; they always add Zechar^ liberacha: Memoria
ejus in benedictione, as we al^ to say, Of blessed memory; but much more
s^aking of God, they always add, Hacadosh Baru^ Hu: Sanctus Benedictus ille:
which is in effect the (...) we say here, Hallowed be thy Name: and it would
fall out well to understand it thus; that so, we may make Christ as good as his
word; for then, Thy Kingdom come, will prove the first petition: and it will
be as Christ said, Seek first the Kingdom of God; and the righteousness
thereof, and all other things shall be ministered unto you: for having sought
the Kingdom of God, by this petition, and the righteousness thereof by the
next; all other things are ministered unto us by the petitions following: For,
we have a Deed of gift of all temporal things, by one; and a general pardon
of all faults, by another; and a Protection royal from all evil, by the last.
But, O my thoughts, wander not in such bypath by your selves: where being
alone, you are not only in danger to go out of the way; but you are in a way
to fall into dangers: but keep the road, where you have company and conduct;
that will always keep you right, and guard you safe: for these words,
Hallowed be thy Name, shall well enough, and most justly be a petition, and a
part of our prayer: and yet Christ nevertheless be as good as his promise: for
this petition, Hallowed be thy Name, refers only to the honor of God; but of
those which relate to our own benefit, Thy Kingdom come, is worthily the
first; and so Christ's counsel stands firm. Seek first the Kingdom of God,
and all other things shall be ministered unto you.

Next unto the Angels in heaven, are placed the Saints in heaven; for when it
is said, Thy Kingdom; may it not fitly be thought the prayer of the Saints
departed? of whom it is said, that lyingunder the Altar, they cry, How long O
Revel. 6.10.
Lord, holy and true; will thou not avenge our blood upon them that dwell upon
the earth? we all indeed pray for the inchoation of the Kingdom of Grace: but
these are p^operly they, that pray for the consummation of the Kingdom of
glory: when all things shall be made subject to the Father and God shall be all
in all. And it remains only for these to pray for this Kingdom, seeing they
are already lifted up above all other kingdoms; having the kingdoms of the
world in contempt; and the kingdom of satan in subjection; and as for the
Kingdom of Grace, they have it already in perfection.

Though we have styled this petition, the prayer of the Saints departed; as
being the most eminent persons that can say it; yet we do not thereby exclude
our selves, but we enter common with them; or rather, we pray for a King^ome
more then they do: They only for the Kingdom of glory: we, for the Kingdom
both of grace, and glory; yet may we justly call it theirs, seeing they began
it to us, and continue it with us, and enforce it for us.

But do not the words of this petition cross one another? and is there not an
opposition between them? For, Kingdom is a word of Majesty: and coming is a
word of inferiority; at most, of equality; and so we seem to pray to Gods
disparagement, we make a superior inferior, at most but equal. But is it
not, that we mean not here a descent, but an extent of the Kingdom: and a
coming, not of duty, but of grace? and so neither the Kingdom disdaineth the
coming; nor the coming disparageth the Kingdom; but Kingdom and coming,
are magnified both in their uniting.

This petition at first sight seems to flatter flesh and blood, asking as they
themselves would wish; but Christ has taken them down from any such hope:
professing plainly that his Kingdom is not of this world. And though it may
be thought am^ition, to ask so great a matter as a Kingdom; yet it is in
truth, humility: for, until we attain to this Kingdom, we cannot be wholly
Gods true servants: and it is reason, the suite should be the greater, because
we are likely to tarry longest for it. But is it not strange to see us come as
we do here, In forma pauperis; to ask a Kingdom? yet so we must do, and
Math. 5.3.
so has Christ proclaimed it; Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is
the kingdom of Heaven. And yet if we mark it well, as poor as we seem to
come; we shall find, that Solomon in all his royalty, was not clothed as we
are by this petition; for by it we are clothed here with sanctification, that
we may be clothed hereafter with immortality.

Some seditious heads may here take occasion to think; that to pray for this
Kingdom, is to pray against all earthly kingdoms; and to disthrone Gods
Lieutenants of their authority. But know, O world, that this Kingdom, though
it take away our subjection to the world: yet it takes not away our subjection
in the world: though we be not of the world which St. James Iam. 4.4. Ioh.
17.16.
taxed for Enmity with God; yet we are of the world, which Augustus taxed for
tribute to Caesar: and this tribute must be paid as well from our hearts as
from our purses; for, out of the duty we owe him that has placed us in his
service, we learn to be contented to serve every one in his place.

When we say this petition, we mean not, that Gods Kingdom should so come to
be here, as that it should be no where else: for, this were but to remove it,
whilst we seek to enlarge it; and to make that finite, which is infinite: but
we pray only for the beams of the Sun of righteousness; not for the Sun
it self: for the power and privileges of the Kingdom, not for the body: that
as Christ says, No man can come unto me except the Father draw him; So we most
properly understand, the Kingdom to come to us, when the Father draws us, and
makes us come unto it: and so in effect our petition is this: that God by his
Spirit would so rule over us, that our spirits may wholly be ruled by him; and
that his Kingdom of grace may so come unto us, that we may come at last to his
Kingdom of Glory.

But what need we to pray for the coming of this Kingdom? for seeing it is
infinite, it must needs be every where; and being every where, it must needs be
here already. But is it not, that there is a difference between the being of
this Kingdom, and the coming? It is indeed every where, but it comes not
every where. It is in the wicked upon earth: and it is in the damned in hell:
but it comes only to the faithful Revel. 3.20.
on earth, or to the Saints in heaven; for, where it only is, it is in power or
justice: but where it comes, it is in love and bounty: where it only is, it
leaves us at sea, and suffers us to suffer shipwreck; but where it comes, it
brings us into the Haven, and sets us safe on shore.

This Petition has but three words, and each word may have its emphasis; each
emphasis its meditation. For if we place the emphasis upon the last word: the
meditation may be this, that the ambition is not in asking a Kingdom, but that
we must have it come to us: as though we thought our selves too good to go to
it: but alas poor lame souls, we cannot go to it though we would never so
feign: for the truth is we are in bondage to another Prince; that unless this
Kingdom come and free us, our Fetters will not suffer us to stir a foot. But
is not this directly contrary to that which Christ says, Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you? for here we pray, that the
Kingdom may come to us: and there we are invited to come to it: Here, we are
the mark, and the Kingdom is the commer: there the Kingdom is the mark; and
we the comers. This indeed may well seem wonderful in our eyes, seeing
nothing is more wonderful in nature, then the nature of this Kingdom is. It
comes to us as our Ransom: We come to it as to our Triumph: It comes to us, as
it came and sat upon the Apostles in fiery tongues: we come to it, as Elias
went up in a fiery chariot. It comes to us, as the Kingdom of Grace: we come
to it, as to the Kingdom of glory.

And if we place the Emphasis upon the second word: It may be seconded with
this Meditation: It is true, we are in this world as in a war; and have many
enemies to assault us: but will no less aid then a Kingdom serve us? Have we
not Forces of our own, which we may muster up, and make resistance? This
indeed, was Pelagius his dream, but all men that are awake, find it
otherwise. For seeing those Forces did not serve our first Parents, who were
strong and at liberty; what hope is there for us, who are weak and in bondage?
But might it not serve to Esa. 41.8.
require the help of Abraham? For Abraham was Gods Friend; and men will do
much for their friends; how much more will God? This also has been, and is
still the ignorant fancy of some Esa. 63. 16.
men: therefore ignorant: because Abraham is ignorant of us, and knows us not:
and seeing, while he lived, he came short by Ten, in helping the Sodomites,
whom he knew; he is like to come much shorter now in helping of uswhom he
does not know. But would it not be sufficient to pray for the aid of Angels?
as God promised Moses, that his Angel should go with him: and we may be
sure, that God knew well, what Assistance would serve. Of this Error, it se^ms
Col. 2.18.
by Saint Paul, some Colossians were in danger; but we see Moses would not
trust to that help neither; but flatly refused it: (It seems he took Exo.
33.15.
Gods offer but as a try all) and unless God would go himself, he thought
it no boore for him to stir. And indeed who can think it reasonable for
Sons to rely upon their Fathers Servants? Ephesians. 2.12.
For we fight not with flesh and blood; but with principalities and Powers;
and seeing we have a Kingdom to assault us; we must likewise have a Kingdom
to assist us. Neither our own Forces; Nor Succor of Saints; Nor aid of
Angels will stand us in stead; God himself must go forth with our Armies, or
we shall never be able to overcome.

And if we place the emphasis upon the first word: It may then raise our minds
to this meditation: There are many competitors for this Esa. 26.13.
Kingdom to rule over us: but above all, though ^udg. 9.14.
the basest of all; the bramble satan catches hold of us to get it: God is the
trne Olive tree; Zach. 4.11.
but he cannot take it upon him unless he should leave his fatness: He is
the true Fig Tree, but he cannot be King over us, unless he should leave his
sweetness: and that fatness and that sweetness he left: (the Father when he
gave his Son: the Son when he gave his life) and now let all the Trees of
the wood rejoice: for, Thou O Lord art w^rthy to receive all glory, and honor,
1 Chro. 16.33. Psalm. 96.12.
and power; and the Lord shall reign for ever. And what then shall we render
for this inestimable favor, in taking us to be his subjects? O let us offer
him, not only the tenths of our labors; but the first fruits of our
affections: let Psalm. 24.9.
us open not only the doors of our lips, but the gates of our hearts; that
this King of glory may come in. And when thou vouchsafest, O my Lord, to come
with thy high Majesty under my low roof; and to work a miracle, by having
that greatness which the world contains not, contained in the little corner
of my breast; Vouchsafe also to send thy Grace for the Harbinger of thy Glory;
seeing there can no room be dressed up against thy coming, but only by thy
coming: and no place can be reckoned fit for thee, until it be made fit by
thee. Possess me wholly, O my sovereign; reign in my body, by obedience to
thy Laws: and in my soul, by confidence in thy promises: Frame my tongue to
praise thee, my knees to reverence thee, my strength to serve thee, my desires
to cover thee, and my heart to embrace thee: that as thou have formed me to
thine Image: so thou may frame me to thy will; and as thou have made me a
vessel, by the stamp of thy Creation, to serve thee on earth, so thou may est
make me, a vessel of honor, by the privilege of thy grace, to serve thee in
thy Kingdom.

In some, the world Governes; and he who is Prince of this world, the devil:
and this government is a very ^yranny: the people here, are not Subjects but
slaves: they have fetters on all their faculties; and if they ^oe not feel
them, it is because they are past feeling. The avre of this place is only
Fogges and Mists, which both blind their eyes, and infect their spirits; and
makes it their Paradise, to be wallowing in puddle. He is no true P^nce but an
usurper, and therefore rules all by force and falsehood: He takes upon him to be
their Pilot; launcheth them out into the maine, and then leaves them to storms
and tem^ests: and their Haven is to split against the Rocks. So here is no
being for thee, O my soul, thou had need to make haste hence, and to seek
thee out some better harbor. In some the flesh governes; and they which be
Ladies of Esa. 47.7.
the flesh, Pride and Lust: and this government is a very Anarchy: Every base
fancy has an even sway, with noble reason; Wisdom here is not justified of
her children; they may speak the language of Canaan, but they are all natives
of Sodom; their eyes are seeled up, yet their flight is only down hill: for
they are traveling to the bottomless Pit. So this, O my soul, is no place for
thee neither; No resting for thee here; seeing here is no rest, but all in
motion; and all motion here is commotion. In some the spirit governes: and he,
who is the Father of spirits, God himself: and this government is a perfect
Kingdom: He has Majesty for his Crown: Mercy for his seat: and Justice for
his Scepter. He has wisdom for his Counsailour; Almightinesse for his guard;
and Eternity for his date. He has heaven for his Palace; the earth for his
Footstool: and hell for his prison. He has laws to which nature assents, and
reason subscribes; that do not fetter us but free us: for by them nature gets
the wings of grace, and transcends the earth: Reason gets the eyes of faith,
and ascends up to heaven. He has a yoke Esa. 40.10.
indeed, but it is easy: a burden, but it is light: his reward is with him,
and his work before him. He is established in this sovereignty, not by his
subjects election of him; but by his election of his subjects: not as rayfing
himself to a higher title, but as humbling himself to a lower calling: and as
not receiving it, from a Predecessor who is before all: so never leaving it to
a successor, who is after all. This is the place where my soul shall dwell,
here will I pitch my Tabernacle: Only O Lord, let me be taken into the number
of thy subjects; and endue me with the privileges of thy Kingdom: and I will
freely and faithfully serve thee for ever. Other Lords besides thee, have
heretofore Esa. 16.13.
ruled us; but now we will remember thee only, and only thy Name.

When we make this petition to God, that his Kingdom may come; we should do
well to remember a petition which God makes to us, My son, give me thy heart:
For, unless we Prove. 13.26.
give God our hearts; whither can we think this Kingdom should come? For, if
it come to the ears, as oftentimes it makes offer at the hearing of Gods Word;
it finds that, only a Thorough-fare which lies open on every side; and no fit
place to make a residence in: and therefore commonly goes away as it came: and
makes no stay there. And if it come to the eyes, as sometime, it offers at the
sight of Gods works: It finds them not able to stay long open, but must have
their windows shut in, and so are apt to keep it out; or if they stand open
they are apt to let in vanity, which this Kingdom likes not; and therefore
cannot abide to abide there neither, but vanishes away. And indeed, these are
but Out-places; this Kingdom loves to be within us, as Christ says, The
kingdom of God is within you: and we have no Luke 17. 21.
place within us, fit to make the Seat of a Kingdom, but only our heart; and
this indeed has no back door to let it out, as the ear has; nor no
percullis to keep it out, as the eye has; but it has a large entrance, and a
boundless circuit; and therefore most fit to give this Kingdom
entertainment. And yet, as fit as it is, God will not have it, unless we give
it him; and he will not have it so neither, unless we give it him all: for it
is against his Nature to have a Partner; and he cannot abide to hear of
moyities: either he must have all, or he has nothing at all: to be a piece for
God, and a piece for the world; is to be all for the world: to conclude God at
all, is to exclude him from all. Wherefore, O my soul, mangle not thy heart in
giving it to God, but give it him all: and think thy self happy that he will
take it all: for the more he possesses it, the freer he makes it; the more he
dwells in it, the fayrer he builds it; the more reigns in it, the richer
he adornes it. O my Lord God, that thou would come and dwell in my hea^ras
the owner of it, and reign in my heart as the King of it: I should not then
envy the Palaces of Princes, nor the kingdoms of the earth: seeing I should
have within my self a Palace and a Kingdom, not only to equal, but far
to exceed them.

But what kind of Kings will this Kingdom make us? Is it, as one says: Rex
est qui metuit nihil? and indeed there is not such a King to be found amongst
all the Princes of the earth: for, how is it possible they should be without
fear; who have a sword hanging over their heads continually, but by a thread?
yet such Kings shall we be made by the coming of this Kingdom. For, whereof
should we be afraid? Of enemies? Revel. 7.16.
but they shall be all subdued under our feet. Of poverty? But we shall hunger
and thirst no more. Of nakedness? But the Sun shall not burn us by Psalm.
125.6.(...)
day, nor the Moon by night. Of sorrow? But all tears shall he wiped away
from our eyes. Of death? Revel. 7.17.
but Mors ultra non dominabitur. Yet all this will m^ke us but negative Kings,
and mere negation makes not happy: for, happiness is a positive thing, and
puts us in a real possession of all good things. And such happiness too shall
we have by the coming of this Kingdom: for, wherein, can we think, does
happiness consist? If in dainty fare? we shall eat and drink with Christ, at
his Fathers Table. If in fine clothes? we shall all be clothed in long white
robes. If Revel. 6.11.
in curious Music? we shall hear the Quier of Angels continually singing. If
in light? Fulgebimus sicut sol. If in knowledge? we shall know, as we are
known. If in dominion? we shall judge the Angels. If in joy? our joy shall be
full, and none shall be able to take it from us. If in (...) Cor. 6.3. John
15.11. John 16.22.
glorious sights? we shall see the blessed face of G^d, which is the glory of all
sights, the sight of all glory. O happy Kingd^me: O happy coming: O happy we
to whom it shall come; that we can never be intentive enough in praying; never
earnest enough in longing, that this Kingdom may come.

But does not this petition seem to cast an eye upon the Jews: seeing it is
not the Kings, but the Kingdoms coming that is here prayed for? for, their
King it was well enough known, was come: known by the Wisemens question:
Where is the King of the Jews that is M^r. 2.2.
borne? Known by the peoples acclamation: Hosanna, Blessed is the King of
Israel, that comes John 12.13.
in the Name of the Lord. Known by Pilates superscription: Jesus Nazaronus Rex
Iudaeorum: Thus their King they saw, but his Kingdom they saw not: for, how
could they see that which was spiritual with carnal eyes? neither indeed, can
they ever come to see this Kingdom, unless this Kingdom come and visit them
first. And is not this then a fit petition for them also? And if we give way to
this fancy of exposition; it will not go much a stray from the former: seeing
the coming of this Kingdom to the Jews, is the immediate Forerunner of the
coming of this King, to us that are Christians.

But it is time now to leave being Jews: and to pray for the coming not only
of the Kingdom, but of the King himself; that seeing in attire of humanity
they knew him not; and in estate of submission, they honored him not: he would
now come at length in the brightnes^e of his Deity; and in the greatness of
his Soverainety: that the eyes which scorned his humility, may be dazeled at
his glory: and that they which refused the haven of his mercy, may suffer
shipwreck on the rock of his justice. And to this end we do all of us set
our hands and hearts to that supplication of thy Saints; who groaning under the
burden of their long deferred hope, do continually with sighs present thee
this petition: Come Lord jesus, come Rev. 6.11.
quickly. And if, O God, thou have Corn behind to reap, which is not yet
sown: and stubble behind to burn, which is not yet sprung: though with
patience we will wait the season of thy pleasure, yet with prayers we will
importune the hastening of thy Harvest: and though we be not worthy to open the
Seals: Rev. 5.4.
yet we cannot choose but be tempering with the wax, that we long for no others
coming but thine own; and reckon nothing long a coming but thy Kingdom.

It is proper to this petition; that where all the other have their present
dispatches, and are put in possession of their suites, this only lives in
expectation; and is put off with a dilatory answer, for God knows how long:
yet is as well pleased with this expectation, as the others are with their
present possessions: and therefore may justly be called, the petition of hope;
but Romans 5.5.
hope that makes not ashamed: seeing it consists not in the uncertainnesse of
the matter, but only of the time.

Next to the Saints in heaven, are placed the Saints on earth: for, when it is
said, Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven: is it not plainly the
prayer of the faithful, living? seeing Christ himself, while he lived on
Earth; made use of this Petition, for our example: Father, if it be possible;
let this Cup pass from me, yet not as I will; but as thou will.

But may not this petition be thought superfluous; to pray for that which is,
and will be done, whether we pray for it or no? For, God Psalm. 135.6. Esa.
14.24. and 46.10.
does what soever he will both in Heaven and in earth: and who has resisted
his Will? But we must consider, that we pray not for God, but to God for our
selves; that having undone our selves by doing our own will; we may be
repaired, by doing of his Will: and not of his Will, absolute: but of his Will
in relation: Not, when he commands, as when he said; Let there be Light; but
when he gives Commandments; as when he said, Thou shall love the Lord thy
God, with all thy heart: We therefore pray that this Will of his may be done
of us; by our obedient and cheerful Acting it; and done in us, by our patient
and thankful suffering it; that concerning the first: we may do, as the
Captains said to Jeremy: Ier. 42.6.
whether it be good or ev^ll, we will obey the voice of the Lord; and
concerning the latter, we may say as Ely said: It is the Lord, let him do to
me, as seems good in his Eyes.

But if we understand it so: Do we not then free the Petition, from being
superfluous; and charge it, with being impossible? For, if we understand it, of
doing his Will actively: how is it possible for Earth to do it, so well as
Heaven? and if of doing it passively: how is that done in Heaven at all? and if
we can find an answer for this; shall we not perhaps free it from being
impossible; by making it, to be either slight, or improvident? for if we
understand it; of doing his will, actively; what great matter is it, for Earth
to compare with Heaven; seeing all impiety began first in Heaven? and if, of
doing his Will passively: what do we then by this Petition; but call for
Justice to be done in Earth upon our selves: as it was done in Heaven, upon the
Angels? But O my soul, consider; we say not, Thy Will be done in Earth as it
was, but as it is in Heaven: for, it is true, there was once an Apostasy in
Heaven; but it was but once: They which exalted themselves, were cast down
never to rise; and the rest have continued in their uprightness, never to
fall: for Christ has merited, as for us, to be purged from our sins; so for
them, to be established in their holiness: and what he is to us, in restoring;
he is to them in confirming.

But shall we make God so peremptory a Prince, as that his Will must stand for
a Law? Do we well to attribute that style to God; which we would scarce
attribute to a just Prince? Sic volo, Sic Iubeo; stat pro ratione voluntas?
Indeed where the Will may be separated from reason: this objection may be
reasonable, but not with God: of whose Will, it cannot be so truly said, that
it is ruled by Reason; as that it is the very rule of Reason: nothing being
otherwise reasonable, but as it is conformable to his Will: and therefore he
gave reason to man, that he might be capable to do his Will: which because
he has not given to Beasts, they are not: all other things they can do as
well, if not better then men: They can make them Nests and houses: and are
better Builders: They can hoord up, and provide before hand: and are better
husbands: They can prevent and circumvent and are better politicians: They can
extract the spirits of vegetables: and are better Alchymists: Only do the
will of God, they cannot: and therefore, how much a man applies himself to do
the Will of God; so much may he be said a reasonable Creature: but if once
he leave to do that; he is presently compared, to the beasts Psalm. 49. 20.
and 73. 22.
that perish: and yet he is favored in the comparison too: for, all things
considered, man is certainly far the more unreasonable: as appears by Gods
own complaint: The Ox knows Esa. 1. 3,
his Owner, and the Ass his Masters ^ryb; but Israel has not known; my
People has no understanding. And, though of the Will of God; we do not
always know the reason; yet we always know, there is a reason in it: unless
perhaps we shall speak more properly, that, not reason is the Rule of Gods
Will; but either his Will is Rule to it self; as he says; I will have mercy
on whom I will have mercy: or at least, some superior Faculty, far above the
capacity of our reason: of which it is said; Who has known the mind of God;
or who has been his Counselor? We are not therefore to stand upon terms with
God; and to examine or censure his Will, by any rule of our reason: (which if
Abraham had done: he had never been the Father of the faithful) but to make
an absolute submission: and humbly to say: Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is
in Heaven.

But how can we be sure at any time of doing the Will of God: seeing God
seems oftentimes variable in his Will: and continues not always in one mind?
For was it not Gods Will, that the ^sraelites should offer him sacrifices? yet
he tells them a while after: they are an abomination to him. Esa. 1.13.
Was it not Gods Will, that Balaam should go to Bal^k? yet when Balaam sadled
his Ass, and went, God sent his Angel to stop his Ass in the way: and
hindered his going. Was it not Gods Will, that Moses should number the People?
yet when David numbered the People: God smote him for it, with a heavy
punishment. And how then is it possible, to do his Will, that is so variable:
and so often changes? O my soul, take heed: for in none of these, nor ever
in any, is there any Mal. 3.6.
changeableness in God at all: all the change is in our selves. For God indeed
appointed sacrifices to the Jews that were but ceremonies, but he intended
also the substance with them: when they therefore offered not the sacrifices,
that were substantial; had not God just cause to refuse their sacrifices, that
were only ceremonial? God indeed commanded Balaam to go to Balak: but when
Balaam went with intent to curse Israel, whom God intend^d, he should bless,
had not God just cause to hinder his journey? God indeed commanded Moses to
number the people: that notice might be taken of their great deliverance; but
when David numbered them to ground a confidence upon them; had not God just
cause though not to punish his right numbering, yet to punish his wrong
confidence? For, to do the will of God, consists not so much in the act, as in
the end of doing it: otherwise we should be like Iehu; who did the will of God
indeed, in destroying all the house of Ahab: but he had his own ends in it, to
establish the Kingdom to himself. We must not therefore think of doing Gods
will, as Politicians; mingling our own ends, with Gods Will; but we must do
it as Angels, simply and purely: we must do it, only that we may do it; so
do his will, that we may do the intent of his will: and thus, if we do the
will of God, we shall find him always one and the same; and no variableness
in him at all, nor shadow of change.

We make a peti^ion here, that Gods will may be done; but should we not have
made a petition Psalm. 6.27. Col. 5.9.
first, that it might be known? as David prayed, That thy way may be known
upon earth: for until we know it, how can we do it? and how do we now know
it, seeing it seems to many to be yet sub Iudice: and so great controversy
and division about it; as if the descending of the Holy Ghost in fiery and
cloven tongues, had been of purpose to foreshew the fiery division, that
should after follow in the tongues of the Church. But should we not consider
that all Gods Law is fu'filled in our love, and while in doubtful
controversies we contend what his will is; of this we be sure, that his will
is not we should contend. And do we not find it true, that Nimium Altercando
veritas amittitur; the very heat of disputation, makes our judgments, as it
were, to warpe: that though Dav^d Psalm. 69.9.
said well; The zeal of Gods House had eaten him up: yet we cannot say well,
the zeal of Gods cause has eaten up our understanding.

But let it be granted, that we are satisfied, concerning the knowledge of his
will; seeing we have an Oracle for it, Gods word is a Lantern Psalm. 119.105.
to our feet, and a light to our path: yet what reason have we to pray, that it
may be done in earth, as it is in heaven? For, what do we know how it is done
in heaven? and so we pray, we know not for what. But do we not know, that
there are none in heaven, but Saints and Angels; who are all ministering
spirits: and being spirits, must needs serve God in spirit: and Christ fetches
this argument higher, that John 4. 24.
God himself is a Spirit: and they that worship him must worship him in spirit
and truth. If then we worship God in spirit and truth, we do his will in
earth as it is in heaven.

It is not enough to believe Gods will; as David Psalm 119.66.
said, I have believed thy Commandments, For the devils believe and tremble.
Nor to remember his will: as he also said, I will never forget thy precepts:
for such was he, of whom God complains; What have thou to do to declare mine
Psalm. 50. 16.
Ordinances; seeing thou hate to be reformed? Nor to approve his Will, as
David also said, All thy Exodus 19.8.
Commandments are true; and I know O God that thy Judgments are right: for,
this the Israelites did to Moses, when they received the law: All that the Lord
has commanded we will do, but yet did it not. Nor to love his will; as he
also said: O how I do love thy Law: for, Peter was not without love to Christ,
even then when he denied him. All these are good steps, but they go not
far enough: they are but as to look our face in a Glass, and so be gon^
There is no good to be done with God, without doing good: and therefore David
after these, uses always to add: It is my meditation continually; and I have
refrained my seete from every evil way, that I might keep thy Word: and if
the nature of our earthen vessels be such that it will not keep this water of
life untainted and in the native pureness; yet it shall be accepted of God, if
we go forward; and can truly say with David, Psalm. 119.112.
I have applied my heart to fulfill thy Statutes always, even unto the end:
and I desire to do thy will, O God. For if unfainedly and seriously we apply
our hearts to fulfill his laws, and desire to do his will, and do it to our
power; this very applying shall be counted a fulfilling; this desire shall be
reckoned for a deed; and then, we shall do his will in earth as it is in
heaven.

But whether do we make this petition, in behalf of the Will of God, to have
that enlarged; or in behalf of the earth to have that exalted? for it seems
applyable to both senses. But alas, what enlargement would it be to the Will
of God, which is now already done in heaven; to have it also to be done in
earth? For what is it, to add earth to heaven; but to add, as it were, a
drop to the Sea? but it is a great exaltation to the earth; to have the Will
of God, done in it, as it is in heaven: seeing to have power to do the Will of
God is the largest franchise that can be granted of God; and if it might be
fully enjoyed, would make the earth an equal match with heaven. But though it
be now prayed for: yet it cannot be expected, till the time come of which St.
Peter 2 P^. 3. 13.
speaks: We expect a new heaven, and a new earth wherein dwells
righteo^nesse: for then heaven and earth shall be even matches: and it will
be a new world; and news indeed; to have righteousness dwell here, where
dwells nothing now but cruelty and oppression. For alas Psalm. 14. 3,4. Esa.
1.23. Mic. (...) 7.2.
poor earth, Thou art condemned for man, to thorns and thistles: and in
revenge thereof, thou bring forth men, full of thistles and thorns; that as
thou skratchest and tearest them, so they skratch and tear one another: and
there will be no help for this till the time come, Romans 8.21.
that the Creature also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption,
into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God: and then will be the full
accomplishment of this petition.

By this petition we know that Gods will is done in heaven: and here we pray,
it may be done in earth: but seeing the petition is chiefly referred to the
honor of God; why do we not pray, it may be done in hell also? seeing hell
is a large and spacious place: as it is said, Tophet is made deep and large:
for by leaving this Esd. 30.33.
out, we leave out a spacious circuit, where his Will may be done; and so
abridge him in the extent of his command. But is it not that we therefore pray
not, his will may be done in hell; because indeed there are no doers there, but
all sufferers; they are all there in bonds, and bound from action: and if we
should understand it of doing his will passively; by suffering patiently: that
cannot be done there neither: seeing impatience is either one of their
Torments: or one of their tormentors. We justly therefore name not that place
in our prayer: because there are no persons in it that are capable of our
prayer. And yet God has a Will that is done even there, enough for his honor:
Voluntas Beneplaciti: Not that he is pleased with the damned: but that he is
pleased with their damnation. but we meddle not with this will: and therefore
meddle not with this place, where there is no other will done.

We learn by this Petition, what it is we must do, when we come to Heaven;
and does not this make men careless, whether ever they come there, or no? for,
seeing the Will of God is so unpleasing a thing to do here; how can they
think, it will be any better: or be ere a whit mended, to do it there? and
therefore, if there be nothing gotten, by going to Heaven; but doing of Gods
will: they think themselves better as they are: and would be glad to tarry
here still: where they may do their own wills. But O my soul: is not this
to be stark dead in sin? For, it there were any sense of life; or any life
of sense remaining in us; we could not choose but see the beauty, and taste the
sweetness, and smell the Odor, of doing Gods Will. Sweeter, says David, then
the honey, or the honey comb. More beautiful, says Solomon, then Cant. 1.10.
the rows of Jewels: or then chains of Gold. More fragr^t, says he also;
then an Orchard Cant. 4.13.
of Pomegranats: or then Myrrh and Aloes with all the spices. O thou eternal
light, and life of all things: so enlighten the eyes, and qui^ken the senses of
my soul and body: that I may both see the Beauty; and Taste the sweetness of
doing thy will: I shall not then need any greater motives of longing to be in
heaven: then that I may be as able, as willing: (who now am scarce willing but
altogether unable) to do thy Will.

But why do we pray that Gods Will may be done in Earth; which is done in
Earth already: and that by Creatures, which one would think, were never able
to do it? He has set bounds to the Sea, which it must not passe^ and the
Sea, as raging as it is, and provoked by all the Rivers of the Earth, that come
running into it, as it were for the nonce; to make it pass his bounds; yet
keeps it self precisely within the limits. He has appointed the earth to
stand still, and not to move; and the earth though but hanging in the Air, and
nothing at all to hang upon; yet offers not so much as once to stir. He has
chargedthe Trees, to bring forth fruit: and the Trees, though even killed with
cold of winter, and threatened with tempests of the spring; yet take heart to
come forth; and seem to rejoice, they can do as they are bidden. The very
beasts, though never so wild and savage, yet observe the properties of their
kind; and none of them encroach upon the qualities of another. And why all
this, but only to do the Will of God? And that, which may seem more strange;
the Flowers come out of the durty earth; and yet how neat, and clean? Out of
the unsavory earth; and yet how fresh and fragrant? Out of the sour earth;
and yet how mellifluous and sweet? Out of the duskish earth: and yet how Orient
and Vermillian? Out of the unshapen earth; and yet in what dainty shapes? in
what curious forms? in what enammelings and Dyapers of beauty? as if the earth
would show, that for all her being cursed; she had something yet of Paradise
left: and why all this, but only to do the Will of God? And why then should
there be complaining, as though the Will of God, were not done in earth? O
wretched man: It is only thy self that is out of tune in this harmony: Man
that should be best, is of all the worst: that should be cleanest, is of all
the foulest: that should be most beautiful, is of all the most deformed: most
full of graces, yet most void of grace: of most understanding to direct his
will, yet of least will to follow the direction of understanding: Man, endued
with celestial qualities: yet leaves them all, to encroach upon the qualities
of every beast: upon the obscenity of swine in drunkenness: upon the
greediness of Cormorants, in covetousness: upon the craftiness of Foxes in
fraud: upon the cruelty of Tigers, in malice: as if he would strive to exceed
his first parents in transgressing: and try whether God had any greater
punishment left, then casting out of Paradise, that if Christ would have served
us in our kind, and as we deserve: he needed not have gone for patterns to
Heaven, he might have found patterns good enough for us, amongst the meanest
creatures of the earth; and as he told the Pharisees; the Queen of the South,
should rise up against them in Judgment; so he might have told us; the
Flowers, the Trees, the Beasts, shall all rise up in Judgment against Man:
that Ier. 9.1.
we had more need to say: O that my head were waters; and mine eyes a fountain
of tears, that I might weep day and night: then, after Trees and Beasts have
done Gods Will; to come after them all, with but only saying; Thy Will be done
in earth, as it is in heaven.

But how do these Petitions hang together? or how is not this, directly
contrary to that which went before? For, there we desire a Kingdom, that we
may do what we list: and here we desire subjection, and to be at another
command. Yet here is no contrariety: for there, we desire to reign over our
own wills: and here we desire to be subject to his will: and this subjection,
is our true reigning; this service, our perfect freedom. Or is it not rather a
straighter Obligation? For by the coming of his Kingdom, we may be thought,
only subjects at large; but by submitting our selves to his will, we are
servants by vow: that seems to refer to Gods promise to the Israelites: Ye
shall be to me a Kingdom of Priests, and an Exodus 19.6.
holy Nation: this seems to refer to the peoples answer to God; All that
the Lord has spoken, we will do. And so there is no contrariety between the
petitions: but the latter is a consectary to the former.

But is it not rather, that we overshoote our selves; and make it here a suite
to be made bondslaves? for what is it but slavery when we can never have our
wills, but must live always subject to the will of another? especially, where
there is so great an antipathy, as between Gods Will and ours? But, O my
soul, consider how wretched a thing thine own will is! how blessed a thing
the Will of God is! and be not here a Dogmatist; but an Empyricke rather:
hearken not to thy reason, which oftentimes is but a Parasite to thy sense; but
look upon experience, which rightly discerned; will make thee always to
discern the right. Has not misery always followed the doing of our own
will? happiness always the doing of Gods Will? Our first parents left Gods
Will, to do their own will, in eating the forbidden fruit; and what fruit
followed, but the utter undoing of themselves, and all their followers? Cain
left Gods Will, to do his own will; in killing his brother: and what became
of him? but that he became a vagabond: lived like a beast: and came at last,
to be killed for a beast? Saul left Gods Will to do his own will, in sparing
Agag, and the fat of the sheep: and what was the issue: but the utter
destruction of himself, and all his issue? But look now upon those who have
gone the other way; and see how they have proved: Abraham left his own will to
do Gods Will, in offering to sacrifice his only son: and was it not his
making: and made him the father of all the faithful? ^oseph left his own will
to do Gods will; in not embracing the embraces of his Mistress: and was it not
his making; and made all Egypt embrace him for their Master? Daniel left his
own will to do Gods Will; in bowing his knee to God, against the decree of
the King of Persia: and was it not his making, and made all Persia bow their
knees to him? O wretch that I am; I now see how unhappy I am, that I have a
will; yet cannot but think my self happy, for having a will! For, if I had
not a will, I could not love God; and having a will, I cannot love him as I
should: for my will is divided, and cannot love him entirely: my will is
corrupt, and cannot love him sincerely: my will is w^vering, and cannot love
him constantly: for I am not master of my will, nor ever shall be, nor ever can
be; unless thy Will, O God, come, and help me to master it: That it is not
the making the P^tition, that makes us to be bondsl^ves; but it is our being
bondslaves that makes us to make the petition; as having no other way to
recover our freedom, but only the virtue of this Petition, Thy Will be done
in (...), as it is in heaven.

To do the Will of God, as it is done in Heaven; is not only to do it fully
for the matter; but with delight for the manner: and therefore David describing
a godly man, is not contented to say only; That he walked not in the counsel
of the (...): but he adds And his delight is in the Law of the Lord. For
without this delight there is no doing it like the Angels; who are therefore
perhaps said continually to be singing. And to quicken us the more to this
Angelical perfection; we may consider, that the delight that is taken in God,
and in the doing of his Will, does infinitely exceed the delight of all other
objects. Godliness is the perfecting of the soul; and seeing every thing
delights most in its own perfection; it must needs be, that the chief delight
of the soul, is godliness. And therefore, where the mind is not sensible of
this delight, it shows plainly, that the soul is degenerated into a gross
corruption, and stupidity. For if we did but see a glimpse of this in the
native pureness: it would plainly make appear, all worldly lustres to be but
stains; all earthly pleasures to be very pains. O Lord God, let it be the
pleasure of thy Will; that I may take pleasure in doing thy Will; for unless
it be thy pleasure, it can never be my Ier. 10.23. and 24.7.
will: for, though we may be good followers, yet we are no good beginners: and
therefore though it please thee to say, Turn unto me, and I will turn unto
you; as though we should begin first: yet we are feign to return it back, and
Ier. 3.7.
say; Turn us, O Lord, and we shall be turned: for, Ier. 3.20. Lam. 5^21.
we, God knows are too unweldy to turn us of our selves: It must be done by
strong hand, and none has strength enough to do it; but thou, O God, Esa.
40.10.
who art the God of strength. And if we would strive as much with the Angels
for holiness; as we do with men, for place, and dignity: we should find God
as ready to take our parts as he was to take our nature; and by such a help of
such a helper, we should be able to make good our saying, Thy Will be done in
earth, as it is in heaven.

We may know, what it is to do Gods Will in earth, as it is in heaven: by that
which St. John tells of the four and twenty Elders; That Esa. 4.10.
they cast down their Crowns before the Throne of God, saying; Thou art
worthy, O God, to receive glory, and honor, and power: for so must we do by
our wills, which are indeed our Crowns: cast them down, and resign them up
to God: but cast them down, not cast them away: resign them, but yet retain
them: for without wills of our own, we can never do Gods Will: unwilling
service is never acceptable: as St. Paul says, If I do it willingly, I have a
reward: 1 Cor. 9.17.
and thus, if we can have wills of our own, and yet not do our own wills,
if we can willingly renounce our own wills, and take Gods Will in their
room, and make it our own will: we shall then do with our wills, as the
Elders did with their Crowns: and then we shall do Gods Will, as it is done
in heaven.

It is a hard matter oftentimes for flesh and blood, to say this petition: For,
could our first parents well say it, when they were cast out of Paradise? Nay,
did the Apostles (who were something more then flesh and blood) well say it,
when Christ told them of his departure from them? yet see the weakness of our
judgments: the darkness of our understandings: This casting out of Paradise,
was thorough Gods grace, an occasion of attaining to a far better Paradise:
for if they had tarried there still, the Son of God had never come into the
world: this departing of Christ from them was a means John 16.17.
of his coming nearer to them: for if he had not departed, the holy Ghost had
not come. And thus, the two greatest seeming crosses that possibly could be,
proved the two greatest real blessings that could be possible. And what
account then can be made of these petty crosses, or of these petty blessings,
which happen daily to us in this world? Surly in prosperities, we may well
moderate our selves with this fear; that they do but prepare a way for us to
greater crosses: and in adversities, we may well comfort our selves with this
hope; that they do but prepare a way for us, to greater blessings. Let us
therefore endeavor always, and do our best, that the best may happen; but
let us always think that best whatsoever happens: so we shall neither clip
the wings of hope, for the future; and we shall give patience a firm ground
to stand upon for the present; and let us remember, that as it has been said
of old: Periissemus nisi Periissemus: so it has been observed of old;
Tolluntur in altum, ut lapsu graviore ruant: that if we give experience leave
to speak the truth: She will tell us, There is not a weaker threatner, nor a
stronger flatterer then fortune is: and therefore, we can never have any just
cause to hinder us from laying: Thy Will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

It is a fearful thing to make this a petition to God; if we do not withal,
make it a rule to our selves, that all the actions of our life, may be squared
by it. And therefore, O my soul; if matter of profit, be offered to thee; lay
it to this Rule; whether it be according to the Will of God, or no: for if it
be not; what great advantage soever it make show of, account it but loss. If
matter of honor be offered unto thee: Lay it to this Rule, whether it be
according to the Will of God, or no: for if it be not, what great advancement
soever it pretend; account it but shame. If matter of pleasure be offered unto
thee: Lay it to this Rule, whether it be according to the Will of God or no:
for if it be not; what pleasing suggestion soever it has; account it but
misery. It was conceived by Ahab; that it would be for his profit, to buy
Naboths Vineyard; but when he would not lay it to this rule; he paid for his
purchase, with his blood to Dogs. It was pretended to Pharaoh: that it would
be for his honor, to pursue the Israelites: but when he would not lay it to
this rule: he perished himself, and all his Host, in the red Sea. It was
suggested to Solomon, that it would be for his pleasure, to entertain the love
of strange women; but when he would not lay it, to this rule: God laid it to
his charge, both raising up adversaries against himself, and renting the
Kingdom from his Son to his servant. We must first therefore endeavor to
make it a rule to our selves: and then we may safely make it a petition to God;
otherwise, if we say to God, Thy Will be done, and intend not to do it; we
shall but turn the petition from active into passive: Gods Will into his
anger: and draw it down to be done upon us in earth; as it was done in heaven
upon the Angels.

Many can say this petition devoutly enough, so long as they understand it not:
but when they are told how Christ said it, Not my will, but thy Will: and
thereby come to know, that to pray for doing of Gods Will, is to pray against
doing their own wills; against their unlawful lusts; against their covetous
desires; against their ambitious designs; against their malicious practices,
and such like: then it strikes cold to their hearts; their tongues cleave to
the roof of their mouths: and they could wish the petition might never be
made. But he that understands it, and yet stands to it; he that speaks it more
from his heart then with his tongue; he that is resolved to say it, because he
says, as he is resolved: this man makes it a prayer for himself, and an
Hallelujah to God; and shall reap the fruit of both in the due time: to the
other, it proves but as the sacrifice of fools: and if it make a noise, it is
but as the tinkling of a Cimball: a Music, at which God stoppes his Ears,
only the Devil makes himself merry.

But do we not by saying this petition, seem to forget both God, and our
selves? For, is not God most Just? are we not most sinful? and what can be
the Will of a Just God to heinous sinners, but wrath and indignation? and will
we pray that the Viols of Gods wrath may be poured down upon us? It is true:
we come afterward and say, Forgive us our trespasses: if this had been said
first; and we had first obtained a pardon of our sins; we might then with
some confidence have said, Thy will be done: but whilst we are in our sins;
and not so much as a pardon asked: to come now with this petition, and to put
our selves boldly upon Gods Justice: what can it seem to argue, but great
precipitation and inconsiderate rashness? But is it not, that this petition is
also one of our Hallelujahs to God: and a petition made by way of Hallelujah,
seems of all other the most effectual? although what need we go so high,
seeing we have familiar reason enough beside? For, what danger can there be in
saying, Thy Will be done: having said before, Our Father which art in heaven?
for we come not now, as strangers to a Judge; but as children to a father: and
that which is more, to a merciful father; and that which is most of all, to a
most merciful father: and which is more then that most, to a merciful father,
who is Father of all mercy, and of mercy to all: and yet this is not all: for
may we not observe, that we pray indeed, that Gods Will may be done in earth;
but how? as it is in heaven. And how is it done in heaven, but in bounty and in
mercy? for, even the Heavens, and even the Angels themselves have need of Gods
mercy; as it is said, His mercy is over all his works. And upthis Foundation
of Gods mercy we may build our assurance, that Gods will is not then done,
when his creatures are undone; but that, as it was his pleasure at first to
make us; so it is his Wisd. 11.25.
pleasure still to preserve us: and as from his everlasting Will, we all have
our life: so by his Will, we should all have everlasting life. When as yet we
were not: his Will was we should be: Now that we are, his Will is we should be
holy. And if any man sin, his will is, he should repent: and if a man
repent, his Will is, he should be saved. Let this Will, O Lord, be as thy last
will; which yet can come but as a stream from the Fountain of thy first will:
for, as it was merely thy Will, that at first made thee to make us; so it is
merely thy Will, that must lam. 1.18.
make us to be holy; that must make us to repent, that must make us to be
saved. These wills in God, are as the chain of his mercy; whereof every link
is fastened to one another; and all of them firmly fastened upon us, unless by
the violence of our sins, and the finfulnesse of our wills, we do wilfully
break them. O God, so frame our wills, that they may be fit linkes to be
fastened to this chain of thy will; that as one link drawn on, draws on
another: so our spirits being guided by thy grace, may be guids to our flesh:
and that our flesh, as living by thee, may live to thee: knowing, that though
the way of thy Will may be troublesome in the going; yet the journey shall be
comfortable in the ending: and though it be the secret of thy Will, that in
doing it we shall meet with many crosses; yet it is the purpose of thy Will,
that by doing it we shall purchase many joys; and therefore can have no cause
to make us afraid to say: Thy Will be done in earth as it is in heaven.

But is it not too great a boldness in this Petition; that where all the other
make suite for great, yet possible things; this only makes a suite which is
impossible? for how can earth bring forth as good fruit as heaven? how can men
perform as perfect duties as the Angels? Indeed not in equality, but in
similitude: Not to do as well as they; but to do our best, as well as they:
Not that our Vessels can be as bright as theirs, but be as clean; and not
hold as much, but be as full. And even this cleanness; and even this fullness
not of our selves: For what cleanness can there be in dirt? or what fullness
in vessels that are full of holes? and such we are all of us, not only ex
humo, but ex limo, and Pleni rimarum; quenching the spirit as fast as it is
kindled; all our cleanness is in him: to whom we say, Purge me with Hisop, and
I shall be clean: all our fullness from him: of whom it is said; Of his
fullness we have all received. He only that has set us the task can give
us, the power: and by him we may attain to that of St. Paul; I can do all
things in him that comfort me: for by the comfort of this Comforter, it may
be possible to make the petition possible; Thy Will be done in earth, as it is
in heaven.

But if it be only in similitude; why do we pray only to be like the Angels:
and pray not rather, to be like God himself? as Christ would have us: Be ye
holy, as your heavenly Father is holy: Math. 5.48.
Be ye perfect, as he is perfect: for now we make a prayer that comes short
of Christ's precept. Is it not that the perfectest patterns that can be, are
in both places propounded to us? and therefore here, where it is matter of
obedience; the Angels are our patterns: of whom D^vid says, Praise the Lord
all ye his Angels; that do his Commandment, in obeying the voice of his
Word: but this pattern, God cannot be, seeing obedience cannot be, where there
is no superior: but where it is matter of holiness or perfection; there God
must be our pattern: and therefore we justly forbear to speak of Angels;
where we have a pattern to speak of in God himself. O Lord God, if I cannot
be like thee in holiness: yet let me be like the Angels in obedience: and If
I can attain to neither, let me at least aspire to both; and what I want in
power, and performance: make me to supply with vows, and prayer.

The time was when Angels might have envyed man for his happiness: but now man
has just cause, (if any cause can be just) to envy Angels for their
happiness: for what happiness can be greater then to be made patterns of
holiness: and that by God, to the Image of God? by the Son of God, to the
Sons of God? But, O blessed Spirits, we envy you not, but admire you rather:
for, why should we envy you for continuing holy; who pity us for not
continuing? and not only pity us, but do your best to relieve us? And how can
we choose but admire you for patterns; who so far exceed the proportion of
patterns? Patterns are but examples, but you are also Assistants: Patterns
do but lie before us, but you pitch your Tents round about us: Patterns do
but light us to the likeness, but you delight, to have us be like you. And how
then can we envy you for being our betters: who envy not us, to become your
equals? O blessed Spirits, we envy you not, but admire you rather; and
willingly, not only accept you for our patterns; but under Christ,
acknowledge you for our Guardians.

And here now seems a fit ^lace to sit down and wonder, at the unspeakeable
love and bounty of God, expressed toward us in these three petitions: For by
the first, we are assured of eternity: by the second, of a Kingdom: by the
third, to be like the Angels: or if we like it better to say; By the first,
we are informed what we shall be, as Angels. By the second, what we shall
have, A Kingdom. By the third, what we shall do; The Will of God. These are
blessings worthy to come from a heavenly Father; these are rewards which
worthily become a bountiful Master. And now, let the Swine (flesh and blood)
go murmr against God, that he is a hard Father; and a bad Master: and that
there is no profit in serving him; because he gives them not the Mal. 3.14
mire of the world to wallow in; as though he had no other way to express his
favors, but by cloddes of earth: but do thou, O my soul, meditate upon these
petitions; and in them upon these blessings; and in these, upon the infinite
love and bounty of God: and think how happy thou art to have such a Father:
how much thou art bound to love such a Master: and think not much to love him
with thy whole heart: seeing he has blessings to bestow upon thee which cannot
enter into thy heart: think not much Esa. 61.3.
to submit thy self wholly to his Will; seeing his Will is, to give thee
beauty for ashes: the Oil of gladness for mourning: that we shall ever find
it a most happy thing for us to say Thy Will be done in earth, as it is in
Heaven.

It is proper to this petition: that where the other seem to wait at Gods
Throne: this only waits at his footestoole: and where the other, sing only
the high note, Glory be to God on high: this seems to add a Base: saying, In
Earth as it is in Heaven. And it may justly be called the petition of
obedience: seeing, all the other have their ends in enjoying; this only has
no end but in obeying.

Next to these, as I may say, of the higher House; come in the commons: and
first, takes place a generality, as it were a corporation: for when it is said;
Give us this day our daily bread: is it not plainly the prayer of all living
creatures? whether living the life reasonable: or the life sensitive: or even
the life only vegetative? For of unreasonable creatures, it is said: The Lions
seek their meat at God, and the young Psalm. 104.21. Psalm. 147.9.
Ravens call upon him, and he feeds them. And of vegetables, it is manifest,
that though the Corn give bread to us; yet God gives bread to the Corn, by
his dewes from heaven. And Psalm. 65.9. Hos. 2.22.
even the Angels, though they have no bodies, yet they have their bread too: of
which it is said, Psalm. 78.25. Psalm. 145.15.
Man did eat the bread of Angels: and of all together, it is said: All things
look up to thee, and thou give them meat in due season; thou openest thy
hand, and fillest with thy blessing every living creature. But as these
several kinds of creatures may be conceived to have their several ways in
making use of this petition: so man, as the summary of them all, partakes with
all of them in all the ways of using it. He partakes in using it, with the
vegetables, by indigence of Nature: He partakes in using it, with the beasts;
by appetite of sense: He partakes in using it, with the Angels; by
acknowledgement of the Author, and thankesgiving for their preservation; as
may be thought included in their Allelujah. In the two former, it is the prayer
of nature: In the latter, of grace: which therefore ought chiefly to be
intended, least seeking only to seed our bodies, God send leanness into our
souls.

This Petition of asking bread, is placed here, in the midst of these
petitions; not as some carnal man would think, to serve as a bayte in the
midst of a journey; nor yet as some worldly man would think, least if we
should speak of our trespasses first, we might happily be denied it: but
therefore it is placed here between Saints and sinners, to show, that
temporal blessings are distributed indifferently to them both; and that they
lie as the commons of Gods general goodness; not as the severals of his
special favor. Or may it not give us to observe; that it stands below the
petition of Saints, to show that temporal blessings are below their
consideration; and that with them, the doing of Gods Will, is before the
providing for their own necessities: but it stands above the petition of
sinners, to show, that temporal benefits are the highest of their thoughts;
and that they set them before even their very salvation.

God made the world without stuff: and he could nourish man without food: but
as his pleasure was, to make man of the dust of the earth: so his pleasure is,
to feed man with the fruit of the earth; that she which was the mother, might
also be the nource: and that seeing from whence we are come; and feeling to
what we are come; we might have within our selves continual remembrancers, to
put us in mind of what we have need to have, and of whom we have need to ask.

Thou O God, have given this life to man, for a time of trial; and thou have
placed man in this life in estate of frailety; that leaving him in distress
thou may see what succor he will seek; and least it should be no fault in
him to forget thee, if he had no use of thee: thou have laid a necessity upon
him to make him remember thee. Thou have enough O Lord, to give to every one
enough: and thy skill serves thee, to serve all alike; but thy pleasure is, to
weigh thy gifts unto us in uneven skales: for the revealing and trial of somes
repining, and others ingratitude: and for the trial and exercise of somes
patience and others charity.

This prayer for bread; seems to be a petition preferred by the stomach; or
at least, for the stomach. For, all other parts of the body, have as I may
say, their certain revenues, and have all of them provision brought in
continually; only the stomach is a day-labourer; and has nothing to live on
but what it can get abroad, from day to day: and if it miss but a day, the
whole body fares the worse for it, God knows how long after. And is not this
now, a glass of our mortality? seeing our stock of life lies all in the hands
of the stomach: and yet the stomach has nothing, but what it gets with the
hands? Or is it not a glass rather for our pride? seeing all the strength and
beauty of our bodies, (of which we are so proud) have yet no other maintenance,
then what they receive from this one poor day-labourer, the stomach? but most
of all; is it not a glass of Gods bounty? for if we have as good a stomach
to make the petition, as the petition is of purpose made for the stomach: we
may live as happily by this daily alms, as others do with their full barnes:
seeing God gives plentifully to all that ask; not only beyond their asking,
but oftentimes beyond their desiring: especially when they ask as the stomach
does here, not for wantonness, but for want.

But is it not a petition of idleness; to think to have that of God by
prayer, which must be had by our own policies, and labors? For, who ever
reaped, that did not sow? who ever gathered fruit, that did not plant? and what
bread should Jacob have had, if he had not bestird him, with his father in
law, Laban? It is true indeed, Jacob took care for his living; but he had
made his way to God by prayer, when he made his prayer to God upon the way:
and vowed his vow, If God will give me bread to eat, Genesis 2^, 20.
and raiment to put on; then shall the Lord be my God: for otherwise he might
have laid his sticks in his Ewes troughes long enough; before his Flocks
should ever have had such strange increase. For, when God gives us our bread;
it comes easily to us, because our labors are succesfull; and leave us fresh
to the enjoying: but when we think to have it only by our labor; it tyres
out our spirits: we make our selves but Silk-wormes, and spin our selves to
death. When we have bread of Gods giving; there comes a blessing with it: It
is not only Noster, but Nobis; Hab. 1.16.
not only ours, but for our good: but when we have it, by sacrificing to our
nets; God blows upon it; we plant the Vineyard, and another eats the Grapes.
When God gives us our bread, it turns to good nourishment, and is a staff of
life unto us; but when it is gotten as Gehezi got gifts of Naaman: It breeds
ill blood, and turns to a leprosy.

There are some that possess their daily bread, and yet enjoy it not; of such
Solomon speaks, Eccles. 6.2.
God gives them riches, and honors, but gives them not power to eat thereof;
and such a one was Nabal. There are some that enjoy their daily bread and yet
possess it not, and such were the Apostles: as having all things, and yet
possessing no thing. There are some that possess it, and enjoy it both: of
whom Solomon also says; There is nothing better for a man then to eat and
drink; and let his soul enjoy good in his labor: and such a one was Abraham:
and there are some that neither possess it, nor enjoy it; and such are such as
Lazarus. Yet are these men as miserable as they seem, in better case then
those that possess it, and enjoy it not; for these have at least, the comfort
of a hope; but those may have the hope; but shall never have the comfort of
Abraham's bosom.

But why should we use this word of giving? for if it be our due; why should
we not ask it, by the word of Paying? and is it not our due, when we have
deserved it? and have we not deserved it by the great services we have done to
God in the former petitions? O my soul, all this is but proud flesh; there is
no soundness at all in it: for, all which thou have done, The hallowing his
Name: The advancing his Kingdom: The doing his Will; All is but the tribute
due unto him: and is a Prince indebted to his subject for paying him his
Tribute? And such is our case with God; all we can do is but to pay him his
Tribute: we cannot deserve so much as a bit of bread: either we must have it
of his free gift, or not at all. Wherefore, O my soul, make much of this Word
Giving; and give it not over in any wise; but account it the greatest strength
of thy Title; the best Title of thy tenure; for if thou look for any thing at
Gods hands, unles by his free gift, thou mistakest thycase clean; and may
stand without doors, amongst the foolish Virgins. For are there not many, that
spend the day in carfulness, and the night in watchfulness, and yet thrive
not? many that tire their bones with labor, and their brains with contriving,
and yet prosper not? Many, that do nothing else, but add and multiply, and
yet increase not? and all because they seek to have that by purchase which
must be had by gift; and strive as it were to extort that from God by violence:
which is not to be obtained but by prayer. When ye want it, ask God for it;
and he will give it: when ye have it, thank God for it, and he will bless
it: Such is the kindness of his love; and the franknesse of his bounty; that
if we ask him, he counts it a desert; and if we thank him, he takes it for a
recompense.

This is one way, and a perfect one, for getting of bread, by praying for it;
yet Solomon tells us of another, a more active way; which yet has its force
from this: Cast thy bread upon the waters, and after many days thou shall
find it. For Eccles. 11.1.
indeed, as poor men stand begging at rich men's gates; so rich men stand
begging at Gods gate: and the next way to receive it, is to give it; and if
they will have their need, helped; and their hunger filled: they must help the
needy, and fill the hungry.

In this petition, there is nothing to be seen, but bread to put in our
mouths; yet here is a bridle put into our mouths withal: for, what we ought
not to pray for, we ought not to desire; but we are taught to pray only for
necessities: and therefore to restrain our selves from desiring superfluities.
The worldly man would know why asking riches he continues poor? and why
asking honors, he continues base? Know O fool: that with asking thou
speedest not, because with faith thou ask not; for faith asks not for
superfluities, but for necessities; not wherewith to satisfy the flesh, which
having never so much, has never enough; but wherewith to content the mind;
which, the greater it is, with the less it is contented.

Many doubts may be raised by graceless fancies about this petition: some may
think it an absolute discharge from Fasting; and that we may gather from
hence, that we need not to fast at all: for, Fasting is an abstinence from
meat one whole day at least: and here we ask bread for every day; and we
should never be appointed to ask it, if we were not allowed to eat it: Some
may conceive, that it is a fit prayer to be said in the morning when we rise;
but not at night when we go to bed: for, what should we do praying for bread
for the day, when the day is spent? and when we have eaten as much already as
we mean to do? Some may reckon it, a prayer necessary for poor men; but
superfluons for rich: for, what should they do praying for bread for the day,
who have bread before hand for many years? Some may suppose the petition is
but in jest: for why should they ask so course a thing as bread, who have so
much provision of more curious and dainty fare? But all these, for all their
provision seem not provided of understanding, to know what this petition
means. For by saying, Give us this day our daily bread: they pray as well for
others as for themselves: and even for themselves they have cause enough to say
it; and to say it at all times and in all estates. For, is there not a blessing
to be asked before the eating, as well as a gift before the having? Is there
not a blessing to be asked after the having as well as a gift before the
e^ting? Is it enough to have bread in our barnes, if we have not means to
bring it to our mouths? Is it enough to have bread in ou mouths, if we have
not power to digest it in our bodies? Know therefore, O thou, whose barnes are
full; thou have as much need to say this petition, as the poorest man, that
has not a grain. For, there are so many things belonging to Gods giving us
our bread; that the only possessing it, is the least matter of a hundred; and
unless Gods blessing be had withal, is scarce worth the having. For indeed^,
bread and all other external things, are of themselves, but lumpes and pieces
of the first Chaos; that unless their proceed some words out of the mouth of
God upon them; there is neither light nor life: neither strength nor comfort,
either from them to us, or in them for us. For, what was the great Lord 2 King.
7.
the better, that there was plenty of bread in Samaria; when he was trodden to
death before he came at it? what were the Israelites the better for having of
Quails; when they went in at their mouths, and came out of their nostrils?
what was the rich man the better for having more then his Barnes could hold;
when a voice came suddenly: Stulte, hac nocte repentent animam tuam? For if the
blessing of God be not in company: either, we shall not have bread; or having
it, we shall not be able to use it: or using it, we shall not be strengthened
by it: or strengthened, we shall not continue; or continuing, we shall not be
satisfied; or satisfied, we shall not be contented. For all these degrees, and
many more then these, are all contained in Gods giving us our bread. God gives
us our bread, when he gives the earth strength to bring forth bread: Deuteronomy.
11.14.
God gives us our bread, when he sends seasonable weather, to gather in our
bread: God gives us our bread, when he grants us peace and quiet to eat our
bread: God gives us our bread, when he gives us health and strength to earne
our bread: and if we could reckon up all the ways of Gods giving us our bread;
we should find them to be more then the very grains of Corn of the bread we
cate. Which if men would well confider, they would rather be humbled with sense
of their just defects; then be puffed up with conceit of their vain excess.

It is a cheerful thing to think of day; for then the Eyes see, the Feet
walk, the stomach feeds; and every part has something to do, or may do
something to delight it. But what says the watchman of Dumah? The morning Esa.
21.12.
comes; and also the night; as fearful to think of, as the day was
cheerful: and therefore as we open our eyes to entertain the day; so
shutting our eyes is entertainment for the night. And why then do we not as
well pray for sleep for the night, as for bread for the day? why take we not
as much care for our eyes, as for our stomachs? Is it not, because this
follows necessarily upon that? For, when God Psalm. 127.2.
in the day gives us our daily bread; he gives us in the night our natural
rest: but when men Eccles. 5.12.
have bread in the day not given them of God; there when night comes, they are
keept waking with cares; and the unquietness of their minds lets not their
bodies take rest. Or is it not a worse matter? that when God gives us our daily
bread, he gives us withal the light of his countenance: but where there is
bread, not given of God; there men may revell it out, and run riot for a
time; but when the night comes they are left without light; and their portion
is to be cast into utter darkness. Or is it, that as bread feeds us in the
day, so sleep feeds us in the night: and then if sleep be bread for the
night; in praying for bread for the day, we pray as well for sleep for the
night; for the evening and the morning make but one day.

But what is this day, for which we ask bread? Is it the natural day of four
and twenty hours? or is it the day of our natural life? For, if it be that
day a little bread will serve; but if it be this day, it requires good store.
But be not deceived, less bread may serve for this then for that: for in that
day we are sure of so many hours: but in this day we are not sure of one
minute of an hour.

But why do we ask bread but for a day? would it not be less trouble to
God; and more providence for our selves to ask it for a longer time? Indeed,
if it could be had: but there is no having it for more then a day: our barnes
may have it for a longer time, but our bodies cannot: for, as it is out of the
very necessity of nature, that we ask for bread; so it is, to the full extent
of Nature, that we ask it for a day. For let us eat never so much; let us
fill our bellies never so full too day; yet it will serve but for a day; too
morrow we shall need it again as much as we did before, unless we should
think of praying for miracles; and to do as Elias did, go forty days
together in the 1 King. 19. 8.
strength of one meals meat: which we have small reason to think of; seeing
Christ denied miracle to James and John; as well as he loved them; and though
they asked him for it in his own behalf. And may it not be another sense of
the word, Too day; that though it be expressed only in this petition; yet it
is to be understood also in the petitions following? For the three former are
common to us with the Saints in Heaven: but the three latter are proper only
to us; and no way communicable to any of them: the three former are without
limitation of time; but these three latter are bounded with time: they must be
obtained either now or never; in this life or not hereafter: they prepare us
indeed for another life; but when another life is once come: both the prayers,
and the things prayed for, shall all cease: for after the day of this life,
there shall be no more eating of bread, against the Millenaries: No more
forgiving of trespasses, against the Origenists: No more deliverance from
evil, against the Purgatorians.

David prayed God to teach him to number Psalm. 90. 31.
his days; as though they were so many, that he could not number them without
a teacher; yet they made all but threescore and ten years; which a mean
Arithmetician would easily cast up: We have here but a day to reckon; and yet
we shall never reckon it aright, unless God teach us, though we cannot
properly say to number it; yet to measure it: which is all one: for we shall
have as much benefit, by measuring our day; as David found by numbering his
days; and we shall find it as hard a matter to measure our day truly; as
David did to number his days rightly: and as it is difficult to measure it
true; so it is dangerous to measure it false: for if we take the measure too
long, it may prolong our repentance; and make us surprised, with stulte hac
nocte: and if we take it too short, it may shorten our providence; and make us
a laughing-stocke to the Ant: we must therefore have a composition, made of
these two; of Providence and Repentance: and this will be the best Elixir, to
keep our life alive; and the truest rule to measure our day: but this we
shall never be able to do; unless we pray as David did; that God will teach
us to measure our day.

We may know our days, to be very miserable; seeing we are beholding to bread
that we live a day: and we may know our building, to be very unstable; seeing
it has no Foundation, but is feign to stand upon proppes: for what are food
and raiment, but the proppes of our life? And will any man that is wise, in
seeking to uphold his ruinous house: choose rather to use fine proppes that be
weak, then course ones that be strong? Dainty fare; and costly apparel are
indeed the finer proppes; but course fare, and plain clothes are the
stronger: are we so unwise, to keep so much a do for getting the finer; and
are not contented when we have the stronger?

Is it not strange that having but a day to live; we should make such provision
for many years? and yet are not sure to live out this short day neither. Ere
it be long, there will come a long day; for which all the provision we can
make, will be little enough: Are we so unwise to make so much provision for
this short day: and for that long day to make so little? for indeed, to have
bread against that day will be worth the having: and if it were not for the
day we hope to live then: the day we live now, were not worth the living.

There is nothing more dear to us then this day of ours: yet we are ever
finding fault with it: either it is too short: or it is teadious: or it is
uncertain: It seldom contents us; never satisfies. I cannot therefore blame
thee, O my soul, if thou often fall into these wishing kind of thoughts: O
when shall the time be, Rev. 10.6.
that time shall no more be: and when will the day come, after which shall
come no night: Esa. 60.19.
but now and hereafter shall be one season: too day, and for ever of one
continuance. For, we shall then find no more fault either with the shortness,
which never shall have ending; or with the teadiousnesse, which ever shall have
pleasure; or with the uncertainenesse, which shall be more fixed, then the
poles of Heaven.

But are we so tied to asking bread for the day; that we must not be
careful to provide against too morrow? must we be so careless of providing
any thing before hand; that we must never look further then for the present?
Is this the meaning of Christ's speech, where he says, Take no care for the
morrow: that when Math. 6.34.
we rise in the morning, we should be to seek of meat for our dinner? This
perhaps may be feared to be taken by some: but such taking is mistaking: for
we may observe, Christ says not, Take no care for meat to eat: but, Take no
care what ye shall eat. Abraham could feast three Angels, with a Calfe, and a
Cake; and all the meats of Nature serve not our turns, unless we feed upon
Art. This is that which Christ forbids; our affecting curiosity, not our
providing for necessity: for if he should do this, he should deny that
wisdom to us which Solomon commends in Ants; who provide in the Summer
against the Winter; and should cast upon us an affected carelessness, so far
from faith; that it is worse then Infidelity: as St. Paul says: He that
provides not for his Family, is 1 Timothy 5.8.
worse then an Infidel. The restraint therefore of care enjoined us by Christ;
is from curiosities, not from necessities: from superfluities, not from
sufficiencies: from the licorish longing after this or that meat, not from the
natural desire of some meat: from faring like Dives, deliciously; not from
faring soberly like Abraham. Or is it that when Christ says; Take no care what
you shall eat: he means by care, our chiefest care; as that which possesses
and takes up our whole heart: and indeed the word used by Christ imports as
much: for the smaller (...)
cares, stand I may say, without doors in our mind: it is the chiefest care,
that takes up all the room within: and this care must be kept for the Kingdom
of God: which as St. Paul says, Romans 14.11.
is not meat and drink: so there is a care which we take, and a care with
which we are taken: and we must not be taken with care what we shall eat;
and yet we must take care what we shall eat: for it seems not so much the
care, as the degree of care that is forbidden us; and care in a low degree is
in Christ's account, of no degree; and such care we may take for what we shall
eat; and yet observe Christ's counsel, to take no care what we shall eat.

But why pray we for our daily bread, as though we would have but one kind of
meat continually to feed upon? For if there be change, how is it daily? and
who would not soon be weary of such a diet? Is it, that howsoever there be
variety or change of meats, yet bread is always one; and is only, we may
justly say, of the Quorum of meats? for though man lives not by bread only:
yet only bread is necessary for man to live by. Or is it, that coming here a
begging to God; we are put into the right language of beggars? who commonly
ask a farthing, when yet they hope for a better alms? Or is it to make us
sensible of our estate; that have not so much as a bit of bread, but what it
pleases God in mercy, to bestow upon us?

But when we say, Give us our bread: do we ^ot speak, as though we thought,
God meant to keep our bread from us and put us to asking for that which is our
own already? But is it not, that we call it ours indeed: but yet not ours,
till God give it: And therefore we give Gods Giving the first place? Or do
we therefore call it ours, because we earne it with our labor? but therefore
Gods gift, because it is he that blesses our labors? Or therefore our bread,
because a convenient nourishment for our bodies: but therefore Gods gift,
because he gives it the virtue of nourishing? Or therefore our bread, because a
competent proportion for us? but therefore Gods gift, because it is he that
gives our portion to us? and though Christ here set the words together for us;
and make them easy to be said; yet we shall find them apt to fly asunder
again, and not easy to be practiced. For let our hand swarve but a little;
and we shall either lay too much upon Gods giving; and too little upon our
bread: or too much upon our bread; or too little upon Gods giving. For if we
depend so upon Gods giving, that we neglect our own Endeavors; we shall but
tempt God; and put him to work miracles, when there is no cause. Or if we
depend so upon our own endeavors, that we depend not withal, and above all
upon Gods giving; we shall then tempt him more, and commit Idolatry, by
sacrificing to our nets. We must therefore weigh the words well; and give each
ingredient, its just quantity; or we shall never make a composition that will
be profitable: or an exposition that will be reasonable.

But why should Christ tie us to asking only for bread, and not allow us, to
ask a larger Donative, as Riches and Honors? seeing it is all one to God, to
give us Quails, or Manna; and he can make Gold and Silver, as common as Stones
in the street, as well to us, as he did to Solomon. No doubt he can do it, and
no doubt he would do it; if it were for our good that he should do it. We
may therefore know, that certainly, Riches and Honors, are not of that worth
the world esteems them. They add indeed to our wings; but they add much more
to our unweldinesse and weight: they enlarge the Eccles. 5.11.
sails of our Ship; but they increase much more the labors and burden. And
in adding to our wings, we are paid but with Feathers; where in adding to our
weight, there is laid a Tax upon our substance: in adding to our sails we
do but gain breath; where in adding to our labors; we try our very spirits.
Besides, It is an ill quality, that Riches and Honors have, they are better
Assequentibus then Assecutis: more pleasing in their chase then in their
purchase. They are too great for our bodies, and too little for our minds. They
are more then we can use; and yet less then we would have; and so are faulty
in both the extremes: both in being superfluous, and in being defective. They
are not so good as health, for you cannot buy health with all your money; and
as little are you able to keep it: and every sickness takes away both their
use and relish. And therefore the poorest man that is, has oftentimes a
richer Jewel then all the other riches of the world: for, having life and
health: he has those things for saving whereof the richest wares in a tempest
are thrown over-boord. And if we observe it, we shall find, that these
Jewels of life and health are oftener lost, by having more then bread, then by
having less: oftener by surfeiting, then by starving. They therefore which have
this Diamond of life; and this Pearl of health; though they have withal but
the Flint of bread; may justly be accounted of greater Ecclus. 30.15.
worth then they who have the Spices, and precious Stones of both the Indies.
For they have as David says most truly, more true contentment Psalm. 4.7.
and joy of heart; then they whose Wheat and Wine does most abound. And to say
the truth, these Riches and Honors, are things of which we may say, Sic Nos
non Nobis: we have them more from others and for others: then from or for our
selves. For if there were no others but our selves; there neither could be any
having of Honors, nor would be any desiring of Riches: And what have we to
do with others? Indeed in civil duties we have both to obey the Magistrate,
and to do good offices amongst our neighbors: but when it concerns the mind
and contentment of spirit; what have we to do with others? we shall never have
any true contentment and joy of mind; until we can reduce our selves to the
solitariness that Adam was in, when there was none in the world but he and
Eve: (for these two in true account are but as one) and this perhaps made St.
Paul profess that he was crucified to the world; and the world to him: there
was no more relation between the world and him, then between the living and
the dead; between things that are, and things that are not. As therefore the
Disciples took Christ walking upon the water, for a Phantasme or Ghost: so we
may justly take all that walk in the world for Ghosts and Phantasmes; as if
there were none other really in the world, but Christ and our selves. And why
should not I so wholly intend to God, as if there were none in the world but
himself and I: seeing he so wholly intends to me, as if there were none in the
world but my self and he? For until we can do this, we shall never come
to walk with God in the Garden of Eden. There will be no quietness of mind,
until we can be at home with our selves; and no such being at home, unless
we can be free from others. There will be no happiness until we can be
united to God; and no such uniting, unless we can be divided from the world.
Let it therefore never trouble thee, when thou see a man grow rich, and his
house to prosper: for this were but to take up David's errors when he himself
has cast them off; for after, when he entered into the sanctuary, he
understood their end. For these causes, this life of ours is justly compared to
a Stage Play; where the matter is not great what part the Player acts, whether
of a beggar or of a King; all the matter is, what share he shall receive when
the Play is ended. Lord, let me be a sharer with thy Saints in the life to
come; and let me act in this life what part it pleases thee to impose upon me.
When Christ therefore bids us to ask only for bread; what is it but to put us
in mind, that we rest our selves upon this bare sufficiency; and never care to
please others, or seek to be thought great in others estimation, by having
the pomps of excess. O Lord God, as thy wisdom has set a bound to this
petition; so let this petition set a bound to our desires; that esteeming
riches not for show, but use: and valuing Honors, not by others breath; but by
our own feeling; we neither have our souls confined to our bellies as beasts
have; nor our felicity laid upon our backs as the Gentiles have; but
Contenting our selves, with the diet of thy providing, and with the garments of
thy making: we may count it our best food to feed on Christ, which is the
doing of his will; and our best clothing, to put on Christ; which is the
coming of his Kingdom, and the hallowing of his Name.

The three former petitions were delivered in terms Indefinite, as being more
like to Alleluj^hs, or as when we make acclamations to a Prince, Vivat Rex: but
now we are come to petitions in their usual terms: and seem more properly to
be within the verge of charity: for charity is, Diffusiva sui; and asks as
well for others as for our selves; and though it begin at home, yet it tarries
not at home, but dilates and spreads it self. If therefore any man's charity be
so wedded to keep home, that it means not much to stir abroad; what should
he do using these spreading terms of Us, and Our bread; but rather speak
plainly as his meaning is: Give me this day my daily bread? Or if at most, he
think it charity sufficient, and that he gives the words their full extent to
understand them of himself and his family; or of himself and his friends
only; let him then consider in what latitude he has used the word before.
For, when he said, Our Father; did he intend it, as though God were the Father
of him and his family only: or rather of him and all the faithful together?
and certainly, as far as the word Our reaches, in saying, Our Father; so far
it is very likely to reach, in saying, Our bread: which yet excludes not a
civil propriety, though it seem to include a Christian community. And as when
Mary poured Mark. 14.3.
her box of Spikenard, upon the head of Christ; it was then better bestowed
then to have given it to the poor: So now, that we have Christ in the flesh
no more amongst us; and that we cannot pour our Spikenard upon his head: It
will be as acceptable to him, if we pour it upon the poor, which are his
Feet.

In all the petitions of this prayer, but most apparently in this; we have need
to look back to our Grammar again: for Grammar teaches, that the Imperative
Mood, bids and commands: and why then do we use the Imperative Mood here,
as though we commanded God? Grammar indeed teaches, that the Imperative Mood,
bids and commands; but it teaches as well, that it prays and demands:
It is as well the Mood, that preferres the petition; as it is the Mood that
signs the bill. When Christ granted the Centurions suite, he did it in this
Mood; Fiat tibi: Be it unto thee, as thou beleevest. So when the Centurion
presented his suite; he did it also in this Mood, Dictantum: say the word
only. Indeed God looks not to the Mood, in which our prayers are made; but he
looks to the Mood, in which we are that make them. For if we pray in an
humble Mood and a lowly mind, we may command any thing at Gods hands: but if
we come to God in a lofty Mood and a high look; we may command, but we are
sure to go without; for God resists the proud: and where God resists, it
is neither praying nor commanding that will prevail. O my soul, can thou
think much to be humble, that have God for a pattern; who suffers thee to
command, that art not worthy to entreat? and no sooner thou openest thy mouth
to ask blessings; but he as soon opens his hand, and fills thee with
blessings. And as a ball, the harder it is stricken downward, the higher it
rebounds upward: so the lower thy prayers take their rising from thy heart; the
higher they ascend up into the ears of God. Stoop therefore, O my soul, and
be sure to be humble; and so thou lam. 4.10.
may be sure to command: fail ^ot to be lowly; and so thou shall not fail
to be exalted: be content to be stricken the harder downward; and so thou
shall make the higher bound upward into Heaven.

But will not this be a dry diet; to have only bread, and no drink to it? Did
it not even choke the Bethulians, and almost wither the Israelites in the
Wilderness? Or, why should we think to have drink without asking, more then
bread? Is it, for that we sinned first in eating; and therefore are punished
with begging for bread to eat? Or is it, that Christ keeps within his
compass, and teaches us to ask for bread from heaven: who was himself the
bread that came down from heaven? Or is it, as Christ said of the poor; that
water we have always with us; but bread we have not always? such indeed, may
be the mazes of thoughts, when they wander in darkness: but by the light of
the first cause, we shall see the true cause; that Christ, who is himself
verbum Esa. 10.23.
Abbreviatum makes this prayer for us in a kind of Hierogliphicks, where one
character stands for many things; and if Moses comprehended all Elementar
matter, as fire, air, water, under the one word of earth; why may not Christ
comprehend all temporal things, under the one word of bread? and indeed in
this sense oftentimes the Scriptures use it; as when we read in Ezekiel, that
one of the sins of Ezekiel. 16.49.
Sodom was fullness of bread; we must not think that their excess was only
in eating of dry bread, but that they exceeded in the superfluity of all meats
and drinks, adding thirst to drunkenness; and making themselves Artificial
stomachs, with devises of gluttony. But why then should he use so many words,
even five whole petitions in expressing spiritual Graces? Is ^t not that
temporal things, like foul clothes or rags, may well enough be wrapped up
in one bundle together: but spiritual graces as things more precious, require
more room: and being to make us without spot; are themselves to be made up
without wrinkle. Yet may it perhaps not be without mystery also; that Christ
teaches us here to ask only for bread: as he promises us in heaven Math.
26.29.
to give us only drink; to show that this life and the next, are both but one
meal: and that we cannot drink with him in his Fathers Kingdom, unless we
first eat him here, the bread which came down from heaven.

But does not this petition seem to be out of his right place? and does it not
come in before his time? seeing Forgiveness of trespasses, is a more excellent
gift then giving of bread; and in all reason, that which is first in excellency
should also be first in order? Yet we shall find reason for this ordering of
these petitions; and the laws of true Heraldry no way transgressed. For, as
Rachel said to Jacob, Give me children, or Genesis 30.1.
else I die: so we much more justly say to God; Give us bread, or else we die.
So that as Nature is before Grace, and life before a happy life: It must needs
be reasonable that asking for bread which nature calls for to supply the defects
of life should go before Forgiving of trespasses, which Grace calls for to
supply the defects of a hapy life: and as there is this reason in respect of
our selves, so their is a stronger reason, in respect of God: for nothing can
more admirably set forth the admirable goodness of Gods Nature, then the very
situation of these petitions. For by this; bounty is placed before his mercy;
and it comes to pass, that the Sun shines upon the good and the bad; and the
rain falls upon the just and unjust. And even for us, it is a most happy
marshalling of the petitions: for, if God should never give us any thing, but
when he has nothing to forgive us, he should never give us; seeing our life is
a perpetual increase of our debts; and while we ask him, to Forgive us; even
in that we commit something that needs forgivenes.

It is proper to this petition, that it is not proper to any one sort of
creatures, but is common to all; and therefore though it stand in a valley, yet
it has the largest prospect. And it may be called, the petition of providence,
for, where all the other are intentive to the care of another life; this only
is appointed to make provision for the present life.

Here now would be competition for place, between the two that follow; but
that Repentance is in wonderful grace with God; and has the Angels also for
special friends: and therefore has precedence. For, when we say, Forgive us
our trespases; is it not plainly the prayer of penitent sinners? who are
always, confessing their sins; and professing their amendment; imploring
Forgiveness; and deploring their own weakness; all which, and only which,
are the parts of this petition. And therefore this petition, if we did well
should not be spoken with words, but with sighs: for what can come from a
broken heart but sighs: and until the heart be broken; this petition will
never be truly sound. And least our own sighs should not be sufficient,
Rom.8.26.
the Spirit it self makes request for us with sighs that cannot be expressed:
which though it be true of all the other petitions; yet most properly of this:
For, if sorrow, grief, fear, shame: all of them great; and all of them
together deserve sighing; they are all here met, or are all here to meet in
this Petition.

There is a word which though it be no part of the petition: yet because it
brings the petition in; it is not it self to be left out; namely, the
conjunction And: which in all the former petitions was never used: because
indeed there was no use of it: For, they went all singly by themselves, as
chiefly referred to the honor of God, who is Actus simplicissimus: and
chiefly fitted for the mouths of Angels, who are substantiae simplices: but
now that we are come to the Petitions for the only use of men; now there is
use of this conjunction: for all blessings in this world are tied, as it were
by linkes together; and are not good but in conjunction; and therefore this
conjunction ^en.1.x.
And, is now here used: that as the first use of it, that ever was; was to
join the bodies themselves of heaven, and earth together; so the use of it
here, is to join the blessings of heaven and earth together; for as an earth
without a heaven would have made but a miserable world; so these earthly
blessings without the heavenly, will make but a miserable man. And therefore
we have no sooner said, Give us this day our daily bread, but it presently
follows; And forgive us our trespasses: as if it would infer, that unless
the spiritual blessings be added also, these temporal blessings will do us
small good: or rather indeed will do us more hurt then good. For, what good
did Dives riches do^ him, but to bear his charges in his journey to hell (...)
what good did Hamans honor do him; but to procure him a higher pair of
Gallows to be hanged upon? what good did A^hitophels wisdom do him; but to
find out a cunning, how in one act, he might both do a murder, and revenge
it? but all this is helped by this conjunction, And: for if the spiritual
blessing be added to the temporal; thy riches will prove a good unto thee, as
being a purse for charity: thy honor will prove a Good unto thee, as being a
stage for humility; thy wisdom will prove a Good unto thee; as being a
lantern for devotion; and a shield against temptations.

The chief force of this petition is in the virtue of confession: for to
confess our sins, is as it were to unsin them again: at least, it stops
Revel (...)
the mouth of our great acc^ser, the devil. For is it not his quality, as
taking no notice of Gods Omnisciency; that he will not come to accuse, but when
he can bring, as it were some new matter; as though he thought to inform God
of something that he knew not before? and herefore, when he hears us confess
already; his work is at an end: for what should he do to come charging us
with that with which we charge our selves? and if we can be thus rid of our
accuser; may we not well hope to find as much favor at Gods hands, as the
Adultresse in the Gospel found at Christ's? who said unto Ioh. 8.10.
her when her accusers were gone, neither do I condemn thee. But besides
this, there is a good quality in the confession, though it publish the ill
qualities of the confessor; that it ascribes to God his due attributes. It
ascribes unto him Omnisciency; acknowledging it were in vain to hide it from
him who knows it already. It ascribes unto him mercy; for it were madness to
confess to him in whom we conceived no compassion. It ascribes unto him
justice; as St. John says, If we confess our finnes, he is faithful and just
to forgive us our sin. Wherefore ^oh. 1.9.
O my my soul, if thou can not be strong enough to resist sin, be humble
to confess it; but confess it with contrition; dissolve into tears for that
which is past; resolve upon amendment in that which is to come; and if thou
can do this, thou shall find this petition the true Balm of Gilead; though
thy sins were as red as Scarlet, they shall be made as white as le^. 8.22.
Snow.

But were it not better, Culpa Vacare, quam culpam deprecari? were it not
better to be without sin, then to ask Forgiveness? and we shall not sin
if we can keep the Commandments: and certainly we may keep them if we
will; for otherwise we should make God unjust; to give Commandments that
could not be kept. O my soul, this is the right reasoning of our crooked
reason: for it is not the hardness of the Commandments that makes them they
cannot be kept; but it is the crookedness of our own natures, that makes us
we cannot be conformable to the straight rule of them. For the Commandments
are the rule of our life; and a rule is a straight line: and a straight line is
the shortest between two points that can be: and such are the Commandments,
the shortest and easiest that could be devised, either between God and men; or
between men amongst themselves. And yet let no man say; we may keep them if
we will; that is, strictly according to the rigor of the law; and by our own
power; for this were to include all the faculties of the soul within the will:
which though it were so, would not serve: and being not so; is impossible. For
we can neither forget what we would; nor remember what we would; we can
neither love what we would, nor hate what we would; we can neither think what
we would, nor will what we would: and seeing a perfection in every one of
these, is necessarily required to the keeping of the Commendements; how far
off must we needs be, who are defective in them all? and therefore, when flesh
and blood shall find it self to have all these in all perfection; then it may
talk of keeping the Commandments, and not before; which will not be, which
cannot be, until our bodies shall be raised up spiritual bodies; and 1 Cor.
1^.44
until corruption shall put on incorruption. But this manner of perfection,
failing us here; we have a refuge to sly to, in the sanctuary of this
petition; Forgive us our trespasses.

By this petition then it appears; that every man commits sin; because every
man is here enjoined to ask Forgiveness: but what say some men? this is no
necessary consequence. For, as in the former petition every man is enjoined to
ask for bread; yet every man does not need bread: (for many have enough in
store) so, every man is enjoined here to ask Forgiveness; though every man
perhaps may not need Forgiveness as Zachary and Elizabeth, who were just
before God, and without reproof: and certainly they which cannot be reproved
need not be forgiven. But there is no standing for Saints, against St. John,
who was as great a Saint as the best; yet he says of all, including himself;
If Luke 1.6.
we say we have no sin. we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us.
But how then shall we reconcile St. Luke; who says, They are just: and St.
John, who says that all are sinners? even as we reconcile the Prophet David
with himself; who says, that he walked before God, in the innocence ^l. 18.24.
of his hands; and yet confesses his sins to be more then the hairs of his
head. They were just before God; that is, if we take it legally; they performed
not only all civil duties toward men, but all religious duties toward God;
and they were just before God by resolute intentions and endeavors to be just;
not by absolute performance of complete Justice. And if we take it
Evangelically; They were just before God in his Mercy, not in his Justice;
before God as a Father, not as a Judge; before God in Christ, not in
themselves. And in a word, to make good David's words; They were Just before
God; not by their not committing, but by Gods not imputing sin unto them. Or to
speak more Gospel-like with St. Paul; They were just before God, 2 Cor. 1.23.
and 5.5.
not by Gods receiving satisfaction from them: but by their receiving a pledge
and earnest of Grace from God. But yet, how shall we reconcile St. John with
himself, who says much more: that They cannot sin: and yet that all are
sinners? Is it not (as one says) that the first is spoken in regard of the
first fruits of the New man; the later in regard of the relics of the Old
man: for as in Adam who is the Old man, all that come from him are sinners; so
in Christ, who is New man, all that live by him, are justified.

There are many phrases in Scripture, by which Gods Forgiving our trespasses is
expressed: Micah Mich 7.9.
calls it a casting them into the bottom of the Sea: Psalm. 103.12.
David calls it a removing them as far as the East is from the West: Another
calls it a casting Esa. 38.17.
them behind Gods back; and great variety there is of such expressing it; yet
all comes to this: that if our sins be once forgiven; they are as if they
never had been done: we are; as if we never had been sinners; God is, as if
he never had been angry.

But does it not concern us to know the extent of this word, Trespasses? For,
how can we look, that God will understand it any otherwise then we intend it?
Or that he will extend his forgiveness any further then we extend our
petition? that if we come short in our asking; he is like to come as short in
his forgiving. And what are then the trespasses we desire to have forgiven?
Are they the trespasses of our feasting, and not as well of our Fasting? Are
they the trespasses of our cursing, and not as well of our praying? Are they
the trespasses of our profaneness, and not as well of our devotion? Are they
the trespasses of our cruelty; and not as well of our charity? O then, how
innumerable must our vices be, when our virtues themselves are tainted at least
with some spice of vitiousnesse. For seeing all our righteousness ^sa. 64.6.
is but as a stained cloth; even the best works we can do as of our selves
we do them; have all of them a need of saying this petition. That as the
devil in the Swine told Christ his Name was legion; because they were many: So
we more truly may say of our trespasses, that their name is legion; because
they are exceeding many: David says of his sins, that they are Psalm. 40.^.
more then the hairs of his head: and Manasseth, that his sins are more then
the sands of the sea: and now, if we could not say of Gods mercies, that their
name is legions of legions; what hope could we have of being forgiven? for what
can forgive, but that which exceeds? although therefore we think it enough,
that we put our trespasses here in the plural number; as being a number able
to hold them though never so many: yet seeing we have trespasses enough to fill
it; we had need look out some other kind of number for Gods mercies; a number
that may not be Quantitas discreta, but continua: and though no such number be
found in art or nature; yet David seems to have found us out such a number to
our hands, where he says: Thy mercy O God is from everlasting to everlasting:
Psalm. 103.
that we may make it the burden of our song, Psalm. 136.
as David did of his; For his mercy endures for ever.

When we pray that our trespasses may be forgiven: why do we not tell what
trespasses and how many they be? For this might both stir in our selves a
greater intention; and move in God a greater compassion? but is it not, that we
tell not what our trespasses be; First indeed because we cannot: for who can
tell the trespasses he commits against God? which made David pray; Forgive me
O God my secret sins. Psalm. 19.11.
And well might David pray so: for in his sins about Vrias and his wife; when
God had forgiven him his two great trespasses, Murder and Adultery: who would
have thought there had been any more behind? yet God found a consectary of
these sins, more heinous in his sight, then the sins themselves; that
through them his Name was blasphemed: which no man could have drempt of, and
perhaps not David himself, if God had not made it known and told him of it.
Which made also St. Paul to say; I know nothing by my self, yet am I not
thereby Justified: for, though he knew nothing by himself; yet God, he was
sure, knew something. And as this may be one cause why we tell not what our
trespasses be; because we cannot: so it may be another cause; because we need
not: for how great or many soever our sins be; yet we must come to God with
this confidence, that his mercies are more and greater then they. And indeed
there is none of the petitions, which a guilty conscience can make with more
confidence, then it may do this: seeing it takes God in his proper element,
with whom it is as natural to forgive trespasses; as it is for fire to ascend
upward. Which yet we must take with reverence; not as though we thought God a
natural agent: who does all things, (...); but because ^l 15.17.
in his Arc of Govenant, he has only Mercy for his Seat; and in his
proclamation of ^od 34.6.
himself, he has chiefly Mercy for his Title. We shall not therefore need to
tell what or how many our trespasses be; but this we shall need, if at any time
sin assault us; that we look upon God, as only all Justice: but all Justice
to the wilful: but if sin have taken hold of us, and overcome us; that we
look upon God as only all mercy; but all mercy to the penitent: so, either
our fear of God, shall be the beginning of wisdom; or our faith in Christ,
the ending of folly.

But how happens it that St. Matthew making Math. 6.12.
mention of this petition; sets down, Debts: and St. Luke, Trespasses: which
cannot both be L^k. 11.2.
true: for if Christ said, Debts; then St. Luke is in an error who sets down,
Trespasses; and if Christ said Trespasses; then St. Matthew is in an error who
sets down Debts. This indeed may seem a knot, but is none; at least not hard
to be untied. For, the word which Christ used (as Interpreters note) was
Choba, a Syriacke word; and signifies both Debts and Trespasses; which as to
the purpose here are both as one: unless we may say, that sins may more
properly be called Debts; being taken as omissions: when we leave that undone,
which we ought to have done: and more properly Trespasses; being taken as
commissions: when we do that we ought not to do: and the Evangelists being
not able in a translate Tongue to express Christ's word in one; have expressed
his sense in two: which shows not so much a diversity in the writers; as an
unity of the Spirit by which they write. And yet withal we may observe, that
though St. Matthew in the petition it self set down Debts: yet in the
repetition presently after he sets down trespasses: and St. Luke also though
in the forepart of the petition he sets down sins: yet in the latter part
he sets down Debtours: that it is but a knot sought in Bul-rush to seek from
these words, to lay aspertion upon these holy writers.

But why say we, Our trespasses: have we not trespasses enough, of our own to
pray for; but we must pray also for the trespasses of others? Indeed not only
charitably, but most justly: seeing the trespasses of others, are oftentimes
the trespasses of our trespasses. For if we infect others, by our counsel, or
by our example: are not our trespasses a cause of theirs? Or if they infect us,
are not their trespasses a cause of ours? and this is all the good we get by
company: Company, the great darling of the world; without which it were no
world; there were no pleasure: that it is no marvel John Baptist went into
the Wilderness to avoid company; that so he mighty neither infect nor be
infected. Indeed if men were to men as God intended them, nothing could cause
more comfort; would yield more benefit then society: but seeing they have left
their first love, the love of God: what marvel, if now they leave their
second love, to love one another: that nothing seems now more dangerous, nor
is oftentimes more deadly, then society.

This word Our, is thrice used in this prayer; and in each place seems to have
a several extent: for, when we say Our Father; it intends community: when we
say Our trespasses, it intends propriety: when we say Our bread, it partakes of
both. There is nothing we call Ours; in which we have so absolute a property as
in our Trespasses: In Our Father, others have a right: In Our bread, others may
claim a share; but in Our trespasses none can challenge any part with us: for
every man must bear his own burden; Call. 6.5.
every man must be accountable for his proper debts.

We have just cause therefore to say, Forgive as our trespasses; but what cause
have we to say, As we forgive them that trespass against us? For is not this a
sudden and strange alteration? We have all this while been at our prayers;
and now to come in with a petition of right? We have hitherto been the
Publicane, confessing our sins: and now on the sudden to turn Pharise, and
boast of our works? But O my soul, do not so conceive it: for what boasting
can there be in humility? and what greater humility, then bearing and forgiving
Trespasses? But it is an humble presenting and offering our service to God;
whereby we show our selves prepared by his grace: and in hope to be capable of
his Forgiveness. And we may perceive by Christ, that there is some great
necessity of these words in this petition: for when he had delivered the whole
form of this prayer to his Disciples: he does not so leave it; but makes of
this petition, a repetition; and nrgeth it particularly: Math. 6.14.
as if he had some special interest in it himself; and so indeed he has:
for, what does Christ so much labor for all his life; as to make us his
Disciples? and how are we made his Disciples, but by bearing our crosses, and
coming after him? and what is this bearing our Cross, but our Forgiving of
Trespasses? for even this was the laft act of his own bearing his cross; when
his cross bearing him, he said: Father forgive them, for they know not what
they do. Injuries indeed and wrongs; oppressions and persecutions may be laid
upon us; as Christ's Cross was laid upon Simon of Cyrene; and we made to bear
them whither we will, or no: but this does not make us Christ's Disciples: but
we Luke 14.17.
must take them up, and bear them of our selves: and as I may say, not with
presumption and precipitation, but with patience and charity, cross our
crosses: and so we shall make them a true Christ's Cross indeed: and by this we
shall be known whose Disciples we are; and thus if ^oh. 13 35.
we present our selves to God the Father; bearing the cognizance of God his
Sonue; we may be sure of favorable audience: which is the thing that Christ so
much desires. Wherefore, O my soul, wonder not that these words are with such
earnestness taught thee to say; but wonder at the love, and loving kindness
of Christ thy Savior; who is so urgent with thee to have them said, which are
so urgent for thee to be performed.

Many would desire to know, and prize it at a great rate, how they might get
the knowledge to be assured, when their finnes are forgiven: and yet it is a
knowledge easy to be had; and every man may tell himself. For if thou find
in thy heart, a loathing of thy former sins; and a resolution to continue in
amendment of life; and especially a sixed charity, to forgive others: thou
may be assured, thou art in the favor of God; and thy sins past are all
forgiven thee. But if thou continuest to take delight in thy former sins: and
art unresolved in reforming thy courses; and especially if thou find in thy
self a desire of revenge: and art implacable toward others; thou may then
be assured thou art still in the state of Gods displeasure; thy sins are not
yet forgiven. For these things are not only the signs; but the certain
effects of Gods forgiving us; when we confess and be grieved for our own
trespasses to him; and are compassionate and relenting to the trespasses of
others to us.

But are we not in this all Naamans? Do we not all think that washing seven
times in Jordan, is too slight a medicine to cure our leprosy? that our
forgiving of others, can never have the power to work in God, a forgiving of
us? but what is this, O my so^le, but to vilify that which God has
sanctified? If God had said unto thee; If thou will have me to forgive thy
trespasses; then go sell all thou have, and give it to the poor; as the young
man in the Gospel was bidden: Or then go sacrifice thy only son, as
Abraham was commanded: ought thou not to have done these things? how much
more, when he says; Forgive, and thou shall be Forgiven? For to skorn the
means, because they seem to us to be weak; what is it, but to forget the
power of that hand which uses them? Could Christ give power to the Hem of his
garment, that the only touching it, drew virtue from him: and cannot God give
power to our forgiving of others, to draw mercy from him? could God give power
to seven times going about Ierico, to make the walls fall down; and can he not
as well give power to our forgiving the trespasses of others, to make our
trespasses fall down before him? But this is done, to make us know that Gods
thoughts are not as our thoughts; nor his ways as our ways: For what Father
indeed on earth, though never so loving, would give so great ablessing to so
small a duty? what Master, though never so bountiful, would propose so
glorious a reward to so mean a service? what King, though never so gracious,
would grant so free a pardon upon so easy terms? for this which he requires
is not the intending of an action, but the remitting of a passion: It is not to
suffer, but not to offer: it is not to do more then we can do; but not to do
so much as we would do: yet such a Master, and King, and Father is God; that
if thou do it in charity, and say it in faith; it will work with him the
effect he promises: and this shall be a sign unto thee; thou shall find in
thy mind that Peace which passes all understanding; thou shall find in thy
heart, that Joy which the world cannot give; and shall plainly perceive by
this subordinate petition, what great cause thou had to say; Thy Kingdom
come.

But what will be the best time for our saying of this petition? May we not put
it off, till we have committed more sins; and then ask forgiveness for all
together? May we not run a while upon the skore, and then strike a tally for
all at once? O my soul, be not so nngratefull to God: so improvident for thy
self: for can thou think it fit, to run further upon the skore; when thou
art more upon the skore already, then all thou art worth? Can thou think it
fit to commit more sins, when thou have committed more already, then a
thousand deaths can expiate? Has God spared thee for this, that thou should
go on to provoke him further? Has he for this given thee a time to repent
thee; that thou should make him repent him of the time he has given thee?
This deferring of repentance dries up the blood of Christ; God in him is a
Father now, who knows how soon he may turn to a Judge? God in him is now all
mercy; who knows how soon he may return to his Justice? This present hour,
this very instant is the Fair kept, as I may say, of forgiving sins: It may
be had now at an easy rate; only for forgiving them that trespass against
thee: but if thou tarry till the Fair be ended; (and who knows how soon it
may be, seeing it has lasted so long already) there will then be no rardons to
be purchased at any rate, but thou must pay for thy improvidence with thy
uttermost farthing. O then my soul, put not off from day to day; least thou
come, as it is said, a day after the Fair; but whilst it is called to day,
call thy self to account; and let not the Sun go down upon thy Impenitence
to God; or upon thine anger to thy neighbor: least it happen to thee, as to
the rich man in the Gospel; who to morrow after his barnes were built would
gee in hand with repentance, when God would not tarry the building of Barnes;
but Hac ^e repetent ani^nam tu^m; this very night they shall take away thy
soul.

But is there not in this petition a hole left for revenge to creep in? may we
not do as much as we say; and yet leave some trespassors, upon whom to be
revenged? For, if we forgive some that trespass against us, we forgive them
that trespass against us, although we forgive not all that trespass against
us: and those we forgive not, will be left for us to be revenged. But, O my
soul, what Sophistry is this to be used to God? do^ thou not by this entangle
thy self in thy own Net? May not God justly return^ thy Sophistry upon thee,
and say: Thou desire to be forgiven, an^ thou shall have thy desire: If I
forgive thee some of the tresp^sses, I forgive thee thy trespass^s; although I
forgive thee not all thy trespasses; and those I forgive not, will serve my
turn for thy condemnation. And when God shall say this, art thou not well
served for thy Sophistry? Wherefore, O Foolish soul, leave playing the
Sophister with God; and as it is thy desire to have all thy trespasses
forgiven; so let it be thy meaning to forgive all, that trespasle against thee:
For if thou will have a general pardon; thou must generally pardon.

If our forgiving of others, consisted in giving good words; in showing fair
looks; in affording smiling countenances; in offering dissembled courtesies;
we might well enough think, that every man living, performed the condition of
this petition; and that the whole world were nothing but charity: but seeing
God has thus centured the Israelites Fasting; Is it such a Fast that I have
chosen? Is it to bow Esa. 58.5.
down your heads as a Bulrush, and to spread Sackclmb and Ashes under you? Do
we not think he will not as ^verely censure our forgiving? Is it such a
Forgiving that I require? Is it to smile in a m^ns face, and cut his throat
behind his back? Is it to give good words, and watch a time to take revenge?
Is it to carry Honey in the mouth, and G^ll in the heart? And how then can we
choose n^w but fear, there is sear^e a man living that can look to have his
f^nes forgiven; and that there is not so much as the poor woman's mite of
charity in the world. For tru^ cha^ity is without dissimulation: and to take
dissimulation out of the world; what were it, but after a sort to prevent God;
and to make a new earth before the time.

But why should God require of us such a quick return from anger; who could
himself carry anger in his mind much longer? for did he not so to Moses? who
having angered God a little at Meribah: was punished for it at Ca^an a long time
after? But O my soul, far be it from thee to think Gods goodness, can once
be touched with such imputation. God was angry indeed, and upon just cause
angry with Moses at Meribah: and swear in his wrath, that he should not enter
into Canaan: So the doom was instantly passed, and could not be revoked; and
his anger was as instantly passed, and never after showed. For, when the
sentence came to executing; with what circumstances of mildness; with what
favor of interpretation was it done? that though the punishment could not be
revoked; yet Gods love turned it into a benefit. For, though he might not go
into Canaan with his feet: yet he was suffered to go into it with his eyes:
that having taken the pleasure of seeing the figure; he might go the more
cheerfully to take possession of the substance. Neither was it perhaps so much
a punishment, as a mystery; at least, a punishment not without mystery: for
Moses represented the law, and could not therefore bring the Israelites into
Canaan; because the law cannot bring us to heaven: It must be Ioshuah the type
of Christ Jesus; that must bring them into Canaan, the type of heaven; as it is
lesus, the true Joshua, that must bring us to heaven, the true Canaan.

But seeing God has forgiven our sins already in Christ; what need we to
trouble God, or our selves, to ask forgiveness again? as though our words
could do more then Christ's deeds? but is it not as when a King proclaims a
general pardon to all offenders; yet none shall have benefit by it, but such
only as sue it forth, and fetch it out: so God indeed has granted a general
pardon to all sinners, in the merits of his Son; but none shall have benefit
by it but such only as sue it forth by the tongue of faith; and fetch it out
by the feet of charity; and this is the tongue of faith; when we say, Forgive
us our trespasses: These are the feet of charity, when we Forgive them that
trespass against us.

But why do we tell God of our forgiving of Ioh. 22.3.
others? For, what is it to God, whither we forgive others, or no? Indeed of
all our service there comes no profit to God at all; and our Psalm. 16.2.
well doing, extends not to him: but it seems this petition would have us
take notice of a property in God; who, as at first, his pleasure was, to make
us according to his likeness: so he takes great pleasure still, that he and we
should be like: and so much desires to have us like him; that rather then
fail, he will be like us: as David says, with the pure, thou will show Psalm.
18.25.
thy self pure; and with the froward, thou will show thy self froward. And
God himself seems to make known this property in himself; where he says in
Ezechiel: Because Edom has taken Ezck. 25.12.
vengeance, and revenged himself upon Judah: therefore will I take vengeance,
and revenge my self upon Edom. And we can in nothing, be so like to God as in
being merciful, as Christ says; Be ye merciful as your heavenly Father is
merciful. But if we care not for being merciful to others, that we may be
like God; let us at least be merciful to others, that God may be like us: for,
if we be cruel to others; there is no avoiding this property in God; he will
also most certainly be cruel to us. To obtain therefore mercy from God to
our selves; we justly make profession of our own mercifulness to others; yet
we tell it to God; not to inform him, and make him to know it; but that we
may be witnesses against our selves, if we do not perform it.

But are there not many other works, by which we might better have expressed
our charity, then by forgiving of trespasses? Certainly not any. For all other
works may have leaven in them, and worldly ends; but this is wholly
spiritual; and without any mixture at all of carnal respects: and therefore
though it be not the only, yet it is the principal; and as I may say, the
Quorum of all the works of charity, as without which, no other work of ours,
how good soever, can indeed be charitable. For, thou may visit the sick;
and take great pains to do them comfort; yet there may be leaven here; for
are there not profits oftentimes: are there no^ benefits many ways, from dying
men to be expected? and so thy visitation may be far^e from charity. Thou
may build Almes-houses; and give great revenues to maintain them; yet their
is a leaven of vainglory; and a leaven of false devotion: as the Israelites
gave their earrings, to make the Exodus 32.3.
golden calfe; and so thine Alms also may be far from charity. Thou may
give all thy goods to the poor; that thou bring thy self to be one of the
number, and yet perhaps but poor charity neither: for may there not be leaven
in it, seeing heathen men have done as much? Thou may give thy body to be
burned: which seems not only the heat, but the height of charity; and yet
perhaps but cold charity neither: for are there not leavens of vainglory? of
false devotion? of obstinacy, and even of Phil. 1.15.
malice? strange leavens indeed: but yet such leavens there are; and so thy
seeming Martyrdom, may be far from charity. But when thou forgivest them
that trespass against thee; this can have no leaven at all in it; for it can
proceed from no beginning: it can tend to no end: it can aim at no mark, but
only charity: and therefore this certainly of all the works of charity, the
fittest to express it; and therefore the fittest to be here expressed: For
this is the new Commandment; and as I may say, The Law of the Gospel; that we
love one another; but no loving without forgiving.

But does not this petition seem of a strange condition? for we ask God to
forgive us upon condition, that we forgive others: but what if others do not
trespass us? then we have nothing to forgive: and so God must forgive us for
nothing. But is it not, that though men see the fruit but as it hangs upon the
Tree; yet God sees it as it lies in the root: and it shall be sufficient, if
we be such forgivers, as all the godly are Martyrs of whom David says, Psalm.
44.22.
For thy sake are we slain continually: and as St. Paul was a Martyr at
Jerusalem; before he was a Martyr at Rome: an habitual Martyr, before he was
an actual; even then when he said; I am ready not only to be bound; but to
die at Jerusalem Acts 21.23.
for the Name of the Lord Jesus. And as such Martyrdom; so such forgiveness
will serve our turns with God: will serve Gods turn in us.

This petition is in nature of a contract: and how can the contract be valued;
that seems not made upon a valuable consideration? For, what recompense is it,
for our trespasses against God; that we forgive others? If God had done us any
wrong, that we might say; Forgive us, O God, as we forgive thee: then there
were reason in the petition; and good ground for the contract: but alas, there
is no such thing. For if Samuel could say; Whose Ox, or whose Ass have I
taken, or to whom have I done wrong? Behold a juster then Samuel is here; one
so far from doing us wrong; that he is Psalm. 68.19.
always loading us with benefits: One so far from bending his fist to strike
us; that he is always opening his hand to bless us; and where is then any
ground for our contract? But Is it not, that if we give a cup of cold water to
Gods children; God takes it as if we gave it to him? and if we forgive the
trespasses of others; God takes it, as trespasses forgiven to himself? And
though Gods forgiving of us be of infinite more value then our forgiving of
others: yet if he be pleased to set so great a price upon ours; and to set no
greater upon his own: what can hinder but the bargain may stand firm enough.
For in contracts between God and us: there are indeed, two kinds of values: A
value of worth: and a value of Acceptance: and in the value of worth; we are,
God knows, nothing worth; for what have we that we have not received? but in
the value of Acceptance, there comes in our wealth: which as it chiefly
consists in sacrifices; so of all our sacrifices, there is none more acceptable
to God: None that makes a sweeter Incense to Gods sense (though to common
senses, of no sent) then our forgiving of trespasses. Solomon offered to God in
Gibeon, a great sacrifice; even a thousand Bullockes: and yet behold, a better
sacrif^e here, then that of Solomon. For obedience is better then sacrifice;
and to 1 Samuel 15.22.
^arken is better then the fat of Rams. If therefore we make not use of this
sacrifice, and forgive not others; we loose the best means we have of
improving our wealth: and may with David stand, upon Quid retribuam Domino, as
long as we will; but we shall never find any thing, so much worth our
givi^g, as forgiving. For, this God accepts as a match to his own mercy; and
so bringing down the price of his forgiving; and raising the price of ours;
he makes at last the consideration to be valuable, and gives validity to the
contract.

But have we not a great bargain from God, by this petition? to have all our
trespasses forgiven; for onel^ our forgiving the trespasses of others? No doubt
we have; if God give us as well the grace to make use of the petition; as
Christ gives us the instruction, to make the petition. Otherwise it may prove
the worst bargain that ever was made: For if we expect our forgiveness;
depending wholly upon God; there can be no fear: but if we expect it,
depending upon any thing in our selves; what hope can there be? seeing revenge
lies boiling, and burning in our breasts; but charity, God knows, lies cold at
our hearts. But may we not say, there are in God two attributes, his Mercy;
and his Justice: and that in this petition, we are provided for them both? For
if we meet with his Mercy; it is enough to say, Forgive us our trespasses:
and if we meet with his Justice, we have in a readiness to say, As we forgive
our debtours? This we may say indeed; and it will do well, if we can well do
it: but if we fail to do it; as we make not good the condition; so we can
look for no good from the petition: if we perform not to God our promise of
forgiving, which we are sure of our selves we cannot: we cannot promise our
selves the performance of Gods forgiving; which we are sure to be most
miserable if we do not.

But will it not give a boldness to men; and make them careless how much they
sin, if they may have their sins so eas^y forgiven? we must therefore
remember; there is an Antecedent, Thy Will be done: and a subsequent, Lead us
not into temptation: and an adjunct, As we forgive our debtours: and all these
must come together, and compass in this petition; or else this petition, being
left to it self alone, will never be granted; nor our sins be forgiven. And
let us not think the suite easy, because we come as children to a Father: for
we must consider, we are but children by Adoption, and if the condition of
Adoption be not performed, the alliance is dissolved; and then we become as
mere strangers: or rather as very children of wrath as we were before: as the
Prodigal child confessed, He was no more worthy to be called his son.

But do we allege our forgiving of others, as a cause of Gods forgiving of
us; or as a measure? Not as a cause: for so we should take place of God, and
go before him: Not as a measure: for so we should limit God and be above him.
And yet as a cause; but a cause or capacity of pardon, not a cause of pardou: a
cause of approach, not a cause of access: not an efficient, and yet without
which, no ede^t. And as a measure also, but a measure which we bring empty to
God, and look that he should fill it; that of his fullness we may all Ioh.
1.16.
receive. When we pray to God to forgive us, as we forgive others, we do
not limmit God to our forgiveness; but we require his forgiveness in its
own extent; as much more full and absolute, then ours; as he himself is more
absoltute then we: his Mercy more full then ours.

But if this be no cause of our forgivenenesse; what can we say for our selves,
why our finnes should be forgiven? Can we say, that the Commandments are too
many, and too hard to be kept? but we sinned as much, when there was but one
Commandment; and that one, eas^e enough in all reason. Or can we say we have
sinned ignorantly, and been deceived? but that excuse would not be taken, in
our first parents; who yet could plead it better then we: for, they were
Novices in the world and not acquainted with the Serpents subtilty; which to us
that have our prentiship in the world is too well known. Or can we say we
have been constrained, and have sinned of necessity? but nothing that is not
voluntary, shall be laid to our charge. We may thus go over all the pleas, of
excuse: and we shall find none to to make for us but all against us; unless
perhaps Psalm. 25.11.
a plea of David's, and that a strange one, God knows: Be merciful unto mine
iniquity O Lord, for it is great. A strange plea indeed; to make our case
desperate; that it may be thought reasonable: to make our selves monsters; that
we may appear handsome: yet such is our case, that such must be our course:
for if we mince our faults, we do but make them the m^re; and if we hide
them from God, we do but make him look more narrowly to Job 13.27.
them: and until we confess them to be great; it shows we have no great
feeling; if no great feeling, no great remorse; if no great remorse, no great
sorrow; if no great sorrow, no great repeat^nce. And if we examine David's words
well; we shall find both a truth in the reason; and a reason in the truth of
them. They are Manass.
great, great in number; for they are more then the sands of the Sea. Great in
weight; Psalm 38.4.
for they are as a weighty burden, too heavy for him to bear. Great in voice;
for their cry reaches up to heaven. Great in continuance: Gen.4 10.
for they have lasted from the time his mother conceived him; to the time his
mother the earth received him again. And yet in the trnth of these
greatnesses, there is great reason of forgiveness. They are great; and
therefore fit to show Gods Power to be great, that can forgive them: They are
great; and therefore fit to show Mercy to be great, that will forgive them:
They are great; and therefore fit to show Gods Wisdom to be great; that
knows how to forgive them in his Mercy, without prejudice to his Justice: and
in his Justice, without derogation from his Mercy.

But has David no better reason to allege, why God should forgive our
trespasses, but the greatness of our trespasses? Indeed, as from our selves,
he has not; from God he has: as Forgive me O God, for thy Name sake: for
how Psalm. 25.11.
else could he verefie his Name of Father: and Save me, O God, for thy Mercies
sake; for how else Psalm. 6.4.
could he justify his Nature of being merciful? and even from our selves,
though David does Psalm. 110.1.
but intimate it, when he says; The Lord said unto my Lord: yet we can
deliver it in plain terms; Forgive us, O God, for thy Son Jesus Christ's
sake: and this we may justly call a reason from our selves: seeing, He was
therefore given to us, that he might become of us: that being in us, he might
be a ransom for us. Ioh. 11.14. 1 lim. 2.6.
And therefore, when we say, Forgive us our trespasses: does not Christ seem
to take our person upon him? and when we say, As we forgive our debtours; do
not we seem to take Christ's person upon us? seeing in the petition, that
seems verified which was spoken of Christ, He was accounted among the wicked:
and in the condition, Esa. 53.12. Ioh. 1.6.
that seems verified which is spoken of us; Of his fullness we have all
received.

But though our forgiving of others, be neither cause nor measure, of Gods
forgiving of us: yet it may be inquired, which has the priority? for they are
here so woaven and connexed together: that it cannot eafily be diseerned. Gods
forgiving is first named; but our forgiving seems first intended. Our
forgiving is the condition; and the condition must be first performed before
the petition can be granted. Gods forgiving is our petition; and the petition
must first be granted, before the condition can be performed. So we are in a
laberinth here. Our forgiving proceeds from charity: but what charity without
the grace of God? and what grace without forgiving our sins? Gods forgiving
proceeds from mercy; but what mercy to them, that have not charity? and what
charity in them that forgive not others? so we are in a laberinth still. Our
forgiving is our action: but what activenesse in us, to any good; without the
assistance of God, the Fountain of all goodness? but God assisteth not, where
he first forgiveth not. Gods forgiving is his action, and is grounded upon our
repentance; but what repentance, without sorrowing for our sins? and what
sorrowing without forgiving? So we are in a laberinth still: and no Ari^dues
thread to guide us out; but only Gods Mercy; for the same Mercy in God which
forgiveth us, enableth us with grace to forgive others. In Gods forgiving, it
is derived to us: in our forgiving it is derived by us: In Gods forgiving, we
are only Passive: in our forgiving, we are both Active and Passive: but
Passive first in receving the grace; and then active in using the grace. And
therefore, we say not, Forgive us as we have forgiven; but as we do forgive:
seeing it cannot be thought when we desire God to forgive us our trespasses:
but that the not forgiving the trespasses of others, is part of the trespasses
we desire to be forgiven. There is therefore no standing with God for priority:
but we shall do well seeing we cannot be too sure of performing the
condition; to turn the condition into a prayer: that as in the petition, we
understand; I believe, O God help my unbelief: so in the condition to
understand; I am in charity, O God help my uncharitableness. Help me, O God,
out of the intricatenesse of this laberinth; so forgive me, that I may forgive:
so make me to forgive, that I may be forgiven.

Do we therefore well consider, what we do, when we say this petition? For
do we not make these words, Forgive us our trespasses: to stand at the mercy
of the words following whether they shall prove a prayer, or no? For if we do
as we say, and be merciful to others: they are no doubt, an excellent prayer:
but if we do not as we say, and forgive not others: what are they then but a
very curse? for what greater curse, or what plainer terms to express a curse,
then to pray to God to forgive us as we forgive others: and in the mean time
to mean nothing less, then forgiving of others? and so we do worse to our
selves: then David prayed to be done to his enemies: Let Psalm. 109.7.
their prayer be turned into sin. For we have little else left us of
goodness, but our prayers to be good: and shall we turn them also into
sin? and that which is the worst of sin, into a curse? can we not be
contented, to commit trespasses against men; but we must make them reach to a
mocking of God? Is it not enough that we be so wicked to deserve damnation; but
we will be so desperate to pray for damnation? O my tongue, cleave rather to
the roof of my mouth; then be made an instrument of this petition; unless
thou find my heart, to set thee a work: for so thou should make thy self
an instance of Gods complaint: They draw near me with their mouths, but
their Esa. 29.13.
hearts are far from me. And yet, O my tongue, I must not have thee to
forbear saying it; seeing it may pass for some part of obedience, to say as
thou art taught: though thou do not as thou say; and who knows whether God
may not give a blessing to it, whilst it is in thy mouth: that though at first,
it rise not from thy heart: yet thorough his grace it may revert a convert; and
turn back upon thy heart.

But what say we to such men, who are so far from thinking it charity, to
forgive their trespassovrs; that they think it honor, Not to forgive them?
do more fear the disgrace of men in forbearing revenge: then the displeasure
of God in seeking revenge? May we not justly say of such: that for all their
pretending either honor or valor: yet they are in truth both cowards and
fools; cowards, to fear where there is no cause of fear; and fools not to
fear, where there is cause. And indeed, is it not a marvailous thing, how men
dare be so bold to say this petition; and yet be so careless to perform the
condition? Do they think it to be a charm; and that the bare saying of the
words, without more ado is of it self sufficient to procure forgiveness? Or
do they think God so prodigal of his pardons, that he bestows them upon
all comers, without any difference? Or do they believe, he is so easy of
belief, that he takes all promises for payments; and never looks further
after any performance? Alas, all these are but suggestions of the devil: they
will all be found in the proof to be of no proof: but rather these words of
the condition will be the ground of their damnation: for, from them the Judge
will take advantage, and justly pronounce against them: E'x ore tuo te judico:
Thou have often prayed to be forgiven thy self, as thou forgivest others: and
yet all thy life long, thou have done nothing but breathe revenge: Thou shall
now at last have thy asking; such forgiveness as thou have showed, such thou
shall find: cast him into utter darkness; He would never forgive; He shall
never be forgiven.

But why should God require that of us which he would not do himself? For
when the Angels sinned; He would not forgive them, but presently in his anger,
cast them out of Heaven: And when our first parents transgressed: He would not
forgive them, but presently in his Justice cast them out of Paradise. And yet
if he had forgiven the Angels; there had not been a Serpent to seduce Eve:
and if he had forgiven our first parents, there had not been original sin
to corrupt us. But O my soul, take heed; remember, the seed of the woman was
not yet promised: and thon may hereby see what God is to us, withont Heb.
12.29.
Christ; even a consuming fire: and what he is, thorough Christ; a fire still,
but to comfort, not to consume: for he having paid the ransom of our sins:
it is now as just with God Ioh. 1.9.
to forgive sins; as it was before to punish sinners: and we are now in the
state St. Paul speaks off; Forgiving one another, even as God for Christ ^sus
sake has forgiven us. So that God requires no more of us then what he has
performed to us: Or may we not be bold to say; He therefore requires it of us,
that he may be able to perform it to us? and let it not be taken as impiously
spoken; that God should not be able to forgive us unless we forgive others:
seeing there is a pious sense, in which perhaps we may be bold to say; He is
not. For is it not said of Christ: that among his own people he could do no
miracles: he seemed, not to want will; but to want power; He could Mark. 6.5.
not do them: yet we must conceive this want of power was not in respect of
himself: but in respect of them; they wanted faith, and were incapable. And as
in them, want of faith seemed to take away power from him that is omnipotent:
so in us, want of charity seems to take away mercy, from him that is all love:
For does not Christ tell us of a King, who forgave his servant many debts: but
when the servant Math. 18.23.
would not forgive his fellow; he came upon him again for the same debts,
notwithstanding his former forgiveness: Not, that the King went back from his
mercy, but that the servant went forward in his cruelty: He wanted charity; and
was incapable. For Gods mercy indeed can never enter, where man's cruelty keeps
possession: and it is impossible a pardon should be sealed to him, in whom
hardness of heart, suffers not the seal to make impression.

But is there not a difference here between the condition and the petition?
For, in the petition, we pray to God to forgive our debts: but in the condition
we offer God, to forgive our debtors? and why is this difference? Indeed in
both must be understood both: yet in each of them there seems a special
adressment to each of them. For it follows with God, that if he forgive the
sin; he is presently withal reconciled to the sinner: but it follows not
with men; for they oftentimes can be content to forgive the offense: when yet
they cannot find in their hearts to be friends with the offendour: as it is
the voice of the world to say; I will forgive him, but I shall never forget
him: where, by not forgetting, they mean not loving: and truly if they love
not, truly they forgive not.

But seeing our trespasses are of two sorts: some, committed against God; and
some, committed against our neighbor: It may be here demanded; in praying to
God to forgive our trespasses, what it is we mean? For, if only the
trespasses committed against God, what shall then become of the trespasses
committed against our neighbor? and if in our prayer we mean them also; it
may then be doubted, what God has to do to forgive trespasses committed
against others, and not against himself? Certainly in our prayer we mean
both: and therefore it remains only to resolve the doubt: which none but
profane persons would offer to make. Indeed, if thou coulst find any thing
which were a trespass against thy neighbor: and were not also a trespass
against God; thy doubt might be thought something, which now is nothing:
seeing, there is no trespass against thy neighbor, which is not first and
greatest a trespass against God. For if a man steal; it is a trespass
against his neighbor; but it is first a trespass against God; because God
forbids it. If a man commit a murder, it is a trespass against his neighbor;
but it is first a trespass against God; because God forbids it: but this
seems not to remove the doubt. For, did not Cain commit a trespass against
Abel when he murdered him? yet God had not then forbidden murder. Did not
Rachel commit a trespass against Lahan, when she stole his Idols? yet God
had not then forbidden stealing. Indeed, these things were not yet forbidden by
the pofitive laws of God, written in Tables of stone; but they were
notwithstanding forbidden by the natural laws of God, written in the Tables
of our hearts. But this does not yet remove the doubt neither. For seeing there
is some trespass committed against the neighbor: it must needs belong to him
to forgive his part; and not to God to forgive all. Surely, the neighbors
part, in regard of Gods part, is scarce worth reckoning: and therefore David
though he had taken from Vrias, both his wife and his life; (two as great
trespasses against a neighbor, as psalm. 51.4.
could be) yet he says to God: Tibi, Tibi soli peccavi: Against thee, against
thee only have I sinned: as if his trespasses against Vrias, were not worth
the speaking off. Yet God is contented to allow the neighbor his part also;
and therefore Christ teaches us, If our neighbor have ought against us: to
go first and be reconciled to him, before we come to offer at the Altar: as
if else he might put in a caveat, and stop our petition: and so indeed he
may. We must therefore use all earnest entreaties; offer all possible
satisfaction: make all humble submission to procure our atonement: but if all
our endeavors cannot prevail: if our ability be so small, that we cannot
satisfy; or their hearts be so hardened that they will not be satisfied: it is
then Gods prerogative to take the matter into his Psalm. 10.4. and 37.33. Romans
12.9. Psalm. 97.1.
own hands: For vengeance is his, and he will repay: and The Lord is King,
says the Pfalme; the earth may be glad: and glad indeed, we may be all; that
the Lord is King, and will judge the earth: for, if men should be our judges;
and our hope of forgiveness should stand in the breasts of men: alas poor
wretches, what man of us all should go to Heaven? for, what care they how many
go to hell: so they may be revenged, and have their wills? which David knew
well: and therefore when after a great sin, God offered him his choice of
punishments: 2 Samuel 24.13.
Either famine, or pestilence, or to flee three days before his enemies:
though he seemed in a great straight; yet he quickly resolved of his choice:
Let me fall, says he, into the hands of God, for his mercies are great: and
let me not fall into the hands of men. And therefore Christ, out of this
prerogative of God, said unto the thief upon the Cross: This day thou shall
be with me in Paradise: he stands not to examine his trespasses to his
neighbor: he takes upon him to answer them himself; and tells him without
more a do; This day thou shall be with me in Paradise. Wherefore O my soul,
observe here first; what thou promisest God to observe: Forgive them that
trespass against thee: I do here therefore forgive all the world: If any man
have done me wrong; if any man have intended me evil: I do freely and fully,
from my heart forgive him. And then, observe what Christ teaches thee to
observe: seek all means to be reconciled to thy neighbor: I do here
therefore desire forgiveness of all the world; if I have done wrong to any
man; if I owe any thing to any man, which I am not able to pay: I am infinitely
grieved, and heartily sorry; and humbly from my heart entreat him to forgive
me. And when thou have done this; thou have yet a City of refuge to fly unto,
God: and to him confess thy sins, and desire forgiveness: I do here
therefore prostrate my self before thee, O God; I confess and acknowledge the
heynousnesse of my sins: and I most humbly from my heart entreat thee to
forgive me. This done, O my soul, thou may rise from the earth, and take
comfort; and may be bold to say, The Lord is my helper, I will not fear
Psalm. 56.4.11. Heb. 13.6. Ier. 15 11.
what man shall do unto me. For thou may be sure that God will use either
hisauthority to the world, to make it forgive thee; or his prerogative over the
world: and forgive thee himself.

But is it not strange this petition should come in so late; which one would
think should have been the first? For, how can we expect a donative before a
pardon? that any thing should be given us; unless our sins be first forgiven
us? Is it not, that the four first petition are very ancient; and were said of
our first parents, even in Paradise: and in them we alter nothing but the
tunes; for they were to them songs; but are to us supplications: They were to
them Himns, but to us are Dirges: but the two latter are wholly new, and come
but now in; and therefore take their place as they come: For, they are indeed,
the mere reparations of our first Parents ruins: and had both of them been
altogether needless, if they had not both of them; been altogether
graceless. And yet there appears another reason. For, we have asked to
hallow Gods Name; and that his Kingdom may come: and that his Will may be
done: and that he would give us bread to eat: and now, it seems by our asking
for temporal things, (which is the last care of a Christian man) that Christ
would have made an end of the Prayer here, if it had been possible; but it
would not be: For, our hallowing Gods Name is but imperfect; his Kingdom comes
to us but in part; his Will, though it be done as it is in Heaven; yet it is
done in earthen Vessels: and therefore after all this, there is no remedy; we
must needs come to this at last, and ask forgiveness: or else all that went
before will not serve the turn, for which this Prayer is intended. And may it
not be another reason why this petition comes in so late, and is placed amongst
the last; to show, that Repentance comes never too late, so it come at last:
and therefore Christ makes this one of our last petitions; as washing the
Disciples feet, was one of his last acts; the very emblem of this petition.
Yet we may observe how dangerous a thing this late repentance is: for, though
Peter, no doubt, had often said with David, Wash me thoroughly from my sins;
yet when it grew Psalm. 51.2.
so late, before Christ came to wash him indeed: he would have put it off; if
Christ had not put him on, with an extraordinary motion.

But may we not seem here to be at a stand? For, here are many petitions; but
we can see none of asking for faith: as Christ prayed for Peter, That his
faith might not fail: and the Apostles Mark. 22.32.
prayed, O Lord increase our faith: and is it not strange that in this
principal prayer, we should not pray for that which is the principal? that
all our petitions should be for works: and none of them for faith? Is it, for
some such reason as Moses had: who describing the creation of the world; and
the making of all creatures: yet speaks nothing, of the making of Angels,
though of all creatures, the principal? Or is it, that Christ makes this a
Prayer, not a Catechism: Heb. 11.6.
and a prayer for the Faithful, not for Infidels: for, He that comes to God,
must believe that God is: and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him? Or
is it, that we cannot pray for faith; but it must be needs, either without
cause, or without effect: and so be either needless or fruitless? For, if we
have favth already, it is needless to ask it: and if we have it not; it is in
vain to ask it: seeing, what we ask not in faith, St. James tells us, we
shall not obtain: and if we ask it in faith, we then have faith to ask it
before we ask it. But will it not be better not to look out reasons, why
we do not ask it; but rather to show reasons, that we do ask it? and ask
it we do indeed; not verbally, but really. For, do we not pray for faith,
when we pray for the hallowing of that, which cannot be hallowed but by the
tongue of faith? the Name of God. Do we not pray for faith; when we pray for
the coming of that, which cannot come but upon the feet of faith? the
Kingdom of God. Do we not pray for faith, when we pray for the doing of
that, which cannot be done but by the strength of faith? the Will of God. Do
we not pray for faith, when we pray for the having of that, which cannot be
had, but by the hand of faith? forgiveness of our finnes. Certainly, seeing
we pray for the causes and the effects; for the root, and the fruits of faith:
it is not the want of naming faith, that can be a reason to make us doubt,
that we pray not for faith; no more then the want of naming Christ in this
prayer, is any reason to prove that we pray not here in the Name of Christ.

It is proper to this petition; that where all the other are absolute, this
only is conditional: and where the other are only contemplative, this is
both contemplative and active: for, it is to be done, as well as to be laid.
And where all the other petitions look God in the face: and expect to receive
something at his hands; this only, with the Publicane, presumes not to look up
to Heaven; neither aspires to taste of Gods bounty, but only of his mercy. And
yet as dejected as it seems, it has greater spirits; at least speaks greater
words then all the rest: for where the other do but only sue for grace, to be
enabled to do good works; this undertakes to do good works at its own
peril: and where the other expect Gods blessings all of free gift; this offers
to pay for what it takes. And it is proper also to this petition; that it may
be called by two names: For, as we say, Forgive us; It may be called, the
petition of repentance; and as we say, As we forgive our debtours; it may be
called the petition of charity: and they are justly joined here together,
seeing they cannot well be parted asunder: for either we must have both, or
neither of both.

Last of all, are placed Infants; who though they be well borne; yet being but
children, it is no disparagement to be set at the lower end: For when it is
said; Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil; is it not most
properly the petition of Infants? who though they cannot say their prayers, in
their own persons; yet seeing they have their Angel, it is like they have
their petition, and say it in their Angel: and what is fitter for them to
pray, who are most subject to fear; then to pray against that object which is
most to be feared: and fear is the proper character, both of them, and of
this petition. And it is fit they should Agnem claudere; be the last that come
into the Temple to pray; seeing they are the last that come into the Field to
fight; or rather their prayer is, they may not come into the field at all. And
this may be a comfort to those parents, whose children die in their infancy;
that certainly their prayer is heard, and granted: seeing God spares to bring
them into the field of temptation: (for Tentatio est vita hominis super terram)
but delivers them presently from this present evil world.

Here the word And, is set on work again; and cold not be spared: for, as
before it served to join the spiritual blessing to the temporal, charity to
prosperity; so here, it serves to join one spiritual blessing to another,
perseverance to repentance. And it seems to do as good service now, as it did
before: For if a man have his sins forgiven; and afterward be led into
temptation; and be not withal delivered from evil: he will quickly fall to
his old trade of sinning again; and the end of that man will be worse then
the beginning. But all this is helped by the coming in of And: which brings
with it either a freedom from temptations, or an assistance in temptations;
either an exemption from the battle, or an assurance of victory.

It is proper to this petition; that where all the other are single, this only
is double: and as being the petition of weak Infants, requires the assistance
of both the hands of God. And it may be called, the petition of perseverance;
and takes the right way for it: for it removes the impediments, and then
applies the helps: and when there is nothing to pull it down; and a sure
proppe to hold it 1 Cor. 1.8.
up: what should hinder, but it may last for ever?

We have seen now, that even the virtues themselves seem to speak; and make
petitions for us: holiness, hope, obedience, providence, repentance, charity,
and perseverance: and is it not strange, that we see not faith amongst them;
and that she, of all other, should be missing here? but may not perhaps the
reason be, because the seems not to have any particular work to do in this
prayer, as the other virtues have; but has her working in the whole; and in
every part; and cannot be so properly said, A Captain of a Company; as she may
be styled, the General of the whole Army?

But howsoever we may be unwilling to understand this petition, of natural
Infants; yet of spiritual we cannot: of whom Christ says; We cannot enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, but as little children. And such we are, the best
of us all, when we are at best; we can neither go nor stand, but as we are
led: for if we be left to our selves, we are sure to fall. We are therefore
contented to be led: and have made choice of our leader; but if he lead us,
where we may chance to fall; what are we the better for his leading? and what is
then our prayer; that he will not lead us, into the rugged ways of temptation,
where we may dash our foot against a stone; but that he will lead us, in the
even paths of righteousness, where ler. ^1.9.
our feet may neitherslip nor stumble: and if he do not always hold his hand
over us, to keep us from taking falls; that yet at least, he will put his hand
under; and keep us from taking ha^mes.

But if we take this petition Generally; does it not seem, to make us speak
exceeding strangely? as though we thought God a seducer; and where all this
while we have expected he should do us good: we should now begin to fear,
he would do us hurt? But the truth is, we are not distrustful of God, but of
our selves; not of his leading, but of our following: Not that God tempts us,
for St. James has cleared him of that, where he says; that God tempts no man.
But we have other tempters; the world, the flesh, and the devil; who have all
their several ways of tempting: For, the devil tempts us, by suggestion of
fancies; the world tempts us, by allurement of objects; the flesh tempts us, by
inclination of will: and these again are all pressed upon us; by the devil;
with the rage of a roaring Lion: by the world, with the subtelty of a
flattering enemy; by the flesh, with the treachery of a false friend: so that,
if force and fraud and falsehood would do it, we were undone: and yet against
all these we may do well enough: For, Christ has overcome the world and has
broken the serpents head; and by Ioh. 16.33. Gal. 5.29.
his death has mortisied the flesh: and so no matter now, who is against us,
if God be with us: but if he lead us in, that should lead us out; in what
case are we then? God is an Actour in all our actions; and he has two hands
to work withal, though he do not always use them both at once, and what is
then our prayer? that he will be pleased not to use his left hand of Justice,
to lead us into temptation; but if his pleasure be to do so; that yet at
least he will use his right hand of mercy also, to lead us out, and to
deliver us.

We said before, that this last petition of the three latter; seems to be
subordinate to the last petition, of the three former; and therefore having
said, Thy Will be done; we justly now make suite to him to be good unto us; and
not to lay too heavy burdens upon us: for of whom should we seek for
mitigation of our burdens, but of him to whom we have submitted our backs?
But why should Christ teach us another order in our praying, then he used
himself in his own praying? For he prayed: Father, if it be possible, let
this Cup pass from me; yet not as I will, but as thou will: so putting his
petition before his submission: but he teaches us, to put our submission
first, and after to come with our petition? Is it not that Christ might place
his petition where he pleased; who had power in himself to grant it to
himself? For he had power to lay down his life; and he had power to take it
again: but if we should place our petition first, it might seem, as if we did
capitulate with God; and made not our submission, but upon condition.

When we say, Lead us not; we seem to doubt God: but when we say, Deliver
us; we show our trust in God: When we say, Lead us not; it implies we are
fearful: but when we say, Deliver us; it implies we are confident. And how
should this variation come to happen? In the first, we look upon our selves;
and can see nothing but weakness; and therefore can feel nothing, but
doubtfulnesse and fearc: but in the second, we look upon God; and can see
nothing but goodness: and therefore can feel nothing but hope and confidence.
In the first, we consider the great hate and power of the devil over us; and
this makes us fearful: In the second, we consider the great love of God to
us; and his great power over the devil: and this makes us confident. In the
first, we consider the Law; and what is threatened to transgressors, and have
cause to fear: In the second we consider the Gospel, and what is promised to
believers; and have cause Gal. 3.24.
to hope. Thus the Law sends us to Christ; our own weakness to seek for
succor; the tempter to look out a deliverer. Consider, then, O my soul; what
happiness it is to thee; that though the Law kill; yet Christ quickens: though
the ^esh be weak; yet the Spirit is willing: though thou have a devil for thy
tempter; yet thou have God for thy deliverer. And may we not take comfort, to
think how fitly our temptation, and our deliverance are placed in one petition
together; least if they were put into two petitions, they might seem to be too
far assunder? For if our deliverance, should not be immediate to our
temptation; GOD knows, what hurt we might take; but we all know, what hazard
we should run.

It may seem a strange prayer of David; to Psalm. 119 37.
say, Averte Oculos, ^e videant vanitatem: Turn away mine eyes from seeing
vanity: as though God meddled with our looking? Or that we had not power in our
selves; to cast our eyes upon what objects we list? But is it not, that what
we delight in, we delight to look upon? and what we love, we love to be
seeing? and so to pray to God, that our eyes may not see vanity; is as much as
to pray for grace, that we be not in love with vanity. For indeed, vanity has
of it self so graceful an aspect, that it is not for a natural man, to leave
looking upon it: unless the fayrer aspect of Gods Grace, draw our eyes from
vanity, to look upon it self; which will always naturally be looking upon
the fairest. And as David here makes his prayer in the particular, Against
temptations of prosperity: so Christ teaches us, to make our prayer in the
general; against the temptations, both of prosperity and adversity; and very
justly: For, many can bear the temptations of one kind; who are quickly
overcome, by temptations of the other kind: So David could bear persecution
without murmuring, but when he came to prosperity; he could not turn away, his
eyes from vanity. In his crosses, he could say; Examine me, O God, Psalm. 26.1 2
and try me; Tudge me according to my integrity. But in his prosperity, he
was glad to say; There Psalm. 31.3.51.
is no soundness in my flesh; neither any rest in my bones, because of my
sin. And as David had better shoulders to bear adversity; then eyes to bear
prosperity: so there are others, that can bear prosperity with moderation; who
are quickly overcome with impatience in adversity. And it seems the Devil
took Job to be of this temper: for he saw his carriage upright, in his
prosperous estate: but he told God, It was no marvel; seeing he had set a
hedge about him; a hedge of prosperity: but if he would break down that
hedge, and let in crosses; he should l^b 1 11.
find him, another man then he took him for; he would curse him to his face.
But though the devil were deceived in Job, and that Job could do this: do
we think, that every one of us could do as much? Or rather, not one of a
hundred? Or rather, as Solomon says; Not one of a thousand? Or rather, as God
himself says Job 1.8.
here; Not such an other in the whole earth. And why then would God lay such
crosses upon a righteous man, for trial of that which he knew already? was it
not enough that God knew it; but a good man must suffer, that the devil might
know it? was it justice in God to put a righteous man to pain, only for the
devils pleasure? But the case indeed is clean otherwise: God did it not for
the devils pleasure; but for his torment; and not for enforming of himself,
but for endeering of Ioh: For, as there is no such cross to the devil, to
make him impatient; as to see a man that is patient in crosses; So there is no
deed of men, so acceptable before God; as to take all thankefully which he
lays upon them. For, not to murmr; or not to cast our eyes upon vanity: are
in themselves any great matters, but when a man murmures not in adversity;
which gives so many causes of impatience: or when a man casts not his eyes upon
vanity, in prosperity; which ministers so many occasions of allurement: this is
a man after Gods own heart; and this is one, to whom the devil may say, as he
said to Christ; Art thou come to torment us before the time? But the difficulty
of doing this; and the danger of not doing this; gives us all just cause to
say; Lead us not into temptation.

But if it be not good that God should lead us into temptation; why should we
think that God will offer it? and if it be good; why should we offer to pray
against it? seeing God, who is the Fountain of all goodness: can never be the
stream to carry us to evil? It is good indeed in God; but it is not good for
us: It is good in God, that heo should set his Justice a work, where his mercy
is provoked: but it is not good for us, that he should lead us in; who is the
only means we have to lead us out. We are well assured, that God never
tempts us: for else St. James should not tell us right: and we are as well
assured, that God sometimes leads us into temptation: for else Christ should
not lay our petition right: but it is not all one, to tempt us; and to lead us
into temptation: To tempt us is properly the work of sa^an: To lead us into
temptation, is oftentimes the work of God: It was God, that led Christ into
the Wilderness to be tempted; but it was the devil that tempted him, in the
Wilderness. And even this is our case; if God lead us into temptation, the
devil will be sure to fall a tempting us, to lead us into sin: and to
resist the devils temptings, Christ found it so difficult for himself; that he
knows it to be impossible for us: and therefore what he knows, we cannot
resist; he teaches us to prevent; which is only done by this petition; For if
God lead us not into temptation: the devil may have the will to fall a
tempting us; but he shall never have the power to tempt us to falling.

But why should we pray, not to be led into Iam. 1.^.
temptation; seeing St. James bids us, to account it for exceeding joy, when we
fall into temptations? Is it wisdom to pray against our exceeding jo^? Or is
it misery to be led into that, into which it is happiness to fall? where
should be the cause of our making this petition? Not in the temptations; for
then St. James would not say, they were cause of joy: Not in Gods leading us,
for then David would not desire God, to be his Guide: Is it, that temptations,
which are good in themselves; are made evil, if God lead us into them? Or is
it, that Gods leading us, which is good in it self; is made evil, if it lead
us into temptation? Or shall we believe Christ, and think St. James was
deceived? Or shall we believe St. James, and think Christ was mistaken? O
feeble flesh, what may not temptations work upon thee; when this very praying
against temptations; becomes it self a tempation unto thee? But is it not,
that some temptations are only outward; and are but as Files, as I may say, of
our rusty nature; of which St. James speaks? And some are inward, and are as
engines of battery, to our weak nature; of which Christ speaks? and so St.
James says true; that we have cause to joy in those; as the Iron has cause to
joy, to have the rust Filed off: and Christ speaks true, that we have cause to
pray against these, as that which is weak, has cause to pray, it be not
batterd with engines: and all comes to this, that God will not lead us into
temptation, and there leave us: but so guard us, and regard us in them, that
though they File us, they may not foil us: though shake us for our fruit, yet
not to our fall, but have the issue with the temptation, 1 Cor. 10.13.


But why should we think that God will do that for us, which he would not do
for Christ himself? For, he led him into temptations, of hunger and thirst; of
scandals and reproaches; of crosses and persecution; but above all, into that
transcendent temptation, which made him cry; My God, my God, why have thou for
saken me? and how then can we look he will spare us? Even for the same love
we look he should spare us; for which we find he spared not him. For he
therefore led him into temptation; that he might thereby triumph over the
tempter; and we therefore look he will spare us: least the tempter should
thereby triumph over us. For God as our Captain will as well bring us off; as
lead us on: and he might well trust Christ with temptations, who had forces of
his own to make resistance; but there is no trusting of us with them, who are
all of us creeples, from our mothers womb.

This petition seems very plausible to worldly minds; because they think
there are no temptations, but only crosses: yet there is something in it that
would not like them very well, if it were well understood. For would any man
like to pray that he might not be rich? yet so he does, that says this
petition as St. Paul tells us, They that will be rich fall into many
temptations; and into many foolish, and ^some lusts. And therefore Solomon
never puts on the masque of generality, but delivers it to God, in bare terms:
Give me neither poverty nor riches: Not riches, as Prove 30.8.
being a temptation to steal away our hearts from God; Not poverty, as being a
temptation to make us steal away the goods of others. And yet we need not be
dismayed, or angry with the petition; seeing he that prayed so against riches,
proved not withstanding the richest man himself that ever was.

But must we not needs think this petition more then needs; seeing by the
former petition our sins are all already forgiven? Indeed if Christ to him
that cried to him for help, had only said, Thy sins are forgiven thee; we
might well enough have made an end of our prayer there: but seeing he adds,
Go thy way and sin no more: this makes way for this petition; and now it
comes of necessity to be added: for if this petition do not come and help
us, we may go our way, but we shall never go the right way; we may be
made clean, but we shall never be kept clean: For the former petition was a
remedy against our sin, but this is the remedy against our sinfulness; that
was physic to cure; but this is the physic to prevent: and if we do not
sometimes use preventing, we must not always look for curing.

But if this be the preventing petition; and the former, the curing; why do we
not use this petition first; and so perhaps we might not need the other? This
indeed might well be done in a sound body; but ours, God knows, from our
conception, have never been so sound, but that we have ever needed curing; and
therefore our prevention is not from diseases; but from the growth of diseases;
not to keep us in perfect health; but to preserve us from greater sickness.

And as it is a preventive against sin: so it is, as I may say, a cross bill
against the author of sin: for the devil is continually making suite to
God; that he would lead us into temptation: and we by this petition make suite
that he will not lead us; and we have no advantage of the devil, for
prevayling in our suite, but only our says: for if faith fail us; the devil
is as like to speed in the suite, as we. But though Christ prayed himself for
Peter, that Ioh. 17.20.
his faith might not fail: and seems to leave us here, to pray for our
selves: yet we cannot doubt, but that coming in his Name, he will do as
much for us as he did for Peter: and then if Christ by his prayer, obtain for
us, that our faith do not fail: we may be sure, by our own prayers to
obtain for our selves, that God will grant our suite, and not the tempters.

But seeing God is in Power, almighty: in Wisdom, infinite: in Care, most
tender: in Watchfulness, most vigilant: what need we to fear, or can we be
afraid off, if he be our leader? No cause indeed of any fear on Gods part: all
the fear is on our parts: for though God be powerful, yet we are weak, as
Christ says; The Spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak; though God be
wise, yet we are foolish: that God says of us, My people has no
understanding: Though God be careful, yet we are wilful; that it may be savd
as well of us, as of the Jews, that we are a stiff-necked Generation. Though
God be watchful, yet we are drowsy; that Christ may say to us, as he said
to the Apostles, Could ye not watch with me one hour? And now if God should
leave us to our infirmities: and add his leading to our own aptness of
falling into temptations: It were impossible that this house of ours, which is
built upon the sands, should ever be able to stand upright. O Lord, let thy
Spirit lead me; for without leading, I am afraid to fall; but let him not
lead me into temptation; for by such leading, I am sure to fall: so lead me
in the way that I be not led captive away: yet know, O my soul, and despair
not; that if it should so ill befall thee; yet He, which led captivity
captive, is able to deliver Psalm. 68.18.
thee.

But why should we talk so much of the devils tempting us? For who is able to
come personally, and accuse him of any such matter? St. James says; Every man
is tempted, when he is Iam. 1.14.
drawn away of his own lusts, and entised: but speaks not a word of any
tempting from the devil. But may it not be said here, Telapalam Iaciuntur;
Clam subministrantur? St. James seems to speak of sensible tempting; of which
our own consciences can accuse us: and which we may easily take notice off in
our sel^: but the devil is no such tempter; he is one that will not be seen
in tempting: he catches us as we use to catch a beast; by clawing and looking
another way, he comesnot more close to us, then he keeps himself close from
us: and therefore the more dangerous because secret; his malice is not known
till felt, and when felt, yet scarce discerned: It is a skill that passes our
cunning, to discern Inter morbum mentis, et morsum serpentis; between the
weeds of corruption, growing naturally in us: and the seeds of infection, cast
by satan into us: as Christ told Peter, Satan has Luke 22.31.
desired to winnow thee as Wheat: and what was this winnowing but tempting?
yet Peter could not charge the devil with any such matter: he found no such
winnowing in himself, nor ever should have done till he had winnowed him all
to chafe: if Christ had not prayed for him, that his faith might not fail.
For as the wind blows where it lists, yet no man knows from whence it
comes: so this windy tempter breaths his suggestions where he lists; yet no
man knows from whence they come. Our natures are so prone to wickedness; that
we may well enough think, they come from thence: yet the Devil that never
thinks us prone enough: is never backward to set us forward, though by ways
and conveyances so secret and hidden: that no Iuggler plays his tricks more
closely to our sense, then he ministers his suggestions, privily to our
fancies, that where Solomon says, There are four things too wonderful for
him; and which he cannot know: he might perhaps have added this as a fifth;
the devils way of tempting in the mind of man. Although therefore we cannot
personally come and charge him with tempting us; as our first parents could:
yet seeing Christ told 1 Pet. 5.8.
Peter, and Peter has told us; we have reason to take notice of it; and give
them the credit to believe it.

But may not this petition, with great reason be thought unreasonable? we
would be taken for pure silver; and can we not endure the trial? we defire to
be accounted hardy soldiers; and can we not abide to hear of the battle?
how unlike are we to David in this? For, what we pray against, he prayed for;
Prove me, O Lord, and try me; examine my raines and my Psalm. 26.2.
heart. But was this prayer of David, an opposition to our petition here? he
prayed to be tried in that which was past: we pray, not to be tried in that
which is to come: He prayed to be tried, because he knew his own innocence; we
pray not to be tried, because we know our own frailety. When the matter was
only between him and Saul; he might stand upon his Innocence and justify
himself: but when it comes between him and God; he knows not then, where he
is himself: but is feign to fall a praying: Forgive me my secret sins: and
not contented with that which is past; he is glad to prevent the time and say,
Incline not my heart Psalm. 141.4.
unto any evil thing: and so David is as ready to say this petition as we;
Lead us not into temptation.

But is it not strange how we should be come to this? Does not this petition
suite very ill, with those that went before? For by them we have prepared our
selves at all points for this spiritual war: By the first, we have put our
selves under Gods colors, and go under his Name: By the second, we have put
on all the Armor of God; and have as much as the Kingdom can afford us: By
the third, we have put on a resolution to stand to it what ever happen: By the
fourth, we have victualed our selves for every day, as long as the war lasts:
By the fifth, we have made our peace with God and the world; and is it not
strange that after all this, we should now shrink from the battle, and be
afraid least God should lead us to it? Esa. 37.3.
But all this is done, as Hezekiah said to Esaias; The children are come to the
birth, and there is not strength to bring forth: that as St. Paul says, God
has concluded all under unbelief; that he may have mercy upon all: So we may
say, God has concluded all under fear and weakness; that he may deliver all:
and that we may know and acknowledge, that we have no hand at all in it; but
that our deliverance is wholly and solely, the work of God: that we may call
him, and call Psalm. 18.48.
upon him with David: O thou our deliverer from our enemies. We only have a
prayer and a song, for all we can do: a prayer of supplication; that he will
deliver us: which is this we say here; Deliver us from evil: and a song of
praise for our deliverance; which is that, that follows; For thine is the
Kingdom, the Power and the Glory. A song of praise for our deliverance: but
from Psalm. 49.15. Ier. 9.4. Eccles. 6.13.
what, and from whom? From hell, from the grave, from the world, from our
enemies, from our friends, from our selves; but above all, from one that makes
use of all these against us; from the bramble satan, who catches hold of us,
to rule over us: but thou, O Lord, art the true Olive tree; and thine is the
Kingdom: from the roaring Lion; that goes about to devour us: 1 Pet. 5.8.
but thou art the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, and thine is the Power; from the
cruel Pharaoh, that pursues to destroy us; but thou art the Lord of Hosts that
gettest thee honor upon Pharaohs Exodus 14.4.
Host, and thine is the glory: And for this deliverance Exodus 15.2.
from Pharaoh and his Host, though but a type of ours: Moses long since sung a
song so Psalm. 118.14.
loud, that it has ecchoed from him to David; and from David to Esaias, and from
Esaias is come Esa. 12.2.
to us; Thou, O Lord, art our strength, and our song; for thou have been our
deliverance.

But is deliverance from evil, the highest blessing, we can reach to, by our
prayers? what becomes then of the resurrection of our bodies, and the life
everlasting? things so much talked off, and so highly magnified? Are they only
idle names, and are there no such things indeed? Or are they so little worth
the praying for, in all this absolute prayer we bestow not so much as a word
upon them? Or shall we think the prayer unperfect; seeing the greatest things
are left unprayed for, and not once named or employed? O my soul take heed,
let not the weak fancies of thy own spirit; or the strong suggestions of a
worse Spirit, move such unhallowed doubts within thee; For our deliverance from
evil, shall plainly appear to be the highest blessing we can directly
attain to by our prayers; and yet our confidence for the resurrection of our
bodies; and for the life everlasting, shall have foundation enough to stand
most firm. For the three first petitions, seem chiefly referred to the honor
of God; in whom all his attributes are equal; and therefore in them, we go as
I may say, upon even gronnd; we can find neither rising, nor falling in them;
we seem to see nothing, that carries any higher than the earth, or that
tarries any longer then this life; (and therefore that clause, In Earth as it
is in Heaven; though it be expressed only, in the third petition; yet it is by
many, understood also in the other two:) but in the three latter, which are
referred to our own benefit; we seem to be climbing up Jacobs ladder; for
at every petition, we take a step higher. In the first, we begin very low;
and ask, as Jacob did, but only meat and raiment: In the second, we take a
step higher; and ask a pardon of our faults. In the third, we go yet
higher; and ask an absolute protection from all dangers, and deliverance from
all evil: wherein we may be said, to have wrestled with the Angel; and
obtained a blessing: for this is the highest step we can possibly attain to
in this mortal life: But how does this step reach so high as Jacobs ladder,
which reaches up to heaven? Mark therefore, O my soul, for having begun in
humility; It seems, as if Christ here, should say unto us: Friend, sit up
higher: for this step of our deliverance from evil, seems to deliver us to
Heaven: seeing it is contiguous and joins immediately to the first step, we
shall take in Heaven; when all tears shall be wiped from our eyes; and they be
made clear, to behold the blessed vision of God, which is the highest step
of all: and in which consists the sum and summum of our eternal happiness.

But why in all this prayer, should we have for these things, no petition? Is
it that we shall have them rather by the participation of Christ: then by the
intercession? rather as sons, by inheritance; then by suit, as servants? and
is as much beyond our prayers as above our capacities? Or is it, that our
deliverance from evil, which is the highest step, we are capable of in this
world, implies an Adhering to the Deliverer himself in the world, where we
shall be capable? Or may we not say, that the petition, Thy Kingdom come;
though it go from us with an only reference to the honor of God; yet it is
returned from God to us, with this Interence; Honorantes me Honorabo: and
though 1 Samuel 2.30.
it reach not so far as the suite of the mother of Zebedeus sons; to have
one sit at his right hand; the other, at his left: yet he reaches as far as
the suite of the thief upon the Cross; Lord remember me when thou come
into thy Kingdom.

But least it should be said, that we go about to take the Kingdom of Heaven
by violence, may we not make the matter playner, by saying: that we therefore
pray not for the resurrection of the body, and for the life everlasting:
because they are not so properly the objects of faith, which have most to do
in our prayers; as they are the objects of hope, which is a transcendent to our
prayers. Faith indeed prepares us for hope: and the things we here pray for,
for the things we here after hope for: but as it is not the fashion of a son,
to pray his father to make him his heir; but he carries himself dutifully;
and performs his obedience; and then he doubts not but he shall be heir: so
it is not our fashion with God; to pray for our inheritance, which is life
everlasting, and the Kingdom of Heaven; but we pray, that as sons, we may
do our duties, and obey his Will; and then, we have an assured hope, we shall
enjoy them. Although therefore by Name, and in express terms, we pray here,
but for the things only, which may be had here; yet by consequent, and as in
their causes, we pray also for the things, which shall be had hereafter. For
the Graces, which are the causes preceding now; the blessings which are the
effects, will necessarily follow; that is, remission of sins: and obedience
to his Will; and an uniting to Christ, by the coming of his Kingdom, being
here obtained; the resurrection of our bodies, and the life everlasting: and
the blessed vision of God, will undoubtedly succeed. We therefore pray only,
that all impediments of our own defects, may be removed; and that all graces
necessary, may be supplied: and for the rest, we rest our selves upon God: and
Faith seems here, to put us over to hope; for we have no more petitions Heb.
6.11.18.
to make; but the next thing that follows: is that, of the Martyr Stephen,
concerning our eternal life; In manus tuas Domine, Commendo spiritum meum: and
concerning the resurrection of our bodies, that of the Prophet David; My Psalm.
16.9.
stesh shall rest in hope: For having the promise of his word; and the truth of
his promise, and the infallibility of his truth, for our security; though we
have not done with Faith; yet we have now more to do with hope; and thorough
faith are made confident to say in hope; I know, that my Redeemer lives; and
Ioh. 19.2^.
though worms destroy this body, yet I shall see God in my ^esh. For, we
thorough the spirit wait for the hope of righteousness, thorough faith; and
that being justified by Gal. 5.5.
his grace we shall be made heirs, according to our hope of everlasting
life. Tit. 3 7.


But yet at last, if it be exacted of this prayer, that it must of necessity
include also the blessings of the world to come; or else will be concluded for
unperfect: may we not very justly justify it, even in this kind also? Let us
therefore take a review: For, though at the first looking, we have discovered
nothing; yet if we continue looking, as the servant of Eliah did; we shall
perhaps, discern a Cloud, arrising from the sea of these petitions: that will
serve to signify, a shower of blessings, immediately to follow. And we need
not stand long a looking: for do not the very first words afforde us a Cloud?
For when we say, Our Father: does it not imply, that we are his children? and
if the Father always be in Heaven; shall the children always be on Earth? how
then is it true, that where he is, we shall be also? and that which Christ
says: the son abides in the House for ever? For how shall he abide there,
if he never come there? seeing therefore Heaven is Gods House; and we as
children, must in our time, be in the house with him; we must necessarily at
last, come to be in Heaven: and so one of the blessings is found here, which
was complayed of, to be wanting in the prayer. And when it is savd, Hallowed
be thy Name: shall not Gods Name eternally be hallowed? If then we be
appointed, to do a work which is eternal; must not we be needs eternal,
that are to do it? and so, to our being in Heaven, is added eternity; another
of the blessings, complained of, to be missing. Let us now come, to Thy
Kingdom come: and will not this afforde us; to see the Cloud more plainly?
For, the Kingdom is but in relation to the subjects; if therefore the Kingdom
be perfect, the subjects must be perfect also: for without perfection of
subjects; It can never be a perfect Kingdom: and what perfection of subjects
could there be; if their should be no other subjects, but only Angels? For
so, there should be, but one rank of subjects; which in a Kingdom, were a
great imperfection. To make therefore some other ranks, for perfecting of this
Kingdom; we also shall be taken in; and then certainly, taken in, whole and
imire^; both hody, and soul: for else, the Kingdom should rule over but
pieces of subjects; which in a perfect Kingdom must not be. If then we be
taken in, whole and entire; then must our bodies be raised, and joined to our
souls again; and this is our resurrection: another of the blessings
complained of to be missing. And may we not continue looking still; and come to
discern the cloud yet playner? For, when it is said; Thy Will be done in
earth, as it is in Heaven: are not we to do as much work, as the Angels? and
if we do as much work, may we not expect as much blessing? and they behold
the face of God continually; and therefore we certainly if we do the Will
of God, shall do so to: and so we have found even the greatest of the
blessings, which were complained of, to be missing in this prayer: And we have
found it here, where we least expected it. Eor indeed, these petitions will
afford, diverse ways of drawing forth these blessings from them; according as
we take our standing to discern the Cloud. But this which is done, may serve
sufficiently, to clear this prayer, from all imputation of imperfection:
seeing we have all the blessings, now, that can be thought of, worth the
having: Eternal life; and that in Heaven; and that both in body and soul; and
in them both, to enjoy the blessed vision of God; which is life everlasting, in
its exaltation. Math, 22.32.
And now, if any man think, that to fetch the resurrection of our bodies; and
the rest of these blessings, is far fetched, and from the Clouds indeed: Let
him consider, how far it was, fetching it, from the words of God to Moses: I
am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob: and yet when
Christ fetched it so far; it was taken for a proof near hand; and for a
Cloud of witnesses. And indeed, there is a benefit to us, by this abstruse
expressing: for being less obvious: It is more speculative in the searching:
and more meditative in the finding: and the more it is wrapped up to the sense,
the more it is dignified to the understanding.

And though these Petitions may serve sufficiently, to afford these Blessings:
yet there is a Petition behind: which though it make not so great a show, of a
Cloud: yet may prove to afford as great a shower of blessings, as all the
former. For, when we are delivered from all evil: then if death be evil, we
are delivered from death; and to be delivered from death, is life everlasting.
When we are delivered from all evil; then if corruption of the body, be
evil; we are delivered from that corruption; and to be deliverd from that
corruption; is the very resurrection. When we are delivered from all evil;
then if restraint from the sight of God be evil: we are delivered from that
restraint; and to be delivered from that restraint: is to be admitted into his
presence, and to enjoy his blessed vision. And now this prayer reaches full as
high, as Jacobs ladder: and so we have ladder enough, to carry us to Heaven;
and prayer enough, to obtain the blessings of Heaven: and we are come to the
Consummatum est; which is not only a finishing, but a perfecting: a perfecting
in it self, in being made perfect; and a perfecting of us, in making us
perfect. Let us therefore pray this prayer; and let us pray, that we may pray
it; seeing it can never be too much said; which can never be enough done.

We have now gone over these petitions, as they lie in the prayer, Ordine
recto: but do they not invite us also, to a consideration of them, as they lie
Ordine Inverso? and apply hither, that of Christ: the first shall be last, and
the last first. For the first of these petitions in our praying; will be the
last of Gods accomplishing; and the last will prove the first: and they seem
to have a correspondence to Gods favors, showed to the Israelites, in their
progress in the Wilderness. For, when we say, Deliver us from evil: Is it
not the first blessing we receive from God; that we are delivered from the
bondage we were in, to satan? and this was figured, by Gods first favor,
showed to the Israelites, in delivering them from the captivity of Egypt;
after many temptations, with signs, and wonders. The next petition is our
desire to be forgiven: and to have our sins washed away, in the blood of
Christ: and was not this also figured to the Israelites, in the Passover? a
figure of the true Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of the World. And
these two petitions, are immediate to one another: as the two favors were
intermingled to the Israelites: For there could not be a deliverance without a
Passover to them; because there cannot be to us. The third petition is for our
daily bread; and this likewise was figured, by the next favor showed to the
Israelites; his sending down of Manna, day by day, from Heaven; and his
bringing water out of the Rocks. The next Petition is for sanctification; when
our wills are made conformable unto his: and though by his Adoption, we are
children, yet by our own Vow, are servants: and this also was Figured in the
Israelites, by his giving of the Law: when God said to them, ye shall be to me
a Kingdom of Priests; and an holy Nation; and they again answered God; All
that the Lord has spoken; we will do. The next Petition, is for the coming
of his Kingdom: which is not only wages, as to servants; but an Inheritance,
as to children: For it is not only said: Euge bone serve: but venite Benedicti
Patris: and this was also figured in the Israelites, when God distributed
amongst them the Kingdoms of the Heathen: and every Tribe had their stations
Number. 26.54.
assigned them in the land of Canaan, some by Geometrical proportion, and some
by Arithmeticall. The last Blessing, is our first Petition; when we shall come
to be as Angels; and when our Hallowing of Gods Name, which is now our work,
shall be our happiness: and this was also Figured in the Israelites; when they
rested in lesnua 21.44.
Canaan, and subduing their Enemies round about them, had nothing but songs of
Praise, and Thanksgiving, for the Blessings they enjoyed. After this, there is
no more Figure; for we are come to that, which cannot be Figured: there shall
be no more use of the Name of Father; for we shall Haliow God, in his proper
Name: and as he is in himself: and our charity shall be in that we shall
then love God, Not as Misericordem; Not as Bonum nobis; but as Bonum: and not
only love him, for himself; but not love our selves, but for him: that it is
no merveile, Saint Paul leaves Faith and Hope behind this Charity: seeing They
are only for our selves: This, only for God: and great reason: for God shall
then be All in All.

And now, before we make an end to speak of Hallowing Gods Name; It may not be
unfit; to consider the Three First Petitions; as they are only Hallowings, or
Alleluiahs: for, observing the difference of the songs: we shall perceive the
difference of the singers. The First, when we say; Hallowed be thy Name; is the
Alleluiah of Angels: and we may truly say, is Canticum Canticorum: the song of
songs: not only because it is sung without ceasing; but because it shall be
sung without Ending; and is both the cause and the effect: both the sign and
the substance of our Eternal Happiness. The Second (when we say Thy kingdom
come) is the Alleluiah of the Saints in Heaven: and is an aspyring to the
First; but in aspiring in a very near degree; Near in Dystance, though remote
in Existence: for they are an assurance of Attayning: and do but tarry the
time, but the time will not be; till Time will not be. The Third (when we say;
Thy will be done) is the Allelujah of the Saints on Earth: and is an aspiring
to the second: but an aspiring in a remote degree: for while they are in the
world, they are subject to all the rubs of the world: while they live in the
Flesh: to all infirmities of the Flesh: yet they have a confidence, though no
assurance, or an assurance; though but in confidence: and therefore are
remiss, but not dejected, Bold; but not presumptuous: not out of heart; but
not out of fear.

And may it not here be observed; that as we begin in saying Hallowed be thy
Name; so we end in a kind of facting the Hallowing it: and our first and last
words, are all for his Glory, who is the first and the last: and these three
Attributes, seem to answer to our th ree first Petitions: Hallowed be thy
Name: for Thine is the Glory: Thy Kingdom come: for Thine is the Kingdom: Thy
will be done: for Thine is the Power: and we seem to sing, not only in the
first, an unisonewith the Angels: but in all the Three; the same Ditty with the
Saints in Heaven; for their Allelujah is: Thou art worthy O Lord to receive
Glory, and Honor, and Power: and ours here: Thine is the Kingdom the Power,
and the Glory: that having sung the Song of Saints and Angels here on Earth, we
may be admitted, into the Q^ire of Saints and Angels in Heaven: and sing
eternally Thou art mo^thy O Lord, toreceave Glory, and Honor, and Power. For
Thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

And now O my soul: Consider how perfect this Prayer is: where are the
Petitions of Men and Angels; the Petions of the Church Militant and Triumphant;
the Petitions of Innocent Infants; Paenitent sinners; and Faithful Believers.
And then harken, what Music it makes in Gods Ears; how Pleasing; where the
songs are all of Christ's own setting: how Melodious; where they are all so
sweet singers: how loud; where there are so many voices: especially, when this
Chorus Cantantium, this Quire of singers, which hitherto have sung their parts
a part, shall all join their voices together, in that sacred Antheme; For
Thine is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory; and so End all in that which
is the End of all; and is it felfe without End. The Glory of God.

FINIS.

