Lectures of I. B. upon the xii. Articles of our Christian faith, briefly set
forth for the comfort of the godly, and the better instruction of the simple
and ignorant.

Also hereunto is annexed a brief and clear Confession of the Christian
faith, containing an hundredth articles, according to the order of the Creed of
the Apostles. Written by that learned and godly martyr I. H. sometime Bishop of
Gloucester in his life time.

1. Pet. 3. verse. 15. Be ready always to give an answer to every man that
asks you a reason of the hope that is in you, with meekness and reverence.
Imprinted at London by C. Barker.

To the right honorable Sir Francis Walsingham, Knight, principal Secretary to
her Majesty, and one of her Highness most honorable privy Counsel, Io. Ba.
wishes in this life the fear of God, and in the life to come, everlasting
rest with Jesus Christ.
COnsidering (right honorable) that diverse both of our countrymen, and others,
have very paynefully and fruitefully labored, to set forth the exposition and
meaning, both of the ten Commandments, and also of the Lords prayer, and that
in the English tongue: I thought good, not to meddle any further that way,
seeing so good an entrance was made unto it: But neither seeing nor hearing of
any that had given forth any sermons or lectures, upon the articles of our
Christian faith, a thing as necessary as the other, I was the more emboldened
to set this treatise forth, that the simple and ignorant, which can but only
read, and have this benefit to profit themselves withal, might have the
true and plain meaning of every article of their faith, as they have the
exposition of the Lords prayer, and ten Commandments. For if this Creed,
commonly called the Creed of the Apostles, shall only be said without book,
and rehearsed of the people, without the meaning of it in more words: then they
can not take such comfort out of these articles as were requisite, because they
do not understand them. And so great and excellent mysteries lying hid, shall
do no good, because they are not opened and revealed to the simpler sort. The
cause that moved me to present these my first fruits unto your Honor, was,
That partly you had heard them read unto you, and your Honors accepting of them
as favoring the truth shall encourage others to do the like, and read them
more diligently. I have not labored to be curious in this matter, but so
plain as the weakest of capacity might easily understand: for whose sake,
and not for the learned I was willing to publish this work, according to that
talent that the Lord in mercy has committed unto me his servant, for the
building up of his spiritual temple. I doubt not, but by the working of Gods
holy spirit in you in reading of these articles now and then, your Honor,
(being void of waightier matters and affairs, when leisure shall serve,) you
shall find some comfort and consolation in them. Although they be plain, yet
are they true, and need no eloquence to set them forth: for truth seeks no
corners to hide her self in: Only her fear is least she should be hid. I
grant, it might seem a needless and fruitless thing to write books and
publishe them in these days, wherein are such store that now books lack
readers, rather then readers want books: but if a man consider well with him
self, he shall find that a great many of them tend not so much to set forth
godliness, as wantonness: neither do they profit the Church and common wealth,
but rather hurt and hinder it as much as in them lies, so that it had been
better that a great many of them had been suppressed and never been written.
They hurt many, for they lead young men, (unless Gods spirit guide them the
better) to utter destruction. These are not the books that teach young men,
which are by nature wanton and wild, and given to lusts, to refrain from
liberty of the flesh: but rather give them the bridle to these wanton lusts
and appetites: and pity it is they should be suffered in a Christian common
wealth. These idle books teach not a man to amend and correct his ways, but
utterly to pervert them. A young man therefore shall cleanse his ways, not by
these means, but by ruling himself according to the word of the Lord, as the
Prophet David has forewarned, Psalm. 119. so then although the store of books
in our days is great, yet the number of them that increase true godliness, is
not so great, but that it may be augme^ted. And albeit some one book please
not every man, yet another may, seeing there are diverse and diverse gifts given
to edify, that all men may be without excuse before the Lord. If any find
fault and say, This writer is too hard and hye for my capacity, he may have an
easier: if this man be too eloquent and fine, he may have another that is more
simple and plain: for God be thanked, there is great varietye of gifts in the
Church of Christ: and as it is in the body natural of men that al members are
not alike, nor have the same function, yet all are necessary: and although the
foot be not so excellent a member as the hand or the eye, yet for the use of
the body, it is as necessary and profitable: neither can the head say to the
foot, I have no need of thee, but one has need of the help of another for
the maintenance of ye whole: So it is in ye mystical body of ye Church, some
have more excellent gifts then others, and some may be likened to the head,
some to the eye, and some to the hand: other of inferior gifts to the foot
and to the leg which yet surely can not be despised or lightly set by,
considering the body can not want them: neither is this only to be seen in
the mystical body of the Church, wherein some are pastors, some doctors, some
Deacons, and some have the gift of eloquence, some of knowledge, some of
utterance, and some of tongues: But this may be perceived in the body of the
common wealth, wherein some are kings and rulers, appointed of God to be
heads over others, and some are craftesmen, and artificers, some husbandmen
and plowmen far inferior to the other, and yet notwithstanding, as necessary
is the poor laboring man for the civil body, as is the magistrate and
superior: for if all should rule, who should obey: if all again should obey,
who should rule or govern? but now the Lord has so tempered and disposed
these things in his infinite wisdom, that there should be no disorder, and
that every one should be indetted and bound to another: that so, love and
unity might be kept and maynteyned in all. For no one man has all gifts given
unto him, that he might stand in need of his neighbor, and love him the
better, having that gift which he sees him self to be destitute of. Thus,
being willing to perform all the duties of a faithful minister of Jesus
Christ unto your honor, I leave to trouble you any furthet from other affairs
of your Prince and country, beseeching the Almighty to increase his gracious
gifts in you, to the honor of his holy name, the profit of his Church, and
the consolation of your own soul in the end. Which he grant unto your
honor for his Christ's sake. Amen. 1579.

Your honors in the Lord Jesus* most humble to command. John Baker.

To the Godly and Christian reader, grace and peace from God the father, and
from our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.
I Have for thy sake (gentle reader) set forth unto thee briefly the meaning of
all the articles of our Christian faith, which are necessary to salvation: to
this end and purpose, that as thou have in English an exposition upon the ten
commandments of almighty God and the Lords prayer, to know the better what
they mean: so thou might have likewise in thy mother tongue, some opening
of these Christian articles, which being well applied to thy own conscience by
a lively faith, thou shall find sweeter unto thee then either honey, or the
honey comb, and a treasure to be preferred before much gold, yea the finest
that may be. And because sermons are not so common in every parish Church, as
by the law of God, and the prince they should be: thou may therefore use
this book privately in thy house when thou shall have leisure, as upon the
Sundays and holy days at after noone. The whole sum of thy faith is here
set forth so plainly, that thou may easily understand it, if the Lord
shall give his grace to thee, and open thine eyes to see: otherwise nothing can
be easy to any man, but an open book shall be as sealed unto men, except the
spirit reveal it unto them, which he will do, no doubt, if thou seek it by
humble and earnest prayer to God, in his sons name. For surely this is the
cause, why many reading the Scriptures understand them not, because they come
to them with unprepared hearts, not subdued with humility, but presuming with
their natural wit, to understand the mysteries in them contained. But flesh
and blood does not reveal these secret and hid things unto us. Other read
them without prayer, to understand them, other some read them but to dispute,
and talk of them with the learned, and not to amend their lives, being
detected by them, but only to know them, and let the practice go. But these
men so doing, can not be blessed Luke 11. cap. Wherefore dearly beloved
Christian, I exhort thee to read the scriptures, and all other books, that
tend to the declaration of the scriptures, with a single eye, and penitent
heart, not thinking or presuming any thing of thy self, for the wind blows
where it lists, as our savior says, John 3. And these divine things are
most commonly had from the wise and men of understanding, and opened by the
spirit unto little babes. Matthew. 11. that is to such as are humble in their own
conceyte, and in their own eyes. For the holy Ghost says: Them that be meek
will he guide in judgment, and teach the humble his way. Psalm. 26. So then
the humble shall be exalted, and they all that exalt them selves shall be brought
low. Luke 14. fare well (dear brother) and use this book, as it was meant,
to thy good and comfort, which Jesus Christ grant unto thee. Amen.

Thy loving Brother in the Lord, always to pray for thee. I. B.

Sermons upon the Creed, or xii. Articles of our Christian faith.
I Believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth.

2 And in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, which was conceived of the holy
Ghost.

3 Borne of the Virgin Marie.

4 Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried, descended
into hell.

5 The third day he rose again from the dead.

6 He ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the father
Almighty.

7 From thence shall he come to judge the quick and the dead.

8 I believe in the holy Ghost.

9 The holy Catholic Church, the communion of Saints.

10 The forgiveness of sins.

11 The resurrection of the body.

12 And the life everlasting, Amen.

The first Sermon upon the first article, I believe in God the father almighty,
maker of heaven and earth.
BEfore we come to speak of the meaning of these words, it shall not be
amiss to consider in a word or two, who made this Christian order and form of
our belief. The general and common opinion received with the whole consent of
the Church, is, that the xii. Apostles of our savior Jesus Christ, made this
Creed, every one an article, as a godly writer of our time, one Aretius in his
book of questions does show. Therefore it is called the Apostles Creed. But
whether it were they or no that made it, or any other, it is no great matter,
seeing it is all the undoubted truth of Gods word, and every point of it
agrees with the rest of the holy scriptures written with the Spirit of Christ.
We have many books in the old and new Testament, which are written for our
consolation and comfort, and that by the finger of God, but yet we know not
the names of those men that wrote them, as the book of the Judges, the book
of Kings, and the Chronicles, and such like: and in the new Testament the
Epistle to the Ebrewes. These all are the holy word of God, but yet we know
not the authors of them. And it seems that the holy Ghost would have their
names suppressed and unknown, because we should receive all Scripture alike,
and with the same authority which proceeds from the mouth of God, making no
difference of persons, or choice of men, when all is truth that is written,
and that we should not consider so much, who speaks or writes a thing, as
what is spoken and written unto us. Thus much for the writers of this work.
Now let us consider the thing it self. This Creed has four parts, the
first is of our faith, and belief in God the Father, the first person in
Trinity: the second is of our trust and belief in God the Son Jesus Christ
our savior, the second person in Trinity: the third is of our faith in the
holy Ghost, the power of God, which is the third person in Trinity: the
fourth and last part is of the holy and Universal Church of Christ, and of
those things that are to be believed concerning the same, which are contained in
the last three articles, which are annexed and joined unto the Church, as The
remission of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life everlasting.
These are the benefits which follow the Church. This is the division of the
Creed. Out of the first article we have to note these two things: first that
we must believe in God: secondly, what manner of God it is, in whom we do
believe. The meaning of these words is this, I the servant and child of God,
I, I say, and not another for me, do believe, hope and trust in one almighty,
eternal and everliving God, which is not only a God of might unto me, to be
able to do all things, but a most merciful father in Jesus Christ, most
willing and ready to help me in all troubles and adversities of this life, when
I shall cry and call unto him. First therefore we learn here to believe and
trust in God only, and not in any creature whatsoever, for they cannot help
us, as David says in his Psalms, Vain is the help of man. It is thou that
sauest me from mine adversaries. And here note, that there is a great
difference between these three, to believe God, and to believe there is a God,
and to believe in God, the devils believe the first and the second, that God is
true of his word and promise, which is, to believe God, and they also believe
there is one God and no more, and tremble, as S. James the Apostle says, Chap.
2. 19. but they believe not the third, that is, in God, which is as much as to
embrace and acknowledge him for our good God, and to stick to him, and to his
word only. This is proper to the Elect and children of God, not to the devils
and reprobates, which do not trust in him. For they lack a true justifying
faith, which is defined to be a sure trust in the mercies of God and his
promises, made unto us in Jesus Christ his Son, (by whom he has adopted us)
that he will be merciful unto us, and forgive us all our sins. This is faith,
and this is it that we must have, when we say, I believe in God. For faith must
look unto God, and not to any man or angel, or saint in heaven. Therefore Paul
said to the iayler, asking how he might be saved, when he had abused and
cruelly handled the Apostles, Acts 16.
Believe, says he, in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved. Surely
he could not have said, Believe in Christ, unless he had been very God: and
mark how he says not, Believe Jesus Christ, but, Believe in the Lord Jesus,
and thou shall be saved, as it is said here in our Creed, I believe in God.
This that we must believe in God, is warranted by our savior Christ, saying to
his disciples, Believe in God, let not your hearts be troubled, John 14. So
that this doctrine to believe in God and in no other, is a doctrine of comfort
to all the godly, and to settle their hearts that they be not troubled or carried
away with vain persuasions of men and of Angels, which Paul forbids, Colos.
2. But here may a question be made, why we say not, as in the Lords prayer in
the plural number, Our Father, and forgive us our trespasses: so here also in
like sort, why say we not, We believe in God? First I answer, that is a prayer
to God, and this is a confession of our faith. Then I say the case is not all
one or alike. For I may pray for another man, 1. Tim. 2.
and am commanded so to do, because we are al members of the same body of
Christ, so that my prayer may help and profit him. But I can not believe for
another man, neither shall my faith and belief profit another man, except he
believe him self the promises of Christ: for every man shall be saved by his
own faith, as ye Prophet Habakuk says, Chap. 2. The just man shall live by his
own faith. And this notably confounds and reproves that fond and false
opinion of the papists, which say that it is enough to believe generally as
the church believes, not knowing how or what to believe. This sentence also
reproves and conuinceth another heresy of theirs which say, that a man may be
justified by his own works. Here it is said, The just shall live by his faith,
and not by his good works or deeds. And when Habacuk says, his faith, he
means not that faith is of our selves, but that faith which does save us, is
within us in our hearts, and not without us in other men, meaning
nevertheless, that faith comes from God above, and not of us. As James chap.
1. And this does teach us to apply the mercies of God unto our selves, saying,
I believe as well as other men, yt God will help me, and be my father. This is a
great comfort which the godly only have, and not ye wicked, as David says, The
Lord is his Lord as well as he is a lord to other. Thus much on who^ we must
believe, yt is, in God only. Now secondly consider with your selves in what manner
of god you do believe and trust: not in such a one as the Paynims did, that
could not help them, as Jupiter, Apollo, Diana and such like, which did appoint
a multitude of them to govern and guide the world, because they thought that
one was not able enough of himself, and therefore made one for heaven, as
Jupiter, another for the sea, as Neptune. One for hell as Pluto. One for the
fire as Vulcan. Neither are we taught here to believe in such a god as the
wicked Israelites did, called Baal, which could not hear them when they cried
unto him, as it is in the book of the Kings, who^ Elias reproves, 3. Kings.
18. Chap. Of such Idols and gods the Prophet David speaks, and derideth them
and their worshippers, Psalm. 115. Saying, they have mouths and speak not,
ears and hear not, eyes and see not, noses and smell not, hands and handle
not, feet and walk not, neither make they a sound with their throat. Neither
have we such pety gods of stone and wood, as the papists have their Images. But
our God in who^ we do confess that we believe, is such a one as is a father,
for his goodness and mercy: and almighty, for his strength and power. This
does David mean, when he does speak of his great God, and sets him
against al other false gods of the idolaters, saying, as for our God, he is in
heaven. As if he would say, he is a most mighty God, and both what soever he
will, no man can hinder or let his power. This as it is a great comfort to all
the godly, to have such a God to aid them at all need, so it is a terror to
the wicked to consider that they have to do with such a God as is omnipotent,
able to beat them to pieces and powder, when they resist him. As he did
mightily destroy Pharao, so did he wonderfully deliver his people and children
the Israelites out of his hands, from the read sea. So he declared him self
an omnipotent father. We see then here as in other places, how God joins his
power and justice to terrify, and also his mercy and clemency to comfort. I
say they are put both together, even to terrify the godly also, yt they should
not commit sin, but fear to offend such a mighty Father. So it is said in
the beginning of our prayer, Our father, to comfort us, but it is said also, in
heaven, to magnify his power and greatness over al things. Likewise in the
giving of ye Law it is said, Hear O Israel, I am ye Lord, great and
terrible, no doubt, to put the^ in mind to fear him reverently, and not to
presume upon him. But yet he adds comfort afterward, saying, Thy God, to
deliver thee hereafter, which has been thy God already. Thus we see that both
must go together, Gods justice, and Gods mercy, as David said, Thy rod and
thy staff, they comfort me, Psalm. 23. We call him father, not in respect of
our creation, for so he is our Maker and Creator: neither in respect of our
government, for so he is our Lord and master: and those names are not so
comfortable unto us, because he is so, that is, a Lord and maker, even to the
wicked and reprobate. But we call him father, first in respect of Christ,
which is his only begotten and beloved son: Then in that we are his children
adopted in Christ our elder brother, which has made us all sons and children
to his heavenly father, by his death and passion, by his obedience, by his
fulfilling of the law, and by his satisfaction for our sins, as John says,
Chap. 3. Behold what love the father has showed unto us, that we should be
called the sons of God. This is a marvelous comfort, yt the God of the whole
earth, the Lord of lords, is a loving father unto us. And this is in Christ
Jesus, that we have this dignity and prerogative above others, not in our
selves, nor by birth and nature, for so we are the sons of Gods ire and
wrath, of co^de^natio^, because of our sinful father Ada^, transgressing Gods
commandment. When we name him almighty, we do not conceive him to have such a
power which he does not use, but in saying this, we confess and acknowledge,
yt he has al things and creatures under his power and obedience, even ye
devils themselves, as we see in ye Gospel, how they submitted themselves to
Christ ye son of God, and how he asked leave, before he could do any thing to
Job, Job. 1. Again, we must needs grant, that being omnipote^t, and almighty,
he does all things that are done, he rules and governs heaven and earth, the
sea and hell, and all things in them, the whole world at his beck does bend and
yield it self. So yt our God being so mighty, is not an idle God in heaven, as
ye wicked do imagine, but disposes al things by his just and wise providence,
howsoever they fall out: nothing comes to pass without his will and counsel, no
not the flight of Sparrowes. Mat. 10. For if ye Lord should not uphold heaven
and earth, yea the whole world with his power, it would fall to nothing, to dust
and ashes: therefore it is said, yt Christ does sustain all things by the
word of his might, Hebr. 1. And here our faith has a double comfort, by ye
providence and omnipote^cie of God. First because it considers, that God has
sufficient power to defend his Church. Secondly, because he is willling to do
it. It follows, maker of heaven and earth. This proves, yt he is almighty,
because he has made heaven and earth of nothing, when it was not, Genesis 1. And
this does notably confute the wicked and false opinions of ye Philosophers, as
Plato and Aristotle, who greatly to ye derogation and impairing of Gods glory
and power, thought and held that the world was eternal from ye beginnings, and
never made, neither should have end. But this is false and blasphemous against
God. We learn here another lesson in our faith, that ye world was made and had
a beginning, and shall have an ending, as Moses proves the one, and Peter ye
other, 2. Epist. 3. Chap. Now by making of heaven and earth, we understand al
things contained in heaven and earth, as the sea. For David says, The sea is
his, and he made it, 95. Psa. The things in heaven, as his angels, ye things in
earth, men, beasts, fishes, fowls, worms, and al other sensles creatures
whatsoever. It is therefore, as if we should say, maker of al things, visible
which we see, and inuible which we see not, as in ye Creed of ye counsel of
Nice in more fully expressed. And this was done, because of the Heretics
called ye Maniches, which did appoint two beginnings of things created, the one
good, which was God, and him they made the beginner of all good things, the
other they imagined to be ill, which was the devil, and him they set over the
evil things, and supposed him the maker of them. But these men were deceived,
which thought any ill thing to be created and made ill at the first, for the
scripture does otherwise pronounce of al things, that they were exceeding good.
Genes. 1. But in that any thing is ill, it is by deprauation and corruption, by
the sin of man, of Adam, and not by creation: for the devil was made an
Angel, but he fell and lost his first estate, and so became a devil and wicked
spirit by his own corruption and will, as Peter proves. 2. Epistle 2. Chap.
Now if the devil made some things, the^ God made not al: but what says ye
scripture? The Lord has made al things for his own sake: he says not some
things, but al: nay he goes further, and adds, even ye wicked for the day of
evil. not yt he created them wicked: for he made them in Adam perfect and good:
but he has appointed them to serve to his honor and glory: although they be
vessels of wrath, he is glorified in them after a sort, although not so as he
is glorified in the good. For therefore did he stir up Pharao King of Egypt,
because he would show his glory upon him, Romans 9. Seeing then God has made
heaven, he has made also all the ornaments of heaven: as the heavenly spirits,
the Sun, the Moon, the Stars to govern the earth by their light. For in
that we give him the creation of the greater, we must needs grant the
lesser, and he that can make the great and huge heavens of nothing, is able
also to make the things contained in them of less importance. As concerning
the Angels, it is sufficient for us to know, that they were all made of the
Lord for his will and pleasure, to be his ministering Spirits, to execute his
commandementes and judgments against the wicked, and for to serve for those
that shall be heirs of salvation, Hebr. 1. It is but curiosity to enquire of
the time of the creation, or of the orders and estate in heaven. Moses tells
us a good and short lesson, that heaven and earth were made perfect in six
days, with all the hosts and furniture of them, and says no more of this
matter, to teach us sobriety in these things, to wade no farther then we have
the warrant of the word to bear us out. Seeing all other vain questions are
condemned of the Apostle Saint Paul, Titus 3. The like is to be understood in
making of the earth, to comprehend all things in the earth, whatsoever I do
see, hear, and understand. By the creation of these things celestial, and
terrestiall, I do consider with my self these four most excellent and divine
virtues in God, which comprehend all the rest in them, and to the which they
may be referred. First by the great and wonderful creation of the universal
world, I learn to come to the consideration of his unspeakable power and
greatness, Potentia Dei.
that he was able without and pain or labor at all, yea with great ease and
pleasure, to create heaven and earth, with his only word, as the Prophet
David says, He spoke the word, and it was done. O what a great God is this,
to be feared over all the earth, for his wonderful greatness and Majesty!
This does put us in mind what a mighty God we do serve, that we may from our
heart fear him. The second thing to be considered in this creation general,
Sapientia Dei.
is his infinite and inestimable wisdom, in disposing so orderly, and placing
so seemly all things in their place and degree, as it is most wonderful to
behold, with such beauty and proportion in every creature, that unless we be
too too blockishe, we must cry out with David and say, and confess, O Lord,
how wonderful are thy works: in wisdom have thou made them all. And
again: Great is our Lord, great is his power, yea his wisdom is infinite. To
see the goodly order of heaven, it will make a man to be astonished at the
wisdom of his God, more then the Queen of Saba was, when she came to see,
and hear the wisdom of Solomon. For this wisdom by whom all things were
made, is the Son of GOD Jesus Christ, the wisdom of his Father, John 1.
Hebr. 1. And here we learn of this wisdom, which he has used and showed in
the creation, a good lesson for our comfort, that as the Lord is almighty,
and able to deliver us his children, and Church from the wicked: so does he
know the ways and means most perfitly and readily how to do it at all
times. For his knowledge passes our understanding far. Therefore Peter said,
The Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of tentation and trouble, and
to punish the wicked. 2. Pet. 2. So that when man can find no way, no device
or mean how to shift him self out of danger, yet the Lord by his wisdom and
knowledge has diverse ways to help. Diverse examples of this are in the holy
Scriptures: when Moses and the Israelites were so entangled and compassed
about, that there seemed no way for them to escape, so that Moses prayed to the
Lord most earnestly to deliver them, for he him self saw no means how to
do it, being on every side on the right hand and on the left, compassed in
with the hie hills, before them was the great read sea, behind them was the
huge host of Pharao, so that now all hope of life and succor was taken away:
then the Lord found a way in the midst of the sea, to deliver his people,
and to drown his enemies: so he declared his wisdom in preserving them so
miraculously. So likewise when the virgin Marie did not see how she should
conceive and bring forth a son being a maid, and not knowing any man, and
therefore said to the angel, How shall this come to pass, so strange and
rare a matter? the Lord found a ready way how he brought it to pass, that
she conceived by the operation of the holy ghost. This made Solomon in his
Proverbs, to say, Chapter 21. There is no wisdom, there is no understanding,
there is no counsel against the Lord. For he overthrows the subtle fetches
of the wisdom of this world, as of Jeroboam in his politic counsel to make
calves, and of Achitophel in his wily practices. The Pharisees in their snare
that they had laid for our Savior Christ, were taken them selves, to their
shame and reproach. Thus the Lord scatters abroad the devises of the wicked
kings and princes of this world, by his wisdom, for theirs is foolishness
to his, 1. Cor. 3. Saint Paul is ravished with the consideration of this great
wisdom, and cries out, saying, O the depth of the riches and wisdom, and
knowledge of God, how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding our. Romans 11. We must then apply these things to our selves, to
receive comfort and consolation by them. When we look up into heaven, and
down in the earth, or in the sea, let us think upon the wisdom of the Lord
and glorify him in it, and say, O Lord, how wise art thou in all thy doings,
how great is thy knowledge unto me: such knowledge is too excellent for me, it
passes my reach and capacities* So said David, say unto God, O how
wonderful art thou in thy works! Unless we do this, we are unthankful
beholders of Gods wisdom, if we praise him not for it. We may see it in our
own selves, and in others every day, in our creation of our body and soul,
how wise and wonderful he is. These things we must meditate upon daily and
think, otherwise we are no better then brute beasts, which see them only
and behold them, but consider nothing in them. Here we learn our duty to
our good God.

3 Thirdly in the creation of the world Bonitas Dei.
we behold as it were in a glass, the goodness of God, his mercy toward
all men, but especially to the elect and chosen, that for them, and their
sakes, he has created these things, and does daily preserve by his providence
every one of them, so that he has not made them for him self, I mean, that
he needed not any of them, being all sufficient in him self, most happy and
blessed, which is meant by his name Shaddai, which signifies that he is
sufficient of his own nature. So that a true Christian man may say that his
heavenly Father has made all things for his use and benefit, heaven one day
to receive him, the earth to maynteyne him, all creatures to serve him, the
Sun, Moon and Stars to light him, living creatures to feed him and to
recreate him, the angels to keep and to preserve him in his ways, by his
Fatherly appointment. O what great benefits are here, that we receive of our
merciful Father by his creation of all things! Here we learn our duty to be
thankful to God for them, in the name of Jesus Christ his Son, to use these
benefits to his honor and glory, to the profit and commodity of his Church,
and our brethren here with us. And here I see by Gods goodness and mercy
toward me, that he has not only created these things at the first, but he
does preserve them every hour by his power: otherwise they would vanishe
away and come to nothing, as David says, If thou take away thy breath from
them, That is, his power from his creatures, they dye. So that here we see Gods
providence over us, and all things. For he woorketh daily by preserving and
keeping his creatures in their estate, as Christ says, My Father hitherto
woorketh, and I work, by maynteyning things created. For God is not like a
carpenter that makes an house, and sets it up in deed, but afterward
never peradventure sees it again, but leaves it to the dweller and owner of
it, the master thereof, and cares no more for it. If God should deal so with
us, it would be ill and wrong with us: for the devil would daily destroy us,
if he did not keep us and all ours. For we are not able to keep our selves,
no not a minute of an hour. Here therefore acknowledge in the mercy of God,
his Fatherly care and providence over us and all his creatures.

4 The last thing we learn of the creation of the world, is the justice of
God, how he governs it rightly in equity and judgment, as the Prophet
sings, All the ways of the Lord are judgment and equite. For unless he
did execute his justice upon the wicked, they would destroy his Church: but he
keeps them under, as it were with a bridle, and hampereth even the proud
tyrants and devils of hell, by his severe justice showed upon them. So that the
Lord is just in all his ways, yea his will is a most perfect rule and pattern
of justice. David often repeateth this lesson, to terrify the wicked, Just art
thou, O Lord, and right are thy judgments, Psalm. 119. So said the Emperor
Mauricius, being killed by Phocas. This do the wicked confess themselves, when
they feel his heavy hand upon them for their sins and offenses, as Pharao
did when the hayle destroyed the cattle of Egypt, saying unto Moses and Aaron,
I have now sinned, the Lord is righteous, but I and my people are wicked,
Exodus 19. Thus the reprobate, whether they will or no, must confess the Lord
to be righteous in his works. For as the Lord is merciful to Forgive the
sins of his children that are truly penitent, and not obstinate: so is he
also a most just Judge over all the earth, to execute his sharp punishments
upon the malitous and wilful sinners. The Judge of the world does according
to justice, as Abraham said of him, when he was about to destroy Sodoma, Genesis
18. I delight, says the Lord, in justice, mercy, and judgment, Ierem. 9.
Examples of his justice he has showed in ye flood brought in upon the wicked.
Example of his mercy, in saving Noe and his family: so that his justice and
mercy goes always together, as David says, I will sing of mercy and
judgment, Psalm. 101. representing the person of Christ, which should be in his
kingdom, as well just as merciful: a Lion of the tribe of Judah, to tear in
pieces the wicked, and a Lamb to preserve his with all gentleness and
softness. Look upon Sodom, how the Lord showed there his extreme and severe
Justice upon those miscreants, to consume them with fire and brimstone from
heaven most terribly, Genesis 19. and as Peter says, Made them an example for
all ages and posterities to come, of his justice against sin and uncleanness,
2. Pet. 2. But yet then he delivered just Lot out of tentation and trouble.
Note his mercy in it, to the good and godly. I might here reckon up the
examples of Sennacherib, of Achab, of Nabuchodonozor, of Herod, of Julian, and
such other persecuting kings and Emperors against the Church of Christ: whom
all God in his justice has overthrown and utterly destroyed. This we learn,
that God does also preserve the state of mankind by his justice, that one
does not ouerrunne another, as wild beasts. Then by this we learn to stand
in fear of Gods justice, if we sin at any time desperately, least we be
caught up with it, and suddenly consumed, If his wrath be kindled, yea but a
little, blessed are al they that put their trust in him, Psalm 2. For our God
in his wrath and justice is a consuming fire, as Hebr. 12. And it is an
horrible thing, to fall into his hands. If he be angry, who may abide or
stand in his sight, when the hills melte away, and the sea is dried up, and
the hard rocks cleave asunder? O that we had this consideration of his justice
before our eyes continually, it would keep us from all sin and ungodliness:
for therefore we sin, because we fear not this justice of the Lords. There
is no fear of god (says David of the wicked) before their eyes, therefore
they sin. We see then what we have to note upon this article of our
Christian belief, and what commodity comes unto us of the creation of all
things by God, how we gather and consider of his infinite greatness, by his
wonderful works: for the heavens declare the glory of God, and ye firmament
shows his handy work. And this is one way to come to God, as to be without
excuse before his tribunal seat in the day of judgment, when the secrets of
all hearts shall be disclosed, and all thoughts opened before the Lord. By
this creation the heathen men are without excuse, and have known him
generally, as Paul says, Romans the first chap. That which may be known of
God, is manifest in them, for God has showed it unto them. For the invisible
things of him, that is, his eternal power and Godhead, are seen by the
creation of the world, being considered in his works, to the intent, that
they should be without excuse, because that when they knew God, they glorified
him not as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish heart was full of darkness: when they
professed themselves to be wise, they became fools. God is known three ways,
by his works, God is known three ways.
by his word, and by his holy spirit of adoption. Although God be known by
all these ways of his elect, yet he is known of the reprobate only by his
word and works, which see the works, and hear his word, but never have his
Spirit directing them aright, which is proper only to his own children. Of
the first way speaks Paul in this place, unto the which the creation is a
glass, to bring us to a full consideration of his greatness. Well, we learn
by the creation of heaven and earth, his power, his wisdom, his goodness and
justice, and whatsoever else may be in God. This is great comfort to the godly,
and brings great boldness unto them, and trust in the last day, that they
have such a father, and do believe in such a God, as is maker of heaven and
earth: this teaches us our duty, to refer all our actions to his honor
and glory, to confess him alone, to acknowledge that he made us, and not we
our lelues, to live to him, to dye to him, to do al things for his sake, that
has made all for us, as good servants should be more careful of their
masters honor and profit, the^ of their own. Now let us give thanks to such
a God, yt has vouchsafed to give us faith to believe in him, being so mighty
a God, and we so low and base children: so merciful a father unto us,
notwithstanding we are unthankful sons to him. And let us pray unto him,
to confirm this faith, and to increase it in us every day, till we come to a
perfect man in Jesus Christ. Let us desire of him to give us grace to behold
this his wonderful and divine work of his creation, wherein he has showed his
wisdom, power, mercy, and justice unto al men, that we may magnify it (as it
does require) worthyly with our hearts, and set forth his honor and glory in
these things, with thanks giving for all his benefits, seeing they
appertain unto us, our bodies and souls, which are fed and nourished by them.
This grace and mercy let us desire him to continewe unto us, for his Christ's
sake our savior, who has dearly bought us: to whom with the holy ghost his
infinite power, three persons and one everliving God, be rendered all power,
praise, glory, honor, and thanksgiving, both now and for ever. Amen.

The second Lecture upon the creed, which is upon the second article: And in
Jesus Christ his only son our Lord, which was conceived by the holy Ghost.
WE have seen in the first article going before, the things, which we have to
believe as concerning God the father in his creation: now follows
consequently what we have to believe of God the son, Jesus Christ, as
concerning his incarnation and all the benefits of his death and passion,
which is the second part of the creed, as we divided it. And here in this
article you must understand and repeat, as in the former, so in this also: I
believe in Jesus Christ: that is, I trust in him, and put my whole confidence
in him, that he is my only savior, and that God will for his sake forgive me
all my sins. For it is not sufficient to believe in God the father, and to
know him, unless we also believe in his only begotten son Jesus Christ our
Lord, and know him also. As John repeating the words of our savior Christ,
says, This is life eternal that they know thee to be the only very God, and
whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. Ioh. 17. So that our savior Christ joins
and matcheth in one, the knowledge of him self with the knowledge of the
father, as he says also in another place, Except ye believe that I am he, ye
shall die in your sins. We see then yt if we must believe in Jesus Christ, he is
one God with the father, and a creator, other wise it were idolatry to believe
in any that is not God. And yt we may believe in him, this is warra^ted unto us
by his own commandment, saying in the 19. of John's gospel to his disciples,
Let not your heart be troubled, believe ye in God, believe also in me. A
notable place to prove this matter. Where we may also learn, yt if we believe
in God, our hearts shall not be troubled, nor waver hither and thither, not
having any place to rest in. For therefore in our miseries and dangers are we
vexed and troubled out of measure, because we put not our full trust in the
father and the son. Now let us see with what titles our Christ is beautified
and adorned with, for our comfort and consolation: first of all, he is here
called Jesus, which is an Ebrew word, and sou^deth in English as much as
Savior, which name the Angel gave unto him (by Gods appointment) before he
was conceived in the womb of the virgin Mary his mother. As we read notably
set forth unto us in the first of Matthew: She shall bring forth a son, and
call his name Jesus, or savior: for he shall save his people from their sins
and offenses. And for this cause he came into the world, as he testifies of
him self: The son of man came to save that which is lost, not to destroy
souls, but to save, and to give his life a redemption for many, Luke 19. By
this we learn, that there is no other Savior appointed for man, either in
heaven, or earth, but only Jesus: and they that will have salvation of God the
father, must have it only at his hands. Therefore does the scripture
pronounce of him, that there is no other name given under heaven unto men,
wherein they must be saved, but only in the name of Jesus Christ. For this is
the stone which is become the head stone, and the chief in the corner, neither
is there any salvation in any other, Act. 4. We have then to seek our salvation
not in Angels, not in saints, not in men or in our selves: but in him only
that has the key of David, that shuts heaven, and no man opens it, and
opens it, and no man shuts. This is the first title of dignity and
honor, that is given unto him of his father: the next is, that he is called
Christ, which is a Greek word, and signifies in English, Anointed, which does
more plainly and effectually declare his office and function given him of the
father for us. For he was anointed for three especial purposes: first to be
our Prophet to teach us, secondly, our priest to offer him self a sacrifice
for us, and thirdly, our king to rule and to defend us from our enemies. These
things are al given unto us to understand in this name Christ. For as all the
Prophets, and priests and kings in the time of the old law, before the
coming of Christ, were anointed with oil by the commandment of God, as God
commanded Elias to anoint Eliseus Prophet in his stead, and Moses was
commanded to anoint Aaron hye priest, and Samuel to anoint Saul and David to
be kings: so was Christ also anointed, not with oil material as they, but
with spiritual oil of gladness, as David says, Psalm. 45. 7.
above his fellows, yt is, with ye holy ghost, above al me^, for he had it
without measure, Ioh. 3. 34. So then, as ye Prophets and priests, and kings
were all figures, and shadows of Christ anointed with oil, to signify yt
they must be gentle, meek, and soft to al their brethren: so it was also
necessary, yt Christ should perform all this yt was prefigured by him. And
first we see, yt Christ took upon him the office of a Prophet, to teach ye
people his fathers will, not thrusting in him self as the false prophets did,
whom the Lord sent not at al, but being thereto lawefully called and authorized
by his father from heaven, Luk 9. 35.
saying, Hear him, that is, to be our doctor and teacher, our Prophet and
Scholemaster. Being thus ordained a Prophet to teach us, he executed his office
and calling most diligently, most paynfully and faithfully: for he taught them
in season and out of season, early and late, at home and abroad, by sea and by
land, as ye Evangelists do sufficiently all of them record in their gospels,
neither did he teach the^ ye will of his father publicly in ye synagogues only,
but privately also in families and houses: as when he was received into Marthas
house, he sat and taught there Mary and others: whereby we that are the
Lords Prophets and ministers, may learn by this good example, how carefully
and readyly with all pain and diligence to behave our selves in the preaching
of the word of God his Gospel, not to cease at any time, but to do as he has
done before us. If then Christ be our Prophet (as Moses says of him, A Prophet
shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren, like unto me: him
shall you hear in all things, that he shall speak unto you, Deuteronomy. 18.) we must
hear him alone, and not others that teach false doctrine, as the papists: for
Christ's sheep hear his voice, Ioh. 10. We learn again, that no man beside
Christ, was able to instruct us in the will of his father, but he alone, as
John says, Chap. 1. No man has seen God at any time: the only begotten son
of God, which is in the bosom of his father, he has revealed him unto us.
Again, we understand that al men by nature are ignorant of the will of God,
and their duty, because we have need of Christ to inform us in the right
way, to lead us in the truth, least we be deceued with lies. For of his
fullness have we all received, Ioh. 1. Therefore is he called of Esaias, The
angel of great Counsel, and that the spirit of the Lord should rest upon him,
the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of Counsel and strength,
the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord, Isa. 11. This is a great
comfort to us, to have such a teacher and Prophet given to us, as is made to us
of God, wisdom. 1. Corin. 1. But the wicked can have here no part at all with
him, for they do not hear his word and voice, neither will they receive his
doctrine and instruction. Now we see how faithfully Christ has fulfilled this
office of preaching, as Mark says of him, 1. Chap. Let us go into the next
Towns, that I may preach there also, for I came out for that purpose. The
end of this prophecy and teaching is, that we should be made his disciples
and scholars, Christ's priest hoode.
which God grant unto us all. Amen. The second office that is in Christ for
his Church, is his priesthode: for after he had taught the people, (which
thing he first took in hand) he sealed his doctrine with his own blood, and
offered up him self a sacrifice most perfect, sweet and acceptable to God his
father, for us al, to purge us from our sins, to serve the living God. For
this also was the duty of the priests in the Leuitical law, that they should
offer sacrifices for the sins of the people, and pray to God for them. This
has Christ fulfilled by his death and passion, which was so effectual and
meritorious to take away sins, yt the father says of him, Psalm. 110. 5.
Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of Melchiesedech. Of this
sacrifice speaks abundantly the Epistle to the Hebremes, but especially in
the 9. Chap. Heb. 9. 14.
saying, That Christ was once offered to take away the sins of many, and to
put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. And again, that the blood of
Christ, which through ye eternal spirit offered himself without fault to God,
shall purge our consciences from dead works to serve the living God, so that
now he is become our mediator between God and us, and does appear in the
sight of God for us. This is a great comfort for us. But we see in this
sacrifice the vileness and greatness of sin, and how loathsome and
detestable it was in Gods sight, that nothing in heaven or earth could put it
away or purge it, but the only body and blood of Christ, this hie priest, most
pure and immaculate. This does teach us to abhor sin, seeing Christ paid
so dearly for it. And this drives us to consider how we are indebted to our
good savior Christ, for dying so mercifully for us: so that we are worse then
beasts, unless we give him continual thanks for it. Nothing could pacify
Gods wrath conceived against our sins, but only his dear son, for in him
he was well pleased, Matthew. 3. So that now we which were sometime far off
and strangers from the common wealth of Israel, are made near by ye blod of
Christ, to offer our selves to him and al ours, our prayers, our thanks, and yt
with boldness, without fear, as Zachary says, Luke 1. The third office yt we
consider in him, is his spiritual and everlasting kingdom, for spiritual it
is, and not carnal and earthly, as he himself said to Pilate, My kingdom is not
of this world. And it is everlasting, as ye Angel said to Mary, He shall reign
over the house of Jacob, and of his kingdom there shall be no end. So then he is
a king, as Zachary also says, Behold, thy king comes unto thee, meek, O
daughter Jerusalem, Chap. 9. This kingdom, he last of al took upon him, after
that he had taught, and offered up him self, even then when he ascended, to
sit at the right hand of God: that is, to have all power and authority in
heaven and earth. This kingdom does consist chiefly in governing his elect,
and his Church by his holy spirit: for he has gotten this kingdom for us,
because he armeth us with power to resist sin, and gives us of his princely
treasures and gifts, and will at the last himself lift us up thither, and set
us with him in glory and honor, to rain for ever and ever, as he says, It is
your fathers will to give you a kingdom, and he that overcomes, shall sit
with me in my kingdom, as I have overcome, and sit with my father in his
kingdom. Reave. 3. Secondly, this kingdom of Christ does beat down al force
raised up against his kingdom: as the devil, the Turk, the Pope, the wicked
ones of this world. Here he shows himself a mighty king over all the earth, to
preserve his Church, having so many enemies. For surely if he did not preserve
it, it would be swallowed up every hour, satan is so greedy to destroy it.
What they have don against it, we see, but they could never prevail: for this
is a comfortable saying, Matthew. 16.
The gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Of this we gather yt Christ
shall ever have his Church, because his power in his kingdom is infinite to keep
it: let ye wicked rage never so much, yet Christ is king of ye whole earth, yea
the world. Thus much for his kingdom. It followweth, his only son. Here is
declared unto us, ye Jesus Christ is the only son of God, and therefore God,
because ye son is of ye same nature with ye father: for he is one with his
father. This is the third title given to our savior Christ, yt he is ye only
begotten son of God: but there may a question be inade, How is Christ the
only son of God, seeing we also are sons as he is, as John says, As many
as believe in Christ, he gave the^ power to be ye sons of God? To this we
answer, that Christ is the only son of God by nature and substance: and we
by grace and adoption, which before were not. For as when a man has no
children, he makes some by adoption and favor, who^ he loves, to enjoy his
lands and inheritance, ^ounting them as his own: so it is with God and us. He
has no more sons but one only by nature and substance: but by his love and
grace he makes us his dear children by adoption in Christ: for all is done
for Christ's sake our elder brother, as Paul proves, Ephe. 1. He has
predestined us to be adopted for sons in Jesus Christ. For this then, that
we are sons to so high and great a God, a Lord and king, ought we not to be
very thankeful? ought we not by all means to set forth his honor and glory
more then our own? Surely we should do so: for how would I love that king here
in ye earth, or that Queen, or that noble man that should make me a poor
beggar borne, his loving son by adoption! Now much more ought I to love the
son of God, yt has made me son to his father by his death and
satisfaction. And when Christ is called ye only begotten son of God, we must
not imagine a carnal or gross begetting, as is here among me^, but a divine
and heavenly, incomprehe^sible and unspeakable to our capacity, before al
beginnings, most mystical and secret. The last title yt is given to Christ
here, is the dignity and honor of a Lord. We call him our Lord, and yt by right:
for his we are who has bought us, and redeemed us by his own body from the
devil and sin, and al other evils and mischiefs. And this is yt that the
Apostle speaks of, that therefore Christ died and rose again, that he might
be lord of al, both dead and quick, Romans 14 and again, Ye are not your own:
for ye are bought with a price, 1. Cor. 6. And therefore is he made lord and
king of his father over all the world, that al should worship and honor the
son, as they honor the father him self: for he is not only the head of men,
but of all the Angels in heaven, as it is said, Let all the Angels of God
worship him, Heb. 1. Ephe. 1. Thus ye see how Christ is appointed Lord and
heir of all things: therefore is he called here our Lord, and we then
confess our selves to be his servants and subjects, to do his will and
commandment. He is called also our Lord, because we should conceive comfort
by it in trouble, that he will be a most gracious lord unto us also, as well as
unto others: as Thomas said of him, so must we say and be persuaded, My God
and my Lord. John 21. Which was conceived by the holy Ghost.

Now follows his co^ceptio^ by ye holy ghost and not by ye seed of man: for
if he had bin conceived by man, he had not been void of sin, as Ioh chap. 3.
ver. 6. Job. 6. chap. 25. verse. 5, 6. and so should he have been unfit to
deliver us from sin. Therefore our savior says, For them I do sanctify my
self. And such an high Priest it became us to have, which is holy, harmeles,
undefiled, separated from sinners, and made hier then the heavens. As that
which went before, did prove unto us sufficiently his divinity and godhead,
that he was yesterday, to day and for ever, as is proved in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, cha. 13. so this co^ception in ye womb of the virgin does prove, that
he is very and true man, and had a beginning according to his humanity, as the
scriptures do witness unto us, yt he was made of the seed of David, according
to the flesh. Ro^. 1. And, that God sent his son into the world, made of a
woman, Gal. 4. The manner of this conception is described lively unto us by S.
Luke Cha. 1. For after yt the Angel had told Marie, that she should conceive in
her womb, and bring forth a son, and call his name Jesus, she asked how it
should come to pass, saying, she knew no man: then ye Angel tells her, that
the holy ghost should come upon her, and the power of y^ most high should
ouershadow her: therefore that holy thing which shall be borne of thee, shall be
called the son of God. So likewise in Matthew. 1. we read, that when Joseph her
husband would have put her away privily, thinking she had been with child of
some man: the Angel called unto him being thus minded, in a dream, saying,
Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take Mary for thy wife: for that
which is conceived in her, is of ye holy ghost. We see then that al flesh in
Adam had corrupted his way before the Lord, and that the ordinary generation of
man was unclean, therefore it was necessary that Christ that should redeem
others from sin, should not be subject to it himself, but be borne by an
extraordinary mean, to cleanse us from all our sins, both original and
actual, which he was void of by reason of this co^ceptio^: wherefore Christ
must be both man and God to redeem us: Man, because man had offended, and our
sins had divided him from us, as a cloud does the bright sun from our
eyes: and he must be God also, to make reconciliatio^ to God his father for us:
for no Angel in heaven was able to do this office of mediation, but the only
God and man Jesus Christ ye true mediator, for all our sins past, present, or
to come. Here consider the great love of Christ toward mankind, yt despised
not our flesh, to take it upon him, being God equal to his father, and has
invested and covered himself with our nature, but yet without sin. This does
teach us our duty toward him in tha^kfulnes, and our duty toward our
neighbors in yelding unto them in matters for their behalf, and not to please
our selves, but to bear with them, and debase our selves for them, as Christ
has done for us already. Phil. 2. Let the same mind be in you, which was in
Christ Jesus. We learn by the co^ceptio^ of Christ by the holy ghost, that he
was thus conceived, to make our sinful conception pure: For we are conceived
and borne in sins every one of us, eue^ the best of us al, yt come of Adam.
David lamenteth ye impurity and imperfection of his conception and birth,
saying, Behold, Lord, I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother
conceived me, Psalm. 51. as if he would say, The cause of this my outward sin
and actual, as murder and adultery, is, that I was conceived in sin, and can
do nothing else of my self but sin every hour: as Paul also co^plaineth of
himself, Ro^. 7. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body
of this death? and then comes unto Christ, and thanketh him, yt he has
delivered him from it. We have the^ to comfort our selves in this, that Christ
was conceived for us, borne for us, and died for us, and whatsoever he did, he
did it for our profit and commodity. In that that Christ was conceived, we
also understand ye verity of Gods promises made unto us in ye prophtes, which
had long before prophesied of it: As in Esai. 7. Behold, says he, A virgin
shall conceive and bear a son, and she shall call his name Immanuel. So we
gather, that God having performed this, he is always just and true in his
promises yt he makes to a thousand generatio^s. And furthermore yt the
Prophets spoke not by their own will, (as Peter says) but by the will and spirit
of God, even as they were led and moved by ye holy ghost, 2. Pet. 1. So ye
whatsoever God either speaks or promises to ye good and godly to their
comfort, it shall come to pass: as here in Esai God promises ye co^ceptio^ of
Christ for a comfort to Jerusalem besieged with her enemies, when Achaz was
king, Esa. 7. Likewise on ye contrary part, whatsoever the Lord of hosts
threatens to the wicked and destroyers of his Church, shall also in due time be
fulfilled and accomplished to ye uttermost, as upon ye Jews for murdering of
Christ, Luke 19.
and upon ye Roman Emperors, for going about to overthrow his congregation
and flock. Although it be many times long before the Lord does either deliver
ye godly, or punish ye reprobate, yet it is most sure and certain, because his
mouth has spoken it, yt can not lie or deceive, as Balaam says of him, Has
he spoken, and shall he not perform it, and said it, and shall he not make it
good? That were impossible. When we say that Christ was conceived in the womb
of the virgin Marie his mother, by the operation and work of ye holy ghost, we
mean that to be spoken according to his humanity only, and not according to
his divinity: for so he is likened to Melchisedech, without father as
touching his flesh, and without mother as concerning his godhead, and yet we
say, yt Christ was conceived, because Christ both God and man, was joined
together in one person. Therefore we must wisely distingush and make a
difference between y^ two natures and properties of Christ, his ma^hod and
Godhead. When Christ says, he can of him self do nothing, he judges no man,
he knows not the day of judgment, and that ye father is greater the^ he,
with such like sentences in yt Gospel, you must understand these things to be
spoken as he was only man. In yt he says he was before Abraham, and ye father
and he are al one, and that the scripture terms him, The first begotten of
all creatures, the lord of al things, the brightness of his father: these
sayings are all applied to Christ, as he is the son of God, and God himself,
that made al things, as John says of him, By him al things were made. If we
mark and observe these two points, the divinity of Christ, and his humanity,
we shall find great light and easines in reading the new testament: and things
which were hard before, will seem plain and evident unto us by this rule. Thus
have ye heard the meaning and the good lessons that may be gathered out of this
2. article of our christian faith, y^ co^ception most pure and most clean of
our savior Jesus Christ. First, that he was conceived, as the word does
testify. Secondly, wherefore he was conceived: which was, because he might
become very man to redeem and suffer for man, offending the majesty of the
almighty God. Now let us give most humble and hearty thanks as we are
bound, to this Jesus Christ, y^ being so hie, he would vouchsafe to descend
so low for us poor wretches, as to be conceived in the womb of a maid to
make us pure: and let us also pray unto his Majesty, yt seeing his conceptio^
is pure and unspotted, he would also make ours so to be, with the free
imputatio^ of his conception and all other benefits of his death and passion,
and that he would kill sin in us more and more daily, by his spirit of
sanctification, that we may live here in righteousness and holiness before him
without fear, all the days of our life, and when the sinful course of this
tra^sitorie life is ended, we may have that life which never shall have end,
whose joys neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor heart of man can
possibly conceive or think: which God grant unto us for his Son Christ's
sake: to whom with the holy ghost, be rendered al power, dominion, praise and
thanksgiving, both now and for ever. So be it.

The third Lecture upon the third Article of our Christian faith, which is,
Borne of the virgin Marie.
IN this article is mentioned and set down unto us the nativity and birth of
our Savior Jesus Christ, how that he was borne, not after the common sort of
men, but of a maid or virgin, not a married woman which knew any man: so that
the meaning of this article in more words is this, I that am a Christian man or
woman, do believe also, that as Jesus Christ was conceived by the holy Ghost,
so was he borne likewise for me of his mother Marie, she notwithstanding
remaining still a virgin. Out of the which article we have to note these three
good lessons and points for our instruction and consolation. First, the birth
it self, secondly, the manner of it, with all the circumstances of the same,
thirdly, the profit and commodity that we may reap by it, believing it truly
as we ought to do.

1 As concerning his birth, Esai in his seventh and ninth Chapter says, The
Lord him self shall give you a sign. Behold, a virgin shall conceive and
bear a Son, and she shall call his name Immanuel: butter and honey shall he
eat, till he have knowelege to refuse the evil, and to choose the good.
Likewise the ninth Chapter: Unto us a child is borne, and unto us a son is
given, and the government is upon his shoulder, and he shall call his name,
Wonderful, Cou^seller, The mighty God, The everlasting Father, The Prince of
peace: the increase of his government and peace shall have no end, he shall sit
upon the throue of David, and upon his kingdom, to order it, and to establish
it with judgment and with justice, from henceforth eue^ for ever. The zeal of
the Lord of hosts will perform this. Thus we see how evidently Esai long
before prophesied of this birth, to the comfort of ye people in his time. The
like thing does Jeremy also declare unto us in his prophecy, of this
wonderful nativity of our Savior Jesus, saying in his Chap. 23. Behold, the
days come, says the Lord, that I will raise up unto David a righteous branch,
and a king shall reign and prosper, and shall execute true judgment and justice
upon the earth. In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely:
and fullness of time, as the Apostle speaks, was come, then God sent his
Son made of a woman, and made under the Law, that he might redeem them
which were under the Law, that we might receive the adoption of sons, Gal. 4.
God then, as in this, so in all other things, is true and just of his promise
and covenant, that he makes to a thousand generatio^s, as says the Prophet.
For nothing can let him, to bring his words to pass, his power is infinite and
over all. And although it be said that Marie was married to Joseph, and Joseph
took her home to him to be his wife, yet she was a virgin, for Joseph knew
her not: so yt Christ was borne of her being a virgin, and Joseph was spoused
to her in this respect, that he should be an aid and comfort for her in her
trouble and pain, in her flight into Egypt, and in her great poverty: for she
was so poor, that she had no chamber to be delivered in, but laid our Savior
Christ in a manger. For these causes, was Joseph called her husband also, that
she might be void of suspicion of fornication, and Christ not thought to be
borne out of wedlock, or in adultery.

2 Secondly, for our instruction let us consider the whole manner of Christ's
birth, after what sort and fashion it was. S. Luke does declare ye order of it
very lively, and says, yt when Joseph and Mary were at Bethlehem, the days
were accomplished that she should be delivered, and she brought forth her
first begotten son, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in a
cratch or manger, because there was no room for the^ in the Inn. By these
words we see the manner of Christ's birth, how it was very poor and base in
respect of the world, and nothing glorious in ye eyes of men, or as might
beseem so great a prince as he was. He that might have been borne in a most
magnificent and royal palace, would be borne in a stable or ox stall, and he
which could have been laid in a most sumptuous bed of down, with silk and
velvet wrought and garnished, yet notwithstanding would be laid in a vile
manger. This does pass the reach and capacity of man's wit, and does
express unto us, how that the Lords ways are not our ways, nor his doings
as ours are: For then surely would he not have had Christ his Son to be
borne so poorly, and without al honor and estimation here in the earth. But
here we see the great love of Christ toward us, ye would so be borne for our
sakes. So that in this is fulfilled that notable saying if S. Paul the Apostle.
2. Corinthians. 8. Chap. 9. saying, Ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, y^
he being rich, for your sakes became poor, yt ye through his poverty might be
made rich. A notable lesson to take poverty in good part, if ye Lord for just
causes lay it upon us. And not only was he borne so poorly and miserably, but
also lived so afterward all his life time, while he was here upon the earth,
for yt space of 2. or 3. and thirty years, insomuch that when he was borne, he
stedde into Egypt from Herod yt sought to kill him, no doubt with trouble and
pain. Afterward, he lived with the benevolence and liberality of certain
good women, as of Mary Magdalene, and Ioanna yt wife of Chuza Herod's steward,
and Susanna, and many other which ministered unto him of their substance, Luke
8. 3. so yt he himself does pronounce to one that would follow him for gain
and estimation in this life, yt the son of man, meaning him self, has not
where to lay or hide his head, but is in worse case the^ ye foxes which have
holes, or ye birds of ye air which have their nests, Mat. 8. By this we learn
to take poverty patiently, which the Lord himself has sanctified in his own
body, neither to think it accursed. And we learn thereby the contempt of this
world, for Christ had nothing glorious in the face and eyes of man, he was
not rich, but poor. If we have riches, let us not think so much, or highly
of them, or be puffed up by them: for Christ had them not. If we be poor, let
us remember that Jesus Christ was poor also in this life. It is sufficient for
us, and enough, if we may be rich after this life, not that these riches and
worldly things are ill, if they be used to Gods glory, but Christ would teach
us by his example, that first his kingdom is not of this world, and then not
to be grieved if we lack these transitorye things, for he had them not at
all: wherefore if we have meat and drink and raiment, we must be content. The
circumstances of his birth, are the place of it, and the time. As concerning
the place, Matthewe and Luke both agree in one, that it was Bethlehem, for so
was it long before prophesied of by the Prophet Micheas. Chap. 5. saying, And
thou Bethlehem Ephrathah, art little to be among the thousands of Judah, yet our
of thee shall come forth unto me, one that shall be the ruler in Israel, whose
goings forth shall be from the beginning and from everlasting. Where he
sets forth unto us plainly, both the humanity of Christ, and also his
divinity: his humanity, in that he says, he came out of Bethlehem: and his
divinity, in that his going forth was from everlasting. The place then was
Bethlehem: no great and famous city as Jerusalem was, but a poor and obscure
town, nothing spoken of among men. Here we may see again, that as Christ
showed great humility in the manner of his birth, so did he also in choosing so
poor and vile a place as Bethlehem was. And this was done no doubt to confound
the wisdom of the wise and mighty, which would have thought rather that
Christ should have been borne at Jerusalem, or some such like notable and
excellent city. Well, our savior Christ chose Bethlehem, and made it famous
through his birth, and rejected all other cities: so is fulfilled that saying
of Paul, God has chosen the weak things of the world, to confound the
strong, and vile things, and things that are despised has God chosen, to bring
to naught the things that are, that no flesh should rejoice in his presence.
1. Corinthians 1. Verses 27. 28, 29. Let no man therefore be grieved or
ashamed, if he be borne in a poor and base village, for so was Christ borne,
and he is nothing the worse for it: he may come as soon to heaven, as they
that are borne in the greatest cities. Neither let any man on the contrary,
brag and boast himself, if he were borne in a famous place: this makes him
not the better, or nearer to God. We may see also at this day, where Christ is
most commonly to be found: not in great cities, and princes courts so much, as
in poor places, and obscure houses. The wise men sought him at Jerusalem the
great city, but Christ was found in poor Bethlehem. Here also learn, that
the prophecies are fulfilled still: for Christ, as they had said, was borne in
Bethlehem. Let us therefore believe the Prophets, either when they comfort us,
or threaten us for sins, for they shall always be fulfilled. The time of our
Saviors birth was in the days and reign of Herod the king, as Saint
Matthewe says, Chapter. 2. and so had Jacob prophesied before, that Christ
should not be borne, until the kingdom did cease, and depart from the race of
the Jews, and was gito the nation of the Romans, as Genesis. 49. The scepter
shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawegiuer from between his feet, until
Shiloh come, and the people shall be gathered unto him. Meaning that Christ
should not be borne and come among the Jews, until such time as they had no
kings to rule among them of their own stock, but of strangers, as Herod was
at that time. Christ being borne in the time of king Herod, a wicked king,
and a Tyrant, does show himself most favorable to the Jews his people,
being in great bondage and miserye. For when They had most need of a Savior
and redeemer, not only of their bodies, but especially of their souls and
consciences, religion being corrupted among them, and his word rejected, then I
say, Christ came, and was borne a deliverer unto them. So is God wont to deal
in mercy toward his children, then, and not before to send help, when they
are at the last cast, and ready to be devoured, to teach them, that when
there is no help and succor in them selves, then is there most present aid
and comfort in him as he said to Paul, My power is made perfect, and is
strong in weakness, that when we are most weak and feeble, then is God most
strong to deliver us from our enemies. He never delivered the Israelites out of
Egypt, until they were brought to the extremytie, then he sent them Moses,
and Aaron, and not before: for he will humble man, and let him to understand,
that when he does any thing for him, and deliver him, or bestow any gift
upon him in body or soul, it is not for any thing that is in him, but of his
mere mercy and goodness, to make his praise the more to be seen, and men
more thankful unto him. Let his praise therefore be continually in our
mouths, and let us magnify his name together, as says the Prophet David,
Psalm. 103. Christ then visited the Jews, when all things were turned vpside
down, his service was defaced by the traditions of men, as the Scribes, and
Pharisees, and Sadduces, who had corrupted the puritye of Gods word and
doctrine, and brought in their own pelf and manners, were altogether
unreformed, the poor neglected, the Prophets despised, and Gods laue set at
naught. So that when our Savior came amongst them, he respected not any thing
he saw in them, but their extreme misery and thraldom, which moved him to
pitye them, and so much the more, because they had such a cruel Tyrant to
rain over them, as murdered a great many of their young infantes. So the Lord
came amongst us of late: when his Gospel was laid aside, and devices of men,
in stead of it, were set up, when his ministers were in every place
persecuted, and burned: then he sent a deliverer to purge religion, to restore
his truth again, to pull down Antichrist, and to abolish Popery: he
respected not any thing in us, for we like sheep were all gone astray, every
man turned his own way: but he did this, being mindful of his mercy and
promise made freely unto us in Jesus Christ: I pray God we may be all truly
thankful, for so great and wonderful a benefit bestowed upon us, as the
like was never seen in our land before. Surely good cause we have to
remember the Lord in our beds, that gives us in the midst of our enemies,
such quietness and rest from all perils and dangers. The thing that followed
immediately upon this birth of our savior, was the coming of certain wise
and famous men from the East to worship him, being led with an
extraordinary star thereunto. Thus God the Father would adorn and magnify
the birth of his son, with the resort of these great and excellent men. And
herein no doubt they being Gentiles, and the first fruits of them, that came
to our Savior, do signifye that the Gentiles also as well as the Jews, should
be called to be the people of God, that there might be one fold and one
shephearde, as our Savior tells us in the tenth Chaper of John's Gospel. This
was comfortable for us, being Heathen men and Gentiles, and altogether
strangers from God, to be made the peculiar people of God, and to be translated
from the kingdom of darkness, into the everlasting kingdom and inheritance
of his well-beloved son. But see how the declaration and showing of this birth
of so wonderful a king, by the wisemen, was taken of Herod and the Jews in
Jerusalem: when they heard the king of the Jews to be borne, it is said,
that Herod and all Jerusalem was troubled with him. Thus we see the nature
and condition of the wicked, that when they should be glad, and rejoice in the
Lord with thanksgiving for his benefits, then they are troubled, they
murmr, and are unthankful. Here all Jerusalem had great occasion given them
to praise God, and they consider not of it a whit, they had rather sleep in
their dregs of sin. May, Herod went about to kill him, that came to dye
for him, and to save him, if he could have believed it. This does also
reprove our manner and doings at this day: for when we should yield God praise
and thanks, we give him none, and when he is most ready to do us good,
either we consider not of it, or else unthankfully refuse it, as the swinishe
Gergesites did. How has Christ visited us in mercy, in giving us his holy
Gospel the food of our souls, as much as ever he did to the Jews? and yet I
say we are troubled still in our minds and souls, with ye cares of this
world, which do choke the seed of his holy word. Well (dearly beloved) let us
learn to be wise, and to consider thankfully of Gods benefits in time, lest
they be taken from us, as they were from the Jews, and given to a nation that
shall better receive them, and make greater account of them. The third thing yt
I said was to be considered in the birth of our savior Jesus Christ, is the
profit and comfort yt we may take and apply to our selves, our souls and
bodies by it, and what duty is required of us in this behalf. The commodity
that arises to us and al Christians by his birth, is, that Christ came to save
that which was lost, as Paul does notably express the end of his coming in
the flesh, saying, This is a true saying, and by all means worthy to be
received, that Jesus Christ came into this world to save sinners, 1. Timothy
1. 15. Then we perceive this, that Christ was borne to redeem us. If he had
not been borne, we could not have been redeemed by him from the power of hell,
and of Satan. This is a great matter, and a most excellent and wonderful
benefit. For we understand now plainly and clearly by the word of the Lord,
that the seed of the woman has broken ye serpents head, Genesis 3. that there is
a Lion and a Lamb in diverse respects, for his strength a Lion, and a Lamb by
his meeknes, found worthy to open the book, and to loose the seven seals of
it, which no man was able to do, neither in heaven nor in earth, nor under the
earth, Revel. 5. that there is a child, as Esaie says, given unto us, upon
whose shoulders the government of heaven and earth is laid, and does consist.
We may say therefore, that a man is borne of the virgin Marie, the true and
natural son of Adam, of Abraham, of David, which was promised in the law
and Prophets, such a man I say, that has conquered hell and death, and
damnation, and desiuered us from the wrath of his father to come. Of this, our
faith may gather a double fruit and co^modite; the one, that there is a
mediator between God and man, even the man Jesus Christ: we have this
mediator for us in heaven already: the other, yt by the participation and
unity of his nature with ours, he receives and admits us into the society
of him self, and all his riches and treasures are made ours, even as the wife
may say of her husband, that al her husbands goods and lands are hers, because
she is one with him: so may we say of our most gracious husband and bridegroom
Jesus Christ, that all his store is now become ours: For we are bones of his
bones, and flesh of his flesh, as Paul tells us plainly, Ephesians. 5. If this be
so, then we ought to rejoice and be glad in our hearts, as Paul says, which
is, in the Lord, because that Christ the great jewel of God is sent into the
world. If we greatly rejoice and triumph, when we have a mortal son an
heir here borne in earth unto us, who^ we know not whether he shall be good
or ill, a comfort or pain unto us: If (I say) we do rejoice at this vanity,
what ought we to do (think ye) dearly beloved brethren, when we hear yt son
of God to be borne for us, and the heir of all things, a son that pacifieth
his fathers wrath justly conceived against sin, such a child as makes us
children, and brings us into his heavenly possession and inheritance? Ought
we not (trow you) unspeakably to rejoice, and thank God and his son Christ
continually? It is good reason so to do, seeing it is our only benefit, and
not his: for he came and was borne for us, and not for him self. The angels of
God herein may teach us our duty, how thankful we ought to be, and to
rejoice for it, not with a worldly and carnal joy, as many do, but with a
spiritual and heavenly joy of mind and conscience, as few do. At the birth
of our savior, there was a company and multitude of heavenly soldiers
praising God, and saying, Glory be to God in the high heavens, and peace in the
earth, and toward men good will, Luke 2. They rejoiced in the Lord, and were
thankful for it, and yet are: much more ought we to do the like, that his will
may be done in earth of us, as it is in heaven amongst them, even as we daily
pray. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. We have in deed a
celebration of this nativity of Christ, which is miscalled of us Christmas. As
ye name is evil, called Christmas of the Papists, as if Christ should say
Mass: so is the time in it spent as lewdly of us for the most part, if not in
massing, yet in masking, in carding and dicing, in dancing, in belly cheer,
in excess of apparel, and in fond and foolish plays and sportes, to pass
the time away. In these sins and vanities, is the time of Christ's nativity
spent and consumed of us. It were better to have no day of it, then so to keep
it: and it is a great grief to a godly mind, to see that time which should
be employed to the service of God, as it was in the primitive Church,
altogether wasted and dedicated to offer sacrifices unto the devil: for it is
in it, as it is upon the Sundays or Lords day thoroughout the year. The
Sabbath which is appointed for to hear Gods word, and to pray in, is turned
altogether to play in, and made a day of all wicked sport and pastime, which is
far from the right use of it, and yet no Magistrate does correct it. God give
an amendment one day of it, to his honor and glory. Amen. Well, so it is with
this time of our Saviors birth: we should give thanks in it, and we never
think of our duty in it the most part of us. If Emperors and Kings have
celebrated the memorial of their birth days, then there is greater reason,
why we should remember the ioyfullest birth day that ever was, or shall be, I
mean, of Jesus Christ our savior, borne so poorly and simply for us. Not
that we should so celebrate and keep Christ's birth day, as wicked Herod did
celebrate his nativity, in feasting, in daunsing, in rash swearing, and last
of all, in murdering the good saint of God, John Baptist, Matthew. 14. Mark. 6. I
say, we must not so celebrate this birth day of Christ with him, least we be
partakers of his punishment and pain. But yet I fear a great many do keep
this time no better. Neither must we keep this day of our brother Christ's
birth, as Titus kept the birth day of his brother Domitian, in killing the
Jews for his pleasure, to triumph, and so defiled his hands with innocent
blood, surely we do not much better: for although we kill not with the sword,
yet we wound and kill our brethren with our tongues, we quarrel, we fight, and
are contentious, we swear and blaspheme, and so revile the living Lord, and
this is done most of all at the birth day of our Savior, as also upon this day
of rest, the Sunday, with cards and dice and bloody oaths. Well, the Lord one
day will take an account of these things of us, unless we speedily repent and
amend. Thus we have heard the things that may be noted upon Christ's birth,
the circumstances of it, with the fruit that comes unto us by it, and how
we should use this day, and what is our duty in it. Let us thank our
savior Christ, that he would be thus borne for us, and pray unto him that we
may remember it, and have the end of this his coming in ye flesh, the
salvation of our fowls, which he grant unto us: to whom with his father, and
the holy ghost, be given all praise and glory, for ever and ever: Amen.

The fourth Lecture upon the 4. article of our Christian faith:
Suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried, descended into
hell.
WE have seen in the other two articles going before, the co^ception of Christ
and his birth, and what things were in them to be considered of: now
co^seque^tly follows his death with certain circumstances of it, as what
follows after it. But here may a question be asked, why there is no mention
made of his life, which went between his birth and death. To this it may be
answered, that seeing the benefits of his life be comprehended in his death
(for whatsoever he did in all his whole life, we enjoy it in his passion)
therefore his life is not here set down, because we do believe it in his death.
This article of Christ's death is very necessary; for nothing had been brought
to pass for our salvation, neither should we have had any profit at al by
Christ, unless he had bin crucified for us. Therefore it is not sufficient to
believe his conception and nativity, except we also confess with our mouths,
and believe in our hearts steadfastly his death and bitter passion for us.
Therefore Christ is always to be considered of a Christian man, as he was
crucified for his sins. The meaning of this article is this in other words: I
yt am a christian man or woman, do believe and confess, yt Christ my savior
suffered, when Pilate was deputy in Jury, and was condemned by him most
unjustly, and that he was crucified upon the cross or tree for my sins, to
redeem me, and that he died for me, to bring me to life, and that he was
buried and laid in the grave as other men, and suffered ye torments of hell in
body and soul, to acquit me before ye judgment seat of God his father. In
this article are five things noted unto us. First, under whom he suffered, and
what judge condemned him: secondly, what manner of death he died, he was
crucified: thirdly, his death it self: fourthly, what was done after, he was
buried: and lastly, what pains he suffered, he descended into hell. Al these
things are expressed unto us in this one article: first is declared unto us the
name of him that condemned Christ, which is Pilate a Roman, as John 19. And
this his name is set down, not only for the credit of the history to believe
it the better, but also because this appertained to the mystery of our
redemption, that we might know his death to be joined with the condemnation
of an earthly judge. For seeing that by ye death of Christ not only our sins
must be purged, but also the condemnation for them to be taken away: it was
necessary that he should die by the sentence of a judge, and no otherwise,
that we might be absolved before the great judge of all the world. If Christ
had been killed by theefes, or murdered in a tumult or sedition by private men,
there had been no redemption for us in such a death, no kind of satisfaction.
But when we read in the Evangelists in their Gospel, that he was arraigned
at the bar, accused by witnesses, and condemned by the sentence of Pilate,
(although iniuriouslye, he pronouncing him just, once or twice, and confessing
that he found no fault in him) we understand by those things, that he
sustained not the person of him self, but of al us most miserable sinners,
that should have been so condemned before his father, if he had not suffered
this under Pontius Pilate for us. And here are two things to be noted of us,
which are both confirmed by the testimonies of the Prophets, and do also give a
notable consolation and confirmation to our faith: for when we hear that
Christ was sent to death, from the judgment seat, and was hanged between the
thieves, we have a full accomplishment of that prophecy, which is cited of
the Evangelist, He was reckoned or counted among the wicked, Esaias. 53. And why
was this so? truly, that he might sustain the condition and estate of a
sinner, and not of a just man, as he suffered death, not for righteousness
sake, but for sin and ye transgressions of the wicked. Again, when we hear
that he was pronounced innocent by the same man, of whom he was condemned, let
us remember that which another Prophet speaks of him, I restored that which I
took not, Psalm. 69. yt is, Christ paid for sin, and bought if full dearly,
which he never had, nor committed: for there was no guile found in his mouth.
And why did Pilate then condemn him? Because he feared man more then God, and
Cesars displeasure more then ye wrath of God: for when ye people cried, If thou
let him go, thou art not Caesar's friend, then he consented unto them to
crucify him against his own conscience, to pleasure the people, and to
gratifye ye Emperor Tiberius. So we see, that he was a parcial, fearful, and
unjust judge, and had not the properties of a good judge, as is required, Exodus
18. First, that they should be me^ of courage, secondly, fearing God, thirdly,
men dealing truly, fourthly, hating covetousness. Let all Judges take example
and warning by Pilate, to execute justice and judgment indifferently to all
men. For Pilate afterward, as histories record, for anguish and sorrow of
mind hanged himself, as Judas did before him. And here we see, that as a
Roman then condemned Christ, and as always afterward he was persecuted by
the Roman Emperors: so it is at this day by that great Antichrist of Rome,
the Pope and his adherentes: he is still persecuted in his members. This is the
just judgment of God upon them. God give them grace (if it be his will) to
repent, and to come to the knowledge of the truth, Amen. Secondly, let us
consider the manner of his death what it was. It was the cross, most shameful
and accursed, not only in man's sight, but also of God him self. Deuteronomy. 21. The
curse of God is on him that is hanged. This Paul repeateth, Gala. 3. and says,
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us,
for it is written: Cursed is every one that hangs on tree. Thus we see still
in every article, and in every point of our salvation, that exceeding great
love of Christ our master to us, that not only he was contented to suffer most
grieous pain for us, but also shame and reproach, ignominy and contempt of
the world. He was at the first taking, led away to Annas and Caiaphas, and
then posted over to Pilate. Pilate sent him to Herod, and Herod sent him back
again with mockes and tauntes in a purple robe in mockage, and derision of
him. And all this did our savior Christ for us. This was much that I have
rehearsed already, but yet nothing to ye death of the cross: for the cross
was as odious and shameful to them, as the gallows is to us, and yet Christ
was well contented with it, so we might be redeemed. This is that Paul
speaks of to the Heb. 12. willing us to follow the great humility of Christ
in his suffering of shame, says, Let us also, seeing that we are compassed
with so great a cloud of witnesses, cast away every thing that presses down,
and sin that hangs so fast on: let us run with patience, the race that is
set before us, looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith, who for
the joy that was set before him, endured the cross, and despised the shame,
and is set at the right hand of the throne of God. Consider therefore him that
endured such speaking against of sinners, lest ye should be wearied and faint
in your minds. We see many men can abide to suffer pain and grief, which yet
notwithstanding are overcome with shame and reproach, and can hardly abide it.
One peradventure could be contented to suffer some trouble for his dear
friend, but who will be hanged for his friend? Let the same mind therefore
dearly beloved be in you, that was even in Christ Jesus, who being in the
form of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God, but he made
himself of no reputation, and took on him the shape of a servant, and was
made like unto men, and was found in shape as a man: he humbled himself, and
became obedient unto the death, even the death of the cross. You see out of
this place, how Christ for our sakes abased himself to shame, which
consists in four points. It was much for him being God, to become man,
whether it had been King, or Prince, or Lord: but it was more to become a
miserable man, a servant unto men: more then that, it was to die: but most of
all was it worthy praise and commendation, that he died the death of the
cross, not for his friends, but for his foes. Many other things did our
savior suffer of the people, ye Scribes, the Pharisees, and the Jews: as
reuilings, and blasphemies, bitter nippes, and tauntes, but al was nothing to
this cross, it surmounteth all: and yet for all this, we must not be ashamed
of him, for he is our glory, Galat. 6. 1. Corinthians. 2. they that are ashamed of
him here in earth before men, he will be ashamed of the^ in heaven before his
father and his Angels. Let us therefore confess and acknowledge Christ
crucified for us, and let us never be ashamed of him, when he comes with his
cross, for he that takes not up his cross daily and follows him, is not
worthy to be his disciple, Luke 9. He might rather have been ashamed of us, to
see us in that case we were, worser then we can see any poor miserable
beggar, amongst us here in earth. We see then, yt by Christ crucified, the
blessing of Abraham is come upon us yt were Gentiles, Galat. 3. and ye the
serpents head is broken, he being y^ true serpent lifted up upon ye cross, to
save al those that hope upon him by faith, as the other brazen serpent lyfted
up by Moses in the wilderness, saved all those Israelites ye were stong, and
looked up unto it, Numb. 21. verse. 9. Furthermore, by this cross, ye hand
writing of ordinances which was against us, and which was contrary to us, he,
eue^ he took it out of ye way, and fastened it upon the cross, and has
spoiled ye principalities, and powers, and has made a show of the^ openly, and
has triu^phed over the^ in ye same cross, Col. 2. Of this crucifying, and
lifting up upon ye cross, was Isaac a figure, who was bound and laid upon ye
altar, ready to be offered. And so were all the sin offerings laid upon the
altar: for he was made of God his father sin for us, that we might he made
the righteousness of God in him, which knew no sin, 2. Corinthians. 5. But of all
other types and shadows of the ceremonial law, this taking away of sin by
Christ in his cross, was most lively set forth and represented unto us, as in
a glass, in the scaps goat. For the Lord commanded Aaron Leuit. 16. that he
should take a live he goat, and present him quick before the Lord, to make
reconciliation by him, and that he should put his hands upon the head of the
goat, and confess over him all the iniquities of the children of Israel, and
all their trespasses, and all their sins, putting them upon the head of the
goat, and should send him away, by the hand of a man appointed, into the
wilderness: so the goat shall bear upon him all their iniquities into the
land that is not inhabited. Here was our savior Christ figured, which bare in
his body upon the cross, the iniquities of us al, Esai. 53. 1. Pet. 2. and was
wounded for our transgressions, and carried away al our sorrows, for by his
stripes are we healed. Esaias. 53. Furthermore, this betraying and crucifying of
Christ, and selling of him for thirty pence, was also forefigured in Joseph.
For as Joseph was sold of his own brethren into the hands of strangers: so
was Christ betrayed and sold of his own disciple, anddeliuered of his own
nation into the hands of Pilate and the Heathen. The third thing that
follows in this article, is his death. He was dead in deed, as the
Evangelists do report: for Luke says of him, that he cried with a loud
voice and said, Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit. And when he had
thus said, he gave up the ghost, Luk 23. So for the certainty of it, it is not
only said that he was crucified, but also that he died: for otherwise nothing
had been wrought for us. God said to Adam, In what day soever thou shall eat
of the forbidden tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall die the death.
Adam offended and brake this commandment: he was not able to make
satisfaction for it, to die the death of body and soul: therefore the second
Adam Jesus Christ died the death of body, and suffered the death in soul, to
redeem us, and to satisfy Gods wrath and displeasure, conceived most justly
against our sin in Adam. This death was signified in every sacrifice of
beasts in the old law of Moses, in the killing of bullockes, of calves, of
sheep, of goats, and such other things. For as the Apostle says, without
shedding of blood was no remission of sins. This was verified in Christ's
blood, shed for us in his death. Neither was this death of Christ to be seen
only shadowed in the ceremonies of the Leuiticall law, but also in diverse
men. As Samson, who died him self to deliver his people from the Philistims:
so Christ, to deliver us from the devils, died him self. David also was a
figure of him in many things. Here we see then, what a grievous thing sin
was in Gods sight, that he could be pacified by no other means, then by the
blood and death of his only and well-beloved Son Jesus. Surely our sins were
as hard as the Adamant stone, which could not be broken by any other means,
then by the blood of the true goat Jesus Christ. Consider here the wonderful
and unspeakable love of Christ: he would die for us, yt we might escape: eue^
as ye Pelicane, which having brought forth her young ones dead, or being stong
and killed by serpe^tes, she pecketh forth her heart blood to revive her young
ones: so we, heing conceived and borne in sin, and altogether dead in our
trespasses and offenses, Ephesians. 2. stong of that old and fiery serpent the
devil, which first beguiled our parents in paradise, and so having the reward
of sin which is death: we (I say) in this case are revived and quickened
again, by the blood of that true Pelicane Jesus Christ, which he from his
heart has shead and powered out for us. Thus we see how deeply we are indebted
to Christ for his great love to us, in dying for our sins, and yet how few
remember this death! Many, not once in a day, nay, not once in a week, or
month, I fear, some, not once in a whole year do remember it well: they are
the more vntha^keful, and unkind sons to God so good a father, and Christ so
loving a brother. It is ye only thing yt should especially be remembered,
although all other things be forgotten. Believe me (dear brethren) Christ died
not to this end, yt his death should be forgotten, which was so cruel to him,
or yt it should be lightly remembered of us, for yt he might have us to remember
it ye better, he instituted his last supper, in bread and wine: the bread
broken, to put us in mind of his most pure and precious body broken and
bruised for our sins, and that it does nourish us, as the bread does nourish
our bodies: for his flesh is meat in deed John 6. The wine ordained, to put us
in mind of his blood powered out for us, to wash us from al our sins, 1. John
1. and that as ye wine does quench our thirst, and refresh us, and comfort our
hearts being soroweful: so does ye blood of Christ al these things unto us, in
greater measure and abundance. This does also teach us unity and love
together, yt as many grapes make but one wine, and many graynes of corn and
wheat make but one lofe of bread: so should we be but one in Christ our head,
for we are all members of the same body. The other sacrament also of Baptism,
does put us in mind of Christ's death: for as ye water in baptism does wash
the body: so does the blood of Christ wash our souls, and cleanse them from
their filthiness. Which thing is represented unto us in our baptism, a sign of
our new birth and regeneration by the spirit of Christ. Therefore in our
baptism we ought to remember this death, for we are buried with him into his
death, by this seal and sacrament of our baptism, as Paul proves, Romans 6.
Now we see, that to the end we may remember this great benefit of Christ's
death, we have tokens of it, two in number: the supper of Christ, and baptism:
for by the^ we show forth the Lords death, until he come again to judgment,
1. Cor. 11. Now if any man marvel why we dye, since Christ has died for us,
and tasted death once for all men, to make reconciliatio^ for the sins of the
people, and to satisfy Gods justice: he may be answered, yt Christ has taken
away the second death of the soul, and not this first and natural death of
the body, which is common to all, for by it we enter into life: and although it
be sometime grievous to Gods children, yet it is not deadly to them, nay
rather, joyful, seeing by it they come to Christ their head, as it was to
Paul: I desire, says he, to be loosed, and to be with Christ, meaning, to die.
For albeit this death of the body dwells in us, yet it has no dominion over
us, by the force and efficacy of Christ's death. And we know that it is made
now to the elect, a gate to pass by into heaven. We should not then fear
death, seeing that the loss of this transitory life, is the high way into Gods
everlasting kingdom. And this may be answered concerning sin also. If any
man ask, how it comes to pass, that we have sin still remaining in us,
seeing Christ has died for it to take it away: I answer, that Christ has
taken away the condemnation of sin, that it shall not hurt us, to bring us
to destruction, but the full abolishing of sin shall cease in the latter day
of judgment, when all things shall be restored again to their perfection,
Acts 5. So that now we may say, There is no condemnation of sin to them that
are in Christ Jesus, which walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit,
Romans 8. For see the wonderful working of God, that all the curses and pains
that were in Jesus Christ, are turned to our blessings and joys: his death is
our life, his poverty our riches, his shame our glory, his descension into
hell, is made our ascension into heaven: and finally, his misery here in this
life, is made our felicity and happiness in the life to come. This is the
Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes. O that men would therefore
praise the Lord for his goodness, and declare the wonders that he does for
the children of men! This death of Christ has two benefits in it: for first
it causes that we shall not die in the life to come, and then here it
mortifieth our earthly members, it kills our old man Adam within us, that it
brings not forth his accustomed actions of sin within us. Thus much
concerning his death. Let us now consider briefly the fourth point in this
article, which is his burial. Christ was buried by an honorable Counselor,
Joseph of Arimathea, and Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews, who begged his body
boldly of Pilate, and buried it with odours, as the manner was, John 19. His
burial is mentioned, to assure us that he died in deed, as when we see a
man buried, we doubt not but that he is dead. The lesson that we learn by
this burial of Christ, is this, as the Apostle Paul teaches us, Romans 6. and
Colos. 2. that we should so through baptism be freed and buried from sin,
as he was buried in the grave, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead
to ye glory of his father: so we also should walk in newenes of life. So
then, as we are crucified with Christ unto sin, and dead and buried thereto,
so must we rise again with him unto righteousness. But of this, more (God
willing) in yt article of his resurrection. The last thing to be noted in this
death of Christ, is the pains which he suffered, which is called his
descension into hell. Although this be last in words, yet in sense it is to
be joined with his crucifying, and went before his death in body, and burial
in the sepulcher. The meaning therefore of this his descension, is this: that
Christ our savior, to redeem us both in body and soul, which had offended
God, suffered the torments of hell, the wrath infinite of his father for the
time, not only in body, but also in soul, and did abide the most bitter and
unspeakable sorrows of death in his mind and conscience, pressed down with
the burden of all our sins, as if he had been forsaken of God his father. In
this hell and torment, partly he was in his heavy agony in the garden, when he
swette (as it were) tears of blood trickling down from his face: his soul
was very heavy and sorrowful, even unto the death, so that there came an
angel and comforted him from heaven, Luke 22. This hell was so great unto him,
that he prayed his Father, if it were possible, that the cup of his passion
might pass from him: Yea, which was most of all, he was compelled for the very
anguish and grief of heart and soul, Psalm. 22. 1.
to say and cry out: O my God, Matt. 27. 46.
my God, why have thou forsaken me? So that all the things that Christ suffered
before, were nothing to this, yt now he suffered, when he cried out for very
pain, and extreme sorrow of mind. For we must remember, that Christ upon ye
cross, did not only suffer pains in body, (as they did which were crucified
with him, which were ye pains that ye Jews did put him to) but farther, he
suffered ye extreme wrath of God his father, hanging upon him, heavier then
heaven and earth, which no angel was able to endure: and therefore, that he
might be able to endure and to co^quer it, it was necessary, that he should be
God also, as well as man. For he suffered for all the sins, original, and
actual, in thought, word and deed, of all men that ever were or are, or
shall be from the beginning of the world, from Adam until the end of it, I
say, he has suffered sufficiently for them all, and as great pains and
torments as any damned souls in hell can or shall suffer. And was not this an
hell (trow you) unto our Savior, to abide in his body and soul, all these
torments, which can not be uttered with any eloquence or tongue of man? Nothing
had been done for us, if Christ had dyed the common death of the body only, as
other did. It was necessary therefore and very expedient, that we might be
perfectly redeemed in both parts both body and soul, that he shoule feel
the severe punishment of the vengeance of God, because he powered out his soul
an offering for sin, and took upon him our part, which were the malefactors
and offenders, to bring us unto the favor of God again. We must not think
then, (yea God forbid we should) that he suffered no more pain then the Jews
put him to, or the other two did which hanged with him. For we see they cried
not out as Christ did, for they felt not so much as he did, which suffered for
the whole world. And all this was for our cause: Let us then apply it as a
medicine to our wounds, otherwise it will not heal us. Take the shield of
faith, that when ye are in great torment and grief for your sins, (as Satan
does many times object them unto you) when ye are even at the brinke of
desperation, then this will be a notable comfort unto you, to bear off all
assaults and grievous tentations, yea, to quench the fiery darts of the
devil, to remember, that our Savior Christ suffered the torments of hell every
one of them, to deliver you from the^. This one lesson, if it be well learned,
and surely settled in our hearts, will heal a wounded conscience, will raise us
up from the gates of hell, and will in our greatest distress, be very sweet
unto us. Be our sins never so many, either as ye sands of the sea, or as the
stars of heaven, as they can not be so many: yet Christ's mercy is above the^
all, and greater the^ they, and has paid a sufficient price and ransom for
them all. If they were as red as purple or as crimson: yet they shall be made
as white as wool, and like to snow, Esaias. 1. A notable and comfortable place:
for before, ye Prophet sharply rebuked them of their grievous sins and
offenses, and now in these words promises them mercy, if they will repent and
amend, and so turn to the Lord with their whole heart. In this, that Christ
has suffered the torments of hell for all, we gather, that all that are
saved, are saved by Christ alone, from Adam until this time, and to the end
of all the world: for he is the lamb slain from the beginning of the world,
Revel. 13. That is to say, his death and passion was as effectual to redeem
all that were before him, that did believe in him that he should come, as it
was auayleable afterward to save all that are after him, which do believe that
he is come in the flesh already to save them. This is that, that our Savior
meant, when he said, John 8. 56.
that Abraham rejoiced to see his days, and saw them: that is, rejoiced in
Christ, that he should be his Savior. Acts 4. 12.
For none other is there given under heaven wherein we must be saved, Acts. 4.
Thus we see what is meant by these words, descended into hell: how he
suffered hellish torments for us, not that his soul went into hell after his
death, for it was in paradise, in the hands of God, as he commended it to his
Father, and as ye souls of the blessed are, and his body was in the grave.
Neither is there any place of scripture to prove any other discension the^
this, which is full of truth and comfort. They allege y^ place of David, Psalm.
16. 10. But that does prove unto us his resurrection that his body should not
be left in the grave, as others were, to see corruption and to rotte, as Peter
does apply it, Act, 2. 27. to prove his resurrection from death, and not his
descension into hell. The place of 1. Peter. 3. does show, that the Spirit
of Christ was in the days of Noe, and preached by him to the wicked which were
then rebellious and disobedient, and are now damned souls in hell, which he
terms spirits in prison. This is the meaning of Peter in that place, (as
also good interpreters do prove.) Neither did Christ descend into hell to
fetch the godly Patriarchs from thence, which dyed in his faith before his
coming in the flesh, for they were in heaven already as concerning the soul,
for the souls of the righteous are in the hands of God, and no torment shall
touch them, Wisd. 3. Here then seeing Christ has suffered and fulfilled all
things for us, we may say to God as concerning his justice, O righteous God,
if shame, confusion and ignominy be due to sinners for their evil deserts,
if death be the stipende and reward of sin, Romans 6. 23. If it deserve thy
wrath and indignation most severe, If it be worthy to be punished not only
with most sharp pains of body, but also extreme torments of mind and
conscience: briefly, if it deserve hell and damnation for the vileness and
filthiness of it: Then O most just Father and God, Christ thy Son has
suffered all these things to the utmost, he has paid al whatsoever thou
can require of me, for sin, Col. 2. 14.
he has performed thy band and obligation, and has clearly canceled the
handwriting that was against me. For can there be a greater burden with
measure more heaped and full, and pressed down, appointed for sin and
iniquity, then this was, which Christ Jesus thy beloved and only Son, which
was in thy bosom, has borne already for me? Therefore I beseech thee most
dear and tender Father, whenever my sins shall come into thy sight, or
question with thee, which my adversary the devil lays before thee and me,
that then thou would look upon Christ thy Son, which is thy true looking
glass, in whom thou shall find me to be most pure and innocent, and to be of
the same white color with him, and to shine most bright in his righteousness,
which he gives unto me by faith, if I believe in him, as I can persuade my
self most certainly and unfeignedly that I do. Good Father, for his sake
receive me into mercy, and bestow thy heavenly blessings upon me, because he
has deserved them well at thy hands. This prayer with boldness and
confidence in Christ's blood, may a true Christian man make to God the Father,
when his sins shall begin to accuse him: and herein may he find comfort,
otherwise none at all. For God is not pleased, but in Christ and in his doings,
as he says, This is my well-beloved Son, hear him, Matt. 3. and 17. Where we
note, that Christ is our only reconciler to God, and our only scholemaster to
teach us the truth of Gods word. Thus have we heard in this article, the
death of Christ, a wonderful and unspeakable mystery, the circumstances of
it, the cause of the same, the pains he suffered, and what comfort we have and
enjoy by it. Now let us give to our heavenly Father most hearty, earnest, and
continual thanks for it, and likewise to Jesus Christ, that would vouchsafe
to take it upon him for our sakes, such poor and miserable wretches as we
were. It is the greatest and most precious Jewel and Diamonde that God could
bestow upon us. Let us therefore pray unto him, to make us deeply consider of
the valewe of it in our hearts and minds, that we slightly esteem not of so
excellent a treasure, but that we may sell all, and buy it. Let us furthermore
desire of him, that by the death of his Son, he would kill in us all
carnal and worldly lusts, and mortify our earthly members, pride,
concupiscence, ambition, hatred, covetousness and such like sins, that we
walk in them no more. Now seeing Christ has dyed for them, to put them all
away, and has fastened and nailed them to his Cross, that we should serve him
(being delivered from the hands of our enemies) without fear, all the days
of our life, in holiness and true righteousness before him: This God grant
unto us for Christ's sake, to whom with the holy Ghost, one blessed God, be
rendered all praise, and glory, and thanks giving for ever, and ever, Amen.

The fifth Lecture upon the fifth article:
The third day he rose again from the dead.
WE have seen before three articles, concerning the person of our savior
Christ, as his conception, his birth, his death: which we have expounded as God
has given us ability by his grace. Now follows the fifth article concerning
his resurrection from the dead. And this does follow orderly in the belief
after his death and passion: for so did Christ always join these two
together, his death and rising again, saying to his disciples, Mat. 26. 21.
Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the son of man shall be delivered unto the
chief priests and scribes, and they shall condemn him to death, and shall
deliver him to the Gentiles, to mock and to scourge and to crucify, but ye
third day he shall rise again. This was spoken to comfort them, yt although they
conceived great care and sorrow, in heari^g yt he should be killed, yet they
might take as great comfort again to hear, that he was risen from the dead.
Christ's enemies did in deed what they might and could, to keep him down
still: they laid a great stone and heavy upon his grave, they sealed ye stone,
they made the sepulcher sure with a watch of soldiers, Matthew. 27. 66. But all
was in vain: for Christ must needs be true of his word and promise, to arise
again the third day, as he had often foretold and prophesied of to his
Apostles, and of the which they were al witnesses, and as S. Paul says, more
then five hundred brethren at once did see him. If any require testimonies of
his resurrection out of scripture, let him read the 28. of Matthew. the 16 of
Mar. the 24. of Luke, the 20. and 21. of John, the 1. Cor. 15. with many other
places of scripture. Wherefore no man can doubt of the truth of this article,
being confirmed by so many places of ye word of God. This resurrection was very
necessary: for unless it had followed, and Christ risen again, nothing had been
wrought concerning our salvation, neither had death been conquered, nor satan
destroyed, nor we redeemed perfectly from the dolours of death. Therefore S.
Peter says, that God has raised him up, and loosed the sorrows of death,
because it was impossible that he should be holden of it, Acts 2. 24. as David
also proves, Psa. 16. Thou shall not leave my soul in ye grave, neither shall
thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption. This article does prove unto us,
that Christ is both man and God:man, in that he did rise with his body in the
which he fell and died before, for it is improper to say that God does rise
again, for he does never fall. His resurrection does prove him to be God also,
because he raised up himself the third day, as he testifies, Destroy this
temple (meaning of his body) and in three days I will rear it up again, Ioh.
2. 20. It is also said, that he was raised up by the glory of his father, but
that is spoken as concerning his humanity, wherein he is inferior to his father.
Seeing then yt in the cross, death and burial of Christ, does appear a kind
of infirmity and weakness in respect of the world, because these things in
Christ seem base to many: we have to go further for the full strengthening
of our faith, to his most glorious and victorious resurrection over al his
enemies: for although we have a full accomplishment of our salvation in his
death, because that by it we are reconciled to God, and satisfaction is made
to his justice for our sins, so that ye curse is taken away from us, and the
punishment paid for our offenses: yet for all this, we are said to be begotten
(not by his death, but by his resurrection) into a lively hope: for these are
ye words of Saint Peter, 1. Epist. 1. Chap. Blessed be God, even the father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abu^dant mercy has begotten us
again unto a lively hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,
to an inheritance immortal and undefiled, and that withers not, reserved in
heaven for us, which are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation,
which is prepared to be showed in ye last time, (meaning when Christ shall come
to judgment) and we shall rise in our bodies. Wherefore as Christ by rising so
triumpha^tly, became co^querour of death: so the victory of our faith does
consist especially in his resurrection, eue^ as the holy Apostle does plainly
express it, Romans 4. 25. for he says, that Christ was delivered from our
sins, but is risen again for our justification: as if he should say, By his
death was sin taken away and abolished, but justice and righteousness was
restored and renewed unto us by his resurrection from death. For otherwise, how
could he have delivered us from death by dying, if he himself had bin swallowed
up of death? or how should he have gotten us the victory, yt had lost it
himself? This thing the Prophet Osee foreseeing by the spirit of God, spoke
prophetically as David and other Prophets did, of this resurrection of our
savior, saying, O death, I will be thy death, O grave, I will be thy
destruction, Osee, Chap. 13. verse. 14. Wherefore we do in this sort distinguish
ye benefits of his death from the benefits of his resurrection. By his death
sin is abolished: by his resurrection righteousness is restored: by his death
is death extinguished: by his resurrection is life repaired: to conclude, by ye
one, hell gates are broken up and vanquished, and by ye other, ye doors of
heaven are unshut and opened unto us. These are the proper differences between
his death and resurrection, although ye one sometime is taken for ye other, and
al things are given and applied to his death whatsoever we enjoy. Here may be a
question, why Christ was three days in the sepulcher. First I may say, It was
to fulfill the scriptures: for Jonas was a figure and sign of his
resurrection: now as Jonas was three days and three nights in the fishes
belly, so was Christ in the grave. Again, he was there three days, and did
not rise by and by immediately after his death, to confirm ye certainty of his
death, that he was dead in deed: for if he should have risen straight way, me^
might have thought with themselves that he had not bin thoroughly dead. Again,
although it be said that he was three days and three nights in the heart of
the earth, yet was he there but part of the^: for the scripture does take a
part and half of a day for a whole day, as also part of a man, for ye whole
man. Whereas it is said, there were so many souls in the ship with Paul, Acts
27. 37.
it is meant, so many men in all with bodies and souls: but the better,
greater, and excellenter part is usually taken for the whole, as in this place
of three days. This article has two principal points to be considered in it:
first, the resurrection it self of Christ, secondly, the benefits yt come unto
us by it, which are three in number. First, life and righteousness is restored
unto us by his rising: the^ mortification and newnes of life here among men, is
taught unto us by this resurrection: lastly, we are assured and persuaded of
our resurrection. In that yt Christ our head is risen again, we also the
members shall rise with him, as Paul says, Whensoever Christ which is our head
shall appear, the^ shall we also appear, that is, rise with him in glory, (yt
is) a glorified body as his is. Phil. 3. Colos. 3. This can not be but great
comfort unto us. As concerning his resurrection, partly some thing was alleged
before, and testimonies brought to confirm it, but this may be said more of
it, that it is so necessary to be believed unto salvation, that without it no
life can be had: for how can he have life, that does not, or will not believe
the author and giver of life, Jesus Christ, to be alive and risen, but dead?
how (I say) ca^ such an one have any life in him at al? Therefore our Savior,
willing to leave a perpetual memory of this article to his Church, seeing it
was of such great weight and importance, after that he had suffered, presented
him self alive to his Apostles and disciples, and to the women also, by many
infallible tokens, being seen of them by ye space of forty days, and
speaking of those things which appertain to the kingdom of God. To this end,
yt he might confirm and strengthen the^ in this true resurrection, he did eat
and drink with them after he rose, Acts. 10. showed the^ his hands and his
feet, bid them handle him, and see that it was even he and none other, Luke
24. 39. Yea this point is so necessary to obtain everlasting salvation, that
the Apostle S. Paul does affirm, that if Christ be not risen again, then is
our preaching in vain, then is our faith in vain, then are we false witnesses
of God, the^ are we yet in our sins, and they that are fallen asleep in
Christ are perished, and we of al men are most miserable. All these absurdities
and inconveniences do follow, if we or any other believe not steadfastly, that
Christ is risen again. But (dearly beloved) Christ is risen again, as the
Angel said to the women, Matthew. 28. 6.
He is risen, he is not here, when they thought he had not been risen, but
there in the grave as he was laid. The Pharisees thought, that if they could
persuade the people from the belief of this his resurrection, they should do
well enough with them, and therefore they gave large money to the soldiers, to
say that he was stolen away by his disciples by night. They well knew that if
ye people of the Jews did believe this his rising from the dead, they would
easily believe all other mysteries of his death and passion, with the articles
going before. The Evangelists al of them do inculcate and make mention of no
one article so much as of this: for although John and Mark do make no mention
of his birth and conception, yet notwithstanding, they make diligent rehearsal
of this resurrection in their Gospels, Mark 16. Ioh. 21. The Apostles after ye
ascension of Christ, did especially preach this article to ye people in all
sermons and preachi^gs of theirs. Peter in five Sermons together, the 1. 2. 3.
4. 5. of the Acts of the Apostles, makes especial mention of this
resurrection. So does he in the Acts 10. And so does Paul. Act. 13. and 17.
and in every Epistle of his. For in deed our whole faith depends upon it,
which if it be once overthrown, then can not our faith be sure and stable.
Although the Apostles were chosen to be witnesses of all the doings and actions
of Christ, Act. 10. verse. 39. yet were they especial witnesses of his
resurrection, because it seemed so incredible in the eyes of all men. For when
as Peter made his Sermon immediately after Christ's ascension into heaven, in an
upper chamber in Jerusalem, to all the disciples, and to the women which were
there. which were in all, both men and women, six score, he made mention of
this to the rest, that there must one be chosen into the room and place of
Judas the traitor, to be made a witness of Christ's resurrection, Act. 1. verse.
22. So that, although not only, yet especially the office of the Apostles was,
to declare and testify with all diligence and boldness, the resurrection of
Christ, to the people and Church of God. Belike then, this resurrection of
Christ does conteyne in it some notable mystery, and lesson for our
instruction: and surely so it does. Seeing it is so, let us come to the
second point which I noted, that was, the benefit and great profit we reap
by his resurrection. This resurrection was great loss unto Satan, but the same
was our gain. For by it, death is swallowed up into victory, and the bonds of
the devil, whereby he held us captives at his will, are all broken and
dashed in pieces, by this victorious Lion of the tribe of Judah. And this is the
first benefit, that eternal life, which is y^ free gift of God, Romans 6. is
now given unto us. Then before this resurrection, we were in the shadow of
death, sitting in blindness and ignorance. Now righteousness is restored:
then surely before, we were in our sins, as Paul says, If Christ be not
risen, then are you as yet in your sins, 1. Cor. 25. Well, now that he is
risen, all our sins, are put away. Let us apply this doctrine to our selves,
for our own consolation and comfort, against Satan and all his tentations, and
let us say of it as Paul did, Galat. 2. I am crucified with Christ, but I live,
(meaning by his resurrection) yet not I any more, but Christ lives in me. And
in that that I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith in the Son of God,
who has loved me, and given him self for me. So must every one of us say,
Christ has risen again for me, and justified me, and saved me, in restoring
life unto my dead body again. Here arises likewise out of this, our duty
and thankfulness to our Lord Jesus Christ for this great benefit, not to
forget it at any time, but as Moses says, Deuteronomy. 6. 6. so must we do: for
this is the precept and commandment of the eternal God, These words or
things which I command thee this day, shall be in thy heart, and thou shall
rehearse them continually unto thy children, and shall talk of them when thou
sit in thy house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie
down, and as thou rysest up. So these benefits of Christ are always to be
remembered. Alas, dearly beloved brethren, if we would so thank and remember
a friend of ours but a mortal man, as we would never forget him, but speak
continually of him, and praise him to others, if he should bestow upon us a
transitory and temporal gift, which lasts but for a time, as a thousand
pound in money or goods, or an hundred pound land a year, if (I say) we
would think this very much, and great love: what shall we think of Jesus
Christ, and how shall we be able to thank him sufficiently, and remember
him enough, which has bestowed upon us his own goods and treasures, far
better then silver and gold, and all precious stones, yea, to the which these
things are but doung? and not only has he given unto us his goods and
jewels:but he has also given unto us most fair and large possessions, even
the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven, immortal, vndestled, and which
withers not away, as these inheritances here below do. These things come
unto us by his resurrection, and yet who almost of the hundred part of men
remembers these benefits, and receives them with thanksgiving accordingly?
Nay, who thinks not more of his lands and possessions here below, then of
those above? Well, they are the more fools and mad men, and altogether
unthankful to our good and loving Savior Jesus Christ, which does offer
these things unto them, if they would receive them. God make them and us al,
one day thankful for them. Well, to conclude this point, let us mark and
behold, that he is risen again from death, wherein did appear greater force
and power, then if he had at that time come down from the cross, when the
Jews willed him so to do: for he did so vanquish and overcome death, striving
with him in the grave, that he was not able with all his force, to keep him
under his rule and government. If he had been overcome, he should not have
saved us. For it had been al one with us, as with one ready to be drowned, and
some other man to help and succor him, would courageously leap into the
water, who in the end should be drowned him self, before he could relieve the
other: what help then could come to the man that first fell into the water?
Truly no other thing could ensue of this, but one evil to follow an other,
and the death of the second man, to be added to the loss of ye first. But this
was far otherwise in Christ, who first delivered him self from the tertors
of death and hell, that he might the better persuade us of our salvation, as a
sure anchor, by faith in him alone. The second benefit that comes to us by
Christ's resurrection, is newnes of life, and that we should mortify our
former: lusts, in dying unto sin, and have a new life in all righteousness
and holiness, as we see Christ did rise again with a glorified body, not
subject to the like affections and passions as he was before, to hunger and
thirst, to mortality and other miseries of the body, but had all things as it
were new: so should we also rise with him from this old life of sin,
wherein we have lived too long, and put on a new and a better life, that is,
as Paul speaks, to cast off concerning the conversation in time past, that
old man which is corrupted through the deceyueable lusts: and that we should
be renewed in the spirit of our mind, to put on the new man, which after God
is created unto righteousness and true holiness. This is the true image
wherein Christ is risen, and wherein we must also rise: For surely (dearly
beloved) as Christ was raised from the dead to the glory of the Father, so we
also should walk in newenesse of life, Romans 6. Then all they that do not
lead a new life and a Christian, have not yet risen with Christ, neither have
they part of his resurrection. For we must consider, that the scriptures of God
do set forth unto us two resurrections: the one is of the body at the general
day of judgment, 1. Corin. 15. Of this we shall hear more in that article of
ye resurrection, and this is common to all, and is in the life to come, called
the second resurrection, where of John speaks, Revel. 20. The other
resurrection is of the soul from sin, here in this life common to ye elect
and children of God, which are true members of Jesus Christ, and follow him
their head, and this is called the first resurrection, because it goes before
the other: and he that will have his part of the second resurrection to life
everlasting, and not be hurt of the second death, must while he lives here,
endeavor to rise from sin. Of this resurrection Saint John in the twenty of
the Revelation spoke most plainly, saying, Blessed and holy is he that has
his part in the first resurrection, for on such the second death has no power,
but they shall be the Priests of God and of Christ, and reygne with him a
thousand years: that is to say, not a thousand only, but for ever and ever,
as is most clearly in another place of the same John expounded, Chapter 22.
verse 5. in these words, The Lord shall give them light, and they shall
reign for evermore: Which by the way makes against the error of them, that
imagined that Christ should reign but a thousand year with his elect, and
that upon the earth also. But to come to our matter again, from the which we
have a little digressed: We see that there is also a resurrection to be sought
for here in this life, from sin. Of this resurrection spoke S. Paul also
Ephesians. 5. speaking to them that where fallen down and asleep, or rather dead
in sin: Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ
shall give thee light. In this resurrection from sin and wickedness did David
arise, when he had slept, and was almost dead in adultery, and murder of
Vrias, for the space of one whole year and more: for when Nathan the Prophet
came unto him, and sharply rebuked him for it, he repented and amended, and so
rose again to a lewe life afterward. So did Saint Peter also rise in this
resurrection, when he had most wickedly and shamefully denied and forsworste
his master Christ: for he went forth and wept bitterly: So he rose again,
Mark. 14. And so do all the godly:when they have sinned, they are sorry for it,
and by and by they arise by repentance, and never intend to do the like
again. And verily so must we all do, every one of us from the hiest to the
lowest, none must be exempted, if we will be Christ's scholars and disciples, or
have any part with him in his holy resurrection. When we have offended our
master Christ, let us be most heartily sorry for it, lament and amendc, and
serve him better afterward, taking heed of the like offenses again: then
shall we have our part in this resurrection, and so be blessed for ever. Now
the wicked and reprobate, because, when they have sinned, they can not rise
again by repentance with Peter and David, but rather lie still under the
burden of their sins, and so fall to despair: therefore they can have no
fellowshippe in this resurrection. As for example, we see in Cain, haw he
dispayred when he had sinned, Genesis 4. 14.
and never repented or amended his life, Gene. 4. So did Saul: and so did king
Pharao confess he had sinned unto ye Lord: but yet he hardened his heart,
Exodus 8.8 and 9. 28.
and continued still in his sins to provoke the Lord, for he would not let
Israel go to serve the Lord, who did not rise in this resurrection. The like
we have of Esau, Genesis 27.38.
who wept in deed, but not in godly sorrow that causes repentance unto
salvation, not to be repented of, as yt Apostle speaks of, 2. Cor. 7. But he
lamented in worldly sorrow, that causes death, because he amended not his
sinful life, Hebrew. 12. The like may be said of Judas, who fell as others
of the godly did into sin, but rose not again with them. Therefore the
reprobate, when they fall away, can not rise, because they can not be renewed
by repentance, seeing they crucify to them selves the Son of God, and make a
mock of him, as Julian that wicked Emperor and runnagate from Christ, after
he fell away from him, never came to him again. For it was impossible for him
so to do, as Paul says, Hebr. 6. verse 4, 5, 6. But here let us behold the
perverse dealing of man, and the vanity of his heart, when he should be risen
with Christ in his resurrection, he rises with the devil to the top of all
sin and wickedness: when he should be alive in all good works, he is dead in
them, and quick in all abominations: many rise, but not with Christ to ye
glory of God, but to their own glory, ye gloof the world: some to promotions
and preferme^ts by unjust and unlawful means, some to pride and ambition, some
rise early, as Esaias, 5. Chapter says, But to follow drunkenness, and to
practice their wicked devises, which they have conceived in their beds. Thus
they rise and have a resurrection, but not in goodness, but in most filthy
and abominable sin. For where we should be fresh and flourishing as good and
green trees, to bring forth good fruit, left we be thrown down and cast
into the fire: we are dead and withered, and dry in all goodness, corrupt trees
without fruit, twice dead and plucked up by the roots. This is a very
miserable thing, but yet common to many. We see then by these things, that the
wicked live in the things wherein they should dye, and die in ye things
wherein they should be alive before God, as faith, hope, and love of God, and
heaven and heavenly things: so that we may judge, that as yet they have not
atteyned to this resurrection, which Christ has gotten and obtained for us by
his rising again. Well, to conclude this lesson, let us that are risen with
Christ, seek those things that are above, where Christ sits at the right
hand of God, and let us set our affections upon heavenly things, and not
earthly, for we are dead, and our life is hid with Christ in God, Colossians
3. verse. 1. and so let us altogether mortify our earthly members, and fleshly
lusts, fornication, evil concupisce^ce, uncleanness, inordinate affection, and
covetousness, which is of all vices the worst, and called Idolatry: doing these
things in the first resurrection, when Christ which is our life shall appear,
then shall we also in the second resurrection appear with him in glory. The
which assurance of our resurrection is the third benefit, we have to note in
this resurrection of Christ: for by it we are made surc and certain of the
rising again of our bodies at the last and general day of judgment, when
Christ shall come to judge all the world in righteousness. I say, that his
rising is the earnest of our immortality, not only in our souls, but also in
our bodies. 2. Cor. 25.
He is become the first fruits of the^ that sleep: and as in Adam we al die:
so again by Christ and his resurrection, we shall al be made alive at the great
and last day, in as much as he is ye resurrection and the life, and he that
believes in him, although he were dead, yet shall he live, John 11. And he is
the head that is risen, therefore the body and all the members of the same shall
follow in due time. For as when a man has fallen into some deep and
dangerous river, and has now recovered his head from under the water, and
swimmeth above out of danger with his head, although his other parts and
members of his body be not yet seen and discovered, yet will al me^ say, he is
escaped from death already: so is it with our head Jesus Christ, and with us
his body. Seeing he is escaped and tise^ from ye deep gulf of death,
(notwithstanding we seem as yet to be covered therein in this our mortal
state) why may it not be justly said, that we are risen with him, being so
nearly joined and united unto him, unless we will deny him to be our head?
Wherefore, if we profess our selves to be his, we must likewise acknowledge
that our resurrection is already begun in his, and that we do by hope, (which
never makes ashamed) in this life retain ye assurance of that state, which
hereafter we shall with full possession and accomplishme^t in heaven with him
enjoy for ever. This can not be but a great and singular comfort to all the
faithful servants of Jesus Christ, to consider that their bodies shall not
lie for ever in the graves, as the bodies of beasts do, but that they shall
rise again with Christ, which is before entered into heaven, to prepare a place
there for us, that he may come again at the last day to receive us wholly unto
him self. If we were by the death of any friend of ours, made sure by good
and sufficient warrant of an hundred pound land a year, how greatly would
we rejoice thereof both night and day! And how ought we to rejoice
continually, being put in assurance by Christ's death and resurrection, not of
lands and goods here, which are but short and transitory: but of the
possession of the everlasting and immortal kingdom of God, where are
pleasures without end, and joys without any weariness. O how ought this to
stir us up to be in love with that life, but especially and above all things
to love him, that was the author and purchaser of these things unto us, even
Jesus Christ the son of God, both God and man! I would to God we did think
of these things and consider deeply with our selves, what is prepared for us
by his resurrection: surely then we would not sin, at the least we would
not wallo we with the sow, and delight in our sins as many men do, the more
is the pity. Well, this is the greatest benefit we obtain by this
resurrection, even our own rising: if it were not for this, we were not better
the^ brute beasts, yea far worse, especially the godly, who suffer many
injuries and tauntes, with mockings and pains of the wicked: if they should
not be assured of this grace and happiness, their life were very miserable,
and they surely would despair. But of these things which are very incident to
the article of our resurrection, mo things (by Gods grace) shall be spoken, when
we come to that point. In the mean season (dearly beloved) let us give to
Jesus Christ most humble and hearty thanks, for the benefits that we receive
of his gracious goodness, by his victorious resurrection, in that he has
gotten to us life, and opened the gates of paradise unto us, which were shut
before. And with all, because we need continually to crave many things at his
hands, let us meekely pray unto him, that he would vouchsafe to work so in
our hard hearts by his holy spirit, that we may by his resurrection, mortify
and kill all the wicked and unruly desires of ye flesh, and other sins which
are crept into us, and beg we of him, that we may all of us, leave the old
finfull life of Adam, and walk in a new life, and put on the new man Jesus
Christ, and to make no provision for the unbridled flesh, to fulfill the lusts
of it, that we may walk before him, and serve him, not for a day, or week, or
month, or year, Luke 1. 75.
but as ye holy ghost says, all the days and times of our life, in holiness
and true righteousness, to his honor and glory, to the profit and
commodity of his Church, our brethren, and in the end, to the consolation and
comfort of our own souls, which God grant us for his sons sake: to whom
with the holy spirit, be rendered all praise, and glory, and wisdom, and
thanks, and honor, and power, and might, for evermore, Amen.

The sixth Lecture upon the sixth article of our Christian faith:
He ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of God the father
almighty.
THis is the sixth Article of our Christian faith, yet but the fifth of the^ that
appertain to Christ and his benefits, from his conception, to this his
ascension into heaven: and it follows consequently in order after his
resurrection, not but that there was some time and space between: for Luke
does reckon forty days, to this end, that he might instruct and confirm
his disciples in the verity of his resurrection: to the which end he did eat
and drink with the^ after he was risen. Now the meaning of this article in mo
words (for the capacity and understanding of the simple and unlearned) is
this: I that am a Christian, do believe, according to the scriptures, that
Jesus Christ in the same body that he rose, is ascended into heaven, for to
prepare a place for me, and to pray continually unto God his father for us, to
be merciful unto our sins. This is the true sense and meaning of this
article. Now let us consider what things we have to learn out of it, and how
many points to mark for our instruction, be in it. There are three things in
this article: first, his ascension, secondly, to what end he is ascended,
lastly, the benefits that come to us by this his ascension into heaven. These
things well marked, will be for our consolation and comfort, against many
temptations and troubles in this life, which the devil assaulteth us with,
that we should despair of the mercy of God in Jesus Christ. But this will be
a remedy for them all, even his ascension into heaven, and that for us.
Christ's ascending into heaven, is manifestly proved unto us in the holy
scriptures, not in one or two places, but in many, that we may be ye better
confirmed in this behalf, either against the^ that doubt of it, or believe it
not, yea, or against Satan, that will go about to persuade us that he is not
there. S. Mark does show us, that after the Lord had spoken certain things
unto his disciples in Bethanie, he was received into heaven, and sat at the
right hand of God, Mark. 16. 19. for those are his very words in ye place.
Likewise S. Luke says, Luke 24.
And it came to pass that as he blessed the^ he departed from the^, and was
carried up into heaven. Neither do the Evangelists and Apostles of Christ prove
this only unto us which were after him, and had familiarity with him, but the
Prophet David, to make it ye more evident to all the world, long before the
coming of Christ in the flesh, spoke of it by ye spirit of prophecy, moved by
the direction of ye holy ghost, saying, God is gone up with triumph, eue^ the
Lord, with the sound of the trumpet: alluding in this ascension of Christ, for
the glory and ioyfulnes of it, unto the tru^pets ye were blowe^ at ye solemn
feasts of ye Jews, Psalm. 47. Also in the 68. Psalm. Thou art gone up on hie,
thou have led captivity captive. We see then ye in the mouth of two or three
witnesses, this matter is proved unto us, and ought therefore to be believed of
us, and fully established. But because no man does (as I thinde) ye is a
Christian, doubt of this, neither is it in controversy between ye Papists and
us, as concerning his ascensio^ (although in ye manner of it there be
contention) I will therefore come to the second point, which is to consider how,
and after what sort he is ascended, and remains in heaven, and to what end,
signified in these words, and sits at the right hand of God the father
almighty. To sit at Gods right hand, What it is to sit at Gods right hand.
is to have, and to be above all rule, power, might and dominion, and every
name that is named, not only in this world, but also in the world to come,
Ephe. 1. It is then as our savior Christ says, Matt. 11. and 28. To have all
things given unto him, al authority, both in heaven and in earth. For the
right hand of God, signifies the everlasting and infinite power of God. We
must not think, that God being an infinite and most blessed spirit, John 1.
18. and 4. 24.
and not a body, has either right hand or left, eyes or arms, or such like
parts and members of a ma^s body:but when ye scripture gives these properties
and speeches unto God, (as it does often) it is for our weakness and capacity,
which are children and babes in Gods matters, and therefore can not understand
him in his majesty speaking to man, unless he lispe (as it were) unto us, like
a nurce unto her young children. For we are so gross, that we understand not
how greatly the Lord is angry with man for his sin and wickedness, unless he
speak after ye manner of men, and say, he repents yt ever he made man. Again
we understand not, or conceive his wonderful power and strength, except it be
by a great and mighty and stretched out arm or hand. So by the eyes of the
Lord is meant his careful and vigilant providence and foresight over all his
creatures, and by his countenance is most commonly meant his terrible wrath and
anger. When the scripture gives an ear to God, and when the preachers say in
their Sermons, that he has an ear: you must understand that he hears all
things be they never so secretly spoken of any man, as by his eye, he sees
al things in this world, although they be never so much hid, and done in dark
and secret places, as the wicked do their evil works. As we see then that
kings and noble men do place at their right hand, such as are either their
betters, or equals, or do govern in their stead, so is it here: Christ is
exalted and placed in that dignity and honor that his father is, because he
is equal unto him. And this latter part of ye article, to sit at Gods right
hand, being in the last chapter of Mark, from whence it seems this was
taken, S. Paul does expound very well in ye 1. Ephesians. that God has set him
far above all principality and power, and might and domination. And in an
other place, Philip. 2. has highly exalted him, and given him a name above
every name, that at the name of Jesus should every knee bow, both of things
in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth, and that every
tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord, unto the glory of God
the father. This is the meaning of these words, he sits at the right hand of
God. It is not of any corporal sitting, for it may as well be said, that he
stands at the right hand of God: For so did Saint Stephen see him, Acts 7.
Therefore both by sitting and standing there, is meant, that he is advanced to
great glory, as has been said already. And here in this his ascension, so
glorious is his kingdom to be seen, which he did not take upon him here in
the earth. So that although Christ did show great glory in his resurrection,
all mortality being laid away, yet by his ascension into heaven, he has
more notably declared his power: for now he governs all things, and rules as
a king over all the earth. And this does the Apostle teach us, that he
ascended far above all heavens, to fulfill all things. For we see, and read
how abundantly, and most miraculously he powered down his holy spirit upon his
Apostles, Act. 2. how he has increased his church and kingdom in every part
of the earth, how he has ever since his ascension, mightily defended his, and
sharply punished his enemies. So that although he be in heaven according to his
bodily presence, and not in earth (as the Lutheranes and Papists do imagine
him to be in the communion, contrary to this article, he ascended, which is to
be meant only of his body, and not of his divine nature, which does fill all
things, and needs not to descend or ascend:) yet (I say) Christ is with us,
as he him self says, even unto the end of the world, Mat. 28. 19. by his
power and spirit, and by his grace and godhead, which is every where. For he
says, that he will not leave us fatherles, but will come unto us: which he
meant by sending his spirit, John 14. We are not then to look for Christ's
body here now upon the earth, (as certain heretics do suppose) even as he
him self says, Matt. 26. Me shall you not have always. Surely this saying can
by no means be true, if his body be every where, in every place, at every
sacrament: then is not his body departed from us, then is he not ascended into
heaven, but remains here still in the earth. But the Angel said to the
women, that he was not there. That was some place, and then he had a glorified
body. And it is said, that heaven must contain him, until all things be
restored, Act. 3. Surely being now ascended in body, we neither read of, nor
believe any other descension in body, then that wherein he shall desce^de to
judge at the latter day: as the Angels spoke to ye disciples, This Jesus which
is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come, as ye have seen him go into
heaven. So that unless we see Christ so come down as he went up, we will not
believe ye papists, yt say he is in the box or pixe, much less them that
say, he is every where, making him in deed to have no body at all, but
altogether swallowed up by his divinity. For tell me, I pray you, if Christ
had mea^t his body should always remain here upon the earth, why did he say
that he must depart from them? They cannot mean it of his divinity, but of his
humanity. Again, what needed his disciples to be so sorowefull for his going
away, if they had had his body with them? Here they answer, The disciples had
not his body visibly, but his body invisible or not seen. But surely the
disciples, if they had understood it so, as the Papists say, of his invisible
body, they were not such children, but that they would have contented them
selves, as well with his invisible body, as his invisible spirit, and grace
afterward: therefore they would needs know how they should be comforted when
he was gone from them. Christ told them, by his spirit, although invisible,
and not by his body invisible, which surely would have comforted them, although
they saw it not, if it had then been with them, as his spirit was: but Christ
meant no such thing, and therefore promised ever his spirit to them, and all
others after, and not his invisible body. This is a plain case, but I leave to
discourse of it any further, because I intend in this book to edify and
instruct the simple readers, only in the points of Christianity, concerning
their faith, and not to make any treatise for the learned. Seeing then we have
a great hie Priest, which is entered into heaven, even Jesus the son of God,
let us hold fast our profession, as the Apostle says, and let us go boldly
unto the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace to help
in time of need. For this was the third point, that I said was to be observed
of us, to weigh with our selves, what profit and commodity thereby does ensue
to all the faithful, that he is in heaven. Surely, this cannot be but great
comfort to all the faithful: for they all are assured by Christ's ascension,
that they also shall one day, even at the resurrection of their bodies, ascend
with him: for he is gone to prepare a place for them, as he testifies in John.
14. I go to prepare a place for you, and if I go to prepare a place for you,
I will come again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there may
ye be also. Christ by his ascension has opened the gates and doors of heaven,
and Paradise for us, which were shut against us before, so that we had no
entrance thither. For this is most certain and true, that if the head be
there, then shall the body and members be there also: and if our captain be
there, then shall his soldiers, which are we, be one day with him, and the
master will have there his servants to wait and attend upon him in his house.
And to be short, seeing Christ is in heaven, he will have his true Christians to
be with him. Is not this a great comfort in all troubles, and hurlyburlies in
this life, to meditate upon this, that one day we shall come into the presence
of our loving Master Jesus Christ? Surely this would comfort any poor
afflicted soul or body, if he did remember it: but we forget it, and then what
joy can we have in this vale of misery? This comforted David in his
banishment, saying, When shall I come to appear before the presence of God?
This rejoiced Paul greatly, when he said, A crown of righteousness is laid
up for me in that day, when the Lord shall appear, 2. Timothy 4. So then, this
is the first, and one of the greatest benefits, that by Christ's ascension,
we have an assurance of our own. For when Christ shall appear, then shall we
also appear with him in glory, Colossians 3. But yet we must remember, that
as Christ first suffered shame and reproach, and bitter death also, and so in
the end entered into heaven, by diverse crosses and calamyties, so must we also
for the most part, enter in the same way with him: for by many tribulations
must we enter into the kingdom of heaven, and all that will live godly in Jesus
Christ, shall suffer persecution. For you know that the servant must not look
to be better handled the^ his master, or ye scholar, to be in better case then
his teacher, nor we the^ Christ. Again, Christ by his ascension does solicit
al our suits, causes, matters and injuries, which we suffer, to God his father.
For he is our Attorney, and pleads for us, as John says, If any man sin,
we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the righteous. Is it not a
great comfort to a poor man, that can not make friends, or come up to the
prince, because of costs and charges, to have always one of the privy counsel
to help and further his suits as readily and diligently, as if he were there
himself? So surely it is with us: we have always Jesus Christ at hand with
God his father, being of his most privy and secret counsel, to make requests
to God for us continually, to pardon our sins, to grant us grace and all
other things necessary. This is singular joy to a godly heart, so yt we need
not to seek any other Mediator, as the Papists do, as if he were not
sufficient of him self, or as merciful to hear us, as his mother, or Peter,
or any other saint in heaven. This is their folly, and madness: let us be
contented with our only Mediator Jesus Christ, because he is most able, and
most willing to hear us, yea bids us to come to him for our causes,
Matthewe 11. Come unto me all ye that travel and are laden, and I will
refreshe you. Therefore we may boldly and safely go unto him in our need and
necessitye, and fear not. Which of us is it, that if the prince did bid us
come at the first to her, and not to any other of her privy chamber, but would
come most willingly, and be glad so to do? Why the^ come we not to God at the
first, saying in his word. Call upon me, in the day of thy trouble, and I will
hear thee? Why come we not to Christ, that so lovingly bids every one of
us? Well, let us hold this for an infallible principle: Christ being ascended,
is our only spokesman, neither let any man think, that it is with Jesus
Christ, the king of all kings, as it is with princes of the earth, that because
he is so hie and in so great dignity and majesty, he does not therefore
regard, or respect us here upon the earth so low: nay, David tells us the
contrary, and meets with this objection: for he says, In deed the Lord is
hie above al nations, and his glory above the heavens. But yet he says, that
he abaseth himself to behold ye things in heaven and in earth: yea, he rayseth
the needy out of the dust, and lifts the poor out of the dounghill, to set
him with princes, Psalm. 113. So we see, although the Lord be hye, yet he has
respect unto the lowly. And Jesus Christ, notwithstanding he be in all
pleasure, and blessedness, yet he thinks upon us, because he has sometime
felt y^ like miseries with us: and we have such an hie Priest, that can be
touched with our infirmities, even at this time also, as he said to Paul
persecuting his saints, Saul, Saul, why do thou persecute me? Christ
counted himself then to be persecuted, although he were in heaven, because his
poor members were afflicted, Acts. 9. In deed princes here, and noble men
with us many times know not the misery of others, nay regard it not, because
they have never felt the like smart, and know not what hunger, or thirst, or
nakedness, or impriso^ment, or banishment, or lack of lodging means, not
having suffered the like themselves. But (I say) ye case is far otherwise
with Christ, who knows better what we lack, then we our selves do, and has
borne the like burden with us, and does not forget us now in his glory and
honor, as many do their poor friends, when they are advanced to any promotion
and dignity by others. Wherefore as Joseph in all his rioltie and glory,
remembered and did acknowledge his poor brethren before Pharao, and all his
house: so does undoubtedly our Savior Christ think upon us, his poor
brethren, saying, I will declare thy name unto my brethren, and he will not be
ashamed to confess us in heaven before his father, and all his holy Angels.
For how should the head be ashamed of his body, or the husband of his wife?
Christ is not ashamed of us his spiritual kindred, as we are ashamed of our
kindred many times, when we are exalted above them: nay, he is never ashamed
of us, unless we be first ashamed of him. For then in deed he says, He
that is ashamed of me and my sayings here in earth before men, I will also be
ashamed of him in heaven before my father: and he that shall deny him here, he
will deny him there: but he that shall confess him here, he will confess him
there. Mar. 8. Furthermore we are to understand, that although Christ by his
ascension has taken away his body from the earth, which was not necessary for
us, yet he has left unto his Church, and given unto it, as a most sure and
firm pledge, and earnest penny of his good will toward us, his holy spirit
always crying in our hearts, Father, father, and working in us, that which is
good and acceptable in his sight. This is the greatest comfort that may be to
the faithful in this life, and therefore is this spirit oftentimes called by
our savior Christ, The co^forter. And this great and singular benefit we have
by his ascension: for he said, that unless he went his way from them, the
comforter would not come, but if he went, he would send him, as in deed he did
after his ascension most plentifully, and does at this day unto his give his
spirit, either in greater or lesser measure, to some more, to some less, as
he thinks good. This benefit then do we enjoy by his bodily presence,
departing for a time from us. This gift is to our souls, the fountain of
life, and the very welspring and beginning of all our Christian regeneration
and new (...) in Christ, and so is called the spirit of Adoption, because it
is proper to Gods children, and none other. This spirit does lead us into al
truth, mortifieth our evil deeds, kills sin in us, reuiueth all goodness
within us, makes us merry in the Lord, rejoices us in troubles, and does
never leave us destitute altogether of some comfort or other. For this pledge
out of our hearts can never be taken away, all other worldly things may be
taken away, as from Job they were, who lost his goods and lands, wife, friends
and children: his body was afflicted, his soul tormented, yet in the midst
of these calamities he had a comfort of this spirit, in that he could say in
faith, I know that my redeemer lives: which he ^therwise could not do, but
by the motion: and help of the holy Ghost, as Paul ^eacheth us, to the first
Corinthians the ^^el^t Chapter, in these words, I declare unto you brethren,
that no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost, verse 3.
Seeing then we have by Christ's ascension the first fruits of his spirit, we
ought also to ascend with him into (...), if not in body, yet in soul, in
mind and heart, and all our affections. For where our treasure is, there
should our hear the also. Our treasure* and only treasure Christ Jesus is in
heaven, therefore let our hearts he wholly with him, as Paul says, Our
conversation is in heaven, from whence we look for the Lord Jesus, who shall
transfourme our vile body, that it may be made like to his glorious body* Phil.
3. So that as we have to learn by Christ's resurrection, a spiritual
resurrection here in this life from sin: In like sort we learn also by these
words of Saint Paul, an holy and spiritual ascension into heaven by our
desires and thoughts, that we may join to him even now in faith and spirit,
till we all meet in body there at the fast day. And truly if we could keep
our minds so ascending up into heaven, it would be very benificiall for us,
and rid us out of many dangers. We see and learn by experience, that the
bird is never ensnared and caught of the fouler, until he light and sit upon
the earth: when he falls to ye ground, then is he subject to gunshatte, or
other snares and dangers. So it is with us: if our minds were fixed above,
upon heavenly things, Satan could not take us in his trappes, but when they
are altogether cast downewarde upon the earth, and earthly pleasures, then we
fall into his baytes, and are entangled in his grennes. Therefore as Christ is
ascended, so let us also ascend in mind and cogitation unto him: for Christ
does bid us tome unto him, and this saying stands in his full force now,
as it did when ^e spoke it here with us upon ye earth: and we must come unto
him now. Let us then come and resort unto him by our earnest and hearty
prayer: for then we talk with him* For prayer is said to be a speech and
communication with God, and a lifting up of our hearts unto him in heaven. We
should remember then, that as often as we pray, we speak to the majesty of
God, and therefore should come with fear and reverence. Let us also come to
Christ, to hear h^^ comfortable word and Gospel. For when we hear his word
preached unto us, or read it our selves, we must consider that God speaks
unto us: and therefore give diligent and attentive heed to the things thou
hear, lest they slip out of thy mind. Again, let us also ascend and come
to him by hearty thank sgiuing, for all benefits received in our body and
soul, both temporal and spiritual. This is to ascend unto Christ in this
life. Seeing therefore yt by the blood of Jesus, we may be bold to enter into
the holy place, by the new and living way which he has prepared for us,
through the veil, that is, his flesh, and seeing also we have an high Priest,
which is over the house of God, let us all draw near with a true heart in
assurance of faith, our hearts being pure from an evil conscience, and washed
in our bodies with pure water: Let us keep the profession of our hope without
wavering, and let us ascend whither our forerunner Jesus Christ is entered and
ascended for us already, even into the heaven of heavens. Another singular
co^^ort ^or to ^ead our faith upon by Christ's ascension, is his power to
strengthen our weakness: for we believe now, that Christ has taken full
possession of his most glorious kingdom, and is entered into glory, to whom as
Saint Peter says, The angels, and powers, and might are subject, and
whatsoever else. For God has said unto him, Sit thou at my right hand,
until I make thine enemies thy footestoole: the Lord shall send the ^odde of
thy power out of Sion, be thou buler in the midst of thine enemies* Psalm.
110. So that we may boldly say as David said sometime, The Lord is our
shephearde: yea, the Lord Jesus is our King, therefore shall we lack
nothing. For tell me I pray you, what good thing can we want, Christ being our
heavenly King, and having now all power and authority given unto him, and
sitting at the right hand of the almighty Father? Surely his servants shall
enjoy all things, as he says, He that overcomes shall inherit all things,
and who is he that overcomes, but Jesus Christ, in whom we by his power and
virtue overcome also? that as he is made heir of all things, so might we
also be made joint heirs with him. Wherefore we know Christ no more in his
mortality, and humility. Yea although we had known Christ after the flesh,
yet hence forth know we him no more after the flesh, but after the woorking
of his myghtie Spirit, whereby he is able to subdue all things to him self,
Philip. 3. For here we must consider, that Christ has thus ascended into
glory for us, and has received gifts for men, even great spoils of the
enemies, to enrich his Church. This is our rejoicing which we have daily in
Christ Jesus: here is the joy, patience, and victory of the Saints of God, for
he must reign, until he has put all his enemies under his feet. Who then
can he discouraged with any thing that befalls unto him, either of body, or
grief of mind, or loss of goods and friends? Is it not Christ that dyed for
us, and which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and
makes request for us? Who shall say any thing unto our charge? who shall
condemn us? If Christ be on our side, as he is most certaynely, being our
head, who then can be against us? how can we sack any thing in this life,
when God has given his Son for us? What man or woman would think to lack
any thing earthly, that had a King to his Father, or a Prince to be his
brother? and shall we be of so little faith, to think that we can lack
ought, having GOD the great King over all the world, to be our loving Father,
and Jesus Christ his Son, the Prince of all princes to be our own brother?
This were madness to think or conceive: but yet if we be wavering through
incredulity, let us say and way with the man in the Gospel, Lord help my
unbelief: and with the Apostles let us say, Lord increase our faith in us,
and make it strong against all tentations of Satan. Seeing then that Jesus
Christ is of that power, that he is able to bring to pass all things, Gods
children may assure them selves of a singular defense against all their
enemies. For who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation,
or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? Nay
(dearly beloved) I am certaynely persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor
angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, nor heyght, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate
us from the love of GOD, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord: for in all these
things we are more then conquerours through him that loved us, and this is
our Christ that sits in the heavens for us. By this his glory and power
ever since his ascending, he has mayntayned the estate and welfare of his
Congregation, and will do to the end of the world. The last thing we learn
by Christ's ascension, is this, that he is also ascended to lead captivity
captive, that is to say, to beat down and overthrow all his foes, and such
as rise up here against him: so that as his power is a great comfort to his
spouse, so it is as great a terror and grief to the wicked reprobates, to
think or to consider of it. For it makes them to frette and fume, and to be
ever at their wits end for sorrow and grief, that he must overcome in
spite of their teeth. Then we learn, that our enemies shall not always triumph
over us, they shall not still have us in their bands, in prison and thraldom,
but one day they surely them selves shall come to confusion and shame. The
Scriptures, when they will paynt out Christ unto us in mercy toward his
Church, they give him the name of a meek and gentle Lamb, apparelled in
white, making no stir or cry in the streets, not breaking a bruised reed,
nor quenching a smoking fla^e, Matthewe 12. But when the Prophets will set
forth Christ in his majesty and glory, after his ascension, they give him
the name and property of a fierce Lion, all apparelled in read and bloody
garments, with a rod and scepter of iron in his hand to rule and govern
all nations. And this no doubt is, to cause and make the enemies of his Church
to quake, even as he showed him self in a vision to Saint John his beloved
disciple, to comfort him no doubt, but to terrify the enemies which were
shortly to go about to destroy the Church of God. We read in the Revelation
1. cha. that as John turned back to hear the voice that spoke with him, Christ
showed him self unto him in his majesty, as he was able to conceive: for he
saw seven golden candlesticks, and in the midst of the seven golden
candlesticks, one like unto the son of man, clothed with a garment down to
the feet, and girded about the pappes with a golden girdle: his head and
hears were white as white wool, and as snow, and his eyes were as a flame of
fire, and his feet like unto fine brass, burning as in a furnace, and his
voice as the sound of many waters, and he had in his right hand seven stars,
and out of his mouth went a sharp two edged swoorde, and his face shone as the
Sun shyneth in his strength. This vision of Christ in his glory was so
fearful, that it made John him self afraid, but the Lord did show him
self so, to comfort his servants which should suffer persecution a little
after, but to threaten the enemies by his mighty power. This is that which the
holy Ghost spoke long since by David, The Lord reigns, let the people
tremble, he fitteth between the Cherubims, let the earth be moved, the Lord
is great in Zion, and he is hie above all people. The Lord that is at thy
right hand, shall wound Kings in the day of his wrath, he shall be judge
among the heathen, he shall fill all with dead bodies, and smite the heads
over great countries. Here we see how David speaks most magnificently of
this glorious kingdom of Christ, being now exalted above the heavens by his
ascension: how he assures the enemies of destruction, but promises
deliu^erie to the godly in the Church. As Christ did always deliver his
Church, even from the beginning, Noah from the flood, drowning the rest, Lot
from Sodom, when he consumed the remnant with fire, the Israelites from the
bondage of Egypt, and the tyranny of king Pharao, overthrowing his euennes in
the red sea, for Christ was that great Angel that went before them: likewise
in destroying the Assyrians so many thousands in one night, and saving good
king Hezekia and the rest, so did he most wonderfully destroy great Babylon,
and ransom thence his own prisoners: finally, how he destroyed the Edomites,
the Ammonites, the Moabites, the Philistims, and the Canaanites, they that
read the hystories of ye Bible, shall well perceive: as (I say) Christ has done
these things to his enemies before his incarnation, so especially after he
was received up in glory, he has done the like. How mightily did he
suppress and beat down the great rage and fury of Saul, being armed and
set as a fierce Tiger, or Lion, to destroy both man, woman and child of
Christ's flock? But the Lord Jesus from heaven subdued him, and made him as
tame as a Lamb, Acts 9. Did he not cut off inlyke sort that cruel tyrant
Herod, that killed James, and had also taken Peter? It is said, that in his
pride he gave not GOD the honor and glory, and therefore was immediately
strooken of the angel, and most shamefully eaten up of worms, Acts 12. How
Julian the Emperor, that wicked forsaker and persecutour of the Christians,
was handled by the justice of God, and ended his life miserably. So Zomenus in
in his sixth book of his story, the second Chapter, does sufficiently
declare, that he was not killed by any of his enemies, but by one of his own
souldyers: And when he was strooken with the darte, and wounded to death, he
understood well the cause of it to be, for persecuting Christ and the
Christians: for he took the blood out of his wound, and flang it up into the
air, as if he had seen Christ, and accused him of his death, as in deed he
was the chief author of it, to punish that wicked reprobate, which had so
before contemned and mocked his word and Gospel. They that list to read
histories, either profane or divine, shall see how the tyrants, and
murdering Emperors of Christ's Church, have been by Jesus Christ in his glory
taken miserably out of this life. Consider all the Emperors of Rome that
persecuted the Church, what became of them, and how they dyed. Was not Nero
that monster, partly by himself, and partly by one of his own men, thrust
through with a dagger, as Suetonius, and others do report? Galba, Otho, and
Vitellius, did they not suffer the like? Did not Domitian destroy his own
brother Titus, and poisoned him? and was not Titus a persecuter of the Jews?
Domitian was miserably killed by one Stephanus his man, Maximinus slain by his
own army, Commodus killed of Narcissus, Macrinus thrust through by his
soldiers, Decius killed by his enemies, Valerianus pearsed with a spear of
the Persians, Pilate after he had crucified our Savior Christ, within few
years after, was he not driven to hang him self for sorrow, as Judas did
before him? Dioclesian and Maximinian, which were the authors of the tenth and
last persecution against the Christians, deposed them selves of their imperial
function, by the secret judgment of God. Maxentius the son of Maximinian,
drank of the same cup with Pharao, being both like enemies against Christ
and his Church: for Maxentius was drowned in the water with his harness upon
his back. The Popes of Rome, being as great persecutours as ever were any, of
Christ and his Church, many of them have had very wretched and shameful ends.
Alexander the sixth, was taken away with the devil, by whom he aspyred to the
papacy. Look upon our papists in Queen Mary's days, and see how a great
many of them dyed. We ^acke not examples among us even fresh in memory in
those days. Let a men consider with himself, the unhappy and unfortunate
ends of the last race of the kings in France, and he shall say, that Christ
even in his glory does marueilously defend his Gospel, with the professors
thereof, and rewards their enemies according to their deserts. So that a man
may justly say and confess with David, Doubtees there is a God that judges in
the earth, surely there is a Christ that defends his Church: for he shall
tread down our enemies under us, and destroy them that rise up against us,
Psalm. 60. By these examples then we may have comfort and persuade our selves
that are the little stock of Christ, y^ as he has done already, so he will do
always for his: for he is able still* and his hand is not shortened, but as long
as it was, neither is he changed. And let us with Peter say and believe, that
the Lord knows to deliver the godly out of tentation, and to reserve the
unjust unto the day of judgment under punishment. I would admonish therefore
the wicked, and the obstinate, and persecuting Papists of Christ's Gospel, to
learn to take heed by these lessons above rehearsed, and not to go on still
to provoke and kindle the great wrath and anger of Christ against them, seeing
he is armed with vengeance and te^^our against them, and now sits in his
throne of majesty. These are the things that we have to bear in mind upon
this article of our faith, concerning Christ his ascension. The first point was
of the ascension it self, not into the air or clouds, but into heaven,
proved by the manifest word of God, the holy scriptures: the second, the
glory and power of it, showing the end of it, which was, to sit at Gods
right hand, to govern all things: the third point was the great assurance of
faith that comes to us by it, and the comfort that we conceive by his so
glorious ascension into heaven for us. Now let us humble our selves before
this Lord Jesus Christ, in giving him first most hearty and entire thanks
for all his benefits bestowed upon us, especially for this, that he has
ascended into heaven as a conqueror, and taken possession of heaven for us
already: and let us pray unto him, that as he is ascended already in body,
so we in the mean while may thither ascend in mind and heart, where true
joys are only to be found. And seeing he is made governor of heaven, and
earth and al, pray we him, that he would govern and defend us here in earth,
by the assistaunce of his holy spirit, till we all mee^e together at our
general ascension in the unity of faith, and acknowledging of the Son of
GOD, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the age of the fullness of him.
And because he is of power sufficient, let us beseech him, to bridle and
stop the mouths of (...), to confound Antichrist, which seeks by all
means to extinguish his truth, that he would also hasten his (...) unto
judgment for his elects sake, which groan under the cross. These things he
grant unto us, which is able, even Jesus Christ the only wise, mighty, and
immortal God, to whom with his father, and his holy spirit, be rendered all
praise, and glory, and dominion, for ever and ever: so be it.

The seventh Lecture upon the seventh article of our Christian faith:
From thence shall he come to judge both the quick and the dead.
THis is the seventh article of our belief, but the sixth and last of the^ that
concern ye person of Christ, and only of all the rest of the five going
before, remains to be fulfilled, and in his time accomplished. For as
concerning the other articles of our savior Christ's person, which are the
five former, we believe most constantly, that they are al already performed
and verified: namely, first, that he has been conceived, secondly, borne,
thirdly, died, fourthly, risen, again, fifthly, and ascended into heaven.
Only this we believe yet to be to come, that is, to judge the quick and the
dead. The meaning of this article is this: I that am a Christian man, woman, or
child, do believe assuredly, that Christ shall come again visibly in the
great and latter day of judgment, with glory and power from heaven, as he
was seen to go up accompanied with his holy angels, to judge all the world most
justly, both those that are already dead, and those that he shall find alive at
his coming, and that none shall escape his judgment seat, 2. Cor. 5. to this
end, that the good may be rewarded with everlasting life and immortality, and
the wicked punished with everlasting death and destruction, from the presence
of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, 2. These. 1. The Lord Jesus even
in this life, does show and set forth unto all the world most wonderful
signs and tokens, both of his mercy to the elect, and justice to ye reprobate:
but because his kingdom is not of this world, therefore our faith must amount
hier to consider of his last coming, wherein he shall show as great glory
and majesty, as he did humility and meekenes in his first coming in the
flesh. For as we do believe that he is appointed of his father, to be the
savior and redeemer of mankind: so do we also confess him to be ordained
the great judge of the universal world, and that it is he alone that shall
judge with unspeakable glory, both great and small at his appearance: so that
although many men think that there is no general judgment, yet at the last,
they shall feel that this judge shall summo^ them all to appear most
fearfully before his imperial throne of majesty. And this judgment of
Christ stands with good reason and justice, that it should be openly seen
and perceived of all men at the last, lest either the wisdom of the flesh or
ma^s reason, or the multitude of ye wicked should be able justly to charge us
(as they do most unjustly) that we feign to our selves a God, a Lord, a Christ,
and such an head as never shows him self, nor was seen of men. Wherefore to
avoid this slander and reproach of the blasphemous mouths which say, Where is
now your God? let him show him self: we (I say) do believe, that one day he
shall come to judge the whole earth. For this is that, that Saint John says
in his Revelation, 1. 7. Behold, he comes with clouds, and every eye shall
see him, even they which pierced him through, and all kinreds of the earth
shall wayle before him, even so, Amen. Let the wicked men therefore, and the
mockers of this judgment, triumph never so much, yet shall they not be able
to hinder or disanull the device and purpose of the Lord. They do in deed
bend their tongues like bows, to shoot out blasphemies against the Lord,
saying, Where is the promise of his coming? But let those men understand,
that as the Lord Jesus was seen to go up into heaven, so shall he come
down again from heaven, as the Angels of God reported, Acts 1. 11. And
albeit they will not believe it, but make a jest of it, yet they shall feel it
one day to their great pain and sorrow. It is meet then, and requisite, that
he that was (for our salvation before the judgment seat of man) unjustly
condemned, should show in the end how great his jurisdiction and authority
over al flesh is, and what his justice requires. Seeing then we must all
appear before the judgment seat of Christ, to receive every man according to
his works which he has done here in his body, whether they be good or bad:
for the more orderly proceeding in this matter, let us consider how many
things are necessarily to be marked in this judgment. There are seven points
to be observed in this matter: first, the judgment it self, secondly, ye
judge, thirdly, the persons that shall be judged, fourthly, the manner of this
judgment, after what sort it shall be, fifthly, the time, sixthly, ye place, and
last of all, the final cause or end of this judgment, wherefore it is
ordained and reserved. But before we speak of these things in order, we must
answer to an objection, which is commonly made of the unskillful and unlearned
against this judgment: for when they hear of this judgment, they ask to what
end it shall be, seeing every man that dies, is judged already, either to
heaven, or else to hell, as soon as the breath is out of his body: therefore it
may seem that this day is superfluous and needeles. To this we make answer,
that judgment is of two sorts, for there is a particular judgment, and a
general. In ye particular judgment of God, every man is judged in soul
incontinently, as he departs this life, but this is for the soul only. In ye
general judgment, both the body and soul shall be joined together, and so
enter either into joy, if they believe in Christ, or into pain, if they
believe not. For until this day the man is but imperfect, as having the soul
only in bliss, and not his body, which shall in this judgment be raised
up, and put unto the soul. To this end is the general judgment: and this
article does prove unto us the resurrection of our bodies: for if all must be
judged, even in the bodies also, then the bodies of the dead must rise again,
and come to judgment, to receive in their bodies, either everlasting life to
immortality, if they have done well here: or else everlasting death, to their
endless pain and grief. Again, this day is to make manifest unto all men in
the world, every man's estate, either to salvation or condemnation: for all
shall appear together before their judge visibly. The scripture does make
mention of three commings of Christ. The one was in the flesh among the Jews
in very poor estate, base and simple, when he did redeem us: this we do
believe to be past and fulfilled already according to the Prophets, against
that wicked opinion of the Jews, which deny he is come in the flesh. Another
coming of Christ is by his holy spirit, grace, power, and word into our
hearts: and when his ministers do come unto us in his name to preach his
word and Gospel unto us, then is he said to come unto us. Of this coming
unto every faithful man's conscience, our savior speaks of in the 14. of
Saint John's Gospel on this wise, If any man love me, he will keep my word,
and my father will love him, and we will come unto him, and dwell with him. And
again, a little before, He that loves me, shall be loved of my father, and I
will love him, and will show mine own self unto him. So we do pray that his
kingdom of grace may come unto us, and wholly possess our hearts and minds.
But neither of these commings do we speak of in this place. The third
coming of Christ is to judgment most royally in his glorious kingdom, with
all his mighty and holy Angels, and whole number of his Saints, at the last
day, when all shall appear before him. The last judgment of Christ (which
was the first part of our division) is most certain and sure to come: if any
doubt of it, let him read these places for his confirmation, for to reckon
the^ all up, were too long and tedious a matter: Matthew. 24. 25. Mark. 13. Luke
21. John 5. Act. 1. 17. and 10. chap. Romans 14. 1. Cor. 15. 2. Cor. 5. Phil. 3.
Colo. 3. 1. These. 4. 2. These. 1. 1. Tim. 6. 2. Tim. 4 Titus 2. Heb. 9. Iam. 5.
8. 1. Pet. 1. and 5. cha. 2. Pet. 3. 1. Ioh. 3. 2. Jude 14. Revel. 1. and 20.
chap. This judgment of Christ shall be most just and upright: and although he
were most falsely judged and condemned, yet shall he judge his enemies most
truly, John 8. from whose judgment it shall not be lawful for any man to
appeal. We know, says Paul, that the judgment of God is according to
righteousness, Ro^. 2. And Abraham affirmed the like, and so did David, The Lord
shall judge his people with equity. Although judges here be corrupt and faulty,
as bribed with gifts, affectioned with friends, lead with fear, moved with
favor, or by any other means induced to pervert justice, yet Christ's
judgment shall have none of all those corruptions and infirmities. He shall
have most divine, yea, infinite wisdom, that he be not deceived, not only to
see things open and manifest, but also to judge and to discern the very
secrets and thoughts of the heart, as Paul says, He will lighten the things
hid in darkness, and make the counsels of the hearts manifest, 1. Cor. 4.
His sentence shall be sincere and sound, not partial, inclining more to one
part, then to another, in whom neither the love of friends, nor fear of
foes, nor bribery by gifts and rewards, shall have any part or place. For
there is no respect of persons with Christ, Roman. 2. Seeing then (beloved)
that this judgment is so severe and straight, let us be diligent, that we may
be found of him in peace without spot, and blameless, as S. Peter does
counsel us. Thus much for ye judgment it self, which was the first thing
proposed. Now let us come to the second part, to consider who is our judge. It
is said, that he shall come to judge, that is, Christ: for to him is al
judgment committted, and the father does judge in the person of his son,
John. 5. because all men should honor the son, as they honor ye father. I
need not to bring many places for the proof of this, the scriptures are full
of it, that Christ is ye supreme judge, and I hope I need not to persuade men
in the doctrine. Let us rather see what we may gather out of this doctrine, and
apply it to our consciences, for our consolation and comfort. The use of this
doctrine, y^ Christ is our judge, is two fold: either in respect of ye wicked,
or else as concerning ye good. As concerning the good, y^ Christ shall be their
only judge, they ca^ not but greatly rejoice and conceive a wonderful comfort,
yt their savior and brother shall be their judge, who although he will not judge
partially, yet surely being a brother and savior, yea ye head of his body,
will judge most mercifully: therefore our savior bids us, when we see this
judgment draw near, to lift up our heads and to rejoice, because our
redemption draws on. For how should we fear, when Christ will make us judges
with him? as he says, Ye that have followed me in ye regeneration, shall sit
upon twelve thrones, and judge ye twelve tribes of Israel. And Paul says, Do
ye not know, that ye saints shall judge the world? Not that we shale be judges
with Christ, but yt we shall allow and approve his judgment. For to speak
properly, the elect shall not be judged, but the wicked shall be judged to
everlasting fire. This certainly is no small comfort for weak consciences, to
consider yt the prince shall judge his own people and subjects, the head his
members, and the advocate his clients. How then can he condemn those, for
whose safeguard he does come, and will ratifye y^ promise of everlasting bliss,
which he has promised here in this life by his Gospel? We shall not the^ be
cited before any other tribunal seat, the^ of our loving bridegro^e, who shall
make himself ready to receive his spouse and wife, unto himself for ever.
Reuelat. 21. This day is called the marriage day of the Lamb, and his supper:
and his wife shall then be arrayed with pure and fine linen and shining, which
is ye righteousness of saints. Let us therefore be glad and rejoice, and give
glory to him yt sits upon ye throne. There can be no day here so joyful as
this, yea al comfort is nothing to this, yt Christ shall be our judge. He cannot
cast away the^ for whom he has died: he cannot deny himself. Paul when he
considered of this judge and judgment, rejoiced eue^ in prison, yt a crown of
righteousness was laid up for him, which the righteous judge Christ Jesus would
give unto him in yt day, 2. Tim. 4. And here we learn a very good lesson by
the way, yt if Christ be our judge, we must (when we ca^ not have redress
here, or judgment equally ministered unto us) refer our causes and matters of
injury to him, who is able to reform all things, and will at his coming. So
that we must not, which are private men, revenge our own quarrels and injuries,
but commit them al to him without murmuring, and he will judge them justly.
Then this does teach us patience, to wait for this coming of Christ, to
judge all things orderly. And this good counsel did Saint James give in his
time to the poor oppressed laborers and husbandmen, which were defrauded by
ye rich men, and had their hier and wages kept back: he does comfort them in
this respect, yt Christ will come to judge their cause, saying, Be patient,
brethren, until the coming of the Lord, and settle your hearts: for the
coming of our Lord draws nere. Yea and our savior Christ said, Luke 18.
that God will avenge his elect, which cry day and night unto him, and that
shortly. Whereby we may gather also, that the day of judgment is not far off
as the wicked do suppose, but draws on, every day nearer then other. Let us
therefore, as our savior does counsel us, watch and pray continually, that we
may be able to stand before him at his coming to judgment. We see then that
we must commit our causes to Christ, and offer our complaints against the
wicked to him, and then doutles with our eyes we shall behold and see the reward
of the wicked, Psalm. 91. As this is very comfortable doctrine to the godly, to
hear that Christ is their judge and auditor of al their causes: so is it as
doleful and grievous a thing to the wicked and cast awaies, to wey with
themselves, that Christ their enemy shall be their judge, whom they have always
in their life time hated, made a mock of, and had in utter contempt, both him,
his Gospel, and ministers of his word and sacraments. This shall pearce them to
the very heart, to see him their judge, whom they could never abide: yea his
sight, and presence shall be so fearful, and terrible unto them all, that they
shall curse the time, that ever they were borne: for they shall hide themselves
in dens, and rocks of the mountains, and shall say to the hills, Fall upon
us, and hide us from the presence of him that sits upon the throne, and from
the wrath of the Lamb: for the great day of his wrath is come, and who can
stand? These and the like words shall they utter for dolor and anguish of
mind, and yet find no comfort: for they have refused the Lord and God of all
comfort here upon the earth, and therefore shall not have him there to be their
comforter. And S. John does tell us who these are, to whom this judge Jesus
shall be so fierce and cruel: even the kings of the earth, and the great men,
and the rich men, and the chief captains, and the mighty men, and every
bond man, and every free man, Revelation 6. not meaning all kings, and noble
men, but some of every state and sort of men, yea, the greater part of every
degree of men, especially of great men: for not many noble, not many wise, not
many mighty men are called to the knowledge of ye Gospel, lest they should
brag: but rather the poor, the base, the unwise are chosen, because they
should not vant of their worthiness, as Paul does tell us in the 1.
Corinthians. 1 Chap. most notably. To conclude this part, seeing the Lord shall
be judge to the wicked, even the Lord Jesus, to render flaming fire, and
vengeance unto them that know not God, and obey not his Gospel, this may teach
them to fear and to live somewhat more orderly, if not for the love of God, of
heaven, and virtue: yet for fear of hell, death and damnation, to avoid ye
punishment that will light upon sin at that day. Let us come to ye third
point. The persons that shall come before this judge to be examined and tried
in judgment, they are said here to be the quick and the dead, that is to
say, al, both ye living and the dead. But here some may ask this question,
Seeing it is appointed to al me^ once to die, because they are mortal, how is
it said here, that some shall be quick and alive at the coming of Christ? To
this we make answer, that they that shall be alive at the second coming of
Christ to judgment shall as it were dye, for they shall all be changed and
renewed, and that suddenly, as if they had been long dead before: and this is
the meaning of Paul, 1 Corinthians. 15. We shall not all dye, that is, we shall
not all be laid in the grave as others, but we shall all be in a moment
altered, which shall be in stead of a death unto us. So we see what we have to
answer to this question. The persons then yt are to be su^moned and cited to
appear by ye voice of ye Archangel and trumpet of God, in a word generally
are all men, that ever have been from the first man Adam, or shall be to the last
man that shall be borne here upon the earth. None can escape this judge, or hide
himself away from his sight, which sees into the bottom of the sea, even
into the midst of the earth and hell: none shall be forgotten, not the lest
child that is, for he has all written in his books, both good and bad, great
and small: for these are the words of the holy Ghost, We must all appear
before the judgment seat of Christ. And again, As I live, says the Lord,
every knee shall bow to me, and every tongue confess to me. None then shall be
missing: no not the great Monarchs, Emperors, and Kings of the earth shall
help themselves here or flee away, but they shall be brought to judgment, and
stand at ye bar as others do, and be brought as low as the lowest. Well, let
us apply this doctrine for our use, to profit by it. Of this doctrine, that we
must al come to judgment, and none escape, Paul gathers this argument and
lesson: that knowing the terror of the Lord, we should do our duty, that
both dwelling at home and removing from home, we may be acceptable unto him.
For it made Paul the more rou^dlie to do his office and function in preaching,
saying, We knowing this, persuade men, and are made manifest unto God, and I
trust also that we are made manifest unto your consciences, 2. Corin. 5.
Fourthly, let us see the manner and order of this general judgment. Our
Savior Christ does most lively describe it in the 25. of Matthewes Gospel,
saying, When the Son of man comes in his glory, and all the holy angels
with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory, and before him shall
be gathered all nations, and he shall separate them one from another, as a
shephearde separateth the sheep from the goats, and he shall set the sheep on
his right hand, and the goats on his left: then shall the king say to them on
his right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, take the inheritance of the
kingdom prepared for you, from the foundation of the world: For I was hungry,
and ye gave me meat, I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink, I was a stranger,
and ye took me in unto you, I was naked, and ye clothed me, I was sick, and
ye visited me, I was in prison, and ye came unto me, and so forth. Then shall he
say to them on his left hand, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire,
which is prepared for the devil and his angels: For I was an hungered, and ye
gave me no meat, I thirsted, and ye gave me no drink, etc. And these shall
go into everlasting pain, and the righteous into life eternal. Here we see
the form and order of this judgment, described most lively unto us in the
person of Christ a King, putting some on the right hand, and some on the left
hand. S. Paul also does set it out unto us most excelle^tly, that the Lord
Jesus shall descend from heaven with a shoute, and with the voice of the
Archangel, and Trumpet of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first, and we
which remain alive, shall be caught up with them also into the clouds, to
meet the Lord in the air: and so shall we be ever with the Lord. Where
note, that he ^etteth it out only for the comfort of the godly, making no
mention in this place of the wicked. Saint Peter says, It shall be as a thief
in the night, in the which the heavens shall pass away with a noise, and the
elements shall melt with heat, and the earth with the works that are
therein, shall be burnt up. 2. Pet. 3. S. John in the Revelation does very
effectually express this thing in like manner: for he says, that a great
white throne was set which he saw, and one that sat upon it, and the dead
stood both great and small before God, the books were opened, ye sea, and
death, and hell gave up their dead, and every man was judged according to the
things written in the books, Revel. 20. We learn this good lesson by it, as
Peter does teach us, that seeing the manner of this great and last day of
judgment by Christ, shall be so terrible in respect of the alteration of the
creatures, we ought to be holy in all conversation and godliness, looking,
and hasting for the coming of that day of the Lord Jesus to judgment. And
here furthermore we gather, that heaven and earth shall be dissolved, and made
new, that this world now shall have an end, as it had a beginning, contrary
to the false opinion of the Philosophers and wicked Atheistes of our time,
which think that all things shall continue (as they do) for ever. Thus much
for the manner of the judgment. Now as concerning the time, our Savior Christ
has forewarned us, that it is not for us to know the times and seasons which
the father has put in his own power, Act. 1. For of that day and hour,
knows no man: no not the angels which are in heaven, neither the Son him
self, but my Father only (says Christ.) Which is to be understood, that
Christ knows not the latter day as he is man, but as he is the eternal God,
and one with his Father, even his wisdom, he knows it, and al things else.
We see then, that the day and hour is most uncertain, and yet the thing it
self most certain that it shall be. But although this day and hour be
unknown, yet notwithstanding, our Savior Christ has given us signs and
tokens of his coming, which may stir us up the more warily to wait for his
coming. These things our Savior said should come to pass before he came,
and we see they are fulfilled already: many shall come in his name to deceive
us, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many: we shall hear of wars:
nation shall rise against nation, realm against realm, there shall be famine,
earthquakes, and pestilence in diverse places: the godly shall be afflicted,
killed, and hated of al men for Christ's sake: many shall be offended at the
Gospel, and betray one another: the father the son, and the son the father:
the brother against the brother, shall rise, and put him to death: false
prophets shall arise and deceive many, iniquity shall be increased, and the love
of many shall be cold, and the Gospel shall be preached unto all nations,
and then shall the end come. Furthermore there shall be signs in the sun, and
in the moon, and in the stars: ye sun shall be darkened, the moon shall not
give her light, and the stars of heaven shall fall: which things have come to
pass, whither you take them literally, or allegorically: for both the sun
and moon has been eclipsed, and signs and wonders have appeared in the
stars, and if ye take the son for the word of God and Gospel, we see it
has been darkened, and abused by the Papists. The moon which does represent
the Church, which takes her light from the sun Jesus Christ, has been
persecuted and turned into blood, and not given her light by reason of
troubles: and the stars which are likened to the preachers, have fallen away,
and otherwise stepped aside. These things and the like may put us in mind, that
the coming of Christ is not far off, even as when we see the trees begin to
budde, we know then that the spring time is near. We know furthermore that the
time of this judgment shall be very sudden, as the lightnings, or as the coming
of a thief, and as the sudden crying out of a woman with child. For as it was
in the days of ye flood in Noes time, the waters came and took them all away,
so shall the coming of the son of man be. Likewise also, as it was in the
days of Lot, they ate, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted,
they buylt, they gave in marriage, and married wives, but in ye day that Lot
went out of Sodom, it rayned fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them
all. After these ensamples shall it be in the day when the Son of man is
revealed. And surely this day is hid from our eyes, that we should be prepared
every day, and not be secure or careless, to differ repentance, and put it off
from day to day, as a great many do among us. Seeing then the time is at hand,
and yet unknown, we ought to be prepared and be in a readiness, and to follow
our Masters counsel: for he says, Take heed to your selves, least at any time
your hearts be oppressed with surfeting and drunkenness, and cares of this life,
and least that day come on you at unawares: for as a snare shall it come upon
all them that dwell upon the face of the whole earth. Watch therefore and pray
continually, that ye may be counted worthy to escape all these things that
shall come to pass, and that ye may stand before the Son of man. This day
is as the day and time of our death, as we know not when we shall die, and yet
it is most certain that we shall die: so it is with this day. And whether a
man should look for the day of his death, or this day of judgment first,
truly I can not tell: they are both so uncertain, neither have we longer
warrant of time prescribed unto us in the scriptures of the one, then of the
other. I pray God, the Lord Jesus may find us as good servants, doing his
will and work at his coming, that we may have our candles burning in our
hands, with oil in our lamps, and the marriage garment on our backs, ready
to open the door, when he comes and knocks for us. Happy shall we be if the
Lord find us so doing: otherwise, if he find us smiting our fellow servants,
eating and drinking, and being drunken, he shall come upon us at unawares, and
cut us in pieces, and give us our portion with the unbelievers and hypocrites,
where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Let us therefore I beseech you
brethren by the Lord Jesus, knowing the time is short and at hand, even in
the doors, gird up the loins of our mind, that when our Savior knocks, we
may open unto him immediately. Thus we see what we have to note and learn upon
the time of the coming of Christ unto judgment. The place also is to be
considered, the nations and kinreds of the people that shall appear that day,
are so many and innumerable, that the earth shall not be able to conteyne them
all: therefore Saint Paul says, that we shall be caught up in the clouds, to
meet the Lord in the air. So that all shall be taken up into the air as the
place of judgment. But I come to the last point which is more material to our
purpose, for what end this great and last day is reserved and kept in store.
It has two ends or causes, why it is ordained of the Lord: the one is, that
the godly may be delivered out of their miseries and troubles, which they have
here stoutly endured for Christ's sake, and be received into everlasting life.
The other is, that the wicked and reprobate, and all the company of infidels,
which have herecontemned the Lord, and lived in pleasure and delites of the
flesh, may be justly punished as they have well deserved, with everlasting
fire and brimstone, which is the second death. For it might seem if there were
no judgment or life after this, yt the Lord were notiust in his doings: for
neither are ye godly and ryghteous rewarded many times in this life, neither
are the ungodly punished for their offenses while they live here, for the most
part. Now God is most just, which will reward all godliness and virtue, and
severely punish vice and wickedness. These two ends, does our Savior mention
in the general judgment: the one sort says he, shall go into everlasting
life, and the other sort into everlasting fire, Matthew. 25. Saint Paul likewise
does make mention of these causes, in the second epist. of the Thessalonians,
the first chapter, showing as well what the good shall have, as the bad, saying
on this wise, It is a righteous thing with God, to recompense tribulation to
them that trouble you, and to you which are troubled, rest with us, when the
Lord Jesus shall show him self from heaven with his mighty angels in flaming
fire, rendering vengeance unto them that do not know GOD, and which obey not
the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, which shall be punished with everlasting
perdition from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power: thus
much for the wicked. Now follows reward for the good, when he shall come the
be glorified in his saints, and to be made marvelous in all them that
believe in that day. Here we may have a notable discourse, as is in any place
of scripture, why our savior Christ shall come to judgment, both in respect of
the good and bad: yea, the wicked angels and spirits them selves, as Jude
says, he has reserved in everlasting chains of darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day. This day is greatly desired and longed for of the
godly, and especially of the true ministers of Christ's Gospel, that their
cause may be known to be good against the wicked, and their sayings veryfied
concerning this judgment: for surely there is nothing almost seen of God, or
believed of the wicked until that day. Tell them of this day, and terrify
them with it, they make a mock at it, they count them for fools and simple
persons, that live a godly and Christian life: but when this day comes, (as
it will come certainly) it will make a recompense for all, and they shall find
all our sayings and threatenings to be most true. Therefore the godly desire it
in respect of Gods glory chiefly, which the wicked have defaced. A great many
of them think that there is neither hell nor heaven, God nor Devil, and that
all are but fables that we speak of this day, and so they grow to an utter
contempt of God and all godliness. But (as the Lord lives) they shall find it
true by experience, which they would not here embrace by faith: yea, they
shall confess themselves stark fools, and the godly men to be wise in
deed, Wisdom 5. Christ Jesus shall be that great Lord and rich master of
the house, which shall come to take an account of his servants talentes given
unto them to increase and use to his honor and glory, and to the good and
diligent servants shall he give rewards and joy, but to the unprofitable
servants, stripes and pain eternal. This shall be the new married bridegroom
and husband, which shall come to make a choice of the wise and chaste virgins,
which have kept them selves pure unto him, from the foolish and unchaste,
which have defiled them selves with the wicked world. In that day Christ
shall be that good and diligent husbandman, which shall come to gather the wheat
in the time of harvest into his barnes for his own use, but shall burn the
chafe with unquenchable fire. And to conclude, he shall be that great
shepherd which shall divide the lambs and sheep from the goats, the one to
sit on his right hand in joy, the other to sit on his lift hand in
sorrow: to this end no doubt shall our savior Christ come, and then shall it
be said, O happy and thrice happy was he that was a faithful servant, a
chaste virgin to Christ, the good corn, the meek lamb of Jesus Christ. But
this of the wicked spoken, then shall be too late, and repentance at that time
shall be in vain. I counsel all men therefore that will not there repent that
ever they were borne, as the wicked shall do, that they would in the name of
Jesus Christ, repent here betime, and ask the spirit of the Lord to amend
their lives, that they put not off from day to day, until they are old, or
have all things as they would. The Lord will come suddenly upon such an one,
taking him away in his sin. If we would lay the remembrance of this
judgment day often before our eyes, to stir up our selves withal, and to
awaken our dull spirits and senses, it would keep us in great fear and awe
before our Lord GOD, and draw us from much sin and abomination, which now
for lack of thinking upon this day, is committed every where, both at home and
abroad, as well in the country and base men's houses, as in the court and
great men's places. Well, we should do as a godly father did in the primitive
Church, that whether we eat or drink, whether we sleep or wake, or
whatsoever we do, we should think always this day to be at hand, and the
voice sounding in our cares, arise ye dead and come to judgment. Notable of
al others, is that lesson that Solomon does give unto us in the book of the
preacher, the 11 and last Chapters, concerning this matter: he mocketh and
derideth them that delight in sin, as you see men commonly do, and afterward
threatens and terrifieth them with this last judgment, saying, Rejoice O
young man in thy youth, and let thine heart cheer thee in the days of thy
youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes:
Mark now what sosowre sauce follows this sweet meat: but know, says he,
that for all these things, GOD will bring thee to judgment: for God will bring
every work into judgment, and every secret thing, whether it be good or evil.
A notable glass for all men to look upon, is this final judgment. We are
taught by these things, that our felicity and pleasure consists not in this
life, neither can we have it here, but it is in the life to come laid up for
us in Christ. Here are confuted all worldlings, which think there is no other
life after this, no joy or pain. This day can not be fearful to the godly,
for it is called our blessed hope, Titus. 2. and the godly do love it, 2.
Timothy 4. If it be fearful and terrible to any, as it is, it is to those
that have no hope of heaven, and to those that put their whole pleasure and
felicity here below in their money and ill gotten riches. To the fearful
and vnbeleeuyng, and the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and
sorcerers, and idolaters, and liars, and covetous persons, this day shall be
fearful and terrible: yea, it shall make them all to quake for fear, for
they shall have their part in the lake that burns with fire and brymstone,
which is the second death, Revelation 21. This day and the cogitation thereof,
serves most fitly, to put men in mind of their duties and callyngs before
the Lord, for so our Savior Christ applied it in his time in his Gospel,
saying to them that were worldely minded, What shall it profit a man, though
he should win the whole world, if he lose his own soul, or what shall a man
give for recompense of his soul? mark his reason, why it is dangerous, thus
to hazard and venture his soul: for, says he, the son of man shall come in
the glory of his father with his angels, and then shall he give to every man
according to his deeds, Mat. 16. so does Paul charge Timo. especially by this
judgment day, saying, I charge thee before God, and before the Lord Jesus
Christ, which shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and in his
kingdom, Preach the word, be instant, in season and out of season, improoue,
rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine, 2. Timothy 4. As if he
should say in effect, There is a day of judgment kept in store, therefore do
thy duty diligently. This day of judgment shall make us very careful to
show forth all good works: For Christ shall pronounce the definitive
sentence upon all men according to their works, not that the godly have
deserved or merited heaven by their good works, that is too great a thing to
be gotten by works: for Christ has already deserved that for us by his good
works, if we believe in him. But Christ shall make mention of works, to
show and to signify to all the world, that the godly have not been idle or
unfruitful in this life, as the hypocrites are, whose sheep skins then
shall be plucked off, and then shall they appear to be ravening wolves: for
this cause shall the judgment be according to works, to stir men up here,
while they hear this, to good works, and to make manifest to al men, that the
godly have walked innocently, and that the wicked have followed the lusts of
the flesh. Our faith can not be seen, and therefore Christ shall speak
according to the effect and consequent of it, which is seen, and that is good
works. Christ before shows the cause of heaven for y^ elect, not their
works, but because they were blessed of his father, and that the kingdom was
prepared for the^ before they were borne, or did any good works for it, yea,
before the fundations of the world were laid, as Paul Ephesians. 1, shows most
notably. Wherefore good Christians, flee the corruption which is in the world,
and give great diligence to bring forth good works, for those are good and
profitable unto me^, and so ye shall be known to be good and fruitful trees.
Join moreover virtue with your faith, and with virtue, knowledge, with
knowledge, te^perance, with te^pera^ce, patience, with patience, godliness, with
godliness, brotherly kindness, and with brotherly kindness, love. For if these
things be among you, and abou^de, they will make you that ye neither shall be
idle, nor unfruitful in ye acknowledging of our Lord Jesus Christ: and he
that has not these things, is blind, and can not see a far off, and has
forgotten that he was purged from his old sins. Give therefore diligence to
make your calling and election sure, for if ye do these things, ye shall never
fall: for by this means an entering shall be ministered unto you abundantly into
the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ. We have heard
now the six articles that appertain to the person of Jesus Christ, and
contain the benefits he has wrought for us, wherein is our whole salvation.
For if we seek salvation, his name Jesus, does show it is in him alone. If
we desire purity, it is in his conception. If we require a kind of
familiarity and gentleness, wherewith he has made him self like unto us, we
shall have it in his nativity. Would thou have redemption for thy sins?
look it in his passion and death. If newnes of life, thou have it in his
resurrection. If inheritance of the heavenly kingdom, it is in his ascension.
If thou ask a full possession of it, thou shall have it when he comes to
judgment. To be brief, If thou desire the gifts of the holy ghost,
absolution, remission of sins, satisfaction, and purgation for thy uncleanness,
reconciliation, mortification of the flesh, and at a word, all treasures of
every heavenly gift, thou have them all in Jesus Christ, as in a well ever
springing, and a fountain that is never dry. Of whose fulness thou and all men
have received, and he is made of God the father unto thee, wisdom,
righteousness, holiness, and redemption, that thou should glory in him
alone* Take heed therefore, that seeing he is all in all to thee, that thou
go not from him to any other, or ascribe any one part or portion, never so
little, of thy salvation to any creature whatsoever. For if thou do, thou
marrest all, and Jesus Christ will have all or never a whit, as Esaie says, I
will not give my glory to an other. Well, to conclude this article, let us
give to Jesus Christ most humble and hearty thanks, that he will one day come
down from heaven, to fetch us up thither unto him, to immortal blessedness:
and let us in the mean time desire of him the spirit of patience, to wait for
his coming to judgment, for our full redemption, that we may have our oil,
our garments, and our lamps ready, that we may be waking when he shall
knock, and open the door forthwith unto him, that in so doing, we may enter
in with him to the marriage, and there reign perpetually with him in the glory
of his father. Which he grant unto us for his sons sake, to whom with the
holy ghost, three persons, and one immortal God in unity, be rendered all
praise, glory, and giving of thanks, from this time forth, for ever more.
Come Lord Jesus quickly, Amen, so be it.

The eight Lecture upon the eight article of our Christian faith:
I believe in the holy Ghost.
Having ended two parts of our Christian faith, ye one concerning God the
father in the first article, the other concerning Jesus Christ, the second
person in trinity, contained in the six articles following: now follows in
order ye third part, concerning our faith in God ye holy Ghost, which is the
third person in trinity. And this is ye eight article of our belief: I
believe in the holy Ghost, that is to say, I that am a Christian man, do
believe and trust in God the holy ghost, the third person in the blessed
trinity, which proceeds equally from the father and the son, being the
natural and essential power of them both, and of the same substance. Which
spirit sanctifies and comfort me in all troubles, and assures me that I
am the child of God, and servant of Jesus Christ, and shall have his benefits
plentifully powered upon me. Out of this article we learn two things, first,
what is the holy ghost, secondly, what are his effects and works, as well in
it self, as in man, in whose heart it works, and moves him forward to that
which is good, to embrace and follow it with all earnestnes, but to hate and
abhor from the heart, that which is naught and wicked. This holy ghost or
spirit, is the everlasting power and infinite might of God the father, which
spirit is no creature but a creator of all things, and very God, because we
are here taught to believe in him, which suerly except he were very God, were
idolatry to do: for we must not believe in any creature, or put our trust in
any, but in God only. And that the holy ghost is God, which certain heretics
have denied, it is manifest in the fifth chapter of the Acts of the Apostles,
where saint Peter speaking of the holy ghost, names him God. For he
reprehendeth Ananias and Sapphira his wife, for their hypocrisy and
dissimulation, and tells them that they lied unto the holy ghost, and
immediately after says, that they lied not unto man, but unto God. In the first
of Genesis, it is said, that the spirit of the Lord moved upon the waters.
This was the third person in trinity, which except he had been God, could not
have so moved upon this great depth, and secretly by his power and majesty,
preserved and maintained it from falling to nothing. David says, All things
were made and created by the breath of his mouth. Therefore if he made al
things, he was very God. For this is proper to God alone, to make and to create
things. That argument of Paul in the 1. Cor. 2. chap. does sufficiently prove
this matter unto us, where he says, that this spirit searches al things,
yea ye deep things of God, and that no man knows the things of God, but the
spirit of God. Now if ye spirit of God knows al things, searches al things,
the^ is he very God, for no creature does this. If this be so, the^ we rightly
believe in the holy ghost, and here we gather this singular comfort, that we
may pray to this holy ghost at all times for his help, and to impart some of
his knowledge unto us, because he has all knowledge and understanding. This is
ye doctrine that we gather generally of this, yt the holy ghost is true and
very God. For verily, except he were God, Christ would not command his
disciples to baptize in the name of the holy ghost, putting him in equal
condition and estate with the father, and him self: Not that we affirm that
there be three Gods, but this we mean: In the one and inseparable divine
nature and essence of God, we understand three persons by them selves, distinct
one from another. But this mystery of the trinity, may better be believed (and
so it is of ye faithful) then fitly expressed of any. I leave it therefore, to
speak any further of it until in the resurrection, we shall see it as it is,
and perceive that by sight, eue^ face to face, which now we conceive by our
faith only. Thus much of the holy ghost, the third person in this trinity.
Now let us consider the wonderful effects of it, which is a thing more
profitable for us. The effects of the holy ghost, are of two sorts: either as
they are considered in him self, or as they are in the children of God: the
effects of the holy ghost in him self, are the creation of the world, the
preservation of it with all things therein, from the beginning unto this day.
Wherein we learn to give thanks to this holy spirit, for his goodness extended
unto us, and to pray to him continually to maintain us by his power and
virtue, yt we fall not away from him.

For if he take away his strength and operation from us, we are as blind men
groping for the way. And this is that, that David speaks of in his Psalm
104. If thou hide thy face, they are troubled, meaning, all his creatures.
Again, If thou send forth thy spirit, they are created, and thou renuest
the face of the earth. But our purpose is especially to speak here of those
good gifts and effects, which this holy spirit does work in men, chiefly
in the elect. For there is no man, but has had some good gift at one time, or
an other, either in body or in soul, from this holy spirit. For strength,
beauty, learning, eloquence, wit, knowledge, utterance, policy, the gift of
healing, of tongues, of miracles, and such like, are from above, although these
are common, as well to the ill and reprobate, as to the good and elect sons
of God, as Paul does show, and declare more at large in the 12. 13. and 18.
chapters of the 1. Corinthians. Our meaning is to speak chiefly of the graces
of Gods spirit in the hearts of his chosen, as of faith, hope, and love
unfeigned, of the spirit of sanctification and adoption, which are proper only
to the elect and good, and are never communicated to the wicked. Of this spirit
spoke our savior Christ to his disciples, that he would send him upon them,
and that the world could not receive him. This is that spirit, by whom the
father does place, and put the elect in full possession of all the goods and
inheritance of Jesus Christ, and does keep and preserve us every hour, and
does make us partakers of all things necessary to salvation, which thing it
brings to pass, when as it does create in our hearts and beget yt
excellent instrument of faith, ye chiefest work of ye spirit, which brings
forth as a most fruitful tree, all other good fruits and works of a
Christian man. This faith does ye holy ghost engender in our hearts, when we
hear the Gospel of Christ preached: and it is confirmed and increased in us,
by ye duly and reverent receiving of the sacraments of Christ. By this faith
(after it is wrought in us by the motion and operation of the holy spirit, we
apprehend and take hold of all Christ's benefits, merits, works, and good
deeds whatsoever, and they are made and accounted ours, as if we had done
them our selves. O wonderful gift of ye holy ghost, yt works so precious a
jewel and pearl in our hearts, as far surmositeth ye price and value of
every thing beside! This is ye first effect of ye holy ghost, and is marvelous
in our eyes. An other property, and effect of this holy spirit, is
sanctification and holiness of life, in ye good and godly only, and therefore he
is called ye holy spirit, for this work of holiness in us. For as it is proper
to ye father to create, to ye son to redeem and ra^some: so in like sort it
is proper and peculiar to ye holy Ghost, to sanctify Gods children, and
effectually to move their minds to true holiness. And of this effect does S.
Paul speak in the 1. Cor. 6. showing the Corinthians that they were wicked
men, as fornicatours, idolatours, extortioners, covetous, thieves and such
like, but (says he) you are washed, but you are sanctified, but ye are
justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. As if
we would say, those good graces and gifts of God were wrought and imprinted in
their consciences and hearts, by the persuasion of ye holy ghost. Necessarily
therefore, after our belief in ye father, and ye son, follows our belief
in ye holy ghost: For whatsoever comes from the^, as all graces do, they are
signed and sealed unto us, by ye warrant of ye holy ghost. Wherefore, it is
fitly compared to a seal, whereby al ye promises of ye blessings of God
through Christ, are deeply engraven in our hearts, yt they ca^ never thence be
rased out any more, but shall continue for ever. As we see the writing to be to
no effect, without a man's hand and seal, no more are ye graces of God unto us,
to any purpose, unless he se^d ye earnest of his spirit into our hearts, which
does confirm the^ unto us, and assertaine our consciences, ye we are his
children, and he our father, Romans 8. This is a notable effect, and is in such
sort tasted of ye godly, and approved of the^, as neither ye wisedo^e of yt
world, nor ye sense and understanding of man is able to comprehend, neither ca^
yet be perceived by ye eyes of me^: for these things are spiritually judged and
discerned, and therefore no marvel, if godly me^ having ye spirit of God, and
speaking therewith, are mocked and derided of the carnal men in this world,
which have him not, neither can judge any thing of him, 1. Cor. 2. This spirit
although it be one and ye same, and not many, or divide, 1. Cor. 12. Ephesians. 4:
yet in respect of ye diverse and sundry effects and operatio^s of him in ye
church of Christ, he is called and termed by ye name of seven spirits, yt is,
of many, for his manifold gifts. As in ye fourth of ye Reuelat, it is said,
There were seven la^pes of fire burning before the throne, which are ye seven
spirits of God: that is, a seven fold spirit of God. This spirit is called, A
spirit of wisdom and understanding, a spirit of strength and counsel, and
the spirit of the fear of the Lord, because it gives al these qualityes unto
men, and does teach us, ye what good gift soever we have, we have it from ye
holy ghost, the giver of al, and whatsoever we lack, we should seek it
likewise of the same spirit, and none other. The holy Apostle, rekoning up the
diversities of the gifts of the holy spirit, affirms always, That it is one
and the self same spirit, that gives these things, as ye gift of wisdom, of
knowledge, of faith, of healing, of miracles, of prophecy, of discerning
spirits, of tongues, of interpretation of tongues: al these things (sayethe
he) works one and the same spirit, distributing to every man severally as he
will, 1. Cor. 12. This does also teach us, that this spirit has most
plentiful store of gifts, to enriche the body of the Church of Christ, and
that there is no want or lack in him. A great comfort unto us to know,
whither to resort inco^tinently for any good gift, and to have it forthwith:
For Christ has promised this holy spirit to them that seek, ask and knock
for it, Luke. 11. Do thou feel thy self to lack faith, or hope, or love,
or sanctification of life, or any good and necessary gift to edifte Gods Church
withal? Pray to this holy spirit, and use the ordinary means he wills
thee, as hearing the word, prayer, labor and study, and this spirit shall be
given thee. This spirit was so necessary, yt our savior promised to send it
above all things to his disciples, to comfort them with, when he departed from
them. For he breathed upon them, and said, Receive ye the holy ghost, Ioh. 20.
And afterward sent it down more plentifully upon them, in the likeness of fire
and cloven tongues, Act. 2. Where with they were not a little comforted in their
miseries and troubles against their adversaries, which were not able to resist
them, speaking with this holy spirit, Act. 6. This spirit is said to have
diverse names and appellations in ye scriptures, to comfort us withal in
te^tations. He is called the spirit of truth, to teach us the truth, and to
lead us into all truth. He is called also ye co^forter, because he
dothrefresh and comfort our hearts nothing more, the^ in te^tations and
adversities, as Paul found it true, in ye 2. Cor. 1. Cap. he is called ye power
of God, because he works al things, and nothing is impossible unto him:
so^etime he is named ye author of light, because he does illuminate, and
enlighte^ our dark and blind hearts, with the bright sunbea^es of his will and
pleasure. Briefly, he is ye well and fountain of al goodness, whereat we must
draw al things needeful for us in this life. This being so, it stands upon
every one of us, to labor by all means possible, to have this spirit
dwelling, and abiding with us for ever. For surely ye necessity of him is
great, and the use of him above most precious gold, silver, and pearls, Psalm.
19. David understood this right well to be so, for he prays that God would
not take away his spirit from him, but stablish him with his free spirit,
Psalm. 50. For where ye spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty and freedom
from the service of ye devil, and from ye slavery of sin. We are by nature, al
of us ye children of wrath and damnation, earthly minded, and always groueling
to ye ground, being ouerloden and burdened with the weight of our sins, except
we be raised and lifted up by this spirit, eue^ as ye soul maintains and
vpholdeth ye weak and brittle body. It comes to pass then in us, no
otherwise, the^ we see it by experience in bladders, ye which, if they be
empty, and cast into ye waters, for ye weight of the^, they sink forthwith,
and are drowned. But if they be blown, and filled with wind, wherewith they be
made light, they flyt above ye water, and swim. Eue^ so it fares with us: How
heavy we are with sin, our consciences (if we examine the^ well) will tell us.
Wherefore we cannot but sink, being tossed in ye waves of ye sea of this
world, and drowned with ye inordinate desires, passions, and affections of this
life, being altogether void of this spirit, which should bear us up from
these surges and te^pests of this life. But now if we be filled and replenished
with this heavenly spirit, the^ shall we swim above, and triumph over sin and
wickedness, and not be drowned with it. Wherefore Paul well weying with himself
this danger, if we were destitute of ye holy ghost, wills us yt we should not
be dru^ke with wine, wherein is excess, and which makes us so heavy and
drowsy, yt we sink: but says, yt should be filled with ye spirit, which
causes us to mount up to heaven. Therefore is it, yt he so often times
co^ma^deth us to walk in ye spirit, and to do ye works of ye spirit, which
are love, joy, peace, long suffering, ge^tlenes, goodness, faith, meekenes,
te^pera^ce. We are with out this spirit, as a ship in the sea without a
governor, or as a man without his eyes, in most dangerous case: for tell me, I
pray you, what is the cause why so many now a days run headlong to all
wickedness and abominatio^s? some to whoredo^e, some to covetousness, some to
dru^ke^nes, some to pride, some to theft and robberies, some to one sin, and
some to another? what is the reason, I say, but only this, because God has not
given his holy spirit unto the^, to defend the^ from these evils and mischiefs?
And this cause does S. Jude render in his Epistle, for having rekoned up the
natural properties and conditions of the wicked and reprobate, namely, that
they were despisers of government and autoryty, (as ye Anabaptists are)
defilers of ye flesh, living in pleasure, murmurers, complayners, walking
after their own lusts, speaking proud things, flatterers and such like. In ye
end he adds this, as ye cause and mother of al these sins, the not having
of ye spirit, meaning in deed, yt because God has not given the^ his holy
spirit, therefore they were such kind of me^, as he there painteth forth in
their colors, and such as we daily se here with us. And yet for all this, God is
not bound to any man to give him his spirit, as Paul proves Ro^. 11. neither
do they humble themselves to ask his grace by earnest and hearty prayer, for
the^ should they have it, Iam. 1. By the lack and want of this spirit in
other men, we may easily see what a benefit we have by him, to keep and
defend us so mercifully every hour, in all our ways and actions of our life.
If this spirit leave us never so little while to our selves, then we fall into an
hundred mischa^ces and evils, as we see in Moses a singular man, being left to
his own will and choice but a little, he fell twice together to doubt and
distrust of the power of the Lord, whether he were able to do all things or
no, as to bring water out of the rock, and to feed the Israelites with flesh,
being six hundred thousand men, for a months space, Numb. 11. and 20. So
David, being not vpholden with this spirit, and left to his own will, fell by
and by to adultery and murder. We had need therefore to pray continually to
Jesus Christ, the giver of this spirit, that we may have him with us to direct
our lives, and make them acceptable before the Lord. This spirit for diverse
other effects that it has, is compared in the Scriptures to water, to oil, to
fire, to wind, to a dove. To water it is likened both in the new and old
Testament, as in Esa. 44. where the Lord says, I will power water upon the
thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground. And what he means by this water
and dry ground, he afterward expounds in the end of the verse, saying, I
will power my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thy buddes. In the
new Testament our Savior says, If any man thirst, let him come unto me and
drink: he that believes in me, as says the Scripture, out of his belly shall
flow rivers of waters of life. And that he meant this of the spirit, John
immediately declares, saying, This spoke he of the spirit, which they that
believed in him, should receive, John 7. As water therefore does cleanse and
purify the filthy and unclean in body being washed with it, and is very
necessary for our life here: so does this holy spirit of God much more cle^se
and purify our souls from the infection and filthiness of sin, as Ezechiel
fitly applies it: I will power clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean,
yea from all your filthiness, and from al your idols will I cleanse you. And so
by and by says, I will put my spirit within you, Ezech. 36. Of this pure water
speaks the Apostle to the Hebr. 10. chap. This spirit is moreover likened to
oil, for the supplenes and gentleness that is in it, and in the^ that have it,
Psalm. 45. To fire also is this spirit compared, as we read in Matthew. 3. and
Act. 2. For Christ shall baptize with fire, as John says: which is ye holy
Ghost. For even as fire does consume, scour, purge and give light: so no
doubt does the holy spirit of God consume the wicked, scour our filth, purge
our sins, and inlighten our ignorant hearts, as Paul says, Arise thou that
sleep, and Christ shall give thee light, Ephe. 5. Lift thou up the light of
thy cou^tena^ce upon us, Psalm. 4. Thirdly it is compared to a great and mighty
wind, Act. 2. For as winds do purge and make wholesome ye air from his
infectio^ and co^tagiousnes: so does ye spirit work in the hearts of his, this
purging from their old corruption and co^tagion of sin by Ada^, and
regenerateth and renueth us again by the immortal seed of the word, 1. Pet.
2. whereby we are borne anewe, that we may enter into the kingdom of heaven,
Ioh. 3. The spirit of God is also likened unto a wind in this respect: yt as
nothing is able to resist or withstand ye force of great whirlwindes, but they
bear down before them every thing that stands against the^, whether it be
trees, houses, castles or towers: so it is with the spirit of God, whom no
creature is able to withstand or resist, but must needs fall under it, and
which destroys every hie thing, which is exalted against the knowledge of
God, casting down strong holds, and the imaginations of mighty Princes, and
brings into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, and has
ready vengeance against all disobedience. This thing may be confirmed by diverse
examples, especially by that of the enchaunters and sorcerers of Egypt, when
they were compelled to say, that this was the finger of God, to bring lyce out
of the dust, and that they could not do the like: the spirit of God so
confounded their wisdom and sorcerie, Exo. 8. Other mo examples might be
brought, but I pass them over, and leave them to the diligent readers of the
scriptures, where they shall find store of them. Fourthly this holy spirit is
likened to a dove, as we read of in the 3. of Matthewe, descending down from
heaven, and lighting upon our savior. He is compared to a dove, for these
qualities and properties, which are meekness and gentleness: for this
spirit does cause them to put off anger and wrath, in whom it abides, and
to use brotherly kindenes one to another. And the dove is said to be without
gall, and very chaste: so is this spirit without all bitterness in the hearts
of them whom it does possess, and teaches them to keep their vessels in
all purity and holiness of life, and not in lust of concupiscence as the
wicked do, which know not God. For this spirit is called the spirit of
sanctification, of cleanness, of innocence. If this be so, that this holy
spirit is clean and pure, and likened to a dove: and furthermore our bodies
are said to be the Temples and houses of the holy Ghost, which dwells within
us, as Paul says, Know ye not, that your body is the temple of the holy
Ghost? 1. Corinthians. 3. and 6. 2. Cor. 6. Seeing this is so, we must prepare our
houses, and sweep them clean, to entertain so honorable a ghest. If this
house which is our body, be unclean, and given to any vice, then surely, as
doves depart from filthy houses: so this most loving and most gentle dove, the
spirit of God departs forthwith from us, and then we are in a most
miserable case, yea God will destroy him, that destroys this his holy
temple. Seeing then (dearly beloved) our bodies are the temples of the holy
Ghost, and we have such promises that he will dwell in them, if they be holy,
and threats that they shall be destroyed, if they be given over to sin and
wantonness: let us, I pray you, cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the
flesh and spirit, and finish our sanctification in the fear of God, putting
off the works of darkness, and putting on the armor of light, and let us
walk honestly, as in the day time, and make provision to receive this holy
spirit into our hearts. You know what great preparation you make both in your
houses, and in your bodies, to have your apparel neat and clean, if you be to
entertayne a Prince, a noble man, or any worshipful friend of yours: then
consider with your selves, that greater care and diligence is to be had by
ten thousand parts, to lodge and receive into your houses the Prince of
princes, even the holy Ghost, the power of God. And seeing he will vouchsafe to
abide with you, and take your preparation in good worth, first give him
thanks for this his so unspeakable courtesy and kindness, and so use and
behave your selves, as he may long continue with you, to your great good and
comfort, and grieve not this holy spirit of God, (by whom ye are sealed unto
the day of redemption,) by your corrupt communication proceeding out of your
mouths: and seeing he will be content to tarry with you, and make his abode in
your houses, let all bitterness, and anger, and wrath, and evil speaking be put
far away from you, with all wickedness. For surely if these things be among
us, he will depart from us, and then he leaves us to our own wills. This can
not be but a great grief of mind, for if our friend should go away from
us, by our discourteous dealing and using of him, we would be sorry: much more
should we be sorry, when such a friend departs and leaves our company,
because we are given to vice and naughtiness, whose presence was all joy, and
whose absence from us, is extreme misery and cursednesse. Wherefore as this
spirit was obtained by the means of prayer, so is he kept and preserved with
us by earnest prayer, and hearing of the word, and other such godly exercises
of the Christians, in which they are commanded to walk in. For the fruit of
the spirit is in all goodness, righteousness, and truth, approouing that
which is acceptable and pleasing the Lord. And here is another effect worthy
the nothing, that this holy Ghost inhabiting within the elect and children of
God, does make now their works and labors to be acceptable unto him, which
before his coming unto us, were abominable and unpleasant unto God: not that
our good works deserve any thing at his hands, but because we are ingraffed
unto Christ by the seal of his spirit. Therefore that which was ill in us
before, is now made good and accepted, as if it were perfect, yea through this
spirit, which does so season inwardly our actions, that they are liked of
God, we become thereby not only his faithful servants, and dear friends, but
yt which is much more, his well-beloved sons, as Paul shows unto us, Because
ye are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts,
which cries, Father, father. Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son.
Now if thou be a son, thou art also ye heir of god through Christ. If this
be so, that we be made the sons of God, and have received the adoption of
children by this holy spirit: then we may assure our selves of salvation,
unless the obedient child may doubt of the good will of his loving father.
Here then falls to the ground the doctrine of the Papists, that teach men to
doubt and stand in fear of their salvation. For is not this a very absurd and
a foolish Position, that they mainteyne, that we may call God Father, and yet
doubt, whether he will bestow the inheritance of children upon us? Shall I
call him father, and doubt of this? For these are the words of the holy Ghost,
uttered by S. Paul, That the spirit of God witnesses with our spirit, that
we are the sons of God. This being so, mark what Paul infers and brings
in upon this point, If we be children, we are also heirs, even ye heirs of
God, and heirs annexed with Jesus Christ. Shall I now be made and appointed an
heir by good and sufficient warrant of the holy Ghost, which lies not, nor
deceyueth, and yet doubt of my inheritance? that were a mad thing. Can the
servant doubt, whether he be his masters man, or shall receive his wages, when
he wears his masters coat and cognizance? or can one doubt of the writing to
be authentical and good, that has the parties hand and seal unto it? Or may
a man doubt, having received earnest in part of payment, but that he shall in
time convenient have the whole, having bargained with an houest man? Or do we
receive the witness of honest men of credit nere in matters political, and
shall not we receive the witness of God the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost, which is greater, and more to be believed of us, when he promises
salvation to the believers? Surely if we doubt, then we have not faith: for he
that doubts, is not grounded in the faith, but is like a wave of the sea,
tossed of the wind, and carried away, James 1. How can I have hope of salvation,
as I am commanded, and yet be in despair of it, and doubt with my self? A
man can not hope for that, whereof he doubts. Does not Saint John say
plainly, We know that we are translated from death to life, because we love
the brethren? He says not, We doubt of it. And again, Hereby we know that he
abides in us, even by his spirit which he has given us. And all this
assurance comes to pass by the testimony and witness of this holy
spirit, which therefore is called the seal of God, the earnest penie, the
spirit of truth, which can not deceive, or be deceived. And here I can not
but maruayle at the ignorance and blindness of the Papists, which while they
go about to establish this doctrine of error, they impugn and overthrow
another of their own. For they say, that a man may fulfill the Law of God
perfitly: nay they go further, and say, he may fulfill the Law, and do all
that God has commanded in his word written, and more to, which are works of
supererogation besides, which he has not commanded, (and so in deed he has
not,) and these works the Monks and Friars do bestow upon their friends
which lack them, for they have enough for themselves, and these they sell to
others, which are the overplus, and they call them the store of the Church.
Now thus stands the case. If they keep the Law, then they need not doubt,
but that God will give them the reward of it, which is life and salvation: and
why then do they doubt, if it be true? they fulfill the commandementes: then
let them not distrust of their wages and hire. Wherefore one of these two must
needs follow: If they keep the Law, then they need not doubt of life. If
they doubt of salvation, then it is certain they keep not the Law. In one of
these two they must needs be found liars by their own confession. But in
deed they are untrue in both of them: for it is false, that they keep the
Law, which is a yoke that can not be borne of any man, except Christ, seeing
it is spiritual, and bids us not to sin, neither in deed, neither in
word, no not so much as once in thought, Matthew. 5. And the other is as false,
that we should doubt of our salvation. But in deed the first author of this
doctrine, the Pope himself, out of whose shop it came, that great Antichrist,
and a man of all abominations that ever were, might well teach this doctrine,
and doubt of his salvation, living (as he does) in filthy fornication with his
Curtisanes and harlots at Rome, sturring up Christian Princes to war one with
another, to mainteyne his insatiable ambition, pride, and covetousness, with all
manner of wickedness: Moving likewise the subjects to rebel against their
lawful and natural princes and magistrates, discharging the^ of their oaths and
obedience unto their rulers. I say, he that does these things, and worse, may
well doubt of his salvation: for he has nothing to do in the kingdom of God.
And so all his adherents, following his steps and religion, whose lives are
altogether most filthy and wicked, may be in the same case and state with
their holy father the Pope. But they say, We can by no means be sure of our
salvation, because we can not be sure of our perseverance in the faith of
Christ unto the end. But this is utterly false: for the scripture says, that
the godly shall continue and persevere unto the end. Paul was sure that he had
the spirit of God, and that caused him to be persuaded, that neither things
present, neither things to come should be able to separate him from the love
of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Then we may be sure, that things
to come shall not remove us from God. Again, the love of God is constant and
perfect, and whom he once loves, he loves with an everlasting love, even unto
the end, as Christ is said to love his, John 13. And to whom God has given
this spirit of adoption, as he does to the Elect, he never takes it away:
but is still a testimony unto their consciences, that they shall be saved in the
end, and continue in the mean season in the faith and obedience of Christ
Jesus their Lord. Yea Paul is persuaded of the Philippians, (and so must we be
of our selves) that he that has begun a good work in us, will perform it
until the day of the Lord Jesus Christ, Philip. 1. And he has the like to the
Corinthians, that God will confirm them unto the end, 1. Cor. 1. And they that
are elected, shall continue: For the gifts and calling of God are without
repentance, Romans 11. S. John a man beloved of Jesus Christ, and to be believed
before our adversaries, doubted not to say and affirm for a truth, in his
second Epistle to a virtuous Lady, that the truth which dwells in us,
shall be with us for ever. If it shall remain with us for ever, how should we
doubt, that it can forsake us at any time, either present or to come? Prove
your selves, says Paul, whether ye are in the faith: examine your selves:
know ye not your own selves, that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be
reprobats? Here he will have us to be thoroughly persuaded, that Christ dwells
in us, and so to be sure of salvation, unless we will be counted reprobates,
which God forbid. If ye Papists will be counted reprobates, let them then doubt
of their salvation: if not, then let them recant, and be assured of it with us,
and amend their religion and manners speedily. Neither is this doctrine, as some
ignorant persons term it, a doctrine of rashness and presumptuousnes, unless
Gods word teach us presumption. But this is a very comfortable doctrine, as at
all times, so especially at the hour of death, when our consciences do accuse
us, and Satan assault us, and the pains of death come upon us: (I say) this
does comfort weak and feeble consciences not to despair, and the other
doctrine of theirs does lead men the hye way to desperation, to doubt whether
they shall be saved or no. They say, we must fear. It is true: but not fear
to be damned. For there is no damnation to them that are in Christ, which
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, Romans 8. Neither must this
fear be without faith and hope: for then it is a slavish fear of the whippe
and scourge, and not a childs fear, to fear to displease his loving father.
We must then have the fear of sons, not of hired servants, to fear to
offend and displease so merciful and loving a Father, and not to fear and
doubt of our salvation: for it stands not in us, but in a surer rock and
ground, which is Jesus Christ: and if we believe in him, we shall have
everlasting life, John 3. Act. 17. And yet here we must take heed of another
extremity, which the Messalians certain heretics, with the Libertines,
Anabaptists, and that wicked sect of ye family of love, falls into: for all
these presume too much of this spirit of God, and of their revelations, because
they join not the spirit of God with his word, but separate it from the word
of Christ, and so it is but a feigned spirit of their own fantastical brains,
and not from God. Now as the Papists take too little, so these men take too
much, and whatsoever comes first into their idle heads, by and by they
attribute it to the spirit of God, be it never so wicked: and so these commonly
contemn the outward word and preaching of the Gospel, with the
administration of the Sacraments, whereas we know that the spirit goes, and
is given by the ministry of the word, and is joined with it, as Acts. 10. we
read, that while Peter spoke the word, the holy ghost fell on all them that
heard the preaching, not before the word came: for Christ gives not his
spirit, but by the hearing of his Gospel first preached, as Paul said to the
Ephesians, After ye heard the word of truth, the Gospel of your salvation,
wherein also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of
promise, Ephesians. 1. Here we see, if any would pretend the spirit without the
word, he may be refuted: for they go both together, the word of truth with
the spirit of promise. For it is not our part to disseuer, or disioyne those
two things, which God will have coupled together in one. And therefore the
Prophets, which might better have used this prerogative of the spirit then
they, called always the people to the word of the Lord God, saying, Hear
the word of the Lord, Thus says the Lord: and still, The mouth of the Lord
has spoken it, Esaias 1. They pretend not the spirit without the word,
although they speak most plentifully by him, 2. Epist. of Peter 1. Chapter.
For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. Furthermore another effect of this
Spirit is to move the heart of man, when the word is preached unto him: for
unless Gods Spirit persuade and work in our hearts within, when the
preacher sounds in our ears the outward word, he shall but speak as it were
in the air, and beat the ear of man in vain. Paul well considering this,
said, that he in deed had planted, and Apollos another preacher had watered
the word, but it is God (says he) that gives the increase. And we know
that God woorketh all things in the hearts of his children by this spirit,
wherewith he seals them after they have heard and believed the word
preached, Ephe. 1. and therefore in the place above recited, this spirit is
called the spirit of promise, because it does assertaine and assure us of all
the blessings and promises of God that are made unto us. In the Acts it is
said, that Lydia a woman being a seller of purple, came to hear Paul preach
the Gospel: but mark what Saint Luke says, whose heart (says he) the Lord
opened, that she attended to the things which Paul spoke: So that except God
open our closed and hard shut hearts, by the secret inspiration of this holy
spirit, in vain shall we either preach, or the people hear. We have need
then all of us (before we come to hear his word) pray to God to give us grace
to perceive and understand his will and mysteries, and to soften our stony
hearts, that they may receive the word, and to circumcise our ears to hear
it. This it that David said, O Lord open thou mine eyes, that I may see the
wonderful things of thy Law: and again, O give me understanding, and I will
keep thy Law. Now David knew very well that all these things were done by
the operation of Gods spirit, as Paul says, The spirit has revealed these
things unto us, 1. Cor. 2. for it is he that helps all our infirmities, Romans
8. This is the mark whereby God does seal and print in the forehead, to be
seen of all men, those that are his, and without the which no man can truly
assure him self that he belongs unto Christ: for as the same Apostle
witnesses, If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his.
Now how greatly this holy spirit is to be desired of all of us, there is no
man that has read the Scriptures, but well understands. This made Eliseus, a
notable man, the scholar of Elias, when his master bad him to ask of him what
he would, that he might do it for him before he was taken away from him into
heaven, that he asked his spirit to be doubled upon him, whereby he might the
better serve the Lord and his Church in his vocation and calling, 2. King. 2.
and so by this spirit he wrought wonderful miracles, and did much good by it to
the whole kingdom of Israel. We see by this petition of this notable father
and godly man, what we also should especially desire of God in our prayers:
not riches or wealth so much, which al do perish, but this holy spirit which
lives and remains for ever in them that have him, and can never be lost or
taken away. And this is the self same thing that our Savior Christ would have
us to ask in our prayers of God his father: for speaking of prayer to his
disciples, he shows that God his Father is most ready to give us our
requests, as soon as we ask of him: as our earthly father is willing to
bestow that upon us which he is able to give. And of all other things that God
gives, he makes mention of this spirit, saying, If ye which are evil, can
give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your heavenly Father
give ye holy Ghost to the^ that desire him? Luke 11. Signifying this Spirit to
be the excellentest gift that God could give, or we desire of him. We have
now heard the meaning of this article, of the holy Ghost, what it is, and what
are the wonderful and comfortable effects of it in the Church, and how the
Lord has promised never to leave his destitute of it unto the worlds end: We
have seen also how we must believe in him, as the true and everlasting God,
equally proceeding from the Father and the Son, because he is the power and
virtue, whereby they do work and create all things. Seeing therefore this
heavenly spirit is so necessary and so great a treasure, let us that are true
Christians most duetifully thank our heavenly Father, for bestowing of him
upon his whole family here in earth, and upon every one of us that are his
servants, whereby we are known in the world, and among our selves, that we
are his own. And let us also pray unto our Lord Jesus Christ, the sender of
this holy spirit, to kindle and stir him up in our hearts daily more and
more, that by his assistance, we may have an earnest feeling and lothing of our
sins, and so be brought to do his will and pleasure, with a careful
keeping of all his commandments, until we all come to a full perfection in
Jesus Christ, even unto that hope which is laid up for us in the new and
heavenly Jerusalem, which Christ has purchased full dearly for us, with his
own precious heart blood. To whom with his Father, and the holy ghost, three
persons in trinity, and yet one God in unity, be rendered all praise, honor,
glory and thanks giving, both now and for evermore, Amen.

The ninth Lecture upon the ninth Article of our Christian faith:
The holy catholic Church, the communion of Saints.
WE have declared already unto you, three parts of this our Christian faith:
the first, wherein we do believe and confess the Father to be the Creator
and maker of all things: the second part, wherein we acknowledge the Son
Jesus Christ the redeemer of mankind: the third shows unto us the holy
Ghost, the comforter of our hearts, and the confirmer of all these things
which are contained in these former eight articles, which we have proved all
out of the everlasting word of GOD. Now follows consequently the fourth
part of our Christian belief, which is concerning the Church, the ninth
article with other three which are annexed unto the Church, as the especial
blessings and benefits which flow and issue out of the former parts, and
always do accompany and follow the spouse of Christ. The causes and matter
of our salvation being already handled, the effect does follow, which is the
Church: Otherwise in vain should God create, and Christ redeem, and the holy
Ghost inspire and confirm these benefits and gifts, unless there were some
that might be partakers of those treasures, brought out and founded by the
blessed Trinity. Again, seeing the kingdom of Christ is everlasting, it is
very necessary and requisite, that there be always some which may acknowledge
him for their King and governor. To this end has Christ his continual
Church, and shall have to the end of the world, as he has had ever from the
first beginning. The meaning therefore of this article, is this: I believe that
God almighty has always had from the first creation of the world, and has
presently, and shall have unto the consummation of the world, his Church here
in earth, which is, the communion of Saints, that is to say, a company and
congregation of faithful men and women, which do truly believe in Jesus
Christ, acknowledging him for their only Savior, and serving him according to
his word, receiving his Sacraments, and taking hold of all his mercies and
benefits by faith only in his blood: and for this cause do we believe that
there is but one true Catholic Church, and no more which shall continue for
ever, although Satan and his ministers go about by all means possible to
overthrow and subvert it. We are then taught here to believe, that there is
an universal Church of Christ, and not to believe and trust in it, as we do
in God: for that were idolatry, to trust in men and put our confidence in
them. But we must trust in GOD only, and not in this Church, as the Papists
would bear us in hand: because the Church is but the company of the elect
and chosen, and are men. Now we can not believe and put our hope in any thing
that is a creature, for that were blasphemy to say, and we are also accursed
if we do so, as the holy Prophet Jeremy has by the mouth of the holy Ghost
forewarned us, saying, Thus says the Lord, Cursed be the man that trusts
in man, and makes flesh his arm, and withdraws his heart from the Lord:
for he shall be like the heath in the wilderness, and shall not see when any
good comes, but shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, in a
salt land and not inhabited, Ier. 17. By these words then of the holy
ghost, we learn, not to believe in ye Church, but that there is an holy Church
of Christ in this world every where dispersed and scattered abroad through
the face of ye whole earth. This article does declare unto us what the Church
is, terming it the communion of Saints, or fellowshippe of the godly, either
with Christ, or else with themselves in love: furthermore what manner of Church
this is, is here likewise set down, that it is holy, by reason of Christ her
head: and catholic, because it is not tied to any one place, as Rome, but
generally is in all places of the earth, tossed as a ship upon the sea from one
coast to another, as pleases God to dispose of it. To these things, two other
points may be adjoined, to make up the perfect discourse of it, and to the
which all other things incident to any manner question of the Church, may be
easily referred. The one is, to consider who is the universal head and
governor of this catholic Church: the other, by what true marks, notes,
signs, and titles, this Church may be known, and discerned from the false and
counter faite synagogue of Satan, that is, from the whorishe and Babylonicall
strumpet of Rome, which falsely takes upon her the name of this chaste wife and
spouse of Christ, being an unclean and a most adulterous harlot, which has
long ago forsaken her bridegroom Jesus Christ, as it shall (God willing)
hereafter better appear, in the discourse and tract of this matter. Seeing the
Church is likened to an house, 1. Timothy 3. and every house is builded and
governed of some man, Hebr. 3. it is necessary that this house also, which is
the Church of the living God, have some builder and head of it to look unto
it, which is both able to do it, and most ready to help it. The builder of
this Chruch is Jesus Christ, Mat. 16. 18. and he is the only head of it, as S.
Paul does prove most manifestly unto us, both in the 1. and 4. chap. of ye
epistle of the Ephesians, and the 1. chapter to the Colos. saying, God has
made all things subject under his feet, and has given him over al things to
be ye head to the Church, which is his body, even the fullness of him that
fills all in all things. And again, Let us follow the truth in love, and in all things grow up unto him, which is the head, that is Christ, by whom all the
body being coupled and knit together by every joint, for the furniture thereof,
according to the effectual power which is in the measure of every part,
receives increase of the body unto ye edifiyng of it self in love, Ephe. 4.
So in the Colos. 1. 18. He is the head of the body of the Church. Out of this
does the body of Christ which is his Church, receive a special and singular
comfort against al te^tations, yt they shall be defended and preserved for ever:
for Christ ca^ not forsake his body, he ca^ not but love it, and nourish it, with
those spiritual graces which come and proceed from him ye head and fountain.
For as we see in the body natural, how yt the head receives not meat for it
self, but for the cherishing and increasing of the strength of the body, and
the rest of the members: so the Lord Jesus is not an head for himself, but for
us, neither has he received all power and authority of his father, with the
fullness of the holy Ghost, to keep it to him self, but to give and to impart
it most lovingly and liberally to his true members, to make them to grow up
more and more, till they come to a perfection in him. If Christ therefore have
strength, holiness, power, and all other good gifts and graces of the
spirit, then may the Church assure her self of them all, because the wife may
reckon that all the goods and lands of her husband are hers: and we know
that the Church has this dignity and prerogative, which is inestimable and
full of wonderful love, that she is counted and called, as she is in very
deed, the chaste wife and spouse of Christ here upon the earth, to whom he
is joined with the conjunction and fellowshippe of his heavenly spirit. I have
(says Paul) prepared you for one husband, to present you as a pure virgin unto
Christ, 2. Corin. 11. Cantic. 4. Ezechiel 16. Ephesians 5. What noble man will
be content to take a poor wretched beggerwoman out of the streets, full of
rags and filthiness, to make her his wife? And yet the Lord Jesus has done
greater things in mercy for us, then this: for when he passed by, he looked
upon us, and behold, our time was as the time of love, he spredde his skirtes
over us and covered our filthiness, yea, he swear unto us, and entered into
covenant with us, and we became his own. So is the Lord in marriage become
now our head, and we his spouse: let us then take heed that we admit no
others into his love, or defile our selves with whoredom and idolatry, in
giving our faith and allegiance to strangers and false gods, whom we know
not. Our husband is very ielous over us: he can not abide another man to be
admitted unto his bed, for that were spiritual fornication and adultery
before him, which he will punish most severely, as he did in the Israelites
which brake covenant with him, and betook them selves to Idols, and bowed
down to them in stead of him, as the Prophet declares, Ezechiel 16. Seeing
then Christ is appointed the head of his Church, and that one wife (as there is
but one body, which is the Church) can have but one husband to be her head,
and one house, but one Lord and master to rule it: what wickedness is it to
say that the Pope of Rome is an universal head over the Church? Is not this to
take away Christ's room and dignity, or rather is it not to make the Church a
monster to have two heads in one body? But they say that the Byshope of Rome
is the visible head in Christ's stead: but this they can not show by
Scripture, neither does the Church require any such head: for Christ is
present with it, as he has promised, Mat. 28. I am with you always, even unto
the end of the world. If the Pope be a visible head, why is he not seen of
al men? why does he not govern all men in the Church, and give nourishment
unto them, as the head ought to do? This he does not: wherefore he is no
visible head, as he does pretend. And surely to be the general head over al,
is too great a matter and enterprise for any mortal man to take upon him. I am
sure the Pope will grant him self to be a member of this Catholic Church: If
he then be a member, how can he be an head, except the same thing shall be
both an head and member, which is very absurd and monstrous? If he say, that
as he is a member, Christ is his head only, and not another: why shall not
Christ be as well a head for all? These things (we see) are very childish
and fond. But yet they apply and say, that Christ said to Peter, Thou art
Peter, and upon this rock will I build my Church. First note, he says not
upon thee Peter will I build, but upon this rock, meaning, the faith of
Peter's confession, which confessed him to be Christ: therefore by the rock he
meant himself. For when Peter had said, Thou art Christ the son of God,
Christ said to him, Upon this rock will I build my Church: and in that place
he gives no more to Peter in the keys, which is the binding and losing of
sinners, then he gives to the^ al else where, as in Ioh. 20. when he said,
Receive the holy Ghost: whosoeuers sins ye remit, they are remitted, and
whosoeuers sins ye reteyne, they are retained. Here all have as much as
Peter: and if they will believe the fathers, which they brag of much, they do
never refer this unto Peter alone, but to the rest of ye apostles and to al
faithful ministers of Jesus Christ. As Orige^ in his 1. homi. upon Mat. and so
does Cyprian, Ambrose, Jerome, and Augustine. And what has ye pope to do with
these words, which follows not Peter, neither in life nor doctrine? A
strange thing it is to see, how they build their kingdom upon Peter, and
whatsoever is said of him, they take it to them selves. But before they can
prove any thing in deed, they must prove these three points unto us, if
they will have the Pope to be the supreme head of the whole Church, which they
shall be never able to do by the scriptures, as long as they live. First, they
must prove yt Peter was chief and head of all the Apostles. Secondly, that he
was at Rome, and sat there as Bishop general. Thirdly, that he left all the
title and preeminence of this seat to his successors whatsoever. If they
prove the two first points, (as they can not) yet they make nothing against
us, although we should grant it them, unless they prove the third, (which they
shall never be able to do) that Peter has left all his authority to his
successors after him for ever. Forasmuch then as the Pope neither is nor ca^
be any ecclesiastical head to this Church, but Christ Jesus alone, which is
always present with it, and ever walks in the midst of the seven golden
ca^dlesticks, so yt he needs no vicar general, or universal B. let us, dearly
beloved, as we love the Lord Jesus our head, and tender the salvation of our
own souls, flee far from the Pope and all his adherents, traditions,
decrees and pardons, lest he make merchandise also of our souls, as he does
of a great many, both in Rome and Spain, and else where. This being set down
as a most certain and sure principle, that Christ is the head of this church,
it would be seen what authority this church has, and what rule or power is
granted unto it. If the Papists will grant, (as they can not deny, but) that
this church is the wife, and chaste and obedient spouse to her Lord and
husband Jesus Christ: If (I say) they will admit this, this controversy
between them and us, of the authority of the Church, whether it be greater
then the scriptures, and word of Christ, shall not be hard to discuss, but
soon ended. For what authority and jurisdiction a wise man will grant to his
wife under him, that liberty is to be granted to the church under Christ. If
it be reason and just, that a wife should not control, or be superior, and
above her husbands word and commandment, having a wise and discrete
husband, to govern and command her: then is it no reason or right
(whatsoever ye papists say) yt the authority of the church, which is the wife,
should be greater and of more force, then the word and will of the husband
Christ, seeing that S. Paul says, Ephesians. 5. 24. that the church is in subjection
to Christ, and from thence draws an argument of the obedience and subjection
of wives to their husbands, which surely can not be so in every thing, as Paul
there wills, except the Church be in subjection, and under the authority of
the will and commandment of the husband in all things. If they will not
permit, but think it unreasonable, unless they go against scripture, that the
wives authority should be either equal or superior to the husband, why then
do they suffer and teach, that the decrees and constitutions of the church,
to make articles, laws, sacraments, and other rites and ceremonies, are above
the authority of the written word? and so consequently above Christ him
self, which can not be separated from his word and will, which he will have
us to receive as him self? For speaking of his Apostles and other ministers,
that brought his word to the people, he says, He that receives you,
receives me, and he that despises you, despises me. And therefore, when the
adversaries say, that the authority of the Church is greater then the word
and scriptures of God, what do they say else, but that man is above God, and
the wife above the husband? The one is blasphemy, and the other absurd. We
see then by these things, that the authority of the church, is to obey Christ
in all things, and to do such works and business as he has commanded in his
word, except it be in indifferent matters, not repugning unto the word, nor
hindering godliness, and being void of superstition, and without clogge of
conscience. The Church is compared and likened to an house, 1. Timoth. 3 or to
a family: and shall the household and family be above the authority and will of
the master? shall the servants and children have greater authority in their
doings, then the Lord and father of the house? How do these things agree
together? And how has Satan (the God of this world) blinded the eyes of the
Pope and his shauelings, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ
should not shine unto them? But let us hear their proofs and arguments for
this authority. The church (say they) has allowed and approved the
scriptures, and discerned the false from the true, admitting the Gospel of
Matthewe, Mark, Luke, and John, and rejecting the Gospel of Nicodenius, and
Thomas with others: therefore it is above the scriptures. A goodly argument and
reason. As if they should argue thus: I do allow and approve the authority
of the prince, therefore I am greater and above her authority. If they would
make this reason with her, as they make the like with Jesus Christ, they might
(peradventure) come short home, and be found traitors to her, (as in the
supremacy of the Pope they all are, if they hold their own doctrine and
maintain it,) as they are to Jesus Christ, their chief prince. Again, one
man tells another which is the king, and discerns him from one that is not
the king: therefore he that does thus tell and discern the king from another
man, is greater then the king in authority. This is their reason, and all one.
The church (forsooth) because it has discerned the true writings of the holy
Ghost, from those that were cou^terfaite and false, therefore they will have ye
church to be above this word: which is utterly false, and in no point
follows. They might by this reason prove them selves, or others to be above
God him self, because many can discern and tire the true and living God from
the forged and false gods, and they can tire and separate the true spirit from
the lying spirit: therefore they are greater in authority, then this spirit
of God is. Who sees not these things to be so childish, that they need no
refutation at all, because if they be once examined by the touchstone, they
fall of them selves, and do easily descrie what they are? Well, let us hold
this for a ground most certain and sure, which can not be shaken: that the
word which Christ has spoken in his fathers name, the same shall judge in the
last day, as he him self says, John. 12. verse 48. Then if the word be
judge, it is (belike) greater, and above them that must be judged by it (which
is the church) in the latter day, even as the judge here is of greater
authority, then the party whom he judges. And here by the way falls to
the ground, another false positio^ of theirs, that say the interpretation of
the scriptures must be according to the church: nay it must be according to ye
word, which is the judge: for if this be a matter of controversy, who shall
determine and decide it, but the ordinary judge? as we see the laws must be
interpreted, not according to the censure and judgment of them to whom they
were given, but after the will and meaning of the judge and law giver, which
made them: so the scriptures must be interpreted by the scriptures, and the
word, by the word, and that which is spoken obscurely in one place, by that
which is declared and uttered more plainly in an other place. As for example:
The papists, to prove that sins may be forgiven hereafter in an other
world, in their feigned purgatory, bring this place out of the 12. chapter of
Matthewe, where our savior says, that he that speaks a word against the
holy Ghost, shall not be forgiven, neither in this world nor in the world to
come: Ergo say they, to establish their purgatory, some sins may be forgiven
after this life, and where is that, but in purgatory: but if they had read the
third of Mark (handling the same matter) and conferred one place with an
other, they should have seen there, that our saviors meaning was to show,
that the horriblenes of this sin was so great, that it should never be
forgiven: for these are his very words there. Verily I say unto you, al
sins shall be forgiven unto ye children of me^, and blasphemies, wherewith they
blaspheme: but he that blasphemeth against the holy Ghost, shall never have
forgiveness, but is culpable of eternal damnation, Mark. 3. So likewise is that
place in Matthewe of the keys expounded in John 20. by remitting or retaining
of sins by all the Apostles, and not by Peter only. Now out of this note
that Christ is the head and only great shepherd of his church, comes forth
many good and fruitful branches for this whole church, that is, many good
lessons for us in doctrine and manners: For if Christ be ye head of this
congregation, then it shall be perpetual and for ever, because ye head of it is
for ever, therefore the body must be so also. As the Lord promises in Jeremy
cha. 31. saying, This says the Lord, which gives the sun for a light to
the day, and the courses of the moon and of the stars a light to the night,
which breaks the sea when the waves thereof roar, his name is the Lord of
hosts. If these ordinances depart out of my sight, (says the Lord) then
shall the seed of Israel cease from being a nation before me for ever. Thus
says the Lord, If the heavens can be measured, or the foundations of the
earth be searched out beneath: then will I cast off all the seed of Israel,
for all that they have done, says the Lord. By the which words the Lord
means that his church shall continue for ever, as ye sun, moon and stars
do: which surely is very comfortable to all his, to consider that they shall
be for ever, as their head is, and have immortality with him. Again, if
Christ be from the beginning, then he has had this church also from the
beginning: first in Adam, then in Abel, and Seth, and so forth in Noe. And
this he has, and will preserve: for they are his members, whom he loves, and
feeds as a father does his dear and own children, Psalm. 103. And if Christ
be the head of it, it must needs be holy also, as here we do believe. For
how should the body be unholy, when the head is so holy? although this holiness
be not full and perfect here, (for the church is in a continuail warrefare and
fight against sin and wickedness,) yet it shall be perfited hereafter, when
it shall be fully joined with her head in heaven. In the mean season it is called
holy, because it contendeth for holiness, and because the holiness of Christ
is imputed unto it: but this is not in it self: for the church is taught to
pray daily, Forgive us our trespases: and there is no man without sin that
lives here in earth, 1. Ioh. 1. yea this church may, and has erred, as every
member particularly may err, as Peter did in the vocation of ye Gentiles, Act.
10. and in dissimulation, in eating with the Gentiles, and withdrawing himself
from them again, when James came to him, and was justly therefore reprehended
of Saint Paul, Gal. 2. Then if Peter erred, so notable and singular an Apostle,
others may err also, but yet return with Peter: yea the whole church at some
time have erred, as all the Apostles doubted of Christ's resurrection, and yet
they were the Church of Christ, and the best men and most perfect that were
then alive, Mark. 16. verse 14. This I say to that end, that none should
imagine such a perfection in the church, as the Anabaptists do and others,
which can not be attained unto in this life: And therefore because they see
some abuses, some dissolute persons, and some errors in the Church (which is
like a field that has corn and tares in it) they by and by depart from it,
and break and divide the unity of the Church, by their ignorance and
frowardness, not knowing yt the kingdom of heaven (which is the Church) is
compared of Christ himself to a net cast into the Sea, that takes both good
and bad fyshes together in it. Mat. 13. I speak not this, to maintain any
thing that is amiss, if it may be reformed by order. For I wish all things to
be well, which are out of order in our church, and I hope God will in his time
cut off all disorders: but I speak it to this end, that none should separate
himself from hearing the word and receiving ye Sacraments, and from public
prayers in the congregation. If al things in the ministry be not so perfect as
every goodman would desire, and as the word of God requires it should be, we
must in deed contend and endeavor for a perfection, as much as lies in us,
which I pray God may be earnestly sought for of every one in his vocation. But
they that are private men, must help with their prayers, their tears and
groninges, and must seek to further this work by continual intercession to
the Lord, and never to leave off, neither to give him any rest, until he
repair, and until he set up Jerusalem the praise of the world. And so for
Sions sake, they must not hold their tongue, until the righteousness thereof
break forth as a light, and the salvation thereof us a burning lamp. Which
God put into the hearts and minds of them that have authority in the
buylding and repairing of this spiritual Church unto the Lord. For Christ
himself frequented the temple at Jerusalem, and there taught the people his
fathers will, although the hie Priests, the Scribes, and Pharisees had made it a
de^ne of thieves, and wonderfully corrupted all things in it, both by their
doctrine, and also by their manners: neither did Paul separate himself from
the church of the Corinthians, although many abuses had crept in among them, in
so much, that some denied the resurrection, the chiefest point one of them in
Christianity, yet notwithstanding all this, he called it a Church, and the
Corinthians sanctified in Jesus Christ. And so we see he did not withdraw
himself from them, but vouchsafed the^ the name of ye church, and goes about
(as we should all do,) to bring them to the purity of the Gospel again. Thus
much for this point: let us return to our purpose. Christ being the head of
this church, it shall not be hard for us to discern who are the members of it,
and who appertain unto the same. This church is said to be holy, and the
communion of saints: then all they that are holy, and sanctified by ye spirit
of Jesus Christ, are of ye number of this congregation: for if they will be of
his body, they must have from him holiness, which has said. Be ye holy, for I
am holy: and they ought to rese^ble him in their life and co^uersatio^, in
godliness, in integrity, in innoce^cie and al other christian virtues. We see
then how we onght to endeavor to be like him, and these are the words of S.
John, where that he says, He that remains in him, ought even so to walk, as
he has walked: That is, he must be incorporated and ingrafted to the body of
Christ, otherwise there is no salvation for him. He is the true vine, and we
are the branches: if we abide in him, we bring forth much fruit, and we
shall be purged to bring forth more fruit: but as the branche, except it abide
in the vine, dies and withers away without any fruit, and is cast into ye
fire: so is every one, that is not of the body of Jesus Christ. Let us
therefore endeavor to be of this body, for without the Church is no salvation,
as all perished by the waters, which were not in the ark of Noah, which was a
true sign and figure of the church, 1. Pet. 3. And as the hand cut off from
the body, dies, and lacks life: so it is in the mystical body of the
Church, no life without the body of Christ: and that is the thing that is meant
in these places of holy scripture. In the thirteenth chapter of Ezechiel ye
Lord threatens the false prophets, that his hand shall be upon them that see
vanity, and divine lies, saying, They shall not be in the assembly of my
people, neither shall they be written in the writing of the house of Israel,
neither shall they enter into the land of Israel. Whereby he excludes them from
his church. So it is said in Joel the second, In mount Sion and Jerusalem
shall be deliverance, as the Lord has said. The like is in Abdie: but most
notable is yt place in the second of ye Acts, where it is said, that the Lord
added to the church from day to day, such as should be saved: giving us thus
much to understand, yt unless they be in ye church, there is no salvation for
them. By this then we gather, that if they only be members of this church,
which believe in Christ, and are holy, then the Turks and Jews, which believe
not in Christ, but persecute him most deadly, are not of ye church, because
they are not united and joined to this body. Likewise all the Heretics, which
have broken the unity and peace of this Church, some by denying the humanity
of Christ, and some his divinity, are not to be counted members of Christ,
neither they that have departed from the fellowship of the godly and saints of
God to Antichrist, can have any part in this congregation, or be heirs of
life, unless they return again with speed to the Church. Here likewise are
all Atheists and ungodly livers shut out from this church. For they communicate
not with the saints, either in life or doctrine, neither do they relieve the
poor and afflicted members of Jesus Christ with ye blessings which God has
bestowed upon them: so that there is no communion of brotherly love among them,
whereby they should be known to be of this holy body. Now yt we know that
Christ is ye head of this church, (as is proved) let us come to ye second
point, to see by what marks and tokens this true church may be discerned from
ye false and hypocricall sinagogue of Satan. For this stands us greatly in
hand to know, otherwise we may be deceived in taking the one for the other. Two
signs there are whereby ye church of Christ is known: ye one is the preaching
of the word of God, contained in ye old and new Testament, and is divided into
ye law and Gospel: so that where this word is sou^ded out by ye preachers,
purely and soundly, without mixture and corruption of ma^s traditions, and
received reuere^tly, there is no doubt the church of Christ, as Christ himself
does witness, My sheep here my voice and follow me. This is the^ ye first and
principal note of ye church, to hear Christ's word, John 10. and where this
word wants, there can be no church. For Christ does sa^ctifie and cleanse it
by ye washing of water through the word, Ephesians. 5. This made ye prophets in old
time to be careful y^ they brought nothing but ye word of God to ye people,
saying. Hear the word of the Lord. The mouth of ye Lord has spoken: and
always they brought the people when they were gone astray, to this word and
commandment of the Lord. This made S. Paul to say, y^ he had delivered no
other thing to ye church of the Corinthia^s, the^ that he had received of ye
Lord, 1. Cor. 11. Neither did Christ, when he sent his Apostles abroad to
preach, give the^ liberty to preach what they list: But go and preach, (says
he,) teaching them to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you:
restraining the^ always to his word, whereby y^ church is gathered together,
not the word unwritten, which they call unwritten verities, and yt traditions
of the Apostles, and y^ church, but the word written only. For of the other we
have no certainty, yea their unwritten verities are against the written verity
and word of Christ, which is a thing very absurd. For the word written does
allow all meats to be eaten with thanksgiving without choice, any apparel to
be worn without difference: neither does it condemn matrimony in any degree
or estate of persons, as they do in the ministers of the word. Now their
unwritten verities do forbid al these things, and a great many more, which are
contrary to the word reueiled. Well, let us hold this point diligently, that
the word truly preached, is the first note to know this church by: the other
note is the true use and administration of ye sacraments, instituted by Christ
himself, which are two in number: the one is Baptism, wherein we are admitted
into the fellowshippe of this Church of Christ, and by the which we are assured
of the remission of our sins by Christ's blood, as we are sure, that the
water does outwardly wash the body and spots of the flesh. This Sacrament
does Paul call the washing of the new birth, Titus 5. and says, that all they
that are baptized unto Christ, have put on Christ. Furthermore the Lord Jesus
does not think it sufficient, or enough to admit us only into his house and
family, by this sign of Baptism, but does also being admitted, feed us
continually with heavenly and spiritual food unto everlasting life, which is
done with the other Sacrament of his precious body and blood, called the
Communion or the Lords Supper. So that as the shephearde does not only
gather his sheep into his fold or sheepecote, but does also provide meat for
them, and pasture: and as the master does not only enterteine his servant
into his service, by giving him his livery coat and badge, whereby he is
openly known to be his man, but does provide and give him meat and drink
daily to feed him: so surely does the Lord with us in these Sacraments. For
by Baptism does he admit us to his service, and by the Supper does he feed
us, that we perish not with hunger. So that where we see these Sacraments
duly administered, without any inventions of man's wit or brain, the one with
the word and water, the other with the word, and bread and wine, without other
superstions and additions, there we may acknowledge the Church of Christ to be
present, and he in the midst of them, according to his word, as he has
promised, Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in
the mids of them, Matthew. 18. Now these Sacraments are in some things unlike.
Concerning the first, which is Baptism, it is to be used but once of a
Christian man or woman, and not often: as the Jews used but once to circu^cise
their children, which Circumcision was a sign of our Baptism, which we have
in stead of it: so this Baptism of infantes is not to be iterated. For even
as a man is borne but once, so once baptizing is sufficient, to signify our
new birth in Christ. Therefore they were ouerseene, which would have it to
be iterated and done again, as Saint Cyprian was in that error. The other
Sacrament must be often used of every Christian man and woman, as the Jews
used many times and often, every year to eat the Paschall Lamb or Passover:
so must we also often resort to the Lords Table, but still with reverence,
repentance, and faith to eat and feed spiritually upon Jesus Christ his body
and blood. For this Sacrament came in the place of the Passover: so that as
they remembered their coming and delivery from the bondage and thraldom of
Egypt and Pharao by this Lamb: In like sort must we remember by this
Sacrament our redemption by Christ from the devil and hell, from the slavery
of sin, whereof the Jews deliverance both in Egypt and Babylon, were most
lively signs and figures unto our eyes, to behold that which Christ has done
for us in dying for our sins upon the cross, that we might be made
righteous in him, 1. Corinthians. 1. Now the oftener we remember this which is
done, especially in the Communion, the better it is for us, always remembering
this, that we come thither with examination of our selves, as the Apostle
wills, least we come to judgment and condemnation. This then is not to be
done at Easter only, as the blind custom of the Papists was, but at other
times also, except they will make it sufficient for a man to eat once in a
year, to feed his body: wherefore as we often use to eat corporal and
earthly food to feed the body, which otherwise would starve: so must we
frequent this Supper, which is holy, many times and often to feed our soul,
which is more necessary then the feeding of the body: and the meat of the one
must be had, and a great deal sooner then the provision of the other, I
mean, of the body, which is but mortal. These are the outward signs, whereby
the Church of Christ may be known from the temple of idols. I am not
ignorant that there are other signs, as the holy Ghost, and faith, which
because they are inward, and known to God, and every man's own conscience, I
let them pass, I only speak here of the visible signs and marks of the
church, whereby it is manifested unto men, such as the word and Sacraments
be. If then these be the signs of true Christians, let us that are English
men, use them diligently, let us in season and out of season hear the word,
and with reverence embrace it, and let us withal confirm it in our hearts, as
with a seal, by the reverent receiving of the sacraments of our Lord Jesus
Christ. This ground being laid, that the Church is known by the word of
Christ, and his Sacraments being used as he ordained them, we can not
acknowledge the Church of Rome to be this Catholic Church of Christ: for she
has not these marks in her forehead. For it is most manifest, that she has
burned this word of Christ in the fire, and refused it, and in stead of it
set up the word of man, the decrees of Popes, and constitutions of their
own, as the lives of Saints in their Legende, which is full of abominable
lies: they mainteyne their own traditions above this word, and have them in
greater estimation: so that the neglect of their own trumpery, as to eat
flesh in Lent, or to break their fasting days, is more severely punished by
them, and made a greater matter then the open contempt of Gods Laws: For the
adultery of their Priests, Friars, and their Nuns, was counted but a light
matter, and no sin with them. Here we see what all the world may judge of
them, and these things to be true, experience it self does testify. And if
at any time they gave the people the word, which is called of Paul the sword
of God, wherewith all Christians ought to fight, and therefore should be
common as well to the laytie as the Clergy, as they term them: If, I say,
they gave it at any time unto them, yet they gave it as a sword in the sheath,
that is, in the Latin tongue, wherein they understood nothing at all,
contrary to the express words of Paul, saying, That all things should be
done to edification in the Church, and that he had rather speak five words
in a known tongue, then five thousand without the understanding of the
people, 1. Corinthians. 14. I say these men are guyltie of the death of the Lords
people, which send them out to fight with their enemies, and yet take away
their weapons and swords from them, and so leave them naked and bare to the
spoil of the enemy. This did the Church of Rome, when it first took away
here with us the scriptures and word of God in English from the people, and
fed them with toys and fables of Beuis of South Hampton, and such like
fabulous books, which were invented by the devils instruments to keep the
people from reading of the holy Scriptures. And no maruayle if they did so,
that is, take away the word from them: for they knew well enough, that if the
people had the Scriptures in their own tongue, they would quickly see and
perceive their knavery and treachery, that they so closely used in corners.
But when they had put out the candle, they played many sluttish parts, and no
man saw them, although the Lord then winked not at them, but has in his good
time disclosed them to their shame, his name be praised therefore. We see then,
that this false church of Rome has dealt with the Scriptures and the people,
as the Philistines handled Samson, for they put out his eyes, and then they led
him whither they would: so the Papists, when they had subtly put out the
eyes of the people, in taking from them the light of Gods word, and the
Gospel of Christ: they brought them where they listed, and made the^ believe
what they would. They thought good to be ill, and ill good, they called sweet
sour, and sour sweet: light darkness, and darkness light: and all
because they had not the word, which was the true light unto their paths, and a
lantern unto their feet, Psalm. 119. Then was it altogether thought good and
godly to go on pilgrimage, to offer to Saints, to pray to them, to have
images in Churches, to bear candles, to kiss the Pax, to go on procession,
with a thousand such trumperies, which we were delited with, as young children
in toys and trifles: whereas now we willingly condemn them, and are ashamed
of them, because we have the light, which has made them manifest, and shows
unto us, that we henceforth be no more children, wavering and carried about with
every wind of doctrine, by the deceit of men, and with craftiness, whereby
they lie in wait to deceive us: But let us follow the truth in love, and in
all things grow up into him, which is the head, that is Christ, Ephesians. 4. ver.
14. and 15. By these things we see, that Rome is not the true Church, because
it has forsaken the word of God, whereby the Church is gathered together, as
men to battle, by the sound of a drum or trumpet. Now as they have done in
the word in mangling it, so have they in like manner corrupted and altered the
true use of the Sacraments, both in adding unto them, and taking away from
them, not being contented with the simplicity and that order that Christ used
them in. To Baptism have they added of their own, spittle, cream, and salt,
with such like trash: the cup have they taken away from the common people,
and say it was ordained for the Priests only, when as our savior Christ
said, Drink ye all of this, Matthew. 26. They say, not al, but the Priests
only: so that when Christ says one thing, they say another contrary unto it.
Furthermore they worship the bread, and say that it is turned into the body of
Christ, and become God, where they commit both idolatry, in worshipping a
creature, as the bread, and blasphemy, in that they say it is God. Seeing then
they have not these marks for their church, let us see what marks they show
unto us. First they say that their Universality or multitude, is a sign of
the Catholic Church: but this is utterly false, confuted both by the
testimonies and authorities of the scriptures, and also by many examples out of
them. For first, if multitude make the Catholic Church, then the Turks and
Pagans shall be the Church, sooner and before the Papists, as the event does
show, for they are more in number then the Christians, or their pretended
Catholics, which yet I think they will not grant to be the Church. But they
will say, Among the Christians the greatest number are the Church. If this be
so, then said not our savior Christ truly, when he called his Church a
little flock, saying: Fear not little flock, for it is your fathers pleasure
to give unto you the kingdom, Luke 12. He should have said, great flock,
according to the Papists opinion. Again, when one asked our savior Christ,
whether there were few that should be saved: he answered in effect that it
was so, saying, Strive to enter in at the strayte gate, for many, I say unto
you, will seek to enter in, and shall not be able, Luke 13. Here Christ says
flatly, that many, that is, the multitude, shall not enter in at heaven gates,
which yet notwithstanding must be saved, if the Church, as the adversaries
say, consist of multitude, for the Church shall be saved. Here Christ
excludes multitude from his Church and kingdom, and in the 7. of Matthewe,
we shall see that he makes paucitie and the small number to be an argument
of his Church, quite contrary unto the blind Papists, saying, Strayte is the
gate, and narrow is the way that leads unto life, and few there be that
find it. Are there few that find this gate? then are there but few of this
Church of Christ. Wherefore we have the more need to watch, to strive, and
to contend to be of this small company, for surely many are called to the
Gospel, but few, and very few are chosen. But let us see the examples of the
holy Scripture. Was not Noah only found righteous with his household before
the Lord, when the flood was brought in upon the wicked world? For all flesh
had corrupted his way before God, Genes. 6. Was the greatest multitude in
Sodom found to be of this Church of God? Surely if it had been so, Sodom had
not been destroyed. But there were not ten righteous men to be found within
it, only Lot with his wife and two daughters escaped the fire, all the rest
were wicked, and therefore most fearfully consumed with fire and brimstone
from heaven, to make others to fear the like sins, as Saint Peter says,
Genesis 19. 2. Peter 2. There came but two into the promised land of Canaan of
all the six hundred thousand men, beside women and children, that came out of
the land of Egypt, and they were Joshua and Caleb: the rest justly perished in
the wilderness for their unbelief and disobedience. But let us see further,
when this Church was more increased in the times that followed. Was not Elias
only against the four hundred false prophets of Achab and Iezabel? 3. Reg.
18. And did not he think, that there had been none alive that appertayned unto
the Lord, but he only? And although the Lord said unto him, that he had
reserved unto himself seven thousand, that had not bowed the knee to the idol
Baal: yet was that to the multitude and number of y^ wicked that were then in
Israel? Again, was not the kingdom of Israel far greater then the kingdom
of Judah? and yet was the true worship and service of the Lord only with the
Jews in Jerusalem, and not in Dan, or Bethel, where were the golden calves of
Jeroboam? Was not Micheas in his time only one Prophet that was good, against
four hundred lying prophets of Achab? He was overcome there by multitude, and
yet he had only the truth and word of the Lord on his side, 3. Reg. 22. If
we list to come nearer the time of Christ under the Gospel, we shall see the
fewest to hold with him. Was not the whole multitude of the Jews with the
chief Scribes, and Pharisees, and hye Priests against Christ, and condemned
him to death: crying, Crucify him, crucify him, John 19. Afterward in the
succession of the Church, we shall see the Christians to be the smallest
number. Universality then and multitude, is no argument of the Catholic
Church of Christ: but rather the contrary may be affirmed, the least number
to be his. Secondly they will have Antiquity to be a note and token of this
Church: If they will stand to Antiquity, and long prescript and continuance
of time, even here also must they needs fall. For their Mass with her
relics was never heard of within the space of five hundred years at the
least after Christ, as a godly and learned man does auouche unto them, which
if they could prove: he would have subscribed unto them: and their
transsubstantiation was never spoken of, before the Council of Lateran: and so
all their trumpery has been patched together by Popes and Councils at diverse
times. Whereas we can prove our holy Communion even from Christ and his
Apostles, using it in the same order with bread and wine in a known tongue, as
he did to his Apostles. If their Mass be of such great antiquity, as they
bear us in hand, it is great maruayle that the very name of it can not once
be found or read of in the Scriptures: but it is an unknown name, for an
unknown thing. Here we see antiquity does confute them, although antiquity
be not always a good argument, to prove a matter by. For if it were, then
murder should be good, which is as ancient as Cain the second man that was
here upon the earth. Genesis 4. From the first king of Israel, which was Jeroboam,
(after that the kingdom was divided in Solomon's time) until the last king of
the same kingdom, which was Hoshea, the golden calves were still mainteyned,
which were erected first of all by Jeroboam, and continued for the space of
three hundred years, or there about. And yet for all this, was not their
religion good, although they received it still by tradition and custom from
their fathers, by the prescript of so many years. For the Prophets
notwithstanding did still reprehende the idolatrous and wicked kings for their
superstitious worshipping of these calves, which they should not have done, if
the argument of our Papists be good, to bring and allege their forefathers,
custom, traditions, Councils, and antiquity: for then Achab might have said
unto Elias, if this be true, why do thou reprehende me for this worship? I
have received it from the first king Jeroboam, and my fathers have lived and
dyed in it, and I have antiquity to plead for me. But Elias knew well
enough that this was no argument, and therefore took him up sharply, as we
may our Papists, although they have had their Masses these seven or eight
hundred years. Again, if antiquity or custom be a general rule to
confirm a doctrine in religion, then might the Pagans and Ethnikes have
alleged against the Apostles these things, when they came to preach Christ
Jesus crucified unto them, and to alter their old religion, wherein they had
continued so long. We see then that antiquity favors them not at all,
neither yet can they father their Church and religion, which they have at Rome,
upon the succession and ordinary descent of their Bishops and Popes, seeing
truth goes not by succession and inheritance, but by the grace and mercy of
God. But if succession of bishops, and hie Priests, as they feign, from Peter
to this time, does prove the Church by a lineall descent to be with them: why
then should not the hye Priests in Christ's time, as Annas, and Caiaphas, and
Ananias in the time of the Apostles, be the true Church? for they had their
succession from Aaron the first hie Priest, ordained by God himself, and might
have objected this to Christ, and did also, their lineall desce^t from Abraham:
and yet they were of the synagogue of Satan, and Christ does call them blind
guides, generation of vipers, hypocrites and fools, and does not take them
for his Church, but whippeth them all out of it rather. We see then, that
succession is nothing to prove the Church by: for then the Scribes, Pharisees,
and hye Priests should have been of the Church in Christ's time. They object
furthermore a general consent and agreement, to prove the Church unto us: but
we know that a consent and agreement without God and this word, is rather a
conspiracy, then a consent. But to cut off this visour also in a word, was not
there a general consent of all the people of y^ Jews, with the chief elders
also, the Scribes, the Pharisees, the hie priests with Herod and Pilate, in
the time of Christ, to condemn him, and to crucify him? For Luke reports
saying, The^ all the multitude cried at once, saying, away with him, and deliver
to us Barabbas, and the voices of them, and of the hie priests prevailed, Luke
23. Behold, here was a whole and universal consent and agreement, and yet for
all that, it was against the truth, even Jesus Christ the author of al truth.
But do they agree among them selves? are they not at variance yet what
purgatory should be? some appointing it to be fire, some water, some ise and
snow? Were not the Dominican friars against the Franciscans about the
conceptio^ of the virgin Marie divided? Are they agreed about the matter of the
sacrament, some holding that he is there only in quality, some in quality
and quantity too? Do they agree in the number and order of their Popes and
bishops? ( Platina differing from Eusebius, some appointing mo, and some less?
Are not fathers against fathers, and councils against councils, and Popes
against Popes? a^^ regorie against them all, in the name of the vniuer sall
bishop, which he justly thinks to be ye name of Antichrist? And yet shall we
think they do agree, or that they can not err, or that these things above
rehearsed, as multitude, antiquity, with custom, consent, traditions,
succession, ancient fathers, general councils, are sufficient proofs of the
church to be with them: Councils have erred, and been contrary one to an
other: for the cou^cil of Constantinople, ordained that images should not be
had in the church: after that, the cou^cill of Nice the second erected them,
and decreed that they should be had and worshipped. They also go about to
prove their church by the authority of Doctors of the Church: but it is
manifest, that they have all erred, and bin deceived in some point or other,
yea even of doctrine, so that they are not to be rules and notes, to know this
church by, for they are but men, and have now or the^ in doctrine, not only in
manners slipped from the truth. Ireneus, Victorinus, and Lactantius, subscribed
to the opinion of the Millinaries, which thought that Christ after the day of
judgment, should reign with his for a thousand years here upon earth, being
deceived with the place of John, Revel. 20. not well understood, where as he
does interpret that M. year, in another place for ever, Reave. 22. Augustine
thought that all children dying without baptism, were damned, which is an
heresy. Epiphanius defends that it was a tradition of ye Apostles six days
before Easter, to eat nothing but bread and salt. Ierom condemned the second
marriages of men, and counted them al (a thing most absurd and erroneous) no
better then fornication. By these things then ye church is not discerned:
neither is glory, pomp, honor, riches, external beauty, and outward success
and happiness, any note of this church of Christ, as the Papists will bear us
in hand, by reason of their glistering and glorious church of Rome. The
contrary things are marks of Christ's Church, as poverty, affliction, no
show to the eye, or any external felicity. For Christ has said, his
church shall be under the cross, and not in any beauty, or gorgeousnes to the
outward eye of the world. The harlot and strumpet goes most commonly better
trimmed and decked in apparel, then the honest woman and matrone of an house:
and so is the whorish church of Rome, it has all things for to please well the
outward senses, and to allure men unto her. It has for the ear, her delicate
music, singing, and piping, and organs, and ringing of bells, and this in
excess also. It has for the nose, sweet smells, frankinsense, and such like.
For the eyes, it has to please them, goodly copes, crosses of silver and
gold, pictures of Christ, and many images of saints, with such like baggage,
and foolish trashe: and for the belly to delight idle lubbers, and loyterers,
there was good chere kept in abbeyes and monasteries: but in the mean season,
what was all this to feed the hungry souls? surely nothing. The word of
Christ was then gone from them, yea, Christ him self was shut out with them,
and his mother Marie more sought to, more prayed to, and more esteemed then he
him self. Here were al things for the body, and by this they would prove unto
us, that they were y^ true church. Well, if we would know the church, let us
think it to be there where two or three are gathered together in Christ's
name: and how should they be gathered together without his word and
commandment? And this agrees to y^ saying of S. Augustine, If they will here
admit him. He that will know, says he, which is the true church of Christ, he
can not know it by any other means, then only by the scriptures. We see here
how resolute he is in this case. Ex homilia 49. operis imperfecti in Matthew. And
again he says, Christians willing to receive the stedfastnes of a true faith,
let the^ fly to nothing but to the scriptures. Otherwise, if they look unto
other things, they shall be offended, and perish, not understanding which is the
true church, and so they shall fall into the abomination of desolation, which
stands in the holy places of the church. How we may plainly understand what
are the signs of the true church, and what also are the bodies of the church
of Antichrist at Rome, even murdering of the saints of Christ, contempt of the
word and sacraments, worldly prosperity, with a multitude of ill men with
sword to defend it. Furthermore, this church, that it may be the better known
of us, therefore has it diverse and sundry names in the scriptures, lest we
should be deceived by y^ false church. It is called y^ sheepfold of Christ,
doing us to understand, that those y^ belong to Christ are gentle as sheep,
and not cruel as wolves: Esaie 11.
for they shall not hurt nor destroy in all the mountain of my holiness, (says
the Lord of hosts) by his Prophet. This name of the church excludes y^ bloody
church of Rome, for they are as wolves and cruel beasts, devouring the
sheep, as well with us appeared in Queen Mary's days, how bloodthirstie
they were, in that the wolves slew so many of the sheep of Christ. It is
called the spouse of Christ, therefore they that give them selves to another
head and husband, as the false Romans do, are not of this church. It is also
compared and likened to the moon, because the church takes all her light and
brightness of Jesus Christ, the true sun of righteousness, as the moon does
take of the sun all her light, which thing the Papists do not: for they
ascribe not all to Christ, but some things to the Pope, and some to them selves
and others. And as the moon is not always visible being in her change, so is
not this church to the eye of man, always in a visible she we, as the proud
church of Rome is, but has sometime war and adversity, sometime peace and
prosperity. It is moreover, like unto a ship upon the seas tossed in deed
with the waves from one place to an other, but yet never drowned, because
Christ Jesus is in it, and holds the stern with his hand. These things,
unto the which the church is likened, do very well convince Rome to be no
church of God at all, for it is always visible to the eye, and in great wealth
and prosperity, as Babylon was, and so it boasts of her self, as she did.
It never at all mourns, or is in the pit of affliction as Christ said his
church shouldbe, John. 16. And as we read in Ezechiel 9. this church of Rome
does always laugh and rejoice, and never feels the rod, which is a token
of bastards, and such reprobates, and not of Gods children Heb. 12. This true
church of Christ is but one: For there is but one mediator, and one husband,
and therefore one spouse, and one body, as Paul proves, Ephesians. 4. and is
called universal, because it is in all parts of the earth, and the Lord has
of his church out of all nations and kinreds and tongues, Revel. 7. Which
church yet notwithstanding, is divided into particular churches of every
country and kingdom, where as they al make but one general church. For they
are joined together in the same spirit, faith, baptism, and Lord Jesus,
which is one head to them all. There was a particular church in the house of
Philemon, as Paul reports in that epistle, and he also calls the
Corinthia^s a church, and others too, unto whom he wrote, meaning that they
were special churches of this universal church. And here the ignorance of the
Papists is seen and manifested, which make that to be general and catholic,
which is but particular and special. For although their Rome were a true
church, yet can it not be termed by any means, Catholic, except all the
saints and good men alive upon the earth were in it, which can not be. Here
the^ they are deceived in the word Catholic, making that to be general,
which is but in part so. Paul did never write to any church, which he called
Catholic, for if he had meant so, that Rome had been the catholic church,
when he wrote unto it, then could he not properly have called Corinth a church
at all. The sum of all that we have said hitherto, is thus much: that there
is an holy church, whose head is Jesus Christ alone, to this end and purpose
called of God by his word, that it should gloryfie him for his goodness. For
look whatsoever our God does, he does it in y^ behalf of his holy church: For
this end does he destroy sometimes mighty kingdoms, and great Princes, that
he might deliver his church, and verily, for this end does he keep and
preserve so long this wicked world, until the number of his elect be
fulfilled. He never destroyed any nation, but it was for his churches sake. Oh
how greatly are we then bound to the goodness of this our Christ, which works
so great things for us! shall we not magnify his grace? shall we not yield
him continual thanks, and that in the midst of the great congregation?
Believe me dear brethren, we are elect, ereated, redeemed, justified,
sanctified, preserved daily by his power, and shall be gloryfied in the life to
come, with his holy angels and saints, that we should set forth his praise and
glory. And this is y^ thing, which the blessed Apostle S. Peter does in his
first Epistle the second Chapter, so earnestly exhort us unto, saying, 1 Pet.
2. 9.
To the church of God, the true christians of Pontus, Asia, Cappadocia,
Galatia, and Bithynia, (and in them to us all:) you are (says he) a chosen
generation, a roial priesthood, an holy nation, a people set at liberty. Mark
now, dearly beloved, the chiefest point, to what end all these things are
done unto us, that ye should (says he) show forth the virtues of him that
has called you out of darkness, unto his marvelous light. Do we now show
forth his goodness with thanksgiving? then are we good Christians, and serve
to the end, whereunto the Lord has made us. Are we not all careful of this
duty, to praise God his name daily? Surely we have then transgressed, and
degenerated from the end, of our creation and calling. The praise of God is
such a thing, so hye, and so excellent, that if all the Angels in heaven, with
their force and might* and all the men in earth, with all their speech and
eloquence, go about to set it forth and declare it, they shall not do it
sufficienly, and as it deserves to be done. We ought then to do what lies in
us: and this thing does the triumphant church in heaven, of Angels, and Saints,
teach us, that we should never cease to exto his name at al times, as they do,
for they cannot satisfy themselves with crying, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord
God of hosts, the whole world is full of his glory, Esaias. 6. And in the
Revelation the fourth chapter, the four beasts, and the Elders cease not day
nor night, crying, Holy, holy, holy Lord God almighty, which was, which is,
and which is to come. And yet for all this, we here in earth can satisfy our
selves, and be contented to set forth his praise, either never a whit, or else
so negligently and by such startes, as we declare, we have no great love and
care thereunto: so cold is our zeal in this point, and yet most hot in
trifles and vanites, apperteining to our pleasures and profits in this life.
We have now heard (dearly beloved) the meaning of this article, concerning
the Catholic Church, what it is, and who is the head of it, what authority it
has, by what signs it may be always known from the Romish or false Church.
We have also declared, that it is called Catholic, because it is not tied to
any time, persons, or place whatsoever, but is dispersed every where, as
seems good to the Lord. We have furthermore showed unto you, what be the
marks of it, and what are not the true signs of it, and that it consists
not in multitude of people, but in weight of truth. Last of al, we have made
manifest, to what end y^ Lord has gathered a church together unto himself
here in earth, which is, that he may be honored and gloryfied in it,
accordingly by their good works and christian conversation. Now let us give
thanks to Jesus Christ, the head of this Church, in that he has vouchsafed
to make us the holy members of it, which were before the firebrandes of hell,
and a generation of Satan's brood. Let us moreover praise his name, for as much
as he does daily preserve us by his fatherly goodness, and divine providence, in
this sheepefold of his, from all wolves and ravening beasts, which otherwise
would devour us. And because he does feed us in it with wholesome and green
pastures of his holy word, and leads us forth to the waters of life and
comfort to refreshe our souls, let us not be unmindful or unthankful to him,
for this so great a benefit. Now let us most humbly pray unto him, that he
would vouchsafe to keep us in this church of his unto the end, lest we wander
and go astray from it as lost sheep, and beseech we him, that he would
continue his graces and heavenly promises made unto us so liberally in his
Gospel, that from day to day, we may grow in holiness toward him, as becomes
this church, until the time come, that our full redemption from him shall
appear. This God grant unto us, not for our sakes, but for Christ Jesus sake,
which has purchased al these things for us, with the shedding of his most
precious blood upon the cross for our sins. To this Jesus Christ with the
father, and the holy Ghost his power, be rendered all praise and glory, honor,
dominion and thanksgiving, both now and for evermore. Amen.

The tenth Lecture upon the tenth article of our Christian faith, which is, The
Remission of sins.
IN the article going next before, we have heard what we have to believe
concerning y^ church, which is ye house of Christ: Now follow the ornaments,
and benefits which ye Lord in mercy does, and will bestow upon this house,
which are in number three. 1. Remission of sins in this life. 2. Resurrection
of our bodies from corruption at the last day of judgment. 3. And everlasting
happiness in ye life to come. These benefits are great and so inestimable, that
we can not worthyly conceive of them, being covered with flesh and blood: and
therefore we are the less thankeful, then otherwise we should be, if we did
or could deeply consider of them: for they are such jewels, as the Lord does
only bestow upon his children, and none else, and therefore they are put after
the Church, and communion of Saints, as things following the state of the
church necessarily, for none can have them, but such as abide in the church,
and are true and lively members of Jesus Christ, ingraffed into his body by
faith. The first of these graces is, the remission or forgiveness of all our
sins. The meaning therefore of this article for the capacity of the simple,
in more words is this, I that am a Christian do steadfastly believe, that
almighty God both has, does, and will of his mercy forgive me all my sins,
both original and actual committed before and after baptism how many and
great soever they be, Esa. 1.
not for any work or merit of mine, which am an unprofitable servant: Luke.
17.
but for the sacrifices sake of Christ's death and passion, wherein he is well
pleased, by whose righteousness, because I am clothed and apparelled by
believing in him unfeignedly, I am sure and certain that I am delivered from
everlasting death and hell, which is ye reward of sin, Romans 6. This is the
plain and simple meaning of this Article, and is proved and confirmed unto us
out of scriptures, as well of the old as of the new Testament. In the 31. of
Jeremy we read thus, This shall be the covenant that I will make, with the house
of Israel after those days, says the Lord, I will put my law in their inward
parts, and write it in their hearts, and I will be their God, and they shall be
my people. For I will forgive their iniquity, and will remember their sins no
more. So likewise, we have the proof of this, in the second epistle to the
Corinthians. Chap. 5. God was in Christ, and reconciled the world unto
himself, not imputing their sins unto them. And in the second to the
Colossians. Ye which were dead in sins, and in yc uncircumcision of your
flesh, has he quickened together with him, freely forgiving you all your
trespasses. We see the^ this doctrine to be warranted with y^ testimonies of
the holy ghost: So yt we need not to doubt any thing at al of it. Seeing then
ye the first entrance into the house of the Lord, is by putting away of all our
sins, and because we have nothing to do with God, except our offenses be
blotted and wiped out of his remembrance: Let us a little I pray you, (dearly
beloved brethren in Christ) mark what we have to consider in this article for
our instruction and edificatio^ unto a godly life. We say here, that we do
believe that there is a remission of sins, for the children of God and
servants of Christ. The first thing therefore that we ought to learn and bear
in mind upon this article, is, that we confess and acknowledge most humbly
and meekely our sins before God. For if we say and grant a remission of
sins, we must also confess that we are sinners, otherwise we can not at
all have pardon of them. Secondly we must consider by whom this remission does
come unto us, and for whose sake it is. Thirdly by what means we are made
capable and partakers of this so great a benefit. As concerning the first
point, it is plain and evident that we are all of us miserable sinners before
GOD, which looks upon the hearts of men, and tries them: For who can justly
and truly say of him self, My heart is clean, I am no sinner. Nay, Solomon
does tell us, that there is not a man that sins not, 1. Reg. 8. Eccle. 7.
And Saint John says plainly, that if we say we have no sin, we do but
deceive our own selves, and there is no truth in us. We are begotten,
conceived, and borne in sin, we live and are brought up in sin: and shall
any man be so impudent and shameless, as to deny that he is a sinner? God
forbid. The Apostle says, All men have sinned and are destitute of the glory
of God, Romans 3. But we need not to go far for the proof of this matter:
Our Savior Christ has taught his to say daily and hourly, even as long as
they live, Forgive us our sins or trespasses, Matthew. 6. It is therefore a
deuilish pride and presumption to say, whosoever he be, that he is no sinner:
for surely the^ Christ can not help him, for he came to save sinners: And yet
there are some in the world, and have been also, that have denied this: So
greatly that Satan bewitched them. Well, if these testimonies of scripture did
not condemn them sufficiently, yet I am sure, their own heart and consciences
some time or other will accuse the^, and their own mouth witness against them.
Job tells us this thing plainly in his book Chap. 9. If I would justify my
self, my own mouth would condemn me. We see the^ that we are al of us, even
the best, wretched sinners: Now as we are sinners, so we must also learn to
confess and acknowledge these sins, otherwise it is to no purpose, if a man
be a sinner, and will not confess it. If a man be sick, and either does not,
or will not acknowledge it, he can not lightly be healed of the Physician:
for he will not seek unto him. Except a man feel his wound, he will not go to
the Surgeon: and unless a man be ignorant, and sees the want of his knowledge
that he ought to have, he will never desire to be further instructed, but
continewe still in his ignorance and blindness. Who desires meat, that is
not hungry? or drink, that is not thirsty? or clothes, that thinks he has
apparel enough? My meaning is this, It is not enough for a man to think he is
a sinner, unless he has an earnest and an effectual feeling of his sins in
his conscience, and that they are as an heavy and grievous burden unto him.
The^ if he come to Christ, he shall quickly have remedy for the^. For he came
not to call the righteous, y^ is, the^ that thought themselves ryghteous, and
boasted of it, for in deed there is none righteous before him: but he came to
call poor sinners to repentance. And this agrees with that notable saying of
Paul, that Christ Jesus came into this world to save sinners, whereof he
confessed himself to be chief, 1. Tim. 1. There is a notable place concerning
this matter in ye fourth of Luke, where our Savior Christ, entering into the
Synagogue of Nazareth to read and to preach on the Sabbath day, found ye place
where it was written of him in ye 61. of Esaias, saying, The Spirit of the Lord
is upon me, because he has anointed me, that I should preach the Gospel to ye
poor: he has sent me, that I should heal the broken hearted, that I should
preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind: that
I should set at liberty them that are bruised, and that I should preach the
acceptable year of the Lord. This place does show for whom Christ Jesus is
sent and is meet, that is, for the poor, the broken hearted, the captives in
sin, ye blind in mind, the bruised in prison. If we feel our selves to be
such men, Christ is sent unto us: otherwise he is not for us. And this is the
cause that made our Savior to keep company most commonly with Publicans and
sinners, and such as were infected with great sins and offenses, as Marie
Magdalene, and Matthew, and Zaccheus: for these did willingly confess their
sins unto him, and so he cured them. But on the contrary side he refused the
company of the Scribes and Pharisees, the hie Priests and Doctors of the law,
because, although they were sinners, yea, and grievous sinners too, yet they
had an opinion of holiness and righteousness in them selves, above other men,
and justified them selves before our Savior Christ, as we see in the parable
of the Publicane and Pharise that went up both of them to pray into the
Temple, Luke 18. These Pharisees our savior said, they had no need of the
Physician, because they did not acknowledge their infirmity and weakness
unto him. Christ in deed is meat, but for the hungry, John 6. he is water and
drink, but for the thirsty, Esaias 55. John 7. he is a refreshing, but for them
that are laden and burdened, Matthew. 11. Do we give alms at any time to a
stout beggar, that although he have need, yet will not confess it, and ask
his alms gently, acknowledging his poverty? No more surely will the Lord
give unto any spiritual alms, unless we shall humble our selves before him,
with true feeling of our poverty and misery. For verily herein we must all of
us be like unto beggars, that, to move pity and compassion, show not the
best things they have, (if they have any) but the worst, as their rags,
their sores, their poverty and nakedness: And this moves men the sooner to
pity them. Dearly beloved in Christ, the case stands so, and no otherwise,
between the Lord and us. If we will get any thing, it is by falling down,
and humbling our selves, and not by vaunting of any thing that is in us: for he
resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble and lowly. Do we not see
it so by experience? Is not the best pasture and meddowe ground in the lowest
places and valleys, and the most barren ground in the highest hills and
mountains? So the graces of the Lord rest in the low stomach and heart, and
flee from the hye and lofty mind. Let therefore every hill and mountain be
laid low, Luke 3. A notable example of this meek and humble confession of
our sins, we have in the Prophet David, who, although he were a King, yet
when he was reprehended and reproved sharply of the Prophet Nathan for his
adultery and murder, said, without any replying or checking of the Prophet,
most mildely, I have sinned unto the Lord. And therefore he heard
incontinently that sweet answer from the Lord, The Lord also has put away
thy sin, thou shall not die, 2. of Kings 12. Chapter. This thing David
reports of himself in the Psalm 32. Then I acknowledged my sin unto the
Lord, neither hid I mine iniquity: For I thought, I will confess against my
self, my wickedness unto the Lord, and thou forgauest the punishment of my
sin. Look in the Psalm 51. where he describes the same more at large.
This lesson is to be learned of us all, that when we commit sin, we should
not cloak our sin as the hypocrites do. Look upon the poor Publicane, and
upon Peter: the one confessed them humbly, the other wept for them most
bitterly. And surely so did all the good men do from time to time. How often
do the Prophets Esaias and Daniel confess their sins, and the sins of the
people! Did not Tobiah do the like? and Paul him self does in many places
confess with grief of mind, that he was a persecuter of the Church of
Christ, 1. Cor. 15. yea, that he had the relikes of sin still abiding in him,
Romans 7. Yea this confession and acknowledging of our faults, must sometime be
made to our neighbor or brother, if we have offended him, and we must, and are
commanded to seek reconciliation at his hands, as our Savior says, Matthew.
5. If thou bring thy gift to the altar, and there reme^brest that thy brother
has ought against thee, leave there thine offering before the altar, and go
thy way, first be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift.
And this is that thing that S. James meant in his Epistle 5. Chap. Acknowledge
your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that ye may be healed:
not so, that we allow any papisticall shrift, or a vain confession of all
our sins in the ear of a masmonging Priest, which can do us no good, but
rather takes an occasion him self to be ill, when he hears the lewd
deeds of some. But we mean, that an agreement is to be sought for, with
submission one to another, if any man be offended. Neither does this place of
James prove the Popish confession, as they would have it: for he speaks
not here of the Priest, but of all Christians. And if so be they will have
this place to prove it, then must their Priest confess as well his sins to
the people, as the people to him: for so go the words of the text, One to
another acknowledge your faults. Notwithstanding if any man feel him self
grieved with his sin, and clogged in his mind and conscience, if then he
resort to his godly and learned Pastor or preacher in the parish, and tell it
unto him, to have comfort and his advise what to do, he can not justly for
this be reprehended of any, because it is both good and godly. But to number
up al their sins to the minister, as the papists would have it, no man can
do: for who knows how often he offends? as David says, Psalm 19. neither
is this thing warranted by any authority or example in scripture. But to our
purpose: we see then by these things, that as we are sinners all the sort of
us, so we must not dissemble them, if we truly intend to have remission of
them, but with our whole heart we ought to confess them unto the Lord. And
here is to be noted, that in this article we do believe and confess a
remission or forgiveness of sins, and not a satisfaction of us for our
sins, as the adversaries teach, that we must satisfy for our sins, and
purchase pardons from Rome by money, by masses, and such trumperies, as going
on pilgrimage barefoote, by fastings, and lying in hearecloth. Surely if these
things be added to take away our sins, then is not this our article true,
which says, that there is a free remission of sins without paying any thing
at all of our part, even as the detter when he has nothing to pay or
discharge his debt, some godly creditour does freely, forgive him. Now if
he should pay any thing, or half of it, then it is not freely forgiven, but
partly forgiven, and partly paid: but John pronounces, that if any man
thirst, he may come and take of the well of the water of life freely,
Revelation 20. 22. Esaias 55. If we may take away any of our sins by
satisfying for them, then all is not due to the blood of Jesus Christ: but John
says, that it is the blood of Christ and no other thing that does purge us
from all our sin. We with all our merits and good deeds can not satisfy
Gods wrath and anger, conceived for one of the least of our offenses: for the
least sin that we commit, deserves everlasting hell fire: and how then
can we satisfy, except we be freely forgiven? This David well understood,
saying, If thou, O Lord, straightly markest iniquities, O Lord, who may stand?
but mark what David adds, and it confirms our position and purpose: but
mercy (says he) is with thee, that thou may be feared, Psalm. 130. He
declares unto us sufficiently, that we can not be justified before the most
pure God, but by forgiveness of sins: and therefore pronounced that man
blessed that had his sins forgiven, not that had satisfied for them. Our
savior does teach his to pray in humility, Forgive us our sins, and not to
say, Give us grace or might to satisfy for them. Thus much for the first
point, that if we will have pardon of our sins, we must first confess and
acknowledge them: for what should God forgive us, if we were not sinners? The
second thing to consider in this article, is to know to whom to come unto
for the forgiveness of sins, and for whose sake they are remitted, otherwise
to know and believe a remission of sins, is in vain: for as it is
bootelesse for a man that is very hungry, to know and believe there is meat
in the world, except he knew the place and the man that had it for him, that
he might resort unto him: and as it is in vain to confess thy disease and
sickensse, unless thou know some good Physicion who may help thee: so surely it
shall profit us nothing at all to know or to confess our sins, if we be
ignorant of the mediator that should take them away: yea, if the sick person
should seek out such a Physician, as either could not or would not cure him,
his labor also were unprofitable, and all one, as if the needy man should go
to one for an alms, that is as needy as he him self. Let us therefore take
diligent heed to this, that being sick of our sins in our souls, we go
and run to such a cunning Physician, as we are sure both can and will for his
ability and compassion cure and heal our infirmities, and has a salve for
every sore and malady. This cure and Physic for all diseases, rests not in
any creature whatsoever, no not in the Angels: for they need a mediator to
hold them al up, not in the Saints: for either they are all sinners, as those
alive here in the earth, or else have been all sinners, as they in heaven, and
therefore need a mediator as well as we. There is no creature therefore in
this great cure of sins, that can do us any good: nay rather we shall be
worse and worse, runnyng to them, as the woman in the Gospel was with the
issue of blood, seeking unto Physicians, until she came to Christ, who cured
her immediately, Luke 8. for he is only the good Physician, that came to cure
our deadly wounds, Matthewe 9. Will ye then know who this is that only
forgiueth sins? Mark what the holy Ghost says, Ioh. 1. Behold the lamb of
God that takes away the sins of the world. Who is this only lamb of God,
but Jesus Christ the son of GOD, slain from the beginning of the world for
the sins of the people? for there is but one mediator between God and man,
ye man Jesus Christ, 1 Timo. 2. and he has given him self a ransom for all.
If this be so, we may boldly come unto him at his commandment, especially
when he calls, Come unto me all ye that do labor and are laden, and I
will refresh you, Matt. 11. The whole scriptures both of the new and old
testament do propounde no other redeemer unto us, then Jesus Christ. All the
sacrifices were figures of remission of sins by Christ alone: for it was
impossible (as the Apostle says,) that the blood of goats and calves should
take away sin: but yet sins were taken away under the law. It remains
therefore, that they should be taken away by Christ: for Abraham rejoiced to
see his day, and saw it gladly, John 8. There was but one temple, but one hie
priest, but one altar: so there is but one Christ to men, to take away sins:
for all these things were shadows of him. He is the true temple, in whom we
must pray, the hie priest that offers his body for us, and the true altar,
upon whom we must offer all our sacrifices of prayer and thanksgiving, if we
will have them to please God, and to be accepted of him. We have (says the
holy ghost) an altar (meaning Christ:) whereof they have no authority to eat,
which serve in the tabernacle, meaning the unbelieving Jews. Let us therefore
by him offer the sacrifice of praise always to God, that is, the fruit of the
lips, which confess his name, Hebrews. 13. Our savior Christ, when he sent
forth his apostles to preach, willed not them to preach remission of sins,
but in his name only, Luke 24. and this does Peter in the Acts declare unto
us chapter 10. Through his name every one ye does believe, shall receive
remission of sins. Healings of ye body were done and wrought in his name by y^
Apostles, Acts 5. and therefore the clensing and curing of the soul, which is
by remission of our sins, is much more to be looked for at his hands. And as
it was in Egypt, in the great dearth and famine of corn, none could have any
food of Pharao the king, but by the hands of Joseph, who^ he had made ouerseer
and ruler of the land in his name (for when they cried to him for bread, he
said, Go ye to Joseph, and what he says to you, do ye, Genesis 41.) so it
is now in the famine and dearth of our souls for spiritual food, we can
have nothing to feed our hungry souls from the king of heaven, but by the
means of the true Joseph, which is Jesus Christ, who is ordained of his father
to rule and govern all things in his name, so that he sends us to his
Son, when we ask any thing of him, for in him he is well pleased, and for
his sake only and for no man's else, does he bestow this benefit upon us:
for GOD has in deed given life unto the world, but this life is in his
Son, that all should honor the Son, as they honor the Father. And as
among the Israelites none could be healed that were stung of the fyerye
Serpents, but all such as looked up to the brazen Serpent which Moses made: so
it is as certain, that none can be delivered from the stinging of the old
serpent which is the devil, but they that look up to the son of God on hie
in heaven, they have redemption by his blood, that is, the remission of sins,
Ephesians 1. There is no other name under heaven, wherein we must be saved, no
other fundation, whereupon we must build up into heaven, no other stone that
coupleth the building together, no other key that opens heaven gates unto us,
but Jesus Christ, Revelation. 5. Except therefore we believe that it is he that
takes away all our sins, we shall die in them, John. 8. Neither is this
doctrine only confirmed unto us by the authorities of the word, but also by
the examples of all the godly. David was ignorant in the way of the Lord, but
to whom does he go for knowledge? Teach me, O Lord, (says he) the way of
thy statutes, Psalm 119. Neither shall ye read, that he went at any time to
any other, in that his whole book of prayers and thankesgiuings, save only to
the Lord: he did know well enough, that all other scholemasters were
unlearned and domme, and as Idols that could not speak. The woman of Canaan
went at ye first to Christ, to have her daughter cured. Saint Paul prayed to
the Lord, to have the messenger of Satan to depart from him, 2. Cor. 12.
Neither can there be any example brought of any, that ever he went to any other
then to the Lord only, to have his sins and offenses taken away. By this,
that our sins are forgiven in Christ alone, we learn yt we of our selves by
nature are hateful unto God, before we be reconciled unto him by the death of
his Son: so that except he behold and look upon our sins in the face and
countenance of Jesus Christ, we are but castawayes. Wherefore (brethren) let us
look unto it, that we may persuade, not men, but our own selves, not in
tongue and mouth only, but in heart and deed, that we are surely members of
Christ. Furthermore we gather by this, that the Papist, the Turk, the Jew,
have all gone astray, for they seek for remission of sins by other means,
then by the death of Christ. The Papist by his satisfactorie works of his
own device, by pardons from the Pope, when as no man can forgive sins, but
God only: by his praying to Angels, to Saints, whom he makes intercessors
and mediators to God, and so leaves the waters of life Christ Jesus, and
diggeth such broken pittes and cisternes, as can hold no water at all. I see
not therefore how he can have remission of his sins, seeing he seeks it
else where then in the blood of Christ, and of Christ alone, for they give
something unto him, but not all, and so they make him but half a savior. But
either he will be a whole Savior unto them, that he may have all the glory
and praise, or else he will be none at all. Christ can not abide any thing to
be joined with him, in the way to salvation and everlasting life, but he will
be the only and whole Savior to men. The Turk that hates this name of
Christ, and goes not about to have remission of sins by it, can claim no
part in the inheritance of the kingdom of heaven: he thinks to be saved by
God the Father, when he honors not God the Son. Again, he trusts to
his Alcoran, and his false prophet Mahomet, and forsakes the true and
everlasting Prophet Jesus Christ, whom God sent into the world, to give life
unto it. They can say, I believe in God the Father Almighty, but they will
not confess that which follows of Jesus Christ the only Son of God, and
therefore they are not under the Covenant of grace and salvation, but stand
all accursed before the living Lord, as being without Christ. Thirdly, the
Jews can have or look for no remission of sins, because they have rejected
this Christ, and go about to establish their own righteousness by the works
of the Law, whereas Christ is the full end or perfection of the Law, for
righteousness to every one that believes, Romans 10. They have a zeal, but not
according to knowledge, and thinking to be saved by the Law, they all stand
accursed, and also accursed justly by the Law before the Lord, For cursed
(says he) is he that continues not in all things that are written in this
book to do them, Galat. 3. They are detters then (without Christ) to keep
and perform the whole Law perfitly and absolutely unto the Lord, which no
man can do, no not they, and therefore (without a Savior) they stand in a
miserable case, even in the state of everlasting damnation and perdition. And
last of all, the false and Hypocritical Christian, which professes with his
mouth, that he knows and believes in Christ, and yet utterly denies him in
his whole life and conversation, can hope for no remission of his sins,
continuing still as he does in disobedience, and all kind of abominations.
But the Lord has dyed for sinners you will say, and great and notorious
sinners too: truth it is, he has done so, but yet they are such sinners as
repent and are sorry for their former sins, they lead not their life in
voluntary sins, so that they should delight and dwell in sin: but they
continue in the fear of the Lord. Briefly, they are penitent sinners, and not
obstinate and wilful persons, that can not repent, for whom the Lord has
died. If we feel our selves to be such trembling sinners, the Lord has a
free remission of sins for us, whenever we come unto him: for to whom does
the Lord look? Even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and
trembling at his words. But he that hardens his heart, and goes on still in
his former wickedness, without remorse of conscience at al, he heapeth up
wrath unto himself against the day of wrath, and makes his sins so heavy
unto himself, that they will press him down to hell. These men must amend
their ill lives, and be heartily sorry for their sins, not in hypocrisy, as
Pharao was, who said, I have sinned unto the Lord: neither in desperation, as
Judas, who repented, but not in faith. But herein let them follow David in the
old Testament, and Peter in the New, who repented, and wept most bitterly,
but yet in hope, and had remission of their sins. These men by their
repentance, afterward changed and altered their old lives and conversation,
their old man with his manners was put off, and the new man, which after God
was created in righteousness and true holiness, was forthwith put on, and so
they walked all their days afterward in a new life. Many men can say now a
days: Oh, I now repent, I am sorry for my sins, and yet by and by, or the
next day, they fall to the same or like sins again. Shall we think such men
repent? nay verily, they deceive but themselves and the world, for God they
can not deceive. Repentance is in the heart, and not in the mouth, for it is a
turning and changing of the mind from ill to good. As long therefore as we
see their lives not to be at all changed, we may boldly say, they repent
not truly, and therefore* remission of sins is excluded from them. He that
repents truly, alters his wicked life, as we see it came to pass in
Paul, who, after that he was called, and repented of his former life, never
returned again to persecute the Church of Christ, neither did he live as
before he did. Well, to conclude this part, if this remission of sins come
unto us by Christ, let us be sure to be in his love, let us not profane his
holy name by our vile blasphemies in our mouths daily, as the wicked do: but
let every one that calls upon this name, depart from all iniquity, 2.
Timothy 2. chapter. The third thing to be considered in this remission of
our sins, was as I said before, the means by the which it may be applied
unto us, and received from Jesus Christ the author of it. For unless we also
know this, it is to no purpose to know the former two points. And this may
be made plain unto us by this similitude. The poor man that is an hungered,
although he know whyther to go to some rich man or other for his meat and
alms, yet except he understand, what means and way to use to obtain this
relief of the rich man, all is in vain: for if he should use stout and
sturdy words, when he ought to be gentle, or if he should command it, when
he should entreat for it, he were not like to speed, or if the rich man
did offer him meat to be received with the hand, and he put forth his foul
feet to receive it, it were a very preposterous order, and such a thing as
might justly cause this man to withdraw his liberality from him: so surely
the case stands between our Lord Jesus Christ, the Prince of all heavenly
treasures, and us poor sinners and wretches. Albeit we well perceive, that he
has remission of sins for us, yet we must know the way to please him,
when we come to have our suit obtained. And this way to please him, and to
take the benefit that he offers, is only faith in his name. For without
faith it is impossible to please him. For he that comes unto him, must
believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of all them that seek him, as
says the holy Ghost the eleventh to the Hebrews. When therefore the Lord
Jesus offers this great benefit of salvation unto us, in the free remission
of all our sins, we must not offer out to him our foul feet, that is to
say, our works, which are with many sins polluted and defiled: for so we
might cause him to be angry with us, and to keep back his gracious
benefits. But we must as he has commanded, and always in the Gospel
requires, when he is about to do us any good, believe only in him, that is,
offer unto him our hand, that is, true faith, which is a fit thing and
instrument to receive his blessings. Neither is this our saying, but the
phrase and manner of speech in the Scriptures. Our Savior Christ did never any
miracle or cure upon the bodies of men, but he required faith of them, and
they being healed, he always attributed it to the faith and confidence that
they had in him, and not to any good work of theirs. In the ninth chapter of
the Gospel after Saint Matthews, we read there, of a very charitable deed of
four men, that brought one being sick of the palsy to our savior Christ, as
he lay on his bed: but what said our savior Christ concerning this? Jesus
seeing their faith, said to the sick of the palsy, Son, be of good
comfort, thy sins are forgiven thee. You see how that the cure of the man is
ascribed to their faith, and not to their good works. Likewise two blind men
came unto him to be healed, crying, and saying, O son of David, have mercy
upon us. This verily was a good confession, and work of them, Matthew. 9. But
what says he unto them? Believe ye that I am able to do this? they said,
Yes. Then says he, According to your faith be it unto you. The woman that was
delivered from the bloody issue, heard this of him: Daughter, be of good
comfort, thy faith has made thee whole, Matt. 9. When he raised up the rulers
daughter, he required but only faith of him, which thing the Papists say, we
can not prove out of the Scripture. In the eight of Luke therefore this word
only is put, to exclude all other things: for (says he) Believe only, and she
shall be saved. Now if Christ require this faith in the cure of the external
man, that is, of the body, which is the less thing, he does much more
require it in the healing of the inner man, the soul, which is the greater
cure, and of more valewe. You have then heard, that faith in Christ cures the
body: hear now also, that Christ requires faith especially to believe in him
to everlasting life. The Gospel written by Saint John is full of this matter
almost in every Chapter. Speaking of Christ, he says on this wise, He came
among his own, and his own received him not, but as many as received him, to
them he gave prerogative to be the sons of God, even to them that believe in
his name, John 1. Again, So God loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have
everlasting life, Ioh. 3. He that believes in him, is not condemned, but he
that believes not, is condemned already, because he has not believed in the
name of the only begotten Son of God. In the fifth of John, our savior
says, Verily, verily I say unto you, he that hears my word, and believes
him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation,
but has passed from death to life. The sixte chapter is full of such godly and
comfortable sayings: I am that bread of life, he that comes unto me, shall
never hunger, and he that believes in me, shall never thirst. Verily, verily I
say unto you, he that believes in me, has everlasting life. These things are
written, that ye might believe that Jesus is Christ the Son of God, and in
believing ye might have life through his name, Ioh. 20. It were infinite to
recite all the places in Scripture that make for this matter, and I should be
tedious, if I would rehearse them all. Notable is that place in the sixtenth
chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, where the Iayler demands of Paul and
Silas, what he should do to be saved: and they answered forthwith, Believe in
the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, and all thine house. I refer them
that list to see more places, to the Acts 3, 10, and 13. chapt. Romans 1, 3, 4,
5, 9, 10, 11. chapters. Ephesians. 2. Out of these words we gather this doctrine
for us, that all the graces and benefits of Christ are made ours by faith in
his blood, and by faith only we take hold and lay hand upon them, for
faith is as it were an hand, or a mouth open, to receive meat into the soul,
and to feed it. We must then open our hand, and our mouth to receive him: as
David says in his Psalms, speaking in the person of God: I am the Lord thy
God, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, open thy mouth wide, and
I will fill it, Psalm. 81. In that place the Lord accuses the incredulity of
the Israelites, that did not open their mouths in faith, to receive his
benefits in such obedience, as he powers them out. Again, if faith be the
mean to be made partaker of Jesus Christ, and to apply him to us, to heal
our diseases: then on the other side, incredulity of man is the stop or
hinderance that lets the Lord, to power down his blessings upon us. This
lack of faith does shut up his benevolence and good will from us, so that he
can not open heaven gates unto us, and power us down his blessing. Of this the
Prophets complained in the old time, both Esai and Jeremy: Behold (says
Esai) the Lords hand is not shortened, that it can not save, neither is his
ear heavy, that it can not hear, but your iniquities have made a separation
between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you, that he
will not hear, Esa. chap. 59. So Jeremy in his fifth Chapter: Your sins have
hindered good things from you. And what sin or iniquity can be greater, or
more detestable before the Lord, then the sin of incredulity and unbelief,
even the mother and fountain of all other sins? This is that which the
Evangelist Saint Matthewe reprehendeth in the Nazarites, even their
incredulity: for when our Savior Christ came among them to preach, and
teach, and to heal them that were sick, as he did in other places, they
were offended with him, and gave him just occasion to say of them, That a
Prophet was not without honor, save in his own country, and in his own
house. Then is it added in the end of the Chapter, He did not many great
works there, for their vnbeliefes sake, Matthew. 13. So likewise our Savior
Christ says to the father of the child that was lunatike, considering his
want of faith: If thou could (says he) believe, all things were possible
to him that believes, Mark 9. And this is the only cause that barred the
Israelites out of the land of Canaan: For we see that they could not enter in,
because of unbelief, Hebr. 3. No more shall any enter at all into heaven,
which was figured by the holy land of promise, which believe not: for John
says, that all the unbelieving shall have their part in the ^ake that burns
with fire and brimsto^^ which is the second death, Reave. 21. Now when we
say, that faith alone in Christ does apply all his good works unto us, we
do not speak against good works, that are done of the godly here in this
life, but our meaning is, that our good deeds do not save us, which any man
that has read the Scriptures indifferently, will grant. We exclude not works
in life and manners here before men, but we exclude them from any part or
portion of justification before the almighty God, in whose presence nothing is
perfect, clean or pure, no not the sun, nor the moon, nor the Angels: but
only the works of that immaculate and unspotted Lamb, even the man Jesus
Christ, whose works are all made ours, and imputed unto us, as if we had
done them, if we do but believe in him. Good works must be done of us, for
these three causes: first, because God has commanded them, secondly, because
he is glorified by them, as our Savior says Matthewe the fifth, Let your
light so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify
your Father which is in heaven. Thirdly, they must be done, because they
profit and further our poor neighbors and brethren, the needy members of
Jesus Christ, and in helping them, we help Jesus Christ himself, Matthew. 25.
For so does he account it as done to himself. You may add to these a fourth
cause, why good works are to be done, although they save us not, because they
shall be signs and tokens to men of our faith, which is hid and within us,
and shall declare that we are good Christians, even as the tree is known by
his fruit: for if we have no good works, surely we have no good faith, but
a devils faith, as James says, although we brag never so much of our
faith. This faith does not save, but is a dead faith, without any works. The
true faith that we spoke of before, it does not save us, in respect of the
worthiness or dignity of it, but because it does look unto Christ his mark
or object, and does apprehende him with his works. The Papists say, that
faith alone can not justify us, because it is imperfect, as we say works
are, which therefore can not save us. But we must understand that the reason is
not alike: for we may have a true and a lively faith in Christ, although it be
not in every point perfect and absolute. No man can have a perfect faith in this
life, for it does still increase, and grow in greater measure: but the
children of God, they have and may have a true faith cleansed from hypocrisy
and dissimulation. And this true faith does justify every one that looks up
to Christ, as well as a perfect faith. Faith is likened to an hand, whereby a
man does receive any thing. Now we know by experience, that one with an
imperfect hand, that either lacks a finger, or a thumb, or that has his
hand sore, or otherwise blemished, may as well with his lame hand receive a
good and fine piece of gold from a rich man, for his alms, as one that has
a whole or sound hand: so may we receive from Christ, if we believe but a
little, as much as a grain of mustard seed in quantity, we may receive
remission of sins, and all other benefits of his death and passion, as well
as he that has a stronger faith and a greater. And nothing shall be impossible
unto us, as Christ said to his disciples in the like matter, Matthew. 17. Now
faith is said to be a firm and a constant assent of the mind to the words
of God, wrought by the motion of the holy ghost for the salvation of all the
believers. Seeing then so many excellent things are given unto us, if we
abide faithful, and believe in the Lord: and seeing furthermore on the
contrary part, we are deprived of all these promises and gifts, if we have no
faith: it behooves us to look about, and to examine well our selves, our
hearts, our consciences, our inward parts and affections, to see whether we be
in this faith or no, and whether we ca^ unfeignedly persuade our selves before
the Lord, that we have this true faith in Jesus Christ: If we have it, let us
continue and abide in it to the end, that we may be saved: let us use the godly
means and exercises of Christianity, whereby it may increase and wax
stronger in us: let us frequent the hearing of sermons, and the word of God,
in reading it also privately, and let us join prayer to the Lord, for this
excellent gift of faith. Likewise, the sacraments are to be used, which are an
increasing of this faith unto us, but with reverence let us often use them.
Finally the company and society of the godly shall help much to this matter.
For as faith is gotten by these means, so is it continued in us, and is lost,
if these exercises be away. If any feel him self void of faith, let him
beseech the Lord Jesus, the author of faith and giver of it, and say with the
Apostles, Lord increase my faith, and let him use ye ways that I spoke of
even now, for faith comes by hearing of the word of God. which when we hear,
the holy Ghost works in us: yea, the holy Ghost it self then comes into
our hearts by hearing the word, as it is reported in the Acts, that while
Peter spoke, the holy Ghost fell on all them that heard the word. Acts 10.

This faith is our wedding garment, and without it, we shall be excluded and
shut out from the marriage of the Lamb. It is the oil which we must always
have in our lamps in a readiness, against the bridegroom come at midnight. As
the fire goes out for lack of wood, so is faith extinguished in us for lack
of the word of God, and earnest and hearty prayer, whereby it is mainteyned.
The Jews were cut off for their meredulitie. Well we stand yet by faith: let
us take heed, least in thinking we stand, we fall. If the true and natural
olives were not spared, how shall we escape that are the wild olives, if we
provoke the Lord? These things although partly they have been touched already,
yet they cannot be spoken of too much, seeing they are the duties of of all
Christians, and the co^mandeme^ts of the Lord. This doctrine of faith in Christ
Jesus, yt we are justified by it alone, and by it obtain remission of sins
without the works of ye law, is not private to some, but common to all that do
unfeignedly believe it, whether they be rich or poor, prince or beggar, bond or
free, Jew or Ge^tile, in this country or that, al are one in Christ Jesus who
is brother to all alike, and there is no respect of persons with God, Acts 10.
which is a father alike to all that call upon him in faith and truth. This, as
it is joyful and comfortable to all, so is it most specially to all them that
are afflicted in mind, to them whose calling is but base and abject in the
world, to such whom the world makes no account of, briefly to all that are
in poverty and misery, forsaken of the world for Christ's sake. Neither is
this doctrine new or strange as the adversaries do falsely slander it, which
say it was never heard of before the time of Luther: It is not so, this
doctrine is as ancient as the Prophets of God are, and all they are witnesses
unto it, and was in the primitive Church taught of the Apostles. For what else
do we say, but that we receive remission of sins through faith in Christ's
name? And does not S. Peter in ye Acts the tenth chapter say the very same,
and confirms it by the testimonies of all the Prophets? Mark his words
well, for they prove our purpose, and confirm the three points that we have set
down in this article, first, yt we al are sinners, secondly, yt Christ does
forgive the^ freely, and thirdly, y^ by faith it is, we lay hold on this
remission. His words are these, every one of them very effectual: To him
(says he) meaning Christ, of whom he made that excellent sermon, going
before unto the captain Cornelius, give all the Prophets witness, that
through his name, all that believe in him, shall receive remission of sins.
Peter does show that this doctrine which we teach, is not new or
heretical, but catholic, and such as the Prophets them selves all long ago
did teach, that by faith in Christ, every one that believes, shall have
pardon of all his sins, whether they be committed before or after baptism,
whether they be actual or original, or whether they be in thought or in
word, or in deed: if we believe steadfastly, they shall all be forgiven us
for Christ's sake. I speak here nothing of that great and horrible sin
against the holy Ghost, which is irremissible: I hope in the Lord, we shall
never have any thing to do with it, and therefore I will not entreat of it,
or what it is. Let this be our comfort, that we that have any fear of God,
any love to Jesus Christ our sweet savior, any reverence to hear his blessed
word and Gospel, and to receive his holy sacraments: we (I say) that have
any motion to these things, are far off from this sin, and it shall not
come nere our dwellings. You have heard now (dearly beloved) what it is we
have to learn and bear away upon this article, what is the meaning of it,
what parts of doctrine it does contain in it. This article, and the belief
of it is very comfortable, yea, the ioyfullest thing of all others in this
life, is to hear of the remission of sins, and that of all, when the least
of them is able to pluck us down to hell, and there to hold us in chains of
darkness for ever and ever, without any hope of recovery, were it not for his
mercies in Jesus Christ. The Lord does in deed bestow daily many good and
great blessings upon us in his mercy, for the which we ought continually to
thank him: but this benefit of the washing away of all our sins in Christ's
blood, does as far pass and excel them all, as either the Diamonde does
the stone in the streate, or else the purest and finest gold that may be, the
filthiest dross and dirt that can be found, so great a grace is it, in Christ
freely to have all our sins wiped out of Gods remembrance. But now let us
give (as we are dieply bound) most humble and hearty thanks to God the
father, for sending Jesus Christ his son into ye world, to take upon him our
sins, and to bear them all away in his body, and let us withal thank this
good and bountiful savior Jesus Christ, for vouchsauing to humble him self so
far for our sakes, as to have our sins imputed unto him, and to be laid
upon his back, and to suffer the punishment dew for them all. And let us also
pray both night and day unto him, to take them away from us more and more, and
to kill this raging sin within us, by the scepter of his holy word, and
operation of his mighty spirit, that notwithstanding sin be in us, as it
shall be to the last day, yet it may not reign in us, or be a tyrant over us,
but that we may mortify it from time to time, until we come to that state,
wherein it shall be clean put away, and altogether destroyed, which will be
when we shall meet together in the joyful and happy resurrection of our
bodies, whereof we are to speak in the article following. These things the
Lord God grant unto us al for his sons sake, to whom with the holy Ghost,
be rendered all praise and glory, and thanksgiving, both now and for ever
more. Amen.

The eleventh article of our Christian faith, and the eleventh lecture upon it,
which is, The resurrection of the body.
IN the fourth part of this our Christian belief, which was of the church, I
declared that there were three consequents or benefits annexed unto it. The
first you have heard, which was the remission of sins: Now does ensue ye
second, which is the resurrection, or rising again of our flesh and body. And
this article does follow in very good and apt order after the former: for as
by the first Adams sin and ours, our bodies became mortal and subject unto
death: so having remission of our sins by Christ the second Adam, our bodies
shall hereafter be made immortal, and raised from death to an everlasting and
better life the^ that, which we should have had in Paradise, if Adam and we had
continued in our state of innocence. This resurrection is the repairing and the
renewing again of the whole man to a most blessed and perfect estate of life.
The meaning therefore of this article is thus much: I that am a Christian, do
most certainly believe, that not only my body, but the bodies of all men, that
ever have been from the beginning of the world to the end of it, shall at the
last day of judgment, by the power of Christ at his coming, be raised up
again, (being the same in substance, but not in qualities) whether they be
rotted in the grave, or burnt in the flaming fire, or consumed of beasts, or
drowned in the sea, and devoured of fishes, or else of birds. And I moreover
believe, that they shall be joined to their souls inseperably, at the which
resurrection the godly shall have a full end of all their miseries, and pains
here; with full possession of eternal life, and that the wicked and reprobate
shall go into everlasting hell fire, which is prepared for the devil and his
angels. This is the true sense and meaning of this article of the resurrection.
Now let us see what good lessons may be gathered out of it, for our
instruction, that we may the better profit in the way of true godliness, and
Christianity. Three things are to be considered in this resurrection. First
that according to ye scriptures, there shall one day be a general resurrection
of good and bad. Secondly, to what end this shall be. Thirdly, the consolation
and comfort, that we may reap and enjoy by this resurrection, in the applying
of it to our own consciences. I am not ignorant, how that very many things
must be repeated here, which have been spoken of before, both in the article of
Christ's resurrection, which is a plain confirmation and proof of this, and
also in the other artice of his coming again to judgment, which shall be then
when this article shall be fully accomplished unto us. These things are so
incident the one to the other, I mean Christ's resurrection, and his judgment
and our rising again, that they cannot ^e separated: howbeit, we will by Gods
grace so speak of them all, as they shall tend to godly edification, and to
the great comfort of all them that do now in these last and dangerous days
mourn in Zion. And albeit some places and reasons shall be now brought here, in
ye proof of this article which have been alleged before: yet it shall not be
amiss to bear them again and often, that we may the better remember them,
because we are all dull in hearing, and forgetful of good things, so fickle
is our memory. In the Scriptures both in the Law and in the Prophets, and
also in the new Testament, ye have the same lessons given forth often unto
you, especially in the Psalms, where the latter part of the verse, is either
but a repetition, or else a more plain declaration of the former part of the
sentence. Yea, Saint Paul him self well understood this to be a very
profitable and good thing, to hear one lesson many times, and therefore said
to the Philippians, It grieueth me not to write the same things to you, and
for you it is a sure thing, chapter 3. Seeing this is so, let us then come to
our purpose, which is to prove that there shall be a general resurrection of
all men. This article is (I grant) very hard to be believed, if we judge of
it by flesh and blood only, as far as natural reason will extend, but where
faith is planted, there reason has no place. And all the works of God, if
they did not pass our reason and capacity, then they were there not so
wonderful, neither should theybe unsearchable or past finding out, which S.
Paul the Apostle affirms, Romans. 11. saying, O the deepenesse of the
riches, both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! Many of the better sort of
the heathen Philosophers, as Plato, Aristotle and Cicero, although they were
fully persuaded of ye immortality of ye soul, yet they never did so much as
once dream or think of the immortality, and resurrection of the flesh,
which we bear about with us. So incredible a thing did it seem unto them. And
therefore Saint Paul, when he came to Athens, and there preached Christ Jesus
unto them, and many other good points of Christianitye, and of our faith, they
heard him indifferently without any mocking at al: but when he said and
affirmed constantly unto them, that God had appointed a day, in ye which he will
judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he has appointed, whereof
he has given an assurance to all men, in that he has raised him from the
dead, the^ they mocked, because they heard of ye resurrection from the dead,
Acts 17. Well, notwithstanding all this, we that are Christians and trained up
in the schole of Christ our master, must believe this point. For surely the full
persuasion of this one article, comprehends many other articles of our faith:
For if we rise not again, then is not Christ risen: if Christ be not risen,
then are we in our sins, and so the former article that went before, falls
to the ground. But if this be true, then all ye other going before are
confirmed, and out of doubt. Let us therefore hear, and mark also some
infallible testimonies, and authorityes of the everlasting and true word of
God, to build our faith upon in this so hard and strange a matter to reason,
and to confirm us against all tentations of Satan, or of the wicked and carnal
Atheists, which will go about to undermine the verity of this article. We have
in the third chapter of the book Exodus, a manifest proof of the resurrection
in these words, where as God speaking to Moses, says on this wise, I am the
God of Abraham, the God of Isahac, and the God of Jacob. Which words are so
forcible, that our savior Christ used no other argument against the Sadduces
which denied this resurrection. For God cannot be said to be God of Abraham,
except he raise him again, and the body be joined to the soul. For he
calls not himself, the God of Abraham's soul, but of Abraham, meaning the
whole man. It was evident therefore that Abraham with ye rest of ye fathers,
shall rise again. Very excellent is ye place of Job, in the nineteenth chapter
of his book. I know (says he) that my redeemer lives, and he shall stand
the last on the earth, and though after this skin worms shall devour this
body, yet shall I see God in my flesh, whom I my self shall see, and my eyes
shall behold, and none other for me, though my reins are consumed with in me.
We see by this, that Job long before us, or before the new Testament was
written, had a full hope of the resurrection, that both body and soul should
enjoy the presence of God at the last day. this is written (as Paul says) for
our instruction, that we should have the like hope and assurance as he had,
in the happy and blessed resurrection of our bodies after death. This trust
and faith had the Prophet David, in the sixteenth psalm, Thou shall not leave
my body in ye grave, neither shall thou suffer thy holy one to see corruption.
In ye six and twentieth of Esaias we read thus, Thy dead men shall live, even
with my body shall they rise. Awake, and sing ye that dwell in dust, for thy
dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast out the dead. What can
be spoken more plainly for this purpose. Likewise under the vision of the dry
bones, which revived and took flesh, the Lord would show unto Ezechiel, that
he was able to do all things, and to bring the people out of captiuitye,
which were as dry bones then rotten and consumed. And this was a type of the
resurrection to the house of Israel in their banishment, being restored to
their country again. That place of Daniel in the twelft of his prophecy is
most evident, At that time, shall Michael stand up, the great prince, which
stands for the children of thy people, and there shall be a time of trouble,
such as never was since there began to be a nation unto that same time, and at
that time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be written in the
book* and many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth, shall awake, some
to everlasting life, and some to perpetual shame and contempt. And they that
be wise, shall shine as the brightness of the firmament: and they that turn
many to righteousness, shall shine as the stars for ever and ever. Here is
set forth the rising of all men, both good and bad, and the glory of the one
sort, and ye shame and confusion of the other. Look Matthew 22. Mark 12. Luke
20. Our savior Christ exhorting rich men to make feasts, and to provide for
the poor, said, that they should be reco^pensed in the resurrection of the
just, Luke 14. Where we may note, that the resurrection is said to be a
recompense and a reward for the just. And surely so it is: for otherwise ye
Lord might seem to be unjust, which many times does not here reward the
Godly, as he has promised, nor punish the unjust, as he has threatened them.
And if we trust in Christ only in this life, we are (says Paul) of all men
most miserable. We hope therefore for another life, and this is in the
resurrection: this is our joy and comfort. I see then no cause why me^ should
be so sorry to dye, and depart from this world, seeing a better world is kept in
store for the^. I come to the new Testament. In the 6 of John our Savior has
a notable place to confirm this matter unto us. Our Savior in that place
speaks of both the resurrections, the one from sin in this life, in the 25.
verse, that the dead should hear his voice, that is, they that were in mind
and faith dead, should now hear his Gospel, and be renewed unto repentance,
and so live a new life. This seemed a strange doctrine to the Jews, and they
wondered all at it. Our Savior then goes farther with them, and tells them
of more strange things then these, saying, Marvel not at this: for the hour
shall come, in the which all that are in the graves, shall hear his voice, and
they shall come forth, that have done good, unto the resurrection of life, and
they that have done ill, unto the resurrection of condemnation. Martha a woman
was well persuaded of this article, for she did believe that her brother Lazarus
should be raised up at the last day, John 11. Again, if all nations shall be
gathered together before Christ, then all shall rise, that they may be judged:
otherwise he can not be said to be the judge of quick and dead. Neither does
the remaining of some alive till the latter day hinder this position, but that
all shall rise. For they that did never die, shall be raised up with new
bodies, which change shall be as the rising from the dead, for having weak and
corruptible bodies, they shall be glorified and made heavenly bodies. If we
consider the power of God whereby he is able to do all things, even what he
list, and greater things then we can imagine: then this will not seem hard
or absurd unto us. We do believe and confess, that he is almighty in the
first article, and therefore we must needs confess that he can do it, as
easily as he raised up the body of Christ, wherein he has given the assurance
of the whole Church. And he that made al things of nothing at the first by his
only word, is able also now to bring to pass that of dust and earth shall
bodies be raised up again. Saint Paul could not be brought from this
persuasion by any means, either by fear or displeasure of the Sadduces, or of
Agrippa: or Festus, but he protested, that he had hope toward God, that the
resurrection of the dead, which did seem an incredible thing unto the^, Act.
26. should be both of just and unjust, Act. 24. The hope of this resurrection
made Saint Paul, as it should do us, to do his duty roundly: for herein
(says he) I endeavor my self to have always a clear conscience toward
God, and toward men. For verily, for this cause do many men make shipwreck of
faith and conscience in their actions and affairs of this life, because they
have quite forgotten this day of ye resurrection, wherein an account must be
given, not only of wicked deeds and blasphemous words, but of every idle
word spoken, as our Savior says, Matthew. 12. If we would consider this,
how we must all stand naked before the hie tribunal seat of Christ Jesus,
it would surely make us to tremble and to quake every vein and joint in us,
when we think upon it. The day shall be fearful and terrible, I hope there is
no man among us that doubts of the certainty of this day, although the day
and hour it self be known to no man. And this is to make us always to be in
a readiness for it. For it shall come upon a sudden, 1. These. 5. I should be
long and over tedious, and not seem to write a Lecture to exhort and teach,
but rather a treatise to convince the adversary and wicked, if I should
reckon up all the places that here might be brought for the confirmation of
this doctrine. Let these therefore for this time suffice: and if the diligent
reader be disposed to see more, let him read the 15. Chapter of the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, there he shall have a goodly discourse and handling
of this whole matter of set purpose, Paul proving the resurrection by many
reasons, both divine and humane, and showing moreover with what qualities,
conditions and properties the bodies of the faithful shall be raised up: where
he also answers the objections that may be made to the contrary. I conclude
this part with the words of Saint Paul to the Philippians the third Chapter:
Let our conversation be in heaven, from whence we look for the savior, eue^
the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body, that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he is
able eue^ to subdue al things unto him self. In these words he shows that
Gods power is able to do this, and although our bodies be vile, they shall
be made fair again: trees seem to be dead and rotten in the winter, which
in ye spring time come forth most florishingly with their fruit in due season:
so it is in the resurrection. This made the fathers so carefully to bury the
dead with their balmes and odours, knowing they should appear again. Last of
all, I refer you to the 2. Pet. 7. Chap. and Reave. 20. where this
resurrection is most lively, as in a table before your eyes, described. It
follows in the second place, to see to what end this great resurrection
shall be. We have seen the efficient and chief cause of this resurrection, to
be the power of God mightily woorking in him self. The form of it is, the
joining and uniting together of the body and soul for ever: and the matter
wherein this does stand, is the soul and body of man, which must be
repaired again, being once corrupted by sin in our first grandfather Adam,
and also in us his children, springing of the same corrupt root with him. The
final cause why this resurrection shall be, is of two sorts: the one is in
the respect of the good and godly men, who have lived here in the fear of the
Lord, to his honor and glory: in these he will show his exceeding great
mercy, in making them vessels of honor to serve him, whom he will reward
with everlasting life, which yet notwithstanding they have not of duty
deserved, (as the Papists say) but in mercy does the Lord bestow it upon
them. The other cause is in respect of the wicked and reprobate, upon whom the
Lord will show his perfect justice against sin and wickedness, committed of
the^ without repentance. These will he make vessels of his wrath, which shall
burn in the^ with an unquenchable fire, without end and mercy, who because
here they have not been thoroughly punished, or sometimes not at all, therefore
the full measure of their punishment is reserved til that great day, then to be
powered out upon them in fire and brimstone, in that burning lake continually
which never shall have end. For these causes is this resurrection (whereof we
speak) ordained. To speak of the end for the godly, first, so it is that the
Lord has promised in mercy to reward all his faithful servants, which
comes not many times to pass in this life, therefore there remains a life
to come to be showed in the resurrection of the flesh. And if all godliness
be sure to be recompensed with a promise of a good turn in the life to come
(as Paul declares to Timothy the first Epistle and fourth Chapter) Then out
of all doubt very expedient and necessary it is, that there should be a
resurrection. If any man say. The souls of the faithful are rewarded as soon
as they depart from the body, with this promise of life, and therefore they
seem not to lack a reward, although there be no resurrection, and so God is
true of his promise: I answer, that as the bodies of the faithful while they
lived well here, have been temples of the holy Ghost, to serve the Lord
withal, and as not only in soul, but also in body through diverse tentations
and persecutions they have been afflicted for Christ, and have still been under
the cross: so surely, they also with the soul shall be glorified and
rewarded, according to the things that they have done. And to this agree the
words of the holy Apostle: We must all (says he) appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, that every man may receive the things which are done
in his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or evil, 2.
Corin. 5. Here he names expressly the body, otherwise the reward were
imperfect, if in one part only it were bestowed. The Lord will not suffer the
giving of a cup of cold water to his saints to go unrewarded, much more
therefore will he reward those that have given their bodies to be consumed in
the flames of fire for his cause and the Gospel: so that if any lose his life
for his sake in this world, he shall find it in the world to come, with an
hundred fold more, with all happiness and joy restored unto him. If we look
upon all the saints that have been from time to time, we shall see that they
had no felicity, nor happiness in this life. The Epistle to the Hebrews,
speaking of the excellent faith of the old Patriarchs and ancient fathers,
shows us what was their estate in this life, for their good works and
deeds: Some were racked and would not be delivered, others were tried by
mockings and scourginges, by bands and imprisonment, they were stoned, they
were hewn asunder, they were tempted, they were slain with the sword, they
wandered up and down in goats skins, and sheep skins, being destitute,
afflicted and tormented, wandering in wildernesses, and mountains, and dens
and caves of the earth. If we ask the end, why they suffered and endured such
things of the wicked, the same Apostle does make us answer, This they did,
that they might receive a better resurrection. And surely they had been fools
to endure such torments of body, if the body and soul had perished in their
death and grave, as do the bodies of brute beasts, without any hope of the
resurrection. Consider ye the Apostles, how they were rewarded here for their
preaching and godly life: did they not all for the most part, in the end
suffer death and martyredome for their labor? how was Paul rewarded of the
Lord in this life? did he not whippe and scourge him when he received him
for his son? yes truly. And he confesses what his whole life was after his
conversion: nothing but a sea of troubles and miseries, fightings without, and
terrors within, hunger and thirst, cold, nakedness, bands and poverty were
the rewards that the Lord gave him here, insomuch, that he might seem to be
in worse case after his conversion to Christ, then before, if he had judged of
his afflictions by a worldly and carnal eye, and not according to faith, as did
carnal Demas, and therefore because he felt miseries in this life, in
Christianity revolted from Paul, and embraced this present evil world, 2.
Timothy 4. These things made Paul to say, that unless there were a
resurrection, his state had been most miserable of al others, for what (says
he) aduantageth it me to suffer these things, if the dead rise not again,
then let us eat and drink, and live in pleasure. So we see the hope of the
resurrection stayed him from running into condemnation with the wicked, and he
confessed else where, that his crown was not here in this life, but was laid up
for him. And al these vexations of the bodies, of souls, of minds and
consciences of men, is to teach them that no blessedness is to be hoped for
in this our vale of misery: but we look for a city to come, whose builder
and maker is God, seeing we have none here that is permanent. Our savior,
when he comforted his disciples against persecutions to come, when as they
should be mocked, reviled, taunted, yea and killed for his sake, willed them
in that day to be glad and to rejoice, for their reward was great in heaven.
He said not in earth, that their minds might be with drawn from this life to
ye everlasting rest out of this world. And this can not be, but in the
resurrection of our bodies. They yt will have their reward in this life, in
short and transitory pleasures of sin for a season, feasting and sporting
them selves in their wantonness and ungodly delites, and are impatie^t to look
and wait for ye heavenly promise of joys, that shall have no end, are like
unto the rich man both proud and gluttonous, that fared deliciously every day,
and went in purple and silk, not regarding the poor estate of Lazarus, and
therefore now in hell receives pain and punishment endless, which in his life
time received pleasure and comfort. But they yt with patience, and quiet minds
can take al things in good worth, whether it be sickness or poverty, or shame
and ignominy, which ye Lord here sends to the^ in this life, for a trial of
their faith, and can look up unto y^ celestial life to come, tarying the Lords
leisure, these men are like to poor Lazarus, which in deed in his life time
received pain, but is now comforted beyond all ma^s expectation with an
everlasting comfort, Luke 16. David pronounces the^ blessed that fear ye
Lord, and yet if we respect ye present time, it does not so appear to us, but
rather ye contrary: for what blessedness is here, either in ye body, or in ye
soul, if we speak of a sound and perfect happiness, as he mea^t it? The soul
is infected with sin, the understanding is darkened, and the things we know not
are more in number, then ye things we know: so yt our knowledge which should
beautify and adorn out soul, is imperfect: and this not only in things
natural and civil, but also in heavenly mysteries, and matters of greatest
weight and importance: so that Paul might well cry out and say, O mortal man
that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death. Romans 7. No
happiness therefore in this life of the mind of man, but that which is, is
rather a shadow and a visour, then any true sight of happiness. For it does
not yet appear what we shall be, although now we are the sons of God: but
this shall appear when Christ shall come in glory, Colos. 3. Now if any grief
of mind which is inward, come to the soul, then it seems to be in hell,
and this dolor surmounteth all the passions and pains of the body. Let any
man consider the body, and he will say that it can not be happy in this
life: the diseases and sicknesses of it are so many in number, that they have
passed the art and skill of the best Physicians to heal them. And if the
diseases of the body were away, yet were there calamities a thousand to prove
it to be in a very wretched case, as long as it is subject to sin in this
pylgrimage. What crosses are shame to us, and ignominy, contempt and reproach,
which cause many most desperately to hang themselves? What is poverty with her
children? as lack of friends, meat and drink, want of apparel which is
necessary, lodging, and house room, with such things? These miseries a man
may have, although he had health of body, although yet these things bring
sickness with them commonly. What then are other external dangers, as the
wounding and hurting of our selves, the spoiling of our goods, dangers upon the
land of thieves, and upon the sea of drowning? and if we escape that, there is
danger of ungodly Pirates. These crosses being laid together, and weyed in the
balance of justice, will cou^terpeise and ouerweigh al our pleasures that are,
or may be invented in this life: so great is the heap of miseries in this
life. And these troubles that I have above rehearsed, as they are common to
all, so especially to the godly, to make them not to be in love with this
world, seeing the Lord has reserved the blessed resurrection for them.
Wherefore (dearly beloved) call now to remembrance the days that are passed,
and consider the saints, which after they had received light, endured a great
fight in afflictions, as our martyrs did in Q. Mary's days, partly while they
were made a gazing stock, both by reproaches and afflictions being tossed to
and fro, and suffered with joy the spoiling of their goods. And know you dear
brethren, that ye have in heaven a better and a more enduring substance then all the gold and silver of princes. Cast not away therefore your confidence which
has great recompense of reward in this day of the resurrection of your bodies.
For ye have need of patience, that after ye have done the will of the Lord,
ye may receive the promise of eternal life. For yet a very little while, and
Jesus Christ the author of this resurrection that shall come, will come, and
will not tarry. Thus much for the end of this resurrection in respect of the
servants of Christ, which then, and not before shall fully be rewarded, and
made perfitely blessed in every part, both body and soul, wherein they have
served their Lord faithfully, when they were alive. Now let us see the end,
for the which all the wicked shall rise again at that day, which also stands
with the justice of the Lord, to recompense them after their demerites. As not
only the souls of the wicked have offended their GOD by their sinful
thoughts and cogitations, but also their bodies have been slaves unto sin,
and have given their members over to serve unrighteousness: so it stands
with equity, that not only their minds and consciences be tormented, but
also their bodies, by the which they here have wrought all these abominations,
should feel the reward and stipende of sin, which is the everlasting death,
even the second death of the soul and body together. This punishment is
deferred most commonly in this life, and who in so good estate, as concerning
the body here, as the wicked and such as contemn the Lord: In so much that
their prosperity and wealth, have moved the godly to wonder at the secret
judgments of ye Lord in this their case. This thing moved the Prophet
Habakkuk to cry unto the Lord for vengeance against the wicked, being
troubled with their prosperity and success. Wherefore do thou look (says
he) upon the transgressors, and hold thy tongue, when the wicked deuoureth
the man that is more righteous then he, whereof they rejoice and are glad.
Habakkuk 1. This complaynt likewise made the prophet Jeremy in his time, in
the 12. of his prophecy, saying, O Lord, if I dispute with thee, thou art
righteous, yet let me talk with thee of thy judgments: wherefore does the
way of the ungodly prosper? why are they in wealth, that rebelliously
tra^sgresse? These were Ieremies words concerning the ill men: but he adds
more, Thou have planted them, and they have taken root, they grow and bring
forth fruit: thou art near in their mouth, and far from their reins.
David found by experience the like success of the wicked in his days also,
and therefore says that he fretted at the foolish, when he saw the
prosperity of the wicked: For (says he) there are no bands in their death,
but they are lusty and strong: they are not in trouble as other men, neither
are they plagued with other men. Therefore pride is as a chain unto them, and
cruelty covers them as with a garment: their eyes stand out for fatness:
they have more then heart can wish: they are licentious, and speak wickedly
of their oppression: they talk presumptuously: they set their mouth against
heaven, and their tongue walks through the earth. Here you have a description
of their life, and of their prosperity, what the one is, and what the other is
also, their life is licentious, and yet it goes well with them for these
transitory goods: but what does David confess of him self, which was the
child of God? Daily (says he) have I been punished and chastened every
morning, Psalm. 73. Seeing this stands so with the wicked, shall we not say,
yt they shall be punished elsewhere? Yes no doubt, there is a judgment day kept
in store for them, where they shall be punished, although they have lived in
pleasure here: otherwise the Lord should not be just. Look upon the 21.
chap. of Job, and you shall see, yt long before David, he took up the like
complaint, then, when he saw yt wealth and ease in this life of the godless,
and contemners of religion. We see how the Jews, the children of God were
still afflicted of their enemies, and kept under the rod, when as their
persecutors, the Assyrians, y^ Caldeans, the Persians, the Grecians, the
Romans, with the rest, lived in all wealth, peace and worldly prosperity. It
remains therefore, that they one day should feel the reward of sin in
their bodies which have sinned: the which thing seldom comes to effect in
this present state of life. The Lord has said by Esaie his Prophet in the 65.
chap. Behold, my servants shall eat, and ye shall be hungry: behold, my servants
shall drink, and ye shall be thirsty: behold, my servants shall rejoice, and ye
shall be ashamed: behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, and ye shall
cry for sorrow of heart, and shall houle for vexatio^ of mind. Although this be
somewhat accomplished, even here under the kingdom of grace, whereby the godly
do rejoice, and the wicked are somewhat quailed: yet shall it especially be
seen in the kingdom of glory, when the elect shall be fully set in sure
possession of all joys, and the wicked have full measure of all their deserved
punishments. To end the^ this matter, the use of this doctrine is this: seeing
the wicked shall be rewarded seven fold into their bosom, and shall make and
give an account very strait of all their life wickedly and ungraciously spent
upon ye earth: let not us freat at them before the time, as David counsels
us, neither let us envy their hie and so prosperous estate, for they shall
soon be cut down like grass, and shall wither as ye green herb. Lo, see
their continuance, and to what thing it is likened of the holy Ghost, Psalm. 37.
The third thing in this resurrection, is ye comfort that thereby does ensue to
ye godly, when they think and meditate upon it, which surely is very great.
For they yt are well persuaded in mind of ye resurrection of their bodies, can
not but at ye last hour of death depart joyfully and merrily out of this life,
yea and desire this day, as ye faithful and godly do, as Paul did: I desire
(says he) to be losed, and to be with Christ. The hope and great comfort of ye
resurrection made him to pray so. But they yt are not fully persuaded of this
true article, die very unwillingly, and with grief and sorrow of mind, thinking
they shall lose all pleasure here, and enjoy none in the life to come, as the
Epicures and belly gods do imagine, whose lives and sayings are most lively set
forth in the second of Wisdom, which chapter I would greatly wish to be read
of all men. Again, the sure belief of this does comfort us, when we have here
lost our dear friends and acquaintance, because one day we shall inioye their
company again. So did Paul comfort the Thessalonia^s, yt they should not be
fory for them that were dead, as those that have no hope, that they shall see
the^ again: as the heathens did, who lamented out of al measure for their
friends, as in deed having no hope at al of the resurrection, as we see it
came to pass in Cicero, who could not be comforted for the death of his
daughter Tulliola, whom he loved so well, although his friend Seruius wrote
most comfortably unto him. The cogitation hereof does arm us against all
persecutions, to suffer all things with a quiet and joyful mind, as the
martyrs did endure all kinds of torments in their bodies, because they knew
their bodies should be after a more excellent and glorious sort, restored to
the^ again in an other life. Furthermore, this will cause us to abstain from
all unlawful pleasures of the flesh and of sin, considering we shall have
pleasures in the resurrection without end, and that we shall reap there joy
without wearines, if we faint not here. With this resurrection did Job comfort
him self in his greatest extremities, saying, I know that my redeemer lives,
and that I shall see him in my flesh, Job 19. This was the comfort of Paul in
all his persecutions that he suffered for ye Gospel of Christ, that the dead
should rise again, ye good to glory, ye wicked to shame and reproach, 1. Cor.
15. Our savior exhorted rich men in this life, to give alms to the poor,
because they should be reco^pensed in the resurrection of the just, Luke 14.
Esaias comforts ye afflicted church in his time with hope of the resurrection,
saying, Thy dead shall rise, eue^ with my body shall they rise, Esaie 26. And
what is else the comfort of the godly at this day in such sorrowful times, and
dangerous days of sin, but only the sure hope of this blessed resurrection.
This is a comfort to every godly man, when he thinks upon it. For this day is
called the restoring of all things again to their former perfection, Act. 3.
It would greatly rejoice the lame man or creeple, to hear that all his limbs
should be restored again perfectly as they were at ye first. Likewise, it
would make glad ye heart of the naked, to hear that he should be clothed with
most precious garments of silk and gold. And why then should not we rejoice
ten thousand times more, to hear that we shall be restored to all integrity
of body and soul, and clothed with most perfect and pure innocence of life for
ever and ever? For our comfort, this day is likened to the pleasant time of
harvest, wherein the godly shall be gathered into the barn of Christ as pure
wheat, and the wicked cast out into the fire, as the unprofitable chafe good
for nothing, Matthew. 13. So that they which sow here in tears, shall there
reap in joy. This day is also termed by Christ and Paul, the day of the
redemption of our bodies from all miseries: for they shall be no more sick,
weak, deformed, lame, naked, hungry, thirsty, and that which is the greatest
of all, they shall cease from sinning any more, for they shall be like the
glorious body of Jesus Christ, without spot or blemish. And is not this a
singular comfort? The finest body here, is but a carrion in respect of the
foulest there. In this day, the righteous shall have dominion over the wicked,
Psalm. 49. David when he considered of this day so joyful, said, that his
heart did rejoice, because his body should not for ever be left in the grave,
Psalm. 16. This day is called of Paul to Titus 2. The blessed hope, of the
effect which it has to make us there all blessed without end in joy
unspeakable. This resurrection, which leads unto everlasting life, may well
be likened to the last door, that in the court or palace of kings, leads
into the princes privy chamber, or the chamber of presence: (for a man can have
no access thither, until he have passed through many other doors and
houses:) so surely it is in the life to come. We can not come or enter into the
kingdom of heaven, even the privy chamber of Jesus Christ, and there behold
his presence, except we first pass by many doors in this life, which do
lead us thither: as for example, we must first pass by our election, then by
our creation, thirdly, by our redemption, wrought by Christ upon the cross,
fourthly, by justification, fifthly, by sanctification of life, and last of all,
we must come to the resurrection, as the last door, if we will have our final
glorification, which is everlasting life, to behold and enjoy the sweet and
loving countenance of the Lord. Yea Paul goes further, and says, that by
many tribulations, as strayte doors and gates, which wring us, we must enter
into the kingdom of God. Needs therefore must the resurrection be joyful,
when as it leads us directly to such a palace of pleasure, as shall never
end, and therefore is called of Peter, the time of refreshing, both of body
and soul, in the presence of the Lord, Acts 3. The holy Apostle willed ye
Thessalonians to comfort them selves with ye joyful remembrance of this day.
1 Thessalonians. 4. For it shall be unto us as a new birth, or nativity in all pureness,
And if we so celebrate the days of our birth, wherein we were borne into a
vale of myserye and troubles, how ought we to celebrate and keep holy this
day, wherein we shall be exempted from all curses of this present life! This
day is termed our marriage day: if we rejoice here when we are married to a
mortal creature, peradventure to our greater pain, and trouble the^ before,
oh dearly beloved, how should we be affected, and what tokens of joy ought we
to show forth, when we shall be married to the son of God Christ Jesus for
ever in faith and truth, with a band which never shall be broken! as the Lord
speaks in Ose 2. chapter, and Reuelat. 19. In this day shall the gates of
heaven be set wide open unto us, which were shut up before, and our bodies
shall so much excel the bodies which we now bear about with us, as the sun
does pass and overcome the moon in brightness and light. O what a joy is
this to have our estate like unto the blessed Angels of God, most pure and
divine creatures! If this cannot move us, I see nothing yt may do it. I am
sure this reward so moved good Moses, that he forsook the kingdom in Egypt,
and suffered pain with the people of God, to come to this life in the end,
Hebr. 11. Yea, this hope of life to come, made Abraham to leave his country,
and to go to the land of Canaan as a poor stranger, Genesis 12. This made Paul
to go through thick and thin in this life, that he might attain to the
resurrection, when he had seen the joys and pleasures, that were showed unto
him in Paradise, when he was taken up thither, 2. Cor. 12. Of this joy, our
Savior gave his disciples a taste in the Mount, when he was transfigured
before them: but it was nothing in respect of this. Now as these things are
most comfortable to ye godly, to hear yt their bodies shall be raised up to
such glory: So is this day most fearful to the ungodly, which have here lived
a dissolute life: For they shall say at that day to the hills, Fall upon us,
and to ye mountains, Cover us. but this shall not prevail, for they shall be
raised up, but to their shame and confusion for ever, as Daniel says, Cha. 12.
They shall come forth (as our savior says,) but to the resurrection of
condemnation, and so to be punished from the presence of ye Lord Jesus, with
the worm of conscience, which shall never leave to bite the^, and with ye fire
which shall not be quenched: So they shall perish worthily through their own
corruption, and receive the wages of unrighteousness, as they which count it
pleasure, daily to live dilitiously. These men would willingly wish that this
day might never be: but it shall come upon them, and that suddenly, and they
shall be taken and snared, and not escape this judgment. For they must yield an
account of al their ungodly works, whereby they have both displeased the Lord,
and evil entreated his saints here upon earth. Thus you have heard (dearly
beloved brethren) the treatise of the resurrection by the scriptures
discoursed. First how that there is a general rising of all flesh. Secondly,
the ends wherefore it is ordained: and then the comfortable doctrine, that the
godly by this may lay hold on, in all miseries of this life. Now it remains
for a final conclusion, that while we live here, we endeavor to have our part
in the first resurrection with Christ, that we may by this come to the second,
and be blessed with him. Let us therefore give thanks to our Lord Jesus
Christ, who is the resurrection and the life, in that he has vouchsafed to
give unto us an assurance of it, in his own person, in that he rose again
from ye dead. And let us likewise pray unto him, yt we may so live, as we may
be children of this happy resurrection to life, having an effectual faith, with
charity which works by love in us, that al our actions whatsoever, may be
seasoned and powdered with it, preparing our selves against this day, with
mortifying of our flesh: and seeing we shall meet so victorious and glorious a
Lord, coming in the clouds, let us purge our selves from all filthiness of
the flesh and spirit, for no unclean thing shall enter in with him. God for
his sons sake, give us the grace to do these things: to the which blessed
and immortal God with the son, and the holy Ghost, be rendered all praise,
glory and thanksgiving, for evermore. Amen.

The twelfth Lecture upon the twelfth article of our Christian faith, which is,
The life everlasting.
THis is the last article of our Christian faith, and ye last and greatest
benefit yt God does bestow upon his church, which is y^ third benefit of the^
that follow ye church: for after remission of sins, and the resurrection of
our bodies, follows this free gift of life, which is the end of all our
faith, as S. Peter calls it, 1. Pet 1. The resurrection going before, gives
a passage unto this endless life: for except that resurrection come, we cannot
fully have this benefit. As remission of sins by Christ is the greatest
gift, that God does bestow upon his children in this life: so in ye world to
come, this everlasting life does so far surmount all the rest, as ye earth in
compass does pass ye bigness of a tennys bal. This article shall then have
his effect when Christ shall come to judgment, and not before. For of all the
articles of our faith, these three only remain to be accomplished, ye general
judgment, ye resurrection, and this life everlasting, which shall al be
fulfilled together. The meani^g of this article is this: I yt am a true
christian, do steadfastly believe, yt as I have already a sure pledge of this
life in me, which is ye holy ghost working in my heart full hope of it, by ye
seed of Gods word: so I shall in ye world to come have this blessed life most
abundantly powered upon me, in full measure of al happiness both in body and also
in soul, which shall never have any term of years, but shall continue for
ever, as ye Lord himself does, without ending, in which state I shall praise the
Lord my God, not in part as I did here, and with the dregs of sin, but without
all sin, never ceasing to praise him, and yet without al wearines, Re. 21. As
concerning ye excellency of this eternal life, if all ye tongues of men and of
angels, were joined and united together all in one, with all their knowledge
and eloquence to express it, if they should be about it a thousand thousand
years: yet notwithstanding, they al shall not be able to express and utter ye
least part of it, no not ye joy and pleasure of one quarter of an hour: so
great, so inspeakable, so incomprehensible are ye things yt the Lord Jesus
has laid up for all them that love and serve him. For although we hear this
life to be replenished with joy, happiness and pleasure, yet these things are
far removed from ye capacity of our senses, until the day come, wherein we
shall see him, as he is, and he reueile his glory unto us, even face to face,
y^ we may see him perfectly. Wherefore the prophets and Apostles, seeing this
blessed kingdom wherein we shall be placed, to be in it self inestimable, and
not to be declared, as it is in deed, to give them a taste of it, whom they
would stir up to be in love with it, they all have described it by earthly
pleasures and commodities, which here we make great account of. So our Savior
used to express it by an earthly table of kings and princes, furnished with all
manner of deynties and delicates, to please both ye eye and ye taste of man,
saying to his disciples, Ye are they which have continued with me in my
tentations: therefore I appoint unto you a kingdom, as my father has
appointed unto me, that ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and
sit on seats, and judge the twelve tribes of Israel, Luke. 22 Here Christ
expressed spiritual things by corporal and earthly blessings. But this we
must think: If the Lord God do contain in himself ye fullness of all
felicity and good things, then we, having ye fruitio^ of ye Lord, shall desire
nothing besides him. And this is yt most great and precious promise, yt Peter
speaks of, which is given to us, That we should be partakers of the divine
nature, 2. Pet. 1. For ye Lord shall be gloryfied in all his Saints, and shall be
made marvelous in the^ yt beleeu. If the^ ye Lord God shall communicate and
impart with his elect, his glory, his justice, his virtue, his goodness, yea after
a sort shall give himself unto the^, we may be sure yt we shall have joys
infinite, and without end, such in deed, as y^ eye has not seen, nor ye ear
heard, nor ye tongue ca^ speak, nor ye heart and mind of man ca^ possibly
conceive and imagine, which pass al understanding: so yt they ought to make us
wonderfully amassed and astonished, when we consider of the^, they do so far
exceed our capacity, and reach of wit. The excellency of this life may be
seen in these 2. things: first in ye happiness of our soul: then in ye welfare
of our body. As touching ye soul, it shall be most happy, for it shall cease to
sin, and shall be wholly joined to ye Lord in faith and truth, and never displease
him any more. What a great joy is this! Again, ye things yt the^ shall beautify
our soul, shall be most perfect: our knowledge, our wisdom, our understanding,
which here is all darkened, shall there be enlightened with ye glory and light of
the Lord: all virtues and ornaments of the mind shall abound in us even to the
full, and every thing that is imperfect, shall be then done away, no grief of
the mind, no sorrow of heart, no torment of conscience any more, but peace, joy
and tranquillity ever to endure. This is the Image wherein we were first
created, and shall then be renewed to a more perfect estate of life, then it
was in before the fall of Adam. Our soul there shall not be enemy to the body,
neither shall the spirit rebel against the flesh, but it shall love the Lord
with all his might. And if the joy of the mind and soul be so great here many
times in the children of God, that they seem to be in heaven, what shall it be
there (think ye) when it shall be in full possession of all his delights and
spiritual pleasures, ever singing and making sweet melody to the Lord, and
yet without any weariness at al? For old things are al passed away, and
behold, all things shall become new again, and the things that are there,
shall be eternal. For Christ shall give unto all his eternal life, John 17.
This is the happiness of the soul. Now let us see the blessed estate also of
the body, and that shall the better appear, if we compare it with the state
that it is in here. Our bodies are now deformed, there they shall be most
fair and beautiful, yea that which is more, they shall be like the glorious
and immortal body of Jesus Christ himself. Here the body is many times
maimed and imperfect, there it shall be perfect and in his integrity: here it is
in sickness, in poverty, in nakedness, in wounds, in stripes, in botches,
in sores, and in all incurable diseases: there shall it be whole and all
sound, rich and glorious, clothed with innocence, and never able to feel any
infirmity any more. For here it is sown in dishonor, in weakness, in
corruption: and there it rises in honor, in power, in incorruption and
immortality. Here be many things that make it to offend against God: there is
nothing that shall cause it to sin: it shall not, as it did here, lust
against the spirit, but be at peace and unity with it: the sight of it most
quick in seeing, and very perfect it shall be in all the senses, in hearing,
in smelling, in tasting, in handling. It shall have all melody and music to
delight the ear, even angels singing continually: it shall have all sightes and
shows to delight and please the eye, even the perpetual presence of the
blessed Trinity. All odoriferous smells, as it were of musks, perfumes,
flowers, the sweet incense of praise and thanksgiving, to smell delectably in
the nostrels of the Lord, and ours, shall not there be wanting. O what a joy
is this to the body, to have all things at commandment, that may well
please and delight it! The pleasures of Kings and Queens are nothing to those
things whereof we speak, yea the pleasures shall be so exceeding great, that if
all ye joys and pastimes of this life were compared unto them, they should be
found to be but pangues and torments. Yea the continuance of all our delites
here for an hundred years, is not like to the blessedness of one minute of an
hour there, nor worthy to be likened unto it. For verily to speak with David,
I had rather be there but for one day, then here a thousand years, in all the
triumphs that Emperors and Kings can make with all their power. This is then
the happiness of the body: Now how great shall the blessedness be, when both
the body and soul shall be conjoined together, and reign for evermore* Surely
as great as ye glory of the Lord is, and his excellent Majesty, which is
infinite: so great shall this glory of the Saints be. The love of this life,
which is everlasting, should make (me thinks) kings and princes to do their
duties to the Lord, to reign over, and govern their subjects in justice and
equity, and not to live in pleasures. The respect of these joys should make
Counselors to speak the truth boldly, and syncerely without flattering and
dissimulation to princes, considering what a reward is laid up for them in
heaven. This should make all Bishops and ministers of the word, to do their
duty in reprehending sin stoutly, and in contemning this vain world, in
teaching the flock without lucre and gain, seeing that when the great shepherd
Jesus Christ shall appear, they shall receive an incorruptible crown of glory,
1. Pet. 5. Finally, the consideration of this life, which is for ever, might
make every estate and degree in their callings, either hie or low, to do most
cheerfully their several duties to all men, that in the end their part may
be in the heavenly inheritance, which fades not away. O that our minds were
erected up to these things, they would not so lightly be carried away to
sin and wickedness, fearing least we should leese these everlasting joys.
This is the reward that Christ has promised to them, that follow him here,
in the regeneration, that have for his names sake forsaken houses, brethren,
sisters, father, mother, wife, children and lands, they shall inherit all
things, even everlasting life, Matthew. 19. This life shall be most happy and
joyful, either in respect of the persons, with whom we shall be, or else in
respect of the place, which is heaven, the seat of God, or in the
consideration of the time, which is for ever. Although we be here many times
in a good place, yet if our company be not good and honest, this can be no
delight to a godly man. Now in heaven we shall have the glorious fruition of
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, the society of all the angels, most
excellent creatures, the company of the Patriarchs, the Prophets, the Apostles,
the noble host of Martyrs, briefly the fellowship of all the elect and Saints
of God, that ever have bin. This can not be but an unspeakable delight to us
all, when we consider of it. Secondly, we shall be blessed in respect of the
place, for otherwise, if the company be good, and yet the place not
correspondent unto it in all things, as not being large enough, or sweet, or
glorious, there ca^ be no great delight there: but this place is most
answereable to the company, wide and large, fair, sweet and glorious, even
the heaven of heavens, the seat of the Almighty, a place of joy, a place of
comfort, a place of all spiritual delectation. S. John seeing it in the
spirit, has described it as far forth as flesh and blood can conceive of it,
under earthly things. I saw (says he) a new heaven and a new earth, and I
saw the holy city new Jerusalem, come down from God out of heaven, prepared as
a bride trimmed for her husband. John compares the place wherein we shall be, to
a city most glorious and excellent, whose shining was like to a stone most
precious, as a Jasper stone, clear as Crystal, whose wall was great and hie,
which had twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels. The wall of the city
had twelve fou^dations, which were garnished with all manner of precious stones,
as Iaspers, Saphires, Emeraudes, and such like, the building of the wall is of
Jasper, and the city was al of pure gold, like unto clear glass. The twelve
gates were twelve pearls, and the street of the city is pure gold, as
shining glass. This City has no need of the sun, neither of the moon to
shine in it, for the glory of God did light it, and the Lamb is the light of
it. The gates of it shall not be shut by day, for there shall be no night
there, there shall be no death, no sorrow, no crying, no pain, for the first
things are passed. There shall be a pure river of water of life, clear as
Crystal, and the tree of life bearing twelve manner of fruits. And there
shall be no more curse, but Gods servants shall raygne there for evermore.
This is the place, which John has shadowed out unto us, as well as he could
under these terrestrial benefits of gold, and silver, and precious stones,
whereas in deed it can not be described as it is in it self, because no man
has seen it, and we being gross and carnal, must have it by carnal and
visible things set forth unto us. Thirdly, the excellency of this life is
seen in the continuance of it, in that, that it never decays or waxes old.
If here below we had all pleasures and delites both for the soul and body,
yea although the place we were in, were most excellent and glorious, and the
company in all respects according to our desire, good, pleasant and honest: yet
if these things were but for a days, or an hours continuance, what great
contentation of mind, or recreation for the body might be here, seeing we
must depart very shortly from these pleasures? and then it had him as good, if
they had not been at al. For all these things are like unto pleasant music,
in a set of viols, which when they cease once, (and cease needs must every
thing in this life, be it never so pleasant) then it is al one, as if we had
never heard this music, so sweet and delectable to our ears, there is no
print or token of it left behind, but al vanishes away with ye very staying
of it: Eue^ as after the flying of a bird in the air, or the passing of a
ship in the sea, there is no trace found after them, Wis. 5. But dearly
beloved, believe me, this life shall have years without end in unspeakable joy,
in this so excellent a place, we shall hear music continually, and yet it shall
never cease, nor we be weary to hear it. And when we have been there in these
delights so long, and so many thousand years, as there be either sands in
the sea, or grasses upon the whole face of the earth, or stars in the sky,
which all are inmunerable to us: yet then we shall not come out, or leave these
joys, but still it is with us, as if it were to begin. O the unspeakable mercy
of ye Lord Jesus, that he has reserved for those that fear and love him here!
What man therefore is so foolish, so mad, so beastlike in his conversation,
that will not at all be moved with these pleasures and joys! For these
things, as the Angel said to John, are faithful and true, and therefore to be
believed, and they that believe them not, their part is in the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone, which is prepared for the unbelievers, Reuela.
21. For from this root of unbelief, proceed all the branches of all other
sins and wickedness whatsoever, as lying, stealing, covetousness, adultery,
and such like. This life and the dignity of it, the Prophet David in two
words has very well expressed in his 16. Psalm, the latter end, Thou will
(says he) show me the path of life: in thy presence is the fullness of joy,
and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore. Here, in fullness of
joy and pleasures for evermore, is all happiness contained. For these joys
are the greatest that may be, and their endurance is for ever. Considering
these things, ought we not to say with Paul? I count that the afflictions of
this present time, are not worthy of the glory that shall be showed unto us, Romans
8. Why, alas then (dearly beloved) what a great matter were it, if we should
endure here afflictions all the days of our life, which can not be above an
hundred years at the most, so we might come in the end to this eternal joy
and glory? Paul considered this well, and did so do. We faint not, (says he)
but though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed daily. Mark
well the words that follow, and lay them up in your minds, and you shall,
by the grace of God, profit thereby. For our light affliction, which is but
for a moment, causes unto us a far most excellent, and an eternal weight of
glory, while we look not on the things which are seen, but on the things
which are not seen. For the things which are seen, are temporal, but the
things which are not seen, are eternal, 2. Corinthians. 4. Shall we then for an
hours pleasure here below, leese the everlasting weight of glory above? God
forbid we should be so foolish, and so besotted with this present life. Let
this saying rather of our Savior Christ sound continually in your ears: What
shall it profit a man if he win the whole world, and leese his own soul?
And yet we see, how many men do hazard and venture their soul, not for the
whole world, but for a piece of land, a little gold or silver, or a little
credit or vain estimation in this world. If the whole earth then will not
be able to make a recompense or an exchange to redeem our souls, being once
lost from the favor of God, how much less then shall these beggarly things,
wherefore we strive so earnestly, be able to do it? Now although this life be
yet as it were hid from us, yet it is most certain: both because we have a
gage of it, which is the Spirit it self of Christ, and also, inasmuch as it
is hid in Christ, which will keep it well, and is able to give it to us in due
time. In the mean season, until it be revealed from heaven, we need faith to
believe it assuredly, and hope to wait for it with patience, which hope never
makes a man ashamed, but always comfort him even in the midst of
troubles of this life, be they never so great. For we do well know, that when
he does appear, we shall be like unto him, and no man need to doubt, but
that there is such a life, although it does not yet seem so to us: for there
is a Sun, when it is compassed in with clouds, and fire is within the ashes,
when it appears not to our sight: so there is a life for the godly, although
deferred, which Christ has promised and spoken of, Matthew. 25. that it shall be
given to his servants. This life everlasting, being so dear a thing and
precious, the devil goes about by all means, to defeat us of it, and to
pluck it out of our hand. Therefore we must lay hold on it, as Paul willed
Timothy, and fight the good fight of faith against him. This is our crown
which we must hold fast, yt no man bereave us of it. For if we miss of life
in the end we miss of all, and if we have this, we have and possess all
things, for all blessedness whatsoever is comprehended under the name of
everlasting life. But the best comfort for us is this, that this life is in the
custody of Jesus Christ, and we being his sheep, no man is able to pluck us
out of his hands: only this remains for us to look unto, that we abide and
continue in his fold. Eternal life being the everlasting inheritance of the
kingdom of heaven, the greatest treasure that the Lord has to bestow upon his
servants, no man must think, that it comes to him for his good works sake,
or that he does deserve it at Gods hand: this were to prejudice and overthrow
the bountiful goodness of the Lord. This benefit is the free gift of God,
for although we deserve hell and death by our sin and wickedness, yet we
merit not heaven by our good deeds, but as Paul says, Everlasting life is
the free gift of God, Romans 6. And Christ tells us, that this kingdom was
prepared for us long ago, even before the world was made, or we borne, so
that we could not step one foot unto it of our selves, when we were not,
Matthew. 25. It is false then that the adversaries of Christ, the Papists, have
taught, that we may deserve this life by our good deeds and works, when as
our good deeds are not pure in the sight of the Lord. In deed, if our good
works were either perfect, or as many as God commands, or if they were our
own, and not Gods gifts in us, or if last of all we were not bound of
duty and by right to do them, then might we with our own good works
deserve heaven: but our deeds are imperfect, they are not our own, of duty
must we do them, therefore they deserve nothing, as of duty from the Lord.
I grant that everlasting life is called by our Savior a reward, but a
reward is not of desert or merit, but of courtesy. A Noble man may reward his
tenant for a thing not worth a shilling, by such a gift as is worth twenty
shillinges: shall he therefore say, that is the poor man, that, because he
has this reward, he has deserved it? If he so do, he does very unthankfully.
When the servant has done his duty, can he claim any thing of his master by
merit? I trow no, says our Savior Christ, Luke 17. Neither does the
master thank him: So we, if we had done all things commanded unto us, (as we
are far from performing the least of them) yet we are unprofitable servants:
and what does an unprofitable servant deserve at the Lords hands? Surely not
the kingdom of heaven: if he deserve any thing, it is stripes. Let us not
therefore think, that we can deserve ought at Gods hands, or gratify and
pleasure him, so that he should be beholding to us, and of duty to do any
thing for us. This is a very deuilish opinion. Christ has deserved at Gods
hands all things necessary for us: therefore if we be in Christ, we shall
have all things we can desire. The land of Canaan, which was but a type and
figure of heaven, the Jews could not get by their own righteousness, but only
by ye free promise of God, in mercy made unto them. It seems they had some
opinion of their own deseruings, as ye Papists have now, and therefore Moses
gave the^ oftentimes in charge, to attribute al to the favor of ye Lord, and
not to their good works, as appears in ye 7. 8. and 9. of Deuteronomy. but
especially in ye 9. chap. whereas he says, Hear, O Israel, thou shall pass
over Jorden this day, to go in and possess nations greater and mightier then
thy self, and cities great and walled up to heaven. A people great and tall,
even the children of the Anakims, who^ thou know, and of whom thou have
heard say, Who can stand before the children of Anak? understand therefore,
that this day the Lord thy God is he, which goes over before thee, as a
co^suming fire, he shall destroy them, and he shall bring them down before thy
face: so thou shall cast them out, and destroy them suddenly, as the Lord has
said unto thee. Speak not thou in thy heart, after that the Lord thy God has
cast them out before thee, saying, For my righteousness the Lord has brought
me in to possess this land: but for the wickedness of these nations the Lord
has cast the^ out before thee. For thou entrest not in to inherit their land,
for thy righteousness, or for thy upright heart, but for the wickedness of these
nations the Lord thy God does cast them out before thee, and that he might
perform the word which the Lord thy God swear unto thy fathers Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob. Understand therefore that ye Lord thy God gives thee not this good
land to possess it, for thy righteousness, for thou art a stifnecked people.
Thus you see how in many words ye Lord throws down all their worthiness, and
extolleth his only goodness toward the^. Now if they were not able to get and
purchase this temporal land of ye earth: how shall we gel heaven? and if a man
ca^ not build an house and finish it, except the Lord build it, Psalm. 127.
How can any man build an house for himself in heaven? The Israelites were
taught to say, that their abundance in meat and drink, and other blessings
of this life, came from the Lord, and not from their own power or strength,
Deuteronomy. 8. verse. 17. And shall we be so injurious to God, so unthankful to
Christ, so presu^ptuous against ye holy ghost, as to say, we have gotten to our
selves everlasting life? God forbid that this foolishness should enter into
the heart of any man. Seeing then al these small things come not for our own
deserts unto us, but for his Christ's sake, much more must we ascribe to his
goodness this great benefit of life everlasting. As concerning this life to
come, to ask, as many do fondly and curiously, rather then godlily, whether
we shall know one another, or whether we shall all be alike in degree: I
think these questions to be such as S. Paul wills us to eschew and put away
far from us. This is certain, our knowledge there shall be most perfect and
absolute: for then shall I know as I am known, and no ignorance of any thing
that is necessary, shall be in us, and every man shall be contented, and have
his full joy in all measure of his quantity, so that the least pynte pot
shall be as full for his measure, as the greatest tun is with his quantity.
All men there shall have fullness of joy, Psalm 16. The Lord send us
thither, and we will be content with the lowest roune, as David professed of
himself. The best question for all to ask, especially of the simple and
unlearned, is, to know thoroughly the way that brings us thither, which is
only Jesus Christ, the way, the truth, and the life, John 14. And so did our
Savior answer: for being curiously demanded of one, how many should be
saved: he told him the means how he should be saved. And so must we do
also, and not feed the fancies of men, or delight their vain humors. I am sure
there be many men that will ask what we shall do in heaven, and what we
shall eat and drink, or whether we shall be clothed there: which can not tell
how to come thither, if they were demanded the question. And what a madness
is this, to strive for the shadow, and to let the body go? to enquire to
know things which we are not commanded to search after, and to let go those
things which we are bound to know? And this vice is most common to them whom
we term fine witted fellows, which contemn common and necessary questions,
to seek out deep and profound questions, nothing at all tending to
godliness, but rather to the subversion and overthrow of all religion and
honesty. These men the holy Ghost does will us to avoid, and seeing they are
fools, to answer them with silence to their foolish questions. These things
breed strife and controversy about words, and they are like to that serpent
Hidra, which of one idle head, bring forth a great many to destruction. Here
is no mention made of hell or of death, because all that is in this confession
of faith, is set down for the only comfort of the godly, and not for their
terror. Notwithstanding as there is a life, and a great reward for the godly
after this race is ended: So is there a hell, and second, death prepared of
old for the wicked and reprobate. For our Savior Christ speaking of this
life, speaks also jointly of the everlasting destruction in fire, which is
for the devil and all his angels, and those that in this life have served him
here with their bodies and souls, and all their members. These (says Christ)
shall go into everlasting pain, Matt. 25. Where Origin and all those that
thought this pain should not be for ever, are most plainly confuted: for
Christ affirms it to have no end. To this saying of Christ agrees that in
Esaias the 30. Chapter, verse 33. Tophet is prepared of old, it is even prepared
for the King, he has made it deep and large: the burning thereof is fire and
much wood: the breath of the Lord like a river of brimstone, does kindle it.
Here is a full description of hell: For by Tophet he means hell. He declares
moreover when it was made, even of old, for whom also, for the King, he
means the King of Babylon, enemy to the Church, signifying that God
respects no man's person, but that hell is as well prepared for Kings and
Queens, for Lords and Ladies, and for great men, as well as the poor, that
do not believe. Yea, the greatest part of men goes this way, in every estate
and degree: so that we had need to look about us, to enter in at the straight
gate, for few there be that find it, but many that pass by the broad way.
Matt. 7. For this Tophet is deep and large to conteyne and to receive many,
yea more noble men shall go thither then to heaven. The Prophet describes the
pain of it, by fire burning with much wood: the continuance is for ever,
because the breath of the Lord which endures for ever, does kindle the fire,
as a river of brimstone. The joys then of heaven are not so inspeakable, but
that the torments and pangs of hell are as intolerable. Wherefore the wicked,
although they be not moved with the pleasures at the right hand of God, to come
unto him by repentance: yet in my judgment the exceeding great torments of
endless hell fire should move them to amend. For surely (dearly beloved) if
all the pains that may be devised in this life, all the sicknesses that ever
have been, all the torments of tyrants, all the griefs of mind that may be,
were all of them laid together, and compared to this hell fire, these pains
how great soever they seem to be here, are but fleabytings, yea rather
pleasures, in respect of this hellish fire, it is so great. And this fire
although it be so great, yet shall it burn for ever and ever, not only the
body, but also the soul, the mind, the conscience, and all the inner parts of
the damned sort. And when they have been there as many hundred thousand
years, as there are peeble stones in the sea shore, yet shall they not then
come out, but continue still, as if they were to begin anewe. For Christ's
words are true, this fire is everlasting, and can never be quenched, Matthewe
3. and 25. It were well with Judas, if he might come out of this woeful hell
and pains, when he has suffered them so many hundred thousand millions of
years, as there are stars in the firmament: but this can not be granted unto
him. If men therefore would consider of these two extremities, wherein is no
mean: of the joys of paradise which are endless, and of the torments of hell
and the wrath of God, which also has no end: then surely would they live in
fear and godliness in this present world. For as heaven is full of joy and
mirth: so hell is full of dolor and sorrow: and as in heaven is continual
rejoicing and peace of mind: so is there in hell a perpetual weeping, with
gnashing of teeth for woe and pain. As the glory of the Lord shall inlyghten
the elect with his gracious countenance: so shall the great majesty and wrath
of the Lord, press down the ungodly for ever. Finally, as in heaven the
saints shall have all things to do them good that they can desire: so in hell
the damned spirits shall have nothing to refresh them, not so much as a drop
of cold water, (which is but a small thing) to cool their tongue withal. And
as I said before of heaven and heavenly joys, so may I speak of this second
death: that if all the men in the whole world would go about to express
these torments, with all their eloquence and learning, yet shall they be
never able to do it: they are so unspeakable and not to be uttered of any
man. And these are the righteous judgments of the Lord, that he to ye wicked
might be known to be a just and a terrible God, to reward impenitent sinners
after their works, as they have deserved. For this end, says the Lord to
Pharao, I have stirred thee up, that I might show my great power and might
upon thee, in punishing thee accordingly. Let the wicked therefore take heed,
for there will come a day that will pay for all: and then what advantage will
it be, to have gotten an hours pleasure, with the purchase of everlasting
woes? But these things, and these evils, by the benefit of Jesus Christ are
far from us, and shall not come near the dwelling of the righteous.
Wherefore we ought with Paul to give thanks always to God, because that from
the beginning he has chosen us to salvation, through sanctification of the
spirit, and belief of the truth: neither has he appointed us to wrath as he
has the wicked, but to obtain this everlasting life, whereof we speak, by
the means of our Lord Jesus Christ, which died for us, that whether we sleep
or wake, we should live together with him. In the mean season it is our part
to stand fast, and not to be removed from this faith, but to lay hand of
this eternal life, whereunto we through the benefit of the Gospel preached,
are called freely of GOD, with an holy calling, not according to our works,
but of his goodness. We must also fight this good fight of faith, and strive
lawfully: if we hope to be crowned, and to continue to the end, we must
endeavor that we may be saved: for they that shrink back, leese this
excellent reward, for the which we are commanded to sell all that we have, and
to bye it, Matthew. 13. We have now heard the meaning of all the twelve articles
of our Christian faith, which are necessary to salvation: First, we have
seen the article that concerns our trust in God the Father, and what things
we learn by it: Secondly, we have declared the articles which contain ye
mysteries of Christ Jesus with our redemption and glorification, and other
benefits apperteining thereunto. Thirdly, the belief in the holy Ghost, the
third person in Trinity, has been opened unto us, and what comfort may
thereof arise to the faithful: Fourthly and lastly, the articles concerning
the Church and the benefits thereto belonging, have been expounded as God
has given us grace. These things are written, that we might believe that Jesus
Christ is the Son of God, and Savior of the world, and that in believing we
might have life through this name: Seeing then we have heard these things,
let us, as the holy and blessed Apostle of Christ, Saint Peter, wills us, be
ready always to give an answer to every man that asks us a reason of the
faith and hope that is in us, with meekness and reverence. And now let us
give thanks as we are continually bound, to our heavenly Father, in that it
has pleased him to make us Christians to believe these articles of our faith,
to our great and endless comfort. And let us pray unto him withal in the name
of his well-beloved Son, that he would give us grace to grow more and more
every day in this faith, that we may not only live in it, but also in the
end of our days, die in it most constantly, that so we may be blessed: And
that it would please him to give this grace, not only to us, but to all people
and nations of the earth, especially to his universal Church, wheresoever it
be dispersed abroad in all quarters of the earth. And in this Church let us
pray for the state of all Kings and Princes, that we may live a godly and
quiet life, with all peace and honesty: especially, let us commend to his
favor the Church of England, desiring him to bless it as he has done these
many years, and to continue his holy Gospel amongst us, although we for our
unthankfulness have deserved to have it taken away from us long ago. Desire
we of him, in mercy still to behold his servant and handmaide, our Queen and
sovereign, that she may be still zealous to set forward the Gospel of
Christ, and to root up all superstition and idolatry within her realm, that
she may be wise to foresee and prevent all mischiefs and dangers, that are
likely to hang over our heads, that so she may have a long and a blessed
reign over us to his glory, the profit and commodity of all her loving
subjects. Let us likewise desire of God, to bless all her most honorable
Counsel with true godliness and wisdom from above, that they may boldly,
and stoutly minister to her majesty the best advice, for the better ouerseeing
and government of this Christian common wealth wherein they live, that all
their counselles and policies, may especially be directed to the honor of
God. Pray we him, to bless the state of the ministry of this land, the
Bishops, and Pastors of his word, that not only in word, but also in good
and godly conversation of life, they may beautify the glorious Gospel of
Jesus Christ: beseech we him to root out from his ministry al ravening
wolves, papists, Atheistes, blind and unlearned ministers, and dumme dogs,
which seek only to fill their bellies, and not to edify the congregation:
that if it be his will, he would give to every Church her faithful and wise
dispenser of the mysteries of Christ. And because the schools of good
learning, are as Nurses and well springes thereunto: let us desire Christ, to
give his spirit amongst them also in the universities, that good learning and
godliness may grow, and increase daily more and more. Lastly, for the whole
body of this common weal, let us pray, that God would keep them al in his
fear, from the hiest to the lowest, and give them duetiful and obedient
hearts toward their prince and magistrates, which are by his authority set
over them, for their welfare and happiness. These things and all other
graces, he only grant unto us, which only is able and wise, and has
immortality, which dwells in the light that no man can see, to whom with his
son Christ Jesus, and the holy Ghost his infinite power, be rendered all
praise, honor and glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

The Lord be praised.
A declaration of the holy Communion.
THe holy Communion, called also the Lords Supper, was ordained, not of any
mortal man, but of the Lord Jesus himself, that as often as we come unto
it, (for often it is to be received) we should remember ye great love of our
master Christ, who loved us so well, that he gave his body and blood for to
redeem us from all our sins. That this great benefit should never be
forgotten of Christians, he instituted that we should receive bread and wine,
in ye remembrance of his death, and therefore this sacrament has two parts:
the one is the outward signs, bread and wine, to put us in mind, that as bread
does nourish the body, so does Christ's body nourish our souls, received
spiritually by faith into our hearts, Ephe. 3. 17. and as wine does refresh
us, and quench our thirst, so does his blood refresh our minds, and wash them
from sin, and quench the spiritual thirst of our souls: and this sacrament
of Christ's death is not given us in bread only, but in wine also, to teach us
that Jesus Christ is all in all unto us, not only meat to feed us, John 6.
35. but also drink to quench our thirst, as he says, John 7. 37. If any man
thirst, let him come to me and drink. And so he is also our apparel: Put you
on the Lord Jesus, Romans 13. 14. The other part of this Supper is spiritual:
the remission of sins, and heavenly graces received of us, as truly as we
receive the signs of them, if we believe: for this is to confirm our faith
in this matter, that we should doubt no more of Gods favor, then we doubt
whether we have received the visible signs. Now for the coming to this
Supper, that we deceive not our selves, we must have these two things: first,
repentance of our former sinful life, to be sorry for it which is done, by
trying and examining our selves, whether we be heartily sorrowful or no for
our offenses: secondly, we must have faith in Jesus Christ, yt yet we despair
not for our great sins, but trust to have mercy at his hands when we call
upon him, so that before we come unto this banquet, we must prepare our selves
to come worthily, reverently, in faith, hope, and love: this is the
examination. In receiving of it our minds must not be on the bread and wine,
or upon any other earthly things, but upon the body and blood of Jesus Christ
in heaven, signified unto us by these things below. After we have received,
we must give unto Christ most humble and hearty thanks, for feeding us with
his body and blood, and meditate and think upon this continually, and not
return to our old life again. Thus doing, you shall be sure to come as the
Lord requires, and as a good Christian ought to do. Which the Lord grant
unto you for his mercies sake, Amen.

A brief and clear confession of the Christian faith, containing an hundredth
articles, according to the order of the Creed of the Apostles:

written by that learned and godly Martyr, I. Hooper, sometime Bishop of
Gloucester in his life time.

Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty.

THis Creed following, being made by the reverend Father John Hooper, is
divided into five principal parts. The first whereof entreats of God the
father: the second of God the Son: the third of God the holy Ghost: the
fourth of the catholic Church: the fifth and last part entreats of the
benefits or fruits, which we receive by the same faith, which he makes in
number three: the first is the forgiveness of sins, the second is the
resurrection of the flesh. the third and last fruit is life everlasting. Of
these five parts, he has made an hundredth several articles, the first part
conteyneth 14. The second 27. The third 5. The fourth 41. The fifth and last
part conteyneth thirteen articles, the contents of which articles are
handeled, as follows*

A brief and clear confession of the Christian faith, containing an hundred
articles, according to the order of the Creed of the Apostles.
I believe in God the father almighty maker of heaven and earth.
The first Article.
I Believe in one God only, one in essence and substance, three in person, the
Father, ye Son, and the holy Ghost. I believe in the Father, as the original
and beginning of all things, as well visible as invisible: Of whom also they
depend as well in their being, as also in their conservation: and he depends
upon none, but on him self, being eternal and everlasting, without end or
beginning. I believe in the Son, as the divine word and wisdom of the
father, which is eternally, and before al worlds engendered of the father, of
his proper substance and nature, because in him shines his shape and proper
Image, which otherwise is invisible unto mortal man. I believe in the holy
Ghost, as a virtue and eternal power, which neither is made, nor created,
neither engendered, but proceeding of the father and of the son eternally,
even as a love proceeding from both persons.

The second Article.
I believe that these three persons are of one, and the self same essence and
substance, nature, authority, power, will, goodness, wisdom, and eternity,
and that these three are but one spiritual substance, eternal, without end
or beginning, true, good, just, merciful, of a sovereign power and wisdom,
having and containing in it self all goodness, not needing any thing.

The third Article.
I believe that this God which is one in essence, and three in person, ought
only to be served, honored, feared, loved, worshipped, and to be called upon
in all our necessities, as he that only can and will provide therefore, and
none other. And therefore I say and confess, that I believe in one God only,
that is to say, that I knowledge and receive him for one only Lord, master,
and savior, of whom proceeds all that is good in me, by whom I can do al
things, and without whom I can do nothing. In him only do I set mine
affiance, and set mine heart, hoping that he assisting me with his holy spirit,
shall be with me against all me^, and that he will deliver me from al perils
and dangers through his grace and mercy, without any merits of mine own,
and that he shall minister to me all things necessary, as well for my soul as
body, even like a good father, as he has promised by his holy word.

The fourth Article.
I believe that the same God almighty has of nothing created from the
beginning both heaven and earth, and all things in them contained, that is to
say, all things, as well heavenly as earthly, visible, as invisible,
reasonable, as unreasonable, sensible, as insensible, the which he does
entertain, lead, guide, and govern by his divine wisdom, without whose
providence nothing comes to pass, either in this world or in the other.

The fifth Article.
I believe that the same God, the father, the son, and holy Ghost, after that
he had created all things, did create and shape man to his own image and
likeness, that is to say, immortal, good, just, true, wise, merciful and perfect
in all things, making him partaker of the goodness, justice, and other
perfections of God, having a will that could agree in all things unto the will
of his Lord, but all that through grace without any kind of merit.

The vi. article.
I believe also, that as the Lord has created al things heavenly and earthly,
for the service of man, and to the end that by his creatures he might come to
ye knowledge of the creator, even so also has he formed and made man for thim
self, that of him, and by him he might be known, loved, feared, served and
honored, which is the greatest good thing that is, or can be in man: and that
in him might shine the image of divine virtues and perfections through good
works, the which God has ordained, because we should walk in them unto his
honor and praise, and to the confusion of the adversary: and that by this
mean, the fall of ye Angels might be repaired, and that man might possess the
everlasting kingdom, made and prepared for him before the foundations of the
world were laid.

The vii. article.
I believe that the same man was ordained of the Lord God, a master and ruler
over all his creatures: the which thing he has lost through his sin, as well
for his own part as also for all his posterity. The which rule and Lordship, I
believe does chiefly appertain unto Jesus Christ, verily God and man, and to
those unto whom he will communicate the same, as unto his own faithful, and
not unto the infidels and damned.

The viii. article.
I believe that the first man, through the craft and subtlety of Satan, did
slide and fall from the excellency wherein the Lord had created him,
consenting through his own free will (which at that time he had) unto the
subtle suggestion of the Serpent, whereby he lost the graces that the Lord had
given him, in such sort, that of wise, he became foolish, of just, unjust, of
true, a liar, of perfect, altogether imperfect, having from thenceforth a will
wholly corrupted, which neither could nor would agree with the will of God, but
altogether with the will of the devil, the world, the flesh and sin, which
could do nothing of him self but evil, seeing that he is altogether carnal,
bond, captive, and sold under sin. This is the free, yea to say more truly,
the bond will that man has in this present life.

The ix. Article.
I believe yt this disorder and corruption of nature was not only in Adam,
because of his sin, but is also in all men generally which come of him,
(Jesus Christ only excepted) and that in such sort, that all men after their
own nature are corrupt, unjust, liars, ignorant, unkind, and imperfect in all
things, and have no power of their own nature to do, think, speak, or will
any thing yt may please God, until yt they be regenerate, and renewed by the
spirit of the Lord.

The x. Article.
I believe that this corruption of nature, otherwise called original sin, is
the fountain and root of all other sins: for the which all the miseries and
adversities that we endure in this present life, as well in body as soul, do
come unto us, yea and in the end double death, that is to say, both of body
and soul. These be the fruits and rewards of sin. But although the same be
due and common to all men generally, nevertheless the Lord through his mercy
has reserved to himself a certain number (which are only known to
himself) the which he has drawn from this corrupt heap, and has sanctified
and cleansed the same in the blood of his son Jesus Christ, and by means
thereof has made them vessels of election and honor, apt unto all good works.

The xi. Article.
I believe yt the Father in Jesus Christ his son through the holy Ghost has
elected and chose^ those y^ are his own, according to his good will, before
the foundations of the world were laid, who^ he has predestinate unto
eternal life, yt there by they might be his children adoptiues, over whom he
has without comparison, a much greater care the^ the best father can have over
ye best child in the world: for he suffers not that any thing shall come to
pass, either on high in heaven, or beneath on earth, which shall not be for
their good and great profit.

The xii. Article.
I believe yt the father, through his son, with the holy ghost, has always
from ye beginning intended to restore man: unto whom after he had sinned, he
showed him self, promising unto him yt blessed seed, by whom the head of
the serpent should be trodden down, and by whom the faithful should receive
blessing. By this promise (which has since been oftentimes ratifyed, and
confirmed to the holy fathers) man (which otherwise had dispayred in sin,)
is relieved, helped, comforted, and clothed with hope, even unto the full
performing thereof.

The thirteenth Article.
I believe also, that after this promise the Lord has prescribed, and given
the law of the commandments to man, promising life to the obseruers thereof,
and death to the transgressors of the same: and he gave them not to the end
that man should seek justification, salvation, or life therein: but for the
policy, peace, and tranquilytie of his people, for the defense of the good,
for the chastenyng and punyshing of the wicked, and to preserve each one in his
office, but especially that therebye man might the better know himself, his
disease, his poverty and imperfection: and by mean thereof to take an
occasion, to humble himself before this law giver, and to seek remedy,
salvation and life in some other, that is to say, in the holy promised seed,
which is Jesus Christ. For this cause the law is called a scholemaster to come
to Christ, the which also serves us for a glass to know our sins by, and
to increase the same knowledge in us. Likewise it serves us for an accuser to
accuse us before the Lord, and for a severe and cruel judge, to declare the
wrath and judgment of God over us, and his condemnation unto eternal death,
and by this mean to make us afraid, and to bring us unto despair, until we
be comforted by the Gospel, through faith in Jesus Christ, whereby we are
delivered from all these causes. These are ye offices of the law, the which
are turned into our good, through faith in the Gospel, the which has other
offices, and clean contrary. For the rest, I confess that the law of the
Lord is good, just, holy, and perfect, and where the same does not bring us
unto perfection, it is not long of it self, but of us, which are altogether
imperfect, and can in no wise accomplish the same, no not to touch it with our
little finger.

The xiiii. article.
I believe and confess Jesus Christ to be the fulness, the end, and
accomplishme^t of the Law, to the justification of all that believe, through
whom, and by whom only, all the promises of the father be accomplished, yea,
even to the uttermost, the which also alone has perfectly satisfied the Law
in that which no other amongst men could persourme, for so much as the law
does command things impossible, y^ which nevertheless man must accomplish, not
by working, but through believing. For so is the law accomplished, through
faith, and not through works, and by this means shall man find ye righteousness
of faith to be available before the Lord, and not the righteousness of works,
y^ which leads nothing unto perfection.

As concerning the first point of my faith, this is y^ which I believe of the
father, and y^ things that are made by him, and consequently of the holy
Trinity, and also of the soul of man. Now let us come to the second point,
which is of the Son of God, and of the things done by him, especially of the
restoring, and repairing again of man.

2 And in Jesus Christ his only son our Lord, which was conceived by the
holy Ghost, borne of ye virgin Marie, suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
crucified, dead, and buried, he descended into hell, the third day he rose
again from the dead, he ascended into heaven, and sits on the right hand of
God the father almighty: from thence he shall come, to judge the quick and
the dead.

The xv. Article.
I believe that Jesus Christ is verily God, and verily man, having two natures
comprehended in one person, a nature divine, (after the which he is the only
natural son of God, equal with the father in all things) and a nature
humane, after the which he is very man in all things like unto us, (sin
excepted.)

The xvi. Article.
I believe that Jesus Christ the son of God, in the fullness of the time
appointed of the father from the beginning, was sent into the world by the
father, and was made perfect man, and was conceived in the womb of a woman
being a pure virgin, called Marie, of her proper substance, and of her proper
blood, so yt he was found a perfect man, desce^ding of ye seed of Ada^, Noe,
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, David and other fathers, unto whom the promise was made.

The.xvii. Article.
I believe also, that all this was done by the working of the holy Ghost,
without the work of man, to the end that all that was wrought therein, might
be holy, and without spot, pure and clean. And that thereby our conception
might be made clean and holy, which of it self is altogether spotted and
defiled with sin.

The xviii. Article.
I believe that Jesus Christ was borne of the Virgyne Marye without any manner
of sin, and without breach of her virginity, so that by his pure and holy
nativity, he has purified and made holy ours, which of it self is altogether
unclean and defiled with sin. In this Nativity of Christ I see and consider
the first estate and condition of man, with his fall, which was y^ cause of
Christ his coming into ye world. Likewise in this, I see and consider the
favor and inestimable love of God the father, which has presented, and given
his only son to serve us. I see also and consider in this Nativity, the
charytie of the son, which has abased and humbled himself, to lift us up,
became poor to make us rich, became bond, to make us free, and became the
son of man to make us the children of God and heirs of eternal life. By
whose coming the nature of man is repaired and made noble, and man that was
lost and destroyed was thereby relieved and set in his perfection, and has
recovered all that he has lost through sin, yea and more. By the same mean
also all the treasures, graces, and blessings of the Lord, are given and
communicated unto man: but all this through grace, without any merits.

The nineteenth Article.
I believe also and confess by the holy scriptures an other conception and
birth of Jesus Christ, which is spiritual, the which (I say) is of no less
dignitye then the first. The which is, that every one that is faithful ought
to conceive into his heart and spirit Jesus Christ, through a true and lively
faith, and to bring him forth by open confessing of him with his mouth as
often and when soever it shall be needful. I do esteem this conception, and
nativity to be so necessary to salvation, that if the virgin Mary, had not
more blessedly borne Jesus Christ in her heart and spirit, then in her belly,
her carnal motherhoode would have profited her little. By, and for this cause
are we called mothers, brethren, and sisters of Jesus Christ.

The twentieth Article.
I believe that the same Jesus Christ is verily Christ, yt is to say, the
Messiah, anointed by ye holy Ghost, because he was y^ very king, ye Prophet,
and great sacrificer, that should sacrifice for all that believe: the which
also is promised in the Law, and is y^ same of whom all the Prophets have
spoken. This annoynting of Christ is not corporal of a material and visible
oil, as was that of the kings, Priests, and Prophets in times past, but it
is spiritual, of an invisible oil, which is the grace and gifts of the holy
Ghost, wherewith he is replenished above all others. So that this anointing is
descended even unto us, which have felt and proved the sweetness thereof: and
by it also we bear the name of Christians, that is to say, anointed.

The xxi. Article.
I believe that this sacrificing of Jesus Christ was not Leuiticall, or carnal,
to immolate, offer up, and to sacrifice beasts, kyne, and other sensible
things, as did Aaron and his successors: but spiritual, to offer and
sacrifice himself, that is to say, his body and blood for the remission of the
sins of the whole world. Even as likewise his kingdom is not of this world,
carnal, but spiritual, which consists in the guyding and governing of his
own by his holy spirit, over whom he reigns by his word, and that to the
destruction of al his adversaries, which are sin, death, hell, Satan, and all
infideles, wicked and reprobate.

The xxii. Article.
I believe that Jesus Christ has verily exercised these three offices, that is
to say, of a Prophet, of a King, and a sacrificer, not only in this world,
being a mortal man as we are, but also that he exercises yet daily the same
in heaven before the face of the father, where he sits and appears
continually for us, and from thence by his holy Spirit does teach, help,
maynteine, and defend his own: and therefore is he called a Prophet, a
King, and a great Sacrificator after ye order of Melchisedek, that is to say,
eternal, and not after the order of Aaron, which had his end with the Law.

The xxiii. Article.
I believe that the same Jesus Christ (after that he had preached the Gospel
in the country of Judea and Galilee, by the space of three years or there
about, and declared him self to be the natural Son of God, as well by his
marvelous works, as by his words, and the writings of the Prophets) was
unjustly and falsely accused by the Priests, whom when they had taken, and in
their counsel unjustly had condemned him to death, they brought him bound to
Pilate the Provost then at Jerusalem: who at the instance of the said
Priests did unjustly, wrongfully, and without cause condemn him to death, and
that the most horrible and slanderous death that could be imagined or
devised, that is to say, to be put on the cross, crucified between two
thieves, as if he had been their Prince and Captain: The which thing he
suffered and endured willingly and innocently without deserving the same. For
otherwise could he not have satisfied for us, neither could his cross have
profited us.

The xxiiii. Article.
I believe also that while he was upon the said cross dying and giving up his
spirit unto God his Father, he descended into hell, that is to say, He did
verily taste and feel the great distress and heaviness of death, and
likewise the pains and torments of hell, That is to say, the great wrath and
severe judgment of God upon him, even as if God had utterly forsaken him, yea
as though God had been his extreme enemy, so that he was constrained with
loud voice to cry, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. This is simply
my understanding of Christ his descending into hell. And besides, I know well
that this article has not from the beginning been in the Creed, and that many
others have otherwise both understood and interpreted it, which esteem that
Christ verily and in deed descended into hell, to the place of the damned,
alleging the text of Saint Peter: the which I confess is yet covered and hid
from me. The Lord vouchsafe to open the gate unto us, and to give us an
entrance into such mysteries.

The xxv. Article.
I believe that all this was done, not for him self, which never committed
sin, in whose mouth was never found deceit nor lie, but for the love of us
poor and miserable sinners, whose place he occupied upon the cross, as a
pledge, or one that represented the person of all the sinners that ever were,
be now, or shall be unto the worlds end. And because they through their
sins have deserved to feel and taste of the extreme pains of death, to be
forsaken of God, and of all creatures, to feel the wrath and severe judgment
of God upon them, Christ which was their pledge satisfying for them upon the
cross, has fealt and endured all the same, and that altogether to make us
free, to deliver us from all these pains, from the wrath and judgment of GOD,
from condemnation and eternal death. And I do clearly reject and esteem as
fables all the Limbos of the fathers, and of young children, Purgatory, and
such other like, to be follyes, mockeries, and abuses which are invented and
found out by man, without the word of the Lord. For I neither believe, nor
receive more then two places in the world to come, that is to say, heaven for
the faithful and elect with the angels, and hell for the infidels and
reprobate with the devils.

The xxvi. Article.
I believe and consider this death and passion, even as I do all other
mysteries of Jesus Christ, not only as touching the history, as a pattern and
example to follow, as was that of the holy men and women which are dead for
the Lords quarrel: but also principally as touching the cause, fruits, and
uses thereof, thereby to know the greatness of my sins, the grace and
mercy of the Father, and the charity of the Son, by whom we are
reconciled unto GOD, delivered from the tyranny of the devil, and restored to
the liberty of the spirit. This is the glass without spotte, to teach us to
know our filthiness, the lauer, or clear fountain to wash and cleanse us,
the infinite treasure to satisfy all our creditours: Of whom and by whom
only the divine justice is fully satisfied for all the sins of all that have
been, be now, or shall be unto the end of the world: And therefore I do
believe and confess, that Christ his condemnation is mine absolution, that his
crucifying is my deliverance, his descending into hell, is mine ascending into
heaven, his death is my life, his blood is my clensing and purging, by whom
only I am washed, purified and cleansed from all my sins, so that I neither
receive, neither believe, any other Purgatory either in this world, or in the
other, whereby I may be purged, but only the blood of Jesus Christ, by the
which all are purged and made clean for ever.

The xxvii. Article.
I believe that Jesus Christ by the sacrifice of his body which he offered
upon the tree of the cross, has defaced and destroyed sin, death, and the
devil, with all his kingdom, and has wholly performed the work of our
salvation, and has abolished and made an end of all other sacrifices: So that
from thence forth there is none other propiciatorie sacrifice, either for the
living or the dead, to be looked for or sought for, the^ the same. For by this
one only oblation has he consecrated for ever, all those that are sanctified.

The xxviii. Article.
I believe that the holy Supper of the Lord is not a sacrifice, but only a
remembrance and commemoration of this holy sacrifice of Jesus Christ: Therefore
it ought not to be worshipped as GOD, neither as Christ therein contained: who
must be worshipped in faith only, without all corruptible elements. Likewise
I believe and confess, that the Popish mass is the invention and ordinance of
man, a sacrifice of Antichrist, and a forsaking of the sacrifice of Jesus
Christ, that is to say, of his death and passion: and that it is a stinking and
infected sepulcher, which hides and covers the merit of the blood of
Christ, and therefore ought the mass to be abolished, and the holy Supper of
the Lord to be restored and set in his perfection again.

The xxix. Article.
I believe also that as the Prophet Jonas was in the Whales belly, (which is
a place of corruption) three days and three nyghtes, without being corrupted,
and the third day came out of him alive without any manner of hurt: Even so
Jesus Christ after he was dead, was laid and put in a new Sepulcher, (which
is a place of corruption) in the which he was three days and three nyghtes,
not touched with any kind of infection of fylthinesse or corruption, but
continued in his perfection, to declare the virtue of his blood, to accomplish
the wrytings of the holy Prophets, and to verify the truth as well of his
body, as of his death: with whom I believe that the law was buried,
abrogated, and abolished as touching the faithful, not as the acquiting of an
obligation whereby they should be no more bound to live, and walk therein:
but only as concerning condemnation, that is to say, that the transgression
of the Law condemns them not before the judgment seat of GOD, because of
their faith which they have in Jesus Christ. And therefore with in one
Sepulcher, I do comprehend three things to be buried, That is to say,
Christ, the Law, and all the faithful which ought to be crucified and buried
with Christ, through the mortification of their flesh.

The xxx. Article.
I believe that as Jesus Christ was put to death for our sins, so also he
rose again the third day for our justification unto everlasting life,
wherein he has openly declared him self both GOD and man, obtaining the
victory over all his adversaries, and has confounded and beaten down all his
enemies, that is to say, the world, sin, death, hell, and Satan, not for him
self, but for us that believe in him, knowing that his victory is ours, and
that in him and by him we overcome the self same enemies, obtaining the
victory over them unto the honor of the Lord, and our great profit.

The xxxi. Article.
I believe and consider this resurrection of Jesus Christ not only as an
history, as was that of Lazarus and other such like which miraculously were
raised up by the virtue of the Lord, but also as the example and cause
efficient of my rising again, and as the earnest and first fruits of the
general resurrection of all that believe. That as Jesus Christ was raised up
the third day after his death unto eternal life through his divine virtue:
Even so by the same virtue, I hope one day to be raised up in body and soul
unto eternal life, after that I have here in this world been raised up in
spirit through lively and true faith in newnes of life, mortifiyng and
crucifiyng the flesh with the affections and concupiscences of the world, the
which ought to be dead and crucified to us, and we to it. For we are buried
with Christ in his death through Baptism, to the end that as he is risen
from death by the glory of the father, without dying any more, even so we
should walk in newenesse of life without serving of sin any more, searching
always principally for the things that are on high, heavenly and eternal,
and forsaking the earthly and transitory things of the world, knowing that
we have not here an abiding City, but that we must seek for that which is to
come.

The xxxii. Article.
I believe and confess that Jesus Christ the fourtieth day after his
resurrection, visibly and before all his Apostles did ascend into heaven, that
is to say, in the majesty of his father in glory and eternal felicity, in
the which he was, before he came into this miserable world, to become man,
yea even before the foundation of the world was laid, that is to say, from
everlasting.

The xxxiii. Article.
I believe that he is ascended into heaven, to accomplish and to fynishe all
things, and to open heaven for us, that we might ascend after him and
follow him as our head, to be eternally knitte with him in glory, the which
thing here we begin through faith. In like manner he has done the same, for
the benefit of his Church that he might send unto his Apostles that
comforter, that he promised them, by the which they were comforted, instructed
and guided in all truth, and there by is his Church supported, maintained, and
defended against all the blastes of Satan and all the gates of Hell.

The xxxiiii. Article.
I believe also that he is ascended into heaven to be our Patron,
intercessour, mediator and advocate, and that he now appears for us before
the face of the father, obtaining for us grace and abundance of all good
things, in such sort that I neither knowledge nor receive any other
mediator betwixt GOD and man, neither any other advocate or intercessour
before GOD the father, then his only son Jesus Christ our Lord. To him do
I resort, with him do I hold my self contented, and none other do I search
for, neither will I, fearyng to blaspheme the name of GOD by giuyng that unto
the creature, that appertains only to the Creator, and to the servant that,
which only apperteyneth unto the master.

The xxxv. Article.
I believe that all they which demand, seek for, or receive any other
mediator, intercessour, or advocate toward GOD the father then Jesus Christ
his Son, the same blasphemeth against God, and does dishonor unto Jesus
Christ, and unto the saints by whom he prays. For as God the father will be
known, served, loved, feared and honored in his Son, and by his only son
Jesus Christ, and not by any other means: even so will he be prayed unto and
called upon in his and by his only Son Jesus Christ, and none other wise. In
this I will neither dispraise, nor think or speak evil of the blessed Saints
which are in heaven with the Lord: but I will have them in honor, and reverence
them as the faithful saints of the Lord, as the Temple of the holy Ghost, and
as the true members of Christ, and have them as glasses and paterns before mine
eyes, to follow them as well in their honest life and good conversation, as also
in their faithful and holy doctrine. And as concerning them, or by the^ I do
understand none other thing, knowing that al my good, my help, and succor
proceeds of God only, by the mean of Jesus Christ alone, which has made
the Saints worthy of his glory by his only grace, by the which also I
believe he will make me worthy with them to be their companion in glory,
that we all together should give unto him onelyall honor, praise and glory
for evermore.

The xxxvi. Article.
I believe that the same Jesus Christ is set on the right hand of God the
father almighty, that is to say, that he reigns in one, and the same
majesty and equal power with God his father, by the which he so governs
his own unto the worlds end, that the power of none adversary can annoye
them without his permission and will. I believe also that the Father has made
him Lord and ruler over all creatures, as well heavenly as earthly, giving
unto him all power over heaven and earth, and that he has lift him up above
all rule, power, and Lordship, and above every name that is named, not only in
this world, but also in the world to come: and has made all things subject
under his feet, and has appointed him over all things, to be the head of
his Church which is his body, Ephe. 1. 21. And therefore I neither receive,
neither acknowledge any other Head of the Church, but only Jesus Christ, which
has given his blood to wash away the filthiness, and to heal the wounds
thereof, and the same to preserve, nourish, defend and govern by his holy
spirit. The same is the only Head and foundation of the Church, whereon every
one ought to build according to his vocacion.

The xxxvii. Article.
I believe that Jesus Christ is ascended into heaven, and that he is there
corporally, that is to say, in flesh, in body, and in soul, after such sort
that he neither is nor can after the same mean and fashion be here beneath on
earth with us, for as much as his body, although it be glorious, can not be
in diverse and many places at one time, but be so in one place after the nature
of a glorified body, that it can not be in an other: otherwise it should not
be a true and natural body, but fantastical, that is to say, a thing
apparent and not in deed, which is false and wholye against our faith. And
therefore do I say and confess, that the true and natural body of Christ
is in heaven, and that from thence he shall not come until he has made all
his enemies his footestoole, and then shall he come to judge the quick and
dead.

The xxxviii. Article.
I believe that when the number of the elect children of GOD shall be
accomplished, the Lord Jesus in the self same body in the which he suffered
and was crucified, with the which he rose and ascended into heaven, in the
self same shall he come with great power and Majesty, visiblye in a cloud,
even as he ascended, and that to judge both the quick and the dead, and shall
render unto every one according to justice, unto the good that he shall find
amongst them, according to their goodness, and unto the evil according to
their wickedness. This judgment shall be general, that is to say, all shall
be called and personally summoned thereunto by the voice of an Angel: at the
which all shall appear, as well the good as the evil, the elect as the
reproved, to the end that every one may render an account and reckonyng
before the judgment seat of Christ, of all that has been done by them in
this world, whether it be good or evil, yea even of their idle words, the
which they esteem no sin. Then shall be saved all those that are found
written in the book of life.

The xxxix. Article.
A believe that then shall be made the total and last separation of the good from
the evil, of the elect from the reprobate, the which now are all mingled
together as the good and the evil fish in one net, the chafe and the corn,
and the cockle with the wheat: but when the harvest comes, he which has
the fan in his hand, shall make a separation, and shall gather the corn into
his garner, but the chafe and cockle he shall cast into the fire, to burn
eternally. Then shall perfitly be declared and known the justice and mercy of
the Lord, and likewise the fruit of the cross and blood of Jesus Christ, the
which thing now we know only but in part, but then the good and elect shall
know the Father, upon whom they have builded their hope, and shall not be
confounded: and in like manner the wicked shall know the Father, against whom
they have stumbled, and whom they have refused, contemned and despised, and
shall be confounded. Then shall the Lord make an end of his office and
ministry: for his mystical body shall then be wholly finished and
accomplished, with all his members, and he shall render up his kingdom, and his
espouse, which is the Church, unto God his Father, altogether glorious,
irreprehensible and acceptable, without spotte or wrinkle. Then shall perfectly
be overcome, destroyed, and confounded Satan and hell, sin and death, and all
other adversaries of Christ, the which presently do yet exercise tyranny upon
all his members, and hold them under their claws, chains and bonds. But
then we, as people ravished with joy, shall say this word which is written:
O death, where is thy victory? Thanks be unto God, which has given us
victory, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The xl. Article.
I believe that this maruaylous, terrible, and fearful judgment unto the
evil, wicked and reprobate, is very much desired, and of great consolation
unto the good, the faithful, and the elect, because that then their whole
redemption, that is to say, of the body, shall be made an end of, and they
shall receive the fruit of their labors. Then their innocence shall openly
be declared and known to all the world, and they shall see the vengeance and
condemnation of the wicked, which have used them tyrannously, afflicted, and
tormented them in this world, whose iniquity shall be manifested by the
Lord, and shall be clearly known of all, to their great confusion, and to the
honor and glory of the righteous children of God, the which shall be in peace
and perfect tranquillity, and shall have full rejoicing and fruition of all
that he has promised and prepared for all those that love him, the which no
eye has seen, no ear has heard, neither can be comprehended by the heart
of man. Therefore do I abide this great day of retribution with a great
desire, as the same which shall bring and show unto me the self same good
thing.

The xli. Article.
I believe that we shall not all dye, but that we shall be changed in a
moment, that is to say, that in this last day and judgment general, some
shall be found alive, the which dyed not, neither shall they die, as
concerning the separation of the body from the soul, but shall continue alive
eternally, to the end that Christ may be known to be Lord and Judge of the
living and dead, and that his grace and merits may be found greater then the
sin of Adam. For as sin has raygned unto death: so likewise must grace
raygne through Jesus Christ unto eternal life. The same nevertheless shall be
changed and transformed from corruption unto incorruption, from mortality unto
immortality, from contempt and ignominy unto glory, after such sort, that
they shall be made partakers of all the gifts, graces, and benefits, the which
the Lord shall give unto those, that before were dead in him: the which shall
not be before the others, but all together shall be taken up in the clouds, and
in the air, and shall all together be with the Lord.

This is the second point of my faith, touching Jesus Christ, the second
person in Trinity, and of his restoring and repayring of man: let us now come
to the third point, which is of the holy Ghost, by whom man (being restored) is
mayntayned and preserved in his integrity and perfection.

3. I believe in the holy Ghost, the holy Catholic Church, the communion of
Saints, the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the body, and the life
everlasting, Amen.
The xlii. Article.
I believe that the holy Ghost is a divine person, distinct from the Father and
the Son, proceeding from them both, in and through all things equal and
coeternall with them: by the which holy Ghost, the Church has always been, is
now, and shall be ruled, guyded, directed and governed unto the end of the
world: By whom also all the Saints, Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles of our
Lord Jesus Christ have spoken. And therefore I do neither believe nor receive
any other Vicar or Lieutenant to Christ upon earth within his Church, then this
holy Ghost, which can not be received of the wicked.

The xliii. Article.
I believe, that ye holy Ghost is the pledge and earnest of our heavenly
heritage, by the which we be assured, ascertained, and certainly persuaded in
our consciences, that we be the children of God, and brethren adoptiues to
Jesus Christ, and consequently coheires of eternal life. The same holy Ghost
also is the finger of God, the which imprinteth in our hearts and spirits the
faith of these things aforesaid: It seals and confirms the promises of the
Lord within our hearts, through his goodness and grace, because we should in no
wise doubt.

The xliii. Article.
I believe that this holy Spirit dwelling in us, through his grace and virtue
does regenerate us into a newness and change of living, mortifying in us, all
that is of us, and of the old man, of the flesh, and of the world, and
quickening all that is his in us: So that we live not thenceforth after our own
lusts, but according to ye will of God. Which holy Ghost also works in us all
good works, and does reprove, rebuke and condemn the world of sin, of
righteousness, and judgment.

The xlv. Article.
I believe that the holy Ghost is the teacher of the ignorant, which teaches,
guydeth, and leads us unto the knowledge of the truth, and by it only are
we brought and delivered out of darkness, and set in the perfect light. Likewise
I believe that it is the comforter of the poor afflicted and persecuted, and
in all their troubles, vexations and adversities does so help, strengthen,
comfort, and assist all such, that it will not suffer them to despair, as do
the wicked and reprobate, but makes them to taste and feel the sweetenes,
goodness, and mercy of God the Father, which by persecution and diverse
tribulations, leads his own unto eternal glory.

The xlvi. Article.
I believe that this holy Ghost, is the spirit of life, which quickens al
other spirits, as well heavenly as earthly, and that the same only of it self
is holy, and that all others by it are made holy: So that if any spirits be
holy, (as there be) either in heaven or in earth, they are none otherwise holy,
but by the holiness of the same holy Ghost, and that is the cause, why I believe
in him, that is to say, for that cause I put my whole faith, hope, trust and
affiance in him, even as I have said before of the Father and the Son. This
is the third point of my faith, which is concerning the holy Ghost, the third
person in the holy Trinity, by the which holy Ghost, after that we are made by
the Father, and repaired and restored by the Son, we are maynteyned and
governed unto the end. There remains now, to entreat of the fourth point
of my faith, which is concerning the Church, and of the things that concern
the same.

4. I believe the holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints.
I believe and confess one only Catholic and Universal Church, which is an
holy congregation and assembly of all faithful believers, which are chosen and
predestinate unto everlasting life, before the foundations of the world were
laid, of whose number I count my self, and believe that I am through the
only grace and mercy of the Father, and by the merits of my good Lord and
Master Jesus Christ, and not by means of my good works and merits, which in
deed are none.

The xlviii. Article.
I believe, that this Church is invisible to the eye of man, and is only to
God known, and that the same Church is not set, compassed and limited within a
certain place, or bounds, but is scattered and spread abroad throughout all
the world: but yet coupled together in heart, will, and spirit, by the bond
of faith and charity, having and altogether knowledging one only God, one
only head and Mediator Jesus Christ, one faith, one law, one Baptism, one
spiritual Table, wherein one meat, and one spiritual drink is ministered to
them, unto the end of the world. This Church contains in it all the
righteous and chosen people, from the first righteous man, unto the last that
shall be found righteous in the end of the world, and therefore do I call it
Universal. For as touching the Visible Church, which is the Congregation of
the good and of the wicked, of the chosen and of the reprobate, and generally
of al those which say, they believe in Christ, I do not believe that to be the
Church, because that Church is seen of the eye, and the faith thereof is in
visible things.

The xlix. Article.
I believe that this Invisible Church is the field of the Lord God, wherein
is neither darnell nor cockle: it is the house and dwelling place of the holy
Ghost, and within that Church is neither Cain, Judas, neither the wicked rich
Glutto^. That Church also is the fold of Christ, wherein is no stinking and
infected beasts, but all clean and undefiled sheep and lambs, which bring
forth their fruits in due time and season. The same Church is the body of
Christ, wherein there is never a rotten, corrupt, or infected member. It is the
Spouse of Christ, which is pure and clean, without wrinckle, and without spot.
It is holy and without blame, cleansed, and sanctified in the blood, and by the
word of her head and well-beloved spouse Jesus Christ, and for that cause they
ca^ in no wise perish, which by lively faith are grafted therein.

The L. Article.
I believe that the gifts and graces of the holy Ghost, are scattered and given
unto every member of the same Church, not so much for their particular profit
and commodity, as for the general profit and commodity of the whole
Congregation and Church, and that through grace wholly, without any merit,
according to the good pleasure and providence of God, to some more, to some
less, and that to ye end we should know, that one has need of another, and
that we should be ready to help one another in all necessities, as well bodily
as spiritually, even as it becomes members of one body.

The Li. Article.
I believe the Communion of Saints, that is to say, I believe that all,
whatsoever our Lord God gives in this world, whether it be benefits and
blessings, that concern the body or the spirit, he gives ye same singularly
to the profit and commodity of the whole Church, and therefore ought the same
to be distributed and communicated to all that are faithful, but chiefly to
those that are in necessity, that like as we do communicate and are knitte in
one God, one faith, one Law, one Baptism, and be partakers of one spiritual
Table, even so we may communicate and be partakers together of, and in those
things, which do proceed and come unto us, by means of the aforesaid
things. For otherwise we can not be Christians or faithful stewardes of
Christ. Here utterly I renounce and abhor the Anabaptists manner of making
common goods, wives, and such other like things, and only do I allow the
Apostles making of things common, which having and possessing any goods
privately, used to distribute thereof, to every one, according as the same had
need, and as necessity required.

The Lii. Article.
I believe that this Church is like unto the Arc of Noah, within the which is
safety and life, and without the same is but death, decay and destruction. For
as Christ is and does raygne in his Church, even so Satan is and does raygne
in, and through all that are out of that Church: The which true Church is
mayntayned and vpholden by the Spirit of Christ, is ruled and governed by his
holy word, and is nourished and fed with his holy Sacraments. That Church
shall always have enemies, and shall still be tormented in ye sea of this world
with the thunderings of Antichrist, and by the wounds and tempest of Satan. For
all the gates of hell do arm and set out themselves against this Church. But
in these waves she shall not be drowned, but shall abide for ever, because
she has a good defense and foundation, which is Jesus Christ the righteous.
And for this cause I call her ye Church milita^t, which wayteth for ye triu^ph
of those yt be blessed, which are where as is nothing but peace, joy, and
everlasting consolation.

The Liii. Article.
I believe that the Lord God has given us three principal signs and marks, by
the which we may know this his Church, that is to say, the word, the
Sacraments, and discipline. I call that only the word, which was revealed by
the holy Ghost unto the holy Patriarks, Prophets, and Apostles of Jesus
Christ, the which word is contained within ye canonical books of the old and
new Testament: by the which word we are made clean, and thereby do receive ye
self same thing, and as much as we do by the Sacraments, that is to say,
Jesus Christ by his word, which is the word of faith, gives and
communicates himself unto us, as well as by the Sacraments, albeit it be by
another manner and fashion.

The Liiii. Article.
I believe, that the same word of God is of a far greater authority then
the Church, the which word only does sufficiently show and teach us all
those things yt in any wise concern our salvation, both what we ought to do,
and what to leave undone. The same word of God is the true pattern and perfect
rule, after the which all faithful people ought to govern and order their
lives, without turning either to the right hand, or to the left hand, without
cha^ging any thing thereof, without putting to it, or taking from it, knowing
yt all ye works of god are perfect, but most chiefly his word

The Lv. Article.
I believe, that as only Jesus Christ amongst all men is holy and true, and
that all others are sinners and liars, even so likewise the only doctrine of
the same Jesus Christ is holy and true, and al other doctrines are vnpure and
false. This doctrine of Jesus Christ, is a well, a fountain of life, a lamp
or pillar of fire to guide us, the bread of the soul, and the power of God
unto salvation, to all that believe: And therefore whatsoever happens, the same
ought only to be advanced, preached, heard, understand and received of all
the world, to the comfort and salvation of those that believe, and to the
greater damnation of the unbelievers, the wicked and reprobate that believe
not. For as the Manna in the desert was to some sour* and to other some a good
and pleasant meat, and as Christ is to some a stumbling stone to be offended
at, and is appointed for ye fall of ye wicked, and the rising up of the godly,
eue^ so the word of the Gospel to some is a savor of death unto death, and to
other some a savor of life unto life. The which word of ye Gosp^^* I receive,
and take only to be my guide, and according to the same, to dye and to live.

The Lvi. Article.
I believe yt the reading of the same word and Gospel ought not, neither can it
be prohihibited and forbidden from any manner of person, of what estate, sort,
or condition so ever the same be of: but it ought to be common unto all the
world, as well to men as women, yea and y^ in a vulgar or common language, which
all do understand, because it is ordained and appointed for all. And likewise
the promises of God, which are therein contained, do apperteine unto al. And
therefore Antichrist and his members do exercise great and cruel tyra^nie upon
the faithful children of God, as well in that they take from the^, and utterly
do forbid the^ to read ye same word, and in stead thereof, set before the^
dreams, lies, Canons and damnable traditions: as also because upon pain of
deadly sin, and eternal damnation, they both forbid and command things, that
in deed are but indifferent: which manner of theirs is ye only note and mark
to know Antichrist by.

The Lvii. Article.
I believe, that this holy doctrine of the Gospel in the very time by God
appointed, ^as confirmed and approved by heavenly ^iracles, as well by Jesus
Christ himself, the Prophets, and Apostles, as also by other good and
faithful ministers of the same Gospel, and that after such a sort, that for
y^ co^firming thereof, there is now no more need of new miracles, but rather
we must content our selves with that is done, and simply and plainly believe
only the holy Scriptures, without seeking any further to be ^aught, watching
and still taking heed to our selves, that we be not beguiled, and deceived
with the false miracles of Antichrist, wherewith the world at this day is
stuffed, which miracles are wrought by the woorking of Satan, to confirm all
kind of idolatry, errors, abuses and iniquities, and thereby to blind the
poor and ignorant: The which thing the Lord God suffers justly to be done,
because they would not receive the spirit of truth, to be saved: yea God
suffers them to receive the spirit of lying, which has power to deceive, to
the end they should be damned, because they have allowed lying and iniquity,
and have refused righteousness and truth. The true miracles then are wrought
by the only power of God, for the confirming of his doctrine, and are wrought
for the infidels sakes, and not for the faithful. But the preaching and true
receiving of the holy word of God is only given and ministered to the
faithful, and to those that believe.

The Lviii. Article.
I believe also ye holy sacraments, (which are the second mark or badge of
the true Church) to be the signs of the reconciliatio^ and great atonement
made between God and us, through Jesus Christ. They are seals of the Lords
promises, and are outward and visible pledges and gages of the inward faith,
and are in number only twain, that is to say, Baptism, and the holy Supper of
the Lord. The which two are not void and empty signs, but full, that is to
say, they are not only signs, whereby some thing is signified, but also they
are such signs as do exhibit, and give the thing that they signify in
deed, as by Gods help we will declare hereafter. But as touching all the
other five sacraments, which with great abuse and superstition are received and
used in the papisticall church, yt is to say, Confirmation, confession,
marriage, absolution, otherwise called the sacrament of the priesthood, and
extreme unction or anneling, I say, that all these were ecclesiastical
ceremonies, the which the holy fathers in their time used holily without any
superstition, even as by their example ye same may be used this day, so that it
be done without any error, abuse and superstition, and that in no wise it be
hurtful to the Christian liberty of the Gospel, the which does deliver our
consciences from all outward beggarly ceremonies by man ordained and devised,
without the word of God.

The Lix. Article.
I believe that baptism is the sign of the new league and friendship
between God and us, made by Jesus Christ, and it is the mark of the
Christians now in the time of the Gospel, as in time past circumcision was a
mark unto the Jews, which were under the Law. Yea, Baptism is an outward
washing done with water, thereby signifying an inward washing of the holy Ghost,
wrought through ye blood of Christ. The which baptism ought as well to be
given and communicated to little children, as to those that be great, according
to Jesus Christ his ordinance, once for all, without any rebaptising. This
baptism is the red sea, wherein Pharao, that is to say, the devil, with
his army of sins are altogether drowned, and the Israelites pass through it
safely, and afterward walking through the desert of this world, in great
sorrows, vexations, and troubles, do use daily for their comfort the heavenly
Manna, which is the holy word of God, until through death they may enter
into the heavenly land of promise.

The lx. Article.
I believe also that baptism is ye entry of the church, a washing into a new
birth, and a renewing of the holy Ghost, whereby we do forsake our selves,
the devil, the flesh, sin, and the world. For being once rid of the old
man with all his concupiscences, we are clothed with the new man which is
Jesus Christ, in righteousness and holiness, and with him we dye and are buried
in his death, to the end yt with Christ we may rise from death to the glory
of the father. And even likewise being thus newborn, we should walk in
newenes of life, always mortifying in us that which is of us, that thereby the
body of sin may be utterly destroyed, and plucked up by the root.

The lxi. Article.
I believe that this baptism ought to be ministered, not with oil, salt,
spittell, and such like baggage, but only in clean and fair water, and that
in the name of the father, the son, and the holy Ghost, according to the
institution and ordinance of God, without changing any thing therein, putting
any thing thereunto, or taking any thing there fro: and the same also to be
used in a vulgar and common language, that all the people may understand: for
what so ever is done or said in the Church of Christ, ought to be understand
and known of all that be faithful. By this baptism we are changed and
altered from children of wrath, of sin, of the devil, and of destruction,
into the children of God, of grace and salvation, thereby to be made the
Lords, heirs and coheires with Christ of eternal life, and for that cause
the same ought to be given and communicated only to reasonable creatures, which
are apt and meet to receive such things, and not unto bells and such like,
which neither can receive, ne use the thing signified by baptism.

The lxii. Article.
I believe that this baptism with water, is not so necessary to salvation,
that one may not be saved without it, in case of necessity. And likewise I
doubt not in the salvation of little children, which die without baptism, but
that the same are saved in the faith of their parents, as well as if they were
baptized, even as in time past under the Law, the little children dying without
circumcision, were saved in the faith of their parents. But this only do I
understand of the children of the faithful, unto whom the promises of God do
apperteine, and not of the infidels and reprobate.

The lxiiii. Article.
I believe that the holy sacrament of the supper, is an holy and outward
ceremony, instituted by Jesus Christ in the Gospel, a day before his death, in
the nature and substance of bread and wine, in remembrance, and for a memorial
of his death and passion, having and containing in it a promise of the
remission of sins. By this sacrament we are in deed made partakers of the
body and blood of Jesus Christ, and be therewith nourished and fed in the
house of the Lord, which is his church, after that into the same, we are
entered through baptism. The same ought to be given and ministered to all under
both the kinds, according to the ordinance and commandment of Christ: for the
altering whereof, none ought to be so hardy as to attempt any thing.

The lxiii. Article.
I believe that in this holy Sacrament, the signs or badges are not changed in
any point, but the same do remain wholly in their nature, that is to say, the
bread is not changed and transsubstantiated (as the fond Papists and false
doctors do teach, deceiving the poor people) into the body of Jesus Christ,
neither is the wine transsubstantiated into his blood: but the bread remains
still bread, and the wine remains still wine, every one in his proper and
first nature. For the words that Christ spoke to his disciples in giving them
the bread, saying, This is my body, I understand and believe to be spoken by a
figurative manner of speech called Metonomia, which is a manner of speaking very
common in the scriptures, as the same was understand, and also declared by the
wrytings of the holy fathers and doctors of the church, Ireneus, Ciprian,
Tertulian, Ambrose, Augustine, Chrysostom, and other like, which lived before
the counsel of Lateran, where it was concluded, that the bread was
transubstanciated into the body of Christ, and the wine into his blood, and
then was it given forth for an article of our faith, to the great dishonor of
God, and to the great slander of all the church, and it was done in the year
of our Lord 1050, by Pope Leo the ninth, in the which time the devil was
unbound, as it was prophesied of in the Apocalips, and troubled the church of
Christ, more then ever he did before.

The lxv. Article.
I believe that all this sacrament consists in the use thereof: so that
without the right use the bread and wine in nothing differ from other common
bread and wine, that is commonly used, and therefore I do not believe that the
body of Christ can be contained, hid, or enclosed in the bread, under the
bread, or with the bread, neither the blood in the wine, under the wine, or
with the wine. But I believe and confess the very body of Christ to be in
heaven on the right hand of the father (as before we have said) and that
always and as often, as we use this bread and wine, according to the
ordinance and institution of Christ, we do verily and in deed receive his
body and blood.

The lxvi. Article.
I believe that this receiving is not done carnally or bodily, but spiritually
through a true and lively faith, that is to say, The body and blood of
Christ, are not given to the mouth and belly for the nourishing of the body,
but unto our faith, for the nourishing of the spirit and inward man unto
eternal life, and for that cause we have no need that Christ should come
from heaven to us, but that we should ascend unto him, lifting up our hearts
through a lively faith on high unto ye right hand of the father, where Christ
sits, from whence we wait for our redemption, and we must not seek for
Christ in these bodily elements.

The lxvii. Article.
I believe that this holy supper is a sacrament of faith unto the faithful
only, and not for the infidels, wherein a man finds and receives no more
then he brings with him, saving peradventure the increase of faith, grace,
and virtue: and therefore they only find and receive Jesus Christ unto
salvation, which through true and lively faith, bring the same with them: but
the others find and receive only the outward and visible signs, and that to
their condemnation, as Judas and other such like wicked and reprobate.

The lxviii. Article.
I believe that this sacrament contains two things, the one is earthly,
carnal and visible, and the other is heavenly, spiritual and invisible. And I
confess that as our body and outward man receives the thing that is earthly
and visible, which is the bread and the wine, whereby the body is nourished
and fed: even so verily our spirit and inward man receives the thing that is
heavenly and spiritual, which is signified by the bread and wine, that is to
say, the body and blood of Christ, after such sort, that thereby we are
become one with him, bone of his bones, and flesh of his flesh, and made
partakers with him of all righteousness and other virtues, gifts and graces,
the which the eternal father has bestowed on him.

The.lxix. Article.
I believe that the holy fathers, Patriarchs, Prophets, and all other faithful
and good people that are gone before us, and have dyed in the faith through the
word and faith, saw him beforehand which was to come, and received as much
and the same thing that we receive by the sacraments: For they were of the
self same Church, faith, and law that we be of. They were as well Christians,
as we, and used the same sacraments in figure, that we use in truth.

The lxx. Article.
I believe that to this holy table only those that are faithful, and are
truly contrite and penitent ought to be admitted, and that all such as are
unworthy, should be refused for fear of defyling and contaminating the holy
meats, the which the Lord gives not but unto the faithful, and to those of
his own household. I call those unworthy which are infidels, idolaters,
blasphemers, despisers of God, heretics, and all other that make sects to
divide themselves from the people, thereby to break the unity of the Church,
all that are perjured, all that resist and are disobedient, to father, mother,
and their superiors, all sedicious persons, murderers, quarrellers, sowers of
discord, whoremongers, thieves, covetous persons, drunkardes, gluttons, and
generally, all those that lead a wicked and a slanderous life. For such manner
of people, have no part nor portion of the kingdom of God, and for that cause
such ought to be cast and thrust out of the Church. For with such it is not
lawful to keep any company, to eat, drink, or to have any friendship, except
it be for the wynning of them, and bringing of them to repentance.

The lxxi. Article.
I believe that the Popish mass is not, neither can be the holy supper of the
Lord, but the mere inuencion of men, which were both liars, and wicked: yea it
is as contrary to the holy supper, as the night is unto the day, and Belial to
Christ as it may appear to al people more clear the^ the noone day, by
conferring and comparyng the institution of the holy supper (as the same is
recyted and written by the Evangelist, and especially, by the Apostle Saint
Paul) unto the celebration of the mass: And therefore the Mass can be no
remembrance of true sacrifice yt is to say, of ye death and passion of Christ
as ye holy supper is: But ye Mass, is an utter forsaking of the same, because
it does attribute, and ascribe to it self, that which does appertain only
to the blood of Christ shed upon the Cross, that is to say, satisfaction,
purgation, and remission of sins, with the increase of grace, and because men
are compelled to do godly honor unto ye creature, in stead of the Creator, to
a morsel of bread in the stead of Jesus Christ our only Lord, Savior, and
redeemer.

The lxxii. Article.
I believe that the third mark, or cognisaunce of the Church which is
ecclesiastical discipline, is very commodious and profitable, yea and very
necessary to ye catholic church, for ye comfort of the good, and for ye
punishment of the evil, the which also I do receive, and to the same do submit
my self, because I know that it is the ordinance of Christ in his Church, and
in like manner the same was practiced by the Apostles in the primitive Church,
and yt because all should be done honestly and in good order, which is a thing
honest and necessary for every congregation.

The lxxiii. Article.
I believe that the power to bind and loose, to excommunicate and to absolve,
that is commonly called the keys of the Church, is given of God, not to one or
two, or to some particular person, but to the whole Church, that is to say, to
all the faithful and believers in Christ, not for to destroy, undo or cast
away, but to edify and to advance al: And therefore I say and confess, that
excommunication and absolution ought not, neither can it be given at the lust
and pleasure of some particularly, but by the consent of all the Church, or at
the least, by the greater or most sound part of the same, when they be
congregated and assembled together in the name of Christ, and the same to be
done with prayer.

The lxxiiii. Article.
I believe that this excommunication exercised and executed rightly, according
as Jesus Christ has declared and commanded ye same in the Gospel, is of so
great authority, strength and power, that it may shut up heaven from men in
such wise, that all those that are worthyly excommunicated, are cast out of the
Church militant, and also shall be cast out of ye Church triumpha^t, which is
heaven, except they repent. It is the sword that is so sharp to cut off the
rotten members of Christ's mystical body, which is his Church. It is the key to
shut up the Heavens from the wicked. It is a rod to chasten them, which
nevertheless is not used to confound them, but as a spiritual medicine to
amend them, to receive them, to make the^ whole, and bring them again to ye
same estate, from the which they are fallen.

The.lxxv. Article.
I believe that this excommunication which is ye last rod of the Church,
ought not, neither can it be exercised toward any manner of person, which first
has not received and professed the faith and religion of Christ. And even
likewise the same can not be pronounced for small matters, as for money, debts,
and such like, neither ought it to be executed toward all sinners, but only
against open rebellious and obstinate sinners, when brotherly correction
commanded by Christ in the gospel, does take no place: And therefore al they
do generally abuse this rod, which do excommunicate the Christians, for
small trifles, without using first brotherly correction: And likewise do they
also that excommunicate the Jews, Turks, the Heathen, and other infidels, yea
and brute beasts, meaning thereby to thrust and cast out of the christian
church, those that never were in it.

The lxxvi. Article.
I believe herewith, that the unity of the spirit, peace, concord, and
charytie, that is to say, true amytie, and brotherly love, the sweet and
friendly helping and supporting one of an other, is also one of ye works and
signs of ye true catholic Church, and of the faithful children of God, by
the which they are known to be of the school and of the number of Jesus
Christ his disciples. And we must not glory in our selves, in the title of
christianity, or of the faith, saying, I believe, I believe, if we have not
this charity, peace, love, and true unity of heart together, agreeing one with
another in all good works. For the true faith never goes without these
things: by the which also it declares, and many festeth it self to all. These
are the signs and marks of the true christian Church, unto the which it is
linked and bound, and not unto any certain place, time or personages. And
there is the Church perfect, where these marks are found and used, and on the
other part, if any one of the same be lacking, then is not the same perfect.
And albeit that this whole perfection, for the estate of this present world,
cannot be found in the Church militant, nevertheless, the fault thereof must
be acknowledged before the Lord, and the remedy and ordering thereof be
committed to him.

The lxxvii. Article.
I believe, and receive in this Church two swords, that is to say, two powers,
the one is ecclesiastical, and spiritual, the which lies and consists in
the only administration of the word, and of the Sacraments, the which bears
neither rod nor staff, other then the tongue, neither does use any other
knyfe then the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God. Likewise I
confess that all those that have this sword in their hands, ought to be
without blame, as well in their living as in their doctrine, otherwise, they
ought to be deposed, and others to be placed in their roumes and to put and
ordain others that are better in their places. The other power is temporal,
that is to say, the magistrate, which has authority over externe and civil
things, to render according to right to every man, that which of right to him
appertains.

The lxxviii. Article.
I believe that the magistrate is an ordinance of God set in his church, for
the defense of the good and godly, and to chasten and punish the wicked: And
also to the magistrate must be given tribute, honor, and reverence and
obedience in all things, that be not in any wise contrary to Gods word. And I
do understand this, not only of the faithful Magistrate, but also of the
infidel and wicked Tyrant, unto whom we must obey as unto the Lord in all
things, so that he command nothing contrary to the word of God: For then we
ought rather to obey God then man, after the example of the Apos^les Peter and
John.

The Lxxix. Article.
I believe that to the magistrate it does appertain, not only to have
regard unto the common wealth, but also unto ecclesiastical matters, to take
away and to overthrow all idolatry and false serving of God, to destroy the
kingdom of Antichrist and all false doctrine, to promote the glory of God,
and to advance the kingdom of Christ, to cause the word of ye Gospel every
where to be preached, and the same to maintain unto death, to chasten also,
and to punish the false prophets which lead the poor people after idols and
strange gods, and in stead of the Gospel preach and teach the fables and
traditions of men, to the dishonor of God and Christ his Son, and to the
great decay of the whole Church. To such a magistrate every person, of what
estate, degree or condition so ever he be, ought to be subject, and him in
all honest and reasonable things to obey, because he represents ye person of
a great Lord, before whom every knee ought to bow. And the same must not be
forgotten in our prayers, to the end that the Lord may vouchsafe to guide and
direct all his ways, and that under him we may live in godly peace and
tranquillity.

The Lxxx. Article.
I believe that the magistrate, as also the use of oaths and such like, is the
ordinance of the Lord, for to lead the imperfection of man in his corrupt
nature after his fall: The which the faithful, after that he has assaied all
other means, may holily and justly use in matters of controversy which may
chance between him and his neighbor, to set an order, and to make peace in all
things. And therefore he that in necessity will not use this way, ought
rather to be judged an Anabaptist then a Christian.

The Lxxxi. Article.
I believe that the Magistrate holily may minister an oath unto the faithful
in judgment for the knowledge of the truth, and to make an end of all
controversies and matters in variance between man and man: the which oath
ought to be taken in the only name of the living God, because it is the
third commandment of the first table. And albeit the perfection required to
be in a Christian, ought simply to use yea yea, and nay nay, without any
swearing, nevertheless the faithful may holily use an oath in place and time
with discretion, and in the fear of the Lord, for things honest, just and
true, for the verifying of the truth, when the honor of God or the saving of
a man's neighbor depends upon it, or else not. For the man that accustometh
to swear, shall be filled with iniquity, and his house shall not be without
the plague. And I confess also that as every oath, vow, and promise made
according to Gods word, be it to God or to men, does bind and ought to be
kept and observed without breaking: even so those that are made without and
contrary to Goos word and commandment, as are the religious vows and such
like, which promise things impossible and contrary to the word of God, do not
bind a man in any wise, but with a good conscience may be violated and
broken. For in wicked promises, and in foolish and indiscreet vows, the
faithful, wise and sage may change their purpose.

The Lxxxii. Article.
I believe and confess that marriage is an honorable estate amongst all men,
and the bed undefiled is holy and ought not to be broken. It is instituted
and ordained of God, for the bringing forth of children, and to eschew
fornication, from the which estate of marriage none ought, nor can be
restrained, if there be no just and lawful let by the word of God, but the
same ought to be free to every body, of what estate, sort or condition soever
the same be of: for it is much better to marry then to burn: And for that
cause, all what soever they be, men or women, which have not the gift to live
unmarried, ought to marry, to the intent the Temple of the holy Ghost, that is
to say, our bodies may not be polluted and defiled.

The Lxxxiii. Article.
I believe also that the forbidding of marriage for certain persons, likewise
the forbidding of certain meats, the difference of days, garments, and such
like, is the deuilish doctrine of Antichrist, and wholly against the Christian
liberty of the Gospel taught by Jesus Christ, the which delivers us from
all outward ceremonies of the law, and sets us at liberty to use all
things with giving GOD thanks: So that it be not done to the hurt of our
neighbor: For all things are made holy by the word of God and prayer, to him
that knows and receives the truth. Therefore to compel the Christians to
these things, is but to take from them and to rob them of their Christian
liberty, and by tyranny to set them under the curse of the law, from the
which Christ by his death and passion has delivered them, and it is one true
mark and note to know Antichrist by.

The Lxxxiiii. Article.
I believe that the pure and true service of God does not consist in these
ceremonies and outward things, neither in babbling much and mumbling of long
prayers, neither in crying and braying in the Church like Asses or the Priests
of Baal, but in spiritual things, as lively and true faith in God and his
word taught by Jesus Christ his only Son, which is of power, and works
through charity toward our neighbor, true and perfect calling upon Gods name,
with due obedience to his commandementes in humblenes of spirit, according to
his word: For as God is a Spirit, so will he be worshipped and served in
spirit and truth.

The Lxxxv. Article.
I believe that all Gods services without Gods word, and contrary to his
commandment, is idolatry and iniquity. I call idolatry, after the fashion of
the Prophets, not only that which is done unto the honor of an Idol or
strange gods, but also that which is done to y^ honoring of the living God,
contrary to his word and commandment: And therefore they are not only
Idolaters which worship and serve Idols and strange Gods, as the Ethnicks and
such like, but also all those which worship and serve the true God of heaven,
after their own fantasy, or after the traditions of men without faith,
without the word of God, and otherwise the^ God has commanded them: And they
only are Christians, which do confess and serve one only God which is in
heaven, according to his word and commandment, all whose works, as well
outward as inward, corporal as spiritual, be the true service of the
Lord, because the same are done in the faith of the Son of God, and
according to the calling of the Lord, after the which every faithful body
ought to walk.

The Lxxxvi. Article.
I believe and confess that it is not lawful for a Christian to be present
either in spirit, either in body at the idolatrous sacrifices, neither to
enter into their temples while they are in doing of their idolatries and
sacrifices, if it be not of purpose to rebuke and utter their impiety, and to
teach the truth as the holy Prophets and Apostles did, and not to dissemble
as the hypocrites do. For if the body be the creature of God, (as it is in
deed) as well as the soul, and be the Temple of the holy Ghost, and a member
of the mystical body of Christ, and if it shall one day rise and possess
eternal life with the soul, it must then follow of necessity, that it ought
to be wholly dedicated unto the right service of God in this world together
with the soul and the spirit, or else they can not at the general
resurrection be coupled together, but must be separated asunder, the one to be
with God in heaven, whom it loved, and the other to be in hell, with the
devil, whom it served: the which thing is impossible, and for that cause I
say, that al such dissimulatio^ is a plain forsaking of Christ and of his
Gospel. Likewise I believe and confess, that all manner of such dissemblings by
the which the truth of the Gospel is hid, the word of the Lord despised,
infidelity and ignorance confirmed, and the weak are offended, the same can
not be of God, but of the devil, and altogether against the truth of Gods
word. And therefore there must be no halting on both sides: but we must go
and walk foorthryght and strayghtly before this great Lord, which sees,
beholds, and knows all things, yea, even before they are begone.

The Lxxxvii. Article.
I believe also that the beginning of all Idolatry was the fynding out and
invention of Images, which also were made to the great offense of the souls of
men, and are as snares and trappes for the feet of the ignorant to make them
to fall. Therefore they ought not to be honored, served, worshipped, neither to
be suffered in the Temples or Churches, neither in any other places, where
Christian people do meet together, to hear and understand the word of God,
but rather the same ought utterly to be taken away and thrown down,
according to the effect of the second commandment of God, and that ought to
be done by the common authority of the Magistrate, and not by the private
authority of any particular man. For the wood of the gallows whereby justice
is done, is blessed of GOD, but the Image made by man's hand is accursed of the
Lord, and so is he that made it. And therefore we ought to beware of Images
above all things.

This is that I believe of the Catholic faith, and of the things that
concern the same, and is for the fourth point of my faith, Now rests to
speak of the fruits that proceed out of the same, and what I receive by the
same faith: which fruits are in number three, whereof the first is,

The forgiveness of sins.
The Lxxxviii. Article.
I believe that al those that are come, and shall come of the race and line of
Adam, generally are conceived and borne in iniquity and corruption, (except
Jesus Christ only) and that they are all sinners, transgressers and breakers of
the law and will of the Lord, and according to their nature they are corrupt,
the children of wrath, worthy of Gods judgment, of condemnation and eternal
death, all needing the grace and mercy of God and of Christ's blood shedding.
For God has wrapped all under sin, to the intent he would have mercy upon
all through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Lxxxix. Article.
I believe that the knowledge of sin proceeds of the law, but the
remission and forgiveness of sin comes of the Gospel, and is given us by
the only grace and mercy of God in the blood of Jesus Christ, through the
faith we have therein, whereby we are counted righteous before God, not
through our good works or deseruings, neither by the merits of any other
creature either in heaven or in earth. For I know not neither do I allow any
other merits but ye merits of my good Lord, master and only savior Jesus
Christ, who has merited and sufficiently satisfied for us, and has paid for
his own their debt in wiping out the hand writing and obligation which was
against us, and in taking the same from us, has fastened it unto the Cross.

The xc. Article.
I believe that this iustifiyng faith is a mere and singular gift of God, the
which is commonly given by the hearing of Gods word, whereupon only it is
builte, and not upon the doctrines and traditions of men. I call a iustifiyng
faith, a certain assurance and earnest persuasion of the good will, love,
grace, bounteousnesse and mercy of God toward us, whereby we are assured and
verily persuaded in our hearts of the mercy, favor and good will of God the
father, that he is on our side, and for us, against all that are against us,
and that he will be a merciful father unto us, pardoning our sins, and will
give us his grace, make us his children by adoption, and admit us for heirs
unto eternal life, and all this freely in his son, and by his only son
Jesus Christ our Lord, and not for our merits or good works. This faith can
do all things, and to it nothing is impossible: the which faith is never
perfect nor great enough in us, and therefore ought we always to pray with
y^ Apostles, saying, Lord increase our faith, help our unbelief: For that
faith only does comfort us, makes us holy, makes us righteous and acceptable
before the Lord, it declares us to be the children of GOD and heirs of
eternal life: the which faith also is the mother, the spring and root of all
good works, like as infidelity is the fountain and root of all wickedness.

The xci. Article.
I believe also that good works are not superfluous, vain and unprofitable,
but necessary to salvation. I call good works, not those which are done after
the fantasy or commandment of men, but only those that God by his word
has commanded to be done, the which ought to be done not to deserve or
merit any thing thereby at Gods hand, or by the same to escape eternal
condemnation, but only because God has commanded them, and that they might
testify the love that we have unto our Lord, and our obedience to his holy
word and commandment, and to the intent that in us and by us he might be
glorified, and that our neighbors, as well the infidels and vnbeeleeuers, as
the faithful, might thereby be edified: and in like manner to show and to
manifest the faith that we have in God and in his word, as the good tree
shows it self and is known by his fruit, yea and to make sure and certain
unto us our calling, election and predestination. To these ends serve all the
good works commanded by God, and who soever does them to any other end,
does misuse them, sins and does injury to the blood of Christ, and
dishonors God and his word, for in so doing, he declares Christ died in
vain.

The xcii. Article.
I believe that there is none, either in this world or in the other world,
either in heaven or in earth, which can forgive me and pardon my sins, but
only God, which has given power and authority to the ministers of his word,
to declare to all faithful believers which are of a contrite heart and be
truly penitent, that all their sins through the free mercy of God are
forgiven them through the blood of Jesus Christ, which was shed for them:
yea to declare unto them that they are pardoned of their sins, and that the
same is done by the ministry of ye word of the holy Church, in the which this
remission is exhibited and given, and not otherwise: But on our part is
required perfect repentance, the which has two parts. The first is
contrition, that is to say, the knowledging, hating, and abhorring of sin:
the which thing is administered by the Law, and brings us to despair, if
with the contrary we be not helped with a lively faith, and the mercy of GOD
the Father through the blood of Jesus Christ, which proceeds out of the
Gospel. This faith comfort us, makes us steadfast, and causes us to find
favor before the judgment seat of God.

The xciii. Article.
I believe that sin dwells still in man, yea in the very saints and
children of God after their new birth through Baptism and the holy Ghost,
the which sin nevertheless shall not be laid to their charge because of ye
faith they have in Jesus Christ: for as all the sins of the infidels and
reprobate be damnable and shall not be pardoned, because of their
infidelity, even so all the sins of the faithful and chosen be venial
sins and forgiueable because of their faith: And therefore I believe, that
there is one only sin that is mortal and irremissible, which is unbelief
or infidelity, that is to say, not to believe in the son of GOD. For where
true faith in Christ is found, there all sins are hid, covered and pardoned.

I believe the resurrection of the flesh, which is the second fruit of my
faith.
The xciiii. Article.
I believe that there shall be one resurrection, which shall be general to
all the world, as well of the good as of the badde, which shall be in the end
of the world by the power of Christ, and through the ministry of the angels,
the which with a great voice of a trumpette shall call together all the world
before the Lord, and shall gather together the elect and chosen from the
four winds, even from the highest of the heavens unto the ends of the earth,
and divide the evil from the good, and the wicked shall they cast into the
fiery furnace, where is weeping and gnashing of teeth: and then shall the
righteous shine as the sun in the kingdom of their father, and shall be
together, and be companions with the Angels of God. This is the second
resurrection, and blessed is he that shall have part of portion therein, for
the same shall not be touched with the second death.

The xcv. Article.
I believe yt this resurrection shall be of ye flesh and not of the spirit, yt
is to say, that ye spirit or soul of man shall not rise, because it is immortal
and dies not. But ye body, which before, as well by ye reason of nature, as also
because of sin was subject unto death and corruption, to rotte, and to be
brought to ashes, shall be raised up, and shall be coupled with his own proper
soul and spirit, and shall be set in a more perfect estate, then that
wherein the first man was before he sinned, and shall be clearly exempted
from al manner of corruption of sin, and so consequently from all manner of
imperfections, and shall be fashioned like unto the glorious body of Christ.

The xcvi. Article.
I believe that I shall rise, not in any other man's flesh and body, but in mine
own that I brought out of my mothers womb, even with the self same body and
bones that I have at this present, but the same altered and changed, made of
mortal immortal, of corruptible incorruptible, of vile and contemptible,
glorious: And therefore I do wait for the coming of my savior Jesus Christ,
the which through his power will change my vile body, which was but a castaway,
to make it like unto his own glorious body, according to the power whereby he
is able to subject all things to him self.

I believe eternal life, which is the third and last fruit of my faith.
The xcvii. Article.
I believe, that I shall rise (as I have said) with all the faithful and elect,
not to die any more, as did they that miraculously were raised up from death,
as well by Christ, the Prophets, the Apostles, and such other, but unto a life
that is immortal, everlasting, and shall endure for ever, to raygne eternally
with God both in body and soul. And thereof I am sure, and doubt nothing at
all, knowing that whosoever doubts of his salvation by Christ, the same shall
not be saved. Wherefore as I am sure and certain, that Christ is dead, and
risen again for me, and therein do not doubt: even so am I sure and certain
of my salvation wrought by him, and that without fail I shall be saved, and by
him shall enter into eternal life.

The xcviii. Article.
I believe, that then I shall see him face to face, whom now I see as through
the glass of faith, and then shall know him perfitly, whom now I know but in
part, who after that he has destroyed and confounded al his adversaries, and
has made them his footestoole, shall make all things new, for the glory of
those that are his. The^ shall he be an whole God in all, and over al things.
Then shall none teach his brother, saying, Know the Lord, for then all shall
know him, from the greatest, unto the least.

The xcix. Article.
I believe also, that as the spirits of the infidels, wicked, and reprobate,
after they are departed from their bodies, incontinently do go to hell unto
everlasting fire, their bodies nevertheless abiding in the earth, corrupting
and rotting: even so likewise the souls and spirits of the faithful and
chosen children of God, incontinently after they do depart from their bodies,
without any tarying, are on high in heaven, to be in glory with the Lord, and
there do still wait with an earnest desire for the coming and whole redemption
of their bodies, the which they have left rotting and corrupting in the earth,
the which thing they shall obtain at the last day, and not before. Wherefore
I refuse the fond opinion of the Sleepers, which affirm, that the spirits of
the saints are not yet in heaven, but do sleep in a certain place unknown
to us, until they shall receive their bodies at the last day. At which day, the
mystical body of Christ wholly, perfectly, and fully must enter into eternal
glory.

The C. Article.
I believe for a conclusion, that as the Saints and the blessed, when the
judgment is ended, shall go with Christ triumphantly through the air, in
body and soul, to dwell everlastingly in glory with him and his Angels: even
so the wretched, wicked, and miserable damned, shall go to hell in body and
soul, with the devil and his angels eternally, to dwell and to be tormented
with him in the fire of hell, which never shall be quenched, whereas shall be
continual weeping, wayling, and gnashing of teeth, stung to the quick with
the worm, that never shall dye. From the which the Lord God of his great
mercy and grace vouchsafe to preserve and keep us. Amen.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London, by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most
excellent Majesty.

Anno 1581.


