Thieves falling out, Truemen come by their Goods: OR, The Belman wanted a
Clapper. A Peale of new Villainies rung out; The sound being Musical to all
Gentlemen, Lawyers, Farmers, and all sorts of people that come up to the
Term: Showing that the Villainies of leawd Women, excel those of Men.

Go not by me, but Buy me; and get by me. Imprinted at London for T. G. and
are to be sold by R. Marcha^^ at the Cross in Paul's Churchyard. 1615.

To all Gentlemen, Marchants^ Apprentises, and Countrie^ Farmers, health.
News* and green Bushes at Tauerns new set up; every man has his Penny to
spend at a Pint in the one, and every man his Ear open to receive the sound of
the other. It is the language which at first meetings is used in all Countries,
What News? In Court, it is the Morninges Salutations; and Noones table-talke; by
Night it is stale. In City, it is more common, then, What do you la^ke? And in
the Country, Whistling at Plough is not of greate^ Antiquity. Walk the
middle I Will in Paul's, and Gentlemen's teeth walk not faster at Ordinaries, then
there a whole day together, about inquiry after News. News then, being a
Fish that is caught every day, and yet a Meat for every man's Table; I think it
not amiss to inuit all men to a Feast of such News, as have of late come in
shoales into my Net. I will not hold a Bird in a Cage to sing strange Notes to
my self, but let her forth to delight others: And albeit (about some two or
three years past) the ugly faces of diverse dambde abuses, were set naked upon
every Post, their Vizards being flead off, both by (...) and Candlelight, and
by the Belman of London: Yet Villainy when it runn^s to seed, being of all
other Grains the most fruitful and luxuriant, the Candlelight was burnt to a
Snuff, and the Belman fast asleep before these Monsters which now are hatched
forth, creeped out of their Dens.

In Westminster, the Strand, H^lburne, and the chief places of resortes about
London, do they every day build their Nestes, every hour ^^^ge* and in Tear^e
(...) especially fl^tter they abroad in flocks: You shall know them by their
Feathers. And because for the most part, they fly in payres, (a Cock and a
Hen together), Behold a couple newly alighted on the Perch; a Hee-Foyst,
and a Shee-Foyst: What they chirrup out, their own Voices can best deliver*
and therefore listen to them. Suppose you hear the first of them setting
forth a throat thus.

Farewell. R. G.
A Disputation between a Hee-Foyst, and a Shee-Foyst.
Stephen, and Kate. Stephen. Fair Kate, well met, what News about your
Westminster-Bulding, that you look so blyth, your ^herry Cheeks discouers
your good fare* and your bra^^ Appare^* be wraies a fa^te Purse: is Fortune now
alate grown so favorable to Foyste^, that your Husband has lighted on some
large purchase; or has your smooth looks linck^ in some young Nouice to (...)
all the byte in his B^unge, and to leave himself as many Crowns as thou have
good conditions, and then ^he shall be one of Pierce pennilesse fraternity?
How is it sweet Wench, goes the world on wheels, that you tread (...) on your
(...)?


Kate. Why Stephen, are you pleasant or p^euish, that you q^ip with such br^e^e
g^rdes* think you a quarte^^e wind cannot make a quick sail, that cas^e
lystes cannot make heavy burdens, that women have not wiles to compass
crowns as well as men^yes and more, for though they be not so strong in the
(...), they be more ripe in their wits: and (...) that I live and will live,
in despite of that p^euish scholar, that thought with his ^onny-catching
books to have crosbit our Trade. Do thou marvel to see me thus brisk^?
f^ire wenches cannot want favors, while the world is so full of amorous
fools: where can such Girls as my self, be ble^^^h^ with a thre^dbare Coat,
as long as c^untry Farmers have full Purses; and wanton Citizens pockets full
of Pen^e?


Steph. Truth, if fortune so favor thy Husband, that he be neither smoakt nor
cloyed: for I am sure* all my bravery comes by his Nipping, Foysting, and
Lifting.


Kate. In ^ayth sir no: did I get no more by mine own wit, then I reap by his
purchase, I might both go ^are and pennilesse the whole year; but mine eyes
(...) were I not worthy the name of a (...) more Charms Calipso more
Enchantments, the Sirens more subtle tunes, then I have crafty flightes to
(...) a Conny, and fetch in a country Farmer. Stephen believe me, you men are
but fools, your gettings is uncertain, and yet you still fish for the
Gallows, though by some great chance you light upon a good ^
^oung, yet you fast a great while after; whereas, as we mad We^ches have our
Tennants (for so I call every simple Leccher and amorous Fox) as well out of
Term as in Term, to bring us our Re^^^: alas, were not my wits, and my
wanton pranks more profitable then my (...) swear my husband gets a hundredth
pounds a year by (...)


Steph. Why Kate, are you grown so stiff, to think that your fair looks
can get as much as our nimble fingers: or that your s^^king can gain as much
as (...) foysting (...), no, Kate, you are (...) Bows down the (...) more
then twenty the proudest Wenches in all London.


Kate Lie a little further, and give me some room: what Stephen, your tongue is
too lavish, all stands upon proof; and since I have le^sure, and you no great
business, as being now when Paul's is shut up, and al^ purchases and Connes in
their (...), let us (...) and take a room to our selves, and therefore the
price of our suppers, I will prove, that women (I mean of our faculty,
traffic, or as base: knaves term us, strumpets) are (...) subtle, more
dangerous in the commonwealth, and more (...), then the cunningest Foyst, Nip,
Li^t, (...) this day.


Steph. Content; but who shall be (...) since in disputing pro and contra,
betwixt ourselves, it is ^ut your yea, and my nay, and so neither of us will
yield to others victories.


Kate Trust me Stephen, I am so assured of the conquest, offering so in the
strength of mine own arguments, that when I have reasoned, I will refer it
to your judgment and censure.


Step. And trust me, as I am an honest man, I will be indifferent.


Kate. Oh swear not so deeply: but let me first hear what you can say for
your self?


Steph. What? why more Kate, then can be painted out in a great volume; but
briefly this: I need not discribe the laws of villainy, because the Bel-man
has so amply pend them down in the first part of C^nuy-catching, Cu^purses in
their ^^llers.
that though I be one of the faculty, yet I cannot ^^^couer more then he has
laid open. Therefore first to the Gentleman Foyst, I pray you what finer
quality? what art is more exc^llent either to try the ripenes of the wit, or
the agilliti^ of the hand, then that for him that will be master of his trade,
must pass the proudest Iugler alive, the points of Legerdemain, he must
have an eye to spy the boung or pursse, and then a heart to dare to attempt
it, for this by the way, he that fears the Gallows shall never be good thief
while he lives, he must as the Cat watch for a Mouse, and walk Powles,
Westminster, the Exchange, and such common haunt^^ places, and there have a
curious eye to the person, whether he be Gentleman, Citizen or Farmer, and
note, either where his boung lies, whether in his hoase or pockets, and then
dog the party into a press where his slaule with heauing and ^houing shall
so molest him, that he shall not feel when we strip him of his boung,
although it ^e never so fast or cunningly c^ucht about him: what poor Farmer
almost can come (...) plead his case at the bar, to attend upon his Lawyers
at the ^ench, but look he never so narrowly to it we have his pursse, wherein
sometime there is fat purchase, twenty or thirty pounds, and I pray you how
long would one of your. Traffiques be ^arning (...) much with your Chamber work.
Besides in faires and markets, and in the circuites after Judges, what infinite
many is gotten from honest meaning men, that either busy about their
necassarie affairs, or carelessly looking to their Crowns, light amongst us
that be foysts, ^ush we dessemble in show* we go so neat in apparel, so
orderly in outward appearance, Three shapes.
some like Lawyers Clerks, others like (...), that attended there about their
masters business, that we are hardly smoakt, vering upon all men with kind
courtesies and fair words, and yet besing so warily watchful, that a good
purse cannot be put up in a fair, but we sigh if we share i^ ^ot amongst us:
and though the Books of Conny-catching have somewhat hindered us, and brought
many br^ue Foysts to the Halter, yet some of our country Farmers, nay of our
Gentlemen and Citizens, are so careless in a throng of people, that they show
us the Prey, and so draw on a thief, and bequeath us their Purses whether we
will or no; for who loves Wine (...), that he will not eat Grapes if they fall
into his mouth; and who is so base, that if he see a pocket fair before him,
will not foyst in if he may, or if foysting will not serve, use his knife and
nip, for although there be some foysts that will not use their kni^^s, yet I
hold him not a p^rfect workman or master (...), that will not cut a Purse as
well as Foyst a pocket, and haz^rd any limme for so sweet a gain as gold: how
answer you me this (...) objection Kate? can you compare with either our
cunning to get our gains in purchase?


Kate. And have you no stronger arguments good man Stephen, The She Devil
worst.
to argue your excellency in villainy but this? then in faith put by your
pipes, and give me leave to speak: your choplodgicke has no great subtlety
for simple, you reason of foysting, and approbriate that to your selves, to you
men I mean, as though there were not women Foysts and Nippes; as neat in that
Trade as you, of as good an eye, as fine and nimble a hand, and of as resolute
a heart: yes Stephen, and your good mistresses in that mystery; for we without
like suspicion can pass in your walks under the color of simplicity to
Westminster, with a Paper in our hand, as if we were distressed women, that had
some supplication to put up to the Judges, or some bill of information to
deliver to our Lawyers, when God wot, we shuffle in for a boung as well as the
best of you all, yea as your self Stephen, though you be called king of
Cutpurses, for though they su^^ke you, they will hardly mistrust us, and
suppose our stomach stand against it to Foyst, yet who can better play the
stanse or the shadow then we, for in a thrust or throng if we shoue hard, who
is he that will not favor a woman, and in giving place to us, give you free
passage for his purse. Women Foysts and Boys, most dangerous in Fayres and
Markets.
Again, in the market, when every wife has almost her hand on her boung, and
that they cry beweare the Cutpurse and Conny-catchers, then I as fast as the
best with my hand basket as mannerly as if I were to buy great store of Butter
and Eggs, for provision of my house, do exclaim against them with my hand on my
Purse, and say the world is badde when a woman cannot walk safely to Market,
for fear of these villainous Cutpurses, when as the first boung I come to, I
either nip or Foyst, or else ^^^ule another, while he has stricken, dispatched
and gone: Now I pray you gentle sir, wherein are we inferior to you in foysting:
and yet this is nothing to the purpose. For it is one of our most simplest
shifts, but yet I pray you what think you when a Farmer, Gentleman, or Citizen,
come to the Term, perhaps he is wary of his Purse, and match him never so
warily, yet he will never be brought to the blow, is it not possible for us to
pinch him ere he pass? He that is the blow, is it not possible for us to
pinch him ere he pass, he that is most chary of his Crowns abroad, and will
cry, Ware the Conny-cat. chers, will not be afraid to drink a pint of wine
with a pretty wench, A Trull with a Gull.
and perhaps go to a trugging house to ferry one out for his purpose, then
with what cunning we can feed the simpl^ Fop, with what fair words, sweet
kisses, fained sighs, as if at that instant we fell in love with him that we
never saw before: if we meet him in the evening in the street, if the Farmer,
or other whatsoever, be not so forward as to motion some courtesy to us, we
straight insinuate into his company, and claim at quaintance of him by some
means or other, and if his mind be set for lust, and the Devil drive him on
to match himself with some dishonest wanton, then let him look to his Purse;
for if he do but kiss me in the street, I Will have his Purse for a farewell,
although he never commit any other act at all. I speak not this only by my
self Stephen, for there be a hundred in London more cunning then my self in
this kind of Cunny-catching. But if he come into a house then let our trade
alone to verse upon him, for first we feign our selves hungry, for the benefit
of the house, although our bellies were never so full, and no doubt the good
Pander, or Bawd, Tricks of bawdes.
she comes forth like a sober Matron, and sets ^^ore of Cates on the Table,
and then I fall (...) on them, and though I can eat little, yet I make haua^ke
of all, and let him be sure every dish is well saue'd, for he shall pay for a
Pippin Pie that cost in the Market four pence, at one of the Trugging houses*
xviii. pence* ^ush what is dainty if it be not dear bought, and yet he must
come off for Crowns besides, and when I see him draw to his Purse, I note the
putting up of it well, and ere we part, that world goes hard if I foyst him
not of all that he has, and then suppose the woorst, that he miss it, am I
so simple acquanted or badly provided, that I have not a friend, which with a
few terrible oaths and countenance set, as if he were the proudest Sould^d^,
that ever bare Arms in the Low Country Wars, will face him quite out of his
money, and make him walk like a woodcocke homeward by weeping cross, and so
buy repentance with all the Crowns in his Purse. How say you to this Stephen,
whether are women Foystes inferior to you in ordinary cous^nage or no?


Step. Excellently well reasoned, thou have told me wonders, but wench though
you be wily and strike often, your blows are not so big as ours.


Kate. Oh but note the subject of our disputation, and that is this, which are
more subtle and dangerous in the Commonwealth, and to that I argue.


Step. I and beshrow me, but you reason quaintly, yet will I prove your wits
are not so ripe as ours, nor so ready to reach into the subtilties of kind
co^s^nage, and though you ^ppropriate to your self the excellency of
Conny-catching, and that you do it with more Art then we men do, because of
your painted flatteries and sugres words, that you flourish rethorically like
nets to catch fools, yet will I manife^t with a merry instance, a (...) d^ne
by a Foyst, that exceede^ any that ever was done by any (...) in England.


A pleasant Tale of a Country Farmer, that took it in scorn to have his
Pursecut or drawn from him, and how a Foyst served hi^.
IT was told me of a truth that not long (...) here in London, there lay a
Country Farmer, with (...) of his neighbors about Law matters, am^ngst whom,
(...) of them going to Westminster Hall, was by a Foyst stripped of all the pence
in his Purse, and coming home, maid great compl^^^t of his misfortune, some
(...) his loss, and others exclamed against the Cutpurses, but this Farmer he
laughed loudly at the matter, and say^ such fools as could not keep their
Purses no surer, were well served, and for my part (...) he, I so much scorn
the (...), that I would thank^ him (...) that would take pains to Foyst (...),
well says hi^ neighbor, then you may thank me, since my harms learnes you to
beware, but if it be true, that many things fall out between the cup and the
lip, you know not what hands Fortune may light in your own lap, tush quoth the
Farmer, heeres forty pounds in this Purse in gould, the proudest Cutpurse in
England win it and wear it; thus he (...). There stood a subtle Foyst by, and
heard all, smyling to himself at the folly of the proud Farmer, and vowed to
have his Purse, or venture his neck for it, and so went home and ^ewr^yed it
to a crew of his Companions, who taking it in (...), that they should be put
down by a Peasant: But where souer they (...), they (...), and both consulted,
and concluded all by a general consent, to bend all their wits to be
possessers of this Farmers Boung, and for the execution of this their vow, they
haunted about the Inn where he lay, and dogd him into diverse places, both to
Westminster Hall, and other places, and yet could never light upon it, he was
so watchful and smoakt them so narrowly, that all their travel was in vain,
at last one of them fled to a more cunning policy, and went and learned the
man's name and where he dwelt, A pretty (...)*
and then he hyed him to the Counter and entered an Action against him of
trespas^e, damages, two hundredth pounds, when he had thus done, he feed two
Sargiants, and carried them down with him to the man's lodging, wishing them
not to arrest him till he commanded them, well agreed they were, and down to
the Farmers lodging they came, where were a ^rue of Foystes, whom he had made
privy to the end of his practice, stood waiting, but he took no knowledge at
all of them, but walked up and down, the Farmer came out and went to Powles,
the Cutpurse ^ad stai^, and would not yet suffer the Officers to meddle with
him, till he came into the West end of Paul's Churchyard, and there he willed
them to do their Office, and they stepping to the Farmer arrested him, the
Farmer amazed, being amongst his neighbors, asked the Sargiant at whose suite
he was troubled, at whose suite soever it be, said one of the Cutpurses that
stood by, you are wr^ngd honest man, for he has arrested you hear in a place
of privilege, where the Sherifes nor Officers have nothing to do with you,
and therefore you are unwise if you obey him, tush says an other Cutpurse,
though the man were so simple of himself, yet shall he not offer the Church
so much wrong, as by yielding to the Mace, to imbellish Paul's liberty, and
therefore I will take his part, and with that he drew his sword, an other took
the man and haled him away, the Officer he stooke hard to him, and said he was
his true prisoner, and cride Clubbes, the Prentises arose, and there was a
great hurly burly, for they took the Officers part, so that the poor Farmer
was mightily turmoyld amongst them, and almost haled in pieces, whilst thus
the strife was, one of the Foystes had taken his purse away, and was gone, and
the Officer carried the man away to a Tavern, for he swore he knew no such
man, nor any man that he was indebted to: as then they satte drinking of a
quart of wine, the Foyst that had caused him to be arested, sent a note by a
Porter to the Officer that he should rel^ase the Farmer, for he had mistaken
the man; which note the Officer showed him, and had him pay his fees and go his
ways, the poor Countryman was content with that, and put his hand in his
pocket to feel for his Purse, and God-wot there was n^ne; which made his heart
far more cold then the Arrest did, and with that fetching a great sigh, he
said. Alas Masters I am undone, my Purse in this Fray is taken out of my
pocket, and ten pounds in Gold (...) it besides white money. One varlet. smo^^^^
another.
Indeed, said the Sargeant, commonly in such brawles, the Cutpurses be busy,
and I pray God the quarrel was not made upon purpose by the Pick-pockets. Well
(says his Neighbor) who shall smile at you now, the other day when I lost my
Purse, you laughed at me? The Farmer ^^^oke all, and sat ^^lecontent, and
borrowed Money of his Neighbors to pay the Sargeant, and had a learning (I
believe) ever after, to brave the Cutpurse.

How say you to this Mistress Kate, was it not well done? What choice witted
Wench of your faculty, or she Foyst, has ever done the like? ^ush Kate, if we
begin once to apply our wits, all your inventions are follies toward ours.

Kate. You say good goodman Stephen, as though your subtilties were sudden as
women's are, come but to the old Proverb, and I put you down, It Is ^s hard to
find a ^are without a Muse, as a woman without a sense* and that wit that can
devise a cunning lie, can plot the in^ent of deep villainies. I grant this
fetch of the Foyst was pretty, but nothing in respect of that we wantons can
compass, and therefore to quite your tale with another, hear what a mad wench
of my profession, did relate to one of your faculty.


A passing pleasant Tale, how a whore Conny-catcht a Foyst.
THere came out of the Country a Foyst, ^ Country, ^oyst Gulles ^^e City
^oystes.
to try his experience, here in Westminster Hall, and struck a hand or two,
but the devil a snap he would give to our citizen Foystes, but wrought warily,
and could not be fetched off by no means, and yet it was known he had some
twenty pounds about him, but he planted it so cunningly in his doublet, that
it was sure enough for finding. Although the City Foysts laid all the plottes
they could, as well by discovering him to the Gaylors as otherwise, yet he
was so pol^^tique, that they could not verse upon him by any means, which
greeues them so, that one day at di^^er, they held a counsel amongst
themselves how to cousen him, but in vain, till at last a good wench that sat
by, undertook it, so they would swear to let her have all that he had, they
confirmed it sollemnly, and she put it in pract^se thus: she subtly
insinuated her self into this Foysts company, who seeing her a pretty wench,
began, after twice meeting, to wax familiar with her, and to question about a
nights lodging, after a little nyce loving and bidding she was content for her
supper and what else he would of courtesy bestow upon her, for she held it
scorn she said, to set a salarie price on her body: the Foyst was glad of
this, and yet he would not trust her, so that he put no more but ten
shillings is his pocket, but he had above twenty pounds quilted in his
doublet: well to be short, supper time came, and thither comes my gen^le Foyst,
who making good cheer, was so eager of his game that he would straight to
bed, by the leave of dame Bawd, who had her fee too, and there he lay till
about midnight, where three or four old Hacksters, whom she had provided upon
purpose, came to the door and rapt lustely: who is there says the Bawd
looking out of the window, marry say they, such a Justice (and named one about
the City that is a mortal enemy to Cutpurses) who is now come to search your
house for a Jesuit and other susspected persons: alas sir says she, I have
none here, well quoth they, Open the door. I will, says she, and with that
she came into the Foystes Chamber: who heard all this, and was a frayde it was
some search for him, so that he desired the Bawd to help him, that he might
not be seen. Why then (quoth she) step into this Closet. He whipped in hastily,
and never remembered his Clothes: she lock^ him in safe, and then let in the
crew of Rakehels, who making as though they searched every Chamber, came at last
into that where his Lemman lay, and asked her what she was: She, as if she had
been afraid, desired their Worships to be good to her, she was a poor
Country Maid come up to the Term. And who is that, quoth they, that was in
bed with you? None for sooth, says she. No, says one, that is a lie, The
Wolf, eats the Fox.
here is the print of two; and besides, wheresoever the Fox is, here is his
skin^e, for this is his Doublet and Hose: Then down she falls upon her
knees, and says, indeed it was her Husband. Your Husband, quoth they, nay that
cannot be (Minion) for why then would you have denied him at the first? With
that, one of them turned to the Bawd, and did question with her what he was, and
where he was? Truly sir, says she, they came to my house, and said they were
man and wife; and for my part I knew them for no other, and he being afraid,
is indeed (to confess the troth) shut up in the Closet. Cards well packt, are
as half the game won.
No doubt (if it please your Worship, says one rakehell) I warrant you, he is
some notable Cutpurse or Pickpocket, that is afraid to show his face, come and
open the Closet, and let us look on him. Nay sir says she, not for to night I
beseech your worship carry no man out of my house, I will give my word he
shall be foorth-comming to morrow morning. Your word dame Bawd, says one, it is
not worth a straw. You Huswife, that says ye are his wife ye shall go with
us: and for him, that we may be sure he may not start, I Will take his Doublet,
Hose, and Cloak, and to morrow I Will send them to him by one of my men; were
there a thousand pounds in them, there shall not be a penny diminisht. The
Whore kneeled down on her knees, and fained to cry pitifully, and desired the
Justice, (which was one of her companions) not to carry her to Prison. Yes
huswife, quoth he, your mate and you shall not tarry together in one house,
that you may make your tales all one, and therefore bring her away: and after,
ye dame Bawd, see you lend him no other clothes, for I will send his in the
morning betimes, and come you with him to answer for lodging him. I will sir,
says she: and so away goes the Wench and her companions laughing, and left the
Bawd and the Foyst. As soon as the Bawd thought good, she unlocked the Closet,
and cursed the time that ever they came in her house: now (quoth she) here will
Worse feared, then hurt.
be a fair ado, how will you answer for your self? I fear me I shall be in
danger of the Cort. Well (quoth he) to be short, I would not for forty pounds
come before the Justice. Mary no more would I, quoth she; let me shift, if you
were conveyed hence, but I have not a rag of man's apparel in the house. Why
(quoth he) seeing it is early morning, lend me a Blanket to put about me, and I
will escape to a friends house of mine. Then leave me a pawn, quoth the Bawd:
Alas I have none, says he, but this Ring on my finger. Why that, quoth she, or
tarry while the Justice comes: so he gave it her, took the Blanket and went
his ways, whither I know not, but to some friends house of his. Thus was this
wily Foyst by the wit of a subtle Wench, cunningly stripped of all that he had,
and turned to grass to get more fat.

Kat. How say you to this device Stephen, was it not excellent? What think you
of a Woman's wit, if it can work such woonders?


Steph. Marry I think my Mother was wiser then all the honest Women of the
Parish besides.


Kate. Why then be-like she was of our faculty, and a Matrone of my
profession, nimble of her hands, quick of her tongue, and light of her tail;
I should have put in, Sir reverence: but a foul word is good enough for a
filthy Knave.


Stph. I am glad you are so pleasant Kate, you were not so merry when you went
to Dunstable: but indeed I must needs confess that women Foystes, if they be
careful in their trades, are (though not so common) yet more dangerous then
men Foystes: Women have quick wits, as they have short heels; and they can
get with pleasure, what we ^^sh for with danger: but now giving you the
Bucklers at this weapon, let me hau^ a blow at you with another.


Kate. But before you induce any more Arguments, by your leave in a little
by-talke. You know Stephen, that though you can foyst, nip, pr^g, lift, curb,
and use the Black art, Crosbiting now most in use.
yet you cannot crosbite without the help of a Woman: which crosbiting now
adays, is grown to a maru^ilous profitable exercise; for some cowardly Knaves
that for fear of the Gallows, leave nipping and foysting, become Crosbites,
knowing there is no danger therein but a little punishment, at the most the
Pillorie, and that is saved with a little Vng^entum Aureum: as for example; W.
C. is now a reformed man, whatsoever he has been in his youth, now in his
latter days he is grown a corrector of Uice; for whom soever he takes
suspicious with his wife, I warrant you he sets a sure fine on his head, though
he has nothing for his money but a bare kiss: and in this Art, we poor
Wenches are your surest props and stay. If you will not believe me, ask poor
A. B. in Turnmill street, what a saucy Signor there is, whose purblind eyes
can scarcely discern a Lowse from a Flea, and yet he has such insight into
the mystical trade of Crosbyting, that he can furnish his Board with a
hundred pounds worth of Plate: I doubt the fand-eyde Ass, will kick like a
Western Pugg^, if I rub him on the gaul; but it is n^ matter if he find
himself touched and stir, although he boastes of the chief of the Cleargies
feuour, yet I Will so set his name out, that the Boys at Smithfield-barres shall
chalk him on the back for a Crosbite. Tush, you Men are foppes in fetching
nouices over the ^^ales: Harken to me Stephen, I Will tell thee a wonder. There
dwelt here sometimes a good ancient Matron, that had a fair Wench to her
Daughter, as young and tender as a (...) Mass Priests Lemman; her she set out
to sale in her youth, and drew on sundry to be suitors to her Daughter, some
wooers, and some speeders; yet none married her, but of her Beauty they made
profit, and inueagled all, till they had spent upon her what they had, and
then forsooth, she and her young Pigion turn them out of doors like
prodigal Children: She was acquainted with Dutch, French, Italian, and
Spaniard, as well as English, and at last, as so often the Pitcher goes to the
Brook that it comes broken home, my fair Daughter was hit on the master
vein, and gotten with child, and the Mother, to releue this matter to save her
Daughters Marriage, begins to wear a Cushion under her own ^irtle, and to
feign her self with child, but let her Daughter pass as though she ayld
nothing: when the forty weeks were come, and my young Mistress must needs
cry out forsooth, this old ^. had gotten huswifes, an^^erable to her self; and
so brought her Daughter to Bed, and let her go up and down the house, and the
old Croane lay i^ childbed as though she had been delivered, and said, the
Child was hers, and so saved her Daughters (...). Was not this a witty wonder
M. Stephen, wrought by an old Witch, to have a Child in her age, and make a
young Whore seem an honest Uirgin: Tush, this is little to the purpose, if I
should r^cite all, (...) many she had co^^^ned under the pretense of marriage:
Well, poor plain Signior See, you were not stiff enough for her, although it
cost you many Crowns, and the loss of your service. I Will say no more, perhaps
she will amend her manners. Ah Stephen, how like you of this gear, in
Crosbiting we put you (...); for God wot, it is little looked too in and about
London; and yet I may say to thee, many a good Citizen is Crosbit in the year
by odd Walkers abroad.


Steph. I cannot d^ny Kate, but you have set down strange Presidents of Women's
prejudicial wits; but yet though you be Crosbites, Foystes, and Nips, yet you
are not good Liftes: which is a great help to our Faculty, to (...) Boult of
Satin or Ueluet.


Kate. Stay thee a word, I thought thou had spoken of I.P.C. his wife: Take
heed, they be par^ous folks, and greatly acquainted with Keepers and Jaylers,
therefore meddle not you with them; for I hear say, the Belman has sworn in
despite of the Brasill ^^affe, to tell such a foul Tale of him in his Second
part, that it will co^^ him a dangerous Joint.


Ste. Kate, Kate, let I. P. beware, ^or had not an ill fortune fallen to the
Bel-man, he could take little harm.


Kate. Who is that Stephen, D. VV.


Ste. Nay, I will not name him.


Kate Why then I prithie what misfortune befell him?


Ste. Marry Kate, he was strangely washed alate by a French Barber, and had all
the hair of his face miraculously shaven off by the Sithe of Gods vengeance,
in so much that some said he had that he had not, but as hap was, howsoever his
hair fell off, it stood him in some ^^eed when y^ brawle was alate: for if he
had not cast off his beard and so being unknown, it had cost him some knockes,
but it fell out to ye best.


Kate The more hard fortune that he had such ill hap, but hasty iourneys breed
danger^us sweates, and y^ Physicians call it y^ Ale Peria, yet omitting all
this, again to where you left.


St. You have almost brought me out of my matter, but I was talking about the
Li^t, commending what a good quality it was, and how hurtful it was, The
conditions of a Life.
seeing we practice it in Mercers shops, with Haberd^shers of small war^^,
Haberdashers of Hats and Caps, amongst Merchant Tailors for Hose and Doublets,
and in such places getting much gains by Lifting, when there is no good
purchase abroad by Foisting.


Kate Suppose you are good at the lift, who be more cunning then we women, in
that we are more trusted, for they little suspect us, and we have as close
conueyance as you men, though you have Cloakes, we have skirts of gowns,
handbaskets, the crowns of our hats, our plackardes, and for a need, false
bags under our smockes, wherein we may convey more closely then you.


St. I know not where to touch you, you are so witty in your answers, and have
so many starting hoales, but let me be pleas^nt with you a little, what say you
to Priggin or horse-stealing, I hope you never had experience in that faculty.


Kate Alas simple sot, yes, and more shift to shun the gallows then you.


St. Why it is impossible.


Kate. In faith sir no, and for proof, I will tell you wonders of this mad
wench and her husband, in my black book, with both their names.
I will put you down with a story of a mad, merry, little dapper, fine wench,
who at Spilsby fair had three horse of our own, or another man's to sell, as
she, her husband, and another good fellow, walked them up and down the Fair,
the owner came and apprehended them all, and clapped them in prison, the Iaylor
not keeping them close prisoners, but letting them lie all a Chamber, by her
wit she instructed them in a formal tale, that she saved all their lives thus.
Being brought the next morrow after their apprehension, before the Justices,
they examined y^ men how they came by the horses, and they confessed they met her
with them, but where she had them, they knew not: then was my pretty peat
brought in, who being a handsome Trull, blushed as if she had been full of
grace; and being demanded where she had the horses, made this answer: May it
please your worships, this man my husband, playing the unthrift, as many more
have done, was absent from me for a quarter of a year^, which grieved me not a
little, insomuch y^ desirous to see him, and having intelligence he would be at
Spilsby Fair, I went thither even for pure love of him, on foot, and being
within some ten miles of y^ town, I wa^ed passing weary, and rested me often,
and grew very faint, at last there came riding by me a Seruingman in a blew
coat, with 3 horses tide at one another tail, which he led, as I gest, to
sell at the fair: the Seruingman seeing me so tired, took pity on me, and
asked me if I would ride on one of his empty horses, for his own wo^ld not bear
double, I thankt him heartily, and at the next hill got up, and rode til we came
to a town within 3 miles of Spilsby, where the Seruing-man alighted at a
house, and ^ad me ride on before, and he would presently overtake me. Well,
forward I rode half a mile, and looking behind me, could see no body; so being
alone, my heart began to rise, and I to think on my husband: a^ I had rid a
little further, looking down a lane, I saw two men coming lustily up, as if
they were weary; and marking them earnestly, I saw one of them was my husband,
which made my heart as light as before it was sa^: so staying for them, after a
little unkind greeting betwixt us (for I chid him for his unthriftiness) he
asked me where I had the horse: and I told him how courteously the Seruingman
had used me: why then says he, stay for him: nay quoth I, lets ride on, and
get you two upon the empty horses, for he will ouer-take us ere we come at the
town, he rides on a stout lusty young gelding: so forward we went, and looked
often behind us, but our Seruingman came not. At last we coming to Spilsby,
alighted and broke our fast, and tied our horses at the door, that if he past
by, seeing them, he might call in; after we had broke our fast, thinking he had
gone some otherway, we went into ye horse-faire, and there walked our horses up
and down to meet with y^ Seruingman; not for the intent to sell them. Now may
it please your worship, whether he had stolen the horses from this honest man
or no, I know not; but alas, simply I brought them to them to the horse fair,
to let him that delivered me them, have them again^: for I hope your worships
do imagine if I had stolen them, as it is suspected, I would never have brought
them into so public a place to sell: yet i^ law be any way dangerous for y^
foolish deed, because I know not the Seruingman, it is I must bide the
punishment, and as guiltless as any here: and so making a low curtsie she
ended. The Justice holding up his hand, and wondering at (...) woman's wit, that
had cleared her husband and his friend, and saved herself without compass of
the law. How like you of this Stephen? cannot we wenches prigge well?


Step. I think Kate I shall be feign to give you y^ bucklars.


Kate. Alas good Stephen, thou art no Logitian, thou can not reason for thy
self, nor have no witty argument to draw me to an exigent: and therefore give
me leave at large to reason for this supper, remember the subject of our
disputation, is the positive question, whether Whoores to Thieves are most
preiuditiall to the Commonwealth. Alas, you poor thieves do only steal and
purloine from men, and the harm you do, is to imb^llish men's goods, and bring
them to poverty: this is the only end of men's th^euery, and the greatest
preiudic^ that grows from robbing and filching, so much do weby o^ the^t, and
more by our lechery: for what is the end of whoredom, but consuming of goods
and begery; and besides, perpetual infamy? We bring young youths to ruin and
utter destruction. I pray you Stephen whether had a Merchants son, having
wealthy parents, better light upon a whore, then a Cutpurse, the one only
taking his money, the other bringing him to utter confusion. For if the Foyst
light upon him, or the Conny-catcher, he loses at the most some hundredth
pounds: but if he fall into the company of a Whore, she flatters him, she
inueagles him, she bewitcheth him, that he spares neither goods nor lands to
content her, that is only in love with his coin: if he be married, he
forsakes his wife, leaves his children, despises his friends, (...) to
satisfy his lust with the love of a base Whore, wh^ when he has spent all
upon her, and he brought to beggary, beats him out like the Prodigal child^;
The end of keeping a whoores company.
and for a ^^^all reward, brings him, if to the fairest end, to beg: if to
the second, to the gallows: or at the last and worst, to the por, or as
preiuditiall diseases. I pray you Stephen when any of you come to your
confession at Tyborne, what is your last Sermon that you make? That you were
brought to that wicked and shameful end, by following of Harlots: for to that
end do you steal to maintain whoores, and to content their badde humors. Oh
Stephen! enter your own thoughts, and think what the fair words of a wanton
will do, what the smiles of a strumpet will drive a man to at, into what
ieopardy a man will thrust himself for her that he loves, although for his
sweet villainy he be brought to a loathsome leprosse. Tush Stephen, they say
the Por came from Naples, some from Spain, some from France: but wheresoever
it first grew, it is so surely now rooted in England, that by S. Sith it may
better be called A Morbus Anglicus; then Gallicus, and I hope you will grant
all these French favors grew^ from Whoores: besides, in my high loving, or
rather creeping, I mean wher^men and women do rob together, there always the
Woman is most bloody: Women out-strippe men in villainy.
for she always urges unto death: and though the Men would only satisfy
themselves with the parties coin, yet she ends her theft in blood,
murdering parties so deeply as she is malicious: I hope (gentle Stephen) you
cannot contradict these reasons, they be so openly manifestly probable. For
mine own part, I hope you do not imagine but I have had some friends besides
poor George my husband: Alas, he knows it, and is content, like an honest
simple Suffragan, to be corriuall with a number of other good Companions, and
I have made many a good man, I mean a man that has a household, for the love
of me to go home and beat his poor wife, when God wotte, I mock him for
the money he spent, and he had nothing for his pence, but the waste
beleauings of others beastly labors.

Stephen, Stephen, Examples.
if Concubines could inueagle Solomon, if Dalilah could betray Sampson, then
wonder not if we (more nice in our wickedness then a thousand Dalilahs) can
seduce poor young Nouices to their utter destructions. Search the Gayles, there
you shall hear complaints of Whoores: Look into the Spittles, and
Hospitalles: there you shall see men diseased of the French Marbles, giving
instruction to others that are said to beware of Whoores, be an Auditor or
eare-witnesse at the death of any Thief, and his last testament is, Take heed
of a Whore.

I dare scarce speak of Bride-well, because my shoulders tremble at the name
of it, I have so often deserved it: yet look but in there, and you shall hear
poor men with their hands in their Pigeon-hoales, cry: Oh fie upon Whoores,
when Fouler gives them the terrible lash. Examine Beggars that lie lame by the
highway, and they say, they came to that misery by Whoores. Some threed-bare
Citizens, that from Merchants, and other good Trades, grow to be base Informers
and Knights of the Post, cry out when they dine with Duke Humphrey: O what
wickedness comes from Whoores. Prentises that run from their masters, cry
out upon whoores. Tush Stephen, what enormities proceed more in the
Commonwealth, then from whoore^^^e. But since it is almost supper-time, and
mirth is the friend to digestion, I mean a little to be pleasant, I pray you
how many bad profits again grows from whoores? Bride-well would have very
few Tenants, y^ Hospital would want Patients, y^ the Surgeants much work, the
Apothe^^ries would have Surphaling water, and Potato-rootes lie dead on their
hands, the Painters could not dispatch and make away their vermillion, if
tallow-faced wh^^res used it not for their cheeks. What should I say more
Stephen? The Sub-vrbes should have a great miss of us, and Shorditch would
compl^^ne to dame Anne a Clear, if we of the sister-hood she (...) uphold her
iollity. Who is that Stephen comes (...) hear our talk? Oh it is the boy Kate
that tells us supper is ready. Why then Stephen what say you to me? have I not
proved that in foisting and nipying we excel you, that there is none so great
inconvenience in the Commonwealth, as grows from whoores: first for the
corrupting of youth, infecting of age, for breeding of brawles, whereof ensue^
murder, insomuch that the ruin of many men comes from us, and the fall of
many youths of good hope, if they were not seduced by us, do proclaim at
Tyborne that we be the means of their misery: you men thieves touch the
body, and wealth, but we ruin the soul, and endanger that which is more
precious then the world^ treasure: you make work only for the gall^wes, we
both for the gallows and the ^^^el, I and for the Surgian too, that (...) live
like (...) Lazers, and (...) with the Fre^^^ Marbles. Whereupon I conclude that
I have (...).


Steph. I confess it Kate, for thou have told me such wondrous villainies, as I
thought never could have been in women, I mean of your profession: why you are
Crocodiles when you weep, Basilisks when you smile, Serpents when you devise,
and the Devils chi^^e brokers to bring y^ world to destruction. And so Kate
lets sit down to our meat and be merry.


THus Contrymen, you have heard the disputation between these two cousoning
companions, wherein I have shakt out the notable vilany of whoores, although
mistress Kate this good Oratresse, has sworn to wear a long Hamborough
knife to stab me, and all the crew have protested my death: and to pro^e they
meant good earnest, they beleagred me being at supper: there were some
fourteen or fifteen of them met, and thought to have mad^ that y^ fatal
night of my ouer-throw, but that the courteous Citizens and Apprentises took
my part, and so two or three of them were carried to the Counter, although a
Gentleman in my company was sore hurt. I cannot beny but they begin to wast
away about London, and Tyborne has eaten up many of them, and I will plague
them to y^ extremity, let them do what they dare with their bilbow blades, I
fear them not: and to give them their last adue, look shortly Countrymen, for
a Pamphlet against them, called, New Laws.
The creeping Law, of petty thieves, that rob about the Sub-vrbs. The limitting
law, discoursing the orders of such as follow Judges in their circuits, and go
about from fair to fair. The Iugging law, wherein I will set out the
disorders at Nineholes and Rifling, how they are only for the benefit of the
Cut-purses. The stripping law, wherein I will lay open the lewd abuses of
sundry Iaylors in England. Beside, you shall see there what houses there be
about the Sub-vrbs and towns end, that are receivers of Cut-purses stolen
goods, Lifts and such like. And lastly, look for a Bed-roll or Catalogue of
all the names of the Foysts, Nyps, Lifts, and Priggars, in and about London:
and although some say I dare not do it, yet I will shortly set it abroach, and
whosoever I name or touch, if he think himself grieved, I will answer him.

The conversion of an English Courtezan.
A Harlots repentance.
Since to discover my parentage, would double the grief of my living Parents,
and revive in them the memory of great (...), and that my untoward ^^ll, would
be a dishonor to the house from whence I came, Since to manifest the place of
my birth, would be a blemish (through my bea^tly life so badly misled) to the
Shire where I was borne: Since to discover my name, might be holden a blot in
my kindreds brow, to have a (...) their stock of so little grace, I will
conceal my parents, kin, and Country, and shroude my name with silence, least
envy might taunt (...) for my wantonness. Know therefore, I was borne (...)
threescore miles from London, of honest and wealthy parents, who had many
children, but I their only daughter,and therefore the jewel wherein they most
delighted, and more, the youngest of all, and therefore the more favored; for
being gotten in the wayning of my parents age, they doted on me above the rest,
and so set^ their hearts the more on fire: I was the fairest of all, and yet
not more beautiful then I was witty, or so much that ^^ing a pretty Parrat, I
had such quaint conceits, and witty words in my mouth, that the neighbors
said, I was too soon wise, to be long old. Would to God either the Proverb
had been authentical, or their sayings Prophecies, then had I by death in my
nonage, buried many blemishes that my riper years brought me to: For the
extreme love of my parents, was the very efficient cause of my follies,
resembling herein the ^^ture of the Ape, that ever kills that young o^e which
he loves most, with embracing it too ^er^ently. So my father and mother, but
she most of all, although he to much, so cockered me up in my wantonness,
that my wit grew to the worst, and I wa^ed upwards with the ill weeds:
Whatsoever I did, were it never so bad, might not be found fault withal, my
Father would smile at it, and say, 'twas but the trick of a child, and my
mother allowed of my unhappy parts, alluding to this profane and old proverb,
An untoward girl makes a good woman.

But now I find, in sparing the rod, they hated the child, that ouer-kind
fathers make unruly daughters. Had they bent the wand while it had been green,
it would have been pliant; but I, ill grown in my years, am almost
remediless. The Hawke that is most perfect for the flight and will, seldom
proves hagard, and children that are virtuously nurtured in youth, will be
honestly natured in age: fie upon such as say: young Saints, old Devils, it is
no doubt a devilish and damnable saying: for what is not bent in the Cradle,
will hardly by bowed in the Sadle.My self am an instance, who after I grew to
be six years old, was s^t to School, where I profited so much, that I writ
and read e^cellently well, played upon the Uirginals, Lute and Citron, and could
sing prick-song at the first sight: insomuch as by that time I was twelve
years old, I was holden for the most fair and best qualified youg girl in
(...) that Country, but with this, bewailed of my wel-wishers, in that my
parents suffered me to be so wanton.

But they so tenderly affected me, and (...) so ^^nded with my excellent
qualities, that they had no insight into my ensuing follies. For I growing to
be 13 year old, feeling the yoke of liberty to be loose on mine own neck,
begin, with y^ wanton Heyfer, to aim at mine own will, and to measure content
by the sweetness of mine own thoughts, insomuch that (...) ^reeping on, I
began to pranke (...) self with the proudest, and to hold it in disdain, that
any in the Parish should exceed me in brauer^. (...) apparel was costly, so I
grew to be licentious, and to delight to be looked on, so that I ^aunted and
frequented all feasts and weddings, and other places of merry meetings, where,
as I was gazed on of many, so I spared no glaunces to survey all with a curious
eye favor, I observed Ouids rule right:

Spectatum veniunt, veniunt spectentur vt ipse. I went to see and be seen, and
decked my self in the highest degree of bravery, holding it a glory when I was
waited on with many eyes, to make censure of my birth. Beside, I was (...)
ordinary (...), and grew in that quality so famous, that I was noted as the
chiefest the^eat in all the Country: yea, and to sooth me up in these follies,
my Parents took a pride in my dancing, which afterward proved my ouer-throw,
and their heartbreaking.

Thus as an unbridled Colt, I carelessly led forth my youth, and wantonly spent
the flower of my years, holding such Maidens as were modest, fools, and such
as were not as wilfully wanton as my self, puppies, ill brought up, and
without manners. Growing on in years, as tide nor time tarrieth for no man, I
began to wa^ passion-proud, and to think her not worthy to live, that was not
a little in love, that as diverse young men began to favor me for my beauty*
(...) I began to censure of some of them partially, and to (...) in the (...)
of many wooers, being ready to fall from the (...) I was come to the (...) of a
blossom; which an (...) of mine seeing, who was my mothers brother, as
careful of my welfare, as me to me in kin, (...) to talk with me, gave
me this (...)

A w^tch-word to want on Maidens.
(...) the most sudden shower, and the yo^gest virgins the (...) dangerous
fortunes, I speak as a kinsman, and wish as a friend, the blossom of a
Maidens youth (such as your self) has attending upon it many frosts to nip
it, and many cares to consume it, so that i^ it be not carefully looked unto, it
will perish before it come to any perfection.

A virgins honor consists not only in the gifts of Nature, as to be fair
and beautiful, though they be favors that grace Maidens much: for as they be
glistering, so they be momentany, ready to be worn with every winters blast
and parched with every Summers sun, there is no face so fair, but the least
Moale, the slenderest scarre, the smallest brunt of sickness, will quickly
bl^mish.

Beauty (Cozen) as it flourishes in youth, so it fades in age, it is but a
folly that feeds man's eye, a painting that Nature lends for a time, and men
allow on for a while, insomuch that such as only aim at your fair looks,
tie but their lou^s to an Apprentiship of beauty; which broken, either with
cares, misfortune, or years, their destnies are at libe^ty, and they begin to
loath you, and like of others.

For she that is looked on by many, cannot choose but be hardly spoken of by
some: for report has a blister on her tongue, and Maidens actions are narrowly
measured. Therefore would not the ancient Romans suffer their daughters to go
any further then their mothers looks guided them. And therefore Diana is
painted with a Tortuse under her feet, meaning, that a maid should not be a
stragler, but like the snaile, carry her house on her head, and keep at home
at her work, so to keep her name without blemish, and her virtues from the
slander of envy.

Cozen, I speak this generally, which if you apply particularly to your self,
you shall find in time my words were well said.

I gave him slender thanks, but with such a frump that he perceived how light
I made of his counsel: which he perce^^^ing, shakt his head, and with tears
in his eyes, departed. But I whom wanton desires had drawn in delight, still
presumed in my former follies, and gave my self either to gad abroad, or else
at home to read dissolute Pamphlets, which bred in me many ill-affected wishes,
so that I gave leave to love and lust to enter into the center of my heart,
where they harbored till they wrought my final and fatal prejudice.

Th^s leading my life loosly, and being soothed up with the applause of my too
kind and loving parents, I had many of every degree that make love unto me, as
well for my beauty, as for the hope of wealth that my father would bestow upon
me: sundry suitors I had, and allowed of all, though I particularly granted love
to none, yielding them friendly favors, as being proud I had more wooers then
a(...) in the parish beside: amongst the rest there was a ^^^lthy Farmer that
wished me well, a man of some forty years of age, one too worthy for one of
so little worth as my self, and him my father, mother, and other friends, would
have had me match my self with all: but I that had the raines of liberty too
long in mine own hands, refused him, and would not be ruled by their
persuasions; and though my mother with tears entreated me to consider of mine
own estate, and how well I sped if I wedded with him, yet carelessly I despised
her counsel, and ^^a^ly ^^de answer, that I would none of him: which, though
it pinched my Parents at the quick, yet rather than they would displease me,
they left me to mine own liberty to love. Many there were beside him, men^
sons of no m^^^e worth, that were wooers unto me, but in vain, either my
fortune or destiny drove me to a worser end, for I refused them all, and with
the B^^^e, refusing to light on the sweetest flowers all day, ne^^led at night
in a Cowsh^^^d.

It fortuned, that as many sought to win me, so amongst the rest there was an
(...) companion that dwelt with a Gentleman hard by, a fellow of small
reputation, and of no li^ing, neither had he any excellent qualities, but
thrumming on the gitt^on: but of pleasant disposition he was, and con^^gaw^^
out many quaint and ribaldrous Iigges and songs, and so was favored of the
foolish sort for his foppery. This shi^^ing companion, suitable to my self in
vanity, would often times be jesting with me, and I so long dallying with him,
that I began deeply (oh let me blush at this confession) to fall in love
with him, and so construed of al his actions; that I consented to mine own
ouer-throw: for as smoke will hardly be concealed, so love will not be long
smothered, but will bewray her own secrets, which was manifest in me, who in my
sporting with him, so bewraied my affection, y^ he spying I favored him, began
to strike when the iron was hot, and to take opportunity by the forehead, and
one day finding me in a merry vain, began to question with me of love:
which although at the first I slenderly denied him, yet at last I granted, so
that not only I agreed to plight him my faith, but that night meeting to have
further talk, I la^ciuiously consented that he cropped the flower of my
virginity. When thus I was spoiled by such a base companion, I gave my self to
content his humor, and to satisfy the sweet of mine own wanton desire. Oh
here let me breathe, and with tears bewail the beginning of my miseries, and
to exclaim against the folly of my Parents, who by too much favoring me in my
vanity in my tender youth, laid the first plot of my ensuing repentance: Had
they with due cor^^^tion chastised my wantonness, and suppressed my foolish will
with their grave advice, they had made me more virtuous, and themselves less
sorrowful. A fathers frown is a bridle to the child, and a mothers check is
a stay to the stubborn daughter. Oh had my parents in ouer-louing me not hated
me, I had not at this time cause to complain.

But leaving this digression, again to the loosnesse of mine own life, who
now having lost the glory of my youth, and suffered such a base staue to
possess it, which many men of worth had desired to enjoy, I waxed bold in
si^^e, and grew shameless, insomuch he could not desire so much as I did grant
him: whereupon, seeing he durst not reveal it to my father to demand me in
marriage, he resolved to carry me away secretly, and therefore wished me to
provide for my self, and to furnish me every way both with money and apparel,
hoping as he said, y^ after we were departed, and my father saw we were
married, and that no means was to amend it, he would give his (...) cousent,
and use us kindly, and ^^ale with us as liberally, as if we had matched with
his good will. I that was apt to any ill, agreed to this, and so wrought the
matter, that he carried me away into a strange place, and then using me a while
as his wife, when our money began to wax low, he resolved secretly to go
into y^ Country where my father dwelt, to hear not only how my father took
my departure, but what hope we had of his ensuing favor: although I was loath
to be left in a strange place, yet I was willing to hear from my friends, who
no doubt conceived much heart sorrow for my unhappy fortunes: so that I parted
with a few tears, and enjoined him to make all the haste he might to return.
He being gone, as the Eagles always resort where the carrion is, so the brute
being spread abroad of my beauty, and that at such an Inn lay such a fair
young Gentlewoman, there resorted thither many brave young Gentlemen, and
cutting companions, that tickled with lust, aimed at the possession of my
favor, and by sundry means sought to have a sight of me, which I easily
granted to all, as a woman that counted it a glory to be wondered at by many
men's eyes: insomuch that coming amongst them, I set their hearts more and more
on fire, that there arose diverse brawles who should be most in my company.
Being thus haunted by such a troop of lusty rufflers, I began to find mine
own folly, that had placed my first affection so loosly, and therefore began
as deeply to loath him that was departed, as erst I liked him when he was
present, vowing in my self, though he had the spoil of my virginity, yet
never after should he triumph in the possession of my favor: and therefore
began I to affection these new-come guests, and one above the rest, who was a
brave young Gentleman, and no less addicted unto me, then I devoted unto him:
for daily he courted me with amorous Sonnets, and curious pend letters, and
sent me Jewels, and all that I might grace him with the name of my servant: I
returned him as loving lines at last, and so contented his lusting desire, that
secretly and unknown to all the rest, I made him sundry nights my bedfellow;
where I so bewitched him with sweet words, that the man began deeply to dote
upon me, insomuch that selling some portion of land that he had, he put it into
ready money, and providing Horse and all things convenient, carried me secretly
away, almost as far as the Bathe. This was my second choy^e, and my second
shame: thus I went forward in wickedness, and delighted in change, having left
mine old love to look after some other mate more fit for my purpose: how he
took my departure when he returned, I little cared: for now I had my content,
a Gentleman, young, lusty, and endued with good qualities, and one that loved
me more tenderly then himself. Thus lived this new entertained friend and I
together unmarried, yet as man and wife for a while, so lovingly as was to his
content and my credit: but as the Tiger, though for a while she hide her
claws, yet at last she will reveal her cruelty: and as the Agnus Castus
leaf when it looks most dry, is then most full of moisture, so Women's
wantonness is not qualified by their warines, nor does their chariness for a
month warrant their castity for ever, which I proved true: for my supposed
husband being every way a man of worth, could not so covertly hide himself in
the Country, though a stranger, but that he fell in acquaintance with many
brave Gentlemen, whom he brought home to his lodging, not only to honor them
with his liberal courtesy, but also to see me, being proud if any man of worth
applauded my beauty. Alas poor Gentleman, too much bewitched by the wiliness
of a woman* had he deemed my heart to be a harbor for every new desire, or
mine eye a suter to every face, he would not have been so fond as to have
brought his companions into my company, but rather would have mewed me up as a
Hen, to have kept that several to himself by force, which he could not
retain by kindness: but the honest minded Nouice little suspected my change,
although I (God wot) placed my delight in nothing more then y^ desire of new
choice, which fell out thus. Amongst the rest of the Gentlemen that kept him
company, there was one that was his most familiar, and he reposed more trust
and confidence in him then in all the rest: this Gentleman began to be deeply
inamored of me, and showed it by many signs, which I easily perceived; and I,
whose ear was pliant to every sweet word, and who so allowed of all that were
beautiful, affected him no less: so that love prevailing above friendship, he
brake the matter with me, and made not many suites in vain before he had
obtained his purpose: for he had what he wished, and I had what contented me. I
will not confess that any of the rest had some sildome favors, but this
Gentleman was my second self, and I loved him more for the time at the heel,
then the other at the heart: so that though the other youth bare the charges,
and was sir pay for all, yet this new friend was he that was master of my
affections: which kindness betwixt us, was so unwisely cloked, that in short
time it was manifest to all our familiars, which made my supposed husband to
sigh, and others to smile: but he that was hit with the horn, was pincht at
the heart; yet so extreme was the affection he bare to me, that he had rather
conceal his grief, then any way make me discontent, so that he smotherd his
sorrow with patience, and brookt the injury with silence, til our loves grew
so broad before, that it was a wonder to the world: whereupon one day at
dinner, I being very pleasant with his chosen friend, and my choice lover, I
know not how, but either by fortune, or it may be, some set match, there was
by a Gentleman there present, a question (...) in about women's passions, and
their mutability in affection, so that the controversy was defended, pro and
contra, with arguments, whether a woman might home a second friend or no, at
last it was concluded, that Love and Lordship brooks no fellowship, and
therefore none so ba^e minded to bear ariuall. Hereupon arose a question about
friends that were put in trust, how it was a high point of treason for one to
betray another, especially in love, insomuch that one Gentleman at the board,
protested by a solemn oath, that if any friend of his, made privy and favored
with the sight of his Mistress whom he loved, whether it were his wife, or
no, should secretly seek to incroach into his room, and offer him that
dishonor to partake his love, he would not use any other revenge, but at the
next greeting stab him with his poynado, though he were condemned to death for
the action. All this fitted for the humor of my supposed husband, and struck
both me and my friend into a quandarie: but I scornfully iested at it, when as
my husband, taking the ball before it came to the ground, began to make a long
discourse what faithless friends they were that would fail in love,
especially where a resolved trust of the party beloved was committed unto them:
and hereupon, to make the matter more credulous, and to quip my folly, and to
taunt the baseness of his friends mind, that so he might with courtesy both
warn us of our wantonness, and reclaim us from ill, he promised to tell a
pleasant story, performed as he said, not long since in Eng^^nd, and it was to
this effect.

A pleasan^ discourse how a wise wanton by her Husbands gentle warning, became
to be a modest Matron.
THere was a Gentleman (to give him his due) an Esquire here in England; that
was married to a young Gentl^woman, fair, and of a modest behavior, virtuous
in her looks howsoever she was in her thoughts, and one that every way with
her dutiful ende^our, and outward appearance of honesty, did breed her
husbands content, insomuch that the Gentleman so deeply affected her, as he
counted all th^se (...) ill spent which he past not away in her com^^^^,
be^o^ting so himself in the beauty of his wife, th^^ hi^ only ^are was to
have her every way delighted. Living thus pleasantly together, he had one
special friend (...) the rest, whom he so dearly affected, as he unfolded
all his (...) in his bosom, and what passion he had in his mind, that either
ioyed him, or perplexed him, he revealed unto his friend, and directed his
actions according to the s^quell of his counsels, so that they were two bodies
and one soul. This Gentleman, for all the inward favor shown him by his
faithful friend, could not so withstand the force of fancy, but he grew
enamoured of his friends wife, whom he courted with many sweet^ words, and
fair promises, charms that are able to inchaunt almost the chastest ears,
and so subtly couched his arguments, discovered such love in his eyes, and
such sorrow in his looks, that despair seemed to sit in his face, and swore,
that if she granted not him, the end of a lovers sighs then would present his
heart as a Tragic sacrifice to the sight of his cruel mistress. The
Gentlewoman waring pitiful, as women are kind-harted, and are loath Gentlemen
should die for love, after a few excuses, let him dub her husband knight of the
forked order, and so to satisfy his humor, made forset of her own honor. Thus
these two lovers continued for a great space in such pleasures as unchaste
wantons count their felicity, having continually fit opportunity to exercise
their wicked purpose, ^ith the Gentleman himself did give them free liberty
to love, neither suspecting his wife, nor his friend: at last, as such
traiterous abuses will burst forth, it fell out, that a maid, who had been an
old servant in the house, began to grow suspicious, that there was too much
familiarity between her mistre^^^, and her masters friend; and upon this,
watched them diverse times so narrowly, that at last she found them more private
then either agreed with her masters honor, or her own honesty: and thereupon
revealed it one day unto her master. He, little credulous of the light
behavior of his wife, blamed the maid, and bid her take heed, lea^^ (...)
sought to blemish her virtues with ^^ander, whom he (...) more tenderly then
his own life: the maid replied, that she spoke not of envy to him, but of
mere love she bare unto him, and the rather that he might shadow such a fault
in time, and by some means prevent it, least if others should not^ it as well
as she, his wives good name, and his friends should be called in question. At
these wise words spoken by so base a drudge as his maid, the Gentleman waxed
astonished and listened to her discourse, wishing her to discover how she knew,
or was so privy to y^ folly of her mistress, or by what means he might have
assured proof of it, she told him that to her, her own eyes were witnesses:
for she saw them unlawfully together, and please it you sir, quoth she, to
feign your self to go from home, and then in the backe-house to keep you
secret, I will let you see as much as I have manifested unto you. Upon this the
master agreed, and warned his maid not so much as to make it known to any of
her fellows. Within a day or two after the Gentleman said he would go a
hunting, and so risse very early; and causing his men to couple up his hounds,
left his wife a bed, and went abroad: as soon as he was gone a mile from the
house, he commanded his men to ride before, and to start the Hare, and follow
the chase, and we will come fair and softly after: they obeying their
masters charge, went their ways, and hereturned by a back way to his house,
and went secretly to the place where his maid and he had appointed. In the
mean time the mistress thinking her husband safe with his hounds, sent for
her friend to her bedchamber, by a trusty servant of hers, in whom she
assured that was a secret pander in such affairs, and the Gentleman was not
slack to come, but making all the haste he could, came and went into the
chamber, asking for the master of the house very familiarly: the old maid
noting all this, as soon as she knew them together, went and called her
master, and carried him up by a secret pair of stairs to her mistress
chamber door; where, peeping in at a place that the maid before had made for
the purpose, he saw more then he looked for, and so much as pincht him at the
very heart, causing him to accuse his wife for a strumpet, and his friend for a
traitor: yet for all this, valuing his own honor more then their dishonesty,
thinking if he should make an uproar, he should but aim at his own
discredit, and cause himself to be a laughing game to his enemies, he
concealed his sorrow with silence, and taking the maid apart, changed her to
keep all secret, whatsoever she had seen, even as she esteemed of her own
life, for if she did bewray it to any, he himself would with his sword make
an end of her days, and with that putting his hand in his sleeue, gave the
poor maid six Angels to buy her a new gown: the w^nch glad of this gift,
^wore solemnly to tread it under foot, and since it pleased him to conceal it,
never to reveal it so long as she lived: upon this they parted, she to her
drudgery, and he to the field to his men; where, after he had killed the Have,
he returned ^ome, and finding his friend in y^; garden, y^ in his absence had
been grafting horns in the chimnies, and entertained him with his wonted
familiarity, and showed no bad countenance to his wife, but dissembled all his
thoughts to the full. As soon as dinner was done, and that he was gotten
solitary by himself, he began to determine of revenge, but not as every man
would have done, how to have brought his wife to shame, and love to confusion,
but he busied his brains how he might reser^^ his honor inuiolate, recl^^^ his
wife, and keep his friend, meditating a long time how he might bring all this to
pas^^, at last a humor fell into his head, how cunningly to compass all three,
and therefore he went and g^t him certain ^^ips, which are counterfeit pieces
of money, being brass, and covered over with silver, which the common people
call ^^ips: having furnished himself with these, he put them in his purse, and
at night went to bed as he was w^nt to do, yet not vs^ng the kind familiarity
that he accustomed, notwithstanding he abstained not from y^ use of her body,
but knew his wife as aforetimes, and every time he committed the act with her,
he laid ^ next morning in the windo^, a slip, where he was sure she might find
it, and so many times as it pleased him to b^e carnally pleasant with his wife,
so many slips he still laid down upon her (...). This he used for the space of
a fortnight, till at last his wife finding every ^ay a slip, or s^metime more
or less, wondered how they came there, and examining her waiting maids, none of
them could tell her any thing touching them, whereupon she thought to question
with her husband about it, but being out of her remembrance, y^ next morning as
she lay dallying in bed, it came into her mind, and she asked her husband if
he laid those slips on her cu^^net, that she of late found there, having never
seen any before. I mary did I, quoth he, and have laid them there upon
special reason, and it is this: Ever since I have been married to thee, I have
deemed thee honest, and therefore used and honored thee as my wife, parting
coequall favors betwixt us as true lovers: but alate finding the contrary, and
with these eyes ^eeing thee play the whore with my friend, in whom I did
repose all my trust, I sought not as many would have done, to have reue^ged in
blood, but for the safety of mine own honor, which otherwise would have been
blemished by they dishonesty, I have been silent, and have neither wronged my
quandom friend, nor abused thee, but still do hold bed with th^^, that y^
world shall not suspect any thing, and to quench the desire of lust I do use
thy body, but not so lovingly as I would a wife, but carelessly as I would a
strumpet, and therefore even as to a whoor^, so I give thee hire, which is for
every time a ^^ip, a counterfeit coin, which is good enough for such a
^^ippery wanton, y^ will wrong her husband that loved her so tenderly, and thus
will I use thee for the safety of mine own honor, till I have assured proof
that thou becomest honest: and thus with tears in his eyes, and his heart
ready to burst with sighs, he was silent, when his wife stricken with remorse
of conscience, leaping out of her bed i^ her smock, humbly confessing all,
craved pardon, promising if he should pardon this offense which was new begun
in her, she would become a new reformed woman, and never after so much as in
thought give him any occcasion of suspicion or iealously: the patient husband
not willing to urge his wife, took her at her word, and told her y^ when he
found her so reclaimed, he would as before he had done, use her lovingly and as
his wife, but till he was so persuaded of her honesty, he would pay her still
slips for his pleasure, charging her not to reveal any thing to his friend or
to make it known to him that he was privy to their loves. Thus the debate
ended, I guess in some kind greeting, and the Gentleman went abroad to see his
pastures, leaving his wife in bed full of sorrow, and almost re^ting her heart
asunder with sighs. As soon as he was walked abroad, the Gentleman his
friend came to the house, and asked for the good man: the pander that was privy
to all their practices, said that his master was gone abroad to see his
pastures, but his mistress was in bed: why then says he, I will go and raise
her up; so coming into the chamber, and kissing her, meaning as he was wont
to have used her accustomed ^alliance, she desired him to abstain with broken
sighs, and her eyes full of tears: he wondering what should make her thus
discontent, asked her what was the cause of her sorrow, protesting with a
solemn oath, that if any had done her injury, he would revenge it, were it
with hazard of his life: she then told him, scarce being able to speak for
weeping, that she had a suit to move him in, which if he granted unto her,
she would hold him in love and affection without change, next her husband for
ever: he promised to do whatsoever it were: then says she, swear upon a
Bible you will do it without exception: with that he to^ke a Bible that lay in
the window, and swore, that whatsoever she requested him to do, were it to
the loss of his life, he would, without exception perform it. Then she
holding down her head and blushing, began thus: I need not quoth she, make
manifest how grossly and grievously you and I have both offended God, and
wronged the honest gentleman my husband, and your friend; he putting a
special trust in us both, and assuring such earnest affiance in your unfeigned
friendship, that he even c^mmitteth me his wife, his love, his second life, into
your bos^me: this love have I requited with^^ con^^ancie, in playing the
harlot: that faith that he^ rep^sed in you, have you returned with treachery
and falsehood, in abusing mine honesty and his honor. Now a remorse of
conscience touches me for my sins, that I heartily repent, and vow ever
hereafter to live only to my husband: and therefore my suit is to you, that
from henceforth you shall never so much as motion any dishonest question unto
me, nor seek any unlawful pleasure or conuersing at my hands: this is my
suit, and hereunto I have sworn you, which oath if you observe as a faithful
gentleman, I will conceal from my husband what is past, and rest in honest
sort your faithful friend for ever, at this she burst a fresh into tears, and
uttered such sighs, that he thought for very grief her heart would have claue
asunder. The gentleman astonished at this strange Metamorphosis of his mistress,
sat a good while in a maze, and at last taking her by the hand, made this
reply: So God help me fair sweeting, I am glad of this motion, and wondrous
joyful that God has put such honest thoughts into your mind, and has made
you the means to reclaim (...) from my folly: I feel no less remorse then
you do in wronging so honest a friend as your husband, but this y^ frailnesse
of man, and therefore to make amends, I protest anew, never hereafter so much
as in thought, to motion you of dishonesty, only I crave you be silent: she
promised that, and so they ended, and for that time they parted. At noone the
Gentleman came home, and cheerfully saluted his wife, and asked if dinner were
ready, and sent for his friend, using him wonderfully familiarly, giving him no
occasion of mistrust, and so pleasantly they past away the day together: At
night when his wife and he went to bed, she told him all, what had past
between her and his friend, and how she had bound him with an oath, and that
he voluntarily of himself swore as much, being heartily sorry that he had so
deeply offended so kind a friend. The Gentleman commended her wit, and found
her afterward a reclaimed woman, she living so honestly that she never gave him
any occasion of mistrust. Thus the wise Gentleman reclaimed with silence a
wanton wife, and retained an assured friend.

At this pleasant tale all the ^^^rd was at a mutiny, and they said the
gentleman did passing wi^ely y^ wrought so coningly for the safety of his own
honor, but exclaiming against such a friend as would to his friend offer such
villainy, al condemning her y^ would be false to so loving a husband. Thus they
did diuers^y descant and past away dinner; but this Tale wrought little effect
in me: for as one past grace, I delighted in change; but the gentlemant y^ was
his familiar, and my Paramour, was so touched, y^ never after he would touch
me dishonestly, but reclaimed hinselfe, abstained from me, and became true to
his friend. I wondering, that according to his w^nted custom, he did not seek
my company, he and I being one day in the chamber alone, and he in his dumps, I
began to dally with him, and to ask him why he was so strange, and used not
his accustomed favors to me: he solemnly made answer, that though he had
played the fool in setting his fancy upon another man's wife, and in wronging
his friend, yet his conscience was now touched with remorse, and ever since he
heard the tale before rehearsed, he had vowed in himself never to do my husband
the like wrong again. My husband, quoth I, he is none of mine, he has
brought me from my friends, and keeps me here (...), and therefore am I as free
for you as for him: and thus began to grow clamorous, because I was (...) of my
lust. The gentleman seeing me shameless, wished me to be silent, and sai^,
although you be but his friend, yet he ho^^s you as dear as his wife, and
therefore I will not abuse him, neither would I wish you to be ^^miliar with any
other, seeing you have a friend that loves you so tenderly: much good counsel
he gave me, but all in vain, for I scorned it, and began to hate him, and
resolved both to be rid of him, and my supposed husband, for (...) another
familiar of my husbands, I so (...) him with (...) words, that I (...) him to
make a (...) of money to steal me away, and so carry me to London, where I had
not lived long with him, ere he seeing my light behavior, left me to ye wide
world, and to shift for my sefe.

I now being brought to London, and left here at randon, was not such a
house-doue while any friend stayed with me, but that I had visit some houses
in London, that could harbor as honest a woman as my self; when as therefore
I was left to my self, I removed my lodging, and gat me into one of those
houses of good hospitality whereunto persons resort, commonly called a
Trugging-house, or, to be plain, a Whore-house, where I gave my self to
entertain all companions, sitting or standing at the door like a staule, to
allure or draw in wanton passengers, refusing none y^ would with his purse
purchase me to be his, to satisfy the disordinate desire of his filthy lust:
now I began not to respect personage, good qualities, to the gracious favor of
the man, when eye had no respect of person, for y^ oldest lecher was as welcome
as y^ youngest lover, so he brought meat in his mouth. Thus to the grief of my
friends, hazard of my soul, and consuming of my body, I spent a year or two,
in this base and bad kind of life, subject to y^ whistle of every desperate
Ruffian, till on a time, there resorted to our house a Cloathier, a proper young
man, who by fortune coming first to drink, espying me asked me if I would
drink with him, there needed no great entreaty, for as then I wanted company,
and so clapped me down by him, and began very pleasantly to welcome him, y^ man
being of himself modest and honest, noted my personage, and iudicially
reasoned of my strumpet-like behavior, and inwardly, as after he reported
unto me, grieved that so foul properties were hidden in so good a proportion,
and y^ such rare wit and excellent beauty was blemished with whoredoms base
deformity, in so much y^ he began to thin^ well of me, and to wish y^ I were as
honest as I was beautiful. Again^^^ see how God wrought for my conversion,
since I gave my self to my loose kind of life, I never liked any so well as
him, in so much y^ I began to judge of every part, and me thought he was y^
properest man y^ ever I saw, thus we sat both amorous of other, I lasciously,
and he honestly, at last he questioned with me what country woman I was, and
why being so prop^^ a woman I would beseem to dwell or lie in a base Alehouse,
especially in one y^ had a bad name: I warrant you I wanted no knauish reply to
(...) him, for I told him the house was as honest as his mothers, mary if there
were in it a good wench or two, that would pleasure their friends (...), I
guess by his nose what porredge he lo^ed, and (...) none such: well, seeing me
in y^ voice he said little, but shaked his head, paid for the beer and went
his way, only taking his leave of me with a kiss, which me thought was the
sweetest that ever was given me, as soon as he was gone, I began to think what
a handsome man he was, and wished y^ he would come and take a nights lodging with
me, sitting in a dump to think of y^ quaintnes of his personage, ^ll other
companions came in, y^ shakt me out of y^ melancholy, but as soon again as I
was secret to my self, he came into my remembrance, passing over thus a day
or two this Cloathier came again to our house, whose sight cheered me up, for
that spying him out at a Casement, I ran down the stairs and met him at y^
door, and heartily welcomed him, and asked him if he would drink, I come for
y^ purpose says he, but I will drink no more below but in a Chamber, marry
sir, quoth I, you shall, and so brought him into y^ fairest (...), in their
sitting there together drinking, at last y^ Clothier fell to kissing and other
dalilance, wherein he found me not coy, at last told me y^ he would willingly
have his pleasure of me, but y^ (...) was too lightso^e, for of all things in
y^ world he could not in such actions away with a light Chamber, I (...) unto
him, and brought him into a room more dark, but still he (...) it was too
light, then I carried him into a further chamber, where drawing a Curtain
before y^ window, and closing y^ curtains of y^ bed, I asked him smiling if y^
were close enough, no sweet love says he, y^ curtain is not broad enough for
y^ window, some watching (...) may espy us, my heart misdoubts, and my credit
is my life: Good (...) if thou have a closer room then this, bring me to it:
why the^ quoth I, follow me, and with that I brought him into a back l^ft,
where stood a little ^ed, only appointed to lodge suspicious persons, so dark
that at noone days it was impossible (...) any man to see his own hands: how
now sir, quoth I, is not this dark enough? He sitting him down on the bed
side, fetched a deep sigh, and said, indifferent, so, so, but there is a
glimpse of light in at y^ tiles, some body (...) fortune see us: in faith no,
quoth I, none but God. (...) hee^ why can God see us here? Good sir, quoth I,
why I hop^ you are not so simple, but Gods eyes are so clear and penetrating,
that they can pierce through walls of brass. And alas, q^^th he, sweet love,
if God see us shall we not be more ashamed to do such a filthy act before Him
then before men, I am sure thou art not so shameless but thou would blu^^ to
have the meanest commoner in London see thee (...) action of thy filthy lust,
and do thou not shamemore to (...) God, the maker of all things see thee, who
re^eng^th (...) with death, he whose eyes are cleerer then the ^un, who i^ y^
searcher of the heart, and holds vengeance in his hands to punish sinners* Oh
let us tremble that we but once durst have such wanton communication in the
hearing of his di^ine Majesty, who pronounces damnation for such as give
themselves over to adultery. It is not possible ^aith y^ Lord, for any
whoremaister or lascivious wanton, to enter into y^ Kingdom of God, for such
sins whole Cities have sunck* Kingdoms have been destroyed, and though God
suffer such wicked livers to escape for a while, yet at length he pays home,
in this world with beggary, shame, dis^ases, or infamy, and in the other life, with
perpetual damnation, weigh but the inconvenience that grows through thy loose
life, thou art hated of all that are g^od, despised of the virtuous, and only
well thought of, of Reprobates, Rascals, Ruffians, and such as the world hates,
subject to their lust, and gaining thy living at the hands of every diseased
leacher. O what a miserable trade of life is thine, that live of the vomit of
sin, in hunting after maladies: but suppose, while thou art young, thou art
favored of thy companions, when thou waxest (...)


