The Golden Aphroditis: A pleasant discourse, penned by John Grange Gentleman,
Student in the Common Law of England.

Whereunto be annexed by the same Author asvvell certain Metres upon sundry
points, as also diverse Pamphlets in prose, which he entituleth His GARDEN:
pleasant to the ear, and delightful to the Reader, if he abuse not the scente
of the flowers.

Habet and musca splenem,
Et formicae sua bilis inest.
AT LONDON ANNO. 1577.

To the right Honorable and his singular good Lord the Lord Sturton, John
Grange wishes health, wealth, and prosperity, with increase of Honor.
I Know ( most Honorable) your wisdom may marvel, and not without cause,
that I who of all other am to be reputed the most unlearned, vvoulde take
upon me, having small skill, or little or none in Palmistrie, to discourse or
rather entreat of the elevation or declination of the Mount of Venus, seeing
both finer vvittes, and ^yper heads before this time herein have vvaded over
shoes for vva^t of greater skill. Yet my Lord, under your most Honorable
correction, to this your admiration, in mine own defense I object this
lavvful excuse: Hono^ (as Tullie says) alit arts, omnesque incenduntur ad
studia gloriae Wherefore reconing my self as one of this generality, and yet
desirous to keep me within the bounds of this phrase, Ne ^utor vltra
crepidam, lavvfully alluded of Apelles for the curious carping at his
undeserved pensell, I may (vvanting feet to run) creep, though as slovve as
does the Snayle, who refusing to come at the call of Jupiter unto his general
feast for all living creatures, was justly punished as you see, with the
carriage of her house on her back, vvherby straying whether she list, is never
the farther from home. Thus your wisdom may see the great desire which I
had, somvvhat to set forth, and that, what best might agree with your Honors
youthful years, and not mislike my youthful authority, who desirous to
paint, as well the pleasure as displeasure of Love, thought good (mingling the
svveete with the sour) not only to discourse of the elevation, but also of
the declinatio^ of the Mount of Venus, for that they are dependant (as fellovv
^abians) the one to the other. And though (my Lord) nothing ought to be penned
svvaruing or not proceeding from grave authority, yet often times under a
defuse garment lies a clodde of vvisdome. Likewise, if unskillful heds
should frame themselves to the limitation of this Greek proverb, Quam
quisque ^orit artem in bac se exerceat: then skill must dye with the Auctor
for want of youthful exercise, yea, nothing should be practiced, much less
learned, fevve then do as Plato, Pithagoras, and Democritus did, who (as some
say) sought all the parts of the world wherein any thing was that might or
could be learned. Yea Democritus, and Anaxago^as, lofte both their goods and
patrimonies (as all men do know) only for the desire of learning. Also
Diodo^us the Stoike, is not much incomparable to these, who thorovv his
continual vvatch and excessive study, being blind of long time, knovving
nothing but what was red unto him by a little child, yet gave himself unto
the study of Geometry, teaching with words who were desirous to learn,
how and in what manner each live should be laid. Wherefore (O grafte of
noble stock) having the like desire (if so I might say) as these have had to
learning, my desire and not my skill, my good will and not my pen is to be
accepted, as the simple Raddish root vvrapped in a piece of green Sarcenet
was better accepted at the Prince his hands, than was a goodly fair Horse
gorgeously trapped given him of his merchant, for that in deed he knevv their
vvilles were not alike: the poor man gave his Radish root for pure love, but
the other his sumptuous Horse in hope of a greater benefit. Thus preacing
(more boldly than vvisely) upon your Honors courtesy, I have brought unto your
Lordshippe a handful of fragrant flowers (though not gathered in Adonis
garden). the chief whereof are Primeroses and Violettes. Your choice is not
great, yet choose what likes you best, the vvorst turn back again. For if
some may please, and none displease, I shall not only think my time well
spent, and my diligence better employed, but also my labor and travel best of
al bestovved. And vvheras I seem (as you shall hereafter perceive) to ground
my Paganicall Pamphlet upon the song of Apollo, most melodiously song unto me
(as me thought) in a vision: I would not your Honor should think the
painting of my pe^ne to be Verbatim spoken of Apollo his mouth, but rather the
ground thereof, which in most ample manner follovving I have delated,
vvherby each one may see (as it were in a gorgeous garish glass before their
eyes) a pretty poetical Pamphlet, shevving paganically, as well the lavvful
copulacion betvveene Vulcano and Venus, as the unlawful combat betvveene her
and Mars. Also in this merry mean a plain mirror of youthful vanities shall
play his part, and the shade thereof shall bereave you of your senses. In the
ensign likewise of this army, your Honor shall find vvritte (as it were
with letters of pure Gold) a chief point of vvomens vanities, videlicet,
look what they may have, cost it never so much, they esteem not: but by a
toy of light valevve, and not easily commen by, they ^o^great store, vvherof
this Proverb came, Far fe^ and dear bought are good for Ladies. Also diverse
other points in this glass your L. shall perceive vvorthie of noting, but
why seem I (who as yet never received one point of discourtesie of any
veneriall Dame) to display with pen and ink upon the imbecillitie of their
natures? God grant (say I) Euripides may well vvithstand their boisterous
blasts, who in his Tragedy entitled Medea, affirms that vvomens vvittes
are unapt to goodness, but very well inclined to unhappiness, because
(said he) women are creatures imperfect, and where perfection is not, there
can nothing rest that is good. It seems the nebbe of my pen is long, and
that I less do fear the stubbing thereof. Such surmises (believe me) assent to
verity, my yo^g years say, I speak not by experience, but rather by hear
say: and what of this? riper years and mellovver vvittes know I feign not
herein, for many of them vnvvillingly have the proof thereof. Yet would I
not, who have no title hereunto, should seem to challenge me as their unjust
accuser, for I mean not generally, my surmise is not unknown, Rub a gauld
Horse on the back and it is a chance if ^ee kicketh not. I will not say but
that Dame Nature has played her part in dividing and distributing her gifts
equally, as well to the one as to the other. For we see, as we have Apollo
and Mercury for Gods, so Pallas and Minerua for Goddesses of vvisdome as
Mars so Bellona for war: as Cupide so Venus for love: as Pan so Ceres for
invention of husbandry: yea, as Morpheus so Murcas for sleep. Thus (to be
short) God has appointed the pleasure of women to conteruayle the toil of
man. Neither are the deeds of men more valiant than the minds of vvome^,
whose courage abateth no not with the fierceness of Tygres, as appeared by
the vviues and matrones of Persia, who thorovv their valiant hearts, noble
courage and impudency, being ashamed of the flight of their husbands,
provoked them to return again unto battle, and not only to overcome them of
whom sometimes not only they, but Cyrus him self stood in dread, but also
in the same battle to take king Astyages prisoner. Moreover, who has not
read of the valiantness of Queen Thomyris? who hearing of the death of her
only son, began not to revenge the same with tears, sobbes, sighs, and
pensiveness, as women use to do ( Tullie testifying the same in his second
book of Tusculanes questions, who inferring upon this proposition De tolerando
dolor, afirmeth that Fletus muliebr^ ingenio additus) but girded her self
with the svvorde, and armed her body with the shield of Mars, cutting off
the hear of her head, and attiring her self in the manner of a man, until
such time as she had gotten the head of Cyrus, with the like vvyles that he
used tovvard her son. Also who knovveth not that the Amazones ruled their
realm betvveene themselves of a long time without the aid of any man,
cutting off their right dugges for hindering the casting of their darts,
vvherof they took this name Amazones (that is) vvanting their right dugges?
But soft here I check, least some stick not to say behind my back, a
blasing star vvil shoot. But what if they do? It is a great wind that
shakes corns: neither do I think but that the standers by which hear this
(having any judgment at all) vvil easily descerne a difference betveene
Orpheus and Pan. I know all men are not given to say well, neither to judge
alike. For (as Plato says) Quot capitatet sunt sententiae* some men will
say, this point was penned to mystically: and an other will say behind my
back, this shade was to gross: here was to much learning shevved, and here
was none at all: here Apollo and Pallas guided his pen: here Pan molested
him with his oten pipe: here will the male kind say, Naestor dreamed, here
will the female say Achilles reigned. Thus in every corner of the house I
look to find a bayting ^ogge, and not without a cause, for I know they can
not speak so evil of me as my pen deserves. But yet what so ever they
say, the blind man may see in this glass, what apishe vvittes women have to
inuestigate by interrogatiue similitudes the perfect meaning and the sure
ground of their lovers heart: and those which have their clear sight to
look steadfastly herein, shall see perchance an Ape vvhipped, which somvvhat
may delight him. Whereupon certain young Gentlemen and those of my professed
friends (well vievving this work) requested me earnestly to have entitled
it A nettle for an Ape, but yet (being somvvhat vvedded as most fools are) to
mine own opinion, who would hardly forgo their babble for the Tovver of
London) I thought it good (somvvhat to stop a zoilous mouth) to set a more
cleanly name upon it, that is, Golden Aphroditis. For if the other had stood,
who most had been bitten herevvith peradventure would have sought all the
means they could to have turned this vvhippe for mine own tale. But stay
here a little, I love not to be counted a ranger, least thorovv my appearing
above the water, I seem to prognosticate thereby (as does the Dolphin) that
some storm or tempest approaches at hand. I trust though my pen does seem
to paint at large, yet not to lauishe. For whereas it seems to blase or
painte the incineration of Veneriall dames and ruffling Nymphs, it proceeds
not of any spite, malice, hatred, melancholy, or evil will that I bear unto
the chaste Matrones, or unto any one that may justly challenge unto themselves
one little spark of the spice thereof. Therefore who are vvilling to
understand, I vvishe them to shun the fountain Chi^s, and rather to open
the gates of their ears, vvherby they might the better understand my meaning:
judge likewise and know the difference of my voices and soundes. If any one
seems to be touched herevvith to the quick, let them propounde their Quare,
and I will alvvaies be at hand Reddere rationem thereunto. Yet on whom so
ever it chances to sound forth this interrogation (what outvvard
countenance so ever she bear) yet can it not be sounded, but as it were
Tragico boatu, therefore who lists so to do, to aid them in their
enterprise, I think it best they call upon the doleful Muse Melp^me^^, on
whom Virgill in his Epigrams thus vvriteth: Melp^mene Tragico proclamat
m^esta boatu.


For this I dare avouch, that oftentimes vyho seems most of al to blaze their
chastity with the Tergate of Medusa, they play more legerdemaynes under this
clean kind of conueyance, or at the least as many, as do those who never
vvoore the necklace of Jasper, neither knevve so much as the cheyne of
Diamantes and Topazes, which are counted the instruments of chastity. And
partly for a proof thereof, who marketh well each thing comprehended in this
little volume, shall find, that I have somvvhat noted hereof by the conception
of Diana, who alvvaies bore the name of Chastity it self. Many other points
(most Honorable) might here be noted, but that I hate the check of Ne quid
nimis, and (as the Proverb goes) Little said* soon amended. My good will I
trust, shall suffice for this once, and though my well doing may not
counteruaile the same, yet I trust your Honor will not stick to defend me,
in saying in my behalf, Et voluisse sat est. Thus ceasing to trouble your
Lordship any farther at this time. I commit you to the tuicion of the highest,
to direct your paths in true Honor and dignity: desiring also the Ladies of
the destenie, so to prolong the fatal threde of this thy terestriall life:
that thou may run the race of hoarie Naestor, to the pleasure of the
almighty, and the great comfort of those which vvishe thee well.

Your Honors poor Orator JOHN GRANGE.

To the Courtelike Dames and Ladie-like Gentlevvomen, the Author sends
greeting.
I Greet (but who^?) the glittring stars and troops of Venus crewe,
With painful pen of ranging fiste, bedewde with Ganges dew,
So ^ocundare leads my will, that wanton needless toil
Of Courtlike Dames, my pestred wits d^claro seeks to foil.
Draw near therefore ye weried Nymphs, with such Mineruas toils,
And vewe this lading scope, which yeeldes for the^ Veneriall foyles.
As none so well as Caesar's pen, could Caesar's deeds indight,
So none but of Morychus sect could dolor put to flight,
Now I who wantes Apollos skill, and eke Dame Pallas wit,
Herein to play Morychus part, have thought my self most fit.
Yet shall you find an Ape, an Ape, in purple be she clothde,
I come not from Trophonius care, for then I should be lothde:
Nor from S. Patrickes purgatory, but play Nepenth^s part,
The juice whereof perforce will keep such sadness from your heart.
Thus labor I with tooth and nail of Lethe force to be:
Then with oblivion might I force your carping cares to flee.
Which once exilde, the better might the Muses then take place,
And barefote might the tripping Nimphs the better show their grace
I often have longde with pen to painte the trade of lovers love,
Yet near cold find what pen deserude, which was not known before.
Thus daily musing, where to find whereon to wreake my spite,
Me thought I hard Apollo sing full sweetly in the night,
And play upon his twinkling harp, whose warbling notes (me thought)
Perforce co^straynde my pen to write, what h^ in songs had tought.
Which fed full well my restles reume with Stories somewhat strange:
Mark now therefore, who list to know whereon I list to range.
It chaunste N. C. a valiant knight, possessed riches store,
Yet wa^ted whom his goods should rule when Cloth^ yeldes no more.
For chaste, and solemn vow once made, Dianas Nymphe to be,
Dame Nature held her as content to hear, and not to see.
Wherefore as one deuoyde of joy, and having issue n^ne,
He often reparde before the Gods, with great complaynt, and moan,
For that Cibile had transformde into a Lions shape
Hypponunes his cousin dear: for taking yielded rape,
Without a reverence of the place: when beauty prickte his heart,
His lust to serve (al^s to soon) his honey waxed tarte.
A Nymphe likewise of S^^^os I Will, adornde with beauty rare,
Before the Gods with earnest suit, full often she did repare:
As for to have Atlanta fair to be restorde again
Unto her former shape, which once Cilele (to her pain)
Together with Hyppomenes transformde to Lions route,
And set them both at once to draw her chariot wheles about.
Thus fortune frail does turn her whele, to give each man his chance:
And fraught their lau^cing ships with wiles, Da^ Cupids round to dau^ce
For meeting both (as fortune would) before the Gods with plaints,
Love gave assault, the sparks whereof, his tender heart attayntes.
Such beauty (as Apollo said) consisted in her face,
That all the Heavens began clear to shine, not Phoebus yet in place,
Who, fearing lest the Gods themselves with love should be inflamde*
Sat all on thorn till she was gone, and was he to be blamde?
No, no.
Thus I at length, have found a text to stubbe a ganders quill:
Which if it prove Ell^borus, according to my will,
A heavy heart needs must it purge, from care, and pensive plight*
And like unto Argivus heart enforce it to be light:
To laugh indeed where cause is none, as this Argivus did,
^et Ajax ^^ses to frequent, my story does forbid.
And I forbid a carping knight to catch where catch he can,
For hard it is one dishe to please the mouth of every man.
Who spies my fault (as easy) may by suyte I him forbid,
To see and turn it to the worst, as Argus whilome did,
That simple skill (which erst I had) I give it you to vewe,
Not doing as this Argus did, who kept his wife in mevv.
For, quicquid in bucc^m venit, the same with haste I pende,
No marvel then (dear Dames) if ought herein ye may amend.
Thus standing to your courtesy (madames) load stars of light,
The sequel shall my meaning show here offered to your sight.
Tam Mineruae quam Veneri.
Cuiquam.
Mark well my friend this ragged ryme,
thrust forth the Elderne pith:
Spare not to cut a hasell wande
to make a winding with.
Seek forth the ground of evry thing,
esteem not filed phrase,
The pythe, but not the paynting penn^
does yield the Aucthours praise.
What though I seek by wantons wit
each man for to delight?
Shall sense therefore enforced b^
by mirth to see no light?
Then is the Readers care but small,
what fruit he reap thereby:
And eke the Aucthours praise, by this,
shall seem in duste to lie.
Then who that knovves, so foolishis
his pen to take in h^nde?
Since that the vewers care is more,
to read, than understand.
Legore and (...) intellige^^ negliger^ (...).
C. G. Master of Art, in the praise of the Author.
Io^n In wisdoms school Apollo, and dame Pallas thought it fit
Of al, therein your Aucthour here, in highest rome to si^.
Hold there (quoth she) the Muses all have ^^lde thee in their lap,
Not I alone have given thee suck, but they have given thee p^ppe.

Grange Gange^, thy streams bedewed, his pen thy sands have po'isht eke,
Rare blossoms blown to mortal men, yet not in him to seek.
Arethusa, thy influence in him it is not skant,
Not Polymne^a eke her rules of Rhetoric does he want,
God guide thy steps therefore my Grange, and eke what is begun,
Echidu^as sting thou only soughtes by s^cre^e means to shun.

John Jove would it so, thou know well PeSnassus Mount to clyme
Of Momus mates, thou needst not care, nor muttring Mucius slym^*
Hold here therefore thy just reward, a crown of Laurel bays,
Not sounding trumpe, but due deserts, thy flickering fame shall raise.

Gra^ge Grant him ye fatal sisters three, old Naestors race to run
Renoumedly without default, and crack of fame to shun.
A Grange in deed he may be termde, a Grange for each delight,
Not Grange, nor grove, nor fertile field that is in each man's sight,
Grange would I so accounted be, but such a Grange I mean,
For outward mirth and secret sense as erst has not been seen.

FINIS.
W. S. in commendation of the Aucthor.
OF silver pure thy pen is made, dipte in the Muses well,
Thy Eloquence and lofty style all other does excel:
Thy wisdom great and secret sense diffusedly disguysde,
Does show how Pallas rules thy mind, and Phoebu^ has deuisde
Those Golden lines, which polisht are with Tagus glittring sands.
A palace plain of pleasures great unto the vewers hands.
Thy learning does bewray it self and worthy praise does crave,
Who so thee knew, did little think such learning thee to have.
Here Virtue seems to check at Vice, and wisdom folly tauntes:
Here Venus she is set at naught, and Dame Diane she vauntes:
Here Pallas Cupid does detest, and all his carpet knights:
Here does she show, that youthful impes in folly most delights.
And how when age comes creeping on, with show of hoary hears,
Then they the loss of time repent, with sobbes and brynish tears.
Thou Ambodexter playste herein, to take the first rebounde,
And for to show thy mind at large, in earth does the same co^pound:
So that Apollo claddes his corpse all with Mory^^us clothes,
And shows himself still friendliest there, where most of al he lothe^.
FINIS.
Golden Aphroditis.
ALhaile ye Lidian streams: what mean these doleful dumpes? has Io cast
her horns? what if she have, yet do the buddes remain? what, are ye tasked
to the prayers of Acharon, that ye f^are the passage to his temple? or have ye
to de^le with the me^orable judges (...) and Rhad^manthus* fear ye the
^orm^ntes of Hercules? the plagues of (...) or the bar^yng of (...) if aught of
the^e be the cause fear you not, but draw near to ^ethe lake, s^one after the
tas^ing whereof ye s^all forget this clodde of car^yng ^are, though in deed ye
have tasted before of the very Well of ^ensi^enesse, videlicet, the S^^g^a
lake. But being thus wrapped in y^ v^^e of misery, I trust a caul^^ sweet
western wind after this your sharp and stormy winter can no sooner come in
place, than he shall be welcomen* neither in the Primetyde of the year (
v^del^cet) in April and in May. can Phoeb^^ so soon display his golden bright
rays or glistering beams upon the earth* than will each heart rejoice, and
each hea^^e which before has been penned up or kept as it were in the prison of
^^arte froste, now laugh his Iaylour the froste to scorn: so I think, be it
morning or evening* come I early or late. I come not to soon to dry up those
surging seas or boystrous streams of carping care, which with p^^s^uenesse
oue^flow your heavy hearts* nor to expel those doleful dumpes which sore
oppress your pestred wits. For as I take no small d^l^ght thoroughly to bas^e
my corpse with the Nectar wine of the Hom^^icall Gods, to reune my doleful
sprytes when I set occasion: so take I a great delight to have a portion of
that marvelous hea^te ^^epenthes (which has force to drive sadness and
melancholy f^o^ each man's heart) about me* to imparte to my friends coming in
^lace where such pensiveness does reign. Now sir, I coming from my wonted
custom, and associ^d with Nepenthes juice, chauncing (as fortune would) into
this fair flock of my faithful friends, whom I plainly see as it were in
glass before mine eyes set altogether lumping and lowering as if ye had lately
comen from Troph^nius cave, or rather escaped S. Patrickes Purgatory, fully
persuade my self I can not better bestow it, than upon your crased corpses:
wherefore (my diligence employed ye shall see how neat I will be, not only in
anointing each part of your s^omak^, whereby you might the eas^er avoid all
Melancholy, but also in curiously wasshing your sweltring hearts, whereby all
sadness may straight avoid and give place to Dame pleasure and all her
troop, for so Nepenthes biddes. Yet du^be not me for a merry knave, but
Nepenthes juice for a pleasant Knight, to whom I am but a servant or rather
an instrument to bring his feats about, as now plainly and manifestly
appears in this amorous discourse of Sir N. O. and the worthy Nymphe A. O.
whom the Gods assigned at length to be his wife. And now (dear Dames)
because I would not h^^^ you (my rare being run) to stand in as foolish or
rather in a foolisher doubt than Plato whylome did, who doubted in deed
whether he should put your se^^ among reasonable or v^reasonable creatures: I
will make every thing so plain unto you, as (...) could not be, though in
de^de you should be led by a line or poynted unto it with Democri^^^ Anger.
And for your better instruction, seeing men in these days think that the
clymate or the country w^erein a man is borne, imports not a little toward
his nobility, ye shall understand, I will not faint (as the Poets did,) and
say, Sir N. O. was brought forth in flo^yng ^elos as Apollo was, nor yet in
hollow rocks as was Jupiter, neither that this Nymphe A. O. took her
beginning in wa^yng Seas as Venus did, or was begotten of the ^rayne of any as
was Pallas b^ Jupiter: but Sir N.O. descended of the ancient house and noble
parentage of Hippomenes, as this treatise makes plain, and the worthy Nymph^
A.O. ^^ the other side (as Apollo said) was borne and educated in Pasquilles
Heaven, daughter unto Dame Diana (though the Poets said the contrary)
begotten of hy^ sweet heart Endymyon, whom in her huntyng not seldom she
visited by startes (if the Poets, are to be credited) which startes you know
full often requires startyng corners, and if you know not, these her startes
may give you to understand: for why should she couette to have her Altar
besprincled with man's blood, if she took no delight in man? or why should
she (using huntyng as a copy of her countenance) visit so often by stealth,
her sweet heart End^m^on, if not for some such intent? for this we know,
that womanhoode and chastity forbids pleasure. If then the like chastnes^e
were grafted in her* as is reported to be, she would not have used in that
order his company, nor yet have spent her days continually in hunting, as we
see she does. Yet marvel not (poetical Nymphs) that thus much has not been
revealed unto you before this time of our ancient Poets: for no marvel it is
if the Poets hereof were ignorant, when none of the Gods knew it, exceptyng
Apollo, neither had he known it, but through her coming to have the advice of
his Oracle at Delphos (that is) to know whether it were a male or female that
she went withal, who courteously answeryng* said, it was a female which with
her should be Alpha and Omega (that is to say) the first and the last that
ever she should bear: who was not before so much dismayed, discomforted, and
grieved with her conception, least (coming to light) the bands of chastity
wherewith she was thought to be ^ound, should be counted broken, but ^entymes
more now rejoiced at this Alpha and Omega, persuadyng her self, that how
lendely soever she behaved her self, wantonness of pleasure would not be
seen. But yet take heed Diana least through thy to much credulity and light
belief (as the Proverb goes) Minertiam exercit^res: For not seldom the
Oracle of Apollo bears a double meaning (most like to the Images of
Alcibi^des) who what imported life without, the same enclosed death within.
Now Dame Diana keepyng this escape very secretly (as wisdom warned her) and
knowing her time of delivery to be near at hand, taking her bow and shaftes
as though she would have gone to her woonted game, conveyed her self primly
under a cloud into Pasqu^lles heaven: where remaynyng until the time of her
delivery was past, the Gods (not knowing where she had been) meruayled much
at this her long absence, and at her return, merrily gyving with her, as they
satte at dinner. Jupiter demanded of her where she had been, and what sport
she had had all this time. Who first fixed her eyes upon her (...) strings,
secondly lookyng steadfastly in the midst thereof, straight ^oorth had a ready
answer by the end: which proves not a little the readiness, ripeness,
sharpness and suttlety of a woman's wit: for she meaning in deed to disclose
the whole matter (least some euesdropper or picketbanke should bewray her unto
Venus, who always was and will be her mortal enemy) yet in such secret
manner and after such a lofty style as the Gods themselves should hardly
vnderst^nde her, answered him in this sort: Sir (quoth she) in sport I past
the bands of pleasure, and came to the Court of felicity, for I had no soo^^e
entered the wild and fennie forest of my wonted game, but a goodly Bucke
forth of the thick and flaking serve began to rouse himself, who contrary to
the nature of his sex, leauyng both fierceness and wildenesse (as though he
had known me) ganne lovingly to fawn upon me, des^^^ryng me with his lips,
and tickyng my garments with his ^ong. Whereat I being amazed, and taking it to
be some of Circes inchauntments, who had taken upon him the Crocodiles nature,
I sent a percyng shaft to stick amiddest his ribs, which contrary to his
former force rebounded back again: the Bucke likewise not f^aryng aught,
began to lick afresh. Whereat I maruellyng not a little, seeing this change of
nature, persuaded my self it was some wayned Bucke, which of late had strayed
from the lodge of my forest (and now forgotten through my tasting of Lethe lake
at my first entering into the same,) wherefore I began to play with him,
calling him by this name, Will, Will: who no otherwise as it were fle^ted
upon me, than does the child or little infant, who smyl^s upon his mother or
nurse calling him by some childishe name. And perceiving I had yielded unto his
lore (as in deed I had) thinking I ^ould follow him, began lightly to trippe
before me, until such time as he came to a broad gate of a fair lawne
field. I like a good bloudhound pursuyng my chase leasurely, kept true
footing, and drew near unto him, whom when he spied (more like a man than a
beast) he opened the hatch with his crooked horn, and with the same h^lde it
open until such time as I had entered. Then did I see him make toward the
middle of the lawne, wherein was a slip hedged about with black and white
thorn, but rather made in the order of a list wherein a combat had or should
be foughten: whom incontinently I followed: he entered, I entered also: thus
being entered, he laid him down to breathe. I fate me down likewise to rest
my wraried limbs, and played with his horns in my lap. But (to be short) he
suddenly rising, began fiercely to pushe at me with his prickyng horns, and so
fi^rcely pursued his fe^nishe thrustes, that before I could recover my feet
again* he gave me a go^ng wou^d. Whereat I being amazed* and yet des^rous to
see farther before I en^oyed his death, withstoode him stoutly, nothing
regardyng his force. Wherein I found that a valiant Knight may soon be
ouercomen, but a fierce Soldier sooner tired, for so was her: yet being
vanquished, he yielded himself, fawning upon me as he did before, to whom
(being moved with pity,) and hoping in short time to recover my hurt, I
granted life, yet brake his ^o^nes and let him go. Who was no sooner gone,
but the sore incontinently began to swell: I (fearing the worste) sought
straightfoorth for Elleborus to purge me thereof, which found, I stamped it
and drank the juice thereof at my discretion: soon after the drinking
whereof. all the corruption and matter which before was congeled in my gored
wound, gushed forth, but to my deadly paynt. Thus in a fair^ large field
between the listes I incountered with my mortal for: who receiving the foil
but not the repulse, I brake his horn, and for the testimonial thereof
behold the same (showing the Gods in deed the little ^^ngar of a borne
gantlet which was her sweet hearts Endymyon, which we call the lovers
fingar, but what she meante thereby I refer to you Madames, whose wits
herein do pass my foolish skill:) The Gods hearing this tale (not
perceauyng her sutteltie) laughyng sore, commended her sport, and began (as
Terence says) Omnia bona dicere and Laudare fortunam eius, saying moreover,
she had done valiantly, and in gy^yng order wished themselves there (being
merrily disposed) some wish cap^ace and bodkyn, some with quisshyn and belhedded
pin, other some with beer bung and fauset, an other with potlyd and ladel, and
some again with cha^berpot and bedstaf. Thus every God had his sundry wish,
and every one his wish alike. But in the mean time Diana her escape was kept
unknown, the knowing whereof she feared the less, seeing At^^ and Momus, the
Gods of reprehension, long time agone were cast down from heaven through the
whole consent of the Poetical Gods, which makes them now (as Homer says)
lead forth an cast life.

Thus I trust (my glittryng stars) ye are fully resolved of the birth and
nativity of the Lady A. O. ye need not farther to doubt hereof, for though my
rude style be not penned with the golden Liduos streams, neither curiously
polisshed with Hermus glitteryng sands, yet (my loving troop) if ye
diligently mark the gloss thereof, you shall find it penned with Ganges
siluery streams, the force whereof will draw Golden sands unto it to shade
the same. Here rests now (to go consequently) the cause why Dame Diana
named this Nymphe A. O. which is, because the Oracle of Apollo, ( Alpha Omega)
signified unto her mother first and last, therefore did she call her by the
first letters of the same ( videlicet) A. O. But now I know ye look I
should return to my matter (that is) to show in deed the first original
acquayntaunce of Sir V. O. and the worthy Nymphe Alpha Omega, which as briefly
as I can, I will declare. N. O. being a man of great possessions, detestyng
always the frothe of Venus, before such time as the wonderful beauty of this
Nymphe had not only dasled his eyes, but also bestraught him of his former
senses, having neither male nor female to enjoy his goods and lands, what
time the fatal threede of this his terestriall life was thoroughly expired and
ended, lamented sore the Metamorphosis of his cousin Hippomenes, and daily
repaired before the presence of all the homericall Gods, cra^uyng most
earnestly upon his knees his cousins shape to be restored again, (whom
Cibele the mother of the Gods had turned into a white Lions shape with the
beautiful Atlanta his wife, for seeking the fraytes of Venus in the woodde
where her daily habitation was, without any reverence of the place) which by
no means he could obtain. Alpha Omega likewise remaynyng in the Island
Seiros, bring praised of all others for her wonderful beauty (setting no
less thereby than in deed others did) hearing of the fair maiden Atlanta who
lately lived in the said Island, whom Hippomenes through the counsel of Venus
won to be his wedded wife, desired upon a time of the Gods that her right
shape might be restored again, meaning thereby (as I suppose) to see which of
their beauties were most to be esteemed, seeing they were both of all men so
highly allowed, and so greatly proved (for sure it is, one woman enuieth the
beauty of an other) and thinks her self fairest of all. So frownyng fortune
and cruel destiny yet withstoode her enterprise, that naught her suyte before
the Gods could prevail ( Venus especially being her heavy friend (only for
her beauties sake.) It happened so, these two having both a like suyte unto
the Gods, met^e (by chance) in the heavenly throne of the mighty and
thundryng Jupiter, at such time as the Gods were disposed to hear mortal
men's vows and supplications (which I judge to be in the forenoone and
sober hours of the day) for in the after noone, when they are well and
thoroughly whirled with the Nectar wine, then lis^e they not to treat on earnest
affairs, but look on which side the heavens bends lowest toward the
earth, there sit they intentiuely beholding mortal men's doings, which unto
them are as it were a Theater of tragical discourses to move them to laughter:
But behold (fair Dames) Venus bearyng their supplications* grudgyng at N. O.
for detesting her froth and hating A. O. for her beauty (not contented to
deny their petitions) called Cupide that blind and conkered boy unto her,
commanding him under affection to strike this N. O. in most ardent love with
A. O. who (obeying her best,) straightfoorth ascended to the Mount Pernossus,
where his guyuer of arrows lay, who (choosing among the rest what best might
work this feate) suddenly stroke his silly heart, who felt no sooner the
arrow prick, but straightfoorth came bo^nde to Lovers lore, yea, in such
sort, that he sat all on thorn till she was g^^ne; whereby he might find
time and place to utter his moning mind unto her, and also to bewray his
sweltring heart. Love made him volde, he feared naught but least the Gods
should be inflamed with her, who (ravished with her sight) might bar him of
his will. Such was her beauty, (said Apollo) as all ye heavens began clearly to
shine (not Phoebus yet in place.) But to be short (her suyte not auaylyng she
departed from thence to her wonted I Will of Scyros, whom N.O. incontinently
followed: and (gardyng her to her lodge) in the way of familiarity taking the
gentle conge of her (as a (...) guerdon in lien of his pains) used unto her
these words followyng: Oh Goddess of worthy price (quoth he) if so I might
thee call, rebuke me not for my boldness, for what my lips have done and now
profess, my heart has wished long before. I grant (not vau^ting of my
pare^tage) a grafte of wilding stock (as I am) deserves not to incou^ter with
the sugared lips of so worthy a Goddess (as by thine outward app^ra^ce) thou
^eemest in my sight to be: say therefore (O well of life) if trespass aught
herein I have committed, then let my life a guerdon be for these my evil
deserts, but in ye me^ne time Lady (as doubtful of my offense,) I appeal to
thy courtesy for grace. Who courteously answering, said: No Goddess sir, yet
often we see blind bayarde hitteth the nail on the hedde, but tell me good sir
I pray you what means this kind of salutation? I, less than seldom have
found in my woonted friends the like courtesy, much less in a stranger,
wherefore your courteous demeanoure (whatsoever it pleases you to say of your
self) gives me to think, your race to have commen of some noble parentage,
or rather of a worthy line. N.O. fearing the imbecillitie of his wit, and
the foltering of his tongue (though in deed he needed not) answered in this
sort: alas (thou fountain of my joy) my foltring tongue is bashefull to
recite the lingering love which this mine inward heart with deadly pain
retayneth: wherefore by humble suyte I crave, that what my trembling tongue for
fear is bashful to recite, the same my painful pen may put in writing. I
grant (quoth she) seeing nothing but reason you do require* if so you had leue^
your pen to paynte, than your tongue to express the same. Yet as it has
pleased you of your courtesy, to accompany me in this so long a voyage (I
unworthy thereof) so I desire you to so^o^^e with me this night, taking a
small repast in lieu of your good will, and a hard lodgyng to rest your
weried limbs, in part of satisfaction to recompense your proffered pain. No
doubt but N.O. willingly accepted her courteous profer: for at what time this
proffer was made they were in the ^ight of the house, which bring most
gorgeously adorned with high points, curious turrets, and few glass
windows round about* inflamed his heart with a great desire to view the
situation, and not only the rules and principles, but also the chiefest
points and most centous workmanship through the device of Geometry which
therein were used, which sure he had no sooner entered, but the ^egall pomp
and princely furniture, seemed in all points correspondent to the brave
paynting, and the curious workmanship of the ba^tle^s and turrets without. But
I will omit this sumptuous bu^lding (least while I seem to praise it at the
full) not giving it his true title (I deminish the glory thereof) and speak of
his friendly intertaynement, because it appertains partly to my charge, At
si^ N.O. his first entrance into the house, Alpha Omega taking him by the
hand and bidding him according to the rules of courtesy most heartily
welcome, showed him all the commodities of the house, and led him into a
fair large gallerie lying on the west side of the house, where first desirous
to know his name, his native country and lineage, and after great parlance more
(which were to tediou^ here to recite:) the board being covered after a stately
manner, supper drew near, whereof being warned by the Steward of the house,
she desired him to take a small repast, who (thanking her for her courtesy) sat
down as he was placed of the Grome, which was at the upper end of the board
next to his Lady, on whom he many a sheepish eye did cast. What should I
here bring in the number and sorts of dayntie dishes, or the curious caruyng
and service at the board? ye showing whereof is as cast as the numbering of the
s^arres in the skies, or the telling of the sands in the seas. Yet think I it
good and Opere precium, here to reduce their pretty Poems and Poetical
Pamphlets conveyed from the one to the other, for he that seeks the ground
and pithe thereof, shall find aliquid salis, in them (as the proverb goes.)
First N. O. marking greatly her behavior and gestures, often times cast his
glauncing eyes (as he thought) by stealth upon her, winking much withal
whereat A. O. maruelling, asked him if the light of the candle das^d his eyes.
To whom he replied thus: Not so (dear dame) I wink for fear, least my too
much contemplation of thy wonderful beauty daze my greedy eyes, for by proof
I find it not over easy to clyme the Egles nest, and thy great courtesy is a
ready repulse to my rudeness, yet bear with my blynking folly: for it is
great good will that grauelleth me, and the fear of repulse makes my heart to
freese. Wherefore I beseech thee, grant fire in time to thaw. Good sir (quoth
she) to find fire in frost, I count it ^etter lost. I grant (said N O.) who
finds fire in frost, he finds, but yet he lives by loss* but who finds
frost in fire, he gapeth for good luck. And yet although for fear my heart
does freese, and craves your lively countenance to thawe the same, yet has
the trump of thy beauty kindled such sparks of hot burning coals, as not
all the water in the sea is able, yet one drop of the deaw of thy lively
countenance may qu^nch the same. Wherefore as after a manner I craved fire to
thawe my fearful freesing: so now (as enforced to the same) I crave the lively
draw of thy ^ountenance, to quench or lay the heat of these my kindling coals.
Whereat with simpering lyps she smyled* thinking he could not perceive her, but
thereof she was deceived. Which cheared him on further to have said, but that
the board being discovered, the sweet music and melodious harmony called
upon them to dance. His Lady likewise (maruelling at his Ephonicall tongue,)
took him by the hand, craving him to lead her a gallyarde: whereof I dare
swear not mis^yking) he granting her request, fulfilled her demand: they
traced (as near as I can remember Ap^llo his words) the gracious galliardes
dedicated to the Gods, and afterward those measures, whose footing and
gestures served best his turn, and some of their hearts likewise daunced
privily loath to depart. But (their legs fainting) he gave his lady the
zucado d^z^labro^, and led her again to the place from whence she yielded her
self. Soon after the company leaving their past once (the Chamberlayn
willing to show him his chamber (he courteously bid his Lady good night, saying
what she had granted, he meant to put in ure. Whereby (as I suppose) he meant
the grant of declaring his mind by writing. Who graciously wishing him good
rest, said: What my lips have spoken, mine honor can not deny. Thus taking
his leave, he marched toward his chamber. which he l^unde all hanged with
white and black. Who knowing well the virtue of each color, and the myrting
of the same, thought verily he swymmed against the stream. For (as I have
heard some say) these colors pretended virginity unto death. But yet N. O.
knowing that out of one mouth, comes both ho^te and cold, and knowing his
heart with fear to s^cese more and more, thought long until such time as
some t^^tale paper had blazed his privy scalding sighs and salt tears to
whom her loved best Wherefore soon after his entering into the chamber, he
discharged the Chamberlayn of his duty, and made this letter following in a
readiness, to give to her Lady at her first flight.

N. O. to his best beloved A.O.
WIth the morning salutation, or rather with an humble kind of gratulation,
which Venus vouchsafed to call the gentle co^ge, and Mars her darling the
Bezolas manes. (as ^ingring love commands me) I salute the^ my second self,
and greet thee here in blabbing paper poetically, not lice^tiously as
testifies the same. For why? if springs and seas were turned to ynke* if lands
were turned to paper* if shrubs and trees we turned to pens, if all the sa^ds
in seas were me^, if every man took pen in hand, if Apollo and Pallas should
give them wisdom, if Mercur^ ambages, and A^ethusa influe^ce, yet would their
ink be dried up, their paper spent, (...) pens stubbed, and (to be short)
their wits grauelled: yet would thy features be untouched, the which in
number pass the sands in seas, and eke the glittering stars in skies. Thy
faint does perce ye cloudy roupes which (...) wyndes suborne, it pierced vashe
the duskye skies: thus art thou borne from Mount to mount, whose same shall
never die: and if I might be bold to speak without the wrath of feigned
Gods, then would I say, that Juno, Pallas, and Venus adorned themselves with
thy beauty, and Egeria supported her self by thy shape. No marvel then (dear
Dame) if I through the sound of thy Ueneriall trumpe have not only been
trapped, but also ravished of my fatal senses: for none otherwise does thy
reluce^t beauty and surpassing qualities daily display before mine eyes, than
does the golden glistring beams or bright arayes of Phoebus display upon the
earth, when through his force, the dim and darkesome skies with clowdie
roupes are put to flight, the which (O well of life) has not only with fiery
flakes, and flasshing flames of ardent love set my heart on fire, but also (as
annexed unto it) has raised such surging seas of carpyng car^, as not Jupiter
his head (I think) was ever so pestered, what time he borrowed Vulcanus axe to
hew Pallas out of his brain, as at this time am I through the fervent desire
which I bear unto thee. Thus has the trumpe of thy beauty conveyed me to
the narrow of Cilla and Charybdu. Either if I seek to shun, my rusticall
deeds will show me to be Pan, and my folly in seeking to kick against the
good, will say plainly in foolishness I pass Morychus. Wherefore I see,
either I must sink in Syrtes sands, it is drown in Lethe lake. Thus is thy
love a Labyrinth to me for my likyng. I a toyling Theseus, and all for
speeding: yet suffer me not to be tossed in thy Labyrinth, whom great good
will has grauelled. My heart is in thy thrall, my corpse requires no less, by
suite I crave, grant, save my life, by ^hinne to hold me up, least that thy
beauty bid me say I tasted Circes cup. For though I have tasted a sharp
stormy winter, yet (standing to thy courtesy) I gape for a new Prymetide,
florishyng with his causine sweet Western wind Let me not therefore be fed
with a vain hope, if yea reigns, ^ay yea, if n^, nav, yet such a weak nay,
as thereon I may build such a steadfast fundation of perfect requitaunce, as
not Eolus with all his winds may shake the top, much less move the fundation
thereof, which granted, persuade thy self to find me as tried in truth, as
Romeus and ^uliet, and as steadfast in faith, as P^sistratus to Catanea, who
do in my sight Home^ her golden Aphroditis pass. Wherefore blame me not, if
I wish the sharpness of Lynceus his sight, that every creuice I might find
out, yea that through the hard flinte and stony walls my glauncing eyes might
be fixed upon the lively shape of the corporal hew, whereby I might inioye
thy company, or at the least have the fruition of those sweet Western winds,
which I hope will breath out of those thy sugered lips. For if (as one
constrained thereunto) I went about of Lethe lake to taste, yet should I but
do as the Giants did, who (as the Ports feigned) with their engines of
Sciences, moved war against nature, which assuredly exceeds the bands of
my force, wherefore take pity upon him, who is, and will be while life does
last, more yours than his own.

Yours in heart N. O.


This (being finished) he laid his drowsy head upon his soft pillow to
sleep: but (God wot) it was so sore pestered with the tedious thoughts of
his fair Lady, that whilst he thought to have rested his weried limbs in a
bed of security, his senses were rested (as it were to the third heaven)
with fear of digression. Thus (as one being placed where pleasure was, and
could not participate the same) with many a sobbing sighe, and skalding tear
he wrested forth the tedious night, in hope, that if the Muses Thaleia and
Pelymneia favored his tongue, as well as Phoebus and Calliope the direction of
his pen, his rising should be on the right side on that day: yet wresled he
so his effeminate band to the siege of backewarde affection, that both trumpe
and drum sounded nothing for their Larum, but Baccare, Baccare: yet as the
sound of trumpe and stroke of drum incourageth not a little the* henlyke man
to martial feats, blouddy acts, and warlike prowes, thinking thereby to
raise an everlasting fame which neither the oblivion of memory should ^oulde
in earth, nor yet the antiquity of time shall turn to duste: so the only
sound of trumpe and drum (though in deed the troop of froward affection,
stood as it were a band of mortal enemies before him, seeking the spoil of
his innocent bloudde) enforced him to set the best leg forewarde, knowing
that Phoebus with his ral^ant rays is able to put the cloudie roupes to
flighte, and therefore with a good courage began to rouse himself. Who (after
each thing placed in order about him (thought to have greeted his Lady with
the morning salutation, as other of his sect have used to do, and coming
through the galery which led him to his chamber, he met (as fortune would) with
his lady upon the sudden, who not grieved with his chance, well liking the
place, and not misliking the time, taking her by the hand, and giving her the
courtesy of Aurora, she conmaunded her nimble feet to encounter a turn or
twain about the galerie, where leaving forain matters, they parled at the
flest of domestical and private affairs. But yet as one word drives forth
an other, so this parlance being soon ended, N.O. issued forth in this sort:
Lady (quoth he) I see dame Pa^las in thee has played her part, wherefore be not
offended with my incroching upon thee, being desirous to be absolved of this
doubt, which is: A valiant captain trusting the craking words of his soldiers
^not knowing their manhood, and pressed in have thereunto) brings the^ to the
field, whom sort assault (for the most part) proves rather cackling hens,
than skilful soldiers in martial exploits. For being environed, or rather (as
it were, hedged in round about of their enemies (who in deed were too strong
for them) having no way to flee but through the surging Sea, some like hens
having small lust to cackle, being expulsed off their nestes, adventure to
escape the seas, and are drowned. The second company stand to the direful dent
of ^attred shield, and are slain. The third (seeing no resistance) yield to
their enemies, in hope to find life, where not seldom we find life to be
none. The captain seeing his hand broken, and his army scattered, stands in
a quandare, not knowing what to do. Thus good Lady (my question being moved)
my demand is in this case, if you were captayn, which of these three companies
would you hold withal? The Lady marking well his proposition* made answer in
this sort: Sir knight (quoth she) this case is plain, the valiant Souldioure
had rather trust to the force of his arms amiddest his enemies, than in the
field a fair pair of heels to show. Therefore, who used that vain of
manhood, I judge were justly served: the toys^ and skylfull Souldieors (s^^ing
Mars to withstand them, and Mercuries shiftings not to prevail) will rather
yield, standing to the courtesy of their enemies, than more boldly than wisely
run headlong into their own destruction: For naught but direful death by
seeking the extremity at tyrennous hands does happen. Wherefore, who
courteously yeeldeed (seeing none other remedy, if I had been their Captain,
with them I would have holden. Then (quoth N O. mark well the consequent: the
case being mine, and you the Castle which I seek to win, ( Mars frownyng
v^pon me) I yield, what would you do? Take all your goods (quoth the
Lady) for inueying against me, then bynding you by solemn oath and
protestation while l^fe do^th last, never to bea^e spear and shield against
me in the field again, with life and lymme you should depart. Now
assuredly (says he) as a greater courtesy I would not wish, so thus much (as
enforced thereto) I crave. For why (fair Lady) in such thunderyng sort does
clipping Echo sound forth the loftye Taratantara of thy amyable trumpe, that
needs I must prefer my rude words unto thy learned ears. Thou art (ob
amarous dame) that strong and steadfast Castle of amity which Cupide inforceth
my heart to inuey: Love is my standerde which b^art^h up the banner of
affection, under whom Dame Venus, inf^rceth my wits to fight: I am that
captain, whose wa^le^ull eyes beholds mine army scattered. Fear of
denial is that platte soldier, who with open mouth and continual cry
calls upon me to adventure the dangerous Lethe, which I see by no means
can be compassed without the Ferrye of Chav^n. Wherefore it is justly alluded,
not all the weapons of Bre^e^, are able to arm fear: and Hope (for breuities
sake) is that Soldier which stands to your curtesye, whose shoulders in
this my extremity) as seemed best by your former opynion) I make my pillar of
assistaunce. Wherefore (thou radyant Star) seeing an easy conqueste requires
the Conqueroures clemencye, my tremblyng toungue gives place. Alpha Omega
lykyng well this ready deriuation, so aptly alluded with an unfeigned
similitude, with brydeled lips answered, Rome was not builded in one day,
wherewith N.O. held him as content for that time, delivering unto her this
fore recited letter, saying: if she wanted a bottom whereon to wind her
silk, that waste paper would aptly serve her turn. Whereat (she plucking
forth her sampler) accepted his writing willingly, saying: if it served not
for white it should serve for black, but (perceauing suddenly somewhat to be
enclosed therein) she turnyng her back toward him, opened it hastily,
wherein she found a pretty ring, having a true lovers knot of white and blewe
ribben tied thereupon, the po^s^e wherein graven was this, Par parirefer, at
the end whereof she found a hand reachyng forth a heart, who had no sooner
spied it, but closed it up as hastily as erst she unfolded it, and turnyng
her face toward him again, filled his cares with a woman's excuse, saying, if
all were gold that glistered, she had a heart of gold, meaning as well by
the colors of the knot, as by the grauing of the hand and heart in the ring,
who answered: what you mean (fair Dame) I know not, but this I know, that
^yme tries truth in every place. She replied him again, then hold you
content, for hereafter comes not yet, but N.O. desirous of farther hope,
bolted forth once more saying, I grant to your silence, for haste makes
waste. A.O perceauyng this wide shot, inferred, delay breeds danger: what
she meant thereby I can not tell, but yet it was pretily devised, seeing him
hot on the spur (as in taking his leave) to make a post return, but yet I
think if his business had not been thereafter, his spurs would have frosen
(for want of heat) unto his heels, before he would have departed: for judge ye
whether his heart daunted loathe to depart or no, when as breakefast being
ended, and he ready to mount upon his Cheuall, taking his leave after the
pleasantest order that might be, said, Lady, though my body departes, my
heart and mind yet remains in thy custody, thus hopyng thy corpse to be the
hour wherein two faithful hearts do shrowde, I commit you to the highest to
direct thy paths as well in the division of Venus as Cupide: who mistically
answering* said, The Dyamant cutteth the Glass. Thus using the trade of Dame
Venus her soldiers, in showing their minds by signs and noddes he departed,
but (God wot) full sore against his will, thinkyng each hour ten till his
return again. Yet was he no sooner departed, but in short time after, came
I.I an old courtier of A.O. who seeing in all his dealings the more he ran,
the more behynd, thinking it in vain longer time to waste, stayed not, but
wrote upon the gallerie door, Veni, vidi, saying unto his Lady: Seeing you
have often given me (as Terence says) Nodum in scirpo quaerere, behold here
your rushe again, the knottes whereof are as ready to gravel your wits, as in
time past they have bin to wast my wynd. Thus departing, he gave his Lady this
letter following, saying: The peache will have wine, and the fig water.

I.I. his device to. A.O.
THe soaring Hawk beyond his skill who seeks to soar so hye,
That weeried wings shall him anoy before he footing fyndes:
The recklesse bird on every branche that seeks to prone and prye,
The sayler of his launching ship the (...) which weakly binds,
At length shall breed their bathing bane to scourge the^ in their kinds.
And though the change of pasture helps by proof to make fat calves,
Through slickenesse yet, the rolling stone we see can take no moss.
Wherefore since you will daily seek each thing to part by halues,
Think for your part, and for your pains, naught else to gain but dross
For while you seek a greater gain, your wits in vain you toss.
Your self to be the rolling stone, and I your Sisiphus
You sought to make, but all in vain, I learned have to shun,
The poisoning plagues of Circes cup (as did Prometheus)
Which was him sent as sauce, for ye which erst by stelth he won:
Wherefore with leisure now repent, with haste what you begone.
Since Socrates us bid divide one Venus into two,
In two likewise Dan Cupid God, love torments to abate:
Therefore you will (as none erst did) her corpse deuid^ in more,
Which plainly shows your change with choice, your change I mean of late,
Which turned your friends to mortal foes, by cha^ging of your mate.
When Aeolus minds to reign, then Boreas needs must have,
Elleborus has me purged, I now defy thy crew.
By proof I find an ape an ape, in purple be she plast.
Let who list do as Argus did, keep thee within their mew:
Yet who so list, or who so does shall never find thee true.
And since you think your beauty such, as none inioyes the like:
To Platos City, fairies land, or to Vtopia wenne:
Yea since you think your wisdom such, as no man has the like:
In deserts shrink (as Tymon did) go seek some cave or den,
There to enjoy your gifts alone, imparted not to men.
Perhaps dan Phoebus in the day, Minippus else by night,
In sight, which pass Linceus eyes, will spy thee forth at length,
With be^ding eyes from sun and Moon, who ravished with thy sight,
In heaven will place thee as a star, none can withstand their strength.
Thus thou dispising mortal men, the Gods enioyes at length.
Mitto tibi fro^tem Veneris, mediumque Dianae,
Principium lucis quod mare claudat item.
Tempus erit quo tu quia nunc excludis ama^tes
Frigidia diserte nocte iacebis anus.
This token herein closed I send as for my last farewell.
It Is Eglantine, which plainly shows where sweet there sour lay.
My love at first (most like the leaves) did give a fragrant smell.
But now at last, it is like the pricks most hurtful bearing sway.
Yet as the pricks do yield no hurt,
Unless some one abuse the smell:
So had my last been like my first,
If thou the first had used well.
Hereafter set by none so light,
As I have found thee set by me:
Least they then do as I do now,
Take of thy belles, and let thee flee.

She received this letter with a coy look, saying: adieu good sir, I suffer the
ill, hoping for the good: but in hoping to take two pigeons with one bean you
are deceived (quod I.I) and thus he took his flight. She seeing this, red his
letter, which pricked her not a little: and set her over the shoes in dumpes. I
will not say she would willingly have been revenged, but yet I dare say it
rubbed her on ye gall as much as the strokes grieved Venus which Diomedes gave
her, when with weapon she would have been revenged upon him, but that Jupiter
calling her aside, said: Daughter mine, thine office is not to be occupied in
warlik affairs, but about toyers and lovers, wherefore attend about love
kisses, embracings and pleasures, and as for martial Princes, Mars and Bellona
have the charge thereof: thus all women are not acquainted with Tisiphones
nature (though for the most part they are) as appears by A. O. for she not
desirous of reuengement, and fearing least it should be blown by Boreas blasts
of S^^mati^ unto her lovers ears, brydeled her nature with the bytte of
affection, and clapped him in Sampsons post. For I.I. not minding longer to
proceed in such havens of assistaunce, seeing Nept^ne with his three forked
mace in this his long nauigatio^ never furthered his suit. And A. O. for her
wits security refrayned ^ir pen from blotting further paper in answering ye
cragged cliffes of his former letter, whereby this matter quailed, as one whose
brows had Morpheus bound and laid to stiepe over head and ears in the snow
of Tygetus, until such time as Titan with his parching beams had turned his
bed to naught. But while their wits thus sailed in a bed of security. N.O.
(daily troubled with the ruby blushings of Aurora, and often warned by the
example of Lady Ver, to greet his lady by writing in the abse^ce of his body,
who shows her grace in green til Autumn yeldes the fruit thereof) greeted
his lady in this order.

N.O his visitation of A.O. by writing.
NEre drowned in du^ps of drowsines, shall Morpheus bind my bed
With kercher dipte in Limbo lake? shall drowsy dumps forbed
My pen to show the zealous love which I to thee do bear?
No no: if Dy^^^ dungeon dark did hedge thee in* to fear
I would not yield my lively spirits: for why* not Tartars den,
Not Cerberus he, Auerne deep, nor yet the G^^gon fenne,
Not Plutoes grisly gates I say, nor yet M^gera fierce,
The Stygi^n poole, with thousand more, which now for to rehearse
It were too long: not Phlegethons flame should bar me fro thy sight,
But needs I would adventure all to win thee in despite.
Wherefore accept my willing pen descrying thus my heart,
Until my corpse does come in place, and makes good his part.
Thus fare you well my gemme of joy, the fountayn of delight.
Farewell once more, thou well of life, thus takes my pen his flight.
Fill up my lamp with oil of grace.
N.O. whom I vow to be, (...) loyal be. Ade^e.


This Letter pleased A.O very well for ye time. But yet as mirth, so sorrow
requires a time. For soon after the reading hereof, the trumpet of news
sounded in her ears a strange amorous combat foughten in the north part of the
world, wherein all remorse of conscience being banished quite, and pity taking
no place, so long as the baner of affection was holden up, and the arming
weapons of Venus would hold, they spared not what beauty forced to, but lying
with l^yaltie they forced not of brutishness, thinking consentaneum what ly^ed
best their lust, for mistrust they knew might well (...) ^et not c^ndemne them.
A.O. crediting the brute of this (...) E^ch^ full often resoundeth an untruth,
(as now mani^estly a^p^a^eth) who bruted (contrary to verity) N.O. to be one
of their (...) soldiers, or rather hungrie-dogges who filled then (...) like
to the carryon Kyte) with du^^ie puddyngs, and (...) ^abitation to be in ye
defiled and unlucky clymat zone, whi^^ thus ^ad ^ansackt her v^ynes, all
(cladding her corpse with mourning weeds, most like a vestall maid, or rather a
sacred virgin, long lulled in Muses lappes) with vapoured eyes and boiled
breast, which erst had bathed him in good will, caused her secretary to write
unto him in this order.

A.O. to her lover, charging him with an untruth.
WIth vapourd eyes, and scalding sighs, my tedious steps I trace,
with wa^lful weeds I clad my corpse, salt tears bedews my face:
A boiling breast like Aetna hill subdues my sweltring heart,
And ransackt veins persuades me now to think on Cupids darte.
I see my heart with inward thoughts has bathed in good will,
That hounde which seeks by ranging foot a virgins rule to spill.
Which lothsom death with fearful mace commands to work my dome,
With aid likewise of sisters three to finish forth my tomb.
O Ladies of the Destiny, shall this a guerdon be
In lieu of my good will bestowed? may naught occasion be
To bulwark my defense in need? have I a rolling stone
All wrapped in gold, as if it were a gemme that peer had none?
Well well N O. unless you prove your self a peerlesse gemme:
Unconstancie will me perforce constrayne thee to condemn.
By proof we see, what golden is, the same has glittering spheres,
As Phoebus has his radyant rays, Pactolus eke that bears
His siluerie sands on shore, and Tagus castes his gold to land
Yea Lydius has his golden streams and Hermes glittring sand:
So Virtue would not lurk unknown, if virtue did thee rule,
But needs would shine like glittring beams, though wrapped in Friars ^ule.
Report could not subvert thy fame, if thou ye virgins path
Had trod by rule of Uirgins law, or bathde thy self in bath
Of loyal love. But yet I hope how that Dan Echo fails,
With mu^bling voice of foltring tongue (though truth imbark ye sails.)
Wherefore as one d^uoide of joy, and yet would feign rejoice,
Imbarke this foming froth of waves, then with of pleasure choice
I may adorn my daisy bank, which delectable seems
To those, whose greedy senses seeks the scent which flowers teems.
And thus Adieu. I (...) lodge where I march all with my dumpishe Muse.
videlicet Me^pomenes. A. O.


This letter being written with the juice of a Lemmon for the secrecy thereof,
because (as some say) it can not be red unless it be held nere to the fire,
and eke this sudden charge seemed very strange unto N. O. and no marvel,
seeing he was accused of his enemies, and half condemned of his Lady, not
being guilty of the crime, neither knowing what she meant thereby. Yet many
thoughts occurred his mazed wits, but which to take unto his senses served
not, neither knew he how to answer this letter (her meaning lying unknown)
the inditing whereof caused him much to muse, for that it seemed rather unto
him the device of Melpomenes the chiefest Muse than the wit of any other
learned clearke, though in deed he had of long time been fostered up with
Muses milk, her cleark like pen he thought condemned his rural wits. Yet
knowing himself in all respects unspotted and undefiled, seeing Veritas non
quaeri^ Angulos, he framed his rural pen (as he thought) to answer in this
sort.

N. O In his own defense.
Shall zoilus he, or Momus mates imbash my pen to write?
Or shall the want of Homers quill, or Virgils vain to endyte,
A new diffused Chaos make of these my pestred wits?
Not so, though Tritons trumpet shrill on fynned fish that sittes,
Has blased unto your tentiue ears, what honor might defame,
Since I vnguiltie am thereof, I will not seek the same
Texcuse, for why? I know that time each thing will bring to light:
And truth it self will come in place against falshoodes force to fight.
By phrase of filed style you seem a verdict rash to give
Of prisoner yours to dye, but yet it grauntes my state to live.
By rolling stone, and ranging hounde unconstant me to be,
Your painting pen by art declares: yet shall you never see,
Nor know my senses, for to know the breath of any wight
Save thou alone, as Biblia, who when Duellus hight
Him self to have a stinking breath by open parlance maid
Of Roman dames unto his face: I have not known (she said,)
But all men's breath have been alike, such was the vestal line
Of that her chosen path, as well the stories do define.
Wherefore in suspense now let hang, the judgment of my dome,
Till truth through time for falshodes corpse has finished up a tome.
Thus fare thou well my iemme of joy Let not our absence breed anoy.


N.O. After the delivery of this letter thought long, as lovers do) to hear an
answer of ye same. Which seeing it came not according to his expectation, he
mounted upon his bayarde gray, making a post journey (being hot on the
spur) partly to visit his Lady, and partly to answer unto her
objections, which no doubt but in thundering wise soon after his coming she
poured forth. Note hereby how hard it is for women to keep any thing
secret, and the waightier the thing, the harder the restraint of blabbing the
same,
I might do well here to bring in the curiosity of lovers and the care they
have al things should be as near as might at ye greting of their Ladies. But
especially in things about their forehead, because it is yt front of their
army which stands in case to make or mar, as in mundiflyng their beardes,
cristalling their teeth, correcting their hairs, cutting their sublabes, or in
demediating the hairs of their heads, some again in turning their monchachous
the Turkey way, in washing their temples with rose water, and other some desire
to perfume their clothes, and set their ruffes after the french fashion. Thus
to be short, every one delights in one thing or an other whereby they should
eleuate the spirits of their fair Dames, as with fragrante flowers, which
represent their Ladies, or else with sweet perfumes which give occasion to
the provocation of pleasure, as in opening their appetites, or else they have
taken it of a custom of Venus* who (as the greek Poets affirm) never
departed from any place not leaving an exquisite perfume and odorous smell
behind her in token of her presence: and as for their flowers (as I said
before) some wear them for a representatio^ of their ladies, as things most
desired, and some again wear them to give unto their Ladies, as things most
agreeyng with their appetites. But happy is he^ (I think) to whom his Lady
gives a nosegay, because the propretie of al women is rather, to take than
give, and thus by such trifling toys lovers use to dye in themselves and live
in others, the heart being more where he loves, than where he gives life: the
eye likewise will always be fixed where the heart is entered, through the preaching
of Cupids leaden shaftes. But soft bold you here contented with these foolish
toys, until occasion serve to bring such like in place. N. O. had no sooner
greeted his Lady with an humble salutation, but (she hardly forbearing the
suppressio^ of her heart told him incontinently what she had heard: Who
answering said, the higher the Sun, the lesser our shadows are, and Asterites
keeping his light within, shows it forth by little and little, yet who so
beholds it thoroughly shall find it in property most like to the star^e.
Wherewith and such like he clearly acquitted him self from all her former
suspicions, to the great contentation of the^ both. For such was the force of
the preuy stroke of affection (as he says) that beauty her self seemed but
ugly in his sight, in comparison of the rosed cheeks of his lady, which his
outward eyes and inward heart had chosen by vow to be his wedded mate: whereupon
he craved of his Trust (for so he had termed her) that what soever he said in
her presence (as perforce constrained thereunto) it might be taken not to
proceed of any dissimulation, but rather of a pure and contrite heart, who
(refrayning her tongue for a season) said. As I find so in time will I loose
(meaning thereby) (as I think) that if she found him loyal, faithful, and
trusty as he had professed, then would she lose him from suspicion of
dissimulation. But tell me sir (quoth she) can the force of affection so rule in
any creature, that what seems not only foul and filthy, but also through
missehap of body vggly in others sight, the same should seem most beautiful
and well proportioned in his sight? why not Lady (quoth he) for if a woman has
matched her self to one as vggly, misseshapen, and misfauored as Thersites, a^
hoary, wrinckled, tanned, and withered through age as Nestor, and yet persuade
her self, that neither beautiful Nireus, fair Phaon, nor yet Phoebus him self
were comparable unto him, why should not this man, as well like her as if he were
ye best favored and comeliest person, alive? likewise if a man taking to wife
one, so ugly misseshapen, foul, filthy, and misfauored, that vglyer could not
be, as seemly as a cow in a Cage, a dog in a dublet, or a sow with a
saddle, yea such a one indeed as has no our spark of comeliness whereby to
delight the meanest man alive, though his innoce^cie were such, as to choose
for Minerua a Sow, (as ye proue^be goes) and yet thinks her to be as comely
in personage as Aegeri^, and of as fair a complexion as Venus, why should not
this disfigured thing be unto him (so supposing) an (...) A^geria in persuage
as it were, and a second Venus in beauty? Marvel not lady at this, for daily
examples do testify thus much, and more tha^ this for need approues: for what
was it but blind affection which moved Syblis to fall in love with her own
brother? and Mir^ha to fancy her father most of al? or where was affection
when poor Pasiphae was ravished with the sight of a Bull? But how far forth did
fond affection rule in Clisophus, raging ( non mediocri^er) upon an Image at
Samos made of white pacia^ Marble? In Pigmalion, toward a white yuorie image
of naked Venus? and in a young man a Citizen of Athens, who so fervently raged
in fleshly lust toward an image of good fortune, standing at the Prytaneum of
Athens, that most oftentimes he lovingly embraced it, and kissed it most
sweetly, being very desirous to buy it of the Senate, offering for the same a
mighty mass of money? but so outragiously did it reign in the three
Gentlewomen mentioned in ye Courtier, that they fell in love with a gentleman at
the sight of a letter in his co^mendatio^s, whom as yet they never saw. Such is
the force of fond affection. If this be true which stories make plain, what
marvel is it then (fair Lady) that I with the sight of thee am ravished?
whose lively countenance feeds as well mine eye, as did the disputations of
learned men in schools feed the earen of the worthy Emperor Charles the
fourth, who seem in my sight fair Helen of Troy, Polixene, Caliope, yea
Atlanta her self in beauty to surpass, Pandoras in qualities, Penelope and
Lucretia in chastenesse to deface. Oh God why seem I thus thy dower to
disgrace? who seem rather in honor Juno, in wisdom Pallas, in beauty
Venus, in shape of personage Aegeria, in chastity Diana, and to be short, in
huswifery Minerua. Or how durst I presume to lay my based finger upon thy
stately corpse (I unworthy thereof) whose relucent beams as yet Gradatim do
increace, which shows by perfect plea thy courteous heart, and eke thy brave
demeanure therwithal: These fond feigned fancies (quod she) and wanton foolish
eyes deserves a glass of dissemblyng water, but an x, or a nod shall serve
for a due guard, and yet what make you then of beauty by this quoth she?)
Plato defined it lady (quoth he) to be a privilege of nature: Carneades a
solitary kingdom: but Pomitius said, that there was nothing more acceptable
in an honest woman: Aristotle affirmed, that beauty is more worth than all the
letters of commendation: Homer commended it for a glorious gift of nature, and
Quid called it a grace of God. You seemed me thought (said A.O) to define this
upon the beauty of an honest woman: but what think you of a Curtisan? who
answered: their beauty (says Socrates) is a tyranny of short time:
Theophrastu^ a secret deceyte: and Theocritus a delectable damage. This pretty
definition, and clawyng by course of tongue lyked A. O. very well: but
especially to hear her self commended of her bestbeloued before Atlanta, who
sometime bore the bell of beauties price in that her native soil. Wherefore
(his talk being ended) she said, his tongue was made of massiue gold,
inferryng moreover, that Apelles pensell, nor yet Sulpicia the Romayne dame,
were able so to paynte or carue in tables of brass, the stately corpse of Venus
rufflyng Nymphs, as was his tongue their features to discrie. Not so (dear
dame) I would (quoth he) my tongue such vigor had, as to express thy virtues
all which heart could never think, ne pen much less (as I suppose) with
ease might well subscribe, whom Marcia she, that all surpassed has in perfect
work in imagerie, could not her pensell frame in hand thy outward shape to
grave, although in deed (as stories do unfold) she naught did use in those
her living days but caruing work, to paynte, or else to draw the shapes of
those whose beauty was a pattern to behold for rufflyng dames, yet would
she never carue nor draw the shape of any man, least that the sight of carnal
things might raise such carnal lusts, as might abridge her virgins laws.
Such was her chosen pathe. This praising of N.O. his rolling tongue did
encourage him not a little by polished phrase of filed style to feed his
Ladies appetites or humors with some one thing or other, whereby he might
fancy what fancy most required. And therefore fillyng his ladies ears with
words (occasion serving him so) he fell from this treatise into the discourse
of chaste Matrones, as in declaryng how that, when Atropos, Lachesis and
Cloth^e, being the Ladies of the destenie had granted to Admetus king of
Thessalia (at the request of Apollo, being thrown into exile, or rather
banished from the stately throne of the potentiall Gods by force of Jupiters
fearful mace) that what time soever the turnyng spindle had thoroughly twyned
his fatal threede, if any one would take upon him death to awarde King Admetus
his life, his proffer should be accepted to ^^iourne his former wish. This
day being common, and none would yield his life for Admetus his sake, then
Alceste she his true and faithful wife did yield to death for to awarde his
life. Mark how N.O. seeks to frame his tongue altogether in the commendation
and setting forth of women, on whom she incroched in this order. No doubt
N.O. but the like constancy is to be found in men? Alas Madame (quoth he) I
can not for thy sake but say and think well of all womenkinde. Yet could I
say as much as this of men, alluding the one with the other if so occasion
served. And this persuade thy self, whylest life does last, my care shall
greater be of thee than of my self: yea Artemisia her self, was never found
more constant to her make than I will be to thee: although in deed the brute of
blasing trumpe has informed the very skies of her chastity, and fethered her
fame, for that her pure love: who when M^usolus King of Caria, had yielded his
life to the fearful mace of loathsome death, did call for death ten
thousand times to change her state with his, who seeing her suite could not
prevail, in regal sort with princely po^pe enclosed his corpse in tome, yet
did she keep his heart above the ground to keep her company, until
continuance of time had turned the same by course to moultryng duste. Then
putting the same in a cup of wine, she drank it up, saying: while life did
last his heart from hyrs asunder should not part. But soft, hold you here
content (quoth A.O.) and yield to silence for a season, for my vewyng eyes
have seen your paynting pen, and my listnyng ears have heard your rollyng
tongue. But who does know your privy thoughts? not I. Why Lady (quoth he) is
the wind at that door now? then I plainly see the more I seek the less I
find. Sometime your wisdom said, the Diamond cuttes the glass: but as yet
me thinks it has not rased the skin. Which daily co^sumes my languished
lymmes with loathsome life, and inforceth my monyng mind to cry upon my harms
so huge. Yet wisdom warns me to rue and not to rage, still lokyng for that
lingryng hour which should forbid my carping cares. For though thy heart
were made of hard flinte and sturdie steel, yet (as Terence says) N^l tam
difficale est quod non solercia vincat. And eke in time the brazen walls will
starte: which puts me in hope (fair Lady) that (doing as the Poet
Anacrion did by Bathillus, Horace by Ligurius, and the Poets by Numa and
Seruius, who always had them either in their songs, or else at the end of
their pens thou can not but in time yield up the title of thy heart. I
trust (Lady) I have not deserved, that thy love should wax colder and colder
toward me, neither that thy charity should decrease, if so I have, then
use the Adamant stone which (as Dioscorides says) will enforce thee to draw
it down again. But what need I thus to mistruste thy discourtesie? who
already have found thy tongue to be made of pure Alabaster, which perforce
will keep thee in amity and charity with all men: thy lips of Achates of
Crete, which makes thee gracious: and thy face of Ger^tites (not for his
color but for his singular virtue) which makes thee so amiable, that no man
can that sees thee, but he enamoured with thee. Likewise the force of it
(Lady) is such, that who carries it close in his mouth, knows what every
one thinks of him. Wherefore (Lady) I I need not longer to blaze unto thee,
for thou know full well my heart being once set on fire with the pure l^ue
which I bear unto thee (most like to the stone Albeston) can not be quenched
again: neither my mind being once frosen with fear, can by any means but
through thy gracious goodness be thawed again, like to the operation of
Gelacia a very white gem, whose coldness in such, that no ^^re can heat the
same. I well perceive your glosing talk (quoth A.O.) but tell me sir (quoth
she) if your heart continually burn why vadeth it not? who answered, as well
Lady you might have asked me why the hill Aetna which burns day and
night is not mouldered to ashes: or why Enid^^^ being but a little stone
always sweatyng and droppyng, is not turned to naught? who seeing she could
not prevail, said, it is but in vain longer to argue with thee, for I see
thy tongue is made of the pale and wanne stone Calcedon, which greatly
befriendeth your sect in pleadyng your cause at Dame Ve^us her bar. Why lady
(said N.O.) do you take me to be such a cold Orator, that if I could
shake Dan Cup^ds shafte out of my ribs I would? no no, if I had (fair Dame)
the herb Dictamus, or Tragion, planted in my bosom, the growth whereof
should touch my lips, yet would I not taste thereof: although in deed they
auayled as much in man as in the Heart or Dear, who so soon as they feel
the arrowe stick amiddest their ribs, straightfoorth (tastyng thereof) can
shake it forth. Say you so (quoth A. O.) what make you then of love? by this I
compare it Lady (said he) unto a kind of stone called Pirr^tes, which
touching it lightly is tolerable, but holdyng it hard in your hand it
burns your fingers before you are aware: so love being once grafted in your
heart, using it moderately, not caryng who know thereof, is tolerable: but
being a secret kind of love, and seeking by all means possible to bide or
oppress the same, it takes on like ^ bedlem, tormentyng the owner with waves
of woe, and burning his heart with insatiable heat. Wherefore not without a
cause did Socrates will us to divide one Venus into two Venus, and one Cupide
into two Cupids. It is also like unto a gem called Lipparia, which Huntesmen
use to tame their game withal when course of Greyhoundes fayles, the property
whereof is to delight and enamour all kind of beasts with his look and
show, unto the sight whereof they all do hastily run, staying there until
their followers stricke the^ down, so love when nothing can, yet it will all
men tame: so you (quoth she) when no man can, yet you the game will gain. N.O.
knew full well what she meant thereby, and was not a little glad thereof, but
yet because she should know that he understood her meaning (seeing it made so
well for him if at any time hereafter she should deny it) he said: glad am
I (Lady) Kabiates so to favor me, that I should not only seem eloquent in
thy sight, but also win favor of thy grace. But (lady quoth he) seeing the
Music and company breaks off our talk, remember the Proverb, Eat well of
the Cresses. Whereby he meant, remember our talk, for Cresses is an herb
which helps much the memory. Away she went, and naught she said but
mumme. Gentles of all sort both male and female wanted not in this company,
who seeing supper time was paste, they sought to recreate their spirits, some
in dancing, some in cardyng, some in dycing, and some again in pleasantly
arguyng of Ueneriall disputations, but N.O. thynkyng his Lady rather to delight
in dauncyng than in any other exercise there used, (because the property of
most women is to delight in the same) he took his Lady by the tender fiste,
fetchyng her from the place where she satte, and led her a stately dance
called Thias round, a dance sometime dedicated unto Bacchus, whereto the
gentles gave their whole consent, and held by hands a round: It fell by
course N.O. should lead this trace, because he knew it best, the tracyng of
this round required in the middle thereof a conge, which he (forsakyng his
marroll) bestowed upon an other Gentlewoman, holdyng with hands the round,
but not dancing, whether he mistook the one for the other, or thought that at
all times he might be bold to kiss his own though not the other, so well as
then, because the dance was as a cloak to cover the rain as touching his
desire to the same, or the dance so required, I know not: but sure it is A.O.
thought no small discourtesie herein, who for manners sake stayed till the
dance was ended. But then she suddenly departed fro their companies, whom
N.O. perceiving, pursued hastily, desirous to know the cause thereof, to whom
she answered snappingly, One perch may not suff^ce a bird to prone and pry
upon. Who knowing what she meant thereby, preaced to have entered the chamber
to have excused himself, but she lockyng the door, said: Auaunt, Go rouse t^y
self in flaking fern. Who answered, The privy is paste, and flaking fern
does wither. Thus perceiving her froward nature, being very sorrowful, he
went to his company again, and argued with them for a space, least they should
take any discourtesie in his suddayne departure. Their theme was this, whether
he was most in favor with his Lady that receives any thing at her hand, or
he of whom his Lady receives ought. N.O took the first part, and the
other the la^t^^, but N.O. his tongue bare the bell away, it chanced N.O.
talkyng of the dying of women's hear and paynting of their faces (occasion
seruyng him so) he told a Gentlewomen how to clarify her face, and to make
it fair (although he needed not) for Dame nature had played her part)
videlicet with the root of an herb called Dragaunce, beaten to powder and
mingled with rose water. Which coming to his Ladies ears, Noctuas Athenas
misit, or rather Opposuit ignem igni, as it were. But N.O. (freesing as it were
with fear until such time as he had heard and also withstoode the boisterous
blastes of his Lady, hastily cut off his former disputations: and sittyng
close in his chamber, devised these verses followyng in her commendation, to
lay in place where they should be found before they were lost.

Ye Muses nine
With grace divine
My wits to shrine
Give not consent,
But ayding hand
To bear my hand
Through sea and land
For good intent
To rhyme not rail
Hold up my sail
Let not breath fail
the virtuous mode
With trumpe to blase
The condign phrase
Of her who stayed
Where virtue stood.
ALthough of Helicone that well
my tongue has not assayde:
And though the Horn of Acheloye
his knowledge has denayde:
Yea, though Alcinous Orcharde has
his fruit denayde my lore,
Whereby I might the apter be
my landing carme to score:
Yet Arethusa, yield me thine
influence to indite,
And Phoebus sharp my willing pen,
expressly for to write
The blasing feats displaying wise
of Natures darlyng dear,
Whom Virtue she with golden mace
and trumpe does seek to rear.
Yet sith my self by paynting pen
I would so feign disguise,
Lucina grant Apollo may
melodiously devise
My filed phrase, so polished
with Tagus glittring sands,
Whereby her vewyng eyes might think
she read of golden lands.
Ye Gods seclude my rural pen,
and yield a glosing style,
With curious polished phrase,
or
with relucent file,
Of Tullies famous eloquence
To praise her worthy excellence.
Come yield thy leaves thou Laurel tree
to make a garland round:
To Crown her head, and let the trumpe
her flying fame resounde.
Whose features all so many are,
so worthy, and so clear.
That of my self I dare be hold
to say, she has no pear.
Such paynting form, some comely hue
consists in her face,
That from the Gods I well suppose
she may define her race.
Polixene fair, Caliop, and
Penelop may give place.
Atlanta, and dame Lucres fair,
she does them both deface.
The precious orient pearl
so fair and gorgeous clear,
Does testify unto her mates
the whiteness of her leare.
Her lusty, lively gallant looks
with rosed ruby ruddes,
Resembles right to standers off
the pleasant red rose buddes.
Her sweet and eke her sugared lips,
soft, rounded like the berrie,
Right well to me resemble do
the crimson bloomed cherrie.
So that to me poor wretch I count
it were an heavenly bliss,
At such a sweet and sugared mouth
to steal a pleasant kiss.
Her round, fair, and fl^uting cheeks
most
rosedlyke are painted,
What though dame Fortune caused her
front to be attainted?
Perforce each heart with truth must grant,
it can not be denayed,
But that this skar upon her front
was womanly conveyed.
Which seems from a far
To be a radyant Star
Her butned, ruby chinne, her face,
and eke her neck did shine,
As though they were with Iu^ry white
all burnisht marvelous fine.
Her pretty nose is somewhat short,
it well beco^mes her face,
Her fryseled hear in knotted wi^e
is to her front a grace.
Her temples smothe, and eke her veins
stand full of lusty crew.
I liken them therefore as likest
to Indie Sapphire blew.
Her twinkling ey^e both steep and gray,
they seem like Christ all clear.
Her siluery teeth, and golden tongue,
do say she has no pear.
Her fingers are both long and small,
her hands are soft as silk:
The palms thereof are somewhat short,
yet whiter than the milk.
Her comely sides are long and straight,
all shapde in massiue gold.
What heart alive could her deny
with fame to be in^olde?
My heart it does both skippe and joy
to see her trace the ground.
Her feet they are so fine, and feate,
her heels so short and round.
But stay, O Muse, thy golden mace,
and Gange now bedewe
My paynting pen with siluery streams,
that I forthwith may show
What feats within this comely corpse
by parant proof does rest,
I thank thee that thou seemst to grant
at first to my request.
Her courteous heart, and ^owly mind
a^ornde with virtues rare:
Her sober looks with brydeled cheer
does show she has a care
To trace the chaste Dianas laws
as well by deed as thought,
That naught may seem to escape her hands
which virtue has not taught.
Her tongue it rolls in Rethoricke terms
to give each man delighte:
Which ravished has my senseless wits
by cancred Cupids spighte.
Alas poor wretch what should I say?
to look on her again
I may nor can it not abide,
though it is a pleasant pain.
With her aye to remain,
Some hearts ease for to gain:
This blossom of fresh flower
Bears Hearts case for her bower.
A. O. VVorthie to be in rolde, With letters of gold. Car elle vault.


These clawyng verses did N.O. lay in a narrow entry, which led to A.O her
chamber, which according to his expectation (as fortune would) she found in
the morning at her first flighte: which being red, her mind did challenge them
as her right and dew: she made no words thereof, but closed it by again,
mistrusting the author, and maruellyng at the imperfect end thereof, which
N.O. left so raw, because he minded was to greet his Lady with a letter
dependyng upon these former verses, before such time as he spoke with her face
to face, whereby she might the easier judge the author thereof. His mo^ing
letter in manner of complainte thus began.

Which flower fair and fresh in Adones garden saw I gro^:
The sight whereof has ravished me, ill might I it forgo.
But (to my grief) to win the same, no way find out I can:
Wherefore this fragrant flower I might full justly curse and ban,
The sight whereof and pleasant h^^ has forced me to yield
Unto their lore, as Si^enes, whose songs both sweet and mild,
Perforce them to do draw the sailors by, but none escape
Fro them alive, no more shall I: for while with hope I gape
My joys to win, my life departes: what do I then prevail,
Unless I had Vl^sses art, then might I safely sail?
For while through pleasant outward sight I seek for to obtain
My hearts desire, and win it not, what joys do then remain?
I would to God my wit had serude to use that famous grace
Of Percian Kings, who never go^ abroad with open face,
But with some lawne or silken scarf: then it I had not spyde,
The want whereof does force me now in ^orments to abide.
For why? I can not turn my self into a golden rain,
Nor to a Bull, as Gods they can, their pleasure to obtain.
Wherefore thus much, though strange it be, yet justly may I say,
I pleasure take, yet as my foe, it brings me to decay.
For while I pleasure take to see, the sight does me confound:
As does the Gorgon whose fierce eyes do yield a deadly wound.
And when I strive to come away, and leave that pleasant sight,
I seem as though with Hydra fierce that serpent I did fight:
Who lee^^ng one of all his heddes, seven springs in his ryne,
So I through voiding of this sight, seven times my cares do twine,
With (...) I play the Faukner kind, I hallowe, and I whoupe,
I shake my fiste, I whistle shrill, but naught will make her stoop,
Wherefore (though sore against my will) I find the proverb true,
Vnmanned Hawks forsake the lure, which makes me to rue,
I see I swim against the stream, I kick against a good,
I cast a stone against the wind: my tongue that nere abode
To say thee well, my feet to go, my hands to do the like,
Yet you denial give, which does my heart asunder strike.
Yet somewhat would my greedy gripes, and eke my carping cares,
My griping grieves, my sobbing sighs, and eke my tedious tears
Abate, if that but half my heart it would return again:
What does prevail co^plainte or none, for naught thereby I gain?
Yet Poets say that Triton can with sounding trumpe enforce
Each thing that has exceeded bands receive his former corce.
If this be true, then Triton come retreyte with me to blow:
I call in vain, there is no such, the Poets brains did crow.
Yet will I woeful wighte my corpse with steadfast colors clad,
As Russet decte with Blew, as steadfast suites as may be had
To represent my faithful heart, a banner to be true,
And like unto the turtle Dove which changes not for new.
As carped knight thus stands my eace, woe to me woeful wight,
Whose heart is like to Aetna hill which burns day and night.
I spend my time in sobbing sighs, from sighs I turn to ^^ares,
From tedious tears to pensive playnt, and thus my life it wears.
Yea thus the shell of carping care has put my joys to flight:
That joyful times increase my woe, thus do I mourn aright,
And if by chance I hear the sound of song or instrument,
Me thinks the tune that doleful is does help me to lament.
And as the dear which stricken is, does draw himself alone,
So will I seek some secret place where I might make my moan,
Secluding joy, embracing c^^e, the Incresse trade to use
I will incline, who closde in walls no pleasure can peruse.
Each side inclosde, part of my grave my nails shall daily scrape,
In token that my death shall soon reward my cursed hap.
Yet may thou al with ease prevent, if pity takes place,
If not, then doleful dumpes approach to rue my wretched case.
N. O.


N.O. fouldyng up this letter in his chamber, Mistress Angelica one of A.O.
her gentlewomen having occasion to go through his chamber, and seeing him
foulding up these verses, snatched them away from him, but with his consent,
for he knew she would as well show them unto her Mistress, as his heavy
cheer and sad countenance used for the nonce, which was his whole desire.
For if she had not thus used him, he would have laid them in the place of his
other verses, privily stealyng away until such time as this cloud were
ouercast: which in deed he did. For willing the young gentlewoman to remember
her mistress of this phrase, Eat well of the Cresses, unknowing to any in the
house, he secretly went his way. A.O. perceiving the beginning of these
morning verses to depend upon the other poetical commendation, she persuaded
her self then that she perfectly knew the aucthor thereof. N.O. within a day
or two after his sudden departure (as most woers do, sparing no cost) sent
many a precious and costly jewel unto his Lady in token of his great good will
toward her. But she naught regarding the cost (by reason as it should seem
of the easy coming thereby) neglected his gifts, saying: Each bird can have
corn in the harvest time, meaning thereby (as I think) that while she lived
in that order, she could not want what might so easily be commen by, what
soever it cost. Whereupon he remembryng the commendation which sometime she
set upon a rare and sumptuous jewel which Venus wore upon her front, whose
like for virtue was not to be found again, and remembryng the common Proverb
and usual experience, Far fette and dear bought do fancy Ladies most of
all, he sought by all means possible that might be invented, some pretty
device whereby to get the same. Who seeing the wild horses to have gotten
their raynes at will from unskillful Phaeton, who wilfully would have the
guyding of the Chariot which carried the radyant Sun about the world: and
knowing the same of force to provoke a great hurlyburly among the Gods and
Goddesses in heaven, repaired thither in haste, whom according to his
expectation he found almost besides themselves, fearyng the consumyng both
of Heaven and Earth by fire. Where seeing the Goddesses most of all skuddelyng
and sekyng to defend themselves longest from smothering, he besought Diana
upon his knees, as she loved her natural daughter, to help him with the
same. Who being moved with pity, willed him to go unto Venus, tellyng her
that her temple is set on fire, and Cypres where she was worshipped most of
all is consumed to naught, whereat (quoth she) she will not only rende her
clothes, but also (neglectyng where) cast them here and there, which when you
see her do, take the Jewel and go your way. This precept lyked N.O. very
well, who (doing as she had commanded him) found each thing to fall out in
all respects according unto her deuination before, wherefore he taking up this
Jewel, departed with great joy and gladness, and sent it unto his Lady for a
token, who knowing it at the first sight, received it joyfully, although in
the bryngers sight but scornefully, by reason of her cloked countenance: for
giuyng the servant thanks, and rewardyng him liberally, she sent his Master
none at all. Thus each man may see, though the lovers purse be strung with the
blade of a leeke, as the Poets feign by Cupide dreaming of their to much
liberality, yet nothing will please the froward minds of their Ladies, if
affection bear not a stroke among them, or else the gift be as hardly won
as this. For Venus perceyuyng her Temple to stand, and the I Will of Cypres as
yet unwasted, and seeing the Father of Phaeton had taken upon him again the
guydyng of the Sun (at the earnest request of Jupiter) waxed very wroth,
with the misinformer of these things, sendyng Circes with a cup of all kind
of diseases to plague him for the same. Which he through the advice of his
stepmother Dian^ utterly refused. But Venus further perceiving the Jewel
whereof she set such great store, to be taken fro the place where she
flung her upper garments, and knowing well the bereauer thereof (for nothing
unto the Gods and Goddesses are unknown) she turned him for his suttlety in
stealyng the same into a wily Fox. But Diana (perceiving the same) werried
him incontine^tly with her hounds, and of his blood restored his shape again.
Then fearing the discovery of her daughter for wearing the same: she changed
not only the color, but also the property of the jewel, even as it hanged on
her daughters front: So that dame Venus knew not what was become thereof. But
( ad propositum) whether these moning verses of N.O. moved his Lady to pity or
no, I can not tell, but sure they might, for the thing it self was pityfull.
Nothing she said of a long time: but yet the smothering fire at length breaks
forth in flame. For she seeing his long absence, and hearing in deed how
heavily he took the matter, greatly regardyng also his gifts in token wise,
could not refrain, but spent her days in sobbing sighs for woe, and being
about somewhat to have written unto him, whereby he might have taken hearty
grace, these verses following came unto her hands.

THe fountain Granus gives strength unto the weakened bone,
And eke the force of Spawe does help al those yt have ye Stone.
Who has the lither Fever, runs to Padoa for help,
And to Veronas well he hies whose want of blood does yelpe.
Yet as by proof Buckestones do stand, to those that here does dwell,
In steed of Grane, and Padoa, of Spawe and Verone well:
So might thou hearts ease be to me, that al these things do need,
In steed of Buckstones present help, if so it be thy meede.
For why? I sink in Syrtes sands, through tasting Circes cup,
Unless thou speedy help wilt bring by chinne to hold me up.
For tangled thus in Scyllas bands, and whelmde in Lethe lake,
Who can me help but thou alone? it is only for thy sake.
If naught may breed remorse, nor make your stony heart relent,
Then may I wake, and wayle the night, my bed with tears be sprent.
Then may I say as Atlas did, I bear this waighte in vain.
My thirste does likewise say, I may with Tantalus complain.
Then may I say as Sisiphus, I toil to none effect,
As Theseus, and Ticius, with other of my sect.
Then is thy love a Labyrinth unto me for my liking:
Whom great good will has grauelled, since Cupid fell a striking.
But yet in time I hope to find such mercy at thy hand:
That where thy wrath sometime bore sway, thy friendship once shall stand.
If not,
Then,
What Cloth^ does on distaste place for Lachesis to twyne,
Come Atropos with speedy pace to bring the same to fine.
N.O.


Which red, be dewyng her pen with privy tears, she answered thus:

A.O. to recomfort her lover again.
THy sudden departure ( N.O.) seemed somewhat strange unto me, and stranger
would have seemed, if not thy pen and deeds bewrayed had the cause thereof.
As touching the which thou know right well ( N.O.) the Hawk which seems
to check at fiste, deserves well the loss of silver belles, but yet, as thou
seek so shalt thou find, I thyrste for no man's blood. Your wound as yet
is green, and I no Surgeon am, but yet if so you grant your self my pacient
for to be, if that to heal your grief my art may stand in steed, behold
good will is priest this cure to take in hand. I have not much to say, but
where your wound does find his cure, in them repose your trust. And look
who gave the sore, let them provide the salve. Thus fare you well from my
lodge where I march in dumpes of musing mind.

As cause does serve your l^yall she A. O.


What better could have pleased N.O. than this? or who could give a better
salve? who could have given a better drink, or Physic to the sick? whose
languisht lymmes forthwith recovered strength: whose wounds and sores
forthwith shoke off their pain. For findyng a present remedy after the
readyng hereof, his poor palfreys took small rest until such time as he
had washed his hands in the lively draw of his Ladies countenance: who
gretted her in this sort. Al hayle (fair Lady) whom proof declares most
full of grace, I see in time the brazen walls will starte, and wa^rishe
drops do pearce the craggie flynte. By this you seem said A.O. to condemn
my body for brazen walls, and my heart insclosed for stony flinte. Not so Lady
(said N.O) for if it were, I would not doubt but that in time my sorrowful
sighs, and sk^ldyng tear^s would pearce the same. Who answered, your salt and
brynish tears they need not in this case, for if I have anoynt^d your p^la^^
wi^h hope, spitte on your hands and take good hold my brains ar washed with
Cr^sses juice, and mine honor forbids my words to ^^ue. I thank thee Lady
(quoth he) for this thy undeserved courtesy, the which my deeds can not
repair, much l^sse my thanks may w^ll require. Whose constancy and
s^^^^litie forbids Penelope to be thy mate, and warns me (as per^orce
constrained thereunto by the wonderful juice of the herb Nymphs to give my
daily attendance upon thee, not being able to starte from the place where this
thy constant body r^steth. I crave no more at thy hands (Lady) but the
fulfilling of thy letter: thou gave me the sort, wherefore provide the salve.
Who answered, show me thy wound and I will show my salve. But he not able
this to do, said, my wound is inwardly, therefore thy outward eyes can not
perceive it. Describe it then (quoth she) who willing thereunto said, Dan
Cupids dyrefull darte divided has my heart in twain, the one half consists
in thee, the other does remain. Why then be hold thy salve (quoth she) Manus
manum fricat, call back thine own again, else take thou half of mine to
recompense the same. But N.O not so content, said: Isidore affirms the
liquor or juice of malowes being tempered with cla^my oil, anointed upon man's
body forbids the s^ing of Bees: and Diosc^^ides likewise testifies, that
wild R^e being applied to any part of man, no Scorpion can sting or wound
him, or if it do^, it can not prevail: which ointment (Lady) or wild Rue if
it were auayleable or of the like force against the sting of Love, yet should
not my body once taste thereof. By this you seem (said she) to agree with
Plato, who in writing set down that the sudden passions and extreme rage of
fervent lovers was not only to be embraced, but also to be desired and wished
for, as the happiest and most blisfull life of al. Who answered, I grant
hereunto: and sithence (Lady) Dan Cupid has enforced me to bestow half my
heart upon thee (whereof I do not repen^e me) I willing am to bestow the
other half upon thee, as a thing most necessarily dependyng on the former, to
retain life within my crased corpse. Wherefore, as you said before, One good
turn requires an other, so say I now, Render like for like. Who (not willing
to make him such an absolute answer: (forsakyng her text) said: If thy
heart remain in me, how can thy life retained ^ee? N.O. (not being to seek
of his answer) said: I die in my self and live in thee, for where the heart
is entered, there the life remains: but my heart is in thy corpse, Ergo my life
consists in thee. Who denying his Minor, he answered: I mean not really but
effectually. A O. (mistrustyng more than she needed) would not seem to
grant over hastily, but seeking the pithe and ground of every thing, asked
him, what if thy friend bestow an acre of ground upon thee (not having
proof thereof) you plowe it deep, you harrow it well, and bestow good sethe
thereon, and yet (not falling out according to your expectation) it yields no
fruit to requite your labor, much less the seed bestowed thereon? N.O.
(perceiving her mystical proposition) answered thus: Lady (as Tull^^ says)
Non nob^^ solum nati sumus, portem potria, partem liberi, and partem amici
vendicant, wherefore (supposing my self to be borne rather for the pleasure of
thee, than to mine own use) I am content to yield my self thy man and not
mine own. And as touching the acre of bareyn ground whereon thy proposition
depends, be it never so mean, so simple, or of so small a value, the good
will of the giver and not the gift is to be accepted. Yet Lady I would be
loathe (if otherwise I might choose) To spend my seed in vain as ^xion lunos
Secretary whilom did. But not withstandyng, S^rs sua ^uique est, wherefore my
destiny appointed I am content therewith. Me thinks you bend to much
(quoth she) for to intend to good. Who answered, the sweter the Violet the
more he bendes to the ground. But N.O. not so content, de^^rous to knit^e
such a sure knotte of amity before they departed. as should not be broken
without the loss of life, preaced on further, saying: I know (dear Dame) if
it were thy pleasure to shake me of, thy comely personage, thy courteous heart,
thy lowly mind, thy friendly cheer, thy cherefull countenance, and eke thy
brave demeanor therewithal, deserves to match with one whose feet stands
higher than ever my head will reach: yet (Lady) where true love, friendship,
and charity remains, there goods can never want. Wherefore though I want
the pomp of Caesar, the goods of Craesus, the wealth of Crassus, the gold of
Midas, and the excessive treasure of Artalus the old, yet hope I still a
blis^ull life to lead. Who answered, They live not most at ease that have the
world at will, but they whom true love has united and (...) together do
lead the pleasant life: for, (as Salus^ testifies) Concordia paruares
crescunt, discordia maxima dilabuntur. Which is, by concord small things grow
to great, and discord makes great things small. N O. liked this well, yet
being in the vain of hope, he was not content to feed his eyes with the sight
of his Lady, and his ears with the pleasant words which flowed forth of her
sugared mouth, yea, sweeter to him than the honey or the honey comb, said, these
words (Lady) make me leap for joy, transporting my corpse (as it were) to
Paradise, placing my mind in a Pallaice of pleasure, rocking my wits in a
Cradle of security, and penning up my heart in a Castle of comfort, yet
(Lady) God grant I play not as the swan of Menander or Apolloes bird, who
joyfully sings before his death, even when the pangs themselves draw near.
For this we see, the Ca^te delights to play a long time with the mouse her
prisoner, before she enioyes his death. A. O. looking frowningly, bending her
brows, and scowling with her eye liddes like unto Pallas, who can no otherwise
do* for that she was engendered of the brains of Jupiter, who always are
troubled and vexed, answered, am I the Ca^^e by whom thou meanest? N.O
perceiving her bending brows* turned himself about, as though he had been
anoyed with some impediment, and lifting up his hands and (...) said with a
soft voice, Juno lucinafer opem, which said, he turned his face again, and
answered her in this sort, Lady ^e not offended, for my words beseem me
very well, intending none evil: my meaning is this, if thou should (as
Terence says) Verba mihi dare, vel me fucum facere, then might I justly
condemn thee comparing thy words to the nature of a Cockatrice, whose breath
alone suffiseth to minister death. She (hearing this) asked him if women's
words deserved such light credence at his hands? whereat he stood as Mutus
illico, which I suppose was, because this sentence was printed in his mind,
Mulieri ne credas ne m^^tuae quidem. Likewise she demanded further of him
whether her mouth seemed to pronounce the bitter words of Achilles, which he
used leaning over ye walls of Troy, or the sweet words of h^ary N^stors
mouth. Who answered, Tullie says: Non solium, vtrum honestum an turpe sit,
deliberari solet: sed etiam, duobus propositis us ^onestis, vtrum honestius,
ite^que duo bus propositis vtilibus, vtrum vtilius. Not withstanding (Lady)
seeing the two latter questions want, it rests to infer upon the former
proposition, which sith (as Tullie says) it deserves no deliberation (for
blind men may judge the difference of contrarieties) I awarde my judgment by
this affirmatio^: the buzzing bees which flew about Platoes mouth, sleeping
in his cradle, have likewise left part of their honey in thy mouth, which
proves rather it to pronounce the sweet words of Naestor, then the bitter
talk of Achilles: which Bees likewise sitting upon the mouth of Anbrose being
a child without hurting him, I gather thereby, thy words proceeding of their
relicte honey, pretends me no evil. At this she held her peace* whereby N.O.
(remembering this phrase, Qui cacet conse^tire videtur,) understood her meaning
as touching that point, yet she (perceiving his insatiable thirste in having
an absolute answer) willed him to spend the night in pleasant conceytes, and
in the morning to repair unto her for their final composition. N.O granting
her the advice of her pillow, seemed content, breaking off their talk for that
time (supper time especially moving thereunto) which ended, and the board
discovered, N.O. after his old wont and accustomed manner, provoked the whole
congregation and common assembly of gentilitie, some to one kind of pastance,
and some to another, to driu^ away with hasty foo^e the long and weary winters
night. But he and his Lady, the one taking his Lute in hand, and the other her
Sytherne, tuning and setting them both to one note, sang distically three
slaves to their instruments in this sort: N. O. beginning, A. O. follows,
craving aid of the Muses and chief Musitions.
He NOw Venus with your ruffling Nymphs
Keep back Dianas dearlings dear:
And Muses grant your ayding impes,
Our strings to tune and notes to rear:
With perfect deawe of Helicons well.
Where Poets feign your Muse to dwell.

She Orpheus with thy Harp in hand,
Arion also with the like,
Wrinche up your strings, and make them stand
In egall height: Amphion strike
Thy twinkling Harp with fingers small,
That joyful tunes may rise withal.

He Me thinks I hear Apollo grant
Melodiously for to devise,
And Venus bid Minerua vaunt,
So that no doleful dumpes may rise:
The Muses likewise (granting aid,)
Do bid strike up, thus none denayde.



These three slaves they sang distically, both playing* the one and the other
by course singyng, nothing meaning thereby but as a preamble or rather an
introduction of their song following, to clarify their throats, endeuoryng
the concord of their instruments.

She WHat man does longer think, than he,
the weary winters night,
Whose cares forbiddes his eyes to sleep?
what is a greater spighte
To him who thinks he sails in seas
whose waves of honye are,
Yet time purloynes his former joy,
and brings him to despair?

He With gasing eyes for him to look
which has no care to come
To serve where no acceptance is
(as Ladies deal by some)
To be in bed and not to sleep,
what greater grief then this?
To die for want of food, and yet
he feeds on dainty dishe^

She To rue and rage, to fry and freese,
these are the lovers panges:
Who dies himself and lives in her
his life in suspense hangs.
Yet if he live in after hope
his Ladies love to gain,
Then holds his heart, and rendeth not
by direful darte in twain.

He Hapt looks for requitance made
which oftentimes does fail,
Or else to gain his heart again
which were a luckie gayle.
But less than seldom scene it is,
what given does not return,
From women's hands, who rather had
to fry then else to turn.

She But what if neither seem to come,
and hope begins to faynte?
Then seem they all to weep and wayle,
and tears with streakes does paynte
Their lether cheeks are (proof declares,)
stale nature to provoke,
Whose heart oppressed with scalding sighs,
their throats does seem to choke.

He Thus witless wightes do breed their woe:
yea, riper years and settled heddes
Herein do want their skoking points,
whose glauncing eyes by rule forbeddes.
Thus trapte they let these words to fly:
oh get my grave in readiness,
Remediless I die, I die,
I die remediless.

Finis.
While they this pithie song did sing, who seemed (to those whose te^tiue ears
were distilled with a greedy desire of hearing) to have tasted of the fountain
Tharsa: the force whereof not only clarifieth the voice, but also makes it
seem both pleasant and armonious: certain of the other young gentles both
male and female were arguing hard between themselves as touching this point.
How the poisonous Serpent, or rather venomous snake named Chelidros, can not
only give an odorous smell, but also cause the ground whereon she slides to
cast the like sweet savor and pleasant scent, being of himself through
outward appearance both foul and ugly as all men know: which N. O.
perceiving, and seeing them through their (...) opinions and erroneous minds
tangled as it were with Vulcanes nets, stepped in among them, easily
absoluing their obstinate doubts, which being absolved, they brake off
company, marching each one toward their chambers. But N.O thinking of things to
come, could not frame himself that night to sleep: wherefore rising somewhat
early in the morning, he walked a pretty space in a grove buttyng or adjoining
upon the house, castyng as it were all such objections unto himself as he
thought by any means she could object unto him in the morning, (which done)
he labored earnestly to premeditate such answers as might refell the same.
But being soon weary thereof, he returned again: and standing in the door of
the Hall of common assembly (none as yet sturring in the house save he alone)
he talked to himself as touching the great desire which he had of his good
success, which Dan Echo (never sleeping) cut off diffusedly by the latter
syllable. N.O. perceiving this division of vocables, thought good to note the
sense thereof, because (said he, as some say) it imports not a little to the
Prognostication or foreshewing of things to come. Wherefore framyng his words
in this order unto himself, he noted Verbatim the clipping sound of Echo.

N. O. his Echo. Echo
God grant I may prevail: for words I will not spare. Spare
What: should I spare to speak or not? not
But will she hear, and grant me thereunto? to
What then should let at large to speak? speak
I grant: I will most boldly try obeying thee: thee
For Fortune says adventure winnes the game. game
Thus if Dan Ecch tells me as it is: is
Then hope does say, fear not, the game is won. won.
N. O. seeing his talk or rather surmise ended with full sense, spared not to
conster the meaning of Echo, whose carpyng sillables being placed in order
Verbatim wise, as his hollow voice pronounced them, tended to this sense: Spare
not to speak, the game is won.
Which encouraged N. O. to speak more at large, who was so friendly cheared
on, wherefore he issued forth once more in this order.

Echo
If fear oppress, how then may hope me shield? shield
Denial says, vain hope has pleased well well
Meaning (...) his (...).
But as such hope thou would not be thine, thine
So would I not the like to rule my heart heart
For if thou love, it biddes thee grant forthwith with
Which is the joy whereof I live in hope. hope.
N.O. placing these words in order, picked forth this sense therein, shield
well thine heart with hope. But behold, they were no sooner ended, and the
meaning thereof constered (which A. O. had heard with the whole discourse
unknowing to her paragon, for that her chamber and eke the head of her bedstead
buried upon the hall) then she replied with a shrill and hollow voice in
manner following: which N O. (supposing it to have been the oracle of Apollo)
in steed of an Echo resounded the latter syllable himself.

The conceytes of A.O. N O. his reviving.
The has of love allured not: why did thou has therein? In
What was ye meaning, tell forthwt? may love the stand instead? stead
If that it may, I yield it thee: fear not to trust thereof, of
But arm thy self from top to toe, yea, arm thy self with hope, hope,
For whom ye love I dare report they will requite thy love, love
And though (...) wight would it withstand, yet I it never shall: shall
If it descent then leap for joy I may thy love requite. requite
And if you seem to ask for why? I answer thee for thy, thy
For I am she I say again that will requi^^ thy pain. pain.
N.O. (hearing this fell in a trance for joy, persuading himself that he
naught else but dreamed: but speedily recovering his former senses again, began to vewe the note which he took of these verses with his pen in manner
of Echoes replication: the sense whereof agreyng in all points with the former
allusion, enforced him to put no small trust and confidence in this di^mation.
Yet could he not persuade himself whether he dreamed all this while or no,
(although he knew of a certentie his eyes winked not) by reason of this vn^oth
sound. But if he dreamed I know he wished it of longer continuance: and if it
were a perfect voice, much more he wished it longer to have been dilated.
Which according to his wish fell forth: for behold, once more it sou^ded in
his tentiue ears in manner following, which he in former manner most
diligently noted.

A.O. (...) second allusion. The second (...).
From whence I come, and what I am, you wish to know: it is I. I
Yea, what I would, and what I mean, this stand you loking for. for
It hoteth not to show the same: and why? I say for thy: thy
And vow, the end of all these things shall render love for love. love
Than this, how can y^ ask for more, each thing to please thy will? will
Can any living wish for more, than good for good to render? render
who lokes for more through follies rule, it is sure, he knows not love love
To stop thy mouth, and end withal, look to have love again. again.
It this full stop, N.O. sought the allusion of these posterior sillables:
which yielding him greater joy than heart could think, as well this, as the
other agreyng in dependant sense, just feet, and perfect Meter, he rated thus
beginning with the former rebecke.

In steed of hope love shall requite thy pain:
I for thy love will render love ^gayne.
This animation not mislykyng him. guarded as it were in a Castle of comfort,
and clothed with garments of hope, there wanted no diligent attendaunce in him
to give unto his Lady as she had willed him in hope to receive his final
answer. Which according to his expectation most happily fell out. For
impartyng a rare salutation upon her, she said, Good morrow my Trust, whereby
he seemed to gather in more and more, using this kind of speech or
familiarity with her. Lady, the courtesy of P^ometheus has yielded me a body
shaped with moulde, which craves life not of Pythagoras quaternion, but of
thy courteous heart. Which if I receive not of thy gracious goodness, then
may my mo^ing mind soiourne with Pythagoras his opinion, who for diverse
pretenses being transformed into diverse shapes and likenesses, as to a king, a
woman, a horse, a fish, and a frogge, yea, to sundry other shapes, as to a
sponge and such like, commended yet all things before the life of man, as
Grillus, who had rather lie gruntyng in a sly with swyne, than change his
state with man. Who answearyng said, I see N.O. thy flesh is naught to heal,
yet fear thou not, for every grief I have a salve in store, and eke good will
is pressed to do the best he can. Who hearing these gentle offers. said, then is
it no masterie for me (Lady) with streaking arms to swim in a sea of honny,
seeing it has pleased thee of thy gracious goodness with tender fiste to hold
me up by the chinne. A. O. replied, I see you build your Castles in the air.
But yet no doubt their fundations may light on the ground. But he desirous to
make short work thereof, said, Lady, some on^ has written upon this gallerie
door, Veni, vidi, who it was I know not, but yet the meaning thereof I partly
conjecture: suffer me as a testimonial that the foundations of my forebuylded
castles shall light upon the ground, to make full and perfect sense of this
phrase, doing either as ^^lius Caesar did, who valiantly and most victoriously
conquering his enemies wrote upon his shield as follows, Veni, vidi, and
vici, or else as the Emperor Charles the fifte, who taking John Frederick
duke of Saxony prisoner, though i^ deed with great difficulty by reason of
his valiantness, Veni, vidi, and dominus Deus vicit. A. O. desirous to see if
Lady Fortune in choice so coy, would him to be her mate or no, seemed not
incontinently to grant, but said, Vici sir knight is eminent to conquestes
gotten by dazing din^e of dyrefull darte, by force of battered shield, by
pushe of pike, by glitteryng sword, or else by pealing shot of gunne,
wherefore whatsoever the authors meaning was thereby, yet Vici in your sense in
no wise may aptly he alluded thereunto. Who answered, might it please thee
(Lady) to yield up unto me the whole interest and title of thine heart, I
would not only think and say, but also prove that no victorious conqueror
nor valiant knight (be his conquest never so great or manfully foughten by
force of arms) might better returning from the field, cause this phrase Veni,
vidi, and vici, to be graven or importered upon his arming shield. Then might
I pronounce the same at the end of my tongue: which winning so worthy a Lady
by the glosing talk thereof, deserves in my judgment a brau^ch of Laurel
tree before the clinke of ha^nesse clapte on back, or arming weeds that
battered tower and town. For Tullie says, Cedant arma toga concedat Laurea
ling^ae. The words whereof flying faster and swifter than does the teacher of
Ganders quill, enters and perceth sooner the heart of any wighte, than does
the force of any glidyng shafte. But behold (these words not fully
pronounced) (...). not minding thus easily to be shaken off (most like to the
toothlesse dog and grudgying that any one should reapt the seed where
sometime his senses were content with the fragrant flowers thereof, wrote unto
N.O. this letter following, wherein he did not only accuse the Lady of a
former grant or promise made unto him, but also offered to gage his glove with
tooth and nail, to hazard life and limme if (so occasion served) to prove the
same.

I.I. unto N.O.
MArs though he was the first that Venus overwhelmed: yet did he ride
unknown in ridden boots. Gnawe on this bone, all is not gold that
glistereth, the (...) mouse mistrusting naught, is trapte in sugered hayte, she
has her wish, she sails in the dew of Apolloes kyne. But yet at length, her
sail being rent, and dares broken, she duckes, she dyues, yea, yea in her
most desired haven she swims without her breath. You think you are the first
which has the grant of A.O. her love. Not so, your Hawk is mewed, and twice
reclaymed, she wethered is, and ma^ned well. She needs not sore alofte. I did
reclayme her soring flighte, I manned her and mewed her well, in recompense
whereof. I had her former grant: but seeing at the first she stouped unto thy
lure, I was content to take her belles and let her fly. If this you think I
feign or any part thereof, herein, I gage my glove, swearing by the Sergian
poole, and eke by Jupiters fearful mace, not only to answer all comers in
this case, but also to stand in destaunce with all gainesayers. Neither do I
repent me herein, but rather think dame Pallas streaked mine oar as well in
this case, as did Ulysses prevail through her counsel against the Syrenes in
stopping his Mariners ears with wax^, and binding himself to the maste of the
ship. Her sugered words persuades you not to believe my pen: but yet time
tries truth, and therefore tr^e and trust. Thus fare you well, from my lodge
oppressed with Ti^iphone.

Yours, if Mars so will. I.I.


THis letter caused N.O. to scratch where it itched not. Which A.O perceiving,
not changing her modest countenance, said: I see the proverb is true* who will
she curnell of the nut must b^^ake the shell. But yet (as Terence says) who
speaks what he list, must hear what be lists not. Which N.O. hearing,
said, why (Lady) ca^ you gainsay these words? or know you not ye man? who
answered, thought is free, ^ words are but wind, although in this case they
lie as logs before my feet to stu^ble at in ye dark. But yet, I know in this
midst of darkness, truth will be a lantern for me. I cannot stop his mouth,
neither forbid, yet may I reprove his pen, condemn his yrefull heart, and
also with his former quill ref^ll his now debated mind: in token whereof
behold here, how rudely he r^^ed upon me in his former letter, because I
seemed not to grant what (...) he craved has. Also for a further proof
hereof, this raw sentence, Veni, vidi, which you se^ here written, was his own
h^ndy work at his last departure from me, because in deed he tried his wits
in vain. If this you believe, in token thereof to make full sense, set vici,
hereunto. N.O. thanking his Lady in most humble manner, felt not the ground
whereon he stood till this he had done, and done, he whispering the messenger
in his ear, willed him to carry his martial glove unto his master (as unto
one unknown) in token that according to the subscriptio^ of his letter, he
minded was in such a place, at such an hou^e of such a day, to encounter with
him personally, man to man in the defense of his Lady. Thus rewarding well the
fellow, be willingly departed, A.O. was very inquisitiue (as most women are of
their husbands affairs) what answer he had sent in this ence. But N.O
(fearyng the worste) not certifying her of the truth (as wise men will do)
said, he willed him to commend him unto his master (as unto one unknown
saying, not trustyng his spiteful pen, I took great scorn to answer the
pen: she points thereof. A.O. thinkyng each sore to be thoroughly salurd, seemed
herewith content (and occasion seruyng her so) she brake off company for that
time. N.O. likewise preased into the company of the young youths, because as
yet the hour was not comen for the Instie young gentlewomen to rouse from
slothful sleep: whom finding idle for want of some Dallida to make them
whette their poetical tongues, and taking pity that such ripe heads, sharp
wits, and fine tongues should be as it were anulled for want (as I said
before) of some wanton and toying Dallida, or else of some lusty young Phaon to
provoke their solitary company either to laughter or else to some youthful
exercise (leauyng such questions as intended to the Love, because the chiefest
orators and greatest arguers as touching that point were not in place) he
deuidyng the route in two companies, propounded two moral questions in manner
followyng. First if the fragilitie of terrene nature, or the terestriall life
of man may aptly bend and yield, or with facility frame themselves to the
information of this phrase penned by Tulli^ in his fourth book of Tusculanes
questions, Videlicet, Dummodo ^oleat aliquid, doleat quod lubet. The second
alluded in the same book, if nature may and can consent to Tullie his
exhortation herein, Nihilo plus aga^ quam sides operam vt cum ratione insani^^:
that is, first if pleasure may displease? and then if men may crave with
reason? which two pretty points held them tugge with hard hold until
such time as the Ladies of pleasure were sturryng, which was about dinner
time, for (as Terence says) Dum comuntur annu^ est. But then (no doubt) as
the company changed, so their talk altered: for sure (in my mind, the
company of men is nothing worth, if women be not in place, whose payntyng
form and lively sh^pes imports such virtue, as suffices alone to make an
eloquent tongue: for proof declares their fair words makes fools sayn^.
especially be they somewhat snoutefayre and cleanly, under the clo^e whereof
let them use what pride they will. But Phabu^ restrayning the raynes of his
breathless horses in the midway of his circut^ or round circle to stay his
chariot wheels withal, these lusty Ladies then (^oary Hyem^ forbidding the
liberty which otherwise Lady (...) would have provoked them unto began to
reason earnes^ly as touching the great affection which Plato, Pythagoras, and
Democritus bare unto learning, whom they say, traueled into all the parts of
the world wherein any thing was that might or could be learned. But
afterward, one nail driuyng forth an other, they fell in great admiration at
the sudden and short anger of lovers, which N O. said, fair Ladies used for
the renewing of love, but the women snarring at this, defined it in this order.
First (said they) the humors and sprites of lovers b^ing exceeding ^ote and
continually boiling, does contaminate their wits, and then earnestly shooting
at one mark, the wagging of a straw (think they) hinders the ^ight thereof.
But seeing the occasions of their anger are small, they endure the lesser while.
(These reasons being allowed of all sides) N.O (remembering the loyalty which
he ought unto his amorous paramour) suddenly departed (unknowing to the Ladies)
to get those things in a readiness which should perform the gaging of his
glove. Which were not so soon prepared, but as soon he had conquered her
enemy (having the best end of the staff in his hand) but A. O. maru^^^ng
hereat, mistrusted forthwith the veriti^, and fearyng the worste, her flesh
tremblyng, her pulses beat, her sinowes shro^ke, each part fell nu^me, her
lively blood descended, her deadly face bring wanne, her color came and went,
the crampe ouertooke her feeling. her sheuering nails started, her saphyre
veins racked, her joints in order cracked, yea her eyes staring, the yellow
hair of her hedde stood vprigh^ thus was she ^^lly soul racked, from
extreme agonies to tormenting woes, from dyning p^ngs to gryping grieves, from
greedy grypes to carpyng cares, from plunging paynt to sorrowful sighs, from
scalding sobbes to tedious ^eares, from thence to pensiu^ playnt. What better
did become her case then monyng weeds to ^ladde her corpse? who cried and
wished ten thousand times, that earth it might enclose the same. Thus
(abandoning each joy with pensinenesse) she enclosed her crased corpse within
her solatarie chamber, until such time as her victorious Pa^agon was returned
again. The sight of whom conducted home in safety, recomforted her moning
mind. Such was her whole desire to counteruayle his love. Who finding his Lady
in such a perplexity, rollyng and sweltung as it were in sudden pass^o^s of
the mind, or rather in extremity of raging woe, refrayned not his tongue, but
said: Is this the Target of Me usa (Lady) to blase thy chastity in mine
absence? why speak you not? is this the spear and shield of Pallas to
encounter with my Martial deeds? what sudden chance is this? what nothing
but mu^me? thou know quoth he) the fountain Epy^^^ is not far hence,
dippe thy fingar and b^the thy tongue therein, the water whereof suffiseth to
extinguishe thy sorrow newly lightened, and likewise to lighten thy pleasures
lately extinguished. Who answered, esteem not my silence a banner of defiance
(my Lord) neither blame my heart but good will, for these my spring^ of tears.
But tell me sir (quoth ^he) have you tasted of the flood Dalmatida since your
departure, that you seem more amorous, than in times paste or did our presence
breed anoy? N.O maruellyng hereat* said: Let this suffice (Lady) the
valiantness of Mars made him better esteemed of Venus, then Vulcane that
halting lymphalt smith given her in marriage. What need you range thus far
(quoth she?) her^in you seem to blaze your self after the Poetical paynting
of the rural God Pan, to trotte on gotishe feet. (Whose patience being
somewhat moved hereat) answered, either you have mistaken my words (Lady) or
else misconstered my meaning: for w^ereas I seemed before, more boldly than
wisely) to say the valiantness of soldiers to be greatly accepted of
courageous women* and also had of great price and in no less veneration of
dayntir Dames: my meaning was thereby, yt the trial of my manhood and
souldierly grace, makes me rather to resemble now the amarous B^^all unto
thee, than I did before. Well well (quoth she by this I see the mount ^f Mars
was elevated at your entrance into the field. I found it so (quoth he) and
also the mount of Venus not declyned when I first repaired unto this Castle
of comfort. Who courteously inferred. the lusty gre^ne of Lady Ver enforced
your heart to live in hope. Yea (Lady said he) and the want of chaungeable
colors makes me not to mistrust inconstancy. For as thou have unfolded me
often in thy colors white and black: so have I replied white and blewe. But
behold, I.I. knowing their knotte of amity to be steadfastly knitte
(pretending much evil and mischief) sought many a pret^e, yet croftie and
subtle devised mean is reduce himself (forgettyng his former derogation) into
the former and accustomed league of amity, not only with A. O. but also with
her lately gained paragon (not in the way of preferment, for why, he knew it
was in vain, and se^^ed also very well content therewith) but only to use her
friendship, if so he sl^^de in need thereof, as he would her to make hold
with him, in the like case, if occasion served. Whereunto they seemed to
grant, being very well content therewith, and not mistrusting his spiteful
heart, which so he showed with sweet and fugered words. Thus as it were a
new feigned friendship my ^ed between them: it chanced upon a time being
merely disposed, he told Angelica for want of other talk, or else (as I
think) of better matter, that her beauty made her a torcht bearer, and that
beauty her self was but a ^ugered bayte confected of gall and honny, bearing
inwardly the contrary to her outward importance (most like to the double
images of Alcibiades) for look what bears life without (said he) enclosed
death within: wherefore it ought to hear in his mouth a scrolle, whereon should
be written this phrase Far and near. This wanton, but not lasciuions talk,
she forthwith (according unto the nature of most women, who can hardly keep
any thing se^re^e: for the greater the weight thereof, y^ greater is their
desire to tell it, who thinks they should burst if they should not ^a^e their
stomach with y^ telling thereof) carried unto her mistrisse her cares. which
was no sooner told her, but she straightforth preased into his company to hear
his former allu^^^, or rather (as I might justly term it) illusions. I.I.
seeing hi^ desirous of his company (thinking to have sped the better with his
enterprise) was very glad thereof, and walking together alone in a place (as he
thought most ^^tte for his villainy) that is, to defloure her, for this was his
only seking) he told her he bore a hungry Hawk upon his fiste without any
alteration of his countenance, yea, with a bold and impudent face,) who for
want of a Feasant or Partridge, desired much to gorge her self upon the
brains of a Pigeon whereof she bore the charge. But A.O. understanding his
meaning thereby, answered very scornefully (and not without cause) that a sta^e
pigeon was to good or at the least might very well serve a carrion Kite to plume
upon. Not so (lady quoth he) I am no carrio^ kite, neither love I to plash in a
massy grosid. Why (said she) do you fear the alteration of your complexion?
assuredly me thinks you need not, for it must be a whote restority in deed
that moves your waynscot face and brazen countenance to blushe. If needs you
would have opened (quoth she) your budget of villainy unto me, yet better
might you have done it with pen and ink, who (as the Proverb goes) never
blusheth, then with that shameful tongue of yours: but thougt your villainy
gives somewhat an extraordinary motion to my lips, yet a small grief does
it set to my heart. For the inconstancy and falsehood of such brutes as you
are (unto their Ladies) is not unknown to me: it appears not a little by
Demophon, Theseus, Pha^^, Aeneas, and Jason. Wherefore you had need to rise
very early, if that flatteryng face of yours could go beyond me herein. Why
Lady, if you got to that (quoth he) what should we think of Lollia Paulina
the wife of Caligula? Agrippina wife unto Claudius Caesar? Poppea wife unto
Nero? Cleop^t^^ Queen of Egypt? Domicia wife to Domitian the Emperor, who
defiled her body with Paru a stage player? and yet not long before was (...)
proclaimed Augusta of her husband the emperor: or what should we think of
Marci^, who sought to poison her husband? Of her in England in the reign of
Henry the eight, who having twelve sons, and lying sore sick, confessed to
her husband that after the first year she was never true unto him? and was
not Cresida turned unto a Lepre for her inconstancy? deuie this if you ca^.)
But yet further to prove the lightness of women: do we not read that in a
company of Gentlemen and Gentlewomen there befell a discourse of a noble woman
of Siena, commonly accounted fair and honest, and albeit she were praised in a
manner of all me^ (as she that deserved it) their were some who either for
desire they had to speak against womenkynde* or else to have a repulse at her
hand, reproved her of vanity and lightness? the honorable Lady the Pecc^
hearing this, answered: why sir if you will take vanity and lightness from
us, what shall we have left? as though vanity and lightness were their
proper and peculiar indewments. How think you by ^as? and yet I have not
r^cyted the hundred part of those examples which I have or could rehearse of
your lightness: For if I should resite them all, a volume of an hundred quyre
of paper were to little to retain the sa^^. But whether think you that women
are the only allurers of men to folly or no, when as their own tongues
bewrays their secrets, inconstancy and lightness of (...), as appears
somewhat more at large by this? when the Emperor Sigismunde was dead, one of
his kindred persuaded the Empress to remain a widdowe: showing her at large a
great circumstaunce of the Turtle, who l^sing her mate, above all other birds
lives chaste ever after: but she smyling hereat, answered: ^^the that you
counsel me to follow an unreasonable bird, why do you not rather set before
me the do^e or the sparrow which have a more pleasant nature for women? and yet
of common unwedded hoores I mean not, for they can not be unconstant to their
mates, because they have them not: to prove then on the otherside the
faithfulness of men to their lemmans or paramours, do we not read that Paru,
Leander, and Troylus, with a thousand more died for love and their false
Ladies sakes? ah poor Pyramus, what reward had thou for thy poor Ladies
sake? ah poor Thi^be (quoth she) how false waste thou to him again? I trust
your rolling tongue has not enjoined me yet to silence, although for a space I
have refrayned the use thereof. How false I pray you has Dido, Hipsiphile,
Phillis, Ari^dne, Oenon, and Sappho been to theirs? died these for love? how
unconstant or waueryng I pray you was Alcest to Admetus king of Thessalia? or
what man was ever more constant, faithful, true, loving, or more lust to his
mate, then Artemesia was to hirs? No doubt but I. wished his words unspoken,
although he set a good face thereon, saying: A blasing star will s^oote.
Whereunto most bytingly she answered, if the shooting of blasing stars, and
every clappe of thunderboltes, yea, if every gale and little puff of wind
should rende and tear the sail: no doubt but these boystrous blastes would
shake much corn in time. I.I. rejoiced inwardly at this word (if) for hereby
he feared the less the discovery of his shameful demand. Thus in lou^yng
manner they departed for that time, but in the next morning she let these
tauntyng verses followyng drop down through the creuice of the bordes into
his chamber as he lay in his bed.

^It fatal fools fat fed with food
of talped mind and rangyng head:
O talpes, think ye to change the mood
of buzzyng Bees with Mel so fed?
O talped talpes, O buzzing Bees,
think ye Dame Venus has no wit
To shun the ginne when she it sees
but that she must needs fall in it?
Then she and all Uenereall kind
Apollo wanted for his skill
To clear their eyes, which were too blind,
if not they could withstand your will.
Of naughty seed since you have store,
will you it cast on others ground:
Then are they common to foolish lore,
which pokes it up and has it found.
When Venus lists for to ride,
to deck her heels with your spurs,
Her nature can it not abide
she has no gappe that wants furs.
Of ought whereof she stands in need,
she needs not to seek redress,
When Vulcane fayles, Mars stands in steed
her corpse with his for to suppress.
But yet,
What needs a mate while Marrowe lives,
this is the mark whereat you shoot:
To tell each hole conteynde in slues
v^bende y^^r bow it is no boo^e.
Unmanned Hawks forsake the lure,
all whistlyng brings them not to fiste:
Wherefore with shame put up your lure,
a Hawk will check still when she list.
I.I. styng the fall of these verses, rose forth of his bed to take them up
to read: which red, his guilty conscience challenged them unto himself,
although they wanted (as you see,) both direction and vnderscription, who
(naught regardyng her womanly taunts, which gave him (as it were) a bitte to
gnawe upon) kept the biting thereof secretly unto himself, until such time
as occasion served him to crave her company into the open air: which she
utterly refused saying, she was no hare for Greyhoundes course. Whereat I.I.
calling to mind the description of Venus after the order of Phidias payntyng,
(that is) to set her feet upon a Tortoise, her denial moved him not,
considering, that Ladies of honor, courtlike Dames, and Ladylike gentlewomen
are seldom ^^iners forth of their doors, but much less strayers abroad,
least the sharp winds of Eolus, or the boisterous blastes of Boreas should
nippe their lively blood, or the excessive heat of ^itans parching beams,
should turn their rosed looks, which are so Crystal clear into a berry
brown: which makes them either to refrain their feet from straying abroad
like housedours or else if they peep never so little into the open air, either
to cover their front with a half paile, or else wholly to shade that
phisnomicall face of theirs with a large silken or lawne skarffe, like unto the
stately grace of Persian kings when they straye forth of their doors. I know
some dayntie Dames will not stick to take hold at the greedy desire which
I.I. had unto the wanton will of pleasure: but what of this? it might be the
merry month of May, or else the prescription of August moved him unto it
through the advice as well of the Physician as of the Astronomer for his health
sake. And if it were so, then were he greatly to be borne withal. And
peradventure also Asmodeus of Hell, through the continual company of his
amorous paramour, moved him to become a Satyr for the time, which have their
toys most fit for Ladies lusts. For even as the wind (called Secias) East
and by North, has power to draw the clouds unto him because his motions are
round: even so has the sweet Southwest wind, which proceeds from beauties
price, the force, to be as it were a Ueneriall rampyre to s^urre up carnal
lusts. Which once through greedy affection being set on fire, can hardely
be quenched again. For look how the Be dies by prycking with her own
s^yng, because she can not draw back again the point thereof without the
great hurt of her self, as in burstyng her belly: so does the amorous
person die before such time as his delectable darts (once flong by violent
sorce of arms) can b^ revoked again: by reason that, the repulse of the
fervent lovers darts does rende his heart in twain: which of force not able
to endure, or abide the division (and love herewith not mitigated) does send
his grysly ghost amiddes the clowdy ro^pes. Therefore I would wish each hunter
which delights in the chase of this game, to build upon a rock and not on
the sands, to lay a sure fundatio^, to chose his mark in a mudde and not in a
stony wall, least it rebou^deth back again: and then his mark thus chosen, to
shoot level with a steadfast and not with a quiueryng hand. For he that
follows the limitation or prescription of this line, shall be sure to make a
speedy joy thereof: because here wants a Laberinth to toss his wavering
minded ship. But each man looks to match so hie in these days, that the
riches and not the love of the party byeth a husband. For be she never so
soul a piece, misshaped, crokebacked, vntydy, uncomely, withered, misfauored,
yea be she never so crooked a piece, so wrinckled, so old, or so tanned a
hagge, that a wife of cloutes may stand a man in better steed, yet for her
riches sake she can not want a lusty young Phaon to be her mate, to whom
once wedded, then glad she is to hyre some princockes buy to daube her
lether cheeks, least through her vggly and misfauored face, he forced be to
cast his wanton and youthful tie aside. And this is the daily end of such
toothlesse hagges, which matcheth with heardlesse boys: and also of such old
dotardes as marieth with garishe ge^les, who seeing his youthful days are
spent, and also such scarcity of sowing seed, that an ill, much less a good
croppe can hardely be reaped thereof, are glad for pleasure sake, to hyre
new and sundry workmen to s^tte on work, some to plowe. some to harrowe,
and some to sow. But yet who soever ploweth, harroweth, and sows it, her
(...) husband is sure to reap it (mistrusting naught) and she to carry it
home to the barn. Thus of each side they bear a warrant to bid each other
to pick a worm between two forked fingars. For a better end of bought
marriages are seldom seen. Wherefore they hold themselves content, saying
seldom comes a better. There be also certain made marriages between infantes
of their parents sides, and all for a little lucre or mucke of the world,
which most commonly come to the like effect. For being matched so young
(through the folly of their parents) not seldom seen it is (love taking no
root) a great disparagement rises when they come to age or years of
discretion, each saying to the other for want of lyking, folly and not
wis^dome, yea, goods and not love brought us together. Thus not agreyng, but
continually ^^cring the one at the other, sometimes they seek diuorcement,
which if they do not, yet better I think were these marriages unmade. Who
minds therefore to match himself in such order as to lead a godly life,
might do very well to follow Socrates rule therein, who thus prescribed unto
a certain young gentleman, demanding of him what wife were best to marie, Nube
equalem, for so (said he) thou shalt be sure in no point to mislike or
disagree. But why seem I thus to stray from my text? a good pen man will
say, or at the least think, rither I did it for want of matter, else was I no
perfect dilater in this case. To whom I answer thus, though I swerve from my
te^te, yet not from the matter. But ( Ad rem redeam) for I know my recorded
notes ye look for. The sacked love of A.O being won as you see by my former
style, N. O. was very desirous to know of a certenty the day wherein this
solemn marriage should be solemnised, for that the preparation thereof required
a long deliberation, whereby each thing belongyng to this sumptuous furniture
might be had in such a readiness, as no heart alive could wish it better to
be. And judge ye whether time wanted to consulte thereof, when as this
demand being made before Christmasse, the time appointed was contrived or
deferred until Easter, because in deed of force she must so do, what though
he thought it long? it was a brauen to live in hope. Neither passed this
tedious time (as he thought) without unfeigned joys and unspeakable pleasure,
for each day they fed their reume, and pleased their appetites with choice
thereof. For first N.O caused (as the time required the twelve labors of
Hercules, and also his own death to be lively set sorth in tragical manner
before her eyes, videlicet, first the ouercommyng of the Lion through the aid
of Nemea: secondly the sleyng of the poisonous seven hedded snake, called
Hydra: thirdly the conquering of the foul sow of Erymanthius: fourthly the
death of the heart with his gilde^ horns: fifthly the oppression of the birds
of S^ymphalide with his be^ded bow: s^^tly the loosing of Hyppolita from her
binding chains: seventhly the clensing of the stable of Augia by his device of
running waters: for the eight the conquering of the mighty Bull in wrestlyng:
then for the ninth as well the conquest of the horses of Diomedes, as of the
King himself: for the tenth his ouercomming of Geriones with his triple body.
In the eleventh the victory of Cerberus in descending for Proserpina: and last
of all, being conqueror of Hesperides, the winnyng of the golden apples. Yet
being the author of so many worthy deeds, how miserably and pityfully, yea in
what lamentable order at the length he ended his life through the wearing of a
shyrte which De^anira put him on for the nonst, besprinkled with the blood of
a Centaure, which cleaned so fast unto his unwitting body, that with greedy
grypes it rent his heart asunder. Also in this tragedy was mentioned the
betray^ng of Sampson through a woman's wilt. Whereat some of the company
departed with a dog in their sleeue. Who in mine opinion it becomed rather to
have stayed, and lulled her fancy in hi^ lap: whose stinking breath anoyes
the gentle route. But what of this? I dare swear, they are not only persuaded
that the scente thereof is perfect restoritie, but also it to cast as
odoriferous a smell to their noses, and to be as sweet to them, and better
accepted, than the codde it self of musk. But much good may it do them. From
such sweet and sauory smells God shield me. And yet, so long as they persuade
themselves this stewe or hoate bathe to be both a restoritie and perfitte
musk: I see no cause but that to them so supposing it should be musk it
self. For I remember diverse pretty iestes looking in my budget of pleasant
co^ceyts: First between a yo^g man who persuaded himself that his nose was so
great that no ro^me be it never so wide could receive him, neither was there
any Monster alive so foul as he, although indeed his nose was in as good
form and fashion as needed to be. But notwithstanding such was his foolish
persuasion and fond belief, that until a Barbor had deceived him in the
cutting thereof at his own request, that he would not believe it. I find
also that an other persuaded himself that he was a glass, and none might come
near, much less touch him least he should break. And to be short, I find
an other merry ieste as touching this point, between a man of the country and
his parish Priest, who lying very sore sick (and the people about him
looking always when he should say, In manus Domini commendo spiritum meum)
because the pangs of death had enforced him often before to say in raging wise,
Cupio dissolui and esse cum Christo, sent unto master Parson earnestly
requesting him to communicate the holy Sacrament unto him, before he yielded up
his ghost: but this being at midnight, and he lying warm in his bed, was loathe
to forgo the same: Wherefore he wrote to this pacient by the messenger (as
touching the Sacrament) C^ode quod edu and edu. Thus master Parson (little
regarding the egernesse of ye wolf, and much less his souls salvation,
forgetting also this sentence, B^n^ est Pastoris ^^ndere pecus non diglubere)
by no means could be gotten forth of his warm bed. It chanced yet in
short time after, this grievous sick man recovered his health again, and
having occasion to ride a little way upon some earnest business, he sent to
this Parson to borrow his horse, who (nothing mistrusting) ^ente it him. But
knowing afterward that he was returned again, he sent for his horse. Who
remembryng his new kind of ministering the Sacrament, kept still the horse,
and wrote unto him in this order: Non meministi, quid mihi dixisti, de corpore
Christi, Creed quod edu and edis: Sic ego rescribo, de tuo Palphrido, Creed
quod habes and habes. Now sir whether he served him well or no, I refer the
judgment thereof to some apishe wit. For each man knows the feather of an
Eagle is of force to consume the feathers of meaner birds. But I will^-omitte
these cragged snubbes and crooked boughs to take hold once again of the
straight body of the tree. First I.I. seeing he could not prevail with his
glosed talk, he gave the assault once more (not only by proffered service
and professed friendship) but also by offryng her rare Jewels and costly
gifts, intendyng through despair to be the more courageous. Whereof Virgill
thus writes, Optima spes victis nullam sperare salutem. Yet she naught
regardyng his vain offers and less his proffered service with professed good
will, answered: It seems you are well acquaynted with this phrase of
Iuuenall, Rara in tenui facundia panno est, and that makes you to offer such
large sums of money in this case: but yet in vain you spend your wind, for
I know too well by proof, that Fistula d^lce cani^ volueres dum decipit
auceps. Stay therefore herein thy clattering bell, for Nulla fides fronti, as
Iuuenall does report. In deed Lady quoth he) not affection alone, but this
verse of Ovid moved me toward this liberality, seeing Munera (creed mihi)
placant hominesque deos^. I thought as much quoth she, Ex abu^dantia cordis os
loqu^tur. And think you therefore I am so foolish, so light of belief, so
light of behau^our, or so covetous, as to accept thy feigned friendship? no no I
defy thy crew, thy progeny, and eke thy race. I set not so much by the mucke
of the world, as to yield unto thy filthy greedy lust, neither to make a God
thereof For while I live, as I do, so will I always become as subject unto
this verse of Horace, Et mihi res non me rebus, submittere con^r. And I tell
thee plain for my last adewe that if thou were able to maintain me as I
read of a Cardinals harlot (although this comparison is odious who set so
light of pearl and precious stone that she set the upper part of her shoes
clean over with the same. Or if thou were able to give me as precious a
pearl as Julius Caesar bestowed upon his lemman Seruilia, the price whereof
was Sexagies, which is in our coin six and forty thousand eight hundred
threescore and seuentene pounds and ten shillings, yet neither could nor
should thou nor any other whatsoever inioye the same at my hands. Why art
thou armed with Diamondes (as the Poets feign by Mars) (quoth he) that thou
seem so obstinately to withstand? yea in this respect, quoth she) and such
like each one shall find me. Then for my last farewell (said he) to thee and
thine adewe. Who answered, adieu likewise by land, thy luck in boats is
barking. Thus by her outward appearaunce she seemed glad thereof. It rests
now by lyneal course to infer upon the peregrination of her peerlesse
paragon, marching pedetent^m unto the bark of love, whom finding bedecked
with a green robe after the paynting of Zenius, caused him the more to live in
hope. But yet this Epigram written in his forehead by Apelles: Spring time and
summer: caused him to judge thereby that it fostered both prosperity and
adversity with one pappe, and ^ulled both life and death together in one
lap. Wherefore he endeavored by all invented means to please her as well
after as before her grant of love, not only by loyalty of service, but also
by gorgious attire (which pleases women not a little) delicate fare, costly
byre, and sumptuous gifts, with the whole discourse of his business, no
counsel kept unknown, which pleased her most of al. But the new year
stealing upon them, whose presence he thought his duty provoked him to adore
with some rare gift, to imparte or represent unto his, Lady in token of his
great good will toward her. Or for a pledge of his eminent loyalty, with an
unfeigned fidelity. Each country far and near by a vision he sought, and in
his rolling mind he vewed each thing therein. Yet nothing he found therein
worthy (as he thought) to bestow upon her, yet did his steadfast love persuade
him no travel spent ^^^aine, who turning himself about, and vewing each
thing at will, misliked the unworthiness thereof. Wherefore he hied hastily
unto the Muses of Boetia the daughters of Jupiter, whom the Poets feign
continually to dwell at the bathe of Helicon. But yet by daily industry he
found them at the length (by his own report) in a pleasant green arbor,
sitting all together most huswifely occupied each one in their proper
vocation: singing most melodiously to pass the time away. This green Arbor
(said he) was planted in a dale not far from this former well wherein they
bathe themselves, most curiously bedecked with fragrant flowers that keeps
their pleasant hew all times of the year alike: at the hedde hereof each one
had her several bed of long green grass, intermingled with all kind of
sweet and fragrant flowers, the growth whereof short up in height above the
lower grass (by his report) two foot, curiously carved and cut of each side,
adorned with pinnacles and pillars in manner of a fair large bedsteede,
besette with goodly green Iuie, twined about with some shoring preuy. Thus was
their beds most formally framed and eke as soft as is the pillow down. Then
had they maniles to cover them with intermingled yuie: the ouercasting of the
Arbor served for a Cannape, and the caruing of each side stood for indented
valla^ce. At the feet of their beds, was erected a good^^ green Mount,
with round cirkled steps up to the top. But there was to be found a
stately chair all made of Iuory white, wherein Melpomene the chiefest Muse (
Phoebus displaying) does place her self, the other eight Muses sittyng in
order beneath her upon the former round steps. Thus squatted upon this
pleasant mount from morning to euenyng they spend their time most earnestly
in their vocation (if no one interrupt them with calling them upon, to aid
them in their enterprise, as the Poets were accustomed to do) each one
singyng by course in the commendation of her own Art ( Melpomene always
beginning, because of her worthiness among them) and while the one sings,
the other eight helps her recorded song with the variety of notes, it was
commonly called the Arbor of amity. N.O. seeing them in this order, thought
verily he had ^^nded to heaven it self. Wherefore his wits abashed at the first
to utter his mind unto them, but Melpomene seeing him to stand in such amaze,
coniectured thereby he had some matter to break unto them, which not the
imbecilitie of wit, but the bashefulnesse of his tongue forbid him there to
utter. Wherefore most courteously she cheared him on, saying: what is thy
will? fear not but show it forth at large: whereat N. O. taking a better
courage, told forth his will and chief desire in this order. O Muses worthy
of musing, by earnest suyte I crave of your wonted and accustomed courtesy, to
unlace your liberality, extendyng your benevolence in fillyng this Goblet of
mine, with the heavenly and unspeakable dew of your gracious Fountain.
Whereat Melpomene answered for them all as you shall hear. This sacred well
(quoth she) is of such force, that who tastes thereof partaketh of our
virtues: and by this means if it should be made common, we should in time
be had in the less reputation and honor. Also our father Jupiter gave us the
same, condicionally, that none should be partaker thereof, except they could
define their race to have descended from the mighty powers. Alas Goddess
(quoth he) I crave it not for my self but for my vowed wife, whose birth I
know to thee is not unknown. No sir (quoth she) I know her race full well,
thy Lady is in my liberty, and eke I know the cause of thy demand. Thou
shalt not come in vain, I grant thee thy request, and herewith she took
her silver pensell (and dippyng it in this well) she graued within the cover
of his Goblet in wauing manner these verses following.

COngealed air does make the stars to shote.
But seldom yet it is seen such stars to fall:
By earnest suyte not I but all our route
We yielded have to aid you when you call.
And that you should such call as best can aid
I send thee here what is each one her trayde.
But in the Goblet she graued these verses following in the same order as she
had done before.

I For my part, love tragedies to pen.
And Cleo notes the worthiness of men.
Thaleia she delights in cunnyng talk.
In soundyng trumpe Euterpes wits do walk:
In Music rules Terpsichore delights.
Erato loves Geometry that hightes.
Heroical verse Calliope first did know.
Euranea loves Astrology to show.
And last of all Polymneia she,
Will force thy tongue Rhetorical to be.
Thus to usurp at any time our aid,
Take heed of this, least that you be denayde.
No doubt but N. O. rejoiced much that he had gotten such a gift to give
unto his Lady: wherefore (not tastyng of it him self through his unworthiness
of birth) he sent it with all expedition unto her, which she received very
thankefully, and would feign have requi^ed him with such like again, but it
wanted in her: wherefore she sent unto him for his new years gift these
verses following.

Since Craesus wealth, with Crassus pomp, and Midas gold is skant, It shall
suffice to wish you well, good will shall never want: Thryce Naestors years
to live in age I crave that Cloth^ grant, that of your health good fame and
wealth, your willers well might vau^t.

Alter
Atropos and Lachesis with Clotho grant you the life of
Long lyfed Naestor, whose youth not soon being cut off,
Aged and hoar^e as Hyem^ who did call him?
Wrinkled, yet sugared in words, so who has not termde him?
These verses N.O. received as thankefully, as worthily, and in as good part
as if they had been a thing of greater price: and in short time after, he
visited his Lady with his presence, whereas before he had greeted her with his
gifts and good will. His coming was somewhat late, and (according unto the
time) he found them at supper, where after his salutation, due reverence and
courtesy he sat him down: it chanced in this supper (as a point of
courtesy) he offered a Gentlewoman salt upon her trencher, who at that
proffered courtesy weeped most bitterly, and would have risen from the board if
her trencher had not been quickly changed. But an other gentlewoma^ on the
contrary nature, weeped because she was denayed salt after this at his hands,
who made a vow (for her sake) he would never give women salt again: their
contrariety of natures caused the Gentlemen to demand at the boorde, which
seemed of them to be most* testie of nature? she to whom the salt was
offered, or she to whom it was denayed? some held that she who loved it was
most angry: and some held the contrary, showing how the Dove which delights
most therein, is the gentlest, lowliest, louingest, meekest, and friendliest
bird that is. But the other side argued to prove their reason, that all those
kind of creatures which have the gall, if they delight in salt, of force can
not be testie, affirmyng also that the Dove has no (...), which is the only
cause of her simpleness. Thus in open parlance their nature was bewrayed. On
the morrow after, N.O to try the wits of the young Gentlemen which argued so
hard and so pre^ily the evening before, he wrote with a red (...) stone upon
the shrine of the ha^^ this De^^ir ( who will the) four times on a row,
hoping that some of them would break their heads (not a little) to make full
sense thereof. At the sight whereof all men mused, but none would take it in
hand: at the length as an unknown Aucthor, he ended them thus: Who will the
curnell of the nutie,
must break the shell:
Who will the spoil of any town,
must sack the walls:
Who will the heart of any Dame,
must touch her harp:
Who will the fruit that harvest yeeldes,
must take the pain.


All men desired much to know the true Author of these verses, but much more
the sense and meaning thereof. But N.O in no case would be acknowne thereof.
His meaning thereby was this, he perceiving certain gentlemen to be inflamed
with love toward a lusty young Lady of the company, who were abashed to show
their great good will toward her, thought by the sight hereof pryuily to bolden
them to give the attempt: but the Ladies burned so inwardly with a greedy
desire of knowing the Author, that at the board Alpha Omega with the rest of
the gentlewomen, wished openly no greater treasure than his wisdom to
counteruayle their beauty. Whereat three drops of lively bloudde fell down
from N.O. his nose, which ( A.O. perceiving) mistrusted thereby the Author:
and meaning to discover him in some secret order (she said) how cheer you (
N O.) I see Apolloe sings, but not bewrayes his pen. Why Madame (quoth he) it
is too fresh to be superfluous blood, meaning thereby, that it was penned to
mistically to intend to none effect. But what should I further speak hereof?
the faggots were dry and the fire flamed. It rests to infer upon their
solemn marriage, for the day wherein it should be accomplished approached at
hand. Whereof Diana (as meetest thereof) was made ouerseer at the request of
her son in law, and eke of her only daughter Alpha Omega (as well for the
ordering of the feast, as for the placing of the Gods and Goddesses in their
degree.) and for their right usage and due service of them in their kind,
whom D^a^^ after a solemn manner had bidden thereunto. Who being (...)
according unto her request, she placed in order thus. But first by the way ye
must understand, that for the solemnizing of this marriage, a stately, a
gorgeous, a costly, and a curious house was ordained, of the building whereof
^ra^^ her self that Muse which first invented Geometry of voluntary good
will became a diligent and careful ouerseer. The pyllers whereof were made of
Jasper, and Marble stone. The pinnacles and ba^^lettes of white f^ee stone, the
brave and curious turrets were made of slurdy s^^^le intermingled with ^^led
iron, most curiously carved of Vulcanes proper hands: It far surmounted in
bravery and cost the buyldings of Lucius Lucull^^, ^^^ius C^sar, Appian,
Paulus Clodius, Ne^o, or Heliogabalus, who used to strewe his floores with the
filings of gold and silver: yea the sumptuous house of Caligula, whose floores
of his chamber were usually set with pearl and precious stone each point
seeming correspondent to the other. In th^s house also was three stately
chambers erected, one straight above an other, made for the purpose, in every
whereof was a fair large and long table, at the end whereof was a chair of
state with a curious crown all made of the purest and finest gold, most
ritchly besette with precious p^a^les, and costly iemmes hangyng over the same,
for the three imperial brethren, Jupiter, Neptune, and Pl^to, the first being
the mighty and thundering God of heaven, he s^tte according to his degree and
worthiness in the stately chair of the highest room in a Robe of reverence
rounded and horned as his manner was with a fearful mace in his hand, at the
shaking whereof both Heaven and Earth does quake for fear. In the second
chair and middle room satte Neptune, the God of the land and sea, with his
three for^ed mace in hand, and also with a rich tarantyne rode coming down
to the ground. But in the lower chair and lower chamber did Pluto the rich
God of Hell place himself, having a golden mace in his hand twyned about
with lothesome and ugly snakes most horrible and scarefull to behold. At this
upper board next unto Jupiter on the right hand, sat Juno that Honorable and
gracious Goddess his wife: Next unto her satte Venus the Goddess of love
with a glove made of flowers stickyng in her bosom, whom Homer has termed
Golden Aphrodit^s: Next unto her Minerua that wise and housewifely Goddess
with a Scythian bow and a clubbe lying by her: and next unto her Egeria the
Goddess of all shape and comeliness: but on his left hand was placed first
and highest of all Cibile the mother of the Gods with diverse panes and
woodnymphes waiting upon her. And then on a row satte Pal^as the Goddess of
wisdom, with a shield lying by her, and a spear cross at her back. Diana
her self whom the Poets feign and suppose to be the Goddess of Chastity,
her bow and arrows lying by her. Cares she that first invented husbandry
with a fine plowe share of beaten gold hangyng down on her kirile. And Murcea
the Goddess of sleep. As for the other meaner Goddesses they placed
themselves as they thought good (whom being placed in order) beneath them all
satte Alpha Omega the bird, but below her satte Apollo the God of wisdom,
Ph^bus the God which rules the Sun, Cupid the God which strikes hearts in
Love, Bacchus that dronken God, for so the Pottes have termed him, because he
(said they) invented first of al sorts of wine. Mars ye God of war,
Mercury that crafty theeuish and iugling god with a Petasus on his head and a
Caduceus at his side, Priapus the great toole^ god, Vulcane that limphault
smith, Momu^ the God of reprehe^sion, Pan the rural God, and Morpheus the God
of sleep, with ye whole route of ye homericall gods, which were to tedious
here to name. What should my gross wit speak of their spiritual and heavenly
food? it was Ma^na it self, their bread was Nectar, and their drink Ambrosia.
It pittieth me to speak of ye toil of their seruitours for I know (poor
Ganymedes) thy feet fainted under thee with trotting so often to and fro with
goblets and cups of wine quaffed from the one to ye other. I will omit therefore
ye recognizing of the wayters toil to register (as it were in marble stone)
their pleasant mirth their sweet and delectable harmony, their unspeakable
pastimes and dalliaunce, their heavenly music, and their strange and
wonderful sightes, with innumerable toys to cheer them up, and to provoke
their sens and to laughter, mirth, and solace. First at Jupiters board stood
Orpheus, Amp^^on, and Aryo^, Lorceas, H^rmogines, Hellycontus, and last of all
(...), playing each one most sweetly upon their Harpes, wrinched and set to
the highest note of D^ateasse^o^, striving each one who should excel the
other. To these their harpes did T^^en, Ag^^h^^^, and An^^reon frame their
voices, singyng most sweetly in the commendation of the Gods and Goddesses
at the board. Of this their heavenly noise and sweet melody was Apollo, and
Minerua appointed for iudge^, who because they would not discourage any one of
them in their doing, said, they played all so well and so alike, that no
judgment consisted therein. After these Pan himself began to play on his O^en
pype, Babys likewise singing and harpyng so rustically, that he which had but
one laughter in his belly could not but have laughed hereat. It would have
made a sick horse to have broken his halter to have heard their iarring, who
made as pleasant a scraping, as if ye^ had set (as the proverb goes) Asinus
ad Lyram. Yet notwithstanding they persuaded themselves they did surpass
therein: and surely in my judgment it was good enough to make sport (as at
that time) whom they had rather hear (being thoroughly whitled with these
Nectar wine) than the Muses themselves. To this their rusticall harping came
Polyphemus boysterously stampyng, with a ^^oute fair tru^^ in his hand to
foot it cheek by cheek: after these came Silenus that hoarehedded lover,
treadyng the hornpype: the Woodnymphes l^kewise followed most nicely tripping,
and tracing the ground barefooted with their clothes as short as their knees.
And the Sa^yr^s half goats to make up the (...) followed them daunsing the
Anticke. But after all these came the Muses themselves in a rank, vaunting it
so smothely upon the ground as if a ship had lau^ched upon the seas, they
were in number nine, and (as the Poets feign) the daughters of Jupiter and
M^emosynes, at whose presence all things were whis^e. At their first entrance
Melpomene with a stately courtesy delivered to Jupiter her fathers hand a
curious carved cup all made of mass^^ gold filled with the water of the
fountain Helicon, whereof Jupiter ^asting, he delivered it unto Juno, from
whose hands it went thorough the whole board. After the tasting whereof,
Jupiter willed them (according as the time required) to frame their song upon
the discourse of wowing, and to divide themselves into two companies, five on
the one side, and four on the other. Whereby they should seem not only to
declare the order of wowyng, but rather as it were in lively order to do the
thing it self (the one side taking the Paragons pa^^e, and the other the
paramouras). And for your better understanding the order of my prescription,
let ( F) stand for the Courtyer, and ( G) for the Courtresse. And where you
find ( P) before the verse, there understand you the man speaks, and where
you find ( G) before the verse, there presuppose likewise the woman answers.
Thus markyng this rule, you can not fail the understanding of my mind. This
note mark also further, that where you find ( All) set before the verse,
there ( F and G embracing) all the Muses sing together, and where a line
deuideth, there the staff does end.

Thus begins their song.
F Unfolde your courtesy oh amorous dame,
Join leagues of amity my dear by name.

G Unlace your loyalty, break up your love,
For so fidelity it does behoue.

F I can though I vaunt not,

G So I though I grant not,
May yield thy request.

F Dan Cupid constrayneth.

G So Venus refrayneth
No time for to les^e.

F I ieste not,

G I weste not,

F Then it for to try
I vow this my heart within that does lie,
Thine own undefiled and ever to be.

G Soon hoate, soon cold I see,
Soon withered what redress?

F This counsel give I thee,
Suth like for like profess.

G My fancy lays liking, oh let thy suyte fall,
Withstand Cupides striking, oh give him a fall.

F I can not, nor will not, it pricketh mine heart,
I dare not, I may not, withstand that his darte.

G My fancy denayes thee,

F But yet sith I like thee
Oh say me not nay.

G Affection scholeth

F No reason it rules
To say me denay.

G And what then?

F Be flat then,

G No likyng I have,
To wedde gaynst liking, your pardon I crave:
For good will deserves good will for to have.

F Then render love for love,
Else shall I die for woe:

G We see how pynes the dove,
But yet he dies not tho.

F May nothing purchase grace my joys to renew?
Shall pity take no place? then pleasure adewe.

G It Is folly I tell thee you lull in your lap,
It grieves me (believe me) that such was your hap.

F My bale then delights me,

G Curse Cupid that struck thee,
To like for no gain.

F That will not suffice me,

G That love should so tyce thee,
The greater thy pain.

F I find it:

G Untwyne it:

F ^ less I can not,
So Vulcanes nets twyne me, that not a denay
Can force me to leave thee, though twere my decay.

G My fancy biddes auaunte,
You spend your wind in vain.

F Though thus you seem to taunt,
I hope your heart to gain.

G Over loved soon lost, betroth not your h^nde:
Least you gain to your cost, a willow garland.

F Alas, fancy moves me, to change for no new,
But still for to love thee, my pain to renew.

G And what though you change not?

F The harder were my lotte
Thus far for to range.

G Your folly it harmeth:

F Is wisdom you warns,
Yet be not to strange.

G I grant it,

F I vaunt it,

G Then if you feign not,
I vow undefiled thine own for to be:
Thy faith it shall bind me again to love thee.

F My joys are unfeigned,
And bannish my gryping:

G My heart thou have gained,
In lieu of thy liking.

F Then coll me and kiss, which art my delight:
Let flaunta, galanta, put sorrows to flight.

G In hope that Dame pleasure us never will fail,
Let flanta galanta stiff hold up our sail.

F Then hoyste it and vaunt it:

G Yea vaunt it, and grant it:
With huff and with hi^^.

F To spa^e I beshrowe thee,

G To flaunt it believe me,
I sit in my ruff.

F Then vaunt it,

G I grant it,

F all So this (...) well:
Our (...) are squenched, with pleasant delight,
Huff, huff, let us huff it, by day and by night.

G Let pleasure ^e hoysted,
New fangles devised,

F Yea let it be ioysted,
And new pastyme trysed:

All With all a flantare then let us begin,
Our goods have no ending, sing let us not linne. (...).

FINIS.
THis pleasant and new devised song liked them very well, for such was their
warbling notes and variety of tunes, that than the hearing of them, there
could be no greater joy. But Venus above all other liked it most of all, in so
much that she caused Hypparchus (whom the Poets feign to be secretary to the
Gods) to write it for her. But least I should seem somewhat tedious unto
you, who will not stick to say behind my back that this little volume of mine
smells of the oil and candle (as Pythias the Orator sometime reported of
the works of Demosthenes) I will the slightlier pass over the commendation of
this song to speak of their other pasta^nce. At the end of this pleasant and
delectable harmony, the board was discovered, and the Gods began each one to
play their part. For Jupiter touching the heavens with his wande, caused them
to thunder and vainbrishe lightnings. Vulcane being (...) smothered, and
swarted with the embers and smoke of his forge, with a knacke of his office
showing in lively form and manner (as with his gestures and motions of his
body,) the continual tosting toil of his art, and the order and course they
keep sometimes in pitpatting with their hammers (as a shifte of deskant (...)
mitigate the fame.) Cupid that fair and wa^ton boy, he sittes playing and
iestyng, showing many a fond toye, and yet pretty devices in the Goddesses
lappes. Minerua she fell hard to her music, singing most sweetly, whom
Pan with his sudden frayments and tumultes disquieted much. Apollo he showed
there his cunnyng at the Harp. Bacchus he being as drunk as an Ape,
discovered many a vanity: And Mercury (to be brief) what with his theft,
and iuggling, iuggled so long, that some of them dropped under the board with
laughing, or else to smoother a skape (as Pryap^o^ did for fear, when he
chanced to see by night season the sorceries of the two witches Canidia and
Sagana: but mumme lack, no more of these b^gges words for forty pound, ^^e,
will you be a teltale, and carry tales out of the school? you shall be no more
a Ladies chambermayde. Thus I have briefly showed unto you the merry conceytes
used at that board. Let us therefore behold (as it were in a glass) the
strange and wonderful sightes which were to be seen in Neptunes room: for I
know each one delights in new fangles and toys. First at this board satte
Neptune in his chair of majesty, accompanied with E^lus the king of winds,
and Boreas his lief^ tenant, the sea Nymphs and all such as he thought good
to be placed at his board. His wayters were Tryton and such like, but the
sightes were these: first the Syrenes appeared in number three, Pa^then^^e,
Lygea, and Lucasia, the daughter of Achelous, and Callio^e singing as sweetly,
and making as heavenly a noise, as does an arbor of Nightingales in a calm
winded night. Who had heard them, would have thought a Nightingale had
breathed upon their mouths being suckyng babes, as they did by Steficho^u^
lying in his cradle. They showed there (at the requ^st of Neptune) before the
common assemble, their habitation to be in a little Isle, beset about with
Willowes and Sallowes, in such order, as none might easily see them as they
p^ssed by: it was betwixt ^al^e and Cicile, where through their sweet music,
they allured and perforce constrained with their sugared bayte, all such as
sailed by, to come unto them, whom incontinently they slew. The Poets feign
that none ever passed them but Ulysses, who through the force of an hear^e
which was given him, escaped them, bindyng himself to the maste of the
ship, and stopping his Manners ears with wax. Some say this was dame Pallas
her advice, whose prescription he used in all his affairs and dealings. But
they took such a displeasure at his escaping of them, and sorrowed ^o, that in
short time after they threw themselves headlong into the Sea, whom ( Neptune
foreseyng) has turned into Marmaydes. The sea Nymphs they displayed with
lively gestures their watrishe streakes, and eke the pleasure they have in the
bottom of the seas, with the daily contention they have with the Marmaydes and
their hard escapyng of the Crocodiles allurements. Here Boreas with his
swelling checkes showed a cast of his office, with many other pretty sightes
which were to tedious here to name. But now by course I come to the
description of Pluto that golden God with his recreation. At his board was
placed Orchus, Saturnus, and Chaos, Charon the fer^y man of ^^ll with his three
daughters Alecto, Tisiphone, and Megera: Prose^pina, and ugly Medusa, a Lady of
whom the Poets feign, that (...) Minerua her hairs were turned into Adders,
and they which ^^^elde her head were turned into stones. Yea, all the hellish
bags of Tarcurs den, and the furies of hell were placed in order about
him. Whose delights were only to see, how Ixion turned the wheel full of
Serpents. Ticius whose entrails were torn by greedy grypes: Tantalus standing
up to ye chinne in water died for thurst. The cousins of Lyncius that draws up
water continually to fill a brinklesse tubbe, S^siphus that rolled continually
a stone to the top of an high hill, which being thither brought, rolleth
down again. Pethemena boiling in pitch, with diverse others, who there
received their purgatory. And last of all how Minos and Rhadamanthus those
in^^orable judges satte judging and condemning of them to the like plagues and
torments. Thus briefly I have discoursed unto you the whole manner of this
marriage, with each private collusion touching the same. Yet one chief point of
so many I had almost ouerslipped, which is, the excess of their Nectar and
Ambrosia, for I swear by the Stygian poole, and by the Homericall faith, it
had ouerflowed the whole earth if not Neptune had caused a gulf to receive the
same. Thus (to be short) each court of charges being broken up, and the
presence of the Gods discharged, my kercher of drowsinesse being vnknitte I
began to wake my Muse, leaving each surmise unto your after wits. Thus
fare you well, and (...) you merry, be not oppressed with doleful dumpes,
repeat each fancy upon your Lute, weary not your needles, but clappe your
hands all together (as Virgill exhorts you in this verse.) Claudire iam
ri^os pueri: sat prata biberunt.

FINIS.
Sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus.
The conclusion of this Book, and an Introduction of the Book followyng.
WHereas (most Honorable) I said in my former Epistle, I have brought unto
your honor a han^full of fragrant flowers, Videlice^, Primroses and Uiolets: I
trust your wisdom (beholding mine inward meaning, and not my phrase of
writing) understands the hidden mystery herein. For (according unto my
judgment) well might they be so termed, because (as yet) they are the first
fruytes which my Muse has yielded. Notwithstanding, your Lordship knows
right well, that of these Prymeroses and Uiolets, there be diverse and sundry
kinds: whereof some are double, and some again are single: the double we see
are peculiar to pryuate gardens, and become so double through their often
planting, but the single are wild, and grow in the common fields: the one
forte is far more beautiful to the eye, and sweeter than the other. Whereof
(most Honorable) I count these my Prymeroses to be of the worser and meaner
sort, by reason of their first plantyng. But if your Honor shall like well
thereof, I do not double but that by often moving of them in their kinds, they
may aspyre to some lively sparks of savor, and become as double as the better
sort. But yet, thus much I do conjecture, that if they were the sweetest
flowers of all, yet would they be mislyked of some, and, those of the greater
sort, which makes some in deed for fear of their Z^ilus mouths to
refrain their learned pen. But who so bold as blind Bayarde? for he
mistrusting naught, comes stumbling forth at will. My meaning is hereby, that
if I had Virgilles vain to indite, or Homers quill, Terence his familiar kind
of talk, or Chaucers vain in writing, yea, if I were as eloquent as Cicero
himself, yet could I not want a Cicer^nian whippe (as the Proverb goes) by
Salust, his great malice toward him. Think ye that Polymneia that
rhetorical Muse is commended of all men? no, though they seem not openly to
rail upon her with their Z^ilus mouths, or to be carping at her like Mo^ius
mates, yet lie they sweltering inwardly as muttering Mu^ius does. And although
it lies not in my power to requite such curious carping Knights, as it lay
in Virgill to requite both Bauiu^ and Meuius: notwithstanding I trust a better
end will not fall to the one than the other. But whatsoever it shall please the
common sort to think of me (as pardie I partly conjecture) yet trusting to
your Honors courtesy, I hope your wisdom will consider, that at the making
hereof, I was neither at Athens, nor yet in the hearing of Cratippus. The deawe
of Helicone is not free to all men: neither has Apollo and Pallas granted
wisdom to all alike. Every one ca^ not aspyre to the right rhetoric of
Polymneia. Wherefore I desire your Honors courtesy to bear with my rude pen,
and to excuse my bold attempt in writing. For though I seem at the first to
entreat of trifling toys ((...) Virgill did in praising the silly Gnatte, and
Oui^ likewise in commendyng the ^asell Nutte (yet (no doubt) but through your
Honors well liking hereof, I may hereafter atcheeue some greater enterpryce, as
in grafting some better piece of work. But if my Muse would take in hand to
entreat or rather to declare, what the orbs of the whole world, the
^^rmament, the skies, the Stars, the Moon and the Sun, or to make manifest
thru things which pass man his capacity, yea if I could do these things,
(as in deed I cannot) so lively and so learnedly, that none could surpass me
therein: yet should I be sure to have some of them which could do least
herein, to think themselves in all points equivalent with me. As Marcias
supposed himself equal to Apollo, and Thamiras to the Muses. But what was
their reward? Apollo he all to be beat the one, and the Muses put out the
other his eyes, such was their just de^erres. And whereas (most Honorable)
heretofore I have anoyed your senses with the unsavory scente of my wild
flowers: I have thought it good, to bring your Lordship now into that rude
garden wherein these my vnsau^ry flowers grow: because if your Honor can find
there any flowers among them all, which shall better please, like, or delight
you, than these have done: I willing am, and with as free a hair to bestow
them upon your Honor, as ^a^st I have done these before. But (woe alas) a piece
of wild ground* lately taken into the gardiners hands, and ^edged in, being
but new set, can not, or very hardly delight any man. Notwithstanding, to
please your Honor I am contented to grant you free liberty at your wisdoms
pleasure to croppe each flower therein, although in deed as yet they have hardly
taken root. But seeing this phrase ( Boni est pastoris condere pec^^ non
diglubere) is not unknown to your Honor, I less regard or f^are the pulling
of the^ up by the roots, so boldly do I build upon your Honors courtesy.
Whose courteous heart, and friendly cheer, with bountiful hands to requite each
courtesy: whose noble mind, lowly behavior, gentle language, and good
demeanure therwithal, so shines toward all men, that needs I must commend
thee, and with a sounding trumpe resounde thy worthy acts, and fether thy fame
with immortal wings: that when the Ladies have consulted upon thy destiny, yet
may thou live through worthiness in each man's mouth, and touch the skies with
flying fame. But what need I to blase thy golden gifts of nature, when as thy
wisdom of it self does counteruayle thy courtesy, and fame already has
incountered with thy worthiness? stay therefore O Muse, least while I seek to
praise him at the full, for want of ability I seem rather to diminishe his
fame than otherwise: or to discommend in seeking to commend him. Your Honors
wisdom may well surmise that my homely style is so plainly painted without any
shade or cannopie, that a great many will blushe in the reading thereof, and
rather reap harm than profit thereby. Such bashful youths I exhort to do
as Socrates did, who when he heard any one talk dishonestly, did hide his head
with his cloak until the tale was ended. But as for those which rather reap
harm tha^ good by the reading hereof, I compare the^ to the spyder, who
sucketh poison forth of the Honny suckle, whereas the Be before did reap the
chief of his honey. Also who are evil given will be naught, although they be
locked in stony walls: for although power wants to do evil, yet an evil
disposed mind or a wicked thought shall not be wanting in them. But who so
marketh well my glosing style, shall find Aliquid sal^^ (as the Proverb goes)
in the meanest or basest point thereof. For if they could conten^ themselves
^^il with one coat as Dionisius of Siracusa did, being called from a private
man to be a King, (that is) if they could diligently read this pleasant
volume, and be drawn neither one way nor other with the reading thereof, then
should they find some taste therein: whereas otherwise it will seem but an
unsavory morsel of meat to digest. For by what means could Skeleton that
Laureat poet, or Erasmus that great and learned clarke have uttered their
minds ^o well at large, as through their clokes of merry conceytes in writing
of toys and foolish theames? as Skeleton did by Speak Parr^t, VVare the hawk,
The Tunning of Elynour rumming, Why come ye not to the Court? Phillip
Sparrowe, and such like, yet what greater sense or better matter can be, than
is in this ragged time contained? or who would have heard his fault so
plainly told him if not in such givyng sort? also Erasmus under his praise
of folly, what matters has he touched therein, even the chiefest points
which pertayneth to man's salvation? And sure in my mind he showed no greater
learning in any one book of his penning, than he did in this. But I pass
beyond my bounds, thus much I thought good to bring in for the allowing of my
pleasant style of writing. And as for my rudeness therein, I trust no reader
will seem to condemn me for the least fault therein, as Domician the
Emperor, who for every fault committed, would condemn the malefactor to
die. Least through their tyranny and rash judgment they purchase the like
hatred as Domician whilom did: for Iudicium durum sequitur sententia dura.
Bear therefore (gentle Reader) I beseech thee with my bold attempt in
writing, accepting rather my good will herein than the thing it self (unless
in your own judgment it deserves to be accepted) yet judge thereof with
equity. And if it deserve commendation, so it is, if not, then use thy
discretion therein. For I must needs say that such Tragedies as intend to
inhumanitie, are not worthy of reading, neither to be put in printe. But yet
the Tragedies of Euripides and Sophocles interlaced with pretty Poemes and
pleasant talk I condemn not, whose sweet language did as it were intermedle
the graces with the Muses. Wherefore such Paganicall histories and poetical
Pamphlets ought to be red^e with indifferency. Thus trusting to your Honors
courtesy, at noone I bid good night.

GRANGES GARDEN: Containing as well certain verses upon sundry points, in
Meter, as also diverse Pamphlets in prose: Pleasant to the ear, and
delightful to the Reader, if he abuse not the scente of the Flowers.

A valiant young Gentleman being trained up in Martial provves, and allured by
evil counsel to women's follies, bewayleth his life in this order.
SOmetime in Martial deeds, I set my whole delight:
And eke my steadfast eyes did hate, of wa^ton dames the sight.
But now I take delight, each blasing star to vewe,
My tongue likewise with sugared words, inquireth of their mewe.
Then thither fast I hie, if hope does give me grace,
And many wanton looks I cast, to vewe her comely face.
Thus has she won my heart, my purse is never tide,
Good will has given a dasing dente, fro thence I may not bide.
In hope I spend my time, in hope to gain my will,
I dance attendance every day, in hope to have my fill.
Sometime I have my wish, the bensell of her bow,
Sometime I have my hearts desire, of certain this I know.
Sometime again I want, what is my hearts desire,
Which as dry wood, and kindling coals, does set my heart on fire.
Then I to late repent my want on foolish eye,
Which gustheth forth like springs of tears, my co^sta^t heart to try.
Than this, what greater grief? to spend my wind in vain,
On those who naught regard my heart, and less regard my pain.
Then wish I all to late, that Mars had ruled my will,
Then Cupid he, nor Venus had, not known my heart to kill.
My goods are wasted whole, and I consumed am,
Beware therefore by others harms, a Tygre seems a lam.
But judgment here I crave, who greater sorrows sent,
Of him who tyste me hereunto, or her to whom I lent?
If he, then all beware, of me who bought my wit,
And shun the counsel of the naught, a wise man's rule to hitte.
If she, likewise eschew, th'allurements of the naught,
And learn by me, for sure it is, I have my wisdom bought.
Though it is a sugared bayte, it is but for the time,
And riper years lamenteth much, the loss of former time.
But youth regards not, the things that are to come,
Oh would to God I followed had, the sound of trump and dromme.
For aged years forbid to run this youthful race,
And warnde me often, who would not hear, for lighting in this case.
Young men thinks old men fools, but old men knows well,
Young men are fools, and wants the wit, wherein they do excel.
Let no man therefore shun, the counsel of the old,
For he a fool may counted be* whose faults would not be told.
Thus happy I him count, who can ^^ght well beware,
Of others harms, least he himself, should fall in such a snare.
His Poes^^
What wisdom warn^th mark you well
That folly har^^^th truth does tell.
The force of Beauties price.
AS Cacia^ wind, has force the clouds to draw:
Is Gea^e, or ^umbre, likewise does by straw:
As Adamant stones, does Iron pluck them to:
So amorous looks, has force the like to do.
And as Dan Titan, with his radiant guyse,
The withering grass, does skorche in smothr^ng wise:
Ueneriall Dames do likewise parche the har^es,
Of ravening youths, with there Cupidall darts.
Thus being set on fire with ma^ing mind they stand,
Of ardent love, and waves of woe, to see the upper hand.
Tace c^mmo^i.
A Gentleman re^ealeth his former life.
WHen youth was in his prime, and florish^ most of all,
I s^t my whole delight to view, whom galla^t dames me^ call.
So wauring was my wit^^, so wanton was mine eye,
That all the day I walked the streets, to see who passed bye.
And when a crewe I spide, adornd with tops of pleumes,
Such gasing sights did please me well, and dainty fed my reumes.
If her I did suspect a Curtizan to be,
Then would I clap her on the lips, though every man did see.
And say all hayle fair dame. I joy to see your health,
You will not know your wo^ted friends, such is your store of wealth.
Then she herewith amazde not knowing me before,
Will think I come (as one a fresh) acquaintance new to score.
If she whom thus I kiss, did sail in virtues bark,
I cry you mercy then I said, I did mistake my mark.
No harm, she would reply: thus I a kiss would gain,
Of those whom nere I saw before, else was it to my pain.
And when my hand was in, with those which were of wealth.
The table^ hanging on her neck, sometime I got by stealth.
Sometime I got her ring, sometimes her chain of gold,
Sometime she gave me money store, to bye me what I would.
Thus making up my mouth, I made thereof a skoffe,
I count I got it all by stealth, her mate knew not thereof.
If her by chance I met, in presence of her mate,
I passed by, I knew her not, nor looked at her gate.
Yet if he marked not, my nobbes a nodde should have,
My Connie she would wink again, but none should it perceive.
If that she bitte her lip, thereby I knew her heart,
I must be iogging all in haste, her husband would not starte.
And for a token true, to pass betwixt us twain,
Yea, for to keep our hearts in love, she broke a ring in twain.
If ought I stood in need, this token did I send,
At sight whereof she ready was, what might for ever lend.
Yea glad she was to bend, least her I should forsake,
Who did her self unto my lure, so courteously betake.
Good cheer I could not want, when gone he was from home,
Nor nothing else which pleased mine eye (neglecting silly mo^^e)
This got my ranging foot, this got my glauncyng ^ye,
This got I say my trying tongue, which told ^yr many a lie.
But now the pryme is pass, the flower of all my joy,
Yea, now my youthful days are spent, and fortune seems coye.
Each thing most fresh of hue, in time of Lady Ver,
Now Titan with his parchyng beams, begins himself to ste^.
Now Autumn he is paste, and Hiems co^mes in place,
My goods are wasted whole and some, who^ should I sue for grace?
What should I lean unto? my pillars now are gone,
And eke the trulles whereto I lent, are changed every ^hone.
Now must I turn my coat, and cleave unto my God,
Desiring pardon for my crime, that spared has his rod.
This is the common end, of those which use the game,
Happy is he that sees the snare, and can eschew the same.
Compare your former lust, unto your after wit.
For wisdom says for Virtues school dame Folly is not fit.
And time will force thee see, how folly did anoy,
For where dame pleasure bent thy bow, now fortune seems coy.
Thus thou at length wilt turn, if virtue gives thee grace,
If not, assure thy self to burn, where pleasures hydes her face.
His Poesy*
Sero sapiunt Phryges.
A Gentleman suyng for grace.
NO foolish fantasy through fond affection, in this my sore faynting could
I find my (dear dame) to turn my pain to pleasure: wherefore, as one
through stong with fierce Achidmas sting, requires the second time to taste
thereof, because plain proof declares one poison to drive forth an other: so
I (as a foolish fly, who seeing the bright flame of the candle, never linneth
buzzing about the same till his wings are scortched with heat) perforce am
constrained willingly to enter the same, as a present remedy to mitigate my
former grief. Which foreshewing unto certain of my friends, one among the
rest which before that time had been stong with the same sting, wished me
rather to seek forth some cunning Physician who should bathe me in the
fountain Lethe, the virtue whereof is to lead his ta^^er unto Morpheus his
house, who of courtesy straightfoorth knitteth his brows with a kercher dipte
in Lymbo lake, and lays him over head and ears in the snow of Taygetus,
whereby thorough a sweet slumber which ouertaketh his senses, he forgets
each thing which has passed him before. But I (God knows) seeking this
bathe at the Physicians hands was deceived herein. For he (as it should seem)
delighting to see me pyne in pain, gave me in steed hereof the juice of the
herb Cresses which helps much the memory: which once perceiving, I told
it again to my former friend, who grieved thereat, told me most
comfortless there was no way for remedy but where I took my wound.
Wherefore (mine only Castle of comfort) to thee I sue for grace. Thou know
right well (my Diamond dear) that twice before this time I have been arraigned
at dame Venus her bar, in which arraignment (Lady) as guiltless I have held
up my hand, standing to your courtesy as one accused I know not whereof but
for loyalty. Thus as a poor prisoner have I held up my hand, answeryng at
the judges call, and appealyng to your courtesy only for some spark of grace.
But you as one willing to hear my pittyfull playn^e, commanded me with retire
to turn again to the gayle of affection, where being clogged with chains of
extremity all liberty was restrained, neither can my trembling tongue tell
forth so tedious a tale as should express the pinchyng pain and pyning
penury, wherein my crased corpse and loathsome limbs have languisht this seven
months day and more. Twice hope has repreued me to appeal my chief dorrs
herein, which as yet I would never. But the third time (in extremity of
panges and dreadful doubt of life) I am content. Brave beauty, demeanure,
Cupid, and affection has moved me hereunto. Lo, to thy demand I have
yielded, grant therefore grace in time, else, I wish not to live but die. My
gryping griefs would enjoin me to silence but that extremity forces me to
speak: make answer therefore I pray thee to this demand, what should be the
cause of the restrainte of your courtesy? as to base of birth have I clymed to
hie? then the greater my fall. But my parentage may counteruayle* our wealth
may encounter, unlace therefore your loyalty. But is there any mistrust of
true meaning, constancy, great good will or perfect love? proof declares
this needed not, or think you extremity will cause me change? those
mistrustfull hands of dissimulation do but hinder your wits of well
thinking, and yet are no daynties for fine affection to feed upon it so any
courtesy rested in you. Wherefore think upon my paineful pangs, and what I
suffer for your sake, all is to little to gain my wiche, and the least to
much to leese it. Grant therefore with pity what rests to grant, or else
at the least in steed of a perfect yea, grant but a weak denay. Then
lingering hope will persuade me, that where I took a deadly wound, there shall I
find a salve. Thus trusting to your unknown courtesy, wayling in woe and
doubtful of redress, I leave you to likyng. And yet my constancy commendes
me thine own for aye.

Yours and not mine, F. E.

The paynting of a Curtizan.
IT is a world to see, each feate displaying wise,
Of Venus Nymphs, of Curtizans, whom folly does disguise.
Yea, how, and by what means, they do allure the youth,
To spend upon the^ all they have, whose beauty whettes their tooth.
Who lists to behold, and mark my painting pen,
Shall see their garish tricks set down, whereby they allure the me^.
First with their lawnes, and calls of gold beset with spangs,
With died, and frizeled perewigs, with hearts fro thence that ha^gs,
With velvet cappes, and plumes, they do adorn their heddes,
With red and white they painte their face, to tice the^ to there beds.
There partlets set with spangs, come close unto their chinne,
There gorgets fairly wrought without, enclose black neck^ wtin.
And from their ear there hangs, a pearl and silver ring,
As for a bell, the sound whereof, such like to her does bring.
About her neck likewise, there hangs many a chain,
Yea, many a costly iem they wear, that's given the^ of their train.
Their gowns in fashion are, there vardingales are great,
Their gowns likewise which are so side, do sweep alo^g ye streate.
Their pompes most often are white, their pantables are black,
Their wo^^ed hose are purple bl^w, thus nothing do they lack.
Their gloves are all befumde, with pure and perfect smell,
Yea, all their clothes which smells of musk, lo here she goes they tell.
Their smockes are all bewrought, about the neck and hand,
And (to be short) I tell you plain, all things in order stand.
They only walk the streates, to see and to be seen,
Their wa^ton eyes cast here and there, will tell you what they been.
But if her flanting looks, has trained any one,
Unto the mewe wherein she keeps, along as she has gone,
They shall be sure to find, all kind of music there,
And she her self (at his request) to play she will not spare.
Which does inflame his heart, with flashing sparks of heat,
To try with sugared words, if so, his heart would cease to beat.
Then she to pass the time, at cards will seek to play,
Or else (...) tables will they go, to drive the time away.
Then will they vaunt, and grant, and for affinity,
At cards they will vye, and reuye, each their virginity.
At Irishe game she will, contrary to the game,
At bearing bear more than she should, by proof I know the same.
If that she taken be, with this, that her foul play,
Then makes she straight thereof a ieste (I saw it not) to say
But with this oversight, she does provoke the man,
To think the worste and try the best, by all the means he can.
Then must she have such cheer, as may be got for quoyne,
That by the food of dayntie dishe, her woes he might purloyne.
To spend and make no spare, he must himself incline,
No quoyne, good cheer, array, nor gemmes, for cost he may define.
For, give me, and fetch me, this is their daily song,
But yet with this word Adfer she drives him straight along.
This word for to fulfill, he settes on sale his land,
And naught he sees her want, but buyth it out of hand.
His presence does deserve, remembrance for to have,
But out of sight so out of mind: good will does presence crave.
And if she grauntes him grace, to mitigate his woes,
His handkercher she will bewet, with water of a rose.
And then such wanton toys, she will be sure to find,
That he persuades himself herewith, to him she is full kind.
Who would require more? it full requites his cost.
And he likewise (as proud thereof) will make thereof his boste.
Yea, yea, she treades so nice, she would not wafers break,
And maulte horse like she bears her main, yt air her arms does streake.
Thus as a floting fish, she glides a long the street,
As lau^cing ships she cuts ye seas, her plumes the sails does greet.
But if by candle light, she chance her self to show,
Her painted form so glistreth, as the stars appearde arowe.
Such cousining tricks they have, each man for to deceive,
That while they credit give thereto, her words their wits bereave.
Wherefore let not thine eye, reduce thy wanton woe,
Nor give no credit to their words, which honey like do flow.
Light won, light lost again, be sure them thus to find,
For lightly comen, so lightly gone, this is a harlots kind.
Believe a harlots words, and weaue a web of woe:
No credit therefore give thereto, believe it is not so.
She will not stick to swear she has not known a man,
And thou alone her maydenhed, by filed phrase haste wan.
And that no man alive, could ever gain his will,
When many an one, yea, evry day, of her has had their fill,
No man has touched her skin, excepting hand and face,
Thus will they lie with every breath, it is their wonted grace.
Take heed therefore betime, least thou too late repent.
And curse the time that ere you knew, thereby what folly mente.
Believe, my words are true, by proof thou shall them find,
Adewe at last, I wish thee well, take heed of womenkinde.
The Authors Poesy.
Ne femina, ne tela, non piglia alla candela.
A Gentleman seeing his brother desirous to go to the seas, vvrote these verses
following, unwitting to any, and laid them in his brothers way.
TRue to see the raging of the seas,
When nothing may king Eolus wrath appease.
Boreas blaste^ asunder rendes our sails:
Our tacklings break, our ankers likewise fayles.
The surging seas, they battred have my ship,
And eke mine oars avail me not a chippe.
The ropes are slackte, the maste stands nothing strong:
Thus am I toste, the surging seas along.
The waves beat in, my bark to ouerflowe,
The rugged seas, my ship will overthrow.
Yea, driven I am, sometimes against a Rock,
Sometimes again a Whale his back I lock.
When Neptune thus, and Eol falls to strife,
Then stand I most in danger of my life.
And when the wind begins most to rage,
Then out I cast (my bark for to assuage)
Each thing of weight, and then if sea at will
I chance to have, I less regard mine ill.
It shipwreck once, I suffer in my life,
Farewell my goods, farewell my gentle wife.
Adewe my friends, adewe my children all,
For naught preuayles, though on your help I call.
First go I to the bottom of the seas,
And thrice I rise, but nothing for mine ease.
For why? at length, when last of all I fall,
My wind does fail, wherewith I burst my gall.
My body then, so full as it may be
With water store, then may each man me see
All borne alofte, amid the fomyng froth,
And driven to land, if Neptune waxes wroth.
But yet if so I cunnyng have to swim,
When first I fall into the water brimme:
With streakyng arms and eke with playing feet,
My part I play the water flouddes to great.
And then perchance, some ship comes sailing ^ye,
Which saues my life* if me they do epsy.
Perchance likewise I drown before they come,
Perchance the crampe my feet it makes numme.
If so it does, then sure I am to die,
In this distress the sea will aid deny.
Wherefore (I wish) who well may live by land,
And him forbid the sea to take in hand.
A Gentleman half in despair seeks release.
Making repair (dear dame) to the comely Court of curiosity where choice
with change of courtesy does abound, hoping to find it a Castle of Comfort,
dame Beauty being Queen contrary to all exspectation being frustrate of hope,
amazed I stood like a carped knight whose eyes had been dazed with her to much
contemplation, as not of force to gaze upon the Sun. In this trance of
troubles my trembling tongue was partly enjoined to silence, but yet extremity
forced me to appeal to her courtesy for grace: notwithstanding boot^l^sse it
was to strive against the stream, for suspection had accused me unto this
prince, and she her self with rash judgment had half condemned me, for that
Affection had sworn to the same: no Lawyerly plea quoth she holds at the
bar unless Affection quitte thee clear, which ^ring, with pityfull cheer I
got me on my knees, holding up my hands, and saying in this sort: I see
Mistrust is no mistress for me in this case, wherefore most gracious prince
it extends not to equity yt in so wayghtie a matter a perjured witness
should judge upon my dome. To his peril be it (quoth she) if he judge thee not
aright. Alas (quoth I) S^minum iu^ summa iniuria est, and if be find me
guilty, it is but of loyalty: wherefore take pity and quitte me before of
courtesy, no fault is there in me (most renowned) for if my heart has
offended, and Affection as foreman of the Jury, so find it yet no death, it
deserves but acquitaunce: wherefore challenging Affection, as by due order of
law licenced, let curtsie I beseech thee for indifferency judge between us
both. Who climeth so hie (quoth she) must needs get a fall: might not berry
brown have contented dame Pleasure, considering the great store of Menowes
that flow in every lake? how say you to this? Menowes Lady (I answered) serve
but as baytes for greater fish, and the brightness of the Sun daseth the
light of the Moon. Thus my Dyamon hoping upon an haven in doubt I stand of
shipwreck, lend me therefore thy helping hand, for in doubtful danger of
destiny, the ready faculty of a woman's wit avails most of all: Thus
forced to fry in my fustian fumes, extremity calls upon your present help.

Yours allowed, F. G.

The description of the love of a Gentleman and a Gentlevvoman.
IN the time of Lady Ver, the sweet and fragrant smell
Of each delight, it does a rangyng foot compel.
For when the April showers, descend with western winds,
Each herb, each flower, and plant, do flourish in their kinds.
Each leaf upon the tree, the grass upon the ground,
The Hatherne buddes new sprung, on earth what may be found,
Does yield as pleasant scentes, as nature can devise:
All things in lusty green, appears displaying wise.
And eurye bird that lives, then strayneth forth his voice:
So that of each delight, each man may take his choice.
Thus in this merry month, he took delight to vewe,
Ought that of nature was, most pleasant in his hew.
Yea, many a time and often, in springs and groves alone,
Himself he would apply, as yet where none had gone.
There in distilling wise, she took delight to see,
The chirpyng birds full often, from bushe to bushe to flee.
Whose warbling notes him thought, enforced to believe,
That nothing under Sun, such merry lives did live.
In every bushe again, the Primerose did appear,
The Uiolet at hand, was pressed to be his feere:
Which cast such fragrant smelles, amid this pleasant spring,
That eury bushe it did, a new delight forth bring.
But walking all alone, in this his whole delight,
The Primerose as him thought, and Uiolet did fight.
Wherewith as one amazde, at large he them beheld,
Hoping at length to see, the one or other yield.
But lighting in a vain, which fortune had not tried,
Behold even near at hand, a damsel he espied,
Whose beauty was so brave, and eke so Crystal clear,
That nature could not frame, the like to be her peer.
Her peer I never saw, for beauty in the face,
The like was never seen, such was her comely grace.
And where he took delight, before in fragrant scente,
Now her to gaze upon, his mind was wholly bente.
And as good fortune would, he stood behind a bushe,
Where well he might behold, and need not starte the thrushe.
For while she took delight, to vewe this pleasant field,
He did obtain his will, at large he her beheld.
And naught she did suspect, for here he lay unknown,
Until such time as love, his kindling coals had blown.
Her round and cherry lips, and eke her skarlet hew,
Her crymson cheeks was cause, the more he did them vewe.
Her rosed looks him thought, his tentiue ears forth fold,
The more that them he did, the more he should behold.
So fell it forth at length, he could not have his fill,
The more he did her vewe, the more he wished his will.
When long he vewed had through many a pleasant tune,
Him thought this April month, was turnde to ^oly June.
For in her face him thought, the red rose and the white,
In lively form did seem, with other for to fight.
The Columbine likewise, which commendable is,
With Dasles did contend, that delectable bliss.
And as a Marygolde amazde, he her behilde,
Until her das^ng dentes, his rufull heart it filde.
Then out alas he cried, but all it was in vain,
His heart fro him was gone, and did with her remain.
This damsel single was, and eke did want a mate,
And he to feed her reume, did want a dayntie date.
But yet his heart was good, and love did make him ^olde,
He spared not at length, his meaning to unfold.
For her he went unto, and greeted in this wise,
Alhayle dear dame he said, the chief of virtues pryse.
I see that Lady Ver, with sweet and fragrant scente,
Inflames your heart to see, whereto dame nature lent.
The Nightingale likewise, with her recorded song,
Has given you this desire, this grove to walk along.
For now each thing that is, does florishe in his kind,
And is of force (me thinks) to recreate the mind.
And eke no greater health, upon the earth is found,
Then early and late to walk, upon this pleasant ground:
The scente whereof will so, restore your lively blood,
That you your self will say, therefore it is very good.
A thousand fancies more, for to delight the mind,
Within this pleasant grove, by walking you may find.
A flower by chance I spy, whose beauty fresh and gay,
Does force against my will, what I to you do say.
It ravished has my wits, wherefore I crave your aid,
Herewith my garlande make, let me not be denayed.
For you the flower are, wherewith aghast I stand,
And choice there rests none, for beauty at your hand.
With you my heart shall rest, when as my corpse is slain,
Take pity on my woe, take pity on my pain.
At which she stood aghast, not knowing what to say,
She soon with love was prickte, and could not say me nay.
So friendly Venus is, so friendly Cupid was,
That fancy brought her soon, unto my wisshed pass.
She answered again, a flower likewise I see,
Wherein the proof declares, my constant heart to be.
And where I heretofore, was mo^de by many a voice,
Yet none my heart could gain, so curious was my choice.
The sap now creeps up, and vapors do increace,
Lust does enforce the flesh, to war and not to peace.
When Ver is in her pryme, each one desires a mate:
And now the thing does please, which I before did hate.
For erst I did detest, to see a gallant dame,
But now I take delight, of thee to hear the name.
And sith that none before, did please my gazing eye,
Until such time I did, your presence here epsy.
So now your love I crave, my love for to requite,
Least cause I have to curse, the canckred Cupides spite.
Betake your self I say, unto a trusty friend,
In me repose such trust, as ye in me shall find.
For why, in you I live, and in my self I dye:
Which as a rampire is, your love again to try.
My harms so huge would cry, if it I should not gain,
And none alive I think, should suffer the like pain.
But hope a Castle is, for me to winter in,
And biddes me not to fear, nor yet my suyte to lin.
With this she walked home, unto her mansion place:
And all the way he sued, of her to purchase grace.
Who fancide him as much, as he did fancy her,
Though it she kept unknown, as best was thought to her.
The end it tried all, such love to him she bare,
He was her whole delight for him was all her care.
His sight it did her good, his absence bredde anoye,
His presence was her meat, her drink, and all her joy.
For if he missing were, at most but half a day,
Her eyes like springs of tears would run i^ like (...).
Or else like Xanthus streams, her tricklyng tears ran down,
As salt as brine, and eke her skalding sighs unknown,
Most ready were sometimes, to end her loathsome life,
Or else in haste she callde for Atropos her knife.
Thus nothing was to much for him that was so kind,
And yet the more he sought, the less his luck to find.
Such peeuishe luck had he, in vain to spend his wind,
That, look the more he ran, the more he came behind.
Jove would it so, I think, dame fortune being coye,
Delay it danger bred, and absence bredde anoye.
Though either was most true, and faithful eke in heart,
If fortune turn her whele, then pleasure is but tarte.
So quaynte by proof she was, and to^^ing in her chance,
That where Dame pleasure stood, she rygor did advance.
For why? it happened so, the trumpe of Muse had blown,
Unto her ears, that he far forth was better known
To other than to her, and eke betrothed had
His hand, his heart, and faith unto an other Dame,
So that she did despair, and yet he not in blame.
But farther it was noysde, that he naught else did seek
Of her, but for to have his pleasure for a week.
Which though it was most false, and blased in despite,
Yet it her ravished had of all her fore delight.
For she believed straight, how that these words were true,
And in this wise began to rage and eke to rue.
Have I long fostred up, a naughty soaring Hawk.
That now forsakes the lure, when I to her it shake?
May whistling naught prevail, needs will thou cheek at fiste,
Then soar alofte at will, and take thee up whose list^.
In deed thy slicknesse showed, thou wast a rolling stone,
Wherefore adewe my joy, since needs thou will be gone.
Sith fortune was so quaynte, and nothing could prevail,
With grief she curste her hap, and thus began to rail.
An other has my right, and it inioyes perforce,
The Gods revenge it will, for this thy sought deuorce.
Take heed ye Ladies all, on whom ye ^et your love,
^^ce that he constant be, for so it does behoue.
Too late now am I wise, be warned all by me,
By others harms, beware the snare ye do not see.
The best that now I can, is others to forewarne.
Least they as I have done, do light in such like harm.
Wherefore I wish you all, whom C^p^d does assault.
Him to divide in twain, least through your own default,
To late you do repent, the force of Cupid^ bow,
And curse the time ye wist, what Venus meant to know.
And learn each one by me, which way to frame your love,
Be constant, just and true, as is the turtle Dove.
But yet beware on whom, ye let your love to light,
Least want of ^endring like, does put your joys to flight.
Know first his nature well, and then repose your trust,
Let nothing be to dear, if so ye find him just.
Spend not your love on those, that will it not requite,
For why? that want of love, it can no one delight.
Thus ponder well my words, let Pallas be your guide,
Least that in w^^ton lust, your feet begin to slide,
Adewe my pleasures all, adewe my chief delight,
Love has me wounded now, and put you all to flight.
Wherefore.
Ye Tigr^s whelps unkind, and eke ye ravening Wolves,
The Stigian poole and eke, the Acherontes golues.
Yea, yea, the Man^icors, the Lions in their rage,
Cerborus, Alecto, with the Leopardes savage.
And (to be short) draw near, ye^ furi^s all of Hell,
Ye Fayries with the rest, elsewhere where so you dwell.
And Cloth^ now leave off, thy disloffe aye to head,
Lachesis sit still, and spinne no longer thread.
But Atropos make haste, and with thy shredding knyfe,
Asunder cut the threede, which does prolong my life.
For why? Milecian maids, your ^^ippes I mean to tr^^^,
And as Lucrecia did, my life for to unlace.
Wherefore ye doleful dumpes, and eke ye Ladies all,
Come rue the wretched chance, which did to me befall.
Come Heraclitus now, to weep and eke to wayle,
And Ladies now to rue, hoyste up your mourning sail.
Melpomene likewise, now take thy pen in hand,
In mourning wise to paint, how fortune does withstand.
Likewise I thee beseech, Sulpicia of Rome,
Some pos^e to indite, to set upon my tome.
That all which hears or sees, may rue my wretched case,
And know the cause wherefore, my life I did unlace.
This said, with bloody hand, she took her dyrchill knife,
And to her heart it thrust, to end her loathsome life.
Which blown unto his ears, he rued in raging wise,
But naught he could withstand, her fond and foolish guyse.
Why live I on the earth, that thus am left alone?
Why seek I not to die, and first to make my moan?
Alas my gem of joy, and eke my Dymande dear,
Ah fountain of delight, as dead why lie thou here.
What shall of me become, my joys exiled are,
My heart with grief will ^urst, hope lodged is so far.
Has Paris, Leander, Pyrame or Troylus,
Aye truer been than I, to thee my pretty mus?
Pesistratus in faith, or Romeus in truth?
What cause then have thou had, to fall in such a ruth?
These words are but in vain, I do but seek to drown
Thy crased corpse in tears, of certain this is known.
It shall not aye be said, that thou for me shall die,
For I the like to do, thy former deed will try.
Blood shall be shed for blood, and life shall pay for life,
I have like force I know, like hand, and the like knyfe.
With like, adewe my ghost, adewe my latter breath,
Adewe each pleasure that is found upon the earth.
Yet Ladies thus much grant, our corpse one tome to have,
One Epitaphe thereon, this only thing I crave.
This said, he kis^e her corpse, ten thousand times and more,
With tears be fillde those wounds, that grieved him full sore.
He callde upon her name, ten thousand times and more,
But life it yielded had to cruel death his lore.
Her eyes they were clong fast, pressed down with heavy death,
Adewe my dear he said, and thus he stopte his breath.
A Song which the Gentlewoman made, before she slevve her self.
O Cupide, why art thou to me unkind?
Unequal art thou in thy raging mood,
Why did thou seek with love to make me blind?
By love to die, it will do thee no good,
Unless perchance you joy to see my woe,
I gave no cause to find you such a foe.
Did (...) offend thy mother any time?
Whereby she sought on me to wrecke her spite,
Did I commit at any time a crime,
Which moved you to put my joys to flight?
If so I have, then did thou serve me well,
If not, me thinks thy nature is to fell.
Jove knows all, but I do feel the smarte,
I have the wound which breeds my endless woe,
Alas, alas, what means that dyrefull darte?
It makes me love whom neither may forgo.
Alas to late I may repent the time,
Of my delight, when Ver was in her pryme.
For my delight has given this deadly wound,
Which by no means again may cured be,
Alas, alas, love does me now confound,
By parant proof each man the same may see.
And none alive does rest to cure the same,
Thee Cupid now full justly may I blame.
And Lady Ver, thou art my mortal foe,
For thy delights did force my feet to range,
Thou art the cause of all this endless woe,
Though Fortune coy she seemed somewhat strange.
Thus all alike did give this mortal wound,
And all alike has sought me to confound.
If Lethe lake should yield unto my lore,
Yet would it want in me his former force.
It could not be a salve for such a sore,
For Cresses juice it would his wont deuorce.
Wherefore in vain I cry and look for aid,
For hope it self at need has me denayde.
Come Ladies now, put on your mourning weeds,
Mourn and lament the cause of my distress,
Through want of will my heart it daily bleedes.
For hope denies to yield me ought redress.
Mourn and lament each day with doleful tunes,
For I am she whom lingering love consumes.
What woman will in man repose her trust,
And finds them so often to be unjust?
Worse than a beast is he that plights his troth,
And then for to perform the same is loath:
But worse is he that gives his faith to one,
When long before to others it was gone.
Falser art thou to me than Demophon,
Theseus, Phaon, Aeneas, Jason:
Falser to me, than ever any wight,
Who waste my joy, and eke my whole delight:
And of my death thy falshoode is in blame,
Whose blood shall pay the ransom of the same.
Come rue therefore with me ye wretched wightes,
With doleful tunes approach ye near at hand,
Weep now and wayle forbidding all delights,
And pleasures eke at elbow yours to stand.
For love it seeks to make me now a tome,
And love it will me bring unto my dome.
FINIS.
An answer to a letter written unto him by a Curtyzan.
A Bottom for your silk it seems
my letters are become,
Which with often winding off and on
are wasted whole and some.
Who nilling other for to find
but through my paintyng pen,
Thereto to give occasion
to write you will not lenne.
And since you take such great delight
my bottomes for to spend,
Behold now grauntyng to your will,
an other here I send.
Ne suitor vltra crepidam,
I give this phrase to vewe,
Forbidding Sowters to exceed,
the clowting of a shoe.
It Is seldom seen a Swan to diue,
of Morehennes had been best
For you to talk, although you seem
that name for to detest.
Dianas troop it best may blase
the Swan of Menander,
It best becomes your pen to paynte
the Gose and the gander.
Whose tongue does run before your wit,
and shows, fools boltes sone shot:
You would a good Virgillian be,
if Vir in place were not.
Sometime if Ovid took delight
to praise the hasell Nutte,
If Virgill vaunting of his Gnat,
why do not I forth put
My self to paynt thy iuggling tricks?
secluding dalliaunce,
Who knows so well thy legerdemaynes
with false conueyance.
You are Meduse that feendlike mare,
no more a Curtizan,
You are no more a soaryng Hawk,
what then, a chaste Diane?
Not so, what then? the rampyng fly,
who vauntes on every dishe
Whereon he lights, and sowes his seeds,
a bayte for those that fish.
For with your preuy winkes, and noddes,
yea with your smyling looks,
With wanton toys, and sugared words,
which are your chiefest hooks:
With Demi grauntes, and weak denayes,
to those that crave good will.
Thou do provoke the bashful youths,
a Uirgins rule to spill.
For sure such is thy change with choice,
and eke thy choice to change,
That it inforceth many an one
his wanton wits to range.
Thy beauty as a trumpet is
this Larum forth to sound,
Tantara, tara, Tantara,
which when it does rebounde
Intentine ears, of force it is
each man for to delight,
And biddes them s^oupe unto thy lure
to put their cares to flight.
Then Alleluya they cry,
with down, down, down, down,
Terlyterlowe, terlyterlowe,
pype down, down^, down, down.
If so the hunte be up, then sound,
tathane, tathane, enough.
I see it is the hounds do yelpe,
bowgh, bowgh, baugh, baugh, baugh, baugh.
The game is dead, beat off the hounds,
rate, rate, hawe, hawe, dead, dead.
They spoil the hare, it is nothing worth,
they mangle all his head.
You know my mind, how beauties price
contendeth still with lust,
Affection yet once let aside,
lays pleasure in the dust.
Farewell and thus adewe.
Sound trumpe Aleluya,
It the end of Taratantara,
To joy my pleasant Dallyda,
So clothed with the Lilly.
A song of a Lover, wherein he shows his love tovvarde his Lady.
THe feathered foul that flies so hye
And floting fish which swimmes so low,
When as their time they do espy,
They take refuge for every woe.
Yet I forlorn a doleful wight,
Who lives in vain upon the earth,
Do wish me set far from the light:
And rid of this my spyring breath.
For that no refuge can I find,
Which will abate my raging woe,
Which forces me to err from kind:
And eke from nature quite to go.
It Hobbyes houer in the wind,
When as they seek to get a pray:
Then am I sure of such like kind,
Their trade in me does bear such swaye.
My Lady fair whose shape does shine
And glyster in my vading sight,
Does force my heart with woe to pine,
And biddes my joys at noone good night.
Yet houer I full often in thayre
My Ladies but which hedgeth in:
Hoping at length of her so fair,
The longed love with ease to win.
I stryde the streets both long and wide,
I stealed sight of her to have:
Escaping neither time nor tide,
But still I seek for that I crave.
What though her love she said me nay,
When as I cravde it at her hand?
Of trothfull troth hope biddes me say,
That love has hedgde me in her hand.
I Proverb old I bear in mind,
The which I hope will be full true:
The falling out of lovers kind,
Is feigned wrath love to renew.
If so it be, I less regard
Her frownyng looks which feigned are,
If not, what then? my luck is hard,
And heart from hope is lodged far.
FINIS.
A Gentleman being half forsaken by mistrust, appealeth to his Lady again by
humility.
LOyalty (Lady binds me, and lingering love commands me to salute thee my
double dear. And since (as the proverb goes) Ink and paper blusheth not. I
think it best rather to unfold my meaning unto thee by some teltale paper
(hoping thereby to gain at thy wonted courtesy, the yelding up of ye Castle of
Comfort, which of long time has been sacked and sieg^d with force) than by
tre^bling tongue to appeal to Humility, whose bashfulnesse in pleading my
cause at your bar, neglects to cou^teruayle good will. Thus ^^orow defaulte
being made by my foltring tongue in this case, wisdom would inioyne me for a
season to silence, but that love makes me bold in this raignement of
Affection without mistrust of thy wonted courtesy to ^olde up my hand,
s^anding and appealing no less to the same for indifferency in ^earyng my
cause, t^an equity in judging of the same. Hope does encourage me to stand
without fear, not lookyng for a rash but a well devised judgment. Let me
not (Lady) be frustrate of hope. With equity judge my cause, and according to
thy discretion define thereof, though dotage (Lady) in some, yet in me it is no
good plea: wherefore let not my writ abayte, my feet with long standing
faynteth, my hand with long holdyng werieth, and mine eye with long lookyng
daseth, wherefore take pity on my senses and lean to affection. Mistrust were
no Mistress for me, whom loyalty casts in thraldom: and distress were no
Master, if liberty were free: discharge me therefore I beseech thee of these
mistrustfull hands of dissimulation, enioynyng me once again to thy Arbor of
amity, and repose no less trust and confidence in me, than my loyalty and
true meaning in equal ballaunce were able to way down. Try therefore and
tr^^^ me. for time tries truth; truth causes trust, trust, true love and
friendship, and true love man's desire. Call therefore thy wits and senses to
a general counsel, therein to determine of my life or dome. Thus as your
poor prisoner clogged with chains of deep despair (but that hope
recomforteth) I appeal to your courtesy, gaping no less for equity than
clemency in this case*

Your poor prisoner, F. G.

A new Married man being stung with vvedlocke, declares his mind Cantico
more, upon this text: Content your self as well as I, let reason rule your
mind, As Cuck^ldes come by destiny, so Cucko^^s sing by kind.
WHen as Aurora in the morn, did buskle up to rise,
And Lucifer that broad day Star, did vaunce himself in skies.
I began Morpheus to resist, and eke his mace to skorne,
Murcea likewise stepped aside, and I as one newborn.
In stretchyng forth my slothful limbs, amid my naked bed,
Began to think oppressed with care, which way my life to lead.
For thryce seven times the Lady Ver, had florisht in her pryme,
And thryce seven times Dan E^tas he, appeared in my time.
No less likewise had Autumn he, by course me showed his face,
With hoary Hyems at his train according to his grace.
Which when I saw how Time did pass, and balde he was behind,
I thought it best my self tapply, his former bushe to find,
And found, thereon to lay fast hold, because he flittes away,
For time and tide it tarieth none, nor keeps at a stay.
Thus musing much with masing mind, which way for me were best,
At length I found that hard it was, for ought to live at rest.
For if dame Pleasure streake mine oar, in this my youthful race,
Sweet meat sharp sauce, I know requirs no judgment in this case.
And what though Venus graunts me grace? naught thereby shall I
Such pleasures lasts but a time, and yet they do ask pain. ^gaine,
And then if so affection fond, within my breast should raygnt,
A Lion in an Asses skin my heart it should retain.
Whereof Valerius does report, that Aristophnes once,
In templis Acharon^^s made prayers for the nonce*
That he in Charons ferry boat might pass the Stygian lake,
To Plutos grysly gates of Hell: which for his daughters sake
He did obtain, through feigned love, which he to them did bear,
Alecto, and Tisiphone, Megera: these for fear
He flattered much, to whom I know such credit did they give,
That they him taught with sops to feed (if so he sought to live)
The Triceps head of Cerberus the porter of his gate,
But see within thou stay not long, least forth thou come to late.
This council did he keep full well, and as they had him tought
He did, and saw what was his will, he found eke what he sought.
But what he found that restes unknown, but when he came again
Unto Thatheniensians, he began to warn them plain,
For wanton Lions fostryng up within the City walls,
Least while they think of Melt to feed, they taste of bitter galls,
Thus likyng breeds extremity, lulld in affections lap,
And look what others pleases most, therein I find least sap.
Alas what one can ^rame himself his youthful race to spend,
All in Mineruas comely court? does not Diana hende
Sometime unto Dame pleasures laws? how then ca^ I withstand
The fiery force of Cupid^s bow? does not dame Venus stand
At Beauties bar with comely crewes and routes of dayntie dames?
Whose smiling looks and pra^king toys, does cast such fiery flames
Before my greedy glauncing eyes, that rolleth here and there,
That I poor soul do rest betrayde, as does the fearful hare.
What shall I do poor silly sotte? make answer in this case:
Where are thy wits as now become, that art so wan of face?
If so they wandering be abroad, then call them home again,
A counsel general to hold it asks them no pain.
Therein determine of my life, how I the same shall lead,
But yet determine of thy self that perfect path to tread,
That leads unto the perfect joys, else thou thy self beshrowe
May soon perchance, and unawares the pain thereof shall know.
Thus being set in counsel grave, this counsel did they give,
That I my running head to stay, and eke at ease to live,
A wife should wedde (oh waylfull woe) what could have chanced wurse?
The wedded man best lives at ease, when fast bound in his purse
He has the tongue of wedded wife, else will she clatter so,
Both to his face and at his back, that glad he is to go
His way and leave her all alone, for why a shrewishe tongue,
Is like unto an Aspen leaf, that nothing vayles to clangue.
But yet for this they councellde me a wedded wife to take,
That I the fish of common sewer might whole and clean forsake.
I was content, my wits did serve, and would me so to do,
To wiue I went, as bootelesse bente, a goslyng for to shoe.
For look whose wife in beauty brave, does pass the middle sort,
Each thinks her naught, a secret whore, and gives her this report.
But further yet of wives to speak, thus much I have to say,
Whose wife in wealth her mate exceedes, she then will bear ye sway,
And tread upon her husbands crown, as for her feet to low,
Thou might have beggde, this will she say (if so she be a shrowe)
If not for me, thou know full well, thus will she bear the rule,
And wear the breeches of her mate, as wrapped in Friars cule.
I did deserve a better man than ever thou will be,
Why seekste thou then thy whole affairs or ought to hide fro me?
Why should not I thy council be, without restraint of will?
So ought it be, and so it shall, till pleasure has his fill.
Then she disdayning of her match, some one will soon procure,
To pay the box, and eke with salve, her former wound to cure.
To Cuckoldes hall she will him send, as warden for to be,
With grifted horns upon his head, as every one may see.
Her husbands wealth shall wasted be, upon her bilbowe boys,
Thus ouerfayre, and all to rich, do want no tedious toys.
Then who so wives, whom beauty wa^ts, be she ere poor or ritche,
He will her loathe, she can not please, she is not for his pitche.
Thus which way can a married man at this day live at ease,
When neither fair, the foul, nor rich, his fancy fond may please?
Yet I a merry mean did find, which is a berry Brown,
Brown and lovely (thus they say) she only bears the crown.
If so it be (as Gods it grant) then am I all to wedde,
For Brown and lovely have I cought, taccompany me in bed.
New married wives and young men too, do think the day is long,
Wherein they wedded be, and wish for want of other song
The night were come, and so did I, that Phoebus to the west,
With steedes were drawn on chariot wheles, and there to take his rest.
His course was done, and Vesper she with Luna playde their parts,
Which pleased us well, for joys approcht, most meet for loving hearts,
But passing forth this pleasant night, with lovely tricks I say,
Alas to soon dan Phoebus he did show, that it was day.
And with his radiant glittering beams began for to display,
It was not meet for lovers, yet so timely for to rise,
But for to chat an hour or two, this is their wonted guyse:
And playing thus with wa^to^ toys, ye Cuckoo bad good morrow,
Alas thought I, a token it is, for me to live in sorrow:
Cuckoo sang he, Cuckoo said I, what destiny is this?
Who so it hears, he well may think, it is no sacred bliss.
Alas (quoth she) what cause have you, as yet thus for to say,
In Cuckoo time few have a charm, to cause his tongue to stay.
Wherefore,
Content your self as well as I, let reason rule your mind.
As Cuckolds come by destiny, so Cuckowes sing by kind.
FINIS.
The Lover forsaken, bewayleth his chance.
IF ever man had cause to wayle,
then have I cause to mourn,
Who joys to see my vowed foe,
I like and am forlorn.
I serve where no acceptance is
and have this seven years space,
And thryce seven in years I would her serve
in hope to purchase grace.
But all alas it is in vain,
I like but to my cost,
For why the love I have bestowed
I count it is but lost.
I take delight to vewe that face
which yeeldes my deadly wound,
I love to serve in loyal thrall
although no thanks are found.
O gulfes of care, O doleful dumpes
that sore oppress my heart,
Why do ye run in ragyng wise,
have I deserude a part?
No no, I see it is bootelesse now
for me to call or cry,
For none I see does rest alive
whose aid I mean to try.
Her breath alone it does suffice
to end my loathsome life,
For why the Coccatryce it is like
and I deserve no wife.
Since Fortune quaynte has granted so,
needs must I be content,
No way there is for to withstand
the chance she has me sent.
Sith it is my hap my joys to cease
dame Pleasure now adewe,
And doleful dumpes approach at hand.
my wretched case to rewe.
FINIS.
The Lover hearing his Lady to be cast in dumpes, vvriteth unto her in this
order.
LAdy, I hear of thy sad perplexity, but what should be the cause thereof
I know not, yet if Hearts ease may heal thee, the Dasle delectable delight
thee, or the pleasant Pinke may please thee, behold here I grant thee the
keye of my garden, gather them, use them, and wear them at will: for even the
chiefest flower therein I afforde it thee willingly to furnishe forth thy
garland. Leave off therefore thy mournyng weeds, let me be thy comfort, who
am thine own for aye. Try and trust me, use and wear me, I am thine own and
will be while life does last. I want the Rhetorical terms of Polymneia to
polishe forth my writing, my heart is true, my love unfeigned, wherefore bear
with my rudeness, for great good will does gravel me. Ink and paper
blusheth not, wherefore if my pen were able, well might I here unlace my
loyalty: but neither tongue can tell, heart think, nor pen subscrybe the
unfeigned love which I bear unto thee, who only art the Castle of my
Comfort: wherefore I will omit the showing thereof my self, committiing
each surmise unto thy after wit. For bashfulnesse in writing incountreth with
my Muse, and facility neglects to counteruayle good will. In secret thought
therefore think of my loyalty, perpende well my meaning, for constancy it
buffeteth a wavering mind: more yours tha^ mine own my tried troth shall
bind me. Open therefore thy breast and let it shroude two faithful hearts in
one. Cupid has commanded me to be no changelyng, for as I am so will I be. O
would thou could perceive mine inward heart or else conceive my secret
thought. But time ^^eth troth and brings all to light, the smothering heat
at length breaks forth in flame Oh open thy breast and let me enter, for the
Sun shall shine at midnight, the Moon and Stars at noone day, the Sea
shall become the Land, and the land the Sea, yea the Heaven shall become the
Earth, and the Earth Heaven, before such time as I forsake thee. Thus printing
my words in thine heart, and rolling full often the sense thereof in thy mind,
I leave thee to judge thereof according unto thy discretion.

Your vowed friend, F. G.

I. G. bids his friend A. T. good morrovve.
AVe madama, good morrow if it please.
Bone iour ma mestresse did you lie at ease?
Dieu vou done bone iour, will nothing make you speak?
What rest have you taken? your mind to me break.
What nothing but mum? an Almon for parrot,
Speak Parrot I pray thee, may nothing be got?
Your pillow misliketh, else care has forbid,
Your eyes to be sleepyng, while pleasure is hid.
Else says M^rcea, the sleep is in thine eyes,
Disdain else forbids (through vanities cries)
To bid me good morrow, if heart will not break.
Then say but Aueto: I like when you speak.
Comporte vou maddam? in French you do excel.
Bien sire gramercy, this likes me very well.
Ie suu bien a^se p^ur vou voye in bone sante:
I am glad to see that your breath is not fainte.
And since that you speak, now for my god morrow,
Ie vou pry de bon ceur, take this that I owe,
A verse it is or twain, wherewith I mean to greet,
Your mornings first flight as love has thought it meet.
Perliez bien ou perliez rien, you know my mind:
Nothing will I speak, which shall not seem full kind.
As hoarie Hyems froste, keeps back with pining pain,
Each brave delight, till Ver does show her face again:
Thy going so to bed does put my joys to flight,
Till morning does appear, wherefore I hate goodnight.
For as the falling sap which creepes into the earth,
Disgrace the trees until return of Ver her bearth:
As naked seems the trees which gallant were of hew:
So naked seems the house when laid thou art in mew.
Thy bed is like thy grave, the earth presents the sheets:
The fricking fleas are like, the worms dead corpse which greetes.
But when the lively sap creepes up in blowing thorn,
And each delight does seem to laugh the frost to scorn:
As Ver most fresh of hue, sendes forth her new delights,
With just return, and greetes us all with pleasant sightes:
So does Aurora seem, his gifts for to bes^owe,
Although to Lady Ver he be a g^^e below.
For as the spring delights each thing upon the earth,
Which moves them to wish and call upon her bearth:
So does the morn (me thinks) unclose and eke unbind,
Each thing which in the night, are closed in their kind.
And nothing greeues me more, than when the night draws on,
For then I know full well we sunder most anon.
And then in vain I wish the morn for aye remain,
That then my pleasure lost I might enjoy again.
For in the morn (me thinks) I see the sap creepes up,
Which to my will, does seek with joys to fill my cup.
As great is my delight to vewe thy comely face,
As is the birds, to see the Lady Ver in place.
And eury morn by course does show me thee again,
Whereas the night before us parted has in twain.
The brydegrome in his course does take no more delight,
Than I do daily take, of thee to have a sight.
Aue I say therefore, I joy to see thy face:
Aueto to reply, this point I ask of grace:
For while my life does last, with thee my darte shall rest;
And for thy sake I will, all other choice detest.
For sure it is in time, the brazen walls will starte,
And eke the water flouddes the craggy rocks will part.
In time the watrishe drops, we see does perce the stone.
Wherefore I hope to find, as yet where love is none.
This salutation print it within thy breast,
And (as deserte deserves) therein so let it rest.
As time it tries troth, so then repose thy trust,
I crave good will for aye, and not to serve my lust.
His good night to the same A. T.
I Brone in grief my tower of trust
to set Morpheus mace:
For needs it will divide us both
though for a little space.
Yet can it not so little be,
though for an hour or twain,
But sure me thinks it is a year,
asunder to remain.
For going to thy naked bed
thou go to thy grave:
And every thing resembles right
the course which death does crave.
Within thy face consistes my joys,
within thy heart my life,
When death does call upon thy corpse
then do I end my life.
At night my joys begin to end,
because we must depart:
And doleful dumpes oppress my mind,
so loathe I am to starte.
And when of force depart we must,
with lingering steps I go:
For why thy sweet abode I wish
whose want does breed my woe.
My heavy heart within my corpse
loath to depart does dance:
And in my moning mind me thinks
whole barks of care does lance.
Thy mewe it is a haven of hope
whereto I cleave and hold:
Hold Cable ropes, and Ancor fast
for hope does make me bold.
Since driven by drifte we must depart,
Morpheus thus much grant,
That all the night I dream on her
whom in the day I haunt.
And that in lively form her face
before me may appear,
So that I may persuade my self
she were in presence here.
I would imbracyng in mine arms
I could my self persuade,
For sure it were a golden dream
to walk in such a shade.
Shall I not lull thee in my lap
as well by night as day?
Though not, I hope thy heart fro mine
it will not go astray.
For why I bear thee in my breast
and will while life does last,
My heart to thine I vow by oath
it shall be linked fast.
And le^te one corpse two faithful hearts
shrowde up* yea all in one.
We linger time and all in vain
of force we must be gone.
Good night therefore, God send you rest,
and eke Hearts ease at will.
God grant your joys they may increase,
also the world at will.
In health the Gods prolong thy life,
of wealth to have thy fill.
Good fame I say and good report,
according to their will.
With heavy cheer I bid good night,
time calls us away:
Against my will we must depart,
and that without delay.
His Farewell to the same.
A Greater grief can hardly be,
Then faithful friends for to depart,
Thy tried friendship biddes me say,
That absence thine will cut my heart.
Thou art my gem of all my joy,
The Fountain eke of my delight.
Thou art the staff whereto I lean*
How might I miss thee fro my sight?
Though space is great and miles are long
Which seems to part our corpse in twain:
Yet distaunce shall not part our love,
Our hearts alike shall still remain.
O Titus true, O Phoenix kind,
How loathe am I to bid farewell?
It grieves me that such faithful friends
For aye together may not dwell.
Shall we asunder parted be,
Who thus have livde in tried troth?
If needs we must, then fare you well,
Yet to depart I am full loathe.
No greater joy on earth is found
Than faithful friends to live in one.
No greater grief can likewise chance,
Than when the one must needs be gone.
Ten thousand times I rather had
A grisly ghost to end my life:
Come Atropos therefore in haste
On me to use thy shredding knyfe.
Come loathsome death with fearful mace,
Spare not to work my latter dome.
Make haste, make haste, I live to long,
Breath yielded has, bring me my tome.
When thou art dead, then all the world
With me is gone, thou art so kind:
Who would then willing let thee go?
Such faithful friends are hard to find.
My lingering feet no power have
Fro thee at all for to depart.
Each stone becomes a Mountain huge
My feet to stop, O faithful heart.
Love it has made mine eyes so blind
I can not see to find the way.
No marvel then if so I seek
A bad excuse to make delay.
Each hour I know will seem a year
Until thou do return again.
Wherefore against my will adewe.
The want of thee does breed my pain.
Return in haste, omit no time,
Thy absence spinnes a web of woe.
Loathe to depart come let us dance,
And make no haste away to go.
The time and tide it tarieth none,
Wherefore this suyte is but in vain.
Of force I see away you must,
But yet make haste to come again.
Adewe, farewell my faithful friend,
As dear to me as is my heart.
Now grief, now care, now endelesse woe
Draws on because thou must depart,
But why seem I thy steps to stay?
The longer stay the greater grief:
As good at first as at the last
Hope of return will yield relief.
No worse to thee than to my self,
Adewe therefore God be thy speed.
With faithful heart and moning mind
I wish the Lord to be thy guide.
Farewell.
Epilogus.
THe proud Pecocke (gentle Reader) strouteth and playteth his gorgeous tail
so long, till at the length he discovers the filthe thereof: so some will
think, and will not stick to say, that while I endeavor to discover the
imbecillitie of other men's natures, I reveal thereby mine own licencious
living, if so (at the least) I speak by experience. And what if I did? yet are
they far deceived herein, and do but dream (as it were) upon falshoode it
self. For the market declares how the coin is sold: and though I am but
young of years, yet may I daily hear and see that whereof by action I am not
partaker. It seems also the vanities of this world are the greater, when as
they lie so open, and are so manifest unto my youthful years. And though it
has not pleased Polymneia so to favor my pen, as to counteruayle my well
willing: yet I trust ye will accept of me for my well meaning, who am not
therein and s^^awe breadth incomparable to Cleanthes. Comparisons are odious, I
mean not therefore by his learning (for thereunto I am many a degree below) but
by the great desire he had in writing, and by the pleasure he took all his
life time therein. How simple yet so ever this little volume of mine be, if thou
will bestow thy travel to seek forth the ground and the depth thereof, thou
shalt soon epsy, and quickly percey^e, how in every point and clause
thereof is hidden, besides the myrthe, some deeper sense and purpose. But unto
the careless Reader it is (as it were) a piece of unleavened dough, wherefore
for such I think it better to have their brows knitte hard with the kercher
of Morpheus, and so to lay them down to sleep, than Legere and non
intelligere, nempe neglegire est. And as I have been brief in all things
heretofore, so will I be likewise herein: and as I have brought you into my
rude Garden, so (turnyng the key) here will I leave you, to choose what flowers
shall like you best. My pen is stubbed, my paper spente, my Ink wasted, my
wits grauelled, and (to be short) time calls me away: wherefore standing
to your curtes^es, and hoping of your good acceptaunce hereof, wishyng to you
as to my self, in haste I bid you Farewell.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman.


