A Most true and marvelous strange wonder, the like has seldom ben seen,
of.XUII. Monstrous fisshes, taken in Suffolk, at Downam bridge, within a mile
of Ipswiche. The.XI. day of October. In the year of our Lord God.
M.D.LX.UIII.
First you shall understand, that the begynners first Uenterers to take these
fishes, was Nycholas Gibbins, and Ihon Carnaby, with their men: after came John
Baker, and Robert Haulley with their men, being all Sailors and Shipmen dwelling
in Ipswiche, with other, besides many of the country there about, which when
they hard of it, came thither to help, and see the taking of them.

Also, of these.xvii. fyshes, there was a male, and a female, that was more
howge and monstrous then the other.xv. For the least of these.ii. fisshes,
were.xxvii. foot long: and as big in the middle each of them, as.iii.
Buttes of Malmezie, and of a marvelous great strength, as it is well known to
diverse in Ipswich and other places, beside those men above named. For they tied
one of these fysshes to a boat, to bring hit to Ipswich wharfe, and being so
tied to the boat, swam away with the boat and all the men that wear in it,
toward the sea a maruaylous swyft pace, for all that they could do: this was
when the tide came in, for they had made provision before, when the water was
loo, to tie great roapes about their tails and finnes with small boats, and
by such means as they could. (And as I said before) the tide coming in and
the fyshe having water, swam away with the boat so fast toward the sea, that
if there had not been rescue of other boats and such vessels as they had thear,
that boat and all they in it, had been lost and utterly cast away. But as God
would have it, by the help of the other boats or vessels, tieng the fish also.
Brought him by force to a convenient place, and tied him fast to a tree with
strong Cable roapes, and so vsyng them one by one, found means to bring
them to Ipswych wharfe. Where they were laid with great labor and trouble,
beside breaking of their wyndlace and a great Cable roape, with halyng them up,
they wear of such maruaylous greatness, strength and wayght. Some of them lay
upon the wharfe.ii. days and a night before they wear dead, and yet they
struck them with Axes and other weapons to kill them. The river wherein they
wear taken was colored red, with the blood that issued from their wounds,
while they wear a taking, y^ water being so deep that a H^y might well ride
thear in. Thear was also.iii. Butchers a hole day cutting out one of these
fysshes, and as many to carye it away with hand barous to the town ware
house, and the Butchers were feign to put on boots to stand in to cut it out,
it was so deep and full of garbyge? this fish was a man's heyght in thicknes,
from the top of the back to the bone: and his bones as hard as stones, that
the Butchers mard al their Axes they occupied about them. The other.xv. fisshes
were.xxiiii. foot long, and some of them.xxi. foot, and byg according to
their length. But the.ii. biggist, male and female, was.xxvii. foot long, and
as byg in the middle as.iii. Buttes of malmsie. Having a round snout. His
mouth wide, gapinge above a yeard broad. And had xliiii. teeth, one being
wayed and waith a pound and a half, viii. inches and a half long, and
above.vi. inches in compass about, yet none of the biggest. Also a great long
tung, a marvelous byg head, and is a yeard between the eyes, Upon their heds
were holes, as big that a man might put in both his fistes at once, out of the
which they did spoute a great quantity of water while they were a taking,
that they had almost dround.ii. boats men and all, with spoutynge of water:
for the water would assende vppwarde from the fisshes, as hie as any house, and
so fall down and weet all them that were within their reach most cruelly.
Also they were white beneath the eyes a hand broad, their eyes black, and no
bigger then the eyes of a Calfe. Their backs as black as ynke, so smoth and
bright y^ one might have seen his face on it, as in a dim Glass. Their
bellies as white as milk. And upon their backs they had each of them one
great black Fin growing, and sum of them were a yeard and a half long, very
thycke, and strong, and.ii. great black ones underneath the fore part of his
bellye. Also the male, one of the.ii. biggest had a yerde, that when it was
out, was more then.iii. quarters of a yearde long, and as byg toward his body
as a man's arm sleeue and all, by the elboe. His tail was.iii. yeardes long,
and.ii. yerdes broad very thycke and black, and wonderful strong: for.x.
tall men stood upon his tail, and he liftng his tail up, over thrue them
all. Also when he had lifted up his tail it was of such monstrous weight
strength, and bygnes, that when it fell the very grund would ring, and shake
therewith. This fyshe was cut out in pieces, and given away to diverse in the
town that did eat of it, and was very good meat, either roasted or bakt, (so
much of it as was kept sweet) and the meat of them bakt tasted like red
Dear. And as they cut it out it was wayed by pieces, so that the very boddye
of this one fish, wayed.LII. hundred the bare carckas, beside many little
peecis that was given away vnwaied to crauers that stood by, and besides a
Carte load of garbyge that came out of his bellye, so that all together was
above threescore hundred and od.

If the men of Ipswych had known so much betyme while they were sweet, as
they have sense, they might have made.ii.C. march more of them then is now
made. But now they be barreld up to make Oil of, and will not be sold for a
great piece of monney.

And this you may see, the perfect and true description, of these strange
fishes, wherein is to be noted, the straung and marvelous handye works of the
Lord, blessed be God in all his gifts, and holy in all his works, the Lords
name be praised, in them, and for them, for ever and ever. So be it.

Quod. Timothy Granger.

Imprynted at London in Fleetestreate* at the sign of S. John Evangelist by
Thomas Colwell.


