A LOOKING-GLASS FOR CHRISTIANS; OR, THE COMFORTABLE Doctrine of Adoption.

WHEREIN EVERY TRVE Believer may behold his blessed Estate in the kingdom of
Grace.

By THOMAS GRANGER, Preacher of Gods Word, at Butterwike in Holland in
Lincolnshire.

LONDON, Printed by William Lones.

1620.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND Virtuous Lady, the Lady HARRINGTON; Grace and Peace.
RIght Honorable, and worthy Lady: As God has made you three and four times
happy in your inward self, so has he made you thrice happy also in your
outward self, as in your State, in your blessed Issue, in your Name; which as
the sweet odor of a precious ointment, comfort those that are near by,
and a far off, even the children of God, who receive comfort and strength by
the graces of Gods spirit in the more principal members, whose pleasant
influence gives vigor and more lively motion to the inferior and weaker.
This happiness the Lord still continue, that as both you and all the children of
God have received grace for grace, and glory for glory; so you may with them be
perfected in glory at that joyful and long expected day of our Lords
appearing, and full redemption of the purchased possession. In the mean space,
I being a stranger unto you, yet a Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ, do
greatly rejoice to hear that you, and other personages of State and Birth, do
walk uprightly in the Truth. And as your Faith, Zeal, and Devotion, most
worthy fruits of the Spirit, are a comfort to me and others: so for your
comfort also, I send to you A Divine Looking-glass, wherein, I hope well, you
shall behold your blessed state, even the beauty and glory of your person in
the sight of God, and in the sight of your own soul. To the poor (in spirit)
is the rich Gospel offered; from the poor (my self) is this rich treasure
sent unto you: in it self rich, but a poor mite as handled and delivered from
me, yet such shall it be, as your Honor shall please to accept.

Your Honors in all

A LOOKING GLASS for Christians.
Ephesians. 1. 5. Who has predestined us to the adoption of sons by Jesus
Christ unto himself, according to the good pleasure of his will.


IN the Third verse aforegoing, the Apostle propounds the general doctrine
of all the spiritual blessings of God the Father toward us in his Son Jesus
Christ, the matter, foundation, and meritorious cause thereof.

From the 4. verse to the end of the 14. verse, he declares, that general
Proposition by an induction, or recital of the specials applied to his purpose
here aimed at, which is to reduce them to their former sincerity of faith, and
obedience. In the 4. ver. he makes mention of Election, and sanctification. In
this 5. verse, of Adoption. In the 6. verse, of Justification. In the 7. verse,
of Redemption. In the 8. 9. 10. verses, of the Gospel with the effects, and
power thereof. In the 11. verse, of glorification. In the 12. 13. verses, of
Faith. In the 14. ver. of the testimony of the Spirit, the pledge of our
assurance, in sealing the same in, and to our spirits.

In this 5. verse he mentions the spiritual blessing of Adoption, which he
sets forth by sundry arguments.

1 By the principal efficient cause. [who has predestined us.

2 He lays down the blessing it self. [To the adoption of sons, (...) in
positionem filiorum.)

3 By the means [by Jesus Christ.

4 By the end. [to himself, or into himself. (...)

5 By the impulsive cause [according to the good pleasure of his will (...))

1 Concerning the first.
Predestination is the most high, and hidden cause of all things, both of their
ends, and of their means, Decreed in the wisdom of God from Eternity,
according to his prescience, and ordered by his providence. In the general
signification it is called Destination, in the more special, i. restrained to
man, Predestination.

Predestination has two parts, Election, and Reprobation.

Of Election there is a twofold end Principal. Inferior.
The principal end respects the Glory of God. verse. 6. Glorification of Man,
verse 11.

The inferior ends are the means of salvation, and of Gods glory in saving
us. They are diverse, and subordinate one to another. The first is effectual
vocation, verse. 8. 9. 10. The second is Justification, verse. 6. 7. The third is
Faith, verse. 12. 13. The fourth is Adoption, verse. 5. The fifth is
Sanctification, verse. 4. The sixth is the Obsignation of all these blessings in
our hearts by the spirit, verse. 14.

2. Concerning Adoption it self.
A son of God may be so called by Nature. Grace.

1. By Nature Jesus Christ is the only Son of God, begotten of the Father by
an incomprehensible and ineffable generation.

2. The sons of God by Grace, taking grace in the largest sense, are so by
Creation. Adoption.



1. By Creation, the Angels, Job 2. ^. and Adam before his fall, Luke 2. 38.

2. By Adoption, Adam after his fall, and all elected in the second Adam (who
are specially called children by Adoption and Grace, being restrained by
Divines to the grace of redemption) in whom alone we recover the nature and
name of Sonship. And we are called sons by Adoption, because when we were by
nature the children of wrath, we have received the right and title of sons
from God, by and for Christ, and in him the sons of God, and consequently
with him heirs both of this world, and of that which is to come.

This affection and action of God is expressed by a term borrowed from the
civil Law: For Adoption (as it is in the Institutions) is an act of Law
imitating Nature, ordained for their comfort which have no children. If the
adopted was a free man, viz. neither under the authority of a father, nor of a
master, it was termed adrogation, but if he was under the power and command
of another, it was called simple adoption.

In old times adoption was in common use, both among Jews and Gentiles. In
Genesis 48. 5. Jacob adopted Ephraim and Manasses, and named his own name upon
them. So 2. Sam. 21. 8. Michol the daughter of Saul, and wife of David, is said
to bear five children to Adriel the son of Barzillai; But God punished
Michol with barrenness, because she derided the zeal of David dancing before
the Arc. So Moses was said to be the son of Pharaohs daughter. Moreover,
children were adopted to the dead, Deuteronomy. 25. 5. For if a man died without
children, his brother was, by the Law of Moses, to marry his wife, to raise up
seed to his brother, and the firstborn son was named after his father
deceased.

For the further clearing of this Doctrine, Adoption is consummate, or
inchoate. The former is perfect, and it is the state of the Elect in the
kingdom of glory. The latter is imperfect, and of it there are two degrees,
according to the nonage or full age of the Church. The nonage was the state of
it before Christ, when it was under Tutors and Governors, Gal. 4. 1. 2. trained
up in Christ, and unto Christ, by the rigor of the Moral Law, and lenity of
the Ceremonial Law, this drawing, the other driving. And of that nonage there
we e degrees also; for there were some more Ceremonial, others Evangelical
men, as David, Solomon, Ezechias, the Prophets, etc. yet all inferior to John
the Baptist, who heard and saw, what they a far off perceived. So that having
a less measure of the Spirit, the Law had more force over them, as the rod and
representations have over children, in whom reason is weak. Therefore it was
called the spirit of bondage, Romans 8. 15.

The fullness of time, or age of the Church, is after Christ, which has two
degrees also, youth and perfect age: youth is the weakness of the children of
Christ, Romans 4. 1. Gal. 6. 1. which in the truly regenerate grows more and
more to strength and perfection, Heb. 6. 1. Ephesians. 3. 16, and 4 13. The perfect
age or strength, is the plerophory or fullness of Faith, Hope, Love, even of
receiving, possession, assurance. And it is the Christian man's happiness in
this world, as the pleasant Land was to Abraham and his posterity before
actual possession: yea this spiritual is greater then that earthly, in that
he is already come in the flesh, and ascended to prepare a place for us in whom
all the promises of God are Yea and Amen.

Perfect men are more specially termed spiritual* Gal. 6. 1. the other
carnal, 1. Cor. 3* 3 of the vigor of the old man, and weakness of the new.
Through the greater revelation of Gods wisdom and love to us in Christ since
his ascension and assurance of his love to us, the Holy Ghost is called in
special manner, the spirit of adoption, teaching, testifying, in sealing the
same more abundantly to us, Romans 8. 15. But how? not that we are void of all
fear; for as Gods love is more abundantly revealed, so are his judgments
also; as grace ^s more manifest, so is sin also: and as Christ has set open
the gates of heaven, even more abundantly revealed the celestial glory that
could be done by the figures of pleasant Canaan, and the material Temple; so
has he more fully manifested the endless torments of the wicked, that despise
grace offered, which breeds greater terror in the Conscience, then the legal
threatenings of temporal punishments. A child offending fears the rod, but a
man fears Imprisonment and Death. Hence it is that Saint John says, Fear
has painfulnesse, but perfect love casts out fear. He that loves,
rejoices evermore. He that believes, yet wants feeling, depends on
Christ by faith, and is Christ's as well as the other, though he know not so
sensibly that he is Christ's as the other does. The perfect man knows himself
to be heir of the kingdom of glory, as the loving and dutiful son is
assured of his fathers inheritance. The other also may know that he is
Christ's, if he depend on none other, nor other means, and Christ forsakes
none, that do not first forsake him; which forsaking stands rather in
affection than action. For Paul says, Romans 7. That to will was present with
him, though he did that which was evil (unwillingly). And he had comfort and
rejoicing, because he did not evil euilly.

To explane this a little farther, There are five kinds of fear.

1. Diabolical, Iam. 2. 19.

2. Natural. It is an affection or passion of the heart, whereby we fear not
only death or dissolution, but also dangers and evils, that are destructive of
our good estate and welfare. This fear is by natural instinct in all sensible
creatures, as well as in man, and in the godly as men, yea in Christ, as he was
man, and subject to our infirmities. This fear of it self is not sin, but
the corruption, (ataxie and anomie) thereof is sin, as when we do not order
it according to the law of God. But Christ in fearing death, did also submit
himself to the Decree and Will of his Father, according to the Commandment,
Thou shall love the Lord: by God with all thine heart, etc. So fear was
overcome of love, or rightly ordered by love. So the godly fear death, yet
humble themselves to death and all crosses, for the love of God extenuateth and
casts out fear.

3. Worldly fear. This is the corruption of natural fear, when as men deny
Christ in what measure soever, that they might not loose their goods, worldly
esteem, pleasures, preferments, etc. Worldly-minded men are full of this fear,
and their fear shall fall on them, Math. 10. 28. and if our hearts condemn
us, then is God greater then our hearts, much more to condemn us. Examples of
such fears, Josh. 12. 42. and 11. 48. Howbeit Gods children are of infirmity
affected with it sometimes, as Nicodemus, Ioh. 3. 2 And the Disciples,
especially Peter. But if we sin and fear, we have an advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, etc. As for the fear of the wicked, it is
without all love, and comfort of hope.

4 Servile fear, (which is void of love, and hope.) It is proper to the
wicked. It proceeds of an evil conscience. Prou. 28. 1. Isa. 57. 20. 21. It
has two effects. 1. It restrayneth the furious, and curbeth the violent. Act.
24. 25. 2 It works hardness of heart through desperatio^ in some, when it
grows to an height of wicked resolution, all hope through Satan being utterly
quenched.

5 Filliall, or sonelike fear. It is proper to the regenerate, who by this
fear are moved to a void sin, and to live godlily. It arises from the
knowledge of God, and our selves, and from the feeling of his accep ation and
love of us, wrought in our hearts by the holy Ghost. Hereof Solomon says,
Prou. 1. 7. Psalm. 111. 10. Job. 28. 28.

More plainly, this fear is thus begotten. First, when a man hears the
law, what is there commanded, what forbidden, the Holy Ghost comes and
takes away the veil of natural blindness, and slumbring, causing him to see
his sin, and to feel the wrath of God upon him, even to lay them both to his
hard heart, whereupon fear troubles the conscience, and breaks the hard
heart.

Secondly, when a man in this case hears the Gospel, the Holy Ghost
inlightneth the mind to understand and believe, and to apply the promises to
himself, whereupon he begines to feel quyetnes, and peace of conscience,
being more and more persuaded that he is beloved of God. Now on this perswation
arises the love of God for his love, mercy, and grace in Christ. On this love
arises a new fear namely, to displease God, so loving and merciful to us.
Psalm. 130. 4.

Of this filial fear there are four degrees, expressed and illustrated by
the fear of children toward their Parents, whereof there are four degrees.
First, a child loves his parents, and flies to them as his chief refuge, yet
is he held in obedience with threatening, and fear of the rod, this may in
special be called servile, Gal. 4. 1. Secondly, partly by reason, partly by
the rod. Thirdly, less by the rod, and more by reason. Fourthly, by reason
alone without the rod. This is perfection in this state of imperfection. The
application, and amplification hereof I leave to the Christian Reader.

3. Concerning the means of Adoption.
He that adopteth a servant or bondsman, gives a price for his redemption or
ransom, even so has God redeemed us with a price, 1. Pet. 1. 18.

4. Concerning the end of Adoption.
It is that we might be his, not any others, nor yet our own. The servant or
bondsman adopted, lives no longer to his former Masters, but to his Adopter,
not in servitude, but in freedom, not in slavish, but in son-like fear, viz.
awful reverence and love. Even so we being adopted, live no longer to our
former masters, and tyrants to whom we were enthralled, and willingly did
homage, through the darkness of our minds, and deadness of our benumbed
Consciences, Ephesians. 4. 17. 18. namely, to the world, the flesh, and the Devil.
Every natural man is a bondslaue to these tyrants, and senseless of his
misery. The best Heathen, the best Jew are not better, how glorious soever they
be. Among the Heathen Aristides was the most just, Socrates the most virtuous,
Aristotle the most learned, Plato the most divine, Lucretia the most chaste,
Aeneas the most pious. Among the Jews, the Essees and Pharisees were most
devout, and among them Paul the most fervent in zeal, unblameable, Philip. 3.
the pattern of perfection, as erroneously he judged of himself, being blinded
by the god of this world. But afterward he saw that his feruency was but fury.
All these I say, even the best Gentiles and Jews admired for their virtues,
being without Christ, were the children of wrath, Ephesians. 2. 1. 2.

5. Concerning the impulsive cause.
It is the alone mercy and love of God, 2. Tim. 1. 9. Who has saved us, and
called us according to his purpose, and grace, etc. Ephesians. 2. 4. 5.

For the more full understanding of this doctrine for our further edification
and comfort, two things are to be considered. First, the comparison between
civil and spiritual adoption. Secondly, the privileges, whereof we are made
partakers thereby.

The comparison is of their likeness and unlikeness. First, concerning their
likeness. These two adoptions resemble one another in eight particulars.

I. The Adopter for the most part wants children of his own So God had no
sons, but his only Son, Jesus Christ, whom he gave to redeem us out of
the captivity of sin and Satan, into the glorious liberty and privilege of
sons.

II. The Adopter out of his own bountifulness and kindness chooses a son
where he pleases, being obliged to none: Even so God has freely out of his
own love and good pleasure chosen us. Tit. 3. 4. When the bountifulness and
love of God toward man appeared, etc. Deuteronomy. 7. 7. 8. God loved not nor chused
Israel because they were more in number (which was in those times a special
prerogative and blessing) but because he loved them of his own free mercy.

III. The Adopter gives a price for the redemption and liberty of the Adopted:
so has God given a price for us, 1. Cor. 6. 20.

IIII. The party adopted is commonly a servant or bondsman: so were we by
nature the children of wrath, of unbelief, of this world, of darkness, of
the night, etc.

V. The Adopter offers himself as a Father, not as a severe Master or Tyrant
to his adopted sons: even so God offers himself, and that in these
particulars principally.

1. In providing and caring for his children, Leuit. 26. 3. to 14. Math. 6. 30.
31. 32. Therefore the Apostle says, Cast your care on God, for he eareth for
you, Genesis 31. 4 God had care over Jacob against churlish Laban, chap. 32. 9.
10. God provided for Jacob always; and God does as much for all his children,
but what God does for us, our childishness conceiueth not.

2. In chastisements and corrections, Heb. 12. 7. etc.

3. In trialls and temptations to humble them, to prove them, to teach them,
that he might do them good at their latter end, Deuteronomy. 8. 2. 3. 4. 5.

4. In patience, forbearance, long suffering, Psalm. 103. 8. 9. etc.

5. In hearing and granting their prayers, Math. 7. 7. Now God grants our
prayers, when we pray to him rightly. Of right prayer there be three degrees.

1. To pray to God the Father only. This excludes Atheism and heathenish
Idolatry,

2. To pray to God through Christ alone. This excludes Turcisme, Iudaisme,
Popish idolatry.

3. To pray to the Father through the Son from an heart informed and moved
by the spirit of God. This excludes all hypocrisy.

The signs of an heart informed and moved by the spirit of God, are these.

1. To pray according to the will of God, 1. Ioh. 5. 14.

2. To pray with an humble and contrite heart, Psalm. 51. 7. This is a special
sign; for pride is the root and top of all sin. It was and is the sin of
the Devil and our first parents, who desired to shake off the yoke of
obedience, and to be equal with God, Genesis 3. 5. 6. The pride of the Devil was
the glorifying of himself with these excellencies wherewith the Lord had
endowed him, 1. Tim. 3. 6. Pride is directly opposite to God and his glory: it
is the maine sin, others are the by. Covetousness is the root of all evil,
but as the purueyor of pride; every covetous man is proud, and there is none of
those sins, as pride of apparel, drunkenness, prodigality, feastings, etc.
which the covetous seems to hate, but he would commit them if they were as
gainful as niggardship, and drudgery is; for what will not the covetous do
for money?

3. To pray in Faith, Iam. 1. 6.

4. To pray with feruency, Iam. 5. 16.

5. To pray for spiritual graces especially and simply, and for other things
as sub-seruant thereto, Math. 6. 33.

6. To aim at Gods glory one'y, as the three first petitions of the Lords
prayer teach us. He that prays thus, shall never be denied any thing,
neither in kind measure, nor manner. Thus Christ prayed, and was heard in all
things: and thus do all the children of God in some measure pray. If they
obtain not, it is because of their weakness, wherein soever it stands.
Howsoever, God accepts the obedience, and withholds no good thing; yea,
he gives that which themselves would only ask, if in this life they were
perfect, as Christ was perfect, and as they shall be in the kingdom of glory.

VI. The adopted does offer himself as a son, not as a servant. So do the
children of God in loving him in his word and worship, in obeying him, in
taking correction at his hands, in suffering themselves to be taught and led by
him. Moses in Deutronomy repeating all the benefits of God toward the
Israelites, at length concludes. And now O Israel what does the Lord thy God
require of thee, but to love the Lord thy God, etc. And Joshua likewise, chap.
24* 14. repeating Gods benefits toward them in like manner, concludes, Now
therefore fear the Lord thy God, etc.

VII. By the Civil Law, the Heir is reputed one and the same person with him
that made him his heir. In like sort we are so near conjoined with God by
Christ, that we are made one and the same with him, as our Savior prayed, Ioh.
17. 12. I pray thee O Father, that they all may be one, as thou art in me, and
I in thee, so they may be one in us.

We are conjoined, or united to Christ by two degrees.

1. We are united to the flesh of Christ; for he is the seed of Adam, therefore
flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bones, as the Jews were wont to say of
themselves* which were descended of the same common stock, viz. of the same
Father and Mother.

2. We participate of the spirit of Christ (not essentially, but effectually)
who works in some measure the same properties and qualities in us, which were
in Christ, as he was man, which is called our transforming into Christ, and our
putting on of Christ.

This conjunction Paul expresses by ingraffing, wherein these two degrees of
union do evidently appear; for the sience and the stock make one individual
thing. For first, their matters are united into one, and closely cemented
together, yet are they but contigua, nearly glued together. Therefore this
Union is yet separable.

2. They participate of one juice, spirit, and life, and are now continua,
continued, being contained under one common form. And this union is now
inseparable. Christ himself expresses this by a comparison drawn from the
vine and the branches, John 15. which have one common life and spirit, by which
they grow burgeon, and fructify, Yet herein there is a difference; for the
sience conuerteth the juice of the stock into his own nature and property:
contrarily, Christ conuerteth and transformeth us into his nature, that are
incorporated into him.

S. Paul expresses this union by Matrimony, wherein these two degrees are
manifest.

First degree, is the outward bond or ceremony of wedlock, which consists of
two parts or degrees. 1. A separation of either from all others. 2. A mutual
donation or enterchange.

Second degree, is the inward bond, viz the conjugal affection, or mutual
love and sympathy. So the union of Christ with us, is the union of our natures,
and the union of his spirit with ours, whereby we are made flesh of his flesh,
and bone of his bones spiritually as he is made flesh of our flesh, and bone of
our bones corporally. Hence we grow up into him, and bear fruit in him; yet
these virtues of the spirit in Christ are pure and perfect, and without
measure, but in us they are measurable, and obscured with sundry infirmities,
both of our corrupt nature, and personal frailties; even as the light of the
Sun is the same, but diuersified in sundry stars, and glasses of diverse
colors.

VIII. The Inheritance is confirmed and finally appropriated to the heir by
the death of the testator; so is our inheritance by the death of Christ. This
of the likeness of these two adoptions.

Now concerning their unlikeness. It stands in four particulars.

1. The Adopter is moved with the consideration of some dignity and desert in
the adopted. Contrarily, God found no motive of love at all in us. For we
were his enemies. And our loathsomnes in his sight, is set forth under a double
allegory, Ezech. 16. where under the parable of a forlorn infant is set down
the state of the Israelites in Egypt, and our estates by nature in the state of
the Israelites in the bondage of Pharao, a type of the Devil.

2. The Adopter gives gold, or some other earthly thing for a ransom, but God
has given his only son to redeem us.

3. The Adopter cannot give the spirit of a natural son to the adopted: but
God has given unto us the spirit of sons, by whom we call him (abba) Father,
even as natural sons do their parents.

4 The Adopted son may love his Adopter only outwardly, for the benefit that
he has received, and reward that he expects, yet in heart he may be so
alienated, as to wish the death of his Adopter, that he may inherit his house
and land, as the Poet speaks of some unnatural sons. Filius ante diem
patrios inquirit in annos.


But contrarily, the children of God, are united unto him in the inward
affection of heart, though outwardly they fail in many things, yea hyppocrits
are often times out-wardly more officious than they, as deceitful servants are
often more obsequious than children. Therefore says David. Psalm. 32. 2.
Blessed is he, in whose spirit there is no guile. Not with standing his
manifold infirmities.

The Second thing is the Privileges, whereof we are made partakers by virtue
of adoption.

I By virtue of Adoption, we are made the brethren of Christ. In this respect
he is called our elder brother. Romans 8. 29. and Math. 28. 10. and 25. 40.

Object. Than before the Nativitie, death and Resurrection of Christ* none were
the adopted sons of God, seeing that by the death and merits of Christ, we
are reconciled to God, called, justified, adopted. Miserable therefore was the
state of all before the incarnation of Christ.

Answ. The birth, and sonship of Christ, took the beginning from the
everlasting Counsel and Decree of God, whereupon his blood is said to be shed
from the beginning of the world. Adam was justified, and adopted by faith in
Christ to come, whom God Preached, and promised in Paradise, and was figured by
the Sacrifices of the Law, which was interpreted by the Prophets, and fulfilled
by Christ himself.

To be the brother of Christ is a glorious title and privilege. In an earthly
kingdom we think it a great prerogative to be the kinsman of a Prince, and a
special privilege to be the Kings son. In the spiritual kingdom and
Church of Christ, every true believer has his prerogative and privilege. And
if men desire to match with persons of birth and blood, for the advancement of
their names and houses; much more should we desire this blessing of Adoption,
for the everlasting advancement of our names and states.

The bondsman or Gally-slaue thinks it a great happiness to be freed, and
made the adopted son of a Prince, and brother to the Kings son. This
privilege have we received, let us take notice of our happiness, and cast
off our slavish conditions.

II. By virtue of Adoption we are made heirs of the heavenly Kingdom, even
coheyres with Christ, Romans 8. 17. And if it be so great a privilege to be
heir apparent to an earthly kingdom, much more greater glory is it to have
right to, and in the kingdom of glory.

III. By virtue of Adoption we are made Kings, Revel. 1. 6. of greater might
and power than Nabuchadnezzar, that sent out Holofernes, (as the Apocryphar
mentions) to cut down all, that would not submit themselves under his yoke:
greater than Ahashuerus that boasted so of his* 127. Provinces: yea than
Alexander would have been, if he had obtained that plurality of worlds,
whereof Anaxagoras informed him. He has made us Kings and Priests to God his
Father. We are made Kings, not in respect of an earthly Kingdom, seeing that
the children of God are often times the most base and contemptible of an other:
but in respect of a spiritual kingdom, to which God has ginen us title and
interest, in, and by Christ, Luke 12. 32.

The faithful are made Kings in three respects. 1. Because they are Lords and
Conquerors of their enemies, Sin, Satan, the World, Death, Hell. 2. They are
partakers of the Kingdom of Christ, and of Salvation; for we have received of
Christ grace for grace, and glory for glory. 3. They have Interest, Dominion,
and Sovereignty of all things by Christ. But Christ alone is universal King,
and absolute Lord. But the faithful are kings as they participate with Christ
in his kingdom, and by virtue of this privilege they shall be Judges of men, and
Angels. Math. 10. 28. 1. Cor. 6. 2. 3. The Saints shall judge the world, and
evil Angels. But how? In that they shall be as it were Assessours, and
Assistants with Christ on the bench giving in voice, and consent with him.

Objection. The wicked are Lords, and owners of worldly things also, how then
belongs this Privilege to the adopted sons of God?

Answ. Adam* was the son of God by creation, and heir of all things, but by
the fall he lost for himself, and his posterity, the right, and name of heir,
and son, so that both he, and we by nature are only usurpers. But Christ by
his satisfaction has purged our sins, reconciled us to God, and recovered
the right of sons and inheritance. For he being the true owner and sight
heir of all things* has made us that are in him, sons and heirs of all
things with him, as the Apostle says* As he has given Christ so shall he much
more give us all things with him.

The godly therefore are the true Lords, and owners of all things. First,
because their persons only are accepted. Secondly, Because they use them
rightly, that is, with a good conscience, namely, to the glory of God. Romans 4.
13. The promise was made to Abraham that he should be the heir of the world,
not by the works of the Law, to wit, as he was a son of the first Adam, but
by the righteousness of faith, that is, as he was the son of the second Adam.

Quest. How then are the wicked possessors and owners?

Answ. In Gods providence they have possession of the things of the world, but
no right unto them, I mean spiritual right. Therefore in the end of the world
they shall be rooted out, and burnt with fire, but the godly shall remain for
ever. Ahraham, and his posterity had right to Canaan, four hundredth years by
the promise of God, before they had actual possession. Genesis 13. 14. The reason
why they had not present possession in it, is given, The wickedness of the
Amorites is not yet full. The usurpers must possess it four hundredth years,
and Abraham Isaac, and Jacob are to have but a part in the plain of Mamre in
Hebron, purchased with their money of the usurpers, and the sons of Jacob
were strangers in Egypt, having no foot, nor possession in the Earth in civil
clame, or right, but by sufferance, and will of their Lord Pharao. So David had
right to the kingdom of Israel, before present possession, He must tarry for
that till Saul be remooved out of the way, and in the mean space suffer
persecution, and affliction of the usurper. In Math. 13. The tares must grow
together with the wheat, and have place in the Land with the wheat, by the
permision of the householder, none can cut them up without the displeasure of
the Lord, not that the Lord loves them, but because he loves the wheat,
amongst which they grow. So the wicked have possession of, but not right to the
things of the world, save only in civil respect, and human Constitution.
And the more rich, and great they are, the more hateful are they, and the
greater condemnation waits for them.

IIII The Adopted sons of God have the Angels, as ministering spirits
attending on them for their good Heb. 1. 5. are they not all ministering
spirits, sent forth for their sakes that all he hears of salvation? Psalm. 34.
11. The Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about them that fear him, etc. 2.
King. 6. 17. Math. 4. Also 1. King. 19. Elias flying from Iezabel is comforted,
directed, and fed by an Angel. Also, Genesis 19. The Angels bring Lot out of
Sodom, before the fiery deluge. Genesis 32. Jacob fearing Esau, saw Angels
coming* and he acknowledges that they were sent to be his protectors, and
conductours in his journey, Gen, 24. 7. Abraham sending his servant to take a
wife for his son Isaac, is persuaded that the Lord will send his Angel
before him. Also* Math. 26 53. If Christ's kingdom had been of this world, and
that he had not ben appointed of God to suffer for man* he should have been
rescued by more than twelve Legious of Angels. And our Savior faith, that
children, and simple, silly, helpless men have Angels protecting, and saving
them. For their Angel beholds the face of God, attending his pleasure in
their behalf. Moreover, in the end of this world, the Angels carry the souls
of the godly into the kingdom of glory, Luke 16. Lastly, in the day of
judgment, they shall gather all the Elect together, as the house-holder
gathers wheat into his barn, but burns the weeds and the chafe, the
profane and hypocrites.

V. All afflictions, troubles, and wants are turned into trialls and fatherly
corrections* inflicted for their good, Romans 8. 28. All things work together
for good, to them that love God, etc. Psalm. 89. 32. I will visit their
transgressions with the rod, etc. but my loving kindness will I not utterly
take from them.

As the Israelites were prepared by many temptations and trialls in the
Wilderness for the land of Canaan, Deuteronomy. 8. and as David was prepared by
persecutions, and afflictions for the kingdom of Israel, so are the children of
God for the Heavenly Canaan; yea, they are chastned of the Lord by sundry
ways, and sometimes by bodily death, (as in the wilderness) that they might
not be condemned with the World, 1. Cor. 11. 3^. In the sorrows therefore of
the children of God, there is matter of rejoicing and in the rejoicing of the
wicked, matter of sorrow, fear and despair.

FINIS.

