A GOOD SPEED to Virginia.

ESAIAS 42. 4. He shall not fail nor be discouraged till he have set judgment
in the earth, and the Jles shall wait for his law. LONDON Printed by FELIX
KYNGSTON for William Welbie, and are to be sold at his shop at the sign of
the Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard. 1609.

TO THE RIGHT NOBLE AND HONORABLE EARLS, BARONS and Lords, and to the Right
Worshipful Knights, Merchants and Gentlemen, Adventurers for the plantation of
Virginea, all happy and prosperous success, which may either augment your
glory, or increase your wealth, or purchase your eternity.
TIme the deuourer of his own brood consumes both man and his memory. It is
not brass nor marble that can perpetuate immortality of name upon the earth.
Many in the world have erected fair and goodly monuments, whose memory
together with their monuments is long since defaced and perished. The name,
memory and actions of those men do only live in the records of eternity,
which have employed their best endeavors in such virtuous and honorable
enterprises, as have advanced the glory of God, and enlarged the glory and
wealth of their country. It is not the house of Solomon, called the Forest of
Lebanon, that continues his name and memory upon the earth at this day, but
his wisdom, justice, magnificence and power, yet do and for ever shall
eternize him. A right sure foundation therefore have you (my Lords and the rest
of the most worthy Adventurers for Virginia) laid for the immortality of your
names and memory, which, for the advancement of Gods glory, the renown of his
Majesty, and the good of your Country, have undertaken so honorable a
project, as all posterities shall bless you, and uphold your names and memories
so long as the Sun and Moon endures: whereas they which prefer their
money before virtue, their pleasure before honor, and their sensual security
before heroical! adventures, shall perish with their money, die with their
pleasures, and be buried in everlasting forgetfulness. The disposer of al humane
actions dispose your purposes, bless your Navy as he did the ships of
Solomon which went to Ophie, and brought him home in one year six hundred
threescore and six talents of gold. The preserver of al men preserve your
persons from all perils both by sea and land; make your goings out like an host
of men triumphing for the victory, and your commings in like an army dividing
the spoil. And as God has made you instruments for the enlarging of his
Church militant here upon earth; so when the period of your life shall be
finished, the same God make you members of his Church triumphant in Heaven.

Amen.
From mine house at the Northend of Sithes lane London, April 28. Anno 1609.
Your Honors and Worships in all affectionate well wishing, R. G.

GOOD SPEED TO Virginia.
Iosuah. 17. 14. Then the children of Joseph spoke unto Joshua, saying, why
have thou given me but one lot, and one portion to inherit, seeing I am a
great people?

Joshua then answered, if thou be much people, get thee up to the wood, and
cut trees for thy self in the land of the Perizzites, and of the Giants, if
mount Ephraim be too narrow for thee.

Then the children of Joseph said, the Mountain will not be enough for us, and
all the Canaanites that dwell in the low country, have Charcts of Iron as well
as they in Bethshean, and in the towns of the same, as they in the valley of
Israel.

And Joshua spoke unto the house of Joseph, to Ephraim, and Manasses, saying,
Thou art a great people, and have great power, and shall not have one lot.

Therefore the Mountain shall be thine, for it is a wood, and thou shall cut it
down, and the ends of it shall be thine, and thou shall cast out the
Canaanites though they have Iron Charets, and though they be strong.


THe heavens says David, even the heavens are the Lords, and so is the earth,
but he has given it to the children of men. Psa. 113. 16. Yet notwithstanding
the fatherly providence, and large bounty of God toward man, so improuident
and irrespectiue is man, that he had rather live like a drone, and feed upon
the fruits of other men's labors, whereunto God has not entitled him, then
look out and fly abroad, like the Be to gather the pleasures and riches of
the earth, which God has given him to enjoy: whence upon it comes to pass,
that although the Lord has given the earth to the children of men, yet this
earth which is man's fee-simple by deed of gift from God, is the greater part
of it possessed and wrongfully usurped by wild beasts, and unreasonable
creatures, or by brutish savages, which by reason of their godles ignorance,
and blasphemous Idolatry, are worse then those beasts which are of most wild
and savage nature. As Ahab therefore sometimes said to his servants, 1. King.
22. 13. Know ye not that Ramoth Gilead was ours, and we stay and take it not
out of the hands of the King of Aram? So may man say to himself: The earth was
mine, God gave it me, and my posterity, by the name of the children of men,
and yet I stay and take it not out of the hands of beasts, and brutish savages,
which have no interest in it, because they participate rather of the nature of
beasts then men.

The Christian part of the world did plainly bewray this improuident and
irrespectiue neglect of Gods providence and bounty. When Christopher Columbus
made proffer to the Kings of England, Portugal, and Spain, to inuest them
with the most precious and richest veins of the whole earth, never known
before: but this offer was not only rejected, but the man himself, who
deserves ever to be renowned, was (of us English especially) scorned and
accounted for an idle Nouellist. Some think it was because of his poor
apparel, and simple looks, but surely it is rather to be imputed to the
improuidency and imprudencie of our Nation, which has always bred such
diffidence in us, that we conceit no new report, be it never so likely, nor
believe any thing be it never so probable, before we see the effects. This has
always been reported of the English, by those that have observed the nature
of nations: Bodin. lib. 5. de Repub. cap. 1. reports, that the English were
always accounted more warlike, valorous, and courageous, then the French, but
the French went always beyond them in prudence, and policy. And to express
the same, he uses the words of Ennius. Bellipotentes sunt magis quam sapients
potentes. And it may be that this might be reported of us English, in those
times when our Country was not pesteced with multitude, nor ouercharged with
swarms of people, for peace and plenty breed security in men: neither is it
necessary for any man to believe reports, though probable, nor to follow
strange proiects be they never so likely, so long as he has home inbred hopes
to rely upon, and assured certainties to satisfy his future expectation.

In those days this Kingdom was not so populous as now it is, Ciuell wars
at home, and foreign wars abroad, did cut off the ouer-spreading branches of
our people. Our country the^ yielded unto all that were in it a surplussage of
all necessities: it yielded preferment in due correspondencie, for all degrees
and sorts of men. The commons of our Country lay free and open for the poor
Commons to enjoy, for there was room enough in the land for every man, so that
no man needed to encroch or enclose from another, whereby it is manifest, that
in those days we had no great need to follow strange reports, or to seek
wild adventures, for seeing we had not only sufficiency, but an ouerflowing
measure proportioned to every man. Religion and piety taught us, that seeing
our lot was fallen unto us in a fair ground, and that we had a goodly
heritage, rather to be content with our own, then either politikely or
ambitiously to undertake uncouth enterprises, unto which necessity did no way
urge us.

But now God has prospered us with the blessings of the womb, and with the
blessings of the breasts, the sword deuoureth not abroad, neither is there any
fear in our streets at home; so that we are now for multitude as the thousand
of Manasses, and as the ten thousads of Ephraim, the Prince of peace has
joined the wood of Israel and Judah in one troe. And therefore we may justly
say, as the children of Israel say here to Joshua, we are a great people, and
the land is too narrow for us: so that whatsoever we have been, now it
behooues us to be both prudent and politic, and not to deride and reject good
profers of profitable and gainefull expectation, but rather to embrace every
occasion which has any probability in it of future hopes: And seeing there is
neither preferment nor employment for all within the lists of our country, we
might justly be accounted as in former times, both imprudent and improuident,
if we will yet sit with our arms foulded in our bosoms, and not rather seek
after such adventures whereby the glory of God may be advanced, the territories
of our kingdom enlarged, our people both preferred and employed abroad, our
wants supplied at home, his Majesty's customs wonderfully augmented, and the
honor and renown of our Nation spread and propagated to the ends of the world.
Many examples might be produced to move us hereunto, but because they were the
practices of rude and barharous people, they are no exemplarie presidents for
christians: but forasmuch as every example approved in the scripture, is a
precept, I thought good to handle this conference between the tribe of Joseph
a family in the Israel of God, and Joshua a faithful and godly Prince over the
whole commonwealth of Gods Israel: which to my seeming, is much like that plot
which we have now in hand for Virginia; for here the people of Ephraim and of
the half tribe of Manasses, are a great people, and so are we: and by reason
of the multitude of their people, the land is too narrow for them; and so
stands our case, whereupon they repair to (...) to have his warrant and
direction to enlarge their ^^^oers, and so have many of our Noble men of
honorable minds, worthy knights, rich merchants, and diverse other of the best
disposition, solicited our Joshua, and mighty Monarch, that most religious and
renowned King James, that by his Majesty's leave, they might undertake the
plantation of Virginia. Lastly, as Joshua not only gives leave, but also a
blessing to the children of Joseph in their enterprises, so has our gracious
Sovereign granted his free Charter to our people, for ye undertaking of their
intended enterprise and adventure, so that from this example, there is both
sufficient warrant for our King to grant his chacter for the plantation of
Virginia, and sufficient warrant also for our people to undertake the same. And
therefore for the better satisfying of some, and for the encoraging of all
fortes of people concerning this project for Virginia, let us more fully
examine the particulars of this discourse between the children of Joseph and
Joshua. First we gather from the text, that the cause why the children of
Joseph desired to enlarge their borders, was the multitude and greatness
whereunto they were grown. God had blessed them according to the prophecy of
Jacob, Genesis 48. 19. So yt the portion which was first thought to be roomie and
large enough for them, is now too narrow and little for them. What should they
do in this case? should they provide and establish laws to hinder the increase
of their people, as we read of Hyppodamus, sometimes a lawgiver among ye
Miles^ans; whose example in government, Aristotle in his 7. book of Politics
and 16. chapter, and Plato in his ^. book Delegibus, have drawn into precept
and rule of policy? should they decree against building and execting houses,
luniting a certain number and no more for every family in their tribe, as
P^^do amongst the Corinthians sometimes did, and (...) ^^ey of Paris of late
enacted, taking order that old an^ ancient houses should be repaired, but no
new edifices erected. Anno. 1548? should they have pestered themselves with
Inmates, and one household have received into it two or three families? They put
none of these in practice, but with one consent they repair to the Magistrate,
they complain that their lot is not large enough, and theyshew the reason,
because they are a great people.

There is nothing more dangerous for the estate of commonwealths, then when
the people do increase to a greater multitude and number then may instly
parallel with the largeness of the place and country: for hereupon comes
oppression, and diverse kind of wrongs, mutinies, sedition, commotion, and
rebellion, scarcity, dearth, poverty, and sundry sorts of calamities, which
either breed the conversion, or euersion, of cities and commonwealths. For
even as blood though it be the best humor in the body, yet if it abound in
greater quantity then the state of the body will bear, does endanger the
body, and oftentimes destroys it: so although the honor of the king be in
the multitude of people, Pro. 14. 28. yet when this multitude of people
increases to over great a number, the commonwealth stands subject to many
perilous inconveniences, for which cause many Nations perceiving their people
to increase above a due and proportionable number, they have sent their
ouerflowing multitudes abroad into other countries and provinces, to the ends
they might preserve their own in greater peace and prosperity: so we see ye
husbandman deal with his grounds when they are ouercharged with cattle, he
remooues them from one ground to another, and so he provides ^ell both for his
cattle and for his ground: and so does the master of the bee-garden, when he
soes a hiue pesteted with multitudes of bees, he drives ye hiue, and so reapeth
^ greater gain by his ware and honey.

And herupon many statesmen have thought nothing more profitable for populous
commonwealths, then to have foreign and externe wars, to the end that
thereby the superfluous branches might be cut off. This was the cause why
Scipio when he had conquered Carthage, would not have it utterly ruinated,
least says he, the Romans having no wars abroad, move civil wars
amongst themselves at home: others seeing the multitude of their people
increase, have planted Colonies with them, others have banished them into
remote countries: and the children of Joseph here being pestered with multitude
come to Joshua to be directed and relieved. This should teach us of this
kingdom and country, prudence and providence, the Lord has blessed us, and
we are grown to be a great people, so that one lot is not sufficient for us:
Our multitudes like too much blood in the body, infect our country with plague
and poverty, our land has brought forth, but it has not milk sufficient in
the breast thereof to nourish all those children which it has brought forth,
it affords neither employment nor preferment for those that depend upon it:
And hereupon it is, that many serviceable men give themselves to lewd courses,
as to robbing by the high way, theft, and cosoning, sharking upon the land,
piracie upon the Sea, and so are cut off by shameful and untimely death:
others live profanely, riotously, and idely, to the great dishonor of
Almighty God, the detriment of the commonwealth. Now our case standing thus it
behooves every one to devise a remedy for this misery: When there was no
bread in Chanaa^, Jacob and his family sought into Egypt for corn to relieve
themselves. And Jacob seeing his sons destitute of counsel in that extremity,
did sharply reprehe^d them for ye dissolute managing of their present state,
saying: Why gaze ye one upon another? Behold, I have heard there is food in
Egypt, get ye down thither, and buy us food thence, that we may live. Even so
may it be said to a company of people in this land, which do nothing but gaze
one upon another, destitute of counsel, advise, and means, how to provide
justly and honestly for their maintenance. They hear of honorable proiects
abroad, they hear of employment and preserment, they hear of plenty and
abundance of many good things, of which a fruitful country largely makes offer
unto them: they hear of gain and profit both to them and their posterity,
they hear many honorable men, many worthy wise men, many valiant and
courageous men, many rich and wealthy men, adventure their persons, their
money, their ships, toward the accomplishing of so godly and memorable a
dsigne, and yet they sit still following their intemperauncie, incontinencie,
and other their luxurious and riotous courses, to the high dishonor of
almighty God, to the great hurt of the commonwealth, and to their own
everlasting shame and ignomie. If an honorable death were set before a
virtuous mind, it would choose rather to die heroically, then live
opprobriously. What then shall we think of those persons, who having an
honorable life set before them, do yet choose rather to live in idleness,
dishonestie and obscenitie? surely they are of degenerate and dunghill minder,
neither are they worthy to be nourished in the bosom of a well governed
commonwealth. It was for ever a blemish to the honor and credit of Ulysses,
because he feigned himself mad, and sowed salt in sreed of corn in his
field, only that by such a shift he might keep himself at home, and not go
with the Grecians to the siege of Troy. So let perpetual shame and dishonor
attend upon all those, which doting upon their wealth, or suffeting upon their
pleasures, find delays and devise shifts, either to save their purses, or
their persons, from such honorable and profitable designments, as offer
probable likelyhoods of future good to this our country or commonwealth.

Thus we have heard the duty of the people which is prudently and prouidently
to consult with the magistrates, concerning the disburdening, and discharging
of such unnecessary multitudes as pester a commonwealth, and also to further
such enterprises either with their purses or their persons as make to the same
end. Now yt in next place, we are to note the direction of Joshua, upon the
aforesaid complaint of the children of Joseph, which is to enlarge their
territories, and dilate their borders, by destroying Gods enemies the
Perizzites, and Giants, which inhabited the valleys, bordering upon mount
Ephraim, which were most abominable Idolaters, and had no knowledge of the true
and only God: from whence we may learn, how odious those people are, in the
sight of God, which having no knowledge of him and his worship, give that
honor to the insensible and unreasonable creature, which is only due to the
omnipotent and almighty Creator. For this cause has almighty God,
overthrown the mightiest Monarchies in the world, for this cause did he
disperse his own Israel among the Nations, and never vouchsafed them to
return again into their own land. David by way of prophecy, does promise a
blessing to those that shall take the children of the Idolatrous Babilonians
and dash them against the stones, and they that have taken arms against such
people, are said to fight the Lords battles. Saul had his kingdom rent from
him and his posterity, because he spared Agag, that Idolatrous king of the
Amalechites, whom God would not have spared: so acceptable a service is it to
destroy Idolaters whom God hates, but forasmuch as God does not delight in
blood, but rather that a sinner should convert and live, agreeable unto which,
is that speech of our Savior Christ in the Gospel, There is joy in heaven
over one sinner that repents. It is far more commendable, and out of doubt
more acceptable unto God, to reclaim an Idolater, unless we have a special
commandment of God to the contrary, as Saul had then to destroy him, to win
him to the faith, then to deprive him of life, and to bring him to the
knowledge of God, and whom he has sent Christ Jesus: rather then to kill them
in their ignorance, and so to bring them into danger both of body and soul,
for they that turn many unto righteousness shall shine as the stars for
evermore. Dan. 12. 3. Paul calls those whom he had won to the faith of Christ,
his crown, his joy, his glory. 1. Thessa. 2. 19. 20. As though they were the
matter of his joy, of his crown, and of his glory. Happy therefore is he
that has an hand in turning any unto God. And he that will find delaie
whereby so gracious a work may be hindered, is not with God, but against God,
for as much as he hinders the building up of the kingdom of God.

And surely so desirous is man of civil society by nature, that he easily
yields to discipline and government, if he see any reasonable motive to induce
him to the same. For we read of certain people in Africa, inhabiting the
mountain Magnan, which offentimes do constrain strangers which travel that
way, to take the government of them, and to impose laws unto them, whereby
they may be justly and orderly governed: and many Nations willingly submitted
themselves to the subjection of the Romans, being allured thereunto by
Justice, equity, clemency, and upright dealing of the Roman captains: for
it is not the nature of men, but the education of men, which make them
barbarous and uncivil, and therefore change the education of men, and you
shall see that their nature will be greatly rectified and corrected: seeing
therefore men by nature so easily yield to discipline and government upon any
reasonable show of bettering their fortunes, it is every man's duty to
travel both by sea and land, and to venture either with his person or with his
purse, to bring the barbarous and savage people to a civil and Christian kind
of government, under which they may learn how to live holily, justly, and
soberly in this world, and to apprehend the means to save their souls in the
world to come, rather then to destroy them, or utterly to root them out: for a
wise man, but much more a Chrtstian, ought to try all means before they
undertake war: di^astation and depopulation ought to be the last thing which
Christians should put in practice, yet forasmuch as every example in the
scripture as I said is a precept, we are warranted by this direction of
Joshua, to destroy wilful and convicted Idolaters, rather then to let them
live, if by no other means they can be reclaimed.

The report goes, that in Virginia the people are savage and incredibly rude,
they worship the devil, offer their young children in sacrifice unto him,
wander up and down like beasts, and in manners and conditions, differ very
little from beasts, having no Art, nor science, nor trade, to employ themselves,
or give themselves unto, yet by nature loving and, gentle, and desirous to
embrace a better condition. Oh how happy were that man which could reduce this
people from brutishnes, to civility, to religion, to Christianity, to the
saving of their souls: happy is that man and blessed of God, whom God has
endued, either with means or will to attempt this business, but far be it
from the nature of the English, to exercise any bloody cruelty amongst these
people: far be it from the hearts of the English, to give them occasion, that
the holy name of God, should be dishonored among the Infidels, or that in the
plantation of that continent, they should give any cause to the world, to say
that they sought the wealth of that country above or before the glory of God,
and the propagation of his kingdom. I remember the practice of Christopher
Collombus, which he used amongst the west Indians, to persuade them to receive
his Spaniardes to society and commerce, which was, he observed that they were
superstitiously given to worship the Moon, and by the skill he had in
Astronomy, he foresaw that within three days the Moon should be eclipsed:
whereupon he called them together, and told them, that he had often used his
best means, to bring them to a civil, and friendly converse with strangers,
but they would not harken unto him, and therefore in the presence of them all,
he called upon the Moon to revenge such a ^acha^ous people, which denied
strangers so converse, and commerce with them: within three days after the
Moon was much darkened by reason of the Eclipse, which when the Indians saw,
they thought the Moon to be angry with them, and fearing some plague would
proceed from her displeasure, they were easily induced to do whatsoever
Columbus would have them. In like manner should all men use their wits in the
first place, and weapons should always be the last means in all our proiects.
And therefore although the children of Joseph have an express commandment
here in this place, to destroy those Idolaters, and possess their land, yet
forasmuch as we have no precept but by example, we must first try all means
before weapons, and when we take them into our hands, necessity of preserving
our own lives, must rather move us to destroy the enemies of God, then either
ambition, or greediness of gain, or cruelty, or any private respect
whatsoever.

Now the third thing which we are to observe in this intercourse of words
between the children of Joseph, and Joshua, is the delays which the people
use, and the excuses which they feign, which seem to import an
impossibility, in the undertaking of Iosuas direction. And their delays are,
that the Chanaanites were strong and well provided of warlike munition, both
for their own defense, and also for the defense of those which would undertake
to supplant or invade them, they had iron Charets, and such like muniments of
war, so that it stood not with wisdom to make an invasion, with
likelihoode to make a conquest of them. This is the nature of muddy and earthly
spirits, to find delays, and forge excuses in matters of least difficulty:
Man says, A Lion is without, I shall be slain in the street. Prou. 22. 13.
What slanders did the ten spies bring upon the land of Canaan? which sla^ders
the I sraelites made good grounds for their retiring back into Egypt, and
thought them lawful excuses for them to murmur against Moses and Aaron, Han^ba
had much ado to bring his Carthagenians into Italy, they alleged the
tediousness of the voyage; and the inaccessible passage of ye Alps. We read
of Caligula, sometimes Emperor of Rome, that he on a time condemned a certain
Citizens son of Rome to be executed, and he sent for his father to see his
sons execution. The father to excuse his absence, feined himself to be sick,
whereupon the Emperor sent him his horslitter, and by that means took away
from him all color of excuse. This perplexed father had good cause to find
delays to keep him at home: but they that forge cauils, to withdraw themselves
from such attempts whereby God may be honored, the majesty and royalty of
their King aduauced, the common wealth enriched, and postrecitie provided for,
would not be drawn to these attempts in Caligulaes horslitter, for that is too
easy means to draw on such backward spirits, neither would I have them
punished for their delays, as Tu^lus Hostilius sometimes punished Metius
Sufferius for his delays: but I would some Diomedes would find out a means to
draw them on to this enterprise, by discovering their driftes and excuses; for
all that they can alleags for their backewardnesse, is most idle and frivolous.

The first objection is, by what right or warrant we can enter into the land of
these Savages, take away their rightful in hexitance from them, and plant our
selves in their places, being vnwronged or unprovoked by them. Some affirm,
and it is likely to be true, that these Savages have no particular proprietis
in any part or parcel of that Country, but only a general recidencis there,
as wild beasts have in the forest, for they range and wander up and down the
Country, without any law or government, being led only by their own lusts and
sensuality, there is not meum Ortuum amongst them: so that if the whole land
should be taken from them, there is not a man that can complain of any
particular wrong done unto him.

But the answer to the foresaid objection is, that there is no intendment to
take away from them by force that rightful inheritance which they have in
that Country, for they are willing to entertain us, and have offered to
yield into our hands on reasonable conditions, more land then we shall be
able this long time to plant and manure: and out of all question upon easy
composition with them, we may have as much of their Country yielded unto us,
by lawful grant from them, as we can or will desire, so that we go to live
peaceably among them, and not to supplant them: we desire not, neither do
we intend to take any thing from them, ex pacto and iure foederis: but to
compound with them for that we shall have of them: and surely except
succession and election, there cannot be a more lawful entrance to a kingdom
then this of ours.

Moreover, all Politicians do with one consent, hold and maintain, that a
Christian King may lawfully make war upon barbarous and Savage people, and
such as live under no lawful or warrantable government, and may make a
conquest of them, so that the war be undertaken to this end, to reclaim
and reduce those Savages from their barbarous kind of life, and from their
brutish and ferine manners, to huinanitie, piety, and honesty. Lip. lib. 5.
pol. ca. 8. Casman. in pol. cap. 8. Ke^kerm. lib. 7. pol. page 124. And Lipsius
alleges Saint Augustine for proof hereof, whose words are these: Qui
licentia iniquitatis eripitur, vtiliter vincitur. Those people are vanquished
to their unspeakable profit and gain, which by conquest are abridged of the
liberty of sin and impiety. And the same Saint Augustine has an other
golden saying to this purpose. Apud veros Dei cultores etiam illa bella peccata
non sunt qua non cupiditate and crudelitate sed pacis studio geruntur, vt mali
coerceantur, and boni subleuentur: Amongst the true worshippers of GOD, even
that war is lawful which is undertaken, not for covetousness and cruelty,
but for peace and unities sake: so that lewd and wicked men may thereby be
suppressed and good men maintained and relieved: whereby we see, that both in
the opinion of Politicians, and also by the judgment of Augustine himself, we
might lawfully make war upon the Savages of Virginia our project, having the
ends aforesaid. And therefore let every man that is or will be an aduenturer
in this plantation, examine his whole heart, and if he find that he is
drawn to partake in this business, to draw the Savages from their barbarous
kind of life, to a moreciuill, honest, and Christian kind of life, let him
not doubt of the lawfulness of it, but let him cheerfully and liberally put
his helping hand to this business.

Secondly, they reason of the future events by those that are already past.
And seeing it is above twenty years agee since this attempt was begun, and
yet no good has come of it, nor little hope of any, they hold it an unadvised
course to set the same attempt on foot again: which objection of theirs is
very sufficiently answered in that book entitled Noua Britannia. And indeed
most childish is this objection, for neither was the end of the first attempt
the same, with the end of this, nor the means, nor the managing of the means
of this attempt semblable with the former, and therefore in all likelihood the
event of this cannot be judged by the event of the former.

Their second objection is, that this age will see no profit of this
plantatio^. Which objection admit it were true, yet it is too brutish, and
bewraies their neglect and incurious respect of posterity: we are not borne
like beasts for our ielues, and the time present only, but besides many other
things which may challenge an interest and right in us: posterity and the age
yet ensuing have not the least part in our life and labors. What benefit or
comfort should we have enjoyed in the things of this world, if our forefathers
had not provided better for us, and bin more carefully respective of posterity
then for themselves? We sow, we set, we plant, we build, not so much for our
selves as for posterity; we practice the works of Godliness in this life, yet
shall we not see the end of our hope before we enjoy it in the world to come:
It is a blessed thing to be blessed of posterity. It was the rejoicing of the
Uirgin Marie, that from thenceforth all generations should call her blessed.
They that do not provide for eternity, can have no assured hope of eternity,
and they which only are for themselves, shall die in themselves, and shall not
have a name among posterity, their roots shall be dried up beneath, and
above shall their branch be cut down, their remembrance shall perish from the
earth, and they shall have no name in the street, Job 18. 16. 17. But the
remembrance which a good man leaves behind him, is like the composition of the
perfume that is made by the Art of the Apothecary; it is sweet as honey in all
mouths, and as music at a banquet of wine: let it not grieve thee therefore
to plant and build for posterity, for the memory of the just shall be
blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot. Prou. 10. 7.

Others object the continual charges which will prove in their opinion very
heavy and burdensome to those that shall undertake the said Plantation. These
like the dog in the manger, neither eat hay themselves, neither will they
suffer the Ox yt would. They never think any charges too much that may any way
increase their own private estate. They have thousands to bestow about the
engrossing of a commodity, or upon a morgage, or to take their Neighbors
house over his head, or to lend upon usury: but if it come to a public good,
they groan under the least burden of charges that can be required of them.
These men would be used like sponges, they must be squeased, seeing they
drnuke up all, and will yield to nothing, though it concern the common good
never so greatly. But it is demonstratiuely proved in Noua Britannia, that the
charges about this Plantation will be nothing, in comparison of the benefit
that will grow thereof. And what notable thing I pray you can be brought to
pass without charges? The things of this world are appointed unto man with
such conditions as there may no profit accrue unto him without pain, nor no
gain without charge: Hiel will build Jericho, though the foundation of it cost
him his eldest son, and the setting up of the gates cost him his youngest
son: Haman will have his wicked desire upon the Jews, though it cost him ten
thousand talents; So little do the wicked respect charges about the effecting
of their malicious, or vain glorious attempts, condemning those that profess
piety and religion, which for saving charges, neglect, and often times suffer
most honorable and profitable protects to fail and fall to the ground. Without
question kee that saues his money, where Gods glory is to be advanced,
Christian religion propagated and planted, the good of the Commonwealth
increased, and the glorious renown of the King enlarged, s subject to the
curse of Simon Magus, his money and he are in danger to perish together. Let
none therefore find delays, or feign excuses to withhold them from this
employment for Virginia, seeing every opposition against it is an opposition
against God, the King, the Church, and the Commonwealth.

Now in the last place let us hear the answer of Joshua to the excuses of the
children of Joseph, and his answer is an exhortation, that in stead of delays
they would use Art and industry in this enterprise which they were to
undertake: Art in cutting down the trees and making the Country champion:
Industry by taking pains to conquer and cast out those Idolatrous Cananites,
and to plant themselves in their places. From whence we are to gather, that for
this present business of plantation in Virginia, there must be special
choice and care had of such persons as shall be sent thither. Nature has
emptied her self in bestowing her richest treasures upon that Country; so
that if Art and industry be used, as helps to Nature, it is likely to prove
the happiest attempt that ever was undertaken by the English. And forasmuch as
of all humane Arts Political government is the chiefest, there must be a
special care in the Magistrate how to carry himself in his place and order:
for herein consists the very maine matter of the success of this business.
As therefore the Magistrate has the eminency of dignity conferred upon him
by his Prince, so must he furnish himself with eminency of virtue: for he
shall the better contain others within the bounds and limits of honesty and
godliness, if he first be able to contain himself. Mala anima male imperat,
Plato: 1. de legibus. A Magistrate therefore must have a good conscience
toward God, and he must also have a loving affection toward those over whom
he has the government. Concerning the conscience that a Magistrate must
carry toward God, he must so watch over himselse, that at no time he burst
soorth into any notorious vice, nor suffer himself to be stained with the
imputation of any enormious crime; for the vices of men are holden so much the
greater, by how much greater the Majesty is of the party delinquent: the
blemishes of Princes are deformities, and diminitiue sins in the^, are sins of
the highest nature. Again, he that is in place of government must know that his
example preualles much with those yt are under his government, so that he shall
rule his subjects better by his good example of life, then by all the laws and
statutes that he can make. Lastly, a Magistrate must know that the modern
times do not only behold him, but that he is subject also to the view of
succeeding posterity; and therefore Tacitus does advise Princes, lib. 4. Ann.
to beware by all means that they give no occasion to Chroniclers to publish
their leaud and wicked actions. Concerning his looing affection toward his
subjects, his first care must be that he always seek the public good of his
subjects above his own private profit: to which purpose the Emperor Adrian
was wont to say; Ita se rempublicam gesturum vt sciret populi rem esse, non
propriam. The example of Alexander the Great is most memorable for this
purpose, who leading his soldiers through the dry and w^^ places of India,
had almost lost his whole army for water. At the last one of his soldiers
found out the river Oxus, and brought the King water to quench his thirst: but
the King powered the water upon the ground before all his soldiers, and would
not drink it, speaking these words: Ego bibam? and reliqui sitient? and when
he and his whole army came to the river, he would not drink before all his
soldiers had quenched their thirst: giving thereby all Princes to understand,
that they should provide for the good of their people before their own good.
Thus in conscience toward God, and in affection toward his subjects ought a
Prince to stand affected. And if he stand so affected he will punish such as
are vild and vicious, and he will advance such as are veriuous and well
disposed; he will encourage the painful and industrious, and he will correct
the idle and dissolute; he will establish true religion, and he will repress
heresies and schisms; he will reiceue the weak and impotent, and he will
suppress the mutinous and insolent; so that God will give a blessing, and al
things will prosper under his government.

And for as much as no policy can stand long without religion, a chief care
must be had of sufficient, honest, and sober minded Ministers to teach and
instruct the people both by their life and doctrine in their duty to God, and
obedience to their rulers. When the T^^be of Dan went to plant themselves in
La^sh, they took a Leuite with them to be a father and a Priest unto them:
Micah thought that the Lord would be better unto him because he had a Leuite in
his house. Neither do I ever read of any that ever attained unto any
government of what religion soever they were, but their first care was to
provide fit persons which might teach the people religion and divine worship;
and therefore if this p^antatio^ should be undertaken without this care, there
were small hope of any good success to come thereof. And as the Minister being
a subject must yield his obedience to the Magistrate, so (...) Magistrate must
be careful to yield him countenance to keep him from neglect, and
maintenance to encourage him in his ministry. And it must be specially
foreseen of the Ministers that they resist Popery; for as it does infect the
mind with error, so it does infect the manners of men with disloyalty and
treachery: and lastly they must labor to preserve the unity of the spirit in
the bond of peace; for if they ^nce ^arre, or dissent among themselves, they
open a gappe to schism and contempt of religion. Policy thus establishing
religion, and religion guiding policy; provision must be made of men furnished
with Arts and trades most necessary for this business: Artificers and tradesmen
must be nourished and cherished, for without Artificers and tradesmen a
commonwealth cannot flourish nor endure: and therefore the Magistrate must
specially regard them and respect them, and they must so carry themselves that
they may be respected and cherished of the Magistrate. It is required at their
hands that they be faithful, painful, and honest in their callings; for if
they be thus qualified, the country itself will make them rich. Every trade
has his mystery, which is for the most part grounded upon deceit and fraud:
but seeing the beginning of a common wealth is now attempted, the foundation
must not be laid upon fraud and deceit, for there can no good end be expected
of an evil beginning. It is requ^red likewise that they be painful in their
trades, or else the commonwealth can have little use or comfort of them. And
here our English tradesmen and Artificers are to be advised that they be wary
in taking the Savages to be apprentices to teach them their trade, seeing
there be means of employment sufficient besides to set many thousands on
work; and therefore not necessary as yet to instruct them in our trades and
mysteries.

Besides all this, industry must be also added to help Art and Nature, so
that such as have no prosessed arts and trades, must painefully im^^^y
themselves in some labor or other, to the furthering of this Plantation: a
Drone will in short space devour more honey than the Be can gather in along
time, and therefore the Magistrate must correct with all sharpness of
discipline, those unthrifty and unprofitable Drones, which live idly: for
there is a law given to the sons of Adam to labor, and to the daughters of
Eve, with the sweat of their brows to get their living, and therefore it is
an Evangelical precept that they which will not labor must not eat. In Jobs
time there was a very strict order taken for such as lived idely, Job 30. 5.
They were chased forth from among men, and every one showted at them as at a
thief: and surely such an order must be taken with those that will not live
painefully in Virginia, the rather because meat and drink, and such other
necessary supplies of liueliehoode will be very precious there a while: and
therefore order had more need be taken, that such provision be not consumed by
unserviceable loytering companions.

Lastly, all degrees and sorts of people which have prepared themselves for
this Plantation must be admonished to preserve unity, love and concord amongst
themselves: for by concord small things increase and grow to great things, but
by discord great things soon come to nothing. Agesilaus being demanded why
the City of Sparta was not compassed about with walls for the better defense
and safety of the City, he showed unto the demandant, the Citizens and
Soldiers of Sparta, all of them living and agreeing together in firm concord
and unity; these, says Agesilaus, are the walls of Sparta: and out of
question so it is; concord and good agreement amongst coinhabitants is a more
sure defense than walls or Castles, or any other warlike munition whatsoever.
Therefore if any mutinous or seditious person dare adventure to move any
matter which may tend to the breach of concord and unity, he is presently to
be suppressed as a most d^^gerous enemy to the state and government there
established. Now all these particulars being already not only concluded upon,
but also provided for by the godly care of the counsel and Aouenturers of
Virginia: I have presumed only to advise, being ^^t o^ ^oubt that they will be
as carefully performed, as they at? already wisely and religiously determined.
And thus far have I presumed in my love to the Adventurers, and liking to the
enterprise, ^o deal in this business, praying as much good success to them
and it, as their own hearts can desire hoping to see their expectation
satisfied, and the glory of England as much increased by this their honorable
attempt, as ever was the Roman Empire by the enterprises of her greatest
Emperors, sorrowing with my self that I am not able neither in person nor
purse to be a partaker in the business.

FINIS.

