GIACOMO Di Grassi his true Art of Defense, plainly teaching by infallable
Demonstrations, apt Figures and perfect Rules the manner and form how a man
without other Teacher or Master may safely handle all sorts of Weapons as well
offensive as defensive: With a Treatise Of Disceit or Falsinge: And with a
way or mean by private Industry to obtain Strength, Judgment and Actiuitie.

First written in Italian by the foresaid Author, And Englished by I. G.
gentleman.

Printed at London for I. I and are to be sold wi hin Temple Bar at the Sign
of the Hand and Star 1594.

To the Right Honorable my L. Borrow Lord Governor of the Breil, and Knight of
the most honorable order of the Garter, T. C. wishes continual Honor,
worthiness of mind, and learned knowledge, with increas of worldly Fame, and
heavenly felicity.
Having a restless desire in the daily exercises of Pen to present some
acceptable piece of work to your L. and finding no one thing so fit for my
purpose and your honorable disposition, as the knowledge of Arms and Weapons,
which defends life, country, and honor, I presumed to prefer a book to the
print (translated out of the Italyan language) of a gentle man's doing that is
not so gredie of glory as many glorious writers that eagerly would snatch Fame
out of other men's mouths, by a little labor of their own, But rather keeps
his name unknown to the world (under a shamefast clowd of silence) knowing
that virtue shynes best and gets greatest prays where it makes smallest
bragg: for the goodness of the mind seeks no glorious gwerdon, but hopes to
reap the reward of well doing among the rypest of judgment and worthiest of
sound consideration, like unto a man that gives his goods unto the poor, and
makes his treasurehouse in heaven, And further to be noted, who can tarry til
the seed sown in the earth be almost rotten or dead, shall be sure in a
bou^tiful harvest to reap a goodly crop of corn And better it is to abide a
happy season to see how things will prove, than soddainly to seek profit
where slowlye comes commodity or any benefit will rise. Some say, that good
writers do purchase small praise till they be dead, (Hard is that opinion.)
and then their Fame shall flowrish and bring forth the fruit that long lay hid
in the earth. This gentleman, perchance, in the like regard smothers up his
credit, and stands careless of the worlds report: but I cannot see him so
forgotten for his pains in this work is not little, and his merit must be
much that has in our English tongue published so necessary a volume in such
apt terms and in so bigg a book (besides the lively descriptions and models
of the same) that shows great knowledge and cunning, great art in the weapon,
and great surety of the man that wisely can use it, and stoutly execute it.
All manner of men allows knowledge: then where knowledge and courage meets in
one person, there is ods in that match, whatsoever manhod and ignorance can say
in their own behalf. The sine book of ryding has made many good hors-men: and
this book of Fencing will save many men's lives, or put common quarrels out of
ure, because the danger is death if ignorant people procure a combat. Here is
nothing set down or speech used, but for the preservation of life and honor
of man: most orderly rules, and noble observations, enterlaced with wise
council and excellent good words, penned from a fowntaine of knowledge and
flowing wit, where the reasons runs as freely as clear water comes from a
Spring or Conduite. Your L. can judge both of the weapon and words, wherefore
there needs no more commendation of the book: Let it show it self, craving
some supportation of your honorable sensure: and finding favor and passage
among the wise, there is no doubt but all good men will like it, and the bad
sort will blush to argue against it, as knows our living Lord, who augment
your L. in honor and desired credit.

Your L. in all humbly at commandment. Thomas Churchyard.

The Authors Epistle unto diverse Noble men and Gentlemen.
AMong all the Prayers, wherein through the whole course of my life, I have
asked any great thing at Gods hands, I have always most earnestly beseeched,
that (although at this present I am very poor and of base Fortune) he would
notwithstanding give me grace to be thankful and mindful of the good turns
which I have received. For among all the disgraces which a man may incur in
this world, there is none in mine opinion which causes him to become more
odious, or a more enemy to mortal men (yea, unto God himself) than
ingratitude. Wherefore being in Treuiso, by your honors courteously
entreated, and of all honorably used, although I practiced little or naught at
all to teach you how to handle weapons, for the which purpose I was hired with
an honorable stipend, yet to show my self in some sort thankful, I have
determined to bestow this my work upon your honors, employing my whole
endeavor to show the way how to handle all sorts of weapons with advantage
and safety. The which my work, because it shall find your noble hearts full
of valor, will bring forth such fruit, being but once attentively read over,
as that in your said honors will be seen in acts and deeds, which in other
men scarsely is comprehended by imagination. And I, who have been and am most
fervently affected to serve your Ls. forasmuch as it is not granted unto me,
(in respect of your diverse affairs) to apply the same, and take some pains
inteaching as I always desired, have yet by this other way, left all that
imprinted in your noble minds, which in this honorable exercise may bring a
valiant man unto perfection.

Therefore I humbly beseech your honors, that with the same liberal minds,
with the which you accepted of me, your Ls: will also receive these my
endeavors, and vouchsafe so to protect them, as I have always, and will defend
your honors most pure and undefiled. Wherein, if I perceive this my first
childbirth (as I have only published it to thentent to help and teach others)
to be to the general satisfaction of all I will so strain my endeavors in an
other work which shortly shall show the way both how to handle all those
weapons on horseback which here are taught on foot, as also all other
weapons whatsoever.

Your honors most affectionate servant. Giacomo di Grassi of Modena.

The Author, to the Reader.
EVen as from our swathing bands we carry with us (as it were) an unbridled
desire of knowledge: So afterward, having attained to the perfection thereof,
there grows in us a certain laudable and fervent affection to teach others:
The which, if it were not so, the world happily should not be seen so
replenished with Arts and Sciences.

For if men generally were not apt to contemplation and searching out of
things: Or if God had not bestowed upon every man the grace, to be able to lift
up his mind from the earth, and by searching to find out the causes thereof,
and to imparte them to those who are less willing to take any pains therein:
it would come to pass, that the one part of men, as Lords and Masters,
should bear rule, and the other part as vile slaves, wrapped in perpetual
darkness, should suffer and lead a life unworthy the condition of man.
Wherefore, in mine opinion it stands with great reason that a man participate
that unto others which he has searched and found out by his great study and
travail. And therefore, I being even from my childhood greatly delighted in
the handling of weapons: after I had spent much time in the exercise thereof,
was desirous to see and behold the most excellent and expert masters of this
Art, whom I have generally marked, to teach after diverse ways, much
differing one from another, as though this mystery were destitute of order and
rule, or depended only upon imagination, or on the devise of him who
professes the same: Or as though it were a matter impossible to find out in
this honorable exercise (as well as in all other Arts and Sciences) one only
good and true way, whereby a man may attain to the entire knowledge of as much
as may be practiced with the weapon, not depending altogether upon his own
head, or learning one blow to day of one master, on the morrow of another,
thereby busying himself about perticulars, the knowledge whereof is infinite,
therefore impossible. Whereupon being forced, through a certain honest desire
which I bear to help others, I gave my self wholly to the contemplation
thereof: hoping that at the length, I should find out the true principles and
grounds of this Art, and reduce the confused and infinite number of blows
into a compendious sum and certain order: The which principles being but
few, and therefore easy to be known and borne away, without doubt in small
time, and little travail, will open a most large entrance to the understanding
of all that which is contained in this Art. Neither was I in this frustrate at
all of my expectation: For in conclusion after much deliberation, I have found
out this Art, from the which only depends the knowledge of all that which a
man may perform with a weapon in his hand, and not only with those weapons
which are found out in these our days, but also with those that shall be
invented in time to come: Considering this Art is grounded upon Offense and
Defense, both the which are practiced in the straight and circuler lines, for
that a man may not otherwise either strike or defend.

And because I purpose to teach how to handle the Weapon, as orderly and
plainly as is possible: I have first of all laid down the principles or
grounds of all the Art, calling them Aduertisements, the which, being of
their own nature very well known to all those that are in their perfect
wits: I have done no other then barely declared them, without rendering any
further reason, as being a thing superfluous.

These principles being declared, I have next handled those things, which are,
and be, of themselves, Simple, then (ascending up to those that are Compound) I
show that which may be generally done in the handling of all Weapons. And
because, in teaching of Arts and Sciences, Things are more to be esteemed of
than Words, therefore I would not choose in the handling hereof a copious
and sounding kind of speech, but rather that which is more brief and
familiar. Which manner of speech as in a small bundle, it contains diverse
weighty things, so it craves a slow and discreet Reader, who will soft and
fair pearce into the very Marrowe thereof.

For this cause I beseech the gentle Reader to show himself such a one in the
reading of this my present work, assuring him self by so reading it, to reap
great profit and honor thereby. Not doubting but that he (who is
sufficiently furnished with this knowledge, and has his body proporcionably
exercised thereunto) shall far surmount any other although he be indewed with
equal force and swiftnes.

Moreover, because this art is a principal member of the Militarte profession,
which altogether (with learning) is the ornament of all the World, Therefore
it ought not to be exercised in Braules and Fraies, as men commonly practice
in every shire, but as honorable Knights, ought to reserve themselves, and
exercise it for the advantage of their Cuntry, the honor of vveomen, and
conqueringe of Hosts and armies.

An Advertisement to the courteous reader.
GOod Reader, before thou enter into the discourse of the hidden knowledge of
this honorable excerise of the weapon now laid open and manifested by the
Author of this work, and in such perfectnes translated out of the Italian
tongue, as all or most of the marshal minded gentlemen of England cannot but
commend, and no one person of indifferent judgment can justly be offended
with, seeing that whatsoever herein is discoursed, tends to no other use, but
the defense of man's life and reputation: I thought good to advertise thee that
in some places of this book by reason of the aequiuocation of certain Italian
words, the weapons may doubtfully be construed in English. Therefore sometimes
fynding this word Sword generally used, I take it to have been the better
translated, if in steed thereof the Rapier had been inserted: a weapon more
usual for Gentlemen's wearing, and fittest for causes of offense and defense:
Besides that, in Italy where Rapier and Dagger is commonly worn and used, the
Sword (if it be not an arming Sword) is not spoken of. Yet would I not the
sense so strictly to be construed, that the use of so honorable a weapon be
utterly rejected, but so redd, as by the right and perfect understanding of the
one, thy judgment may some what be augmented in managing of the other: Knowing
right well, that as the practice and use of the first is commendable amongst
them, so the second cannot so far be condemned, but that the wearing thereof
may well commend a man of valor and reputation amongst us. The Sword and
Buckler fight was long while allowed in England (and yet practice in all sorts
of weapons is praisworthie,) but now being laid down, the sword but with
Seruing-men is not much regarded, and the Rapier fight generally allowed, as a
wapon because most perilous, therefore most feared, and thereupon private
quarrels and common frayes soonest shunned.

But this piece of work, gentle Reader, is so gallantly set out in every point
and parcel, the obscurest secrets of the handling of the weapon so clearly
unfolded, and the perfect demeaning of the body upon all and sudden occasions
so learnedly discoursed, as will glad the under stander thereof, and sound to
the glory of all good Masters of Defense, because their Art is herein so
honored, and their knowledge (which some men count infinite) in so singular a
science, drawn into such Grounds and Principles, as no wise man of an
impartial judgment, and of what profession soever, but will confess himself
in courtesy far indebted both to the Author and Translator of this so
necessary a Treatise, whereby he may learn not only through reading and
remembering to furnish his mind with resolute instructions, but also by
practice and exercise gallantly to perform any conceited enterprise with a
discreet and orderly carriage of his body, upon all occasions whatsoever.

Gentle Reader, what other escapes or mistakings shall come to thy view,
either friendly entreat thee to bear with them, or courteously with thy pen
for thine own use to amend them.

Farewell.
The Sorts of Weapons handled in this Treatise.
THe single Rapier, Or single Sword. The rapier and dagger etc. The rapier and
Cloak etc. The sword and Buckler. The Sword and square target. The sword and
round target. The Case of Rapiers. The two hand Sword. The weapons of the
Staff, As The Bil, Partesan, Holberd and Iauelin.
Falsing of Blows and Thrusts.
At single rapier etc. At rapier and dagger etc. At Cloak and rapier. At sword
and buckler, square target and round target. At the two rapiers At the two hand
sword At the Bill, Partesan, Iauelin, and Holberd. At the Pike.
The true Art of Defense exactlie teachinge the manner how to handle weapons
safely, as well offensive as defensive, With a Treatise of Disceit or Falsing,
And with a mean or way how a man may practice of himself to get Strength,
Judgment, and Actiuitie.
THere is no doubt but that the Honorable exercise of the Weapon is made right
perfect by means of two things, to wit: Judgment and Force: Because by the
one, we know the manner and time to handle the wepon (how, or whatsoever
occasion serves:) And by the other we have power to execute therewith, in due
time with advantage.

And because, the knowledge of the manner and Time to strike and defend, does
of it self teach us the skill how to reason and dispute thereof only, and the
end and scope of this Art consists not in reasoning, but in dooinge:
Therefore to him that is desierous to prove so cunning in this Art, as is
needful, It is requisite not only that he be able to judge, but also that he
be strong and active to put in execution all that which his judgment
comprehends and sees. And this may not be done without strength and
actiuitie of body: The which if happily it be feeble, slow, or not of power
to sustain the weight of blows, Or if it take not advantage to strike when
time requiereth, it utterly remains overtaken with disgrace and danger: the
which falts (as appears) proceed not from the Art, but from the Instrument
badly handled in the action.

Therefore let every man that is desierous to practice this Art, endeavor
himself to get strength and agilitie of body, assuringe himself, that
judgment without this actiuitie and force, avails little or nothing: Yea,
happily gives occasion of hurt and spoil. For men being blinded in their
own judgments, and presuminge thereon, because they know how, and what they
ought to do, give many times the onset and enterprise, but yet, never
perform it in act.

But least I seem to ground this Art upon dreams and monstrous imaginations
(having before laid down, that strength of body is very necessary to
attain to the perfection of this Art, it being one of the two principal
beeginninges first laid down, and not as yet declared the way how to come by
and procure the same) I have determined in the entrance of this work, to
prescribe first the manner how to obtain judgment, and in the end thereof by
way of Treatise to show the means (as far forth as appertains to this Art)
by the which a man by his own endeavor and travail, may get strength and
actiuitie of body, to such purpose and effect, that by the iustructions and
reasons, which shall be here given him, he may easily without other master or
teacher, become both strong, active and skilful.

The means how to obtain Judgment.
ALthough I have very much in a manner in all quarters of Italy, seen most
excellent professors of this Art, to teach in their Schols, and practice
privately in the Listes to train up their Scholars. Yet I do not remember
that ever I saw any man so thoroughly indewed with this first part, to wit,
Judgment, as is in that behalf required.

And it may be that they keep it in secreat of purpose: for amongst diverse
disorderly blows, you might have seen some of them most gallantly bestowed,
not without evident conjecture of deep judgment. But howsoever it be seeinge
I purpose to further this Art, in what I may, I will speak of this first part as
aptly to the purpose, as I can.

It is therefore to be considered, that man by so much the more waxes
fearful or boulde, by how much the more he knows how t'auoid or not to
eschew danger.

But to attain to this knowledge, it is most necessary that he always keep
steadfastly in memory all these aduertisements underwritten, from which
springs all the knowledge of this Art. Nether is it possible without them to
perform any perfect action for the which a man may give a reason. But if it so
fall out that any man (not having the knowledge of these aduertisements)
perform any sure act, which may be said to be hand led with judgment, that
proceeds of no other thing, then of very nature, and of the mind, which of it
self naturally conceiueth all these aduertisementes.

1 First, that the right or straight Line is of all other the shortest:
wherefore if a man would strike in the shortest line, it is requisite that he
strike in the streightline.

2 Secondly, he that is nearest, hitteth soonest. Out of which aduertisment a
man may reap this profit, that seeing the enemies sword far off, aloft and
ready to strik, he may first strik the enemy, before he himself be stricken.

3 Thirdly, a Circle that goes compassinge bears more force in the
extremity of the circumference, then in the center thereof.

4 Fourthly, a man may more easily withstand a small then a great force.

5 Fifthly, every motion is accomplished in time.

That by these Rules a man may get judgment, it is most clear, seeing there is
no other thing required in this Art, then to strike with advantage, and defend
with safety.

This is done, when one strikes in the right line, by giving a thurst, or by
delyuering an edgeblow with that place of the sword, where it carries most
force, first striking the enemy before he be stricken: The which is
perfounned, when he perceives him self to be more nere his enemy, in which
case, he must nimbly deliver it. For there are few nay there is no man at all,
who (perceiving himself ready to be stricken) gives not back, and forsakes to
perform every other motion which he has begun.

And forasmuch, as he knows that every motion is made in time, he indeuoreth
himself so to strik and defend, that he may use as few motions as is possible,
and therein to spend as little time, And as his enemy moves much in diverse
times he may be advertised hereby, to strike him in one or more of those times,
so out of al due time spent.

The division of the Art.
BEfore I come to a more particular de claration of this Art, it is requisite I
use some general division. Wherefore it is to be understood, that as in all
other arts, so likewise in this (men forsaking the true science thereof, in
hope peradventure to overcome rather by disceit then true manhood) have found
out a new manner of skirmishing full of falses and slips. The which because it
some what and some times preualeth against those who are either fearful or
ignorant of their grounds and principals, I am constrained to divide this Art
into two Arts or Sciences, calling the one the True, the other, the False art:
But withal giving every man to understand, that falsehood has no advantage
against true Art, but rather is most hurtful and deadly to him that uses it.

Therefore casting away deceit for this present, which shall hereafter be
handled in his proper place and restraining my self to the truth, which is the
true and principal desire of my heart, presupposing that Justice (which in
every occasion approaches nearest unto truth) obteineth allwaies the
superiority, I say whosoever minds to exercise himself in this true and
honorable Art or Science it is requisite that he be endued with deep Judgment,
a valiant heart and great actiuitie, In which three qualities this exercise does
as it were delight, live and flourish.

Of the Sword.
ALbeit Wepons as well offensive as defensive be infinite, because all that
whatsoever a man may handle to offend an other or defend himself, either by
flinging or kepinge fast in his hand may in my opinion be termed Weapon. Yet
notwithstanding, because, as I have before said, they be innumerable so that if
I should perticularly handle every one, besides the great toil and travail I
should sustain, it would also doubtless be unprofitable, because the principels
and grounds which are laid down in this Art, serve only for such weapons as
are commonly practiced, or for such as happily men will use: and so leaving al
those which at this present make not for my purpose, I affirm, that amongst all the wepons used in these days, there is none more honorable, more usual or
more safe then the sword.

Coming therefore first to this weapon, as unto that on which is grounded the
true knowledge of this Art, beeinge of reasonable length, and having edges and
point, wherein it seems to resemble every other weapon, It is to be
considered, that forasmuch as it has no more the^ two edges and one point, a
man may not strike with any other then with these, nether defend himself with
any other then with these. Further all edg blows, be they right or reuersed,
frame either a circle or part of a circle: Of the which the hand is the Center,
and the length of the sword, the Diameter.

Whereupon he that would give either an edg blow in a great compass, either
thrust with the point of the sword, must not only be nimble of hand, but also
must observe the time of adua^tag, which is, to know when his own sword is more
nere and ready to strik then his enemies. For when the enemy fetches a
compass with his sword in delivering his stroke, at the length of the arm: if
he then perceive himself to be nerer by half an arm, he ought not to care to
defend himself, but with all celeritie to strike. For as he hitteth home
first, so he preuenteth the fall of his enemies sword. But if he be forced to
defend him self from any edge blow, he must for his greater safety and ease
of doing it, go and encounter it on the half sword that is hindermost: in
which place as the enemies sword carries less force, so is he more nere at
hand to offend him.

Concerning thrustinge, or the most perilous blows of the point, he must
provide so to stand with his body, feet and arms, that he be not forced, when
he would strik, to lose time: The which he shall do, if he stand either with his
arm so forward, either with his feet so backward, either with his body so
disorderly, that before he thrust he must needs draw back his arm, help
himself with his feet, or use some dangerous motion of the body, the which
when the enemy perceyueth, he may first strik before he be stricken. But when a
man stands in due order (which shall hereafter be declared) and perceives
that there is less distance from the point of his sword, unto his enemy, then
there is from his enemies sword unto him, In that case he must nimbly force on
a strong thrust to the end he may hitt home first.

The division of the sword.
FOR as much as the Effects which proceed from the length of the sword, are
not in every part thereof equal or of like force: It stands with reason
besides the declaration of the cause, that I find out also the property and
name of each part, to the end every man may understand, which are the parts of
the length wherewith he ought to strike, and which the parts, wherewith he must
defend.

I have said elsewhere, that the sword in strikinge frames either a Circle,
either a part of a Circle, of which the hand is the center. And it is manifest
that a wheel, which moves circulerly, is more forcible and swift in the
circumference then toward the Center: The which wheel each sword resembles in
striking. Whereupon it seems convenient, that I divide the sword into sower
equal parts: Of the which that which is most nearest the hand, as most nigh to
the cause, I will call the first part: the next, I will term the second, then
the third, and so the fourth: which fowerth part contains the point of the
sword. Of which four parts, the third and fowerth are to be used to strike
withal. For seeing they are nearest to the circumference, they are most swift.
And the fowerth part (I mean not the tip of the point, but four fingers more
within it) is the swiftest and strongest of all the rest: for besides that it
is in the circum ference, which causes it to be most swift, it has also four
fingers of counterpeize thereby making the motion more forcible. The other two
parts, to wit, the first and second are to be used to ward withal, because
in striking they draw little compass, and therefore carry with them but small
force And for that their place is near the hand, they are for this cause
strong to resist any violence.



THE Arm likewise is not in every part of equal force and swiftnes but
differs in every bowing thereof, that is to say in the wrist, in the elboe
and in the shoulder: for the blows of the wrist as they are more swift, so
they are less strong: And the other two, as they are more strong, so they are
more slow, because they perform a greater compass. Therefore by my counsel, he
that would deliver an edgeblow shall fetch no compass with his shoulder,
because whilst he bears his sword far off, he gives time to the wary
enemy to enter first: but he shall only use the compass of the elboe and the
wrist: which, as they be most swift, so are they strong enough, if they be
orderly handled.

That every blow of the point of the sword strikes circulerly and how he that
strikes with the point, strikes straight.


Having before said and laid down for one of the principels of this art, that
the streit Line is the shortest of all others (which is most true.) It seems
needful that I make demonstration thereof. And further having suggested for a
troth, that the blow of the point is the straight struck, this not being
simply true, I think it expendient before I wade any further, to show in what
manner the blows of the point are stricken circulerly, and how straightly. And
this I will strain my self to perform as plainly and as briefly as possibly I
may. Neither will I strech so far as to reason of the blows of the edg, or
how all blows are stricken circulerly, because it is sufficiently and clearly
handled in the division of the Arm and sword.

Coming then to that which is my principal intent to handle in this place, I
will show first how the arm when it strikes with the point, strikes
circulerlie.

It is most evident, that all bodies of straight or long shape, I mean when
they have a firm and immovable head or beginning, and that they move with an
other like head, always of necessity in their motion, frame either a wheel or
part of a circuler figure. Seeing then the Arm is of like figure and shape,
and is immoueably fixed in the shoulder, and further moves only in that part
which is beneth it, there is no doubt, but that in his motion it figureth also
a circle, or some part thereof. And this every man may perceive if in moving
his arm, he make trial in himself.

Finding this true, as without controversy it is, it shall also be as true,
that all those things which are fastened in the arm, and do move as the Arm
does, must needs move circulerlie. Thus much concerning my first purpose in
this Treatise.

Now I will come to my second, and will declare the reasons and ways by which a
man strikinge with the point strikes straightly. And I say, that when soever
the sword is moved by the only mocion of the Arm, it must always of
necesitie frame a cirkle by the reasons before alleged. But if it happen, as
in a manner it does always, that the arm in his motion make a circle
vpwardes, and the hand moving in the wrist frame a part of a circle downwards
then it will com to pass, that the sword being moved by two contrary motions
in going forwards strikes straightly.

But to thentent that this may be more plainly perceived, I have framed this
present figure for the better understanding wherofit is to be known, that as
the arm in his motion carries the sword with it, and is the occasion that
being forced by the said motion, the sword frames a circle upwards, So the
hand moving it self in the wrist, may either lift up the point of the sword
upwards or abase it downwards. So that if the hand do so much let fall the
point, as the arm dothlift up the handle* it comes to pass that the swords
point thrusts directly at an other prick or point then that it respects.

Wherefore let A. B. be the circle which is framed by the motion of the arm:
which arm, if (as it carries with it the sword in his motion) it would strike
at the point D. it should be constrained through his motion to strik at the
point B. And from hence proceeds the difficulty of thrustinge or striking
with the point. If therefore the arm would strik directly at the point D. it is
necessary that as much as it lifts the handle upwards, the ha^dwrist do move
it self circulerlie downward, making this circle AC and cariyng with it the
point of the sword downewardes, of force it strikes at the point D. And this
would not so come to pass, if with the only motion of tharme, a man should
thrust forth thesword, considering the arm moves only above the center E.

Therefore seeing by this discourse it is manifest that the blow of the point,
or a thrust, can not be delivered by one simple motion directly made, but by
two circuler motions, the one of the Arm the other of the hand, I will hence
foreward in all this work term this blow the blow of the streit Line. Which
considering the reasons before alleged, shall breed no inconvenience at all.



MOst great is the care and considerations which the paces or footstepps
requier in this exercise, because from them in a manner more the^ from any
other thing springs all offense and defense. And the body likewise ought
with all diligence to be kept firm and stable, turned toward the enemy,
rather with the right shoulder, then with the breast. And that because a man
ought to make himself as small a mark to thenemie as is posible, And if he be
occasioned to be^d his body any way, he must bend it rather backwards then
forwards, to the end that it be far of from danger, considering the body can
never greatly move it selfanie other way more then that and that same way the
head may not move being a member of so great importance.

Therefore when a man strikes, either his feet or his arm are thrust
forwards, as at that instant it shall make best for his advantage. For when it
happens that he may strongly offend his enemy without the increase of a pace,
he must use his arm only to perform the same, bearing his body always as
much as he may and is required, firm and immovable.

For this reason I commend not their manner of fight, who continually as they
fight, make the^selus to show sometimes little, sometimes great, sometimes
wresting themselves on this side, sometimes on that side, much like the moving
of snailes. For as all these are motions, so can they not be accomplished in
one time, for if when they bear their bodies low, they would strike aloft, of
force they must first raise them selves, and in that time they may be stricken.
So in like manner when their bodies are writhed this way or that way.

Therefore let every man stand in that order, which I have first declared,
straining himself to the uttermost of his power, when he would either strik or
defend, to perform the same not in two times or in two motions, but rather in
half a time or motion, if it were possible.

As concerning the motion of the feet, from which grow great occasions as well
of offense as defense, I say and have seen by diverse examples that as by the
knowledge of their orderly and discreet motion, as well in the Listes as in
common fraies, there has bin obtained honorable victory, so their busy and
unruly motion have bine occasion of shameful hurts and spoils. And because I
can not lay down a certain measure of motion, considering the difference
between man and man, some being of great and some oflitle stature: for to some
it is comodious to make his pace the length of an arm, and to other some half
the length or more. Therefore I advertise every man in all his wards to frame a
reasonable pace, in such sort that if he would step forward to strik, he
lengthen or increas one foot, and if he would defend himself, he withdraw as
much, without peril offalling.

And because the feet in this exercise do move in diverse manners, it shall be
good that I show the name of every motion, to thend that vsinge those names
through all this work, they may the better be understood.

It is to be known that the feet move either straightly, either circulerly:
If streitly, then either forwards or backwards: but when they move directly
forwards, they frame either a half or a whole pace. By whole pace is
understood, when the foot is carried from behind forwards, kepinge steadfast the
forefoot. And this pace is sometimes made straight, sometimes crooked. By
straight is meant when it is done in the streit line, but this doths eldome
happen. By crooked or slope pace is understood, when the hinderfoot is brought
also forewardes, but yet a thwarte or crossing: and as it grows forwards, it
carries the body with it, out of the straight line, where the blow is given.

The like is meant by the pace that is made directly backwardes: but this back
pace is framed more often straight then crooked. Now the middle of these back
and fore paces, I will term the half pace: and that is, when the hinder-foote
being brought nere the foore foot, does even there rest: or when from thence
the same foot goes forwards. And likewise when the fore-foote is gathered
into the hinder-foote, and there does rest, and then retireth it self from
hence backwards. These half paces are much used, both streit and crooked,
forwards and backwardes. And in like sort, half paces forwards and
backewardes, straight and crooked.

Circuler paces, are no otherwise used than half paces, and they are made
thus: When one has framed his pace, he must fetch a compass with his hinder
foot or fore foot, on the right or left side: so that circuler paces are
made either when the hinder-footstanding fast behind, does afterward move it
self on the left or right side, or when the fore-foote being settled before
does move likewise on the right or left side: with all these sort of paces a
man may move every way both forwards and backewardes.

Straight Line A. B. Straight Pace C. D Crokedor slope pace C. E. Streighte
half pace C. F. Circuler half pace C. G


Of the Agreement of the Foot and Hand.
THe right leg ought always to be the strength of the right hand, and
likewise the left leg of the left hand: So that if at any time it shall
happen a thrust to be forciblie delivered, reason would that it be accompanied
with the leg: for otherwise, by means of the force and weight, which is
without the perpendiculer or hanging line of the body, having no prope to
sustain it, a man is in danger of falling. And it is to be understood, that
the pace does naturally so much increase or diminish his motion, as the hand.
Therefore we see when the right foot is behind, the hand is there also: so
that who so straineth himself to stand otherwise, as he offers violence unto
nature, so he can never endure it: wherefore when he stands at his ward,
bearing his hand wide, there also the foot helps by his strength, being
placed toward that part: and when the hand is borne a low, and the right
foot before, if then he would lift his hand alofte, it is necessary that he
draw back his foot: And there is so much distance from the place where the
foot does part, to join it self to the other foot, as there is from the
place whence the hand parts, to that place where it remains steadfast, little
more or less: wherefore, presupposing the said rules to be true, he must have
great care to make his pace, and move his hand at one time together: And a boue
all, not to skip or leap, but keep one foot always firm and steadfast: and
when he would move it, to do it upon some great occasion, considering the foot
ought chiefly to agree in motion with the hand, which hand, ought not in any
case what soever happen to vary from his purpose, either in striking or
defending.



Of wards
WArds in weapons are such sites, positions or placings which withstand the
enemies blows, and are as a shield or safegarde against them. For he who has
no skill to carry his body and bear these weapons order lie, which either
cover, or easily may cover the whole body, cannot be said to stand in ward,
insomuch that a man ought to use great diligence in the apt carriyng of his
body and weapons, For many times he ought to settle and repose himself in his
ward, therein deliberating upon some new devise, or expecting when his enemy
will minister occasion to enter upon him.

The Wards which may be used with the single sword are threefold, Neither in
my opinion may they be any more: for that one only straight line, which is
the sword, may not cover, defend and easelie offend after any other manner.

The high ward.
THis high ward, which also might be called the first, beeinge the very same
which every man frames at the draing of the sword out of the sheath, may so
far forth, and in so much be termed a ward, in how much, by turning the
point of the sword downewarde, it wardeth the whole person, and for that, by
gathering in of the hinderfoote, and incresing forwards with the right foot,
a man may discharge a strong thurst above hand at his enemy.

In this, and in all other wards, it is diligently to be noted, that he bear
his weapons so orderly disposed, that the straight line which goes from the
swords point be still bent to strike the enemy, either in the face or in the
breast: for if the point be so borne that it respect over the enemies head, the
enemy may easily first enter underneath and strike before the fall or descend
thereof: And by holding the point two low, he may by beating it somewhat
downwards cause it to be quit void of his body, and so safely come in to
strik, the which has bine many times seen.

The high ward. The low ward.


The broad ward.


THis second ward from the effect shall be called the broad or wide ward,
because the Arm widning and stretching it self directly as much as is
possible from the right side, bears the sword so far off from the body,
that it seems to give great scope to the enemy to enter, albe it in truth it
be nothing so. For although the hand and the handle of the sword, be both far
from the body, and quite out of the straight line, yet the point of the
sword, from which principally proceeds the offense, is not without the said
line: For it is borne so bending toward the left side that it respects
directly to strike the enemy, and being borne in that sort, it may very
well both strike and defend. And when the point of the sword is borne out of
the straight line, as the hand and handle is, then a man is in danger to be
hurt caselie by the enemy, the which happens not when the point is bending,
for in such order, it is as a bar and defense to the whole body.

The low Ward.
THis also from the effect is called the base ward or lock: Neither is this
name improperlie given by the Professors of this Art, for that it is more
strong, sure and common dious then any other ward, and in the which a man may
more easelie strik, ward and stand therein with less pain. This ward is
framed in the Schools after diverse fashions, either bearing the hand low before
the knee, either very much stretched forwards, either between both the
knees. All which fashions, (if we regard natural reason, and the motions used
therein) are to small purpose: for, besides that they are all violent, and for
a small time to be endured, they are also such, in the which a man may not
strike but in two times, or at the least in one, and then very weakly.
Wherefore, casting all these aside, I will frame such a ward, as shall be
applied, to time, to nature, and to safety: And it is, when one bears his
arm directly downwardes near his knee (but yet without it) and his sword
with the point somewhat raised, and bearing toward the left side, to the end,
it may arm and defend that part also, in such sort, that (being borne without
violence) he may continue long. And if he would strike, he may in one time,
forcibly deliver a great thrust. But this he cannot do, if he bear his sword
directly before him, for then he must either draw back his arm when he would
strike, or else strike in one time, but very weakly.

This ward therefore must be framed with the arm stretched downwards near the
knee, but yet on the outside thereof, because after this manner a man stands
safely, commodiously, and more ready, both to strike and defend.



The manner how to strike.
WIthout all doubt, the thrust is to be preferred before the edgeblowe, as well
because it strikes in less time, as also for that in the said time, it does
more hurt. For which consideration, the Romans (who were victorious in all
enterprises) did accustom their soldiers of the Legions to thrust only:
Alleging for their reason, that the blows of the edge, though they were
great, yet they are very few that are deadly, and that thrustes, though little
and weak, when they enter but iij. fingers in to the body, are wont to kill.
Therefore I lay down this for a firm and certain rule, that the thrust does
many times more readily strike, and give the greater blow against the enemy.
And to the end, a man may thrust it out with the greatest force at the most
advantage, and uttermost length that may be, he must always remember to carry
his left foot compassing behind him in such sort, that the hinderfoot so
compassing may always be in the straight line of the hand and sword, as a
Diameter in the midst of a Circle. And in finishing of the blow, to draw
his hinder-foote a half pace forwards, and so by that means the blow is
longer and stronger, and the shoulder and side are only opposite to the
enemy, and so far off from him, that they may not be strooken: and it is not
possible for a man to frame a longer blow than this.

When it is better to strike with the edge.
FOr no other cause, the edge is preferred before the point, then for the time:
the shortness whereof, is so to be esteemed above all other things in this Art,
that (omitting the point and edge) it ought to be given for the best and chief
counsel, that same to be the better blow, in which a man spends least time.
And therefore when this happens and may be done with the edg, then the edg is
to be preferred before the point: the which as occasion serves shall be further
declared.

When I reasoned of the blow of the point or thurst I said, that a man ought to
thrust when the point is in the straight line, because the blow is then
performed in one time. But the edg differs from the point, in that that being
out of the strait line, it indeuoreth to come in to the same again. Therefore
when it happens the point to be born either on the right, either on the left
side, either aloft, out of the strait line, if then on would thrust in the
right line, he can not perform it but in two times, whereas if he would strik
with thedg be it right or reuersed, or downwards, he may do it in one time. It
shall be also very commodious rather to strik with the edg, when as sometime a
man bearinge his sword in the strait line, and the enemy there finding it, does
with his hand beat it on this side or that side: In which case, if he would
return it again into the said line of purpose to strik, he shall be constrained
to do it whith great violence and much time.

For these reasons I hold it better to let the sword swaie to that side,
whereto the enemy beats it, and to ioin unto it such force, as he may to
help the motion, and (fetching withal a compass) to strik with the edg.

The which blow is so ready and strong, that thenimie can hardly have time to
withstand it, being already occupied in beating aside the sword and pretending
to strik: nothing at al expecting that thaduersaries sword will strik again
either so quickly, or with the edge, on that side from which it was beaten.

The Line of the edg is from A to B, The line of the point from C. to D. and
from D. to E.


The means to defend
THE means of defending a blow given either with the edg or point of the
sword, are three. One is when the weapon is opposed to the blow, in such sort
that the weapon which comes striking either at the head or at the body,
cannot hit home to the place whereu^to it is directed, but hindered by some
thing or other then set against it, be it sword, dagger, target, bil, Iauelin,
or any thing else, which at that instant a man has in his hand. For it
chances not always to wear or carry weapons of purpose, or ordained to that
intent. Neither happily is it thought soldier or gentlemanlike, not to know
how to strike or defend, but only with wepons framed to that end: for which
cause, it may well be said, that the soldier differenth from other men, not
because he is more skilful in handling the sword or iauelyn, but for that he is
expert in every occasion to know the best advantage and with judgment both to
defend himself with any thing whatsoever, and therewithal safely to offend
the enemy: In which and no other thing consists true skirmishing.

He that perswads himself that he can learn this Art by the exercise of a few
particular stroks of the point and edg is utterly deceived: for besides, that
by those particular triks, there is small knowledge gotten: So the chances in
this Art are so dangerous and diverse, that it is impossible to deliberat
suddenly, except he have the universal knowledge and understanding of all the
rules and principels hereof, being grounded upon offending and defending, and
not only upon the sword, the dagger, the target, the iauelin and the bil. For a
man at al times (when he is occasioned to strike or defend) does not carry
these weapons about him, but is constrained to defend himself with a piece of
wood from a Iavelyn, with a stool or form from a sword, or with a cloak
from a dagger, in which case men commonly use many other things not ordained
for that purpose, doing that therewith which natural instinct teaches them.
And this instinct is no other thing then the knowledge of the rules before
laid down: which knowledge, because it is naturally graffed in the mind, is
something the rather helped and quallified by Art, and makes a man so assured
and bold, that he dares to enter on any great danger, and judges (when he
sees the quality of the wea pon, and the syte wherein it is placed) what it
may do, or in how many ways it may either strike or defend. From which his
judgment springs the knowledge of all that he has to do, and how he has to
handle himself to encounter any danger.

But returning to my purpose, to wit, of the way how to defend, which is to
carry the weapon opposite, this manner is commonly used, but is not so
profitable, being used as it is. And the reason is, because when men endeavor
themselves to encounter or oppose themselves against the weapon which comes
to strike them, (neither making bold that their weapon can, neither knowing
how it should defend) they withdraw their body with their foot, and commit
all these faults following.

1 First, by withdrawing of themselves, they encounter the enemies sword
toward the point, in which place it bears most force, and therefore with
great difficulty they sustain the blow.

2 Another is, if they would strike the enemy, of force they must return
their feet and weapons thither, where they were before, and yet increase
forwards somewhat more, if they would strongly strike him: And in this they
spend so much time, that the enemy may not only easily defend, but also,
very well and safely strike. To him then that would use this manner of
defense without danger, it is necessary and needful, when he encountreth the
enemies sword, that he do not withdraw himself, but with his left foot
increase a crooked or slope pace forwards, the which shall encounter the
sword, which before was coming striking with the edge, on that part thereof,
in which it has least power to offend, and shall by that means easily
withstand the blow. But if the sword come with a thrust, he must find it and
beat it aside: for every little motion is sufficient to drive the point far
enough from danger of hurt. And there is this advantage gotten, as well in the
blow of the edge as of the point, that the body is voided out of the straight
line, by means of the said slope pace: and it stands so apt and so near to
offend the enemy, that one may strike in the very instant, neither can the
enemy so much withdraw himself as is sufficient to avoid the stroke: For a
man has to use the straight pace of the right foot to follow the enemy,
which pace is so strong and so swift, that the enemy may not avoid it. And
because this manner of defense, in mine opinion, seems to be most sure and
short, I will use it above all other.

There is another way, to wit, when one perceives the enemies sword in the
delivery of an edgeblowe, to fetch a great compass, he may strike him before
the fall of his sword with a thrust: or else when the enemy thrusts, (but yet
spends many times in doing thereof) he may likewise strike him in as short
time as may be. The which manner of defending is most profitable, and
perchance the better of the two. For there is no man that will run himself
hedlong upon the weapon, or that, perceiving himself ready to be strooken,
will not suddenly draw back and withold that blow which he had already
prepared to discharge. And although there be some, who being strooken run
rashly on, yet generally, men will not so do, albeit they be strooken when they
are most collorick, but will, when they are strooken or wounded, give back and
be dismayed and by reason of the blood which goes from them, always more and
more be weakened.

But yet when they be so wounded, it shall be for their profit to be well
advised, and not to discomfort themselves for the greatness of the blow, but to
bear it patiently: for that which they do in disdain and fury shall turn
them to much displeasure.

3 The third manner of defense is, when the body voideth out of the straight
line toward this or that side, but this is seeldome used alone and by it
self, but rather accompanied with the opposing of the weapon, or with the
second manner of defense aforesaid. If it be used alone, the manner is to let
slipp the blow, and to strike the enemy in the same time that he is over
reached in his blow.



The method which shall be used in handling the Chapters following.
FOrasmuch as I ought in the Chapters following to teach more particularly all
the blows and defenses in every ward, (to the end that no man do marvel
why I do not perform the same, and do think that the instruction is
therefore imperfect) I think good (because my purpose is now to entreat of
that only which pertains to true Art, to the which the blow of the point, or
thrustes, are most agreeable, being more ready and strong than any other) to
handle them principally, and yet not so, but that I will also talk of edgblows
when in my treatise I come to that place where it shall be commodious to strike
therewith, placing them near to their wards and defenses, although against
all edgeblows this is the best defense, to strike by the right line before the
fall of the enemies sword, for, being delivered in shorter time, it
withstandeth their fall and lighting. The order I say, which I will observe,
shall be, to lay down every ward, their blows and defenses, but principally
of the point, then of the edge, if need require.

The hurt of the high ward at single Rapier.
THE truest, and surest blow that may be given when a man lies at the high
ward, is, the thrust above hand, as well for that it is in the straight line,
as also, because it naturally stays it self in the low ward: So that from
the beginning to the ending of this blow, there is never any time given to the
enemy to enter, by reason, that the point stands always directly against
him. But in the discharging of this blow, a man must remember to draw his
left foot near his right foot, and then to increase forwards with the right
foot, and deliver it as forcibly as he may, staying him self in the low
ward.

True it is, that he may also deliver a right and reuersed edgeblowe at the
head: or else, strike downwardes from the wrist of the hand: but because he is
notable to turn his wrist in so small a compass, in the discharge of an
edgeblowe, either high or low, but that the point of the sword will be out of
the straight line, by the length of a sword, in the which (before it return)
the enemy has sufficient time to strike: Therefore I would not counsel any
man to use them either alone, or both together. But yet between two thrustes,
they may be very well used together, by continuing the one after the other
(though they be voyded) until the last thrust, the which does safely rest it
self in the low ward. The use of them is on this manner.

When one having discharged a thrust from the high ward, perceives that it
does not hurt, because it was voyded by the enemies sword, he must turn a
right edgeblowe from the wrist athwart the enemies head, fetching a compass
with his foot behind him toward the rightside, to the end the blow may be
the longer, which is the longest blow of all others. But if the enemy void
this in like case (which is very difficult) then he must suddenly turn the
reuerse from his elbowe increasing therewithal a slope pace with the hinder
foot. And it is to be noted, that in delivering a reuerse, the slope pace is
in a manner always to be used, to the end he may go forth of the straight
line, in the which (if he should deliver it) he may easily be strooken. Having
used this pace and reuerse, whether it hit or not, the sword in the same
instant is something to be drawn or slyded: which drawing is profitable in
this, that in giving the reuerse it does both cause the weapon to cut, and make
the greater blow. Wherefore it is to be understood, that all edgeblowes ought
so to be delivered, that they may cut: for being directly given without any
drawing, they cause but a small hurt.

Coming therefore to my purpose, I say: that as soon as he has so drawn his
sword, he ought with the straight pace of the right foot, discharge a thrust
underneath, being already prepared, the whrich thrust is so strong, both for
the aptnes thereof and increase of the pace, that it pearceth through any
impediment withstanding it. And all these blows (beginning from the thrust
above hand, till the end of the thrust underneath) being roundly delivered one
after another with such swiftnes as is required, are in a manner not to be
warded. Besides, they have so great increase of pace, that it is not almost
possible for the enemy to retire so much backwarde, as these increase upon him
forward.

The defense of the thrust of the high ward at single Rapier.
ALL the fury in striking before spoken of, is utterly frustrated, when, as
here it may be seen, a man withstandeth and incountreth the first thrust. For
the defense whereof it is needful that he stand at the low ward, and as the
thrust comes, that he encounter it without, with the edge of the sword, and
increase a slope pace forward, with the hin der foot at the very same time,
by which pace he moves out of the straight line, and passes on the right side
of the enemy. And he must remember to bear always the point of the sword
toward the enemy: So that the enemy in coming forwards, either runs
himself on the sword, which may easily happen, and so much the rather, when he
comes resolutelie determined to strike, or else if he come not so far
forwards that he encountreth the sword, yet he may be safely stricken, with
the increase of a straight pace: to which pace, having suddenly joined a slope
pace, a man must return and increase again though the enemy were strooken at
the first increase of that pace: For if at the first stroke and increase, the
enemy were not hit in the eye, it shall be to small purpose. Therefore as
soon as he has used the crooked or slope pace, he must presently increase an
other straight pace, the which does so much gather upon the enemy, that if he
would strike him in the breast, he may thrust his sword up to the hiltes.

Now for the lofty edge-blowes, both right and reuersed, the rules aforesaid
may suffice: To wit, the edge-blowe fectheth a compass. The blow of the
point or thrust is the shortest, and in this blow, he that is nearest hitteth
soonest: So then he must thrust under any of these edgeblowes. And farther, for
as much as it is naturally given to every man to defend himself, he may
encounter the right edge-blowe after an other way, and that is, to encounter
it with the edge of his sword, and presently, to drive there withal a thrust
at the enemies face, and to compass his hinderfoote, toward the right side
behind, to the end, that the thrust may be lengthned and his body thereby
covered, considering he shall then stand right behind his sword.

This manner of defense, may serve to ward all right blows of the edg,
delivered from the high ward, and it is the best way of all other, because it
does not only ward, but also in one and the selfsame time, both strike and
defend safely.

This manner of thrust is called the reuersed thrust. But if one would ward a
reuerse, he must oppose the edge of his sword without, and therewithal
increase a slope pace, and then deliver a thrust with the increase of a
straight or right pace. And this may suffice for all that which may be used
against a lofty, reuersed, edgeblowe, as farfoorth as a man endeavors to
oppose himself against the weapon. And this is the very same also which may
be used for the warding of the thrust.

The hurt of the broad ward at single Rapier.
THe most sure, most true and principal blow that may be used in this ward
is the thrust underhand, so that a man draw his left foot near his right
foot, and then discharge it with the increase of the said foot, and settle
himself in the low ward.

He may also in this ward with the said increase of the right foot, deliver a
right edgeblowe from the wrist of the hand, and stay himself in the low ward.
And perchance he may (although with great danger) bestow also a reuerse: yet
considering he shall do it out of the straight line, in the which only he
strikes safely, I do not think it good, that he use either the said reuerse,
either the said right blow except it be very seldom, and for the same cause,
assuring himself in the blow of the point, or thrust, the which he shall not
give, except it be very commodious, or that he be forced of necessity,
considering this thrust does not only easily and commodiously defend, but
also, at one instant, safely strike, and offend, as shall be showed in the
defense of this ward. That therefore which he may safely do, in this ward, is
to expect and watch for the enemies coming.

The Defense of the broad Ward at single Rapier.
IF a man would defend himself from the blows of the foresaid broad ward,
it is good that he stand against the enemy in the low ward: for whilst he
is so opposite in the same ward, the enemy may neither easily enter, neither
commodiously defend himself. So that he which is in the low ward may very
easily withstand the downright blow, and the reuerse by giving a thrust, for
that he shall hit him first, And if he would only oppose his sword, and not
strike also therewithal, he must encounter the enemies sword with the edge of
his own, and turning the same edge fetch a reuerse, striking at the face of
the enemy. And as he so turns his hand and edge of his sword, it shall be
good that he carry his forefoote a half crooked or slope pace toward his
right side, staying himself in the broad ward. For defense of the reuerse, it
is to be marked, when the enemy lifts up the point of the Rapier out of the
straight line, because then of force he fetches a compass: And whilst he so
does, a man must make a straight pace forwards, and with his left hand take
holdfast of the sword hand of the enemy, and incontinently wound him with a
thrust underneath already prepared.

Now, the very same defense is to be used against the thrust underneath, which
is against the right edgeblow. Neither is there any other difference between
these two defenses, but that whilst the right blow fetches his compass, a man
may give a thrust and hit home first: For the thrust underneath, must only of
necessity be warded, because, coming in the straight line, it ministers no
advantage or time to hit home first.

The hurt of the Low ward at single Rapier.
A Man may in like manner in this ward, as in others, deliver a thrust, a right
blow, and a reuerse: but the true and principal effect of this ward, is to
expect the enemy, as well for that a man bears himself without wariness,
as also, because it is apt and ready to defend all blows either high or
low: For being in the middle, it is as easily somewhat lifted up, as something
borne down: So that when one stands in this ward, he may not (as for his
advantage) be the first that shall give either the downright blow, or the
reuerse: for both the one and the other (departing out of the straight line)
are deadly, because they give time to the enemy to enter nimbly with a thrust.
The thrust therefore, may be only used when one means to strike first, and it
is practiced either within, or with out, always regarding in either of the
ways, so to bear and place his arm, that he have no need (before he thrust)
to draw back the same. And if the enemy ward it, by the trauerse or cross
motion of his Rapier, as many use to do, then he ought to increase a straight
pace and lift up his sword hand, holding the point thereof downwards betwixt
the enemies arm and his body, and with the increase of a straight pace to
deliver a thrust. And this manner of thrust does easily speed, because it
increases continually in the straight line in such sort that the enemy can do
no other then give back, and especially when it is done without, for then the
sword is safe from the trauerse motion of the other sword.

The Defense of the Low ward at single Rapier.
BEcause both the downright blow, and the reuerse are vary easily defended
in this ward, I will not stand to speak of any other then of the thrust,
restraining my self thereunto. The which thrust, if at the first it be not
withstoode, may prove very mortal and deadly. Therefore, when this thrust is
given within, it must be beaten inwardes with the edge of the Rapier, requiring
the turn of the hand also inwards, and the compass of the hinder foot, so
far toward the right side, as the hand goes toward the right side. And
the enemy shall no sooner have delivered the thrust, and he found the sword,
but he ought to turn his hand, and with a reuerse to cut the enemies face,
carrying always his forefoote on that side where his hand goes. If the enemies
thrust come outwardes, then it is necessary, that with the turn of his hand
he beat it outward with the edge of his sword increasing in the same instant
one slope pace, by means whereof he delivers his body from hurt. And
therewithal (increasing another straight pace, and delivering his thrust
already prepared) he does most safely hurt the enemy.

The Rapier and Dagger.
Having as briefly as I might possibly finished all that which might be said,
of true knowledge of single Rapier: it seems convenient, that coming from
the simple to the compound, I handle those weapons first, which from the Rapier
forwards are either most simple or least compound: And especially those which
now adays are most used, and in the which men are most exercised, the which
weapons are the Rapier and Dagger accompanied together, and are a great
increase and furtherance both in striking and defending.

Wherefore, it is first to be considered, that with these and the like weapons,
a man may practice that most desired and renowned manner of skirmishing, which
is said to strike and defend both in one time, which is thought to be
impossible to be done with the single Rapier, and yet in truth it is not so:
For there are some kind of blows in the defense of which one may also strike
(as in the blows of the edge, down right and reuersed) both high and low,
and other high blows which here are not spoken of.

Wherefore seeing with these weapons a man may very commodiously, both strike
and defend, for that the one is a great help to the other, it is to be
remembered, that because these weapons are two, and the one of lesser quantity
then the other, to each one be allotted that part both of defendinge and
strikinge, which it is best hable to support. So that to the Dagger, by reason
of his shortness, is assigned the left side to defend down to the knee* and to
the sword all the right side, and the right and left side jointly downwardes
from the knee. Neither may it seem strange that the only Dagger ought to
defend all the blows of the left side: for it does most easily sustain every
edgeblowe, when it encountreth the sword in the first and second part thereof.

But yet let no man assure himself, to bear any blow, with his only Dagger
when he meets with the sword on the third and fourth part thereof, because
that part carries more force with it then may be sustained with the only
Dagger. And yet for all that, no man ought to accustom himself to defend
blows with the Rapier and Dagger both together, which manner of defending is
now commonly used because men believe, that they stand more assuredly by that
means, although in truth it is not so. For the Rapier and Dagger are so bound
thereby, that they may not strike before they be recovered, and therein are
spent two times, under the which a man may be strooken when he that strikes
continuing by the straight line, increases forwards, perceiving his enemy to
be occupied and troubled in defending of himself. And albeit this is not seen
to come to pass many times yet that is because the advantage is notknowen, or
being known, men either are not ready to execute it, either stand greatly in
fear to do it.

Therefore leaving aside this manner of defense, let each man use to oppose, one
only weapon against the enemies sword, keeping the other free, that he may be
able to strike at his pleasure.

And it is diligently to be noted, that not only the blows of the sword, but
also of any other weapon be it never so great, may with the only Dagger be
sustained and defended, when a man does boldly encounter it toward the hand.

It is therefore to be known, that in the handling of these two weapons one
may with less danger give a blow with the edge then at the single Rapier: For
albeit the point of the Rapier be moved out of the straight line: yet for all
that there is not free power given to the enemy to strike, considering there
is an other weapon contrariwise prepared to defend: but this does not so fall
out at the single Rapier, which bearing it self far off when it strikes
with the edge, does present and give the means to the enemy to hit home
first. And yet for all that, I would counsel no man, either in this or in any
other sort of weapon to accustom himself to give blows with the edge: for
that he may under them be most easily strooken by a thrust.

Of the Wards.
IN the handling of these weapons, men use to frame many wards, all which,
because many of them carry no reason, for that they are either out of the
straight line, either under them a man may easelie be stricken, I will cast
aside as impertinent to my purpose, and restrain my self unto those three with
the which a man may safely strike and defend, whereunto all the rest may be
reduced.

How to defend with the Dagger.
I Have said elsewhere that the left side of the person is that part which the
dagger ought to defend, that is to say, from the knee upwards: the lower parts
together with the right side ought wholly to be warded with the sword.

Concerning the dagger, that which is to be done therewith, it is to be noted,
that for great advantage, it would be holden before with the arm streched
forth and the point respecting the euemie, which although it be far from him,
yet in that it has a point, it gives him occasion to bethink himself.

Now whether a man ought to hold his Dagger with the edge or flatt toward
the enemy, it may be left to the judgment of him that handles it, so to use
it, as shall be most for his advantage. I have seen some, who bear it with the
elge toward the enemy, alleging this to be their advantage, that as they
encounter the enemies sword (which comes with the edge or point) in the
first and second part thereof, and therewithal do increase a pace forwards, of
force the hand turns and places the edge of the Dagger there where the flatt
was first: So that they are to drive the enemies sword far from them without
any great trouble, because each little motion in the first part of the sword
causes very great variety in the point, from whence principally proceeds
the hurt. In which case, it shall be very profitable to have a good large Dagger.

There be other some, whom it pleases to carry their Dagger with the flatt
toward the enemy, using for their defense, not only the Dagger, but also
the guardes thereof with the which (they say) they take holdfast of the
enemies sword: and to the end they may do it the more easily, they have
daggers of purpose, which beside their ordinary hilts, have also two long
sterts of Iron, four fingers length, and are distant from the dagger the
thicknes of a bow-string, into which distance, when it chances the enemies
sword to be driven, they suddenly strain and hold fast the sword, the which
may come to pass, but I hold it for a thing rather to be immagined then
practiced, the case so standing, that in the heat of fight, where disdain
bickereth with fear, little does a man discern whether the sword be in that
straight or no. And when he is to premeditate and mark, endeavoring and
striving in his lively judgment, he must advise himself to perform it with
the exquisite knowledge and perfect discerning of the enemies motions, his
neerenesse and farrensse, and to resolve himself to strike by the shortest way
that may be: for therehence springs the victory.

Let every man therefore hold his dagger with the edge or flatt toward the
enemy, as it shall most advantage him, or as he has been most accustomed.
True it is, that by holding the edge toward the enemy there is this advantage
gotten, that with the dagger he may strike with the edge, which he may not do
the other way. But let every man hold it as he will, yet he ought to carry his
arm stretched out before him, with the point in manner aforesaid, to the end
he may be able to find the enemies sword a great deal before it hitteth his
person.

Besides this, he ought to observe for an infallible rule, that when the point
or edge comes on the left side, he must beat it from that side with the
dagger. And in like sort defending himself with the sword, to drive it from
the right side, for doing otherwise: that is, if he force the blows given on
the leftside outwardes on the right side (forasmuch as the enemies sword has
by that means two motions, the one crossing, which is already given, the
other straight which the enemy gives it, continuing the one with the other)
it may be, that in the straight motion, it may hit the person, before that (by
the thwart or crossing motion) it be driven quite outwardes.

Therefore all blows shall be beaten outward toward that side or part of the
body which is least to the end it may the sooner avoid danger. And those
blows that come on the right side must be beaten toward the right side: and
those on the left side must in like manner be voided from the same side.

Now, as concerning the fashion of the Dagger, thus much is to be said: that
it would be strong, able to bear and encounter the blows of the sword:
indifferently long) that it may be quickly drawn out of the sheath somewhat
short: and those that are of the middle size would be chosen.

The offense of the High ward at Rapier and Dagger.
AS in handling the single Rapier, so likewise in this, it shall not be amiss
to begin with the High ward, which in managing these two weapons may be framed
after two sorts. The one with the right foot before, which I will call the
first: and the other with the same foot behind, which I will term the second.
This second requires a greater time, because the point of the sword is
farther off from the enemy. The first (being more near) with the only
increase of the foot forwards, strikes more readily, yet not more forcible
than the second, which, when it strikes with the increase of a straight pace,
joins to the force of the arm and hand, the strength of the whole body.

Beginning then with the first, as with that which each man does most easelie
find: I say, he ought if he will keep himself within the bounds of true
Art, to thrust only with the increase of the foot forwards, settling himself
in the low ward.

In the second way, which is framed with the right foot behind, the sword
alofte, and the dagger before, and borne as aforesaid, he ought in like sort
discharge a thrust as forciblie as he may, with the increase of a straight
pace, staying himself in the low ward. Neither ought any man in the
handling of these weapons to assure himself to deliver edgeblowes, because he*
knows that there is an other weapon which defends: For he that defends
has the self same advantage, to wit, to be able with one weapon (and
happily the weaker,) to defend himself and strike with the stronger. The which
stroke is painfully warded by him, who has already bestowed all his force
and power, in delivering the said edgeblowe, by means whereof, because there
remains in him small power to withstand any great encounter, let him provide
to thrust only.

Of all, or of the greater part of the edgeblowes, as well of striking as
defending, I will reason at large in the Treatise of Deceit.

Of the defense of high Ward at Rapier and Dagger.
TO speak of the manner how to withstand the blows of the edge, having
already said that all such blows may easelie be warded by giuinge a thrust,
I omit as superfluous. But for the defenses of both sides of the body: I say,
it is great vantage, to stand at the low ward, with the right foot
forwards, by the which manner of standing, the right side is put fourth
toward the enemy, whereunto he will direct all his thrustes: and those may be
encountered after three sorts, that is to say: with the Dagger only: with the
Sword only: and with both joined together. But in each of them, a man must
remember to increase a slope pace, whereby that part of the body which was to
be strooken is voided out of the straight line.

When one wardeth with his Dagger only, he shall increase a pace, and bear
his arm forwards, and having found the enemies sword, he shall (with the
increase of a straight pace) strike him with a thrust underneath, already
prepared.

When he wardeth with his sword only, it is requisite, that making a slope
pace, he lift up his sword, and bear it outward, or else, as soon as he has
found the enemies sword, that with his dagger he strike at the temples of his
enemies head, staying his sword with his own: or else in steed of striking
with the Dagger, therewith to stay the enemies sword, and with it, (increasing
another straight pace) to deliver a thrust: but it is very commodious to
strike with the Dagger.

The third way: As soon as he has made the slope pace, and found the
enemies sword, he ought to stay it with his Dagger, and therewithal,
withdrawing his own sword, to discharge a thrust underneath with the increase
of a straight pace.

The hurt of the broad ward: at Rapier and Dagger.
IN each weapon and ward, I have laid down as a general precept, that no
man ought, (either for the procuring of any advantage, either for striking the
enemy more readily) deliver blows of the edge. And in like sort, I have
said, that easily and with small danger, one may be strooken under any such
blow: which precepts, as in each time and place, they ought to be observed: so
in this ward principally they may not be forgotten. For a man may not without
great discommoditie and loss of time, strike with any edgeblowe, as he
stands at this ward.

It rests therefore, that the thrust be only used, which ought to be
delivered with the increase of the foot forwards, always regarding before it
be given, if it be possible) to beat away the point of the enemies sword
with the Dagger.

The defense of the broad ward at Rapier and Dagger.
THis thrust also as well as the other may be warded after three sorts, to
wit: with the Dagger only, with the sword only, and with both joined together.
But for a man's defense in any of these ways, it is good to stand at the low
ward. And when he wardeth with the dagger only, he must make a slope pace, and
finding the enemies sword, with his said dagger, discharge a thrust underneath
with the increase of a straight pace.

And when he wardeth with the sword only (which is the best of any other,
both to strike the enemy, and defend himself) he must oppose the edge of his
sword against the enemies, and drive a thrust at his face, fetching a compass
with his hinderfoote, both for the lengthning of the thrust, and assuring of
himself.

It is possible to withstand the thrust with the sword and dagger joined
together: but it is so discommodious and so ridiculous a way, that I leave to
speak thereof, as of a way nothing safe to be practiced.

The hurt of the low ward at Rapier and dagger.
IN each ward, when one stands bearing the point of the sword toward the
enemy, it does much disadvantage him to strike with the edge. And if in any
sort it be lawful so to do, it is, when he stands at the low ward: For it
is commodious, and there is spent but little time in the bestowing of an
edgeblowe between thrustes. Or, the rather to try the enemy, there may be
delivered an edgeblow from the wrist of the hand, in the which as there is
spent little time, so the point is carried but a little out of the straight
line, so that the enemy may very hardly enter to strike under either of these
blows. But it is better, not to use them, resolving rather to discharge thrust
after thrust, then any edgeblowe.

This ward may (as the high ward) be framed after two sorts, to wit: with the
right foot behind, and the same foot before: but that with the right foot
behind, is used rather to expect the enemy than to strike first. For although
it carries great force by reason that the sword is far off from hurting,
and before it hitteth home, it spendes much time, yet the hurt thereof may
easily be warded, either with the weapon, or by retyring a pace. I will speak
of that only which is framed with the right foot before. And in this, one may
strike two ways, to wit: either within or without: By (Within) I understand,
when his sword is borne between the enemies sword and dagger. By (Without) I
mean, when any one of them is borne in the middle against the other.

When one finds himself within, at the half of the enemies sword, the point
whereof, is directed to strike at the right side, he must very swiftly
increase a slope pace, and in a manner straight, to the end he may approach the
nearer his enemy, and therewithal suddenly barring the enemies sword in the
middle with his own sword and dagger, increase a straight pace, and deliver a
thrust.

This may be done after another plainer way, and that is: when he stands at
the half sword, to beat the enemies swords point out of the straight line on
that side which shall be most commodious, and in that line increasing his foot
forwards to drive a forcible thrust, at the enemies face or breast.

But standing without, he may (with the increase of his foot forwards) give a
thrust at the face, which the enemy of necessity must defend with his sword:
but therein the sword and the point thereof is commonly carried out of the
straight line, in which case he may (with the increase of a slope pace) turn a
reuerse at the legs, and then presently something withdrawing his sword,
deliver a thrust underneath with the increase of a straight pace.

He may also after a second manner, give a right edgeblow from the wrist, as
short and strong as is possible, not so much pretending to strike as to find
the enemies sword: And it being suddenly found, he must with the increase of
a slope or crooked pace, lift up his hand and drive a thrust downwards, with
the increase of a straight pace.

After a third sort also, he may strike, and that is to deliver the foresaid
blow from the wrist, and having met with the enemies sword, to make presently
a slope pace, and stay the sword with his dagger, and then nimbly recovering
his own sword, to thrust underneath with the increase of a straight pace.

These be sufficient, concerning that which may be done in this ward with the
sword both within and without, at least, for so much as may be done by true
Art.

The defense of the low ward at Rapier and Dagger.
ALthough in the defense of blows in each ward, there is great consideration
and heed to be taken: yet in this especially is required a far more excellent
judgment and readiness in action. For this ward does oppose it self against
all others. And the greater part of blows which are of importance, proceed
from this ward.

Besides, every man does naturally more accustom himself to stay and repose
himself in it, than in any other. Neither is it (as I believe) for any other
cause, then that he knows, by so bearing himself, he may easily both strike
and defend. And because in this ward, as I have before said, in the hurt or
offense thereof, it is more commodious to strike with the edge than in any
other ward, albeit, it is not there given for counsel to be good to use it.
But yet because it may easily happen, there shall be here laid down some
defense for it: calling this principle before any other to remembrance, (He
that is nearest, hitteth soonest,) to the end, that knowing what way either
sword makes, each man may resolve himself to deliver a thrust under an
edgeblowe, by the which is prevented the fall of the said blow.

But because none, but such as are endued with deep judgment, great
actiuitie, and stout courage, do or may safely put this in practice: And to the
end also, that those, who accustom to defend every blow, perfourming that in
two times which might as well be done in one, may rest satisfied: I will lay
down the defense of the edgeblow.

Therefore, whenever edgeblows are given, they are either right or reuersed,
high or low.

Against the right high blow, either the only dagger is to be opposed, either
the sword and Dagger both together. When the only dagger is used, then a
straight pace must be increased, and the dagger hand lifted up to encounter
the enemies sword in the weakest part thereof, and being suddenly found a
straight pace is to be increased, and a thrust underneath (already prepared)
to be discharged. But if the sword and dagger be both together opposed, they
both must be lifted up, and as soon as the blow is encountered, the enemies
face is to be cut by discharging a reuerse, with the only turn of the hand,
resting and staying it self in the broad ward.

The right blow, given beneath, or below, must be warded after no other
manner, then by driving a thrust at the enemies thigh, which thrust is to this
purpose, that it hitteth home safely under that blow, and farther is a let, or
bar, to the enemies sword, so that it may not light on the legs,
considering that in the discharge of the said thrust, the hinder foot must
necessarily go compassing toward the right side behind.

Reuerses also, are either high or low. If high: they may be warded with the
dagger only, therewithal discharging a thrust underneath, with the increase
of a straight pace, as soon as the dagger has met with the enemies sword.
Either, they may be warded with the sword only increasing a straight pace
with the left foot, therewithal discharging a thrust (already lifted up in
the ward) with the increase of a straight pace of the right leg. And this
manner of warding, is more according to Art, because it has been said, That
all blows on the left side, are to be warded with the dagger only.

The reuerse blow would be warded with giving a thrust which safely hitteth,
and hinders the swotde to light on the legs. This blow also, may be warded
after other and diverse manners, which shall be declared in the treatise of
Disceit: for this is not their proper place.

There is great regard to be taken in warding of thrustes, to wit: to bear
the body out of the straight line, because this is the safest way that may be
found to void them, because it very difficult to meet with them, when they
come barred and closed in, and are forciblie discharged. For when a thrust
comes within (at the very time that the enemy strikes) he ought to
increase a slope pace, ensuring himself of the enemies sword with his dagger,
and then to discharge a thrust with the increase of a straight pace.

The thrust without is warded after the first manner, to wit, when the enemy
strikes, to increase a slope pace (whereby the body voideth danger) and to
give a thrust with the increase of a straight pace. In this order one may ward
himself from other ways of stryking.

In like case, when the enemy (only to try and provoke) does deliver an
edgeblowe from the wrist of the hand: let every man be advised, as soon as
the blow is delivered, to increase a slope pace, and deliver a thrust with the
increase of a straight pace, before the enemy (after his blow given) do
determine to discharge any more. This may suffice, for the handling of the
Rapier and Dagger truly, with advantage.

The Rapier and Cloak.
THat I may continue in the weapons which are most usual and most commonly
worn: After the Dagger, I come to the Cloak: The use whereof was first found
out by chance, and after reduced into Art. Neither was this for any other
cause, then for that nature does not only delight to invent things, but also
to preserve them being invented. And that she may the better do it, she
takes for her help all those things that are commodious for her. Wherefore,
as men in diverse accide^ts have casually proved, that the Cloak helps greatly
(for as much as they are to wear it daily) they have devised how they may
behave them selves in all that, in which the Cloak may serve their turn. Which
accidents, because they are infinite, and do not generally serve for our
purpose, I will restrain my self and speak of those only which appertain to
this Art, the which are such and so effectual, that they may greatly help to
the obteining of safe victory, if they happen to be placed in such a man as
knows how to use and handle them. And for that in true Art it does little
prevail, the use thereof being in a manner altogether deceitful, I was
resolved to put over all this to the treatise of Deceit, as unto his proper
place. Notwithstanding, to the end it may not seem strange to any man, to
read nothing of the Cloak in all the handling of true Art, I am minded to lay
down a certain few blows in the accustomed wards, referring the more
abundant handling thereof unto the treatise of Deceit.

The manner how to handle the Cloak.
AS the Cloak in this Art, has in it three things to be considered, to wit:
length, largeness, and flexibilitie: so it is to be wayed how far each of
these will stretch, to serve the turn. Of which three, one does properly
belong unto it, and that is flexibilitie, which may neither be increased nor
diminished: The other two, may receive alteration. But yet it is at any hand
to be provided, that these two also be not diminished. For the Cloak is no
strong thing, which of it self may withstand the blows of the weapon, being
directly opposed against them.

And therefore he shall prove himself but a fool, who trusting to the Cloth
wrapped about his arm, does encounter any right edgeblowe therewith. For
seeing the Cloak is not flexible in that part (which flexibilitie is his
only strength) little prevails either length or largenes, wrapped about a
solid substance. But being opposite in that part thereof, where it has
length, largenes and flexibilitie (which is from the arm downwardes) it is
auailable: for all three being joined together will ward any edgeblow: which
manner of warding should not be so sure, if the cloak had only length and
flexibilitie: For having behind it little air, which is the thing that does
strengthen it, it may easily be beaten too, and cut, by any great blow.
Therefore, if a man have so much leisure, he ought to wrapp his Cloak once or
twice about his arm, taking it by the Cape or collar, and folding his arm
therein up to the elbowe, and therewithal to ward all edgeblowes from the
flank thereof downwardes, as well on the right side, as on the left side,
always remembering to carry his foot differing from his arm, for the
avoiding of danger that may rise by bearing his leg on the self same side,
near his cloak knowing the Cloak wardeth not when there is any hard substance
behind it.

Thrustes also themselves, may be given without, if with the Cloak, or with
the hand in the Cloak, the enemies sword be beaten off, one handful within
the point thereof. For the edge having but small power in that case, is not
hable in so little time, to cut the hand. The blows also, as well of the point,
as of the edge, from the slanke vpwardes, ought to be warded with the sword:
For to lift the arm so high being burdened with the weight of the Cloak, which
naturally draws downwards, as it is a violent thing it is also perilous,
least the arm be placed in steed of the Cloak, and so rest wounded, or lest
the arm or Cloak be placed before the eyes, which by that means remain
blinded.

An Advertisement concerning the warding and wrapping of the Cloak.
THere are two ways (in these days) to wrappe the Cloak, the one is, when
one having leisure takes the Cloak by the cape or collar, and so fouldeth it
once or twice about his arm: The other is, as often times it falls out, when
letting the Cloak fall down from the shoulder, it is happily taken by one
side, and so is turned once or twice about the arm.

Now as concerning striking, a man ought in the handling of these weapons as
he would strike, first to increase and carry the one foot near to the other,
and then farther to increase a half, not a whole pace, as in other weapons:
For at these weapons, it is dangerous least (making a whole pace) he entangle
his foot or feet in the Cloak and fall down therewith. And this must be
taken heed of, in the first and second foulding, but principally in the
second, because in it the Cloak is longer, and therefore does more easily
touch the earth and entangle his feet: In the first fold, although the cloak
touch not the earth, because the arm does orderly bear it, yet by reason of
werines, the arm falls and causes the foresaid effect.



The hurt of the high ward at Rapier and Cloak
IN these manner of weapons, asin others, I will frame three wards: The first
by the foresaid reasons, shall be the high ward, which in these kind of wepons
more then in any other deserve the name of a ward. For the Rapier (something
bending) wardeth as far as the clok hand, and the clok hand down to the
middle leg: so that in this ward a man is warded from the top of the head
down to the foot.

Therefore standing at this ward, whether it be* with the right foot before
or behind, he may deliver a thrust with the increase of a half pace forwards,
staying himself in the low ward.

The right edgeblowe ought to be delivered from the wrist without any motion of
the feet, resting in the low ward: but in delivering of the reuerse, it is
necessary to fetch a whole pace, and in a manner straight. If the enemy ward
it with his sword, then the encounter of the enemies sword, must be stayed
suddenly with the Cloake-hand in the first part thereof, and a thrust be
delivered underneath, with the increase of a straight pace.

The defense of the thrust, right and reuersed blows of the high ward at
Rapier and Cloak.
FOr the better avoiding of the hurts which proceed from the high ward: it is
necessary to stand at the low ward, in the which the thrust is to be warded
iiij. manner of ways, to wit: either with the single sword within and
without, either with the single Cloak within and without. If with the single
sword within, it is requisite to fetch a compass with the foot backwards on the
right side. In like case to turn the body the same way, to the intent, to
carry it out of the straight line (in which the blow comes) and to drive a
reuersed thrust at the face, the which thrust in such order delivered is the
longest that is, and such a one, as thereby the hurt is not only voyded, but
also at the self same time, the enemy is stricken in the face. If it chance,
that the sword be encountered without then it is not only profitable but also
necessary, to step forwards and with the Cloak to encounter the enemies
sword in the first part thereof. And recovering his own sword, to discharge
a thrust underneath with the increase of the right foot. And although it be
laid down for a rule, not to use a whole pace in handling of the Cloak, this
ought to be understood in striking, in the which (whilst one endeavors to
strike with his sword) it may be forgetting the Cloak, his arm may fall, by
means whereof he may stumble against it: but in warding, it does not so
happen. For nature being careful to defend her self (at every little danger)
lifts up both her arms, yea, although they be oppressed with weight and
burden.

Wherefore it is not to be feared, that in warding this thrust, the hand will
be drawn down by the weight of the Cloak.

The same wards and defenses may be used with the single Cloak, in the which,
one must likewise strike, with the increase of the right foot. This manner of
warding is not very sure, and therefore it requires great actiuitie and deep
judgment, considering he ought to bear his Cloak and arm stretched out
before him, and to mark when the enemies swords point shall pass within the
Cloakhand one handful or little more: and not to suffer it to pass farther, but
to beat it off, and increasing to discharge a thrust underneath, with the
increase of a pace with the right foot. But as I have said, this manner of
warding has little certainty and great peril in it, and yet it strikes well,
if it be done in short time.

The right edgeblowe may in like manner be warded with the single sword or
cloak: but when it comes aloft, it shall not be commodious to encounter it
with the single cloak, for by that means the eyes blind themselves. How much
this imports, let others judge. But, when the said right blow comes in a
manner low, so that it may well be warded, keeping the enemy in sight, then
the cloak is to be opposed, with the increase of the left pace, and presently
thereupon, a thrust to be discharged, with the increase of a right pace.

When one opposes the single sword against the right blow, he must drive a
thrust at the face, and fetch a compass with his hinder foot, cutting the face
with the said thrust, and stay himself in the broad ward. The self same
must be done, when he defends him self with both together, to wit, with the
sword and cloak.

Against the reuersed blow, the self same manner is used in warding to wit,
either with the one, or with the other, either with both joined together.

With the cloak, by the increase of a pace, and by encountering the enemies
sword, as far forwards as is possible, that thereby it may be done the more
comodiously, delivering a thrust therewithal underneath, with the increase of
a pace of the right foot.

With the single Rapier, the same defense may suffice, which is laid down in
the treatise of the single Rapier, and that is, to discharge a thrust at the
enemies thigh, the which withstandeth the fall of the reuersed blow.

Now, if one would defend himself with both these weapons joined together, he
must increase a pace with the right foot, and staying the enemies sword with
his cloak, recover his own sword nimbly, and then diliuer a thrust with the
increase of a pace of the right foot.

The hurt of the broad ward, at Rapier and Cloak.
IN this ward, as well as in others, a man may both thrust and strike, yet
diversely: For he may not discharge a right edgeblowe beneath. And the reuerse
is manifestly dangerous: So that, when he is to deliver it, he ought to
perform it in this order.

First, he shall drive a thrust, fetching a compass with his hinder foot, that
by that means it may reach the farther, then suddenly (without moving of
himself) he shall discharge a right edgeblowe, from the wrist, after the which
presently, the reuerse must follow, with the increase of a pace of the right
foot: and further, must follow on with the thrust already prepared, and
increase the like pace.

The defense of the broad ward, at Rapier and Cloak.
TO him that will safely ward himself from the hurt of the broad ward, it is
requisite, that he stand at the low ward. And when the thrust underneath hand
comes, he shall thrust at the face, fetching a compass with his hinder foot
toward the right side, with which kind of thrust, it does lightly happen
that the enemy is hit in the face: but if it fail, yet for all that, the
enemy obtains not his purpose, in the discharge of the thrust of the broad
ward: For by delivering the thrust underneath, and compassing of the hinder
foot, the body is carried out of the straight line: So that, as soon as the
thrust is delivered at the face, and the enemy not strooken therewith, but
passes beyond his head, the reuerse is to be turned at the face, and the foot
to be plucked back, settling in the broad ward. To ward the right and
reuersed blows, there is a thrust to be given at the thighs or some other
place that may most hinder them, in the very same time that such blows are in
their circle or compass. Although I do not believe that there is any man so
foolish, that (in this ward) will deliver a reuerse only.

Of the hurt of the low ward, at Rapier and Cloak.
THis ward is so straight and perilons, that no man ought to assure himself to
deliver an edgeblow any manner of way. For under any of them he may be easily
strooken, and each of them may easily be warded with the Cloak. Therefore, he
must diligently take heed, that he thrust only, the which must never be
discharged before the enemies sword be found, and then as far forwards as
is possible. So then finding it, he may thrust both within and without. Neither
is therein this thrust any other advantage to be gotten, then to steal a half
pace unawares of the enemy, which may be done very commodiously, considering
the cloak occupies the enemies sight, And having drawn this half pace, and
found the enemies sword, he must increase an other half pace forwards, and
strike him, costing and forcing the enemies sword, on that side where it may
do no hurt. And this may be used both within and without: But he whom it
pleases, and who doubts not to be entangled in the Cloak, may (finding
himself within) carry his left foot making a pace therewith, and between his
cloak and his sword, close the enemies sword, and deliver a thrust with the
increase of a pace of the right foot: And sinding the enemies sword without,
he may use the self same increase and thrust. But if he find not the enemies
sword, he may deliver a little edgeblow from the wrist of the hand, in such
sort, that the enemy have no leisure to enter in: And having found the Sword,
to to discharge a right or straight thrust, or else not voyding the enemies
sword by the increase of a left pace, to drive a thrust from aloft downwards,
lifting up the fist somewhat high, and delivering it with the increase of a
pace of the right foot.

Of the defense of the low Ward at Rapier and Cloak.
TO the end a man may ward himself from all the thrustes reckned in the
hurtes of this ward, he neither ought, neither happily may do any other thing
then void his body from the straight line, wherein the enemy purposes to
strike, making a left pace forwards, somewhat thwarting or crossing and
striking the enemy safely. The which does not so chance, when one defends
himself either with the single Cloak or single Rapier: For whilst he
assaieth to defend himself, he cannot strike. And if the enemy do first move,
and strike straight, in the which, his sword is not carried much outwardes
(and it is hardly done,) I say, the enemy may by stealing of half paces,
discharge a thrust perforce. And therefore he must take heed, that (as the
enemy moves) he increase a slope pace (by that means voyding the hurt) then
a thwart or crossing pace next, with the increase of a straight pace of the
right foot, to strike the enemy with a thrust underneath.

This may suffice, for the handling of these weapons as much as appertains to
sure play. All that which remains is reserved to the treatise of deceit, in
which place shall be seen many handlings of the cloak no less profitable
then pleasant.

Of the Sword and Buckler.
FOrasmuch as the Buckler is a weapon very commodious and much used, it is
reason that I handle it next after the Cloak. For my purpose is, to reason of
those weapons first which men do most ordinarily use, then of those that are
extraordinary and less accustomed, discoursing upon each of them, as much as
is requisite when I come unto them. Therefore I will first consider of the
Buckler, therewith proceeding orderly.

First his form, as much as appertains to this Art. Next the manner how to
use it, giving every man to understand that the Buckler and other weapons
(which are said to be weapons only of warding) may also be of striking, as I
will declare in his proper place.

Of the Form of the Buckler.
AS the form of the Buckler is round and small, and ought to be a shilde and
safeguard of the whole body, which is far greater then it: So it is to be
understood how it may accomplish the same, being a matter in a manner
impossible.

Let every one therefore know, that the little Buckler is not equal in bigness
to the body simply, but after a certain sort or manner, from which
springs this commodity, that he which understands it, shall be resolved of
the manner how to bear and handle it, and shall know that in it, which shall
not only advantage him in the use thereof, but also of many other weapons.

It is to be understood, that the Buckler bears the self same respect to
the body, which the little prike or sight, on the top of the harquebush
artilirie or such like bears to the object which they respect and behold. For
when a Harquebusher or Gonner, discharges happily against a Pigion or Tower,
if they behold and find that the Prike strikes the object, although that
prike or sight be very little, and of a thousand parts one: yet I say, the
said prike of the Harquebush shall cover the whole Pigion, and that of the
Artilery in a manner the whole Tower: The effect procedinge of no other thing
then of the distance. And it is in this manner. The eye behoulding directly
through the straight sight, as soon as it arriueth at the object, and may not
pass through, teareth it, and sends through a line sidewise, spreading it
self like unto the two sides of a triangle, the which overthrows the
foundation of that thing which it strikes: The which foundation, the
instrument strikes with which the discharge was made. And if it work
otherwise, that comes either of the defect of the instrument, or of that it
was not firm.

Wherefore, applying this example to our purpose I say, that the enemies
sword is as the line of the eiesight, The Buckler, even as the little prick or
sight in the Harquebush, the body of him that holds the Buckler, as the
object unto the which the strok is directed: And so much the rather the Buckler
shall be the more like this prick or sight, and have power to cover the whole
body, by how much it shall be the further of from the thing that is to cover.

As concerning his greatness, standing still on the form of the Buckler, by
how much the greater it is, by so much the better it voydeth the blows. But it
is to be regarded, that it hinder not the eye sight, or at least as little as is
possible. Besides this, there is required, that about the middle thereof, there
be a little strong circle of Iron, well nailed and hollowed from the Buckler, so
that between that circle and the Buckler the Sword may enter, by means
whereof, a man may either take holdfast of the sword, or break a piece of the
point. But this is done rather by chance then that any rule may be given how a
man should so take hold and break it, for the sword comes not with such
slowenes, and in such quantity of time, as is requisite in that behalf.

It shall be also very profitable, that in the midst of the Buckler, there be
a sharp point or stert of Iron, to the end the enemy may be stricken therewith
when occasion serves.

The manner how to handle the Buckler.
IF a man would, that the Buckler work the said effect, to wit: that it may
be hable with his smalnesse to cover the whole body, he must hold and bear
it in his fist, as far off from the body as the arm may possibly stretch
forth, moving always the arm and buckler together, as one entire and solid
thing, having no bending, or as if the arm were united to the buckler, turning
continually all the flatt thereof toward the enemy. From which kind of
holding proceed all these commodities following.

1 The first is, that the arm (standing directly behind the Buckler) is wholly
covered, neither may be strooken by any manner of thing which is before it.

2 The second, that all edgeblows are of force encountered in the first and
second part thereof, where they carry least force: neither can it fall out
otherwise, if the enemy would (in manner as he ought) strike either at the
head or body. For if the enemy would strik them, it is necessary, that his
sword come within the buckler so much as the arm is long: for otherwise it
shall never hit home. And in this case he may well ward each great blow, and
therewithal easily strike, and that in short time.

3 The third commodity is, that all thrustes are most easily warded: for the
Buckler being round, with the directly flatt opposite against the enemy, and
wardinge all the body, the enemy will not resolve himself to give a thrust
but only against those parts which are so well covered by the Buckler, as,
the head, the thighs, or some part of the body, being found discovered by
ill bearing of the Buckler. And seeing that these thrustes, having to hit home,
ought to enter so far in, as is from the buckler to the body and more (and
that it is the length of an arm) they may easily and without doubt (making
less motion, and therefore in little time) be driven outwardes by the Buckler
before they come to the body.

There are many other commodities to be gathered by so holding of the buckler,
which at this present are not to be recyted.

Wherefore being to finish this Chapter, I say, that the Buckler ought not to
defend, but only down to the knee and less. And reason would that it should
defend no farther than the arm can stretch it self, that is to the middle
thigh. In the act of fighting a man stands always somewhat bowing, therefore
a little more is allowed. The rest of the body downwardes, must be warded with
the Sword only.

Of the hurt of the high ward at Sword and Buckler.
BEcause it is a very easy matter to ward both the right and reuersed blows
of the edge: And for that a man may easily strike under them, I will not lay
down either for the one or the other their strikings or defendings, but only
talk of the thrust. I say, the thrust above may be delivered in two sorts,
the one with the right foot behind, the other with the right foot before.

When the thrust is discharged that carries the right foot behind, there
must (in delivery thereof) be increased a straight pace of the right foot.
And it must be driven and forced with all that strength which it requires, and
that is very great, then settling in the low ward.

When one would deliver a thrust with the right foot before he must remember
in any case, first (unawares of the enemy) to steal a half pace, that is to
say: to draw the hinder foot near the forefoote, and then to cast a thrust
with the increase of a half pace forwards, settling himself after the
delivery thereof in the low ward.

Of the defense of the high ward at Sword and Buckler.
AS a man stands at the low ward he may easily defend both those lofty
thrustes. When they come, he standing at the said ward, it shall be best to
drive them outwardes, with the increase of a left pace, and with his sword and
buckler to stay the enemies sword. And because this left pace is a great
increase: and likewise the enemy, driving his thrustes, comes with great
force, it may easily come to pass that both may approach so near one to the
other, that he may with his bukler give the enemy, the Mustachio, in the face,
but that must be done when fit occasion is offered, and then further recovering
his own sword to discharge a thrust underneath with the increase of a pace of
the right foot.

Of the hurt of the broad Ward, at Sword and Buckler.
IF a man would stepp forward, and strike as he stands in the broad ward, it
is not lawful for him to use any other than the thrust, considering the right
and reuersed blows may not be delivered without great peril and danger. For
in the site or placing of this ward, the sword is far off from the body.
And as he moves to fetch a right or reuersed edgeblowe, his sword of force
will be much farther: So that it may not be done without great danger. Therefore
he shall use the thrust only: in forcing and delivery whereof, he shall
proceed first to carry his hinder foot a half pace forwards, and then to
drive it on with the increase of another half pace of the right foot, staying
himself in the broad ward.

The defense of the broad ward at Sword and Buckler.
AGainst the thrust of the broad ward, the Buckler is to be opposed, standing
at the low ward. And when the enemy comes resolutely to thrust, then
without warding it at all, he shall drive a thrust at the face, carrying the
hinder foot in a compass toward the right side as well to lengthen the
thrust, as also to carry himself out of the straight line, in the which the
enemy comes resolved to strike, who, by this manner of thrust is easily hurt.

The hurt of the low ward at Sword and Buckler.
AS this low ward is framed two manner of ways, that is to say, with the
right foot before and behind: So likewise a man may strike therein after two
sorts, Standing with the right foot behind (leaving aside, the blows of the
edge, being to small purpose) he shall deliver a thrust with the increase of a
pace of the right foot, between the enemies sword and buckler, or else, if it
be more commodious without the sword and buckler, settling in the low ward,
with the right foot before, in which ward, a man may strike two manner of
ways, within and without. Finding himself without, having first met the
enemies sword with his own, he shall increase a left pace, not to the intent to
avoid himself from the enemies sword, but shall with his buckler also, stay
the enemies sword, and forasmuch as he did not at the first deliver the said
thrust, he shall then continue and force it on directly with the increase of a
pace of the right foot. Finding himself within, the same thrust is to be used
but more strongly. For, with the increase of a pace, leaving his buckler or
thenimies sword, he shuts it in between his own sword and the buckler: and
keeping it in that strait, (whereby he is sure the enemy can deliver no edgblow
because it may not move neither upwards nor downwards, neither forwards, but is
then without the body,) he shall continue on, and resolutely deliver this manner
of thrust, with the increase of a pace of the right foot.

The defense of the low ward, at Sword and buckler.
FOr the defense of all these thrusts, it is necessary that he stand at the
low ward, and standing thereat, whilst the thrust comes which is delivered
with the right foot behind, he shall do no other, than in the selfsame time,
deliver a thrust at the thigh or breast, turning the hilte of his sword against
the enemies sword, and compassing his hinder foot, withal bearing his body out
of the strait line, in which the enemy strikes. And this manner of warding
does not only defend, but also safely hurt.

For the defense of the other two thrustes, the one within, and the other
without, a man must take great heed, and it is very necessary that as the
enemy increases (pretending to strike safely) he carry a slope pace with the
left foot and deliver a thrust above hand, up on the which the enemy of
himself shall run and inuest himself. And it is to be considered, that in
these thrustes, he that defends has great aduanrage: For the enemy comes
resolutely to strike, not thinking that it may in any other sort be warded then
by giving back, But he that wardeth by increasing, defending and drawing near
unto the enemy, is so placed, that he may easily hurt him.

Of the Sword and Target, called the Square Target.
IT is most manifest, that the Target is a most ancient weapon, found out only
for the use of warfare, and not for frayes and peculiar quarrels between man
and man: albeit, since the finding thereof, there have been devised by the
industry of man a thousand ways to serve them at their need: From whence it
has come to pass, (because it seemed convenient unto the professors of this
Art) that this weapon was very comodious and profitable, as well for his
fashion, as for that it is a mean or middle wepon, between the buckler and the
round Target: That they have framed a special kind of play therewith,
although it differs from the other two weapons in no other thing then in the
fashion. Therefore, diverse professors of this Art, being moved, some by reason
of the form, some by the bigness, and some by the heaviness thereof, have
accustomed to bear it after diverse ways. Those who make most account of the
heaviness, would for some consideration, that the right and proper bearing
thereof, was to hold it leaning on the thigh, not moving therehence, but being
greatly constrained thereunto.

Others, who esteemed the form and bigness thereof, because it seemed unto them
that the Target without any other motion was most apt of it self to ward all
that part of the body which is betwixt the neck and and the thigh, bare it
with their arm drawn back close to their breast. The which opinion, I mean
not at this present to confute, forasmuch as by the showing of mine own
opinion, it shall appear how mightily they were deceived in the holding
thereof, from the true holding whereof springs all the profit which his
form and bigness does give it.

The manner how to hold the square Target.
BEing desirous to bear great respect as well to all the qualities of this
Target (which are, the form, the bigness, and heaviness) as unto that wherewith
it may either help or hurt, I say (if a man would that the form thereof do
bring him profit without hurt) it is to be holden with the high point thereof
upwards respecting the head: the part opposite, the low parts of the body:
the right part thereof, the right side, and the left, the left side: from this
manner of bearing spring these advantages. First, a man may more easily see his
enemy, and view what he does by the point of the corner, which is on the one
side, and that is by the high point, by which, if he would behold his enemy,
from the head to the feet, it is requisite that he carry his Target, so low,
that he discover not too much of his body which is above it: to the warding
whereof he cannot come again, but discommodiously, and in long time.

Besides, the said commodity of beholding the enemy, there is also another
that is of warding: For the Target being borne after this manner (framing a
triangle) the sharp corner thereof respects the forehead, and the sides
thereof so spread themselves, that through the least motion, any bigg man
whosoever, may stand safe behind them. And if blows come at the head, be they
thrustes or edgeblows, al of them light upon one of the said sides, behind
which stands the head safe without hindering of the eyesight. The other two
sides of the Target, right, and left, with very small motion, ward the right
and left side of the body, in such sort, that a man may also draw back his
arm: For the left side of the Target wardeth the elbowe, which it does not do,
when the high side thereof is carried equal. To conclude therefore, that in
holding the Target, his bigness may the better ward, for the causes above said
being superfluous to be repeated again, I counsel, it to be holden with the
arm stretched forth from the body, not accompting the heaviness to be
hurtful, because a man continues not long in so holding it: and if the too
long holding be painful, he may draw back his arm, and rest him self. The
better to do this and to be able to see the enemy, I say, he shall hold it,
his arm stertched out, with the high point outward, respecting the forehed.

The hurt of the high ward, at Sword and square Target.
Many Deceites, Falses, and Wards, may be practiced in the handling of these
weapons: All which I reserve to the treatise of Deceit or falsing, as unto his
proper place, framing likewise in this as in all the rest, three ordinary
wards, upon which, all the rest depend, and against which they may be opposed.

Standing at this high ward, and pretending to strike the enemy, it is first
of all to be provided, that one steal a falfe pace from behind, and then
discharge a thrust above hand, with the increase of an other half pace
forwards, which being warded by the enemy with his target only, not moving
his body, he may then increase a straght pace of the left foot, and (somewhat
lifting up his hand, and abasing the point of his sword) force a thrust from
above downwards between the Target and body of the enemy, with the increase
of a pace of the right foot: the which thrust will safely speed the enemy,
if his body be not fitst voided. The self same thrust may be delivered in
this high ward, standing with the right foot behind.

The defense of the high ward, as Sword and square Target.
THE foresaid thrust may easily be warded, if in the very time that it comes
it be encountered with the high point of the Target, but yet with that side
which bends toward the right hand. And as soon as the enemies sword is
come one handful within the Target, it must be strongly beaten off by the
Target toward the right hand, increasing the same instant a left pace. Then
with as great an increase of a pace of the right foot as may be possible, a
thrust underneath most be given, already prepared, because a man ought to stand
at the low ward for the warding of the thrust abouehand.

The hurt of the broad ward, at Sword and square Target.
IN this ward likewise, the enemy may be invested on the point of the sword,
by going forwards as straightly as is possible, and by striking quickly before
the enemy. For the Target (whose charge is only to defend) is so great, that
it may easily ward all edgeblowes, and those chiefly which come from the knee
vpwardes. Farther, when a blow is pretended to be delivered, it is manifest,
that a thrust does enter by a more narrow straight than any edgeblowe does.
And therefore, when one would strike the enemy standing at the lock or low
ward, he must remember that he approach as near him as he may possible: and
being so near, that with his Target put forth one handful more forwards, he
may beat away the enemies sword, then by so beating of it, he shall increase
a left pace, and presently after it, with the increase of a pace of the right
foot, deliver him a thrust, if it so chance that at the first encounter he
struck him not strongly.

The defense of the broad ward, at Sword and Square Target.
STanding at the low ward, one may ward and defend the thrust of the broad
ward, diverse ways, among all which, there is one way, very easy and sure
and thus it is.

For the defense of this thrust, it is necessary, that he stand at the low
ward, his sword and arm being in their proper place: and that with his Target
something stretched out from his body, he provoke the enemy, who being
determined in himself, and coming resolutely to give a thrust, he then ought
with the increase of a pace of the right foot, to strike the enemy with a
low thrust, underneath both his own and his enemies Target.

Of the hurt of the low ward, at Sword and Square Target.
THere are many blows to be bestowed, standing at the low ward, all which I
esteem as vain and to no purpose, considering the manifold and abundant
defense of the Target. Therefore I will restrain my self unto two only which
are very strong and hardly to be warded. And they are two thrustes, the one
within, the other without, with the right foot both before and behind.

When one finds himself within, with his right foot before, and so near
his enemy, that by the increase of a left pace, he may with the right side of
his Target, beat away the enemies sword in the middle thereof, then he ought
nimbly to increase that left pace, and (closing in the enemies sword between
his Target and his own sword) to deliver a forcible thrust at the thighs,
with the increase of a pace of the right foot. He may also do the very
selfsame when he finds himself to stand with his right foot behind, but
then he must farther increase a pace of the right foot first, and then
continuing still force his sword and paces directly onwards, if he hit not the
enemy as he would at the first.

But if it chance that he find himself without, then he must (having first
found out fit opportunity to beat off the enemies sword with his Target)
increase a left pace, and placing the high side of his Target under the enemies
sword, and his own sword upon it closing it in, in the middle, increase a
pace of the right foot, and discharge a forcible thrust, at the breast or face.
And he may do the self same, when he stands with the right foot behind.

Of the defense of the high ward at Sword and square Target.
FOr the warding of those two thrustes of the low ward, it is necessary,
that a man stand at the same ward. And as the enemy comes resolutely
determined to thrust within, he must as soon, or more redily then he, increase
a left pace, and with the right side of his Target close in the enemies sword,
between it and his own sword, and then to enter perforce, and thrust either
between the two Targets or else under them, with the increase of a pace of the
right foot.

But if the enemy come without, he must increase the self same slope pace,
and with the right side of his Target beat off the point of the enemies sword,
and then thrust either above, either beneath, as in that occasion it shall be
most for his advantage with the increase of the pace of the right foot. And
when in consideration of the abundant defense of the Target, he may neither
increase his paces, nor deliver a thrust, he must settle himself in the low
ward with the right foot behind, which ward I will largely handle in the
treatise of deceit or falsing, being as it were his proper place, here ending
the true handling of the sword and square Target.

Of the Sword and round Target.
THE round Target would require a long and a most exquisite consideration
because it is of circuler form, most capable, and most perfect of all others.
But for that my purpose in this my work, is to write that only which I know
does appertain to this Art, giving leave to every man to busy him self in
his own profession. And leaving a great part of this consideration to the
Mathematicians and Historiographers to reason of his diverse qualities or
passions, either who was inuentor thereof, either, whether it be a weapon of
antiquity, or of this our age, And coming to discourse of that, wherein it
profits in this our time, (being a weapon sogreatly honored and esteemed of
Princes, Lords, and Gentlemen, that besides thvse thereof in their affairs, as
well by day as by night, they also keep their houses richly decked and
beautified therewith,) And considering only that thing, in the round Target,
among al other weapons which may either profit or hurt in the handling
thereof, I said, that the said round Target has been diuersely holden, borne
and used, by diverse men in diverse ages, as well as the other square Target, and
other weapons of defense, as well as of offense. And there want not also men in
our time, who to the intent they be not wearied, bear it leaning on their
thigh as though that in this exercise (in which only travail and pains are
available,) a man should only care for rest and quietness. For by means of
these two, strength and actiuitie, (parts in the exercise of weapons, both
important and necessary) are obtained and gotten.

Other some, holding their whole Arm bowed togeither, have carried it
altogeither flat against their body, not regarding either to ward their
belly, or utterly to lose the sight of the enemy, but will at any hand
stand (as they think) safe behind it, as behind a wall, not knowing what a
matter of weight it is, both to see the enemy, and work other effects, which,
(by so holding it) may not be brought to pass.

Of the manner how to hold the round Target.
IF a man would so bear the round Target, that it may cover the whole body,
and yet nothing hinder him from seeing his enemy, which is a matter of great
importance, it is requisite, that he bear it toward the enemy, not with the
conuexe or outward part thereof, altogether equal, plain or even, neither to
hold his arm so bowed, that in his elbowe there be made (if not a sharp yet)
at least a straight corner. For besides that (by so holding it) it wearieth the
arm: it likewise so hinders the sight, that if he would see his enemy from
the breast downwardes, of necessity he must either abase his Target, or bear
his head so peeping forwards, that it may be sooner hurt than the Target may
come to ward it. And farther it so defends, that only so much of the body
is warded, as the Target is bigg, or little more, because it cannot more then
the half arm, from the elbowe to the shoulder, which is very little, as
every man knows or may perceive: So that the head shall be warded with great
pain, and the thighs shall altogether remain discovered, in such sort, that
to save the belly, he shall leave all the rest of the body in ieopardie.
Therefore, if he would so hold the said Target, that it may well defend all
that part of the body, which is from the knee vpwardes, and that he may see
his enemy, it is requisite that he bear his arm, if not right, yet at least
bowed so little, that in the elbowe there be framed so blunt an angle or
corner, that his eyebeames passing near that part of the circumference of the
Target, which is near his hand, may see his enemy from the head to the foot.
And by holding the said conuexe part in this manner, it shall ward all the
left side, and the circumference near the hand shall with the least motion
defend all the right side, the head and the thighs. And in this manner he shall
keep his enemy in sight and defend all that part of the body, which is
allotted unto the said Target. Therefore the said Target shall be born, tharme
in a manner so straight toward the left side, that the eyesight may pass to
behold the enemy without moving, for this only occasion, either the head,
or the Target.



The hurt of the high ward, at sword and round Target.
BEcause the round Target contains in it most great and sure defense,
therefore ought not any edgeblowe which may be easily warded with the single
sword without the help of the Target be delivered. Thrustes also enter very
difficultlie to strike the body, because the Target, by means of the lest
motion that is, seems to be, as it were a wall before the body. And to
thrust at the leg is no sure play. That which remains to be done is, to
thrust forcibly with the sword: and when one perceives, that the point thereof
is entered within the circumference of the enemies Target, it is necessary that
he increase a left pace, and with the circumference of his own Target, to beat
off the enemies sword and Target, to the end, it suffer the thrust so given of
force to enter in. And (having so beaten and entered) to continue on the thrust
in the straightlyne, with the increase of a pace of the right foot.

When he finds himself in the high ward, he shall increase a half pace with
the hinderfoote, gathering upon the enemy, as near as he may without danger.
And being so nigh that he may drive his sword within the circumference, then as
soon as he perceives his sword to be within it, (his arm being stretched
out at the uttermost length) he ought suddenly to increase a left pace, beating
off with the circumference of his own Target, the enemies Target: and with the
increase of a pace of the right foot, to cause his thrust to enter perforce.
This also he may practice when the enemy endeavors, to withstand the
entrance of the thrust, when it is already past, within the circumference of
his Target.

But if the enemy (as it may fall out) ward this thrust not with that part of
the circumference, which is near his hand, but with that which is above it
(by means whereof his Target discovers his eyes) then he may very
commodiously, increasing his paces as aforesaid, recover his thrust above, and
force it underneath, with the increase of a pace of the right foot. And this
is a more sure way of thrusting than any other.

The defense of the high ward, at Sword and round Target.
FOr the defending of the thrust of the high ward, it is most sure standing at
the low ward, and to endeavor to overcome the enemy, by the same skill by
the which he himself would obtain the victory. In the very same time, that
he delivers his thrust, a man must suddenly increase a slope pace with the
left foot, bearing of the enemies Target with his own, and driving of a
thrust perforce with the increase of a pace of the right foot. And with this
manner of defense being done with such nimblenesse as is required, he does
also safely strike the enemy, who cannot strike him again, because, by means
of the said slope pace he is carried out of the line in the which the enemy
pretended to strike.

The hurt of the broad ward, at Sword and round Target.
IT is very difficult to strike in this broad ward, if first with much
compassing and gathering of the enemy, a man do not assaie with the
circumfere^ce of his Target near his hand, to beat off the enemies sword.
And being so beaten, to increase a left pace, and farther by adding thereunto
the increase of a pace of the right foot, to discharge a thrust. But it shall
happily be better in the handling of these weapons, not to use this broad ward:
for the hand is borne out of the straight line, in the which he may strike both
safely and readily: And before it return into the said line, there is much
time spent.

And farther, a man is not then in case with his Target to beat off the
enemies sword: But if happily he be, yet (though he be very ready, as well
with the hand as foot) his thrust shall never enter so far that itmay hit
home: For the enemy, with a very small motion of his Target forwards, may
very easily drive thenimies sword out of the strait line. Therefore, he that
would change or shifte out of this ward, to the intent to strike, must of
necessity be passing nimble and ready, and before he delivers his blow,
must beat the enemies sword with his Target.

The defense of the broad ward, at Sword and round Target.
BEcause in every occasion or accident a man stands safe in the low ward,
I will endeavor in this case, to place him also in the same ward, for the
encountering of the hurt of the broad ward. That therefore which by mine advise
he shall do, is, that he take great heed, not to suffer his sword to be
beaten off any manner of way. And when the enemy without this beating
presumes to enter, he must in the selfsame time increase a left pace and
safely deliver a thrust underneath with the increase of the right foot. And
farther, when the enemy shall perform, that is, first find the sword and
beat it off, (seeing of necessity if he would enter and hit home, his sword
must pass by the circumference of the Target near the hand) then, to
withstand the entry, it is requisite that he drive the enemies sword
outward on the right side with his Target and with the increase of the said
pace, that he enter and strike him.

The hurt of the low ward, at Sword and round Target.
A Man may strike in this ward, the right foot being behind, and before, and
in both ways, he may bear his sword either within or without. If therefore
he find himself to stand with the right foot behind and without, he shall
assaie at any hand, before he determine to strike, to find the enemies sword
with his own, and as soon as he finds it shall clap to his Target, and
strike perforce with a low thrust, increasing with the right foot. But finding
himself to stand within, no more with his sword, then he does with his
Target, he shall prove whether he can find the enemies sword, and having
found it, shall strain it fast between his own sword and Target, and then
shall deliver a thrust with the increase of a pace of the right foot, the
which thrust of force speedeth: This being performed, he shall settle himself
in this, or in either of these ways in the low ward with the right foot
before. And as he so stands in this ward, he may after the same sort strike
either within or without.

Therefore finding himself within, he shall provide to meet with the enemies
sword, and with the increase of a left pace, shall clap to his Target, for the
more safety, and then drive on a forcible thrust, with the increase of a pace
of the right foot. And finding himself to bear his sword within in the said
ward, and with his right foot behind, he shall endeavor to find the enemies
sword with the Target, and having found it, shall close it in between his own
sword and Target, and with theincrease of a left pace, shall perforce hurt the
enemy, with the increase of a pace of the right foot.

Now, all these thrusts, no doubt shall speed every time that the enemy
either makes no trauerse mocion with his body, either as he strikes, comes
directly forwards, or else being fearful, goes directly backwards, for it
is not possible that one man go so fast directly backwardes, as an other may
forwards. Yt is therefore diligently to be observed in this ward, never to
determine to strike, either in the handling of these, or of any other kind of
weapons, if (with one of them) he shall not first find the enemies sword. The
which redowneth to the great profit of every man, but especially of those,
who have strong arms, for that they are the better hable to beat back the
enemies weapon.

Of the defense of the low ward, at Sword and round Target.
ALL the foresaid thrusts are warded, by not suffering the sword to be found by
the enemy with either of his weapons. For the enemy (not finding it will not
assure himself, or presume to enter, without first finding of the sword) may
most easily be stricken and not strike, if a man increase a slope pace, (to the
end he may void his body from hurt,) and with the increase of a straight pace
of the right foot, do also discharge a thrust beneath. And after this order he
may strike safely, (not only when his sword is not found by the enemy, but
also when it chances to be found) if he be ready and nimble to make his slope
pace, and to beat off, as forcible as he may, the enemies Target with his own
sword and Target, thereby forcing a low thrust to enter in, with the increase
of a pace with the right foot. And thus much concerning the true striking and
defending of the sword and round Target.

Of the Case of Rapyers.
THere are also used now adays, as well in the scholles, as in the lists, two
Swords or Rapiers, admitted, and approved both of Princes, and of the
professors of this art, for honorable and knightly weapons, albeit they be
not used in the wars. Wherefore I shall not vary from my purpose, if I reason
also of these, as far as is agreeable to to true art. To him that would
handle these weapons, it is necessary that he can as well manage the left hand
as the right, which thing shall be (if not necessary) yet most profitable in
every other kind of weapon. But in these principally he is to resolve himself,
that he can do no good, without that kind of nimblenes and dexterity. For
seeing they are two weapons, and yet of one self same kind, they ought equally
and indifferently to be handled, the one performing that which the other does,
and every of the^ being apt as well to strik as defend. And therefore a man ought
to accustom his body, arms and hands as well to strike as defend. And he
which is not much practiced and exercised therein, ought not to make profession
of this Art: for he shall find himself to be utterly deceived.

The manner how to handle two Rapiers.
IT is most manifest that both these weapons may strike in one and the same
time: for there may be delivered jointly together two downright edgeblowes on
high and two beneath: two reuerses, and two thrustes, and are so rich and
plentiful in striking, that it seems they may be used only to strike. But
this ought not to be practiced, neither may it without great danger For all
that, whatsoeu er may be done with either of them, is divided into striking and
defendinge. That this is true, it may be perceived in the single Sword, which
assaieth both to strike and defend. And those who have taken no such heed, but
have been bent only to strike being moved either through collar, either
believing, that they had to deal with an ignorant person, have remained thereby
mightily wounded. Of this, there might be laid down infinite examples, which I
leave to the intent I may not swerve from my purpose. I say therefore that of
the two Rapiers which are handled, the one must be applied toward the other
to strike, regarding always to use that first which wardeth, then that which
strikes: for first a man must endeavor to defend himself, and then to strike
others.



Of the high ward at two Rapiers.
PResupposing always, that either hand is very well exercised, as well in
striking as in defending, this high ward shall be framed after two ways, which
yet in a manner is all one. The one with the right foot, the other with the
left, so working continually, that the hinder arm be aloft, the former beneath
in manner, as when the low ward is framed at the single sword. And as a man
strikes, he must always maintain and continue this high ward, which at the
two rapiers, is the most perfect and surest, and he may easily perform and do
it: for whilst he enters to give a high thrust with his hinder foot,
although that foot be behind yet it must accompany the arm until it has
finished his thrust, and settled it self in the low ward. The other sword and
hand (which was borne together with the former foot in the low ward)
remaining behind by reason of the increase of the high thrust, must presently
be lifted up, and be placed in the same high ward.

Therefore it is to be noted, that whosoever means to shift from this ward and
strike, whether it be with his right or left foot, before or behind, it is
requisite that he stand without, and when he would strike, he shall first prove
with his low sword, whether he can find the enemies weapons, and having
suddenly found them, he shall nimbly beat them back, and (in a manner) in the
same instant force on a high thrust, with the increase of a pace of the right
foot: from the which, if the enemy (for saving of himself) shall hastily and
directly give backwards, he shall follow him, delivering presently the other
high thrust behind, already lifted up. And this thrust will safely hit home and
speed, because it is not possible that one may go so fast backwards, as an
other may forwards.

Farther, as well in this ward, as in others, the ward may be framed with the
right foot before, and the right arm lifted, and so contrariwise. But because
there is small force in this ward, both in the feet and hands, which stand not
comodiously either to strike or defend, and seeing there is required in the
handling of those weapons, great strength and stedfastnes I have thought good,
not to lay it down, as to small purpose.

THe direct opposition and defense of the high ward is the low ward, the
manner whereof shall be seen in his proper place. That which principally is to
be considered (for the low ward also, in like sort as the other may be framed
after two sorts) is this, that of nenessitie a man stand with the same foot
before as the enemy does, to wit: if he bear the right foot before, to put
forth the right foot also, and to endeavor as the enemy does, to stand
without, for of both ways this is of the more advantage and safety. Finding
himself therefore without, in the low ward, he must not refuse, but rather
suffer his sword to be found and beaten by the enemy: for this does redowne
much more to his own advantage then to his enemies because the enemy carries
small force in his low hand wherewith he endeavors to find and beat off the
sword, considering it is born to far off from the other: for that which is
sle^derly united, is less forcible: whereas standing at the low ward, he bears
both his hands low near together and sufficiently strong. Therefore as soon as
the enemy having beaten back the sword, shall resolve himself to give a thrust,
he must increase a slope pace, and with his hinder low sword, drive the eni
mies high thrust outwardes toward the right side, if it chance that he were
in the low ward with his right foot before, And suddenly with the other low
sword behind (which was suffered to be beaten off by the enemy, because it
might turn the more to his disadvantage: for seeing the enemies sword being
slenderly united, as I have said before, carried but small force, it was the
rather beaten off and disappointed: So that as soon as the slope pace is
increased, and the said high thrust warded, before the enemy place his other
sword also in the high ward, he may with the straight pace of the right foot
deliver a low thrust continuing still to beat down the enemies sword with
his own low sword, that is borne before. And this manner of warding is most
safe and sure: for besides that it strikes the enemy with the slope pace, it
does likewise in such sort deliver the body from hurt, that of force the
enemy is disapointed. Neither is there any other sure way to ward this high
thrust, being so strong, and besides, having so great increase of pace.

This manner of defense is most strong and sure, and is done with that sword
which is farthest off. Yet there is another way, and that is, with the low
sword before, the which is no less stronger and sure than the other, but yet
much shorter. For look in what time the other defends, this strikes.

Therefore in the low ward it is to be noted, (when the enemy moves,
pretending to beat off the sword and there withal to enter,) that then the
point of the sword before be lifted up, keeping the hand so steadfast, that it
oppose it self and keep outward the enemies high thrust, and having made
this bar, to keep out his weapons, then and in the self same time, he shall
increase a straight pace, and with the low sword behind shall strike the enemy
in the breast, to whom it is impossible to do any effectual thing, or to avoid
the said stroke, for that (by means of the point of the sword lifted up in
manner aforesaid) both his swords are so hindered, that they may not safely
strike, either with the edge or point.

Of the hurt of the broad ward at the two Rapyers.
THis broad ward, may in the self same manner be framed two ways, and it may
deliver the self same blows, in the one as in the other: This ward is framed
with one foot before, and one foot behind, the arm (which is borne on the
side of the hinder foot) being stretched wide, and broad outward. Therefore
when one stands at this ward, and would deliver as straight and as safe a
thrust as is possible, he shall first prove with his low Rapyer, whether he can
find the enemies Rapier, which being found, he shall turn his fist outward,
and force the enemies Rapier so much, that it may do no hurt, and then withal
increasing presently a slope pace, shall go forewards to strike the enemy in
the thigh, with the wide thrust. He might as well also thrust him in the flank,
or in the head, but yet the other thrust is used, because the Rapier, which is
directed to the thigh, is in place to hinder the enemies other Rapier to light
on the legs.

And as in the high ward, so likewise in this, he must always stand without,
and having delivered the wide thrust, he ought presently to widen the other
arm, and settle himself in the broad ward.

Of the defense of the broad ward at the two Rapyers.
FOr the defense of the thrust of the broad ward, it is necessary that a man
stand at the low ward, and there withal diligently observe, the mocions of
the enemies body, how it compasses and passes to and froe, by knowledge and
due considerations whereof, he may easily defend himself. If therefore the
right arm be stretched out wide, the right foot also (being behind) shall be
in like manner widened, the which, when it increases forwards, shall also
carry with it the right shoulder, voyding always with the left side.

And the self same must be considered, and practiced, when he stands at his
ward, the contrary way. That therefore which he must do, for the defense of
him self, shall be to void that part of his body, which may be hurt by the
enemies wide and broad thrust, and to oppose himself against that part of his
enemy, which comes forwards pretending to strike: And this he shall do, at
what time the enemy (finding the sword) would come forwards in his thrust. And
in the self same time, (assuring himself with his own low sword) shall
increase a slope pace, thereby inuesting and incountring that part of the
enemy, which came striking, and with the which he framed the broad ward.
Neither can it be safe striking at any other place, for either he shall find
nothing to encounter, by means of the mocion of the body, or else if he do not
oppose himself against that shoulder of the enemy which carries the hurt, he
is in hazard to be stricken by the enemies broad thrust.

Of the hurt of the low ward at the two Rapyers.
THe low ward shall be framed after two ways, the one with the right foot
before, the other with the left, and each of them may strike, either within,
either without. The way which strikes within, has one blow, the way which
strikes without has two, and in all, they are six. I will lay down but
three, because they differ not from the other three, but only in the hand and
foot, which must be placed before, so that they are the self same, for I have
already presupposed, that he who takes upon him to handle these weapons, can
as well use the one hand, as he can the other. He may therefore find himself
to stand with his right fooote before and within, (I understand by within, when
he bears one of his swords between both his enemies swords, and likewise
when the enemy carries one of his, between the other two. Yt is likewise true,
that this also may be said within, to wit, when both weapons are borne in the
middle between the other two. But I suppose no man so foolish, who handling
these weapons, will suffer both his swords to be without, being a very unsure
ward whereof I leave to speak.

That therefore, which he is to do, (finding himself with both his rapiers
below, and within, with his right foot before, after the said first way of
being within) shall be, that marking when he may close in the enemies Rapier,
between the which the enemies rapier shall be so shut in and barred, that it
may do no hurt, and one of the two Rapiers, that is to say, the right Rapier
shall pass under the enemies rapier, and thurst safely. And his other Rapier
albeit, it may thrust directly, yet (for the better saving of himself, from
the enemies other Rapier that is at liberty) he shall bear it somewhat
abasing his hand, with the point vpwardes, the which point shall sauegarde him,
from the enemies said Rapier, although this last note, be superfluous. For
seeing the enemy must ward himself from the thrust that hurts him, he has
no leisure, nor happily minds to strike, but only to defend himself,
either by voyding his body, or else by some other shift, which he shall then
find out.

The way of warding without, may strike directly after two ways: The first,
by beating off the enemies Rapier, with his own that is before, and by
delivering a thrust, either at the breast or head, with the Rapier that is
behind, increasing therwithall a slope pace, and settling himself in the low
ward, with his left foot before.

The second is, by taking opportunity, which he may do, if he be nimble. And he
ought with the increase of a slope pace, to drive the point of his former
Rapyer directly toward the enemy, and above the enemies Rapier. And his
other own rapier, which before the increase was behind, he must force on,
under the enemies rapier. And thus, not giving over, these two thrusts must be
strongly and nimbly driven toward the enemy, by means whereof being
overtaken, the enemy has no other remedy to safe himself, then to retire
back: for he may not come forwards, but he must run himself upon the
weapons, and that he will not do. So then, the enemy retiring himself may be
followed, as far as the increase of the right foot will bear, then, settling
in the low ward.

Of the defense of the low ward at the two Rapyers.
AL three thrusts of the low ward, by standing at the same ward, may easily be
warded, and that after one manner. If a man remember first to void his body
from hurt, by the increase of a pace, that is very slope, or crooked, either
before the enemy comes thrusting, either as soon as he moves himself for
the same purpose, or if he be active and nimble to trauerse, and in defending
himself to strike the enemy.

Therefore when any of the same three thrusts come, and before he perceives his
Rapier to be closed, and barred in, he shall move a slope pace, to th'entent to
avoid himself from hurt, and with his Rapier, which is at liberty, he shall
go forwards and deliver a thrust at the enemies face, which thrust, does
surely speed, if he be resolute to enter.

Of the Two hand Sword.
THE two hand Sword, as it is used now a days being four handfulls in the
handle, or more, having also the great cross, was found out, to the end it
should be handled one to one at an equal match, as other weapons, of which I
have entreated. But because one may with it (as a galleon, among many galleys)
resist many Swords, or other weapons: Therefore in the wars, it is used to
be placed near unto the Ensign or Ancient, for the defense thereof, because,
being of it self hable to contend with many, it may the better sauegard the
same. And it is accustomed to be carried in the City, as well by night as by
day, when it so chances that a few are constrained to withstand a great
many. And because his weight and bigness, requiers great strength, therefore
those only are allotted to the handling thereof, which are mighty and big
to behold, great and strong in body, of stout and valiant courage. Who
(forasmuch as they are to encounter many, and to the end they may strike the
more safely, and amase them with the fury of the Sword) do altogether use to
deliver great edge blows, down right and reuersed, fetching a full circle, or
compass therein, staying them selves sometimes upon one foot, sometimes on the
other, utterly neglecting to thrust, and persuading themselves, that the
thrust serves to amaze one man only, but those edge blows are of force to
encounter many. The which manner of skirmishing, besides that, it is most
gallant to behold, being accompanied with exceeding swiftnes in delivery, (for
otherwise it works no such effect) it is also most profitable, not properly
of it self, but because men considering the fury of the sword, which greatly
amaseth them, are not resolute to do that, which otherwise they could not
choose but do. That is, either to encounter the sword in the middle toward
the handle, when it carries small force, or else to stand far off, watching
whilst the sword goes, and is carried compassing in his great cirkle, being of
the compass of ten arms, or more, and then to run under it, and deliver a
thrust. And these two ways are effectual, when such men are met withal, who
are exercised to enter nimbly and strike, or such as dare, and have the spirit
and courage, to set, and oppose themselves single against the two hand sword,
even as the single two hand sword aduentureth to oppose it self against many.
Neither is this thing to be maruailed at, for in these our days, there be
things performed of greater actiuitie and danger. And there be some which dare
do this with the sword and round Target, but yet they are not resolute to
strike first, but will receive and sustain the blow, with the round Target, and
then enter and thrust, this truly betokens great courage and actiuitie,
although not such as is required in this behalf.

Thus much concerning that, which appertains to the defense of the circuler
blows, of the two hand sword, when it indeuoreth to oppose itself against
many. And forasmuch as men have, and sometimes do use, both in the lists and
other places, to fight single combats, one to one with the single two hand
sword, I will also declare my opinion touching the same.

Of the manner how to handle the Two hand Sword, in single combat.
TO those, who would cunningly handle the Two hand Sword in single combat, it
is principally necessary that (as in other weapons) they be practiced and have
the skill, to use the one hand as well as the other, and that they be both active
in body, and strong in the arms which are required in the managing of each
weapon. And farther it is requisite that they carry the principles of this Art,
surely fixed in their minds and memories, by means whereof they may become
bold and resolute, in as much as they have to do, either in striking or
defending.

They ought furthermore to consider, how the two hand Sword is used, and how it
ought to be used.

Touching the first, All men use to deliver thrustes, as well as edge blows,
down right, and reuersed, with both hands to the Sword, which way albeit, it
be profitable in the bestowing of edge blows, as being the better hable to
sustain the Sword, yet in discharging of thrustes it is hurtful, for it
causes them to be much shorter, then they would be, if in the beginning, they
were forciblie delivered with both the hands, and then, by taking away one
hand from the cross, they were springed as far forth, as the pomel hand,
foot, and all the body of that side, may be stretched out. For, being
discharged in this manner, if they hit home they make great passage, and if they
be voyded, yet the Two hand sword may be quickly had again, by the retyring
of a pace, and of the hand and arm, placing the other hand there where it was,
and so settling in the low ward. Therefore, when one finds himself to stand in
the high ward, (the which at the two hand Sword, is framed, either with the
right side toward the enemy, either with the left, in either of which ways,
the arms would be borne aloft, and far off from the body, causing the point
somewhat to bend bothtowards the ground and the body, to the end it may defend
both the length of the body, and cover it in a manner thwarting or crossing, it
being so far off from the sword.

Farther, in this ward, the hand that is toward the enemy, must take hold
fast of the handle near the cross, and underneath, the other hand above, and
near the pomell. I say standing thus at the high ward, he may either deliver a
thrust, either a down right blow of the edge.

The thrust is discharged (as soon as the enemies sword is found) as far in
the beginning as he may with both arms: Then, taking away the cross hand, he
shall force it farther on with the pomel hand, as much as he may stretch it
forth, always in the discharge, increasing a slope pace. And the thrust
being thus delivered, he shall presently retire his said pace, and return
his hand again to the cross, settling himself either in the high or low
ward. But if he would deliver a downright blow with the edge which I counsel
him not to do, because he may easily be stricken under it, he shall first
discharge a thrust with both his hands, and then increasing a pace, shall turn
the said downright blow, stretching out the arm as much as he may. In the
delivery of which blow, if he meet with the enemies sword, he shall take
away his hand from the cross, and stretch out the pommel hand as much as he
may, with the increase of a pace. And farther, turning the said hand which
holds the sword vpwardes, to the end, to lengthen the thrust, he shall
drive, and force it on, and presently retire himself in manner aforesaid.



Of the defense of the high ward, at the two hand sword.
THe low ward, shall be the defense of the high ward, and it may be framed with
the right foot before and behind, in such sort, as the said high ward, the
which shall be declared in his proper place.

Therefore, regarding to place himself for his defense in the low ward (and
that directly contrary to his enemy, that is to say: if the enemy stand
with the right foot before, to put his left foot foremost, and as the thrust
of the downright blow comes) he shall encounter it without, and as soon as he
has found the enemies sword, he shall void his cross hand, and increase a
pace, and therewithal deliver a thrust, with the pommell hand, as far as it
will stretch out. The which thrust will easily speed, if the enemy come
resolutely in delivering of his blow: for he shall come directly to encounter
the point of the sword, with that part of his body which increases
forwards. Thus much for the defense of the high thrust.

The downright blow may be warded, if whilst the enemies sword is in his
compass, he nimbly deliver a thrust under it. Or else, if he would encounter
it, (as soon as he has so done) he do void his cross hand, and with the
increase of a pace, thrust as far forth as the pommell hand will stretch out.

Of the hurt of the low ward, at the two hand sword.
BEcause the broad ward in handling of this weapon is painful and unsure, I
leave to speak thereof, and come to the low ward, which is framed two ways,
to wit: either with the right or with the left foot before, and in either
way, one may strike both within and without. Within, is rather to ward, then
to strike: for the enemy that stands without, has the greater advantage.

Finding himself therefore within, and bearing the sword firmly, he shall
force and drive on a thrust, as farie as both arms may stretch out together,
increasing a pace and settling in the low ward, if he do not speed

But finding himself to stand without, and as soon as he has found the
enemies sword, he shall deliver a thrust, first, at the length of both arms,
then, voyding the cross hand, increase a pace and deliver it out at uttermost
length of the pommell hand, and immediately after the thrust, retire his hand
and pace, staying himself again in the said low ward.

The defense of the low ward, at the two hand sword.
IT is a general rule, that the true defense of all blows is the low ward.
Therefore, when one stands thereat, if there come a thrust without (because
it is necessary in this case to stand within,) he shall do no other then
encounter the enemies sword, and thrust his arm forwards, to the end he may
void it from his body, and farther retire his foot more backwards, and as it
were, in a compass, thereby the better saving his body from the hurt.

But if the thrust come within (by reason whereof he should stand without) as
soon as the enemies sword is encountered, he shall deliver a thrust with both
his hands, and then voiding his cross hand, he shall deliver it strongly with
his pommell hand, with the increase of a pace. And this thrust does safely
speed. Neither is it to be doubted, that by holding the sword with one hand,
the enemy may take holdfast thereof, for he has enough to do, to retire
himself, and ward the thrust, neither can he perform so many things in one
time.

Of the weapons of the Staff, namely, the Bill, the Partisan, the Holbert, and
the Iauelin.
BEcause it may seem strange unto many, that I have here placed these iiij.
sorts of weapons together, as though I would frame but one only way for the
handling of all, although they differ in form, from which form is gathered
their difference in use. Therefore, forasmuch as I am of opinion, that all of
them may be handled in manner after one way, it shall not be amiss, if I
declare the reason thereof, speaking first of every one severally by it self,
and then generally of all together, holding and maintaining always for my
conclusion, that the skill of handling of them, helps a man to the knowledge
of all the rest, for as much as concerns true Art.

Of the Partesan.
Coming therefore to the Partesan, as unto the plainest, and as unto that,
whereupon all the rest depend, omitting to show who was the inuenter thereof,
as being to small purpose: I say, that it was found out to no other end, then
for that the foot men in the wars, might be able with them to hurt those
horsemen (whom they might not reach with their swords) as well with their point
as with their edge. Further, weapons which are to be cast, or sprung forth at
the length of the arm, are for the most part deceitful, by means whereof,
they might hurt as well the Archers on horseback, as other horsemen.

Therefore, these Partesans were made bigg and of great paize, and of perfect
good steel, to the end they might break the maile and deuyde the Iron.

And that this is true, it is to be seen in the ancient weapons of this sort,
which are great and so well tempered, that they are of force to cut any other
Iron. Afterward, as men had considered, that as this weapon was only to
strike, it might in some part thereof, have as well something to ward withal,
whereby it might be said to be a perfect weapon, they devised to add unto it
two crookes or forkes, by the which, that blow might be warded, which parting
from the point and continuing down along the staff, would come to hurt the
person. And these forkes, or (I may say) these defenses were by some men
placed on that part of the Iron, which next adioyneth to the staff, making
them crooked and sharp, and a handful long, and for the most part, with the
points toward the enemy, to the end they might serve not only to defend, but
also to strike. And to the end, the bigness and weight of the Partesan, (which
ought to be apt and commodious to be handled) might not be increased, they
diminished part of the Iron thereof, and gave the same to the forkes or
defenses: And by that means they framed another weapon called a Iauelin, which
(because the broadnes, and happily the weight and paize thereof is diminished)
is not very forcible to strike with the edge, but all his power consists in
three thrustes. Othersome afterward would not that these defe^ces should be
placed at the lower-most part of the Iron, but in the middle thereof. And these
men bearing great respect to the blows of the edge, left the Iron which should
serve for the defense behind, in his breadth and weight, adjoining thereunto in
the opposite part of the right edge, a most sharp point of Iron, to the end,
that what way soever it were moved, it might strike and hurt. But if any man
obiet and say: if the said point of Iron were put there in respect of
striking, they might also as well have left there an edge, which being longer
would strike more easily. I answer, that the blows of the false (that is to
say, the hinder or back edge of the weapon) are very weak, and the point
does strike and hurt more easily then the edge. And therefore it was requisite
that there be facility where there was weakness. These men by these means
framed the ancient weapon called the Holberd, out of the which, men of our age
have diriued and made another kind of Holberd and Bill. And these bearing also
respect to some one profitable thing or other, did maintain the defense, and
increase the hurting or offense. The respect was, that as they discoursed and
pondred with themselves, at length they very warily perceived that a man with
weapon in his hand, might make six motions, that is to say, one toward the
head, one toward the feet, one toward the right side, one toward the left,
one forwards and toward the enemy, the other backward and toward him self.
Of all the which, five of them might very well strike, and the last might
neither strike nor defend. There fore, providing that this last motion also
should not be idle and unprofitable, they added a hook with the point turned
toward the handle, with the which one might very easily tear armor, and
draw perforce men from their horses. Those, who framed the middle or mean
Holbert, would that the said hook should be placed in the safe or backer edge.
And those that devised the Bill, would have it on the right edge, leaving the
edge so long that the hook might not altogether hinder the blow of the edge,
but rather (to the end the edg might make the greater effect) they would that
the hook should bear an edg and be cutting in every part thereof. Where I
gather, that the Bil is the most perfect weapon of all others, because it
strikes and hurts in every of these six motions, and his defenses both cut
and prick: which the new kind of Holbert does not perform, being framed after
the said fashion, and rather for lightness aptnes and bravery, then for that it
carries any great profit with it: for the edge is not so apt to strike, and
the point thereof is so weak, that hitting any hard thing, either it boweth or
breaks: neither is it much regarded in the wars, the Harquebush and the
Pike being now adays the strength of all armies.

Hereby it may be gathered, that with the Partesan, a man may strike with the
point and edge in five motions: with the Iauelin, with the point only, and in
such motions as it may: with the Holberd and Bill, both with the point and
edge, in six motions. But because these weapons for the most part are
exercised, and used to enter through diverse Pikes and other weapons, and to
break and disorder the battle raye, to which end, and purpose, if it be
used, then that manner of mannaging and handling is very convenient which is
practiced now adays, and thus it is: The Partesan, Holberd, and Bill (but not
the Iauelin, being in this case nothing effectual because it has small force
in the edge) must be borne in the middle of the staff, with the heel thereof
before, and very low, and the point near a man's head. And with the said
heel, or half staff underneath, from the hand downwardes, he must ward and
beat off the points and thrustes of the Pikes and other weapons, and having
made way, must enter with the increase of a pace of the hinder foot, and in
the same instant, let fall his weapon as forcibly as he may, and strike with
the edge athwart the Pikes. This kind of blow is so strong (being delivered
as it ought, considering it comes from above downwardes, and the weapon of it
self is very heavy) that it will cut asunder not only Pikes, but also any
other forcible impediment. In these affairs the Iauelin is not used, because
it works no such effect. But when one is constrained to use it, he ought
neither to beat off, neither to ward with the staff, but altogether with the
Iron and his defenses, remembering, as soon as he has beaten off and made way
of entrance, to thrust only: for to handle it in delivering of edgeblowes
prevails not, considering the small force it carries in that manner of
striking. And as among all the foresaid iiij. weapons, the Iauelin in this
kind of skirmish, is least profitable, so the Partesan is most excellent and
commodious, for having no other defense, it is provided in the staff, and is
most forcible, to cut the Pikes by means of his heaviness and weight, and the
rather, because it is unfurnished and void of other things, which in this case
might let and hinder the edge blow. Therefore the Partesan shall be used (as in
his own proper quality) to enter among the Pikes, and cut them a sunder, and
other weapons also partly for that cause, and partly to skirmish single, one
to one. Which although it be not ordinarily accustomed, yet nevertheless,
because both this, and the rest of the weapons, may be handled in single
combat, and do contain in them, as well offense, as defense, Farther, to the
end, the wise and discreet (happening to be in such affairs) may be skillfull
to determine with themselves, what they may and ought to do: I will show my
opinion what may be done with these weapons in single combat, reasoning jointly
of the Iauelyn, Bill, and Holberd, because there is but a small difference in
the Iauelyn, And the Bill, and the Holberd, are in a manner all one, and the
very self same.

Of Bill against Bill, Holberd against Holberd, or Holberd against Bill.
FOrasmuch, as the Bill and Holberd, have the self same offense and defense,
and be of one length: I thought it not good to make two Treatises thereof,
because I should be forced to repeat the self same thing in both, the which,
being superfluous, would breed loathsomenes. I say therefore, that whosoever
would handle the Bill or Holberd, which being all one, I will name
indifferently, by the name of the Holberd, I say, to him that would use them,
and strike as well with the point, as with the edge, which blows at these
weapons are mighty and forcible, it is necessary, that he consider the
difficulty in striking with the point, and the danger in striking with the
edge. That it is difficult to strike with the point, it is most clear, because
the full course of the point, may very easily be hindered and tied, by means
of so many hooks and forkes which are in the Holberd.

And that it is perilous to strike with the edge, has bin declared when I
entreated of the single Rapier, which peril ought the more to be considered in
this weapon, because by means of his length, it frames a greater cirkle, and
therein gives more time to enter under it.

Therefore no man may safely handle the Holberd, if first he do not consider
these two things, the one, (which he may very hardly withstand) and that is
the thrust, because these hooks and forkes, are properly belonging unto it,
and are impossible to be untied and taken away, when a man would, the form
being as it is. 2. The peril of the edge blow, may some time be voided, if he
be nimble and bold, performing all that in due time, which shall here be laid
down for his instruction.

How to strike with the Holberd.
IN the handling of this weapon, there shall be framed (by my counsel) no more
then one ward, bearing the hands, for the more suertie in the middle of the
staff. And that ward must be the low ward. The hands must be somewhat distant
one from an other, and the point of the weapon directly toward the enemy,
regarding always to place himself with the contrary foot before, to that,
which the enemy shall set forth, that is to say: If the enemy be before with
the left foot, then to stand with his right foot, or contrary wise. And
standing in manner aforesaid, he must always prove and try (before he be
determined to deliver a thrust) to beat off the enemies weapon, which being
done, presently deliver a forcible thrust toward the enemy. But because it may
lightly so fall out, that in beating off the enemies weapon (the enemy
happily pretending to do the like) the weapons be entangled fast together.
Therefore, as soon as it is perceived that they be grappled fast, standing
sure, and firmly on his feet, he shall increase a pace toward the enemy,
lifting up aloft the enemies weapon, together with his own by force of the
said intangling, and then with the heel, or the blunt end of the Holberd shall
strike the enemy in the breast, (for which consideration it should not dislike
me, if for that purpose, there be fastened in the said blunt end, a strong and
sharp pike of iron) and as soon as he has stricken with the said blunt end,
(because, by means of the said lifting up, the weapons shall be now vnhooked)
and retyring that pace which he had before increased, without removing of his
hands, he shall deliver a strong edge blow, which then is very commodious.

And it is to be understood, that this edge blow being delivered in this manner,
is so strong, that it is apt to cut the enemies sword, if it be opposed in his
ward. Only that which is to be regarded in the delivering of this blow, is,
that he be nimble, and of stout courage, not doubting that he shall be strooken
again, because he is to go so near his enemy, for besides, that he is in
such case, that he may easily ward any blow, the enemy finds no way, to
strike, except he perform it in two times, to wit, by retyring his pace and
Holberd, and then by delivering a thrust.

That this way of striking is good, after the tying, and intangling of the
weapons, it may be hereby understood, that as a man indeuoreth to untie, and
vnloosen the weapons, either by retyring himself, either by carrying them on
the one side, to the intent to strike, he may then go forth of the straight
line, by going to one of the both sides, or else lose one time, by retyring
himself, under which two inconveniences, either he must needs be hurt, or else
defending himself, tie fast the weapons again. But these inconveniences
happen not in the foresaid manner of striking.

Farther, a man may strike after an other way to wit, as soon as by the
intangling of the weapons they are lifted up, to the intent to vnhooke, and
untie them, he must change his hands, and deliver an edge blow, either a
thwart, either on high, either a low, for it is commodious any way, so that he
change his hands and retire a pace. But this is not so commodious in the other
way, because he may not strike but only downwards. But in this manner of
changing hands, he may easily strike the enemy in that place, where he
perceaueth him to be most discovered, be it above or beneath.

Of the defense of the heel, or blunt end of the Holberd.
FOr the defense of the abouesaid two blows, it is requisite as I have
already said, that a man stand with the contrary foot before, to that, of
the enemies. And as the enemy (after the fastening of the weapons) endeuoreth
to lift them up, (being well awares thereof) he ought to recover his Holberd by
the increase of a pace, and strike with the heel at the enemies thigh or
belly, and then changing his hands, he shall deliver an edge blow, without
any other retyring of him self, or moving of his hands, The which blow shall
lightly speed, being nimbly delivered. And when it speedeth not, yet, it
will safely ward the edge blow, which the enemy shall give. And this may
suffice for as much as concerns the blows of the Holberd in single combat,
wherein there is any difficulty to be found, the which, a man must seek to
avoid by all means, especially endeuouryng by all possible ways to deliver
thrustes, without tying or intangling of his weapon. But although the enemies
weapon, may not be tied to any prescript law or order, (for he also uses, all
the policy he may to avoid danger) yet these blows with their fastnings are
laid down, because I presuppose, that who so is skillful to strike,
notwithstanding these difficulties, will be much more aduentrous, in striking
when he shall find little, or nothing to hinder him, As for example, when in
fight he meets with a weapon of the Staff, of the self same, or of greater
length, but yet, void of hooks or forkes: For seeing his own weapon, is only
hable to hook, and drive outward the enemies weapon, he may safely deliver
an edge blow, with the increase of a pace, being sure, that he may not be
stricken again, but only with a thrust, which the enemy may not deliver, but
of force, must either retire his staff, either his feet, under which time, an
edge blow may be delivered without danger.

Of the hurt and ward of the Iauelyn.
THe self same ward, shall be framed with the Iauelyn, as with the Holberd. And
because, of necessity, the weapons will be entangled, I say, the very same
thrusts shall be given therewith, as are delivered with the Holberd. But because
the edge of the Iauelyn is weak, and the pacing which is made when the weapons
are fastened, is only profitable for the giving of the edge blow: Therefore in
handling of the Iaueling, this intangling or fastening, is by all means possible
to be avoided. But when a man is to strike his enemy, let him first prove, to
beat off his Iauelyn, and then to force on a thrust, in this manner.

Finding the enemies Iauelyn to be within, (by within, I understand, when the
Iauelyn is between the enemies arms, or against them) then he must force it
outward, and drive a thrust with his own Iauelyn, at the length of the staff
(without moving of his feet) at the enemies face. Finding it without, he ought
to beat it backwards, and increasing a pace, to launch out the Iauelyn at the
enemies face, at the length of the staff and arm, immediately retyring his
pace, and hand, and afterward settle himself in the same low ward.

Of the defense of the thrustes of the Iauelyn.
FOr him that would defend himself from those two thrusts, and strike under
them, it is necessary to call to remembrance the most subtle consideration
of times, without knowledge whereof, there is no man that may safely bear
himself under any weapon: Coming therefore to the said consideration, I
say, that if the enemy would beat of the Iauelyn, (his own Iauelyn being
either within, either without) of force he must enlarge and widen it from out
the straight line, if he would as aforesaid forciblie beat off the other
Iauelyn. Therefore at what time soever a man sees the enemies Iauelyn wide of
the straight line, then, and in the same time (in the which it comes
purposing to beat off) he must nimbly deliver a thrust. And in like manner,
finding himself, either within, either without, and the enemies Iauelyn
something wide of the straight line, then before it come into the said line
again, he shall with the increase of a pace deliver a thrust, at the length of
the hinder arm, and then retyring his said pace, settle himself at his ward
again.

Of the Partisan.
IF a any would handle the Partisan in single combat, they shall not strike
with the edge, because the time is too long, and they may easily be stricken
under the same. Therefore practizing the thrust, they shall use the self same
offense and defense, which I have showed in the Iauelyn, to the which I refer
them.

Of the Pike
AS among all other weapons, which are worn by the side, the single sword is
the most honorable, as being such a one which is left capable of deceit of any
other: So among the weapons of the Staff, the Pike is the most plain, most
honorable, and most noble weapon of all the rest.

Therefore among renowned knights and great Lords this weapon is highly
esteemed, because it is as well void of deceit, as also, for that in well
handling thereof, there is required great strength of body, accompanied with
great valor and deep judgment: for there is required in the use thereof a
most subtle and delicate knowledge and consideration of times, and motions,
and a ready resolution to strike. These qualities may not happen or be
resident in any persons, but in such as are strong of arms and courageous of
stomach. Neither may they procure to get any other advantage in the handling
thereof, then to be more quick and resolute both in judgment and hand than
their enemy is. Therefore seeing every man may hereby know what is necessary
for him so to handle it, as he may obtain victory thereby: let him resolve
himself either to give it over quite, or else to handle it as he ought, and is
required.

The manner how to handle the Pyke.
THis renowned weapon has been of diverse diversely handled, in single combat:
(for the manner of using it in the wars, makes not at this present for my
purpose.) Therefore it shall not be amiss, if (speaking of the manner of his
use in these our days) I declare also mine opinion concerning the same. There
have been some (who greatly regarding ease and little pain) would have the
Pike to be borne in the middle. Other some, more strong of arm, but weaker of
heart, (to the end they might be the farther off, from hurt) accustomed to
bear it at the beginning near the heel or blunt end thereof: which two ways
in my judgment are to be refused, the one being too dangerous (I mean the
bearing of it in the middle) the other too difficult (I mean, the bearing it at
the blunt end,) because a man is not able to stand long at his ward, neither
to defend himself strongly, nor offend safely, considering, much of his force
is taken away, by susteining and bearing it at the said end. So that, when a
forcible blow comes he has not sufficient power to beat it off. And
forasmuch as the Pike is a long straight line, which has his motion in the
head or beginning thereof, which motion be it never so small, near the hand,
is yet very great at the point, it is requisite, if he would strike just and
straight, (when he so holds it at the end) that he be greatly practiced, and
have great strength whereby he may be both skillful and able to bear it so
just and even, that the point thereof strik or hit there where the hand and eye
would have it. This is very hardly accomplished, as well because it is a thing
impossible to strike by the straight line, as also for that the arms being
weakened with the paize of the Pike, do shake and deliver it vnstedfastly.
Therefore, for the avoiding of these two inconveniences, the Pike must be born
within an arms length of the said heel or blunt end, in which place, it is
sufficiently distant from hurt, and it is not borne with much difficulty if
the hands be placed an arms length one from another of the which the hinder
hand must be steadfast, I mean, hold the Pike hard, and the forehand somewhat
loose: So that the Pike may shift thorough it to and fro.



For what cause the Pike makes greater passage with the point then any other
shorter weapon.
IT is most manifest, that the Pike makes greater passage with his point than
any other weapon: and the twohand sword, more then the ordinary sword: and
the sword more then the dagger. And among al weapons, this is generaly true,
that the longer the weapon is, the greater passage it makes with the point,
and the greater blow with the edge. Neither does this so chance, because the
weapon is more heavy, neither because there is applied more force unto it in
action, as most men suppose, but rather through a natural cause which is as
follows. If there be two circles, the one greater then the other, and are
moved by one manner of motion, the greater shall be more swift then the less:
for being greater in circumference and turning round, in the same time that the
less turns it must needs be, that it goes more swiftly. So it comes to
pass, that one selfsame hand may deliver a greater blow with the two hand
sword than with a single sword, and with a long sword, then one that is
shorter, and with that, then with the dagger: And with a Bill, a greater blow,
then with the two hand sword, and so likewise in all other weapons. Wherefore
it is most clear, that of edgeblowes that makes the greater stroke, which is
delivered with the longer weapon. It remains now to be considered, how this
falls out in the blows of the point. I say therefore, the blows of the
point are also circuler, so that the Pike being very long, makes the greater
circle, and by consequence the greater blow of the point or the greater
thrust. That the blows of the point are circuler, may be showed by this
reason. The arm (being as a straight line, and fixed fast in one part, as for
example in the shoulder, and mouable in the other, as in the hand, standing I
say, fixed as a straight line, and the one end moving from the other) shall
always move circulerly: So that the arm cannot otherwise move, except when it
is bowed, and would then make it self straight again, the which motion also
is doubtful, whether it be straight yea or no. Therefore imagining that on the
mouable part of this arm, or straight line, there be also another thwart
line, to wit, a Pike, a sword, or any other weapon, then the arm moving,
carries also, circulerly with it, the said thwart line: which line, by how
much, the longer it is, by so much it makes the greater circle, as may be
seen in this figure.



Whereby, it is manifest, that the Pike, the longer it is, it frames the
greater circle, and consequently, is more swifte, and therefore makes the
greater passage. The like is to be understood of all other weapons, which the
longer they are being moved by the arm, cause the greater edgeblow, and
greater passage with the point.

Of the wards of the Pike.
IN mine opinion, if a man would either strike, or defend with the Pike, he may
not otherwise use it, then by framing of two wards, in one of which, he shall
strike the body from the middle upwards, and this I will term the low ward:
the other shall strike the body from the middle downwards, and shall be called
the high ward. Neither shall they be so termed for any other cause, then for
that it is very necessary for him that strikes, first to beat off the
enemies Pike, and then to deliver his own. But yet it should breed great
inconvenience, and there would be two much time spent if finding it good and
comodious to strike in the low ward, he would first beat off the enemies
weapon, and then shift from the low to the high ward. For that cause I will
frame the high ward, which shall be, when one bears his arms high, and the
point of the Pike low. And the low ward is, when the arms are low, and the
point of the Pike high. There is another ward which would be framed as a mean
between these two, and that is, when the Pike is borne directly toward the
enemy. And it falls out that it is most sure and long, when it is opposed
against any of the other two aforesaid, because then a man is in case both to
beat off the weapon and to enter therewithal with great advantage. But putting
the case, the enemy do likewise directly oppose himself against this ward,
then the Pikes may not beat off one another, but both parties are like to be
invested and run through at one instant, without any defense or warding
thereof.

So that this straight ward may not be used except it be against one of the two
aforsaid. And when the enemy stands in any of the said two, then a man must
resolutly bring his weapon into the said straight ward, for as he gets
thereby the greater advantage both of length and time, so he may very easily
beat off the enemies Pike.

Of the manner how to strike in the said wards.
WHen the enemy is in the low ward, a man ought always to stand either at the
high or straight ward. And contrarily, in the low or straight ward, when the
enemy is in the high ward. And must endeavor as forciblie and as nimbly as he
may, first of all, to beat off the enemies Pike, whether it be within or
without, but yet in such sort, that he depart not much from the straight line,
and be thereby constrained, to spend much time in returning thither again, And
as soon as he has beaten off the enemies weapon, to thrust* bearing his body
contrary to his arms, to the end, he may be the more covered from the
thrustes, and deliver his own thrusts with the more force, always regarding
in the high ward, to thrust downwards, and in the low ward, upwards, and in
the straight ward, in the middle: for this manner of thrusting, is very
commodious, and consumes little time.

Of the defense of the wards.
THe hurts of these wards, are defended in the self same manner, as those of
the Iauelyne are, to which Chapter, (having there reasoned sufficiently) I
refer you, to the intent I may not repeat one thing often.

And it is to be considered, that there is greater regard to be had of the
times in managing this weapon then in any other, because it is not furnished
with any forkes, or other defenses which may help a man, but all hope of
victory consists in the judgment of the times, and in dexterity of
delivery.

I will not therefore at this present stand to declare any more of the true
knowledge of the weapon, then that, which only appertains to be spoken in
this work, but will hereafter at my more leisure, handle it more at large, at
what time, it shall be known, that men (giving over all other false and vain
kind of skirmishing) ought to settle them selves in this, by means whereof,
their judgments are perfected, and they more insured under their weapons, and
so by consequence are made more bold and hardy. And forasmuch as all this
ought to be verified in deeds, and not in words, it shall be every man's part,
that will exercise himself in this Art, first diligently to learn the
principles, and afterward by exercise of the weapon to attain to the most
subtle and delicate knowledge and consideration of the times, without which (as
I have said else where) it is not possible to profit therein. For although there
be happily some, who (being strong of arm, and nimble in delivering falses,
either right, reuersed, or straight) have bin in our time accounted for tall
men, yet for all that, those who are skillful in this true Art, ought not to
give credit unto it, because they know assuredly that not right or reuersed
edge blows, get the masterie, but rather the thrusts of the point, neither the
bestowing of them every way, but with advantage and in due time. Neither ought
a man to strike, thereby to be stricken again, (which is the part and point,
rather of a brute beast, then of a reasonable man) but to strime and remain
without danger. All which things by this true Art are easily learned.

FINIS.
THE Second Part intreatinge of Deceites and Falsinges of Blows and Thrustes.
Being come to the end of the true Art, and having declared all that which
seemed convenient and profitable for the attaynement of true judgment in the
handling of the weapon and of the entire knowledge of al adua^tages, by the
which as well al disaduantages are known: It shall be good that I entreat of
Deceit or Falsing, as well to perform my promise, as also to satisfy those who
are greatly delighted to skirmish, not with pretense to hurt or over come but
rather for their exercise and pastime:

In which it is a brave and gallant thing and worthy of commendations to be
skillful in the apt managing of the body, feet and hands, in moving nimbly
sometimes with the hand, sometimes with the elbow, and sometimes with the
shoulder, in retiring, in increasing, in lifting the body high, in bearing it
low in one instant: in brief, delivering swiftly blows as well of the edge as
of the point, both right and reuersed, nothing regarding either time, advantage
or measure, bestowing them at randone every way.

But diverse men being blinded in their own conceits, do in these actions
certainly believe that they are either more nimble, either more wary and
discreet then their adversary is: Of which their folish opinion they are all
beastly proud and arrogant:

And because it has many times happened them, either with a false thrust, or
edge blow, to hurt or abuse the enemy, they become lofty, and presume
thereon as though their blows were not to be warded. But yet for the most part
it falls out, that by a plain simple swad having only a good stomach and
stout courage, they are chopped in with a thrust, and so miserably slain.

For avoiding of this abuse, the best remedy is, that they exercise themselves
in delivering these falses only in sport, and (as I have before said) for
their practice and pastime: Resolving themselves for a truth, that when they
are to deal with any enemy, and when it is upon danger of their lives, they
must then suppose the enemy to be equal to themselves as well in knoledge as in
strength, and accustom themselves to strik in as little time as is possible,
and that always being well warded. And as for these Falses or Slips, they must
use them for their exercise and pastimes sake only, and not presume upon
them, except it be against such persons, who are either much more slow, either
know not the true principels of this Art. For Disceit or Falsing is no other
thing, then a blow or thrust deuered, not to the intent to hurt or hitt home,
but to cause the enemy to discover himself in some part, by means whereof a
man may safely hurt him in the same part. And look how many blows or
thrusts there may be given, so many falses or deceits may be used, and a
great many more, which shall be declared in their proper place: The defense
likewise whereof shall in few words be last of all laid open unto you.

Deceits or Falsings of the single Sword, or single Rapier
AS I take not Victory to be the end and scope of falsing, but rather
nimblenes of body and dexterity in play: So, casting aside the consideration
how a man is either covered or discovered, and how he has more or less
advantage) I say that there may be framed at the single sword so many wards,
as there be ways how to move the arm hand and foot.

Therefore in falsinge there may be framed the high, low, and broad ward,
with the right foot behind and before: a man may bear his sword witht the
point backewardes and forwards: he may bear his right hand on the left sid,
with his swords point back wards: he may stand at the low ward with the point
backewardes and forwards, bending toward the ground. And standing in all
these ways, he may false a thrust above, and force it home beneath: and
contrary from beneth above, he may false it without and deliver it within, or
contrariwise.

And according to the said manner of thrusting he may deliver edge-blowes,
right, reuersed, high and low, as in that case shall most advantage him.
Farther he may false an edgeblow, and deliver it home: as for example, to false
a right blow on high, and deliver home a right and reuerse blow, high or
low. In like sortthe reuerse is falsed, by delivering right or reuerse blows,
high or low.

But it is to be considered, that when he bears his sword with his point
backewardes, he false no other than the edgeblow, for then thrusts are
discommodius. And because men do much use at this weapon, to beat off the
point of the sword with their hands: therefore he must in that case for his
greater redines and advantage, suffer his sword to swaie to that side, whether
the enemy beats it, joining to that motion as much force as he may,
performing therein a full circuler blow, and delivering it at the enemy.

And this blow is most ready, and so much the rather, it is possible to be
performed, by how much the enemy thinks not, that the sword will pass in
full circle that way, for the enemy being somewhat disapoynted, by beating off
the sword, after which beating, he is also to deliver his thrust, he cannot so
speedely spend both those times but that he shall be first stroke^ with the edge
of the sword, which he had before so beaten off.

General aduertisementes concerning the defenses.
BEcause it chances commonly, that in managing of the hands, men bear no
great regard, either to time or advantage, but do endeavor themselves after
diverse and sundry ways and means to encounter the enemies sword: therefore in
these cases, it is very profitable to know how to strike, and what may be
done in shortest time.

The enemies sword is encountered always either above, either in the middle,
either beneath: and in all these ways a man finds himself to stand either
above, either beneth, either within, either without. And it fales out always
that men find themselves underneath with the sword at the hanging ward, when
they are to ward high edgeblowes or thrusts; and this way is most commonly
used: The manner whereof is, when the hand is lifted up to defend the sword
being thwar ted, and the point turned downwards: when one finds himself so
placed, he ought not to recover his sword from underneath, and then to deliver
an edge-blowe, for that were to long, but rather to strike nimbly that part of
the enemy underneath, which is not warded, so that he shall do no other then
turn his hand and deliver an edge-blow at the legs which surely speedeth.

But if he find himself in defense either of the reuerse or thrust, to bear
his sword aloft and without, and not hanging, in this the safest thing is, to
increase a pace, and to seasyn upon the enemies hand or arm.

The self same he ought to do, finding himself in the middle, without and
underneath: But if he find himself within, he cannot by any means make any
seasure, because he shall be then in great peril to inuest himself on the
point of the enemies sword.

Therefore to avoid the said point or thrust, he must turn his fist and
deliver an edge-blow at the face, and withdraw himself by voiding of his foot
toward the broad ward. And if he find himself beneath, and have encountered
the enemies edgeblow, either with the edge, or with the false or back of the
sword, being beneath: then without any more ado, he ought to cut the legs,
and void himself from the enemies thrust. And let this be taken for a general
rule: the body must be borne as far of from the enemy as it may. And blows
always are to be delivered on that part which is found to be most near, be
the stroke great or little. And each man is to be advertised that when he
finds the enemies weapon underneath at the hanging ward, he may safely make a
seizure: but it would be done nimbly and with good courage, because he does
then increase toward his enemy in the straight line, that is to say,
increase on pace, and therewithal take holdfast of the enemies sword, nere the
hiltes thereof, yea though his hand were naked, and under his own sword
presently turning his hand outwardes, which of force wresteth the sword out of
the enemies hand: neither ought he to fear to make feisure with his naked
hand, for it is in such a place, that if he should with his hand encounter a
blow, happily it would not cut because the weapon has thereverie small force.
All the hazard will be, if the enemy should draw back his sword, which
causes it to cut. For in such sort it will cut mightily: but he may not
give leisure or time to the enemy to draw back, but as soon as the seizure
is made, he must also turn his hand outward: in which case, the enemy has
no force at all.

These manner of strikings ought and may be practiced at all other weapons.
Therefore this rule ought generally to be observed, and that is, to bear the
body different from the enimes sword, and to strike little or much, in as small
time as is possible.

And if one would in delivering of a great edge-blowe, use small motion and
spend little time he ought as soon as he has stricken, to draw or slide his
sword, thereby causing it to cute: for otherwise an edge-blowe is to no
purpose, although it be very forcibly delivered, especialy when it lights on
any soft or limber thing: but being drawn, it does every way cute greatly.

Of sword and dagger, or Rapier and dagger.
ALL the wards which are laid down for the single sword, may likewise be
given for the sword and dagger. And there is greater reason why they should be
termed wards in the handling of this, than of the single sword, because albeit
the sword is borne unorderly, and with such disadvantage, that it wardeth in a
manner no part of the body, yet there is a dagger which continually stands
at his defense, in which case, it is not convenient that a man lift up both his
arms and leave his body open to the enemy: for it is neither agreeable to
true, neither to false art considering that in each of them the endeavor is to
overcome. And this manner of lifting up the arms, is as if a man would of
purpose be overcome: Therefore, when in this deceitful and false art, one is
to use two weapons, he must take heed that he bear the one continually at his
defense, and to handle the other every way to molest the enemy: sometime
framing one ward, sometimes an other: and in each of them to false, that is, to
feign a thrust, and deliver a thrust, to false a thrust, and give an
edge-blowe: and otherwise also, to false an edge-blowe, and to deliver an
edge-blowe. And in all these ways to remember, that the blow be continually
different from the false: That is, if the thrust be falsed above to drive it
home below: If within, yet to strike it without, and falsing an edgeblowe
above, to bestow it beneath: or falsing a right blow, to strike with the
reuerse: or sometimes with a right blow, but yet differing from the other. And
after an edgeblowe on high, to deliver a reuerse below. In fine, to make all
such mixture of blows, as may bear all these contrarieties following, to wit,
the point, the edge, high, low, right, reuersed, within, without. But, I see
not how one may practice any deceit with the dagger, the which is not openly
dangerous. As for example, to widen it and discover some part of the body to
the enemy, thereby provoking him to move, and then warding, to strike him,
being so disapointed: but in my opinion, these sorts of falses of discovering
the body, ought not to be used: For it behooves a man, first, safely to defend
himself, and then to offend the enemy, the which he cannot do, in the
practice of the said falses, if he chance to deal with an enemy that is
courageous and skillful. But this manner of falsing next following, is to be
practiced last of all other, and as it were in desperate cases. And it is,
either to feign, as though he would forcibly fling his dagger at the enemies
face, (from the which false, he shall doubtless procure the enemy to ward
himself, either by lifting up his arms, or by retyring himself, or by moving
toward one side or other, in which travail and time, a man that is very
wary and nimble, may safely hurt him:) or else in steed of falsing a blow, to
fling the dagger in deed at the enemies face. In which chance or occasion, it
is necessary that he have the skill how to stick the dagger with the point.
But yet howsoever it chance, the coming of the dagger in such sort, does so
greatly trouble and disorder the enemy, that if a man step in nimbly, he may
safely hurt him.

These deceits and falses, of the sword and dagger, may be warded according as
a man finds it most commodious either with the sword, or else with the dagger,
not regarding at all (as in true art) to defend the left side with the dagger,
and the right sid with the sword: For in this false art men consider not
either of advantage, time, or measure, but always their manner is (as soon as
they have found the enemies sword) to strike by the most short way, be it
either with the edge, or point, notwithstanding the blow be not forcible, but
only touch weakly and scarslv: for in play, so it touch any way, it is
accounted for victory.

Concerning taking holdfast, or seizing the enemies sword, I commend not in any
case, that seizure be made with the left hand, by casting a way of the dagger
as else where I have seen it practiced: but rather that it be done keeping the
sword and dagger fast in hand. And although this seem impossible, yet every
one that is nimble and strong of arm, may safely do it. And this seizure is
used as well under an edgeblowe, as under a thrust in manner following.

When the edgeblowe or thrust comes above, it must be incountred with the
sword without, on the third or fourth part of the enemies sword, and with the
dagger borne within, on the first or second part thereof having thus suddenly
taken the enemies sword in the middle, to turn forciblie the enemies sword
outwardes with the dagger, keeping the sword steadfast, and as straight toward
the enemy as is possible by means whereof it may the more easily be turned.
And there is no doubt but the enemies sword may be wrong out of his hand, and
look how much nearer the point it is taken, so much the more easelie it is
turned or wrested outward, because it makes the greater circle, and the
enemy has but small force to resist that motion.

Of Sword and Cloak, or Rapier and Cloak.
FOR to disceyue the enemy with the cloak, it is necessary to know how many
ways it may serve the turn, and to be skillful how to fould it orderly about
the arm, and how to take advantage by the largenes thereof: and farther to
understand how to defend, and how to offend and hinder the enemy therewith,
because it fales not out always, that men fight with their cloak wrapped
about the arm, and the sword in hand, Therefore it is the part of a wise man,
to know also how to handle the cloak after any other manner.

Wherefore one may get the advantage of the cloak, both when it is about his
body, and when it is folded about his arm: The cloak being about the arm in
this manner. When it chances any man to bicker with his enemy, with whom he
is at point to join, but yet happily wears about him at that instant no
kind of weapon, whereas his enemy is weaponed, and threatens him, then by
taking both sides of the cloak as near the collar as is possible, he may draw
it over his own head, and throw it at his enemies face, who then being in
angled and blinded there with, may either be thrown down, or disfurnished of
his weapon very easily by him that is nimble, especially if he have to deal
against one that is slow. A man may after another manner take the advantage of
the cloak which the enemy wears, by taking with one hand both sides
thereof, near the collar: which sides being strongly holden, cause the cloak
to be a ginne or snare about the enimes neck, the which ginne being violently
haled, and plucked with one hand, he may so forciblie strike him with the
other on the face or visage, that he will go near hand to break his neck.

There be many other ways whereby one may prevail with the cloak, to the
greatest part whereof, men of mean judgment may easily attain unto.
Therefore when one has his cloak on his arm, and sword in his hand, the
advantage that he gets thereby, besides the warding of blows, for that has
been declared in the true art is, that he may molest his enemy by falsing to
fling his cloak, and then to flinge it in deed. But to false the flingyng of
the clok is very dangerous, because it may not be done but in long time. And
the very flinging of the cloak, is as it were a preparation to get the
victory, and is in a manner rather true art then deceit, considering it is don
by the straight or some other short line: neither for any other cause is this
the rather here laid down, in deceit, then before in true art, then for
that when one ouercometh by these means, he seems not to conquer manfully,
because he strikes the enemy before blinded with the cloak. wherefore when
one minds to flinge his cloak, he may either do it from and with his arm,
or else with his sword: and in so doing it is necessary, that he have not the
cloak too much wrapped about his arm: I say, not above twice, neither to
hold it straight or fast with his hand, that thereby he may be the better able
when occasion serves to fling it the more easelie. If therefore he would fling
it with his arm, and have it go with such fury, and make such effect as is
required, he must of force join to the flinging thereof the increase of a
pace, on that side where the cloak is, but first of all he must encounter,
either find, either so ensure the enemies sword, that by the means of the
increase of that pace it may do no hurt.

And it is requisite in every occasion, that he find himself to stand
without: and when either an edgeblow or a thrust comes, be it above or in the
middle, as soon as he has warded it with his sword, he shall increase a pace
and fling his cloak, how soever it be folded, either from the collar, either
from any other part, or else to hale it off from his shoulder, although it be
on his shoulder: and in this order it is easelie thrown, and is thereby the
more widned in such sort, that the enemy is the more entangled and snared
therewith.

Concerning the flinging of the cloak with the sword, I say, it may be
thrown either with the point, either with the edge: with the point when one
stands at the low ward with the right foot behind, and the cloak before:
In which case the cloak would be well and thick doubled and placed on the
arm, but not wrapped. And in steed of driving a thrust with the point which
shall be hidden behind the cloak, he shall take the cloak on the point of the
sword, and with the increase of a pace, force it at the enemies face. And in
this manner the cloak is so forcib lie, and so covertly delivered and flinged,
that the enemy is neither a ware of it, neither can avoyde it, but of force it
lights on his face, by means whereof, he may be stricken at pleasure in any
part of the body.

The cloak may be flong or thrown with the edge of the sword, when one
stands at the low ward, with the point of the sword turned backewardes, one
the left side and the cloak upon it, folded at large upon the arm up to the
elbowe: but not fast wrapped about it, and whilst he falseth a reuerse, he may
take the cloak on the edge of the sword and fling it toward the enemy, and
then strike him with such a blow as shall be then most fit for his advantage
deliver.

Many other deceites there might be declared of the cloak, as well of flinging
as of falsing it: but because I think these to be sufficient for an example to
frame many other by, I make an end.

Of Sword and buckler, square Target and round Target.
BEing of opinion that as touching deceit, there is but one consideration to
be had of all these three weapons, and for because all the difference which may
be between them is laid down and declared in the true art, in the
consideration of the form of each ofthem: Therefore I am willing rather to
restrain my self, then to endeavor to fill the leaf with the idle
repetition of one thing twice.

All these three weapons ought to be borne in the fist the arm stretched
outforwardes and this is evidently seen in the square Target and buckler: the
round Target also, because by reason of his greatness and weight, it may not be
holden in the only fist, and forward, in which kind of holding, it would
ward much more is borne on the arm, being stretched forth with the fist
forwards, which is in manner all one, o the self same. Therefore one may
false as much with the one as with the other, considering there is no other
false used with them then to discover and frame diverse wards, bering no respect
to any advantage. And yet there is this difference between them that with the
round Target, one may easily ward both edgeblowes and thrustes, and with the
square Target, better than with any other, he may ward edgeblowes, because it
is of square form: and the edge of the sword may easily be retained with the
straight side thereof, which is not so easily done with the buckler: for over
and besides the warding of thrustes, the buckler is not so sure of itself, but
requires aid of the sword. Edge-blowes also when they come a thwart (for in
that case, they encounter the circumference thereof: the which if it chance,
the sword not to encounter on the diameter, or half, in which place the sword
is only stayed, but does encounter it, either beneath, either above the said
diameter (may easelie slip and strike either the head or thighs: therefore
let euetie man take heed and remember, that in striking at the buckler, either
with the point or edge of the sword, he deliver it crossing or a thwarte.

As concerning the falses and deceites, which may be used in the handling of
these weapons, as at the single sword, they are infinite, so at these weapons
they are much more, if the number of infinite may be exceded. For besides, that
with the sword one may false a thrust, an edgeblowe, on high, a low, within
without, and frame diverse other vnorderlie wards, There remains one deceit
or false properly belonging unto these, which is, to bear the bukler, squar
Target, or round Target, wide from the body, and therewithal to discover
himself, to the end the enemy may be hindered, and lose time in striking,
being therewithal sure and nimble to defend himself and offend the enemy. And
this he may practice in every ward, but more easelie with the square Target
than with the other two, because it is big and large enough, and may easelie
encounter and find the enemies when it comes striking: but this happens not
in the round Target, because his form is circuler, neither in the buckler,
because, besides his roundnes, it is also small: by means of which two things,
blows are very hardly encountered, except a man be very much exercised in the
handling thereof. And because there are two weapons, the one of offense, and
the other of defense: it is to be considered, that when by means of a false
thrust or edgblowe, the enemies round Target, square Target or buckler, is
only bound to his ward, and his sword remains free and at liberty, one
resolve not himself to strike immediately after the falced thrust, for then he
may very easelie be hurt by the enemies sword. Therefore let him remember for
the most part, to false such thrustes, against the which, besides the weapon
of defense, the sword be also bound to his ward, or else to false edgeblowes
from the knee downwards: for seeing the round target, or any of the other two,
may not be used in that place, of force the sword must be there placed at his
defense, which as soon as it is found, and thereby ensured that it may do no
hurt, a man may then step forwards, and deliver such a blow as he best may
without danger.

An advertisement concerning the defenses of the false of the round Target.
Every time that one uses to false with round Target, square Target, and
buckler, or as I may better say, with the sword accompanied with them, he
falseth either an edge-blowe, either a thrust, either leaves some part of the
body before discovered. Against all the falces of the edge, which come from
the knee upwards, the round Target or any of the rest, must be oppressed, and
then suddenly under them a thrust be delivered, against that part which is
most disarmed. But if blows come from the knee downwardes, they of force must
be encountered with the sword, and always with the false, or back edge
thereof, whether that the blow be right or reuersed: and therewithal the
enemies leg must be cut with the edge prepared without moving either the
feet or body. And this manner of striking is so short that it safely
spedeth. Moreover, all thrusts and other edgeblowes, as well high as low may,
naie rather ought to be warded, by accompaning the target or other weapon of
defense with the sword, whose point would be bent toward the enemy, and
as soon as the enemies sword is encountered, if it be done with the false edge
of the sword, there is no other to be done, then to cut his face or legs.

But if the sword be encountered with the right edge then if he would strik with
the edge, he must offorce first turn his hand and so cute. And this manner of
striking and defending, does properly belong unto the round Target, square
Target and buckler, and all other ways are but vain and to small purpose: for
to encounter first and then to strike, causes a man to find himself either
within the enemies Target or sword, by which means he may easelie strike,
before either the sword or Target may ward again.

But if any man ask why this kind of blow carries small force, and is but
weak? I answer, true it is, the blow is but weak, if it were delivered with
an axe or a hatchet, which as they say, have but short edges, and makes but
one kind of blow, but if it be delivered with a good sword in the foresaid
manner, because it bears a long edge, it does commodiously cut, as soon as
the edge has found the enemies sword, and especially on those parts of the
body which are fleshly and full of sinnowes. Therefore speaking of deceit or
falsing, a man must always with the sword and round Target and such like, go
and encounter the enemies blows, being accompanied to gether. And as soon as
he has found the enemies sword, he shall within it, cute either the face or
the legs, without any farthar recovery of his sword, to the intent to deliver
either thrustes, or greater edgeblowes: for if one would both defend and
strike togeither, this is the most short way that is.

But when the enemy discovers some part of his body, thereby provoking his
adversary to strike, and then would beat off the blow and strike withal: in
this case, either a man must not strike if he perceue not that his sword is
more near the enemy, then his own Target is to the enemies sword, or else if
he strik and be further off, he must recover his sword and void the enemies
blow, striking comodiously either above either some where else. And it is a very
easy matter to lose much time, for the Target and such like are heavy, And if
these motions meet with no object or steye, they pass beyond their strength.
But if it so happen or chance, as I have before said, that a man finds
himself more near to hurt the enemy, then the enemy is ready to defend
himself, then he must not false a blow first, and then recover his sword, but
strik and drive it home at the first, as resolutlie, and as nimbly as he may
possibly: and this manner of striking pertains rather to true art then to
deceit or falsing.

Of the falses of the two Swords: or Rapiers.
THESE kind of weapons have so great liberty of striking or warding, and are
so entermedled the one with the other, as no other sort of weapon is, which I
may compare with these. There may be framed an infinite company of wards with
these weapons, and all of them sure, except two, which are framed and borne
without, and are these as follows.

To bear both swords with their points backward: for this manner of warding, is
as if one would of purpose cause himself to be slain: or else to bear both
aloft, which a man may hardly sustain, considering the paizes of the swords
are naturally heavy and tend downewardes, so that the arms are much cumbred
thereby. Therefore from these two which are framed without, shall be laid down,
all those which may be found and may be framed in the handling of these
weapons: as for example, high wards, low, wide, altered, diminished, and al
those wards which are mixed, as to frame with one sword the high ward, with
the other the broad ward, and to frame the low and broad ward, the high and
low ward, two low wards, and two broad wards: but yet these last two are
as painful as the two high wards, and therefore shall not be used. Moreover,
a man may bear one sword with the point forwards, and the other backewards,
and he may further, very easily find out and practice diverse other ways, if
he consider in how many ways a man may move his hands his arms, his feet,
and his whole person: for each of these motions are sufficient of themselves,
to alter the ward. In all these wards, he may with either hand and sword,
practice to false against the enemy, sometimes by fayning, sometimes by
discovery. And this is properly belonginge to these weapons, to wit, to false
with one, and to strike home, either with the self same, or with the other
weapon: and likewise discover with the one, and ward with the self same, or
with the other, the which never yet to this day was or might be done with any
other weapon. For in the handling of other weapons, that which falceth, does in
like manner strike home, so that of force, there are spent two times: for which
consideration men hold opinion, that falsing is occasion both of great hurt,
and also of loss of time. But yet this happens not in these weapons, which
forasmuch as they are two, and are of equal power both in striking and
defending, may be handled both after one fashion. And presupposing always that
one is as skilful to handle the one aswelas the other, he may discharge at
self same time two thrustes, two edgeblowes, both right and reuersed.

But if he would exercise himself only in sport and play, he shall then
continually use to strike his enemy with one, and defend his person with the
other. Therefore when one deals against an enemy that has two swords, one
of the which may always increase a pace, and strike either with a thrust, or
with the edge, from that sword he must take heed to ward himeselfe, for it is
very forcible, and always brings great danger and peril with it: The
other sword which was before, makes no increase of pace and therefore cannot
strike more then the defense and strength of the arm will bear, and that is
weak to strike, but yet very strong to defend: and the self same accidents
and qualities, which are found to be in the enemy, are incident also to our
selves. Wherefore when one finds that he stands with his right foot before,
be it in any ward whatsoever, he may false with the forsword and strik home
with the same, or else he may false with his hinder sword, and strike with the
self same: or else after a third way, to wite, to false with the one, and hit
home with the other: And this kind of false, does more properly belong to the
two swords then any other, but yet he must take heed and veriewell remember
that whilst he falceth with the one, and would also strike home with the same,
that he bear the other directly opposite against the enemy. For whilst the
enemy is bound to ward the false, and homeblowe of the one sword, he may come
in with the other and strike, if he find any place either discovered or easy
to enter: So that bearing this rule continually in remembrance, which is in
the fight of two swords, to bear always the one directly against the enemy,
to the intent to hinder him, that he resolve not himself to enter, he shall
endeavor to false, sometimes with the one, and sometimes with the other sword,
some times a thrust, some times an edgeblowe, and then to drive it home, either
with the same sword that falceth, or else with the other. But in the practice,
and doing of all this, it is required that he be of deep judgment, knowing
presently upon the false, what part of the body the enemy discovers,
increasing thither, and inuesting the enemy with that sword which is most nigh
to that part, and with the which he may most safely strike.

And it is to be considered, that it is a very strong and short way of
striking, to false with the fore sword either a thrust or an edgeblowe, and to
false them not once or twice, but diverse times, now alofte, now beneath, some
times with a thrust, some times with an edgeblowe, to the intent, to blind and
occupy the enemies both swords, and at the last when fit occasion serves, to
strike it home with the hinder sword: but yet always with the increase of a
pace. The falce which may be practiced with the hinder sword, is un profitable
being made without the motion of a pace, for it is so short that it is to no
purpose. Therefore it cannot busy the enemies swords in such manner, that it
may force him either to discover or disorder his body. From whence it may be
gathered, that after this false of the hinder sword, it is no sure play to
strike either with theselfe same hinder sword, or else with the fore sword;
because the enemy was neither in any part discovered or troubled. The best
thing therefore that may be don, if one would false with the hindersword, is, to
drive either a thrust or an edgeblow, resolutelie striking with the increase of
a pace, and as the enemy moves to defend him self, to strike him with the
same sword, in some place that is discovered: For he cannot strike with the
other sword for that by means of the increase of the hinder sword, that sword
which was before, remains now behind, So that it may not strike, except it
increase a pace, and to increase again, were to spend much time. Therefore
when one endeuoreth with the increase of a pace to force his sword within, he
shall assaie to strike it home, with the self same sword because as I have
before said, to strike with the other were to long. Wherefore I will lay down
this for a rule, in the handling of these weapons, that if a man false with the
foresword, he may also strik home with the same, or else with the other, so
that he increase a pace. And if he false with the hinder sword, he shall
presently, and resolutely force the blow home with the same sword, but yet with
the increase of a pace: but if he do not fully deliver it, he shall again
procure immediately to strike home with the self same sword, either with a
thrust, or edgeblowe, be it high or low, as at that instant shall be most
commodius to serve the turn.

An advertisement concerning the defenses of the two Swords, or Rapiers.
IN sport or play one may stand every way against the enemy, to wit, if
the enemy be on high, to settle himself at his ward, low or broad. But it
is more gallant to beehold and more commodius indeed to place himself against
thenimy in the very self same manner as he finds him, with the self same
foot before, and in the very same site that he is in, either high or low. For
standing in such manner, the enemy may hardly endeavor with his false, to
troble or busy both swords. And moreover it must be considered, that the fore
sword is that which wardeth both falses, and resolute blows, the which it
does very easily perform: For if it be borne aloft, then by the bending of
the point down, it defends that part of the body, to the which it is turned.
Remembering therefore these rules, which are, to stand every way as the enemy
does, and to ward his falses with the fore-sworde, I say, where any falses or
blows come: then as soon as he has warded them with the fore-sword, he shall
increase a slope pace, and with the hinder sword deliver either a thrust at
some discovered place, either a right blow with the edge at the legs, or else
(which is better) shall fetch a reuerse, either athwart the face, or else
athwart the arms, and this blow does most easily speed: for the enemies
fore-sworde is occupied, and his hinder sword cannot come to oppose it self
against this blow: neither may it so easily strike, because (by increase of
the foresaid slope pace) the body is moved out of the straight line, so that
the enemy may not so commodiously strike with his hinder sword, but that he
shall be first stricken on the face or on the arms.

Wherefore, let every man resolve himself, (as soon as he has encountered the
enemies sword with his own foresworde) that he step in and strike with his
hinder sword. Neither, let him stand in fear of the enemies hinder sword:
for either it cannot hurt because the body is voyded (as I have said,) or
else, if it may, it must presently provide to stand to his defense, and thereto
is so bound, that it may do no manner of hurt.

Of the two hand sword
FOr the deceites and falses of the two hand sword, there is no more regard
to be taken in the handling thereof single, that is, one to one, then there is,
when it is used among many: only this end is to be purposed, to wit, to
move and handle with all nimblenesse and dexterity, as well the edge as the
point, fetching those great circuler and unruly compassinges, therewith as his
form, greatness, and manner of holding requires.

Nether ought a man so much to regard to fetch a small or great compass, or to
strike more with the point, then with the edg, but must beliue only that the
victory consists in the nimble and active guiding thereof any manner of
way. Therefore there may be framed many wards, of all the which, being a
thing superfluous to reason of, I will handle only six of them, which are
most commodius and usual: whereof the first may be called the high ward, the
second the broad ward, the third, the low ward, from which there springs
all other three, toward the other side, making sixein all.

The high ward is framed by bearing the sword and arms lifted up on high and
wide from the body, with the point of sword turned toward that part, as that
arm is, whose hand is placed by the cross, that is to say, if the right hand
shall be at the cross, and the right foot befoore, to bear also the sword,
with his point toward that side.

There is an other hie ward opposite to this and that is, without moving the
feet at all to turn the point toward the other side, that is, toward the
left side and to cross the arms. And it is to be noted, that in this high
ward, be it on what side it will, the sword is to be borne with the point
turned downewardes.

The second is the broad ward, and must be framed with the arms widened from
the body, not high but straight. And from this springs and is framed an other
broad ward, turned toward the other side by crossing of the arms.

The third is the low ward, and in this the sword would be borne with the
point some what vppwardes. And this ward has his opposite or contrary, by
turning the sword on the other side, and crossing the arms. There may be
framed many other wards: As for example, to bear the sword on high, with the
point backewardes, to the intent to drive a down right, or cleaving
edge-blowe: or else to bear it low with the point backwardes, to the intent
to drive it from beneath upwards. But in these wards falses are to small
purpose: And if there be any one of them worth the using, it should be the
false of an edgeblowe, the which at the two hand sword is not to be used at
all, because there is much time lost considering that immediately after the
false, he must strike home with an edgeblow. For it is not commodius at the two
hand sword, to false an edgeblowe, and deliver home a thrust, because the
weight or swing of the sword in delivering an edge-blowe, transporteth the arms
beyond their strength, so that they may very difficultlie withhold the blow to
such purpose, that they may be able as it were in that instant to deliver a
thrust. Therefore the false that should be used at the two hand sword, ought
always to be framed with a thrust, and then an edgeblow right or reuersed to
be delivered, or else to false a high thrust, and deliver it beneath or else
where. But yet if one would needs false an edgeblowe, let him do it with the
false edge of the sword, then turning it in full circle, to deliver home the
edgeblowe, and in striking always to increase a pace. But when this false of
the back or false edge is practiced, the arms being crossed, and that
presently after the false, one would deliver home a reuerse, then he must
increase a left pace, And when he finds in himself any other ward, his hands
not being crossed, then if he would step forwards to strike he must increase a
pace with the right foot. And if in any of these wards he would false a
thrust, which is the best that may be used at the two hand sword, he must
observe the very same notes and rules concerning increasing of the pace.
Further the thrust is falsed, and the edge-blowe delivered home at the two hand
sword for no other cause or consideration, then for that the said edgeblowe is
far more forcible then the thrust: For the two hand sword is long, by means
whereof, in the delivery of the edgeblow, it makes a great circle. And
moreover, it is so weighty that very little and small strength, makes and
forces the blow to go with great violence. But for as much as the striking
with the edge is very dangerous considering it spends much time, and
especially in the great compassing of the two hand sword, under which time
wary and active persons may with sword or other wepon give a thrust, Therefore
for the avoiding of this danger, he must before he determine with himself to
strik with the edg, first drive on a thrust, rather resolut then falsed, and as
far forwards as both arms will stretch. In doing of the which, he shall force
the enemy to retire so much, that he may easily thereupon deliver his
edgeblowe with the increase of a pace, nothing douting that the enemy will
strike home first with a thrust. Therefore when one stands at the high ward,
on either side he must false a thrust, and increase a pace delivering there
withal such an edgeblowe, as shall be most commodius to serve his turn, either
right or reuersed. And further may practice the like in the broad and low
wards, in either of the which, it is more easy to false the said thrust, then
in the other.

And it is to be considered, when the edgeblow after the falced thrust, is by a
slope voided, that he suffer not his arms and sword by reason of the weight or
swinge thereof, to be so far transported beyond his strength, that the sword
light either on the ground or that he be forced thereby to discover all that
part of his body which is before. Therefore the best remedy is, as soon as
he shall perceive that he has delivered his blow in vain, that he suffer his
sword to go (not with a full thwarte circle, and so about his head) until the
point be backwardes beneath in such sort, that the circle or compass direct
him to the high ward, in the which he may presently resolve himself and
return either to strike again, or else defend him self on either side, so
handlinghis weapon, as shall in that case be most for his advantage.

The Defenses of the two Hand sword.
THe defenses of the two hand sword require a stout heart, for that the
susteining of such great blows, by reason whereof, a man considers not the
advantage of time, being the most principal thing of al, causes him to fly or
retire back holding for a certainty that every blow given therewith, is not
possible to be warded. Therefore when he deals against an enemy, who uses
likewise the two hand sword, he shall appose himself in the low ward: And when
a false thrust comes, if it come so fare forwards that it may join home, he
ought first to beat it off, and then to forse a thrust at the enemies face, or
deliver an edgeblow downwards at the arms but not lifting up the sword in a
compass. But for that these falced thrustes for the most part are far off,
and come not to the body, being used only to fere the enemy, and cause him
to retire, that thereby one may have the more time to deliver an edge-blow with
the increase of a pace (which pace causes the blow to go with greater
violence:) nd farther may discern and judge, by nearenesse of the enemy,
whether the blow will hit home yea or no, for it is easelie known how much
the arms may be stretched forth: Therefore when this false thrust does not
join or hit home, he ought not to endeavor to beat it off, but to expect when
his enemy delivers his edgeblowe, and then to increase a pace, and strike
him with a thrust.

But if it happen him to deal against a two hand sword, with a single sword
or dagger, assuring him self that the two hand sword cannot strike but with a
thrust or an edgeblow, for the defense of the thrust he may beat it off and
retire himself, but if it be an edgeblowe, then, as soon as the two hand
sword is lifted up, in the same time he must increase forwards and deliver a
thrust, or else if he have no time to strike he must encounter and bear the
blow in the first part of the sword, which is near the hiltes, taking hold
thereof with one hand, and striking with the other. And this he may perform,
if he be nimble and active, because the twohand sword carries but small force in
that place.

Of the Partesan, Bil, Iauelin and Holberde.
DEceites or falses, are all more manifest and evident in these, then in short
weapons which are handled only with one hand because both the arms are moved
more slowly then one alone. And the reason thereof is, that considering they
are more long, they therefore frame in their motions a greater compass: and
this is perceived more in edgeblowes then in thrustes. Therefore the best false
that may be practiced in the handling of these weapons, is the false of the
thrust, and that the edgeblow ought never or seldom to be used, except great
necessity constrain, as shall be declared. Wherefore in these weapons, I will
frame four wards, three of them with the point forwards, of which three, the
first is, the point of the sword being borne low, and the hinder arm being
lifted up.

The second is, the point high, the right arm being behind and borne allow.

The third, the point equal and the arms equal: And in every on of these a
man must false without, and drive it home within, or false within and deliver
it without, or false aloft and strike beneth, and so contrariewise. But as he
falseth within or without, he ought to remember this note, which is, he must
always to the intent he may go the better covered and warded, compass the
hinderfoot to that part, to the which the weapon shall be directed to strike
home after a false.

The fourth ward which is much used, and especially with the bill, shall be to
bear the weapon with the bluntende or heel forwards, the edge being lifted
up on high. And this is much used, to the intent to expect the enemies blows,
and that thereby a man may be better able to ward them, either with the heel
or middle of the staff, and then to enter and strik delivering an edgblo with
thencreas of a pace, the which manner of striking is most ready and nimble. The
false, which may be used in this ward, is when he has warded thenimies blo
with the heel of his wepon, and the^ would increase forwards to deliver an
edgeblowe, if the enemy shall lift up or advance his weapon to defend
himself from the said blow, then he shall give over to deliver that blow, by
retiring his weapon, and give a thrust underneath, with the increase of a pace.

And this kind of blow is very likely to work his effect without danger, if
it be aptly and nimbly used.

Of the Pike.
THere may be used some deceit also in the Pike, although it be a weapon void
of any crooked forkes, and is much more apt to show great valor then deceit.
And for as much as it has no other then a point to offend, and length to
defend, for that cause there may be used no other deceit therewith, then with
the point: and considering true art, is not the mark that is shot at in this
place: I say, it may be borne after diverse fashions, as shall be most for a
man's advantage, as either at the end, either in the middle, either more
backewardes, either more forwards, as shall be thought most commodius to the
bearer. Likewise, one may frame three wards therewith, to wit, the first
straight, with the arms equal: the second with the point low, the third, the
point high, falsing in each of them a thrust, either within, either without,
either high, either low, and then immediately forcing it on resolutely, but
contrary to the false, and carrying alwais the hinder foot toward that side,
to the which the Pike is directed to strike. In handling of the pike, a man
must always diligently consider, so to work that the hinder hand be that
which may rule, drive on, draw back and govern the Pike, and that the fore
hand serve to no other purpose then to help to sustain it.

The defenses of the deceites of the weapons of the Staff.
I Have not as yet laid down the defense of the Bil, and the rest, because
they are all one with this of the Pike. And I mind to handle them briefly
all togeither, considering that in these a man may not either render false for
false, or take holdfast of the weapon. And although it might be done, I
commend it not, because it is a very difficult matter to extort a weapon that
is holden fast with both hands. That therefore which one may do to defend
himself, is to have recourse unto true Art, remembering so to ward the enemies
falce, as if it were a true blow, and to strike before the enemy spend an
other time, in delivering his resolute thrust, And to take heed in delivery
of his blows, that he be nimble and carry his body and arms so aptly and
orderly applied, that the weapon wherewith he strikes may cover it wholly.

And here I make an end of disceit, in practicing of the which, there is this
consideration to be had, so, always to false, that if the enemy provide not
to ward, it may reach and hit home, because being delivered in such order, it
loses but little time.

The end of the false Art.
How a man by private practice may obtain strength of body thereby
IF nature had bestowed strength upon men (as many believe) in such sort as
she has given sight, hearing and other senses, which are such in us, that they
may not by our endeavor either be increased, ordiminished, it should be no
less superfluous, then ridiculus to teach how strength should be obtained,
then it were if one should say, he would instruct a man how to hear and see
better then he does already by nature. Neither albeit he that becomes a
Painter or a Musition sees the proportions much better then he did before, or
by hearing lerneth the harmony and conformity of voices which he knew not,
ought it therefore besaide, that he sees or hereth more then he did? For that
proceeds not of better hearing or seeing, but of seeing and hearing with more
reason. But in strength it does not so come to pass: For it is manifestly
seen, that a man of ripe age and strength, cannot lift up a weight to day
which he can do on the morrow, or some other time. But contrary, if a man
prove with the self same sight on the morroe or some other time to see a thing
which yesterday he saw not in the same distance, he shall but trouble himself
in vain, and be in danger rather to see less then more, as it commonly
happens to students and other such, who do much exercise their sight.
Therefore there is no doubt at all but that man's strength may be increased by
reasonable exersise, And so likewise by too much rest it may be diminished: the
which if it were not manifest, yet it might be proved by infinite examples. You
shall see Gentlemen, Knights and others, to be most strong and nimble, in
running or leaping, or in vawting, or in turning on Horseback, and yet are
not able by a great deal to bear so great a burden as a Cuntrie man or
Porter: But contrary in running and leaping, the Porter and Cuntrieman are
most slow and heavy, neither know they how to vawte upon their horse without
a ladder. And this proceeds of no other cause, then for that every man is not
exercised in that which is most esteemed: So that if in the managing of these
weapons, a man would get strength, it shall be convenient for him to exercise
himself in such sort as shall be declared.

For the obtaining of this strength and actiuitie, three things ought to be
considered, to wit, the arms, the feet and the legs, in each of which it
is requisite that every one be greatly exercised, considering that to know
well how to manage the arms, and yet to be ignorant in the motion of the
feet, wanting skill how to go forwards and retire backewardes, causes men
oftentimes to overthrow themselves.

And on the other side, when one is exercised in the governing of his feet,
but is ignorant in the timely motion of his arms, it falls out that he
goes forwards in time, but yet wanting skill how to move his arms, he does
not only not oftend the enemy, but also many times remains hurt and
oftended himself. The body also by great reason ought to be borne and
sustained upon his foundation. For when it boweth either too much backewardes
or forwards, either on the on or other side, straight way the government of
the arms and legs are frustrate and the body, will or nill, remains
stricken. Therefore I will declare the manner first how to exercise the Arms,
secondliethe Feet, thirdly the Body, Feet and Arms, ioynly:

Of the exercise and strength of the arms.
LET a man be never so strong and lusty, yet he shall deliver a blow more
slow and with less force th^n an other shall who is less strong, but more
exercised: and without doubt he shall so werie his arms, hands and body,
that he cannot long endure to labor in any such business. And there has been
many, who by reason of such sudden wearines, have suddenly dispaired of
themselves, giving over the exercise of the wepon, as not appertaining unto
them. Wherein they deceive themselves, for such wearines is vanquished by
exercise, by means whereof it is not long, but that the body feet and arms
are so strenghned that heavy things seem light, and that they are able to
handle very nimbly any kind of weapon, and in brief overcome all kind of
difficulty and hardness. Therefore when one would exercise his arms, to the
intent to get strength, he must endeavor continually to overcome wearines,
resolving himself in his judgment, that pains is not caused, through
debilitie of nature, but rather hangs about him, because he has not accustomed
to exercise his members thereunto.

There are two things to be considered in this exercise, to wit the hand that
moves, and the thing that is moved, which two things being orderly laid
down, I hope I shall obtain as much as I desire. As touching the hand and
arm, according as I have already said, it was divided in the treatise of the
true Art, in three parts, that is to say, into the wrist, the elbowe, and
the shoulder, In every of the which it is requisite, that it move most
swiftly and strongly, regarding always in his motion the quality of the
weapon that is borne in the hand, the which may be infinite, and therefore I
will leave them and speak only of the single sword, because it bears a
certain proportion and agreement unto all the rest.

The sword as each man knows, strikes either with the point or with the edge.
To strike edgewise, it is required that a man accustom himself to strike
edgewise as well right as reuersed with some cudgel or other thing apt for the
purpose, First practicing to fetch the compass of the shoulder, which is the
strongest, and yet the slowest edgeblowe that may be given: Next and presently
after, the compass of the elbowe, then that of the wrist, which is more priest
and ready then any of the rest. After certain days that he has exercised
these three kinds of compassing edgeblows on after an other as swiftly as he
may possible And when he feleth in him self that he has as it were unloosed
all those three knittings or joints of the arm, and can strike and deliver
strongly from two of those joints, to wit the Elbowe and the Wrist, he shall
then let the Shoulder joint stand, and accustom to strike strongly and
swiftly with those two of the Elbow and the Wrist, yet at the lengh and in the
end of all shall only in a manner practice that of the VVrist, when he
perceives his hand-wrist to be well strengthened, delivering this blow of the
Wrist, twice or thrice, sometimes right, sometims reuersed, once right, and
once reuersed, two reuerses and one right, and likewise, two right and one
reuersed, to the end that the hand take not a custom to deliver a right
blow immediately after a reuerse. For sometimes it is commodius, and does much
advantage a man to deliver two right, and two reuersed, or else after two
right, one reuersed: and these blows, ought to be exercised, as well with one
hand as with the other, standing steadfast in one reasonable pace, practicing
them now alofte, now beneath, now in the middle. As touching the weight or
heft, which is borne in the hand, be it sword or other weapon, I commend not
their opinion any way, who will for the strengthening of a man's arm that he
handle first a heavy weapon, because being first used to them, afterward,
ordinary weapons will seem the lighter unto him, but I think rather the
contrary, to wite, that first to the end, he do not over burden and choke
his strength, he handle a very light sword, and such a one, that he may most
nimbly move. For the end of this art is not to lift up or bear great
burdens, but to move swiftelie. And there is no doubt but he vanquisheth which
is most nimbly, and this nimblenesse is not obtained by handling of great
heftes or waightes, but by often moving.

But yet after that he has sometime travailed with a light weapon, then it is
necessary according as he feels himself to increase in strength of arm,
that he take an other in hand, that is something heavier, and such a one as
will put him to a little more pain, but yet not so much, that his swiftnes in
motion be hindered thereby. And as his strength increases, to increase likewise
the weight by little and little. So will it not be long, but that he shall be able
to manage very nimbly any heavy sword. The blow of the point or the
thrust, cannot be handled without the consideration of the feet and body,
because the strong delivering of a thrust, consists in the apt and timely
motion of the arms feet and body: For the exercise of which, it is
necessary that he know how to place them in every of the three wards, to
the end, that from the ward he may deliver strongly a thrust in as little
time as is possible. And therefore he shall take heed that in the low ward,
he make a reasonable pace, bearing his hand without his knee, forsing on the
thrust nimbly, and retiring his arm backward, and somewhat increasing his
forefoote more forwards, to the end the thrust may reach the farther: But if
he chance to increase the forefoot a little too much, so that the breadth
thereof be painful unto him, then for the avoiding of inconveniences, he shall
draw his hinderfoot so much after, as he did before increase with the
forefoote, And this thrust must be oftentimes ierked or sprung forth, to the
end to lengthen the arm, accustoming to drive it on without retyring of it
self, that by that means it may the more readily settle in the broad ward,
For that is framed (as it is well known) with the arm and foot widened
outward, but not lengthened toward the enemy. And in thrusting let him see,
that he deliver them as str ight as he can possibly, to the end, they may reach
out the longer.

At what time one would deliver a thruste, it is requisite that he move the
body and feet behind; so much in a compass, that both the shoulders, arm and
feet be under one self same straight line. Thus exercisinge him self he shall
nimbly deliver a very great and strong thrust. And this manner of thrusting
ought oftentimes to be practiced, accustoming the body and feet (as before)
to move in a compass: for this mocion is that which instructs one, how he
shall void his body. The thrust of the high ward is hardest of all other not
of it self, but because it seems that the high ward (especially with the
right foot before) is very painful. And because there are few who have the
skill to place themselves as they ought to deliver the thrust in as little time
as is possible. The first care therefore in this ward is, so to place himself,
that he stand steddily. And the syte thereof is in this manner, to wite: To
stand with the arm aloft, and as right over the body as is possible, to the
end he may force on the thrust without dravving back of the arm or loosing of
time. And vvhilest the arm is borne straight on high (to the end it may be
borne the more straight, and with less pains) the feet also would stand
close and united together, and that because, this ward is rather to strike
than to defend, and therefore it is necessary that it have his increase
prepared: so that when the thrust is discharged, he ought therevvithall to
increase the forefoote so much that it make a reasonable pace, and then to let
fall the hand down to the low ward, from the which if he would depart
again, and assend to the high ward, he must also retire his forefoot, near
unto the hinder foot, or else the hinderfoote to the forefoot, And in this
manner he shall practice to deliver his thrust oftentimes alvvaies placing
himself in this high ward with his feet united, discharging the thrust
with the increase of the fore foot. But when it seems tedious and painful to
frame this ward, then he must use, for the lengthninge of his arm, to fasten
his hand and take houldefast on some nooke or stafe, that stands out in a
wall, as high as he may liftvpp his arm, turning his hand as if he held a
svvord, for this shall help very much to strengthen his arm, and make his
body apt to stand at his ward. Now when he has applied this exercise,
for a reasonable time, so that he may perceive by himself that he is nimble
and active in delivering these blows and thrusts simply by themselves, then
he shall practice to compound them, that is to say, after a thrust to deliver
a right blow from the vvrist, then a reuerse, and after that an other thrust,
always remembering when he delivers a blow from the vvrist, after a thrust
to compass his hinderfoote, to the end, the blow may be the longer: And
when, after this right blow, he would discharge a reuerse, he must increase
a slope pace, that presently after it, he may by the increase of a straight
pace, forse on a strong thrust underneath. And so to exercise himself to
deliver many of those orderly blows togeither, but yet alvvaies with the
true motion of the feet and body, and with as great nimblenesse, and in as
short time as is possible, taking this always for a most sure and certain
rule, that he move the arms and feet, keeping his body firm and steadfast, so
that it go not beastly forward, (and especially the head being a member of so
great importance) but to keep alvvaies his body bovved rather backwards than
forvvard, neither to turn it but only in a compass to void blows and
thrustes.

More over, it shall not be amiss, after he has learned to strike, (to the
end to strengthen his arms) if he cause an other to force at him, either with
a cudgel, or some other heavy thing, both edgeblovves and thrustes, and that
he encounter and sustain them with a sword, and ward thrustes by avoiding
his body, and by increasing forvvardes. And likewise under edgeblovves,
either strike before they light, or else encounter them on their first parts,
with the increase of a pace, that thereby he may be the more ready to deliver
a thrust, and more easily sustain the blow. Farther, when he shall
perceive, that he has conveniently qualified and strengthened this instrument
of his body, it shall remain, that he only have recourse in his mind to the
five aduertisements, by the which a man obtains judgment. And that next, he
order and govern his motions according to the learning and meaning of those
rules. And afterward take advise of himself how to strike and defend,
knovving the advantage in every particular blow. And there is no doubt at all,
but by this order he shall attain to that perfection in this Art which he
desires.

FINIS.

