A SHORT AND easy introduction to Christian faith: Containing the sum of the
principles of Religion, necessary to be known of all before they presume to
receive the Sacrament of the Lords Supper: SET DOWN IN questions and answers,
and distinguished into Chapters.

By H. GRAIE.

AT LONDON Printed by Robert Waldegraue, and are to be sold at his shop in
Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Crane.

Anno. 1588.

PROVERBS. 3. 13. Blessed is the man that finds wisdom, and the man that
gets understanding.







TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Margaret countess of Cumberland, my very good lady, H.
G. wishes comfort and joy in the Holy ghost, with continuance and increase
of all spiritual graces and blessings for the susteining of faith in this
present world, and in the world to come eternal felicity in the kingdom of
heaven.
THe wise man in a most heavenly and divine proverb, as most wisely by his
extraordinary wisdom, so most truly by the instinct of the spirit, wherewith
he was inspired, in writing that book, has commended it to all posterity
that the fear Prou. 3. 7. Psa. 111. 10
of the Lord is the beginning of knowledge, the meditation whereof, and of such
like places of holy scripture no doubt (right H. and my very good La.) did
first work in your self, an earnest desire to know and fear God: and after,
that godly and zealous care which your Ho. carries toward your whole family
(whereof I my self upon certain experience can give testimony) that they
might be instructed and taught in the knowledge and fear of God. This zeal
and carefulnes though it be commendable in all, yet it is so much the more
commendable, as the person in whom it appears, is in hier and greater place,
and therefore they also unto whom the Lord has given honor and has exalted and
set them above other, are especially bound in regard of their places and the
goodness of god showed to them, to render thanks to the Lord, by showing
obedience to him, and having careful oversight of them which are under their
authority and government: the which the Lord having given you to see, and in
some good measure to desire to practice, and to make an open profession of the
zeal of gods glory, so that the same thereof is spread in most places of this
land (I hope to the sturring up of many by your good example and to the
propagation of the praise and honor of God) it stands more nearly upon you
to labor, to continue, and to go forward, and increase in that zealous and
godly profession of the sincerity and truth of religion, that God of his
goodness has more mercifully dealt with you, may be more glorified by you tha^
by others upon whom he has not bestowed like graces and blessings, and hereof
great numbers which only have by constant report hard of you, do assure
themselves and assist you with their faithful prayers. And I for mine own part
at this present (whom it has pleased the right Ho. my Lord, and your La. by
the providence of God to place over your family) as a testimony and witness of
your zeal and care of religion, which is better known to me then to others,
have caused this short Catechism and sum of religion to be published, which I
offer unto your honor as the greatest new years gift which my small power in
so sudden and short time could present you withal, hoping that it shall be
accepted in good part, not for the worthiness of it, but in consideration of
the occasion, the purpose, and the end your La. had in moving me to write it.
In the handling thereof, as your desire was, I have labored for brevity, and
by questions and answers have observed that method which is most easy and
plain. If by the merciful goodness of God (as my desire and prayer is) this
short and little treatise may redound to the benefit of your family in regard
of that end whereunto it especially aims; and if your Ho. unto other your
diverse and manifold tokens of your good acceptance of me continually since my
first coming into your house shall add this, to accept in good part my
endeavors and purpose, I shall think my self abundantly and fully rewarded,
and have just occasion offered to ascend praise and glory unto the Lord, whose
divine majesty from the bottom of my heart I most humbly beseech to grant unto
your honor continuance of health and welfare, and the use of all those his
gifts and benefits, which both concern the goods of this life, and especially
the atteining of life everlasting.

Your ladyships humble bounden in the Lord Jesus, H. Graye.

Of the Creation of al things, and fall of man. CHAP. 1.
Question. WHat think you of the frame of this world, and of all things
therein, have they not been for ever?


Answer. No.


Q How were they then first made?


A God who is without beginning, and only Gene. 1.
everlasting, in the beginning made all these things which you see.


Q What is God?


A God is a spirit, infinite, eternal, uncreated, John. 4. Iere. 23. 24 Apoc.
1. Gene. 1. Iere. 10. 23 Prou. 2. 30 31 Iam. 1. 17.
creator and governor of all things, without quality or quantity, without
shadow or change: who is in his essence or being infinitlie mighty, just,
merciful and good, and therefore made all things good, and rules all things
well.


Q Is there but one infinite and one God?


A No: but there be three persons in the Mat. 28. 19 John. 1. 17. 14 24. Pro.
8. 2 Matt. 3. 17. Ioh. 15. 26.
same Godhead, the father of himself alone, the son begotten of the father
before all beginning, the holy ghost proceeding from the father and the son.


Q Wherefore did God make the world and all creatures therein?


A To set forth his glory. Prou. 16.



Q Seeing God, who is only God and without corruption, made all things, how
comes it to pass, that evil is come, and the world and all creatures in it
are subject to corruption?


A Man for whom all things were especially Genesis 3.
made, by the suggestion of satan transgressing the commandment of god brought
Romans 1.
sin into the world, and by sin death entered upon all his posterity, who
had sinned in him, and moreover by him the creatures were Romans 8.
made subject to vanity and corruption.


Q Wherefore is the cause of sin and corruption imputed unto man.


A Because God having made man after Genesis 1.
his own image, and giving him free will and power to continue in that perfect
estate wherein he was created, he notwithstanding, abusing his free will and
power which he had to the committing of sin, is most justly to be accounted the
cause of all sin, and the exclusion of himself and al his posterity out of
paradise.


Q What call you the image of God?


A Perfect uprightness and integrity in Ephesians. 4. Gal. 2.
body and soul.


Q In what case does man stand now by means of Adam his fall?


A We are by nature bondslaues of sin and satan, Rom* 3. Ephesians. 2.
and the children of wrath and condemnation.


Of the restoring of man. CHAP. 2.
Q Does man remain still in that damnable estate whereunto Adam by his fall
brought him?


A God forbid.


Q How the^ is the case altered with man?


A God by his infinite wisdom, of his only free mercy and goodness has so
disposed, ordered and turned the fall of Adam to the good of his elect
children, that their estate after this Roman. 4.
life in the kingdom of heaven shall be a great deal more happy and blessed
than if they had lived in paradise.


Q By what means does the Lord work this?


A By fulfilling his promise in sending the Genesis. 3. Cor. 1. 15.
seed of the woman to conquer satan, sin and death, and to set us free from
them, and to purchase for us everlasting life in ye kindom of heaven.


Q Who is the seed of the woman?


A Christ Jesus perfect God and perfect man, God in that he is of like
substance, equal majesty, Philipp. 2.
eternity and power with his father. Man in that he is the seed of the woman,
and took the whole nature of man upon him.


Q Was it necessary that our savior and redeemer should be both God and man?


A Yea.


Q. Why so?


A If he had bin man alone, he could not have paid the ransom for sin, and
satisfied the infinite wrath of God, but should have been swalowed up of death,
because man was subject to death. And again, if he had bin God Romans 4.
alone, he could not have suffered death, therefore it was requisite, that he
should be both God and man, man, that he might die, God, that he might sustain
and uphold the manhood, Gal. 3.
to overcome and vanquish death.


Q But is it now true, that cursed is he that does not all things which are
written in the book of the law?


A Yes verily.


Q How the^ shall we be freed from this curse?


A By the death and obedience of Jesus Galat. 3.
Christ: he has by his death suffered the torments of hell for our sin, and by
his obedience performed the whole law for us.


Q But how does that profit us which Christ did in his own person?


A Christ is ours by the gift of God, and Roman. 8.
whatsoever Christ did, he did not for himself, but he that knew no sin
was made sin for us, that we might be the righteousness 2. Cor. 6.
of God by him.


Q By what means are we made partakers of Christ and his benefits? Gala. 3.
26. Ephesians. 1.



A Only by a true faith, whereby we receive Christ.


Q What is faith?


A It is an undoubted and certain persuasion of the love of GOD toward us in
Romans 8. 38 39. and 26, 11
Christ Jesus grounded upon the promises of God, made unto us in the gospel,
whereby Roman. 8.
we are assured, that our sins are remitted, and we by the spirit of god
working in our hearts are made the adopted children of God.


Of the trial of our selves whether we be the children of God, or no. CHAP. 3.
Q HOw shall we know that we have faith?


A By proouing our selves whether we 2. Cor. 13. 5
be in the faith, or whether Christ Jesus be in us or not.


Q How shall we prove our selves?


A By the working of the spirit in us, for Romans 8.
those which are the children of God, are led and governed by the spirit.


Q How shall we know that the spirit dwells in us, and that we have faith?


A By the effects and fruits of the spirit, Gala. 5. 21.
which are love, peace, long suffering, etc. and according to the rule of saint
James: show James 2.
me thy faith by thy works, and I will show he my faith by my works.


Q Are works then necessary to salvation?


A Yea but not as causes of our justification, but as effects and testimonies
of our faith, and the way which the Lord has prepared Ephesians. 2.
wherein we should walk and glorify him, til he bring us to his kingdom of
glory.


Q How is this faith begotten in us?


A The ordinary means is the word Roma. 10. Romans 1. 18. 1. Pet. 1. 23
preached.


Q Can not they then be saved which either have not the use of the word, or else
refuse it?


A God forbid that we should judge or condemn any, for the Lord can save
extraordinarily without means, and he does not call all at all times.


Q Is it no sin therefore to refuse the word?


A Yes it is a fearful and dangerous sin, refusing the word, and as much as
in us lies we debar our selves of our salvation.


Q What call you the word, the preaching whereof you make the instrument and
means to beget faith?


A Generally the whole scripture which is contained in that book commonly
called the Bible, but especially the gospel, wherein these causes are
comprehended whereupon our faith is grounded.


Q What is the special use of the preaching of the law?


A It is a forcible means to humble us by the threatenings of the same, and it
is a Galat. 3.
schoolemaister to prepare us, and make us fit to receive the gospel, and
Christ Jesus which is offered unto us by it.


Of the law. CHAP. 4.
Q HOw many things does this word of God generally taken teach us
principally?


A These four: first, obedience to the law of God: secondly, prayer, which is
a part of the worship and service of god: thirdly, faith in Christ: fourthlie,
the Sacraments which are seals and pledges of the doctrine of faith.


Q How do you distinguish these four things according to the usual and common
division of the word into the law and the gospel?


A The first two infer unto the law, and the last two unto the gospel.


Q How is the law divided?


A Into two tables: Exodus 31. 18. 34. 7.


Q What is contained in the first?


A Our duty which we owe unto God, and what service and worship we are to
perform unto him.


Q What is contained in the second?


A Our duty toward our neighbor, and how we ought to behave our selves toward
him so long as we live in this world.


Q How many commandments be there?


A Ten.


Q How many perteine to the first table?


A The first four.


Q How many to the second?


A The last six.


Q Rehearse the commandments.


A God spoke these words, and said: Thou shall have no other gods before me,
etc.


Q What is the end and fulfilling of all these commandments.


A Love: 1. Tim. 1. Gal. 5. Matthew. 22. Nom. 13. Mar. 12.


Q Is it possible for us to fulfill all these without breaking any one of them?


A No, though we do what we can, yet we Mat. 15. 19 Romans 17. 18. 19.
break them daily and hourelie in thought word and deed.


Q What punishment then is appointed for the breakers of these commandments?


A The curse of God which is eternal Deu. 17. 26 Mat. 25. 41
destruction both of body and soul.


Q How shall we then escape this punishment?


A Christ became accurssed for us to deliver Gala. 3.
us from the curse, and has nailed that handwriting which the Lord had
against us upon the cross, and has made a show and triumphed openly over
death, and over Coloss. 2.
the curse where unto we were subject.


Of prayer. CHAP. 5.
Q WHat do we owe unto the Lord for this work of our redemption and our
deliverance from the curse?


A Al honor, al praise, al glory, al thanksgiving.


Q How shall we give these to the Lord?


A By prayer which is unfeigned, and proceeds from a true and lively faith.


Q What thing is prayer?


A It is an humble lifting up of our hearts and souls unto the Lord, whereby
we either make request for things necessary concerning this life and the life
to come, or else give thanks unto God, for benefits and graces received.


Q How many things do you gather out of this description of prayer?


A I observe these three things: first, to whom we must pray: secondly, for
what we must pray: thirdly, the distinction or diversity of prayer.


Q To whom must we make our prayers?


A To God alone.


Q May we not pray to Angels or saints?


A No: for that is flat idolatry.


Q What reason have you to prove this?


A To give that to the creature which is proper and peculiar to God, is
manifest idolatry, Reave. 9.
but prayer is a part of ye service which Psalm. 11.
is dew only to the Lord, therefore to give it to the creature, it is idolatry.


Q Are not the angels ministering spirits for the use of man?


A Yes: but we have no commandment or warant to pray unto them, for we must
Psalm. 61. Romans 10.
call upon him in whom we must believe, but we must believe in God only and
therefore pray unto him alone and not to angels or saints.


Q For what cause we pray?


A For all things necessary both for this life and the life to come.


Q Must we pray for earthly and for spiritual things after the same manner?


A No: we must pray for earthly things with exception and condition, so far
forth as they shall stand with gods glory and our good, and salvation, and thus
we must pray for riches, for health, for prosperity, etc. but we may pray for
spiritual and heavenly things absolutely and without condition, as for faith,
sanctification, wisdom, and salvation, for these things are always joined
with the glory of God.


Q How is prayer distinguished?


A Into a petition and thanksgiving.


Q What is a petition?


A It is a suit and request which we make unto the Lord for such things as we
stand in need of.


Q What is thanksgiving?


A It is to acknowledge the Lord to be James. 1. 1. Cor. 4. 7.
the author and fountain of all goodness and that we receive al good things
from him.


Q For what must you give thanks?


A For all benefits both corporal and spiritual. Ephesians. 5. Ierre. 2.



Q What call you corporal benefits?


A All those which concern our bodies and the use of this life.


Q Which call you spiritual?


A Al those which concern the welfare of the soul and our eternal salvation,
as namely, our redemption and deliverance from death which we mentioned in ye
beginning of this section, and all other good graces and benefits which
concern life everlasting.


Q How must we pray unto God, or give thanks unto him?


A With the spirit of our minds, for god John 4.
is a spirit.


Q What manner of mind, or with what affection must we pray?


A In the affection well disposed unto prayer, these four things are required
first, Luke 18. 13
that we renounce our selves, and whatsoever is in us, and throw down our
selves before the throne of the majesty of God, acknowledging and confessing
our own sins and unworthiness: secondly, that we pray Iame. 1.
in faith: thirdly, that we have a feeling of ve. 6
our miseries, and of the wants and necessities for the which we pray, and that
we have an earnest desire to obtain them: fourthlie, that we come unto the
Lord with unfeigned Mar. 9. 24.
repentance and purpose of amendment of life, for the Lord promises no
blessing to any, but to such as are his children, and have Roman. 8.
a care to walk in his fear.


Q What form of prayer must we use?


A That especially which our Savior Christ himself has presented unto us in
the sixth of Matthew, and second of Luke.


Q May we not use an other form of prayer besides this?


A We may use an other form of words, but the matter of all our prayer must be
examined and limited according to this form, wherein in general terms is set
down by the wisest that ever was, nay wisdom it self, what things we must
pray for, both concerning this life and the life to come.


Q Repeat this form of prayer which we call the Lords prayer.


A Our father which art in heaven, etc.


Q Show me briefly the sum and the meaning of this prayer.


A This prayer consists on those two parts, first, a preface in these words,
Our father which art in heaven, then the prayer it self in the words
following: the preface teaches us two things, first, what GOD is in respect of
us, to wit, a loving father, who as a father tendreth his children, and will
not deny him any thing which he has need of: so the Lord is most ready and
willing to give unto us such things as are necessary for us if we ask them by
faith: secondly, in ye last words of this preface, to wit, which art in heaven,
we are taught what God is in respect of himself. The examination of the place
where the Lord is said to be (not that 1. King. 8. Acts 1. Esa. 16.
he is indeed contained in any place, or can be, because he is infinite) does
argue ye power, the majesty, the might of God whereby we are sure that the
Lord is able to grant us al our requests. This preface then does make much for
the strengthening of our faith, when we consider, that God is a father, and
therefore willing, and he dwells in heaven, and therefore is able to give us
every thing we ask. The prayer it consists upon certain petitions, and a
conclusion annexed to them: the petitions which are six in number be of two
sorts, the first three concern the glory of God, the last three our own
wants and necessities, the order of the first three lies thus: first we pray
for the glory of GOD which is the end of all things, that we may celebrate and
sanctify the name of God: in the second we pray for the means that we may do
this, that Christ would rule by his kingdom in our hearts, and by the working
of his spirit, thorough the ministry of the word, would be at down in us al
sin and wickedness, and raise us up to sanctification and holiness of life: in
the third, that we may have assurance that we perform both the former, we
pray that the will of god may willingly and readily be done of us, as the angels
do it in heaven. The order of ye three last lies thus, in the first we pray
for all things requisite and necessary for the maintenance and sustenance of
this life: in the two last we pray for spiritual things, and such as concern
life everlasting: in the fifth petition we pray for remission and pardon of our
sins through Christ Jesus, Apo. 20. 27 21. 17
without the which we cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven: in the last,
that the Lord would not give us over unto satan, or suffer us to be ouercommed
of temptations, but would deliver us from the devil, and all evil which might
hurt and endanger our faith, if the Lord should leave us and suffer them to rule
and tyrannize in us. The conclusion is For thine is the kingdom, etc. which is
added for the confirmation and strengthening of our faith, and contains three
arguments: the first the Lord is our king, for he will be mindful of us and
provide for his poor subjects: secondly, he has al power, and therefore he will
show it in helping and defending his church and granting his children their
requests: thirdly, to him apertaineth and belongs al glory, and therefore that
his children may glorify him he will give them such things as they shall stand
in need of, Amen, which is as much as so be it, is added for two causes: the
first is to show with what devotion or affection we must pray, that is, with an
ardent and earnest desire: secondly, with what assurance and confidence, to
wit, with full persuasion that the lord will grant our desires.


Q Do you say in this your explication of the lords prayer, that the three
first petitions concern Gods glory, and the three last our own necessities?


A Yea.


Q But do not all concern the glory of God which you have said to be the end
of al things?


A The first three concern only the glory of God, the last 3 do concern also
ye glory of God, but so that we also pray moreover, for those things which are
needful for us both for our souls and bodies, that we by them, and in them
we may glorify God.


Of faith. CHAP. 6.
Q WHat is the third principal thing which the word teaches us?


A The doctrine of faith in Christ Jesus.


Q Unto what part of the word do you refer this?


A Unto the gospel.


Q What is the gospel?


A It is the glad tidings of salvation, and that heavenly doctrine which
teaches us how to believe to obtain eternal life thorough Jesus Christ only.


Q Is there not a sum of the chief points of the Gospel collected and set
down shortly and briefly?


A Yes.


Q What call you it?


A The apostles creed.


Q Why is it so called?


A Because as some think it was made by the apostles, but rather because it
agrees with their doctrine and that belief which they preached in their time.


Q Rehearse the articles of the creed.


A I believe in God the father almighty, etc.


Q How is this creed divided?


A Into twelve articles.


Q How many things do these articles teach us principally?


A Four.


Q Which be they?


A First we are taught what to believe of God the father in the first article.
2. What to believe of God the son in the six next. 3 What to believe of God
the holy ghost in the eight article. 4. What to believe concerning the church
in the four last articles.


Q What do you believe of God the father?


A First I believe that he is my father in Esaias. 69. 6. Romans 58.
his son Jesus Christ. 2. That he is the founteine of all things, and the
maker and creator of them. Lastly, that he is almighty, Job. 31. 2.
and has power to do all things, and without his providence nothing can be
done by men, by angels, or by the devils in earth, heaven, or in hell.


Q What do you believe concerning the second person in trinity.


A I believe that he is Jesus, that is my savior and redeemer. 2. That he is
Christ, Matthew. 1. 1.
that is the anointed king, priest and prophet. 3. That he suffered the
torments of hell for Phil. 1.
me upon the cross, and truly, and not feinedlie, died for my sins, and rose
again from death for my justification. 4. That he is ascended Romans 25. Acts. 1.
up into heaven, and there shall remain till the latter day, and then he shall
come accompanied with the holy angels to judge ye world. Mat. 25. 32



Q What do you believe of the holy ghost?


A First that he is God. 1. Pet. 1. 2. Ephesians. 4. Acts. 5. 3. 4 Luke. 1. 15 John.
3. 5. 1. Cor. 5. 5. 28.
Secondly that he does sanctify me, and make me a new creature, and assure me
of my salvation.


Q What do you believe concerning the church?


A I believe that Christ has, and has had, and shall have till the end of the
world in all places, and amongst all sorts of men, his Act. 10. 34. Ephesians. 5. 34.
1. Cor. 12. 12. 13. 14. 1. Cor. 10. 2. Cor. 11. 28. Galat. 1. 2. Esa. 53. 4. 5
church, that is a company of elect and faithful people, which have a society
and fellowship amongst themselves, as members of one head whereby they
communicate all benefits both spiritual and temporal, to whom the Lord gives
remission and pardon of sins in this life, and in the world to come life
everlasting after that he has raised them up from ye dead. 1. Ioh. 2. 8. 1.
Cor. 15. 53. 54. 1. These. 4. 14 1. Cor. 15.



Q By what means do we apprehend and atteine to this which you have now
confessed.


A The ordinary way is the hearing and preaching of the word of God, whereby
the holy ghost does work faith in our hearts Gal. 1. 2. 3.
to apprehend and understand effectually these articles of salvation.


Of the sacraments. CHAP. 7.
Q Has the Lord appointed unto his church no other means to help and
strengthen faith by but his word?


A Yea, our savior Christ providing for our weakness and infirmities, has
given unto us outward and visible signs, which do represent, and as it were,
set before our eyes and senses, for ye confirmation of our faith, the truth,
and if I may so speak for more plainnes, the especial matter of this whereof
you have now made confession.


Q What call you these signs?


A Sacraments.


Q What is a sacrament?


A It is an outward and visible sign instituted and ordained of the Lord to
confirm the promises and covenants of God made to us in the gospel in the
hearts of the faithful. Genesis 17. 11



Q What do you learn out of this definition.


A These three things. First that it is a sign of another thing which is
signified. 2. That every sacrament must have his institution of the Lord. 3.
That it is a pledge or seal of the promise of salvation.


Q Why do you say this is a sign?


A Because it is a thing which the Lord sets before men's eyes, to signify a
thing which is not seen,


Q why must it be instituted of god only?


A He only must appoint the seal and the sign which gives the promise, but
God only makes the promise of salvation, and therefore he only has
authority to ordeine the sacrament or sign.


Q Why say you that it must be a pledge or seal of the promise of salvation.


A Because it is given us of the Lord for the confirmation of our faith, which
is grounded upon the promise of salvation.


Q Are all these things necessarily to be observed in every sacrament.


A Yea.


Q What account do you make of those five which the papists have added,
namely the sacraments of penance, absolution, confirmation, laieng on of
hands, extreme unction, and matrimony.


A That account which the word of God teaches me to make of them, that they
are no sacraments, because these three things which are necessarily required in
every sacrament, are not to be found in any of them.


Q How many sacraments do you make the^?


A Two.


Q Which be they?


A Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord. 1. Cor. 10.



Q What is Baptism?


A It is a ceremony instituted of Christ in Matthew. 18.
a visible sign of water to signify our remission of sins, and reconciliatio^
which we have with God by the blud of Jesus Christ which is shed for us.


Q what do you consider in this definition?


A These two things (which are also to be considered in the Supper of the Lord)
I observe for the true use of the sacrament. First what is the sign. Secondly
what is ye thing signified.


Q what is the sign in baptism?


A Water.


Q What is the thing signified?


A Remission and pardon of sins by the Act. 22. Mark. 14.
blood of Jesus Christ.


Q In every sacrament there must be a resemblance and proportion betwixt the
sign and thing signified, tell us therefore what it is in this sacrament of
Baptism?


A As the water does wash away the filthiness of the body, so our souls
being Ti. 3. 6. 5. 6. Ephe. 5. 20 1. Pe. 1. 1. 2. 1. John. 7.
sprinkled with the blood of Jesus Christ washed and purged from the
filthiness and pollution of sin.


Q Is there any difference betwixt water in baptism and other water?


A Not as concerning the substance, but they differ in the use: for common
water serves to wash the body, but water in Baptism is a Sacrament of the
washing of the soul,


Q Wherefore are we but once baptized since we are commanded oftentimes to
receive the supper?


A Because, as circumcision was to the Genesis 17
Jews, so baptism is to us an entrance and admission into the church of god,
and it is sufficient for us once to be admitted into gods family, and therefore
as they were but once circumcised, so we must be but once baptized: yet that
we may remain and continue in this family and church of god, it is necessary
that we be fed oftentimes, and therefore we must often receive the Sacrament
of the supper, as the Jews did also every Exodus 12.
year celebrate the passover.


Q What is this supper of the Lord which is the other sacrament?


A It is a ceremony instituted of our savior Christ a little before his death
in visible Mat. 25.
signs of bread and wine, to testify and represent unto us his passion and
bloudshedding, whereby he suffered the torments of hell for our sin.


Q What be the signs in this Sacrament?


A Bread and wine.


Q What is the thing signified?


A Our redemtion and deliverance from Phil. 8.
eternal death and hell by the suffering and bloudshedding of Jesus Christ
upon the cross.


Q What is the resembling and proportion betwixt the sign and the thing
signified?


A That as our bodies by the hand and mouth receiving these outward things of
bread and wine are thereby nourished indeed, so assuredly we apprehending by
faith the John. 6. 35. Mat. 26. 26 Romans 4. 23. 1. cor. 30. 2. cor. 5. 21
passion and bloudshedding of Jesus Christ, our souls are thereby nourished
and fed to eternal life, having our sins remitted, and Christ's death and
righteousness imputed to us.


Q What does the bread signify?


A The body of Christ. 1. cor. 11. 24



Q What does the wine signify?


A The blood of Christ. 1. Cor. 11. 25



Q Why has the Lord iustituted two signs in the supper, and but one in
baptism?


A As our bodies are not sustained by meat only, but also by drink, so the
Lord would assure us that we are not fed to halfs, as it were, but Christ he
is both meat and drink unto us.


Q Is the bread and wine in the Sacrament the same with other common bread and
wine?


A They are the same in substance and 1. Cor. 10. 16. 17. 18. 1. Cor. 11. 26.
Mat. 26. 28
nature, but the holy use whereunto they are applied, make them differ from
common bread and wine.


Q Is not the bread turned into the body of Christ, and the wine into the
blood of Christ?


A No.


Q But does not our savior Christ say, this is my body, when he gave the
bread, and this is my blood, when he gave the wine?


A Yea, but they are figurative speeches attributing the name of the thing
signified, unto ye thing signifieng, as also in the old sacraments.
Circumcision was called the covenant which was but a sign of the covenant,
Gene. 17. Exodus 12. 1. Cor. 10.
and the paschall lamb was called the passover, and the rock was called
Christ.


Q What is the reason why the sign is called by the name of the thing
signified?


A Because we should lift up our minds from these earthly and corporal things
unto the heavenly and spiritual things which are signified by them.

To what end do we receive this sacrament of the supper?


A For these three causes principally. Mal. 26.


First, for the redemtion and strengthening of our faith.

Secondly, for a testification of our obedience 1. Cor. 11. 26. Mat. 26.
and thankfulness unto God for the work of our redemption.

Thirdly, for increase of love and amity, 1. Cor. 10. 17. 1. Cor. 12. 13. 1.
Cor. 11. 33. Ephesians. 4. 5.
for there is always a communion of saints in the church of God, which
especially consists in this, that all the children of God are members of the
same body, and partakers of the same Savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ.


Q Seeing the body of Christ is in heaven, and we are on earth, how are we
partakers of it?


A Thorough a true and a lively faith John 3. 17.
which discendeth and takes hold of the mercies of GOD in the merits of
Christ Jesus.


Q That we may be worthy communicants of this sacrament, how must we prepare
our selves unto it?


A We first must try and examine our selves concerning the doctrine of a
sacrament whether we do rightly understand or conceive of it or no. Secondly
also concerning our manners and life, whether we be fit to receive it at the
time appointed.


Q How must we examine our selves concerning the doctrine*


A By entering into consideration of that which ye holy ghost has written and
set down of it, whether we do fully understand and know it, and whether our
hearts and consciences can willingly subscribe and yield unto it which is
taught to be the truth of it.


Q Is this examination of our selves concerning the doctrine necessary?


A Yea, otherwise how shall we know how to behave our selves in this holy
action, except we know what it is that we do, and for what end and purpose.


Q How must we examine our selves concerning our manners and life, whether we be
fit to receive this sacrament or no?


A By proving our selves whether we be 2. Cor. 13. 5. 1. Cor. 11. 28.
the members of Christ or no.


Q How shall we know this great secret and mystery.


A If we have faith and repentance.


Q How shall I decerne that I have faith?


A If in my heart I be assuredly persuaded Ephe. 1. 13 2. Cor. 1. 22. 5. 5.
Romans 8. 15. Ephe. 3. 12 1. John. 2. 1 Esaias. 53. 6. Ephesians. 17. 18
by the working of the spirit in me, that the punishment of my sin is fully
discharged in Christ, and that whatsoever he has done pertains not only
unto others but even to me.


Q How shall I know that I have true repentance?


A If I be inwardly and heartily sorrowful Mat. 26. 75 Iere. 4. 4. Joel. 2.
12. Romans 6. 45. 6. 7. Phil. 3. 13. 14
for my sins, and do most willingly confess them unto God, with full
deliberacion and purpose of amendment of life, and an earnest desire to
mortify and kill sin in me, and wholly to conform my self to too the will of
the Lord.


Q What if I find not these things in me, what counsel give you me?


A Not to presume to come to this table of the Lord, for he that eats and
drinks 1. cor. 11.
vnwoorthilie (that is, without faith and repentance, whilst he is a wicked
liver, a profane person, a blasphemer, etc. and has not repented him of his
sins, with full purpose to renounce them, and live always after in the fear
of God) he eats and drinks his own condemnation, not decerning the body of
Christ aright.


Q Is it a thing left to our choice and liberty whether we will come to the
supper or not?


A No, the holy ghost in forbidding men to come thither unworthily commands
al them which have discretion and judgment, to examine diligently, and
prepare themselves, that they may come worthily unto it: so that if we do
absent our selves, and neglect this preparation and making of our selves ready
to come unto it, let us fear least we become contemners of it, and so deprive
our selves of that great benefit which is offered unto us by it.



