LITTLE TIMOTHE his Lesson: Or A Summary relation of the Historical part of
holy Scripture, plainly and familiarly comprised in Meeter, for the help of
memory, and instruction of the ignorant in the Writings of God.

By E. G. Mr. in Arts, and practitioner in Physic for the Kings Hospital of
St. Bartholomew, in the City of Gloucester.

DEVT. 11. 19. You shall teach them your children, speaking of them, when thou
sit in thine house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie
down, and when thou risest up. COLOSS. 3. 16. Let the word of Christ dwell in
you plenteously, in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing your own selves in
Psalms and in Hymns, and spiritual Songs, etc. LONDON, Printed by William
Hall for Jonas Man, and are to be sold in Paternoster Row at the sign of the
Talbot. 1611.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL, and other the Officers of the Hospital of St. Bartholmew,
Mr. John Brown Mayor of the City of Gloucester, and President of the House: Mr.
Laurence Wilshire Alderman and Surueiour, Mr. John Thorn, Alderman and
Treasurer, Mr. Richard Smith, Sheriff and Surueiour, Mr. William Locksmith,
and Mr. John Moore, Almoners, Mr. John Bruster and Mr. Antony Robinson
Scrutaners, or Visiters of the poor.
BEing long since enioined by that Reverend Father and painful preacher, the
Lord Bishop that lately lived amongst us, to publish this little Pamphlet; I
have at last adventured it into the view of all. Many Critics it must make
account to meet with, and more curious Readers then courteous, in this so
literate and censorious age; wherein many Poems of the same argument are
already extant, but more of many other, and for due cadence of words and
poetical measure, far more excellent. Since then the acceptance hereof may
well seem doubtful, and the tenuity and nakedness of it, is so apparent as
justly shameth to look great learned men in face; I have thought meet and
most convenient to shadow it under your worships protection. Equity craves at
my hands no less: First, in respect of you, who being by place and Office
protectors of the poor, may justly challenge to patronize and support,
whatsoever poor and lame labors do creep out of the House. Secondly, in
regard of my self, who being much bounden to the body of this City, for the
love and favor I found in my free election, should much forget what I owe, if
I should not upon so just occasion, thankfully acknowledge what is due.
Thirdly, in respect of the poor people of the pl^ce, whose benefit and good,
charity does challenge, and particular relation require me by all just means
and fit opportunities to purchase and procure. All the good that may be done
them, must necessarily concern either their souls or their bodies. For the
body, as the miseries thereof are more sensible, so is your care commendable,
who at your ordinary and monthly Court, endeavor to increase their weekly
pay. For the soul, I would to God there were not some cause of complaint: and
seeing this present argument is spiritual and divine, give me leave in
presenting the same, to beg for them this heavenly benefit, that even the
souls of forty poor people, may by your due regard and provision appear to
be dear unto you, as their bodily estate is tendered, pitied, and provided
for. What their case is, I need not express: Saint John describes it at
full, and in few words, Revel. 3. 17. where he calls the Laodiceans,
wretched, miserable, poor, blind and naked: a dangerous state, and (which is
most to be lamented) they know it not. That it is to be succored and
relieved, I shall not need to use many arguments for proof or persuasion: I
will only remember you of the intention; first, of the Foundresse, and then of
the poor people. In the eye of the Foundresse both soul and body had their
due respect; and if she were so careful for the benefit of the body, as by a
Physician and Surgeon to provide for their griefs, and by means of
maintenance in some measure for life and lodging, to bring their gray heads in
peace unto the grave; it cannot once be imagined (without wrong unto the dead)
but that by the Ministers office and place appointed, a greater care was
intended of sending their souls with comfort to their Savior. And as touching
the poor people that come to be placed; it is known, to be the profession of
all, as to be maintained by the charity of the House; so, to end their days in
the service of God. Consider therefore I beseech you, that the sacrifice they
offer, is halt, blind and lame; that the days they consecrate, are their last
and worst; wherein they are neither fit to serve sin and the lusts thereof, nor
yet the Lord and his holy will; and seeing they profess a desire of the choice
of the better part, let them not lack help to direct them thereunto, that the
eyes of their understanding may be opened, the hand of their faith stro^gthned,
and their feet guided to make straight steps toward that narrow gate that
leads unto life. That this blessing may be upon them, and the danger of the
ditch avoided, Mat. 1 5. 14. instead of trash and riffe raffe Vrs^n Cat. (...)
Epist.
(rightly so valued by the same Reverend Father) let true wisdom dwell among
them, and a man of understanding be procured them, that so together with their
daily double praying they may have also often instruction, and plain teaching.
And the laborer (you know) is worthy of his hire; and the hire (you will say)
you know not where to have, so that herewithall comes all the difficulty.
Here also let me be bold to put you in mind (and to put it in Print, that it
may remain to put your successors in mind) that special care be had for
raising and conferring maintenance to this purpose, by your provident
dispensation and husbanding of the profits appropriated heereunto. Your good
endeavors herein, may be a means (when God shall grant opportunity) to move
the heart of our noble King James, or the hopeful Prince Henry his son, to
raise this spiritual building higher, upon so worthy a foundation, laid by
that excellent Princess, and peerless Queen, Elizabeth of blessed memory
and admired. Whatsoever you gain the poor people, you shall reap to your
selves a worthy recompense; praise and good report among men, peace and comfort
to your own consciences for discharge of your duty, and confidence before God
in that great day of the appearing of your Savior and Judge, when you shall
without fear or fainting, give up an account, as of other actions, so of the
trust committed unto you, of many the members of Christ, the bodies and souls
of your poor brethren. If I seem tedious, if importunate, if elamorous, let it
be remembered, that it is no shame for a Bartholmews man to beg. Hoping
therefore that I shall in time be heard, I leave pleading, and conclude
praying; first and principally for your worships, and the rest of your worthy
rank, that you may be ever found such as the Exo. 18. 21
Lord requires, you should be, men of courage fearing God, dealing truly, and
hating covetousness; next and generally for the whole people of this City,
that as they are politically one body, so the Lord would give them one heart,
for conscience sake to fear him and obey their Superiors, and to serve one
another through love; that so his blessings may be continued and increased upon
both Magistrates and people, from generation to generation for ever.

Your worships in all duty E. G.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir William Throckmorton, Knight; and to the Lady
Cecilie his virtuous and beloved wife, E* G. wishes continuance and increase
of all heavenly and earthly happiness, to their perpetual comfort.
TO none more rightly then to you I owe,
this Map (for memory) of holy writ:
The former part, you quickened as you know
by daining grace and liking unto it,
When as in dust it lay, a birth forlorn
And durst not further ^^ye for fear of scorn.
And from that influence, the later budde
has sprouted out to satisfy desire:
But all in private meant, for walls of mudde,
fit country Cottages, but mount not higher.
And that it comes with characters thus clad,
Authority gave charge they should be had.
To press unto the Press, this world in Print,
where wit with wisdom vvarres, and humors hold;
The raines on reason, to prescribe the stint
and measures that the best, which seems most bold,
In meaner wits I do it madness deem
Since worthier works do miss of right esteem.
But call you that oppression of the Press,
when higher powers command and I obey?
I rather think, I should be judged no less
then void of reason herein to gainsay.
The spreading theirs, the springing is your own*
And by the timely fruit, let tree be known.
Genesis 18. 17. 18* 1. Sam. 1. 24 2. John v. 4.
If masters would in Abraham's steps insist,
if Mothers Bathsh eha's, or Hanna's were,
If Ladies like The Elect, from what they list,
Would curb their families to God his fear,
Then should this simple plant have place enough,
Then should the fruits be seen to follow proof.
If grand-dame Lois, her Lesson were in use
we should not see young children from the shell
To swear, to curse, to practice all abuse,
and by their parents pattern to rebel:
2. Tim. 1. 5. compared with cap. 3. 15
For from the faith that in her first did dwell,
young Timothy could talk and Scriptures tell.
And for impression in that tender mould,
and best those vessels new at first to season,
This pains was meant, and by all means I could,
made fit for their capacity and reason.
Story we know, with pleasure spends time,
And what runs readier on the tongue then ryme?
Blessed be God, good Joshua his mind,
does plenteously, your worships hearts possess,
The comforts in his sacred word you find,
procure no doubt the fruits which show no less.
And that you may with grace be ever blessed
I humbly pray, and evermore I rest
Your worships most bounden EDMUND GRAILE.

Upon the Authors Work.
THey that have pleased their knowledge to impart
And to bequeath their skill to aftertimes,
Have ever writ their chiefest grounds of Art
In some Perspicuous and compendious rymes:
Which being well observed and con'd by heart*
Stick faster by us, and do long remain
Firmly imprinted in the weakest brain.
So long discourses that whole volumes fill
Containing Rules of life, or true narrations
Of mighty men that lived well or ill,
Or some good counsel, or sound disputations
In verse abridged, and with heedfull skill
Summed up in brief, are by that means confined
Within the narrow closet of man's mind.
This and such helps has humane skill prepared,
For humane frailty: but until this day
For other arts howeuer men have cared,
The Art of Arts wanted this lock and keye
To shut her treasures up: no man has spared
Time for this task, until Grayle undertook*
In this small cheste to lock up Gods great book*
It Is not to please the nice he took this pain,
Their itching ears, and curious eyes delight,
In such a fluent style that must contain
More words then matter: it is his vein to write
Much in few words, and in their sense so plain,
That the unlearned in his shallowe heart
May now contain the great Soule*sauing Art.
I. M.

In Momum.
Was Mamus (crow you) whelp'd in butchers stall,
That he resembles so that greedy kind?
For mark: the worst that is of men let fall,
Lying in midst of better fare half pind,
He chambers, as a bait pleasing his mind*
Fie on him, fie, that he so currishlie,
Should joy in that, which others do defy!
Or was he of that curres most spiteful brood,
Which sat in cribbe, keeping the ox from meat?
For he from others keeps that wholesome food,
Which (hungry souls) they seek for with their sweat,
And yet himself disdaines thereof to eat.
O cursed envy, that to stroy the more,
Will even himself lead way unto deaths door.
Or rather sprang he from that hellish hound,
That welcoms damned souls to Plutoes place?
He so does triumph when ought may be found
In others, that may turn to their disgrace.
(O worthy progeny, O noble race!)
What ere he deemed was, I am sure of this,
Were he a God, yet now a Dog he is.
What, what, a Dog? and should his snarling bay,
Scarre men from that the wise have healthful tried?
No: worthy Jason held on in his way,
Though he might seem by sea, and land denied,
By Bulls repeld, by Dragons fell envied*
Shall hope of treasures earthly so inflame,
And shall not heavenly much more do the same?
Io. Gr.

The Author to the curious Reader.
I Leave perfection of a Poets skill,
(which does with silver rays poor rusticks daunt)
To Siluesters, and to Du Bartas quill,
and such as harbor, where the Muses haunt,
Bathing in crystal streams of rare conceits,
conceiting what they list, of any subject,
Subiecting whatsoever them delights,
unto their wit and art, their natures object.
To such leave I, the majesty,
of Poetry divine:
more rife is their dexterity,
their wits more ripe then mine.
There needs no garland where the wine is good,
nor colors, where the substance is most pure.
Sincerity by Truth has ever stood,
and shall, so long as does the Truth endure*
More truth then Sacred verity:
no creature can require.
And who so likes simplicity,
lo here his full desire*
THE FIRST PART OF THE SVMME OF THE HOLY HISTORY.
The first Section.
IN the beginning God the Lord,
did heaven and earth create
Of naught; by his almighty word,
as Scriptures do relate.
Out of a void and formelesse mass,
the matter of each creature,
Genesis
He wrought them all in six days space,
and gave them shape and feature.
The first day he commanded light,
the darkness to prevent:
The second day, he reard in sight,
the stately Firmament:
The third, the earth with fruits adorned
the swelling sea debarres:
The fourth, the Sun and Moon were formed,
with all the glorious Stars:
The fifth, the Fish with scales and sins,
and then the feathred Foul:
The sixth, the beasts and creeping things:
and then that living Soul,
Which that one God in persons three,
made, as by consultation,
With purpose that the same should be,
the glory of his Creation,
Even man, framed out of earthly dust*
yet Gods own image bearing,
Thereby right holy, wise, and just,
(earth far above earth rearing.)
And for his aid, who was alone,
of Adams rib made Eve,
That both, as of one flesh and bone,
might mutual comfort give.
Thus having finished all with speed,
and blessed them, and protested,
That each thing made was good indeed;
the seventh day he rested.
Man made in perfect state most pure,

As Lord of every creature
with power above them graced.
There had he every fruit for meat,
that then in Eden grew,
Save one; whereof when he did eat,
death, death, should then ensue.
But this strict charge did not restrain,
the Serpent Eve beguiled,
And Adam she; so both to pain,
with shame were thence exiled.
Now wretched man was wrapped in woe,
and in his loins, his heirs,
For cursed and corrupt they go;
yet to prevent despaires,
verse. 15.
God promised them to restore,
unto a state more stable.
And Eve unto her husband bore,
his two sons Kain and Abel.
Kain was accur'st for bloody deed,
against his better brother;
Anno Mund 130.
But Habel slain, God in his steed
gave Sheth unto his mother.
Section 2.
FRom Sheth did spring a righteous line
of just and holy men,
Henoch a rare and pure Divine
God took away as then.
Anno. 1056.
His grandchild Lamech did beget
Noah: and then began,
The sons of God their face to set,

Thence Giants came, a mungrel kind
on whom the Lord did frown,
And for their sin and wicked mind,
did threat the world to drown.
Noah alone one earth did live
uprightly; him God sent,
And did an hundred years them give,
and twenty to repent.
Mean while built Noah as his charge
an Arc three stories high:
The wicked world lived still at large,
and dreamed that Noe did lie:
Till fountains burst, and open stood

Which quickly caused a fearful flood,
for down it powers amain,
Anno. 1656.
And all the earth with ruin fills;
men, beasts, and birds must die,
When as the flood above the hills
flowed fifteen cubits high.
For twelve months space well near it raged:
and then was Noah bidden,
To loose those creatures few, which cag'd,
and in the Arc were hidden.
So Noah, his wife, his sons, and theirs
came forth in number eight;
The unclean creatures all by peires,
the clean by seuens: straight
He offered sacrifice, God smelled,
a smell of rest: wherefore
He promised though man rebelled
to drown the world no more:
And gave the Rainbow for a pledge,
and also did make good.
Above the beasts, man's privilege,
giving their flesh for food.
So, having now his covenant made
of mercy, grace and peace,
Blessed Noah, and his sons he bade
they should mankind increase.
Of Iapheth did the Gentiles spring,
the Canaanites of Cham,
Who cursed was for opening
his fathers sin and shame.
Now all the world in speech was one,
Anno. 17^6.
and did to build conspire
A Babel, and confusion
they gained for their hire.
Section 3.
FRom Shem the son of Noah came,
an holy race and fruitful,
Anno 2008.
Continued even to Abraham
the father of the faithful.
Who left his land, his kindred all,
and fathers house most dear,
When him the Lord his God did call
to go, he knew not where.
Vr, he went to Canaan,
with Sarai and with Lot,
To settle there he scarce began
but that by famine hot,
To Egypt he was forced to fly,
where fearing much his life,
Before King Pharaoh fainingly
he did deny his wife.
Bethel he goes back again,
where strife began to grow,
Twixt Lot and him; for wealth amain,
did in upon them flow.
Old Abraham with humble heart,
to younger Lot gave place,
And after that in love took part,

So Melchizedek did him bless,
but childlesse still he staid
Till Ismael: and that increase
was but by ^arai's maid.
Yet God by special promises,
himself did often tie,
As heavens stars, and sand of seas,
his seed to mu tiplie.
And for assurance, thereupon
a seal he did ordain,
The sign of circumeision,
on each male to remain.
Jam. 2. 23.
And as a friend did entertain
him, full familiarly:
As (once for all) appeared plain
when Sodoms sinful cry
Did pierce the skies, and God down came,
and if but ten good men
Could there be found; for Abraham,
the Lordhad spared it then.
So, fire and brimstone fearfully
from heaven fell apace,
And furnace-like the smoke did fly.
poor Lot preserved was,
And unto Zoar fled for life,
where, in a drunken mood,
On's daughters, (having lost his wife)
he got a Moab the father of the Moabites.

Beniammi the father of the Ammoni^^s.


cursed brood.
Section 4.
Abraham went to Gerar land,
where he again for fear,
His wife denied: and by Gods hand,
Abimelech did forbear.
Long had he waited, hope was past,
yet still he did beleene:

and Sarah did conceive:
And in her old age Izhaak bare,
her self becoming nurse:
Mark here a good old Ladies care;
the child was near the worse.
This only son, and only heir
of promise, God commands
Anno. 2108.
Must now be slain, and burnt with fire
and that by Abraham's hands:
Well, he obei'd, and called his men,
wood, knife, and son he took,
On to the place they go: and when
was bent the fatal struck,
God staid his hand, and in the steed
of Izhaak there was tied,

good Abraham's faith was tried.
His son thus spared, his godly care
was next about to spy
For him a wife, and therefore swear
his man's fidelity.
Who full religiously performed
the office on him laid,
And with Rebeckah soon returned,
a fair and virtuous maid,
Whom Izhaak married; but still,
she barren was; they praid:
God heard, and granted all their will,
and further to her said,
That in her womb the babes that strove,
Anno. 2168.
were twins and nations twain,
The younger should prevail above:
the elder should remain
A servant: Esau was his name,
and as he venison sought,
And wearied back and hungry came,
his younger brother bought
His birth right, for a mess of broth:
God Izhaak blessed mean while,
For which his enemies were wroth,
verse. 14. 15.
and played parts most vile.
When age came on and eyes waxt dim,
then solemnly he meant,
To bless his son, requiring him,
Venison for that intent,
About goes Esau with his bow,
but Iaacob does prevent him;
The means his mother did him show,

In Esaus clothes and skins of kids,
unto his father; who
Mistrusts the voice, and therefore bids,
come near to feel and know.
With fat of earth, and heavens dew,
with happy seed and kin,
He blessed him: (reverend was the show)
and then came Esau in.
And he with tears and piteous moan,
the blessing sought in vain,
He came too late, alas 'twas gone.
With that he whet his brain,
Revenge to seek, and work: and then,
the days (quoth he) make speed
Of mourning for my father, when
I will pay home this deed.
Section 5.
THen did Rebekah forthwith call,
and send Iaacob away,
Lest Esau in his rage should fall
on him, and should him slay.
And Izhaak charged him (taking leave)
to play a wiser part
Then Esau; who did vex and grieve
by heathen wives, their heart.
But he should to his uncle go,
and match in godly race,
And blessing should be with him; so
he went out from their face.
As he in fields that night did sleep,
in Haran, on a stone,
By dream he saw a ladder steep
from heaven; and there-on
The Angels passing, and above
God standing all in view,
The blessed promise of his love,
with Iaacob to renew.
There Jacob vowed, the Lord to fear:
thence on he went apace,
Inquiring in the fields to hear,
of Labans dwelling place.
The shepherds showed him readily,
his cosen Rahel there:
Whom he saluted cheerfully,
and she could not forbear,
But ran and carried home the news:
then Laban hies to meet him,
To dwell there he must not refuse,
where all his kindred greet him,
A match was made, and seven years,
for Rahel he must work,
But Leah in the light appears,
(deceits in darkness lurk.)
Well, seven more he was content
to serve for his beloved,

verse. 20.
though full of toil it proved.
Laban for his sake,
but him he blessed much more,
What ever wages he did take,
to him was gain in store.
Then Laban did envy his wealth,
Yet loathed to let him go.
Iaakob fled away by stealth,
and made him (following) know
The wrong he did; and both good friends,
after a chiding, parted.
Then Iaakob in his journey sends
to pacify hard-hearted
Esau his brother, who in Arms
was then against him bent;
But God prevented all the harms,
by altering his intent.
Iaakob, called Israel,
(for God had changed his name
When he prevailed at Peniel)
in peace to Shechem came.
Here Dinah must a gadding go,
but sauc'd her sport with shame,
And caused the Shechemits much woe,
being too too much to blame.
Section 6.
THence up to Bethel had he word,
to go to pay his vow
Of holy worship: for the Lord
again to Canaan now,
From Padan Aram had him fet;
where mightily he grew,
In cattle, servants, substance great,
and sons, whose names ensue:
Reuben, Dan, Leui, Simeon,
Issachar, Napthalim,
Asher, Gad, Judah, Zebulon,
Joseph and Benjamin.
These Patriarks were, of whom great men
and Princes did proceed,
God keeping promise unto them
and their succeeding seed.
Judah the royal line enioi'd,
who for a deed amiss,
Had Tamars life with fire destroi'd,
but that the fault was his.
Young Joseph, Iaakobs joy, the rest
still stomacked and spited,
Yet hatred he deserved least,
had him his brethren righted.
For envy they conspired to kill;
Ruben did persuade:
Yet secretly they did him sell,
to men of Merchants trade;
Who sold him unto Potiphar,

And faithfully himself did bear,
he was in prison cast.
But God beheld his misery,
and gave him wisdom great,

even next to Pharaohs seat.
For when the king no rest could find,
of dreams that him had past,
The ungrateful buttler, then to mind
does Joseph call at last.
And then he was from prison sent,
and set before the King;
Where he to Pharaohs great content,
expounded every thing.
Besides, he* showed a ready way,
the famine to withstand;
Which Pharaoh liked, and then did lay
on him the charge in hand.
So by him was provision made,
verse 14. 17. 19.
against the time of need,
Wherewith (to Pharaoh gainefull trade)
all Egypt he did feed.
Section 7.
OLd Iaakob and his sons also,
Were pinched with penury,
Wherefore he charged them to go
and food in Egypt buy.
They went with grief, and bought in fear,
not dreaming of their brother,
Nor did he countenance them bear
more kind then any other.
Till when they came to him again,
affection was so great,
He could no longer it contain,
which in his breast for heat
With weeping eye and ioifull tongue,
he then did plainly tell,
He was their brother, whom with wrong
to Egypt they did sell.
The joy of either was so much,
that neither now could bear it:
Their sobbing passion was such,
that Pharaohs house did hear it*
Who then advertised of it,
commanded presently,
With Charets and what else was fit,
For Jacob they should hie.
Anno 2298.
So he, with all his family
went thither out of hand,

and placed in Goshen Land.
Goshen Land did Jacob see
the fullness of his days,
In Joseph's lives prosperity,
his fill of earthly ioies.

he blessed his sons each one:
And Joseph eke gave up the breath,

Now when these fathers both were dead,
and still their seed did grow:
There rose a Pharaoh in his stead,
that did not Joseph know.
Exodus
He tyrant-like, with heavy hand,

And gave the midwiues strait command,
the males to kill or drown.
Section 8.
Anno 2428.
Borne in these flames was Moses mild,
and by Gods providence,
Though cast in River flags (poor child)
yet was he freed thence,
By Pharaohs daughter, who did take,
and keep him as her own
Until he came to man's estate,
when fearing to be known,
For killing an Egyptian; he
forsook the Court and fled:
And all this was by Gods decree,
whose work must now be sped.
For God had heard the grievous cry
of Hebrews, sore oppressed,
And Moses he meant to employ
in having it redressed.
Him then he called and sent away
to proud King Pharaoh,
Requiring him without delay
to let his people go.
Anno 2508.
But he the Lord God did despise,
and asked, what was he?
Increasing more and more their cries,
by greater cruelty.
The Lord, to tame this Tyrant stout,
and his own folk to right,
With Moses sends Aaron out,
The ten plagues numbered in their order.
to make him know his might.
They caused Blood, Frogs, Lice, and Flies,
and Murraine, Scabs and Hail,

all Egypt to assail.
Goshen land, where dwelt
Gods people Israel.
Yet Pharaohs heart did nothing melt,
for still he did rebel.

And bade them with the blood,
Their dore-posts should be ouerstain'd,
for their safe-gard and good.
Lest that his Angel passing by,
should smite them with the rest:
For he the first borne did destroy,
of Egypt, man and beast
From Egypt then they forced went,
with borrowed Jewels plenty,
When they in Egypt, years had spent,
four hundred ten and twenty.
But Pharaoh did repent the deed,
and forthwith did not slack,
With men and charrets to make speed,
again to fetch them back.
And to the red Sea them pursued,
they passed through dry,
He followed with courage proud,
but in the midst did lie.
For God affrighted man and horse,
and made his Charets fall;
The Sea returned with raging force,
and drowned king and all.
Of this so strange deliverance,
was then a worthy song,
Recorded for remembrance,
and so they marched along.
Section 9.
Job.
ABout this time (the learned Judge)
did patient Job endure
All mischiefs that the Devils grudge,
and malice could procure.
Spoil of his goods and children dear,
torments of body and mind,
As by his botches might appear,
and wife and friends unkind.
Who long and large discourses had,
to prove him plagued for sin,
Whereby they did affliction add,
to misery he was in.
And to such passions did him drive,
twixt hearts despair and hope,
That flesh and spirit did strongly strive,
and scarce to breath gave scope:
Job commends
doubling his former weal,
And checked his unjust judging friends.
But now to Israel.

directed them the way,
By fiery pillar in the night,
and shading cloud by day.
With Angels food and waters fine,
from rocks that forced stream


Sinai; where the mighty God,

And they in fear, far off abode,
nor durst, nor might come near.

and other Laws did write,
For to contain them in the bands
of holiness and right.
There did he unto Moses show,

In every point he taught him how
to make and use the same.
There made he choice of Leuies tribe,
the Priesthood to attend,
Their duties all he did describe,
and what to them pertain'd;
Mean while had Israel made a Calfe,
and grievously offended;
But Moses zeal in Gods behalf
deserves to be commended:
Who sharply punished with the sword,
about three thousand men,
And earnestly besought the Lord
to spare the remnant then.
God granted it, and promised
his Angel should (in token
Of love) them lead; and then he did
renew the Tables broken.
Full forty days and forty nights,
was Moses in the hill,
Recording what the Lord indites,
his precepts, laws, and will.
Familiarly and face to face,
and fasting from all food,
He waited in that holy place:
And thence he came and stood,
In prease of people to repeat
all that the Lord had said;
When of his face, the brightness great
made them the while afraid.
Section 10.
Anno 2510.
When as the Tabernacle now,
was reared and finished:

it should be furnished:
Numbers
Toward Canaan the promised land

They marched forth band after band;
But stubborn still and stony:
For by the way they soon forgot
Gods mercy and his power,
And cared not how they him prouok't
to anger every hour.
They long for flesh, they Manna loath,

Moses both,
for crossing their desire.
Nor would they warned be, though they
his dreadful judgments law,
On them inflicted day by day,
which lived not under law.
As Korah, Dathan, Abiram,
with thousands more among,

and such as serpents stong.
Yet tempted they the Lord so long,
and with so high an hand,
That in his wrath he swear, not one
should enter to the land,
Save Joshua and Caleb, who
returning with the spies,
Affirmed the truth that they did know,
and crossed their fellows lies,
So wandered they in wilderness,
the space of forty years,
Till all were dead that did transgress;
as by Gods book appears.
Their children then he forward led,
but others kept them back;
As Sihon, Og, and Moahs head,
who named was Balaak,
Who hired Balaam them to curse,
and so thought to molest them:
But for himself it was much worse,
for Balaam three times blessed them.
He with those two, and five kings more,
which were of Midian,
Were in revenge of Baal-peor
subdued, spoiled, slain.
Here Rubens Tribe, and also Gads,
their heritage possessed:
But they in arms, like lusty lads,
must march before the rest,
Number. 34.
Here Moses named every one,
that should the Land divide,
And give a fit possession,
to every Tribe beside.
Deuteronomy. 31.
But Moses now must make an end,
as did his fathers all:
Wherefore he did not time misspend,
but forth did Joshua call,
As God had bid: and gave him charge
the people to conduct,





and forth with he ascended
Nebo, unto Pisgah top,
where as he did suruay
The Canaan land, the earthly hope,
God took his soul away,
Anno 2549.
To heavens rest; and buried then,
his body none know where,
When peere-lesse he amongst all men,
had lived full six score year,
And yet his eie-sight was not dim,
nor natures force did wither,
There Israel lamented him,
for thirty days together.
Section 11.
Josh. 1.
THen did the Lord call Joshua,
and bid him to be strong,
And trust in him who was his stay,
and boldly go along.
So he the Captain sends out spies,
whom Rahab safe did hide,
And they returned in ioifull wise,
which made them to provide
To pass with speed into the land.
At Ioshuah's powerful word
The Jordan waters back did stand,
and passage dry afford.
In midst whereof in open view,
they did a pillar rear.
The circumcision they renew,
the Manna ceased there.
Then set they upon Jericho,
and also upon Ai.
But Achans sin did work them woe,
and from the conquest stay.
The Gibeonites dealt craftily,
so they escaped alone.
The rest they voided utterly,
to place the Tribes each one.
They cast them out and did them kill,
with a victorious hand.

at Ioshuahs command.
When he had now fully possessed,
each several Tribe in order,
And given to all, content and rest
by lot, in every border:

to stay them from backsliding,
verse. 24.
Twixt God and them, a league he struck,
by his example guiding.
And still exhorting them to fear
the Lord, and him obey,
Anno. 2566.
He witnessed for them his care,
and passed by death away.
Full soon had they the Lord forgot,
when Joshua was dead.
Judah had the charge and lot
their Armies forth to lead.
But for their great transgressions,
and league with Canaanite,
God gave them to oppressions,
of cruel men of might.
Who spoiled them without mean or end
and did them sorely grieve,

their greeuance to relieve.
Against King Cushans tyranny,
stout Othniel raised he.
And when fat Eglon made them cry,
lame Ehud set them free.
Against Sisera of Canaan,
did Deborah prevail.
Now Ruth good Boaz woed and wan,
when nearer kin did fail.
Against Midian a mighty host,
marched captain Gedeon.
Bloody Abimelech did boast,
he next would reign, or none.
The proud oppressing Ammonite,
by Iphtah was subdued.
The Philistines for all their spite,
the birth of Sampson rued.
Whose matchless strength miraculous,
was ouermatch'd by guile,
Of Dalilah perfidious,
who wrought his bane the while.
When none amongst them ruled as king
each what he listed did;
Then Micah made a molten thing,
and it he worshipped.
And at such time, that heinous sin,
upon the Levites wife,
Twixt Israel and twixt Benjamin,
cost many a thousands life.
Section 12.
1. Sam.
ELi was Judge in Israel,
when for his sons lewd ways,
Samuel,
sharp vengeance he would raise.
This Samuel a righteous man,
Anno 2905.
was last of all that judged,
And in his time the Kings began,

And in their discontented mood
would have a king to reign:
Which motion Samuel withstood,
as tending to there pain.

a goodly man and taule,
And Samuel did him anoint
their King, his name was Saul.
A Princely mind God to him gave,
with complements of place,
Jonathan did brave

Yet God that him advanced so high,

He disobeied when foolishly,
Agag he did spare.
Therefore the Lord did him reject,
and little David chose,
Anointed Isreal's king elect,
when he should Saul depose.
Now great Goliath played his prize,
but David knocked him down,
The people shout with ioifull cries,
and give him chief renoune.
Saul bit the lip at David's praise,
and hated him the more,
Yea sought his life all manner ways,
and chased him lik a Bore
With Iauelling and with threatening sword
with troops of horse and men,
From house and home, from bed and board
from desert den to den.
Forced he was himself to feign,
with Achish to be mad,
And for defense to entertain
lewd runnagates, was glad.
But Jonathan his faithful friend,
at no time did forsake him,
And warning did of danger send,
when Saul used means to take him,
Although for it he did engage,
himself in danger deep,
For such was Saul's suspicious rage,
None might his counsel keep.
Ahimelech did give him bread
in his necessity,

and all his progeny.
Had David labored like for like,
to Saul for to repay,
He had both time and place to strike,
and followers bade him slay.


But he, to touch did ever dread
the Lords annoited dear.
And that he did both mercy love,
and bloody vengeance flee,
Nabal did him prove,
wise Abigail did see.
Now Saul with envy almost pin'de
and driven to distress,

some comfort and redress.
Of which he failed, and in the field
as desperately he fought,
His sons were slain, his soldiers yield,
and ghastly he besought

but he the deed, abhorred;
His own heart blood then did he spill,
with his own hand and sword.
Section 13.
2. Sam. Anno 2945.
THen David was proclaimed, and reigned
in Hebron, Iudahs King:
But Ishbosheth had Israel gained
by Abners counselling.
Long war was twixt the houses both,
of David and of Saul,
Till Abner with his new king wroth,
to David's side did fall.
This Abner and eke Ishbosheth,
were slain by villainy:
But David did lament their death,
and murderers all defy.
So, now he was established
sole king of all the Land;
His wars and all things flourished,
that he did take in hand.
Then solemnly he thought it fit,
to fetch the Arc more near him,
But Vzzahs death did hinder it,
Gods judgment did so fear him.
Yet afterward he brought it on,
and purposed to rear
A house for God; but he would none,
as Nathan did declare.
When he had all his foes subdued,
and as a Monarch reigned,
In peace and ease; see what ensued,

With murder and adultery:

Yet was he punished diversely
with haps to be lamented.
First, Absalom shed Amnons blood,
(vengeance does incest close)

His father to depose.
Achitophel that crafty wretch
had chief hand in this matter,
Hushai did him ouer-reach,
by skill he had to flatter.
Shimei with open throat,
did curse him as he fled:
Sheba shortly blows his note,
but lost his traitors head.
Lo yet again, sin of the king
Gods fearful wrath reuiues,

cost seventy thousands lives.
And lastly, in his aged years,
1. Kings
his son, a wanton bred,
Adoniah, boldly tears
the Crown from off his head.
This prophet after Gods own heart,
Psalmist of Israel,
Did yet at last in peace depart,
and closed his days full well.
Section 14.
Anno 2985.
NExt him did Solomon his son,
the kingdoms Scepter sway,
There never sat on Regal throne,
his peer, unto this day.
For wealth, for state, for princely port,
for plenty and for peace,
For wisdom rare, and great resort;
which made his fame increase.
Witness his sentence in that case,
of queanes crying out of wrongs.
His purueiance, his horses race,
his Proverbs, Writings, Songs:
Witness the glorious Temple, which
he built for Gods great name;
The costly furniture and rich,
the treasures of the same.
Witness his prayers that excel,
for knowledge zeal and fitness.
His offerings great, walled towns, and well
may queen of Saba witness,
Who took some pains to find out fame]
a liar in her kind,
But found that though she laden came,

Yet Solomon, in midst of mines,
of wisdom and of treasure,

got to him for his pleasure.
These drew him from religion
and from sincerity,
To wicked superstition,
and gross Idolatry.
For which Gods judgment did begin,
his kingdom rent in twain,
Judah alone and Benjamin,
did to his heirs remain.
The other Tribes, in number ten.
from their allegiance fell,
Set up a king, and named him then,
the King of Israel.
Samaria held the throne Royal,
on which he ruled them;
But Iudahs seat Imperial,
was fair Jerusalem.
Anno 3025.
And there did Rehoboam reign,
when Shishak robbed the Temple:
Abiam,

Then Asa, then Iehosaphat,
both, good and godly kings,
For reformation; saving that,
they let alone some things.
Section 15.
Kings of Israel.
Mean while in Israel, Nebats son,
King Jeroboam reigned,
An arch-idolater and known,
by withered hand he gained.
Nadab his son, King Baasa,
king Elah, and king Zimri,
Did for the Crown each other slay,
so likewise did king Omri:
But his son Ahab, with his wife,
that cursed Iezabel,
Did work such villainy and strife,
and to such fury fell:
That good Eliah fled for fear,
who was by Ravens fed;
Who raised the widows son so dear;
who laid Baals Prophets dead.
By whom king Ahab warning had:
But words did naught prevail,
verse. 2.
Nor famine; not yet Benhadad,
who strongly did assail
Samaria: yet for all that
he killed Naboth just.
Iehosaphat,

For crossing which, poor Micaiah,
verse. 27.
was in the dungeon cast.
But Iosaphat in battle saw
verse. 34.
proud Ahab slain at last.
His son took place when he was dead,
Ahaziah;
And after him was Ioram head.
as then did good Eliah

to heaven; and in his place,
His spirit did on Elisha light,
with special power and grace,
To work great miracles, as by

And by Naamans leprosy,

And by the plenty prophesied,
Samaria,
which th'infidel that said he lied,
to his small comfort saw.
Iehu did this Ioram quell,
and reigned in his steed.
He slew also vile Iezebel,
Baals Priests and Ahabs seed.
His wicked son Iehoahaz,
verse. 3. 4.
succeeded; and the next
verse. 25.
Was his son Ioash: either was
by Arams armies vexed.
Section 16.
Kings of Judah.
IN Judah next Iehosaphat,
did his son Ioram reign,
verse. 25.
Then Ahaziah; then up start
Athalia, who had slain,
All the Kings sons that she could catch:
young Ioash escaped alone,
By help of friends who did him fetch,
and placed on the throne.
Gods house decai'd he did repair,
and left king, when he died,
Amaziah his hopeful heir;
then Joel prophesied.
Vzziah, Amazia'hs son,
was struck with leprosy,
As he did reign: and then began
Isaiahs prophecy.
verse. 5.
Iotham a Prince of Gods behest,
succeeded next Vzziah:
Ahaz that beast,
Hezekiah.
Section 17.
Kings of Israel.
NExt unto Ioash, Isreal's king,
Jeroboam reign,
To Niniue now did Jonas bring
Gods message, not in vain.
Then did Hosea take his text,
and Amos prophecy.
Jeroboam dead; the next
was his son Zachary.
verse. 10.
Whom Shallum slew in open sight,
and reigned in his steed.
verse. 14.
But Menahem did him requite,
and in his seat succeed.
verse. 23.
Then Pekahia, Men'hems son,
did wear the Crown until
verse. 25*
His Captain Pekah seaz'd thereon,
and did his Sovereign kill.
Nor had this Pekah reigned long,
but he received his doom,
verse. 30.
Hoshea did revenge the wrong,
and reigned in his room.
In his time did Salmanaser,
besiege Samaria strong,
verse. 6.
And took Hoshea prisoner,
and led with him along
Anno 3265.
All Israel into Syria;
where they did still remain,
And planted in Samaria,
of his Assyrian train.
verse 25.
Whom God by Lions did molest,
for their blind superstition,
Which made them get an Ebrue priest,
to mend their bad religion.
Section 18.
Kings of Judah.
Anno 3260.
THus leaving Israel dispossessed,
lets now return again,
To Judah, whom the Lord had blessed,
with Hezechias reign.
Against him, proud Saneherib,
sent railing Rabshekee,
Who to his cost was answered,
and caused with shame to flee.
Now was the Prophet Micah heard,
and Nahum: but we find,

to Babel is too kind.
Next him, his son Manasse reigned,

2. Chron. 33. 12. 13.
Until he was in Babel chained:
but thence God did him bring.
Ammon his son, the next in row,
was for Idolatry,
2. Kings 21. 23.
Slain of his servants: and as now,
Habakuk did prophecy.
Then young Josiah, Ammons son,
a worthy Prince and zealous,

as was and will be famous.
Now Jeremiah Trumpet-like
cries out; and Zephaniah:
Necho's men in battle strike,
and slay good king Josiah.
His son Iehoahaz the Crown
obtained; but reigned not long,
For Pharaoh Necho put him down,
and chained with fetters strong,
2. Chron. 36. 4. 2. Kings 24. 1.
And placed his brother in his room,
Iehoiachim by name,
Who Babels vassell did become
for three years space with shame.
Anno 3389.
And then rebelling brought again
great Nabuchadnezer
With all his huge and warlike train:
who took him prisoner,
And bound and carried him away,
with whom to Babylon,
Ezechiel, and Mordecai,
and Daniel are gone,
With other more of royal seed.
1. Chron. 3. 16. 2. Kings 24. 8. verse. 10. 11.
young Iechoni alone
Was left behind in's fathers steed,
to sit on Iudahs throne:
Nor sat he long but Babel does,
his Soldiers stout command,
To fetch him and his treasure both,
and chief men of of the Land.
Anno 3399.
His uncle Zedekiah placed,
was in his room, and crowned:
Who likewise did rebel at last:
but Babels king so frowned,
That up against Jerusalem,
verse. 17. 20.
the fowerth time he came,
And by strong siege so starued them,
that warriors fled with shame.
verse. 3. 5.
King Zedekiah also fled,
but Chaldees quickly caught him,
And that due judgment might be had,
They unto Riblah brought him,
verse. 6.
And slew his sons before his face,
and then put out his eyes,
And chained him with all disgrace,
that else they could devise.
Anno 3400.
And so to Babel they return,
with prisoners and with pray.
The Temple after that they burn,
and take all thence away.
verse. 8. 9.
Yea burnt the Palace fair and rich
which Solomon did build:
And all the goodly houses which
Jerusalem did yield.
Section 19.
Daniel
BEing now at Babel fast in hold

Of captive children, to be schooled,
and Chaldea learning taught.
There Daniel among the rest,
did to such ripeness come,
That when a dream the king oppressed,
and Wisards all were dumb,

verse. 27.
which was an Image great,
Of metals different composed,
from head unto the feet.
verse. 46.
This made the king much to admire,
him and his fellows all;
Yet three were cast into the fire,
for that they would not fall
Before his image hugely trim:
but fire could take no hold.
Another dream then vexed him,
which Daniel did unfold;
And eke the state of future times,
of Monarchs Crowns surprising.
Of Christ precisely he divines
and of the deads arising.
But Babels king restored back,
from beasts, made better end.
Next him, reigned Euilmerodach,
even Ieconiahs friend.
Ier. 52.
To him succeeded Balshazzar,
who, in his drunken feast,
Did neither God nor's people spare,
for blasphemy and jest;
Till fingers writing on a wall,
dazzling his very sight,
verse. 6.
Did so his countenance appall,
was never man so fright:
This writng Daniel expounds;
and so without delay,
verse. 30.
That night Darius all confounds,
and took his Crown away.
Section 20.
When now full seventy years were spent
Anno 3458.
in their Captivity;
King Cyrus Proclamation sent,
for their delivery.
Zerubbabel does them retire,
Ezra.
with all the Temples treasure,

the ruins at their pleasure.

the Lords work to withstand,
By flattering speech unto their face,
and letters under hand;
Yea Hammans hatred cankered,
had made an utter riddance,
Ester.
Had not Queen Ester ventured,
Jews deliverance.
Ezra.
Then Haggai; also Zachary,

And shortly after Malachi,
their lack of zeal and love.

Nehemia
by Duke Zerubbabel,
Nehemi with patent sped,
the walls to build as well,
Which he performed for all the hate,
of enemies profane,
Tobiah, wicked Sanballat
and worse Samaritane.
verse. 1. 2.
And then he kept a solemn feast,
whereat the Law was read,
And sealed a covenant with the rest,
their God to serve and dread.
Next Kings and Dukes, the Maccabees,
(as stories do recite)
1 The Babylonians.

2. The Grecians

3. The Romans.


Did rule them: but the Monarchies,
still top't them by their might.
In such subjection did they mourn,
four hundred years and od,
Until Messiah, Christ was borne,
true Man, and very God.
The Dukes of David's stock, after the return out of Captivity.
1 Ieconias, Ier. 52. 2 Shealthiel, Hag. 1. 3 Zorobabel. 4 Reza, 5 Ioanna. 6
Judas Hyrcanus. 7 Joseph Primus, 8 Abner Semei. 9 Eli Mattathia. 10 Azar Mahat.
11 Nagid Artaxad. 12 Haggai Eli. 13 Maslot Naum. 14 Amos Syrac. 15 Mattathia
Siloath. 16 Joseph Secundus. 17 Ianna Hyrcanus.
This Ianna was slain by Antiochus Epiphanes king of Syria, who tyrannized
over them until Mattathias the high Priest armed and encouraged his sons
against him, who drove him out of the country and successively reigned in his
room.

The Princes and Kings of the Family of the Maccabees.
1 Judas Maccebeus the son of Mattathias reigned -- 5. years 2 Jonathan an
other son -- 19. years 3 Simon a third son, -- 8. years 4 Johannes
Hyrcanus -- 31 years 5 Aristobulus his son -- 1 year 6 Alexander Ianneus --
27 years 7 Alexandra his wife -- 9 years

8 Hyrcanus her son succeeded, but Aristobulus his younger brother rebelled
and made war against him: wherefore Hyrcanus sent Ambassadors to Pompey the
Roman captain for aid. Pompey came to Jerusalem, subdued the Rebels, gave the
government and Priesthood to Hyrcanus, and carried Aristobulus with his two
sons Alexander and Antigonus captives toward Rome. Alexander escaped by the
way, and returned and got part of Galile, but was taken again by Gabinius, and
afterward put to death at Antioch by Scipio the father in law of Pompey.
Antigonus was set at liberty by Julius Caesar after the battle between him and
Pompey. But coming into Iewry he dealt cruelly with his old uncle Hyrcanus
the high Priest, cutting off his ears and banishing him into Parthia, for
which cause he was taken again and executed at Antioch, by Antony, Herod's
Lieutenant in Iewry.

Herod also sent for Hyrcanus out of Parthia, and put him to death, and so came
the family of the Maccabees fully to an end, and the kingdom of Iewry was
established to Herod and his heirs.

The posterity of Herod.
THe kingdom or province of Iewrie was given by Julius Caesar to Antipater of
I dumaea the father of Herod, in recompense of the faithful and good service
which he did him in Egypt, in the time of his wars and danger there.

1 Herod the son of Antipater, called Herod the great, was made King by the
Senate of Rome, and reigned 37. years. He pulled down the Temple that was
built after the Captivity, and built another after the pattern of Salomons
wonderful richly and stately. He put to death Aristobulus and Alexander his
sons upon suspicion of Treason.

2 Archelaus another of his sons ruled Judea nine years.

3 Herod Antipas another son governed Galile; he beheaded John Baptist.

4 Plilip another son governed Ituria.

5 Herod Agrippa the son of Aristobulus, who killed James, and was eaten up
of worms, Acts cap. 12.

Agrippa his son (mentioned with Bernice his sister, Acts 5.) being a child
was carried into Syria, and the Romans took the government of Iewry again into
their own hands as in former time.

A brief supputation of the years and times, from the Creation of the World,
unto the birth of Christ: collected out of Iunius, according to the Scriptures.
The age of the World.

Genesis 5. ADam being 130 years old begat Sheth -- Sheth at 105 years old
begat Enosh -- Enosh at 90 begat Kenan -- Kenan at 70 begat Mahalaleel --
Mahalaleel at 65 begat Iared -- Iared at 162 begat Henoch -- Henoch at 65 begat
Methushelah Methushelah at 187 begat Lamech -- Lamech at 182 begat Noah -- Noah
at 502 begat Shem -- In his 500. year he begat Iaphet, for thus Iunius reads
it out of the Hebrew (brother to Iapheth the elder,) Genesis 10. 21.

Genesis 11. Shem at 100. years old begat Arphachshad. -- This being two
years after the flood, (which came in Noah's six hundredth years) it follows
that he was begotten in the five hundred and second year of Noah, Genesis 11.
verse. 10. Arphachshad at 35. begat Shelah. Shelah at 30. begat Heber. Heber at
35. begat Peleg. Peleg at 30. begat Reu. Reu at 32. begat Serug. Serug at 30.
begat Nahor. Nahor at 29. begat Terah. Terah at 70. began to beget children,
(says Iunius) and at 130. Abram --

This plainly appears, for Terah was 205. years old when he died in Haran,
Genesis 11. 32. and Abram going out of Haran shortly after was but 75. Genesis 12. 4.
Now diduct the sons age out of the fathers, and there remains 130. to Terah
at Abrams birth.

Abraham at 100 years old begat Izhaak.

Izhaak at 60. begat Esau and Iaakob.

Iaakob being 130. years old, goes down into Egypt, Genesis 47. 9.

Iaakob died 17. years after his coming Egypt, Genesis 47. 28

Joseph died 53. years after his father Iaakob, Genesis 50,

Moses was borne 60. years after the death Joseph.

Moses was 80. years old, when he stood Pharaoh, Exodus 7. 7.

The Tabernacle was reared the second Exodus 40. 17.

Moses died 40. years after the departure Egypt, and 39. after the Tabernacle
erect, Deuteronomy. 1. 3.

Joshua died 17. years after Moses.

Othniel died 40. years after Joshua.

Ehud died 80. years after Othniel.

Deborah died 40. years after Ehud.

Gedeon died 40, years after Deborah.

Abimelech usurped 3. years.

Tola died 23. years after Abimelech.

Iair died 22. years after Tola.

Iphtah died 6. years after Iair.

Ibzan died 7. years after Iphtah

Elon died 10. years after Ibzan.

Abdon died 8. years after Elon.

Sampson died 20. years after Abdon.

Eli died 40. years after Sampson.

Samuel succeeded to the time of Saul.

Saul began his reign, and reigned alone, and with Samuel -- 40. years.

David reigned 40. years

Solomon reigned 40. years

Rehoboam reigned 17. years.

Abiam reigned 3. years.

Asa reigned -- 41 years.

Iehosaphat reigned 25 years.

Iehoram reigned 4. years after his fathers death; having been made Viceroy
twice in his fathers life time. First, in his seventeenth year, as appears
1. Kings 22. 51. compared with 2. Kings 1. 17. And again, in his 22. years,
as appears 2. Kings 3. 1. compared with cap. 8. 16.

Athaliah reigned 6. years.

Ioash reigned 39. years.

Amasiah reigned 29. years.

In his seventeenth year (or the fourth of Jeroboam K. of Israel) there was a
conspiracy against him, and he fled to Lachish, and lived there a banished man
11. years, Vzziah his son being in the mean space made king by the common
people, 2. Ki. 14. 21. See Iunius his note on the place.

Vzziah reigned 52. years

About this time began the Greek Olympiads, by which they made a computation
of all memorable matters. It was again instituted by Hercules on the hill
Olympus in Greece, which was held in the beginning of every fifth year, and
continued five days, with great solemnity, and concourse out of all Countries.

Iotham reigned alone -- 15. years --

Ahaz reigned -- 16. years --

Hezekiah reigned -- 29 years --

Manasse reigned -- 55 years.

Ammon reigned -- 2 years --

Josiah reigned -- 31. years. --

Iehoiakim reigned -- 11 years --

Ieconiah reigned three months and was carried captive to Babel, 2. Chron. 36.

Zedekiah reigned -- ^1 years. --

From Zedekiah to the exaltation of Iehoiakin 2. King. 25. 30. -- 26 years --

In Sum.
From the Creation of Adam to the flood, are -- 1656 years. From the flood to
the death of Joshua, are -- 910 years. From Joshua to the death of Eli, are --
339 years. From Eli to the deportation of Ieconias, are -- 473 years. Anno
3458.
From the Captivity of Ieconias to the Edict of Cyrus for their deliverance
(promised, Ier. 25. 11. and performed in the first year of his reign) are --
70. years. From the Edict of Cyrus, begins the first of Daniels 70. weeks.
These 70. weeks are to be expounded as the Sabbaths, or Weeks of the year
of Iubile, Leuit. 25. 8. and they contain in the whole -- 490 years.
These are divided by Gabriel the Angel into three parts, Dan. 9. 25.

First he appoints 7. weeks, or a Sabbath of weeks, or a Iubile of 49.
years, for the building of the Temple, and restoring of the pure worship of
God.

Secondly, he appoints 62. weeks (which contain 434. years) for repairing
of the City, and building the walls. And these begin with the commission of
Nehemiah, from Darius Artaxerxes Longimanus Neh. 2. 9. and reach unto the last
week in which Messiah began to preach.

Thirdly, he speaks of the last week, and divides it into two parts.

1 In the first part, and midst of it, or in the fourth year, he says that
Messiah shall abolish the sacrifice and oblation: namely by offering up
himself once for all, Heb. 10. 14. Which is more plainly expressed, Dan. 9.
26. where he is said to be cut off, or crucified and delivered to death. But
nothing to him, that is, death shall not prevail over him, but that he shall
make good his judgments upon a rebellious and gaine-saying people. For it is
said, [He shall destroy the City, and the holy things,] or the Temple; and that
with such severity, as if a flood of wrath and judgment swallowed up all.

These 69. weeks and a half week, contain 487. years, which fall out just,
by this account.

From the Edict of Cyrus to the re-edifying of the Temple, and the return of
Ezra. 6, 15 7, 12 Anno 3507.
the people, by the command of Artaxerxes, the whole time of Ezra his story, are
-- 49. years, From the Temple finished, to the repairing of the City
Jerusalem, and the end of Anno 3577.
Arsanes his reign; the time of Nehemiahs story, -- 70. years From thence to
the death of Alexander the great, are -- 12. years. Alexander died in the
first year of the 114. Olympiade, and Christ was crucified the last year of
the 202. Olympiade. Which 89. Olympiades contain -- 356. years, Anno 3945.
and so is the sum 487. fully made up.
The latter part, or other half of the week, is referred unto the Revelation
of the new Testament, cap. 11. 3. where it is said, that the two Witnesses
should prophecy, 1260 days, or 42. months; which make up three years and a
half: and so the full number of the 70. weeks.

The second Part.
The first Section.
OF Abraham's seed and David's line,
directly he descended;
Mat. 1.
So have the Evangelists divine
Luk 3.
by scripture left commended
Before him was an Herald sent,
his coming to proclaim:
Mat. 3.
Woe cried in wilderness repent,
the paths of God make plain.
His clothing was of hair and skin,
his meat, of no great cost:
Mat. 14.
And for reproving Herod's sin,
his head at last he lost.
John Baptist he was called: his name,
by Gabriel was foretold
Luke 1.
(And eke his birth, and why he came)
to Zacharias old;
Too old to have such news believed,
verse. 18.
and therefore was struck dumb,
Until Elizabeth conceived,
and all to pass was come.
verse. 26.
To Mary eke of Nazaret,
a Virgin pure and chaste,
With salutation high and great,
this Gabriel did haste.
Showing that she must mother be,
Gods dear Son forth to bring,
The Holy Ghost by high decree
her ouer-shadowing.
Yet was she at that time betrothed
Mat. 1.
to Joseph (Scriptures say)
Who finding her with child, bethought,
to put her close away.
But then an Angel warned him,
by dream, to keep her still,
For that she had conceived within
was Gods own work and will.
Section 2.
Luk 2.
AT Bethlehem was Jesus borne,
the Savior of mankind;
And laid in cratch, as one forlorn,
such welcome did he find.
By Angels was his birth made known,
to Shepherds: forthwith they
Found out the Babe, as had been shown,
and published it with joy.
The eight day was he circumcised,
th^n did the Temple grace him,
Where good old Simon well advised,
and Anne, were glad t'imbrace him.
Mat. 2.
Out of the East there came from far,
wise men, him worshipping,
Directed by a special star,
to find out Iudahs king.
They offered gifts, and warned were
by God, in their return,
To take good heed, and not come near
king Herod, who did burn
With wrath and envy for the bruit,
of this great king of kings,
And being mocked sends out,
and slew all the sucklings.
God unto Joseph warning gave
to Egypt thence to fly,
The babe and mother there to save,
from Herod's cruelty.
King Herod dead, then hasted he
to Israel again:
But turned aside to Galilee,
because his son did reign,
And all this was for to acquit
the Prophecies of old,
From Egypt and a Nazarite,
to come, he was foretold
Section 3.
AT twelve years old, with Doctors he
Luk 2,
in Temple does dispute;
The hearers all amazed be,
verse. 46.
his mother also is mute.
At thirty years he was baptized
Mat. 3
by John in Jordan flood;
And by God, for his son agniz'd
while heaven open stood.
Mat. 4.
To wilderness then was he led,
and fasted forty days:
The devil there he vanquished,
though tempted many ways.
And so, his ministry of weight,
he closely sets about:
He chooses twelve Apostles straight,
Mat. 10.
and also sends them out:
Luke 10.
And seventy mo, by two and two,
he sent with like command,
To preach, to heal, and to subdue
the devils that did withstand.
Mat. 17
To quicken them the more, he did
part of his glory show,
On mountain high transfigured
into an heavenly hew.
Nor was he idle, but did purge
Ioh, 2. 14.
the Temple first and last,
Luke 19. 45
And still he did repentance urge,
as up and down he past.
Section 4.
Mat. 13
AT Nazeret he took his text
in Esai's prophecy:
Luke 4.
Whence hardly scaping, he did next,
to Capernaum hie.
There Satan showed his discontent
Mat. 4.
but strongly was cast out,
Unto the great astonishment,
of all that stood about.
Ioh. 3.
To Doctor Nichodemus old,
a lesson strange he taught.
The woman of Samaria bold,
Ioh. 4.
and crafty, yet was caught:
Upon the Mount he showed at large,
Mat. 5.
true blessedness most clear,
And then set out the weighty charge
his ministers do bear.
The Laws of God he likewise there
did perfectly expound,
Mat. 6.
He taught them how to pray and where,
and did a form set down,
Of alms, of fasting, carking care,
of iudgeing, knocking, striving,
Of Prophets false how to beware,
and other Christian living.
Which, partly he by Parable,
and partly, plainly taught.
Each word and every syllable,
with power in hearers wrought.
By a Builders, b Bridegroom, c Birds and d Bread
bye Beasts, f Thieves, g Spirits unclean,
By h Servants i Shepherds, k Salt, and l Seed,
by m Nets, n new Cloth and Wine.
Christ's Parables.
Mat. 7. 24.
THe Builders on the rock and the sand -- Mat. 21. 22
The Stone which the Builders refused -- Luke 14. 28.
To count the cost, before building -- Mat. 9. 15
The children of the Bride-chamber -- Mat. 22. 2.
The Marriage of the Kings son -- Mat. 25. 1.
The Bridgrome and ten Virgins -- Mat. 6-26.
The Fowls of heaven sow not -- Mat. 10. ^9
Two Sparrowes sold for a farthing -- Ma. 23. 37
Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often -- Ma. 15. 26
Not to take the childrens bread -- Mat. 7. 9.
If a son ask bread, will he give -- Joh. 6 48.
I am the bread of life -- Mat. 8. 20.
Foxes have holes -- Mat. 7. 6.
Give not holy things to Dogs -- Ma. 12 34.
Generation of Vipers, how can ye speak Ma. 24. 43
The th^efs time unknown -- Luke 10. 30
A Traveler fell among thieves -- Joh. 10. 1
Climbers another way are thieves -- Ma. 12. 27.
If I by Beelzebub cast out -- verse. 47.
When the unclean spirit is gone -- Mat. 6. 24.
No man can serve two Masters -- Ma. 18. 32
The cut throat servant -- Ma. 24. 46
The servant blessed, so doing -- Luke 17. 7.
Who bids his servant, sit down M. 18. 12
The straied sheep, of a hundred Joh. 10. 11
The good shepherd giving his life Ma. 25. 33
The sheep, and the goats Mat. 9. 36.
The multitude scattered as sheep Ma. 5. 13
Ye are the salt of the earth. Luke 14. 34
Salt is good, but if it has lost. Mar. 9. 49
Every man shall be salted with fire Mat. 13. 3
The Sower went forth to sow Ma. 13. 24.
The enemy sowing Tares verse. 31.
The kingdom of heaven like a mustardseede Mat. 17. 20
Faith as a grain of Mustard seed. Ma. 13. 4
The kingdom of heaven like a drawnet. Ma. 9. 16
New patches, old garments. New wine, old bottles. Ma. 5. 14
Ye are the the light of the world. Mat. 5. 15.
A candle under a bushel. Mat. 6. 22.
The light of the body is the eye. Ma. 7. 3.
The mote in thy brothers eye. Joh. 8. 12
I am the light of the world. Ma. 13. 33
It is like Leven which a woman hid. Mat. 16. 6.
The Leven of the Pharisees. Luke 14. 8
Sit not vpermost at a feast. verse. 12.
Call not thy friends to feast. verse. 16.
The great supper. Luke 16. 9.
Friends with the riches of iniquity. Luke 11. 5
The friend coming at midnight. Luke 12. 16
The rich Farmer pulling down his barns Luke 16. 19.
The rich Glutton, clothed in purple. Luke 16. 1
The rich man's Steward that wasted. Luke 18. 10
The rich Pharisie, and poor Publican. M. 7. 17
Every good tree bears good fruit. Ma. 1^. 13
Every plant which my heavenly father. Mat. 21. 19
The barren Fig Tree cursed. Ma 26 32
The green fig tree shows Summer. Luke 13. 6.
The fruitless fig tree spared. Ma 2^. 14
The Talents bestowed. Ma* 6. 19.
The Treasure in heaven. Ma. 12. 35
Treasures of the heart. Ma. 13. 44
Treasures in the field. verse. 52.
The good Scribes treasure. Lu. 15. 11
The prodigal son. Ma. 11. 16
The little children piping. Ma*. 18. 3
Except ye be converted as children. Mat. 21. 28
The dissembling son and his brother Luke 15. 8.
The woman's lost groate. Luke 18. 2.
The importunate widow. Mat. 24. 41
Two women grinding, Ma. 12. 50
Christ his mother, sister and brother. M. 7. 13
The straight gate leading to life. Joh. 14. 6
I am the way. Ioh. 15. 1.
I am the true Vine. Ma. 21. 33
The Vineyard hedged and husbanded. Mat. 20. 1.
The laborers hired into the Vineyard.
By o Light and p Leven, q Feasts and r Friends
by s Rich men, t Trees, and u Treasure.
By x Children, y Women, z Ways, and * Vines.
he uttered out of measure
Deep mysteries which long lay hid,
which he from heaven brought:
And by miraculous power he did
confirm what he had taught.
Section. 5.
AT Cana he did at their need
Ioh. 2.
turn water into wine.
Mat. 14.
And with five loaves, five thousand fed,
by his great power divine.
Mat. 15. Mat. 14. 26 Mat. 8. 26. Christ's miracles.
Another time four thousand men,
with seven loaves he filled.
He walked on the sea: and when
it raged, the waves he stilled.
Good Ma 9. 27 Mat. 12. 22 Mat. 20. 31 Mar. 8. 23. John. 9. 1.
sight he gave to many blind
and Ma. 9. 32 Ma. 12. 22 Mar. 7. 32.
speech unto the dumb,
The Ma. 12. 10 Joh. 5. 8. Luke 13. 11.
lame their limbs do firmly find,
the Mar. 7. 32.
deaf to hearing come.
He Mat. 8. 6. Mat. 8. 14. Mat. 9. 2. Mat. 9 20. Mat. 14. 26 Mat 22.
healed sicknesses long bred,
even Mat. 8. 3. Luke 17. 12.
foul and leprous evils.
Yea more, Luke 7. 12 John 11. 1. John 5. ^7.
he raised up the dead;
and Ma. 8. 19 Mat. 9. 32 Man. 17. 1^. Mar. 9. 20
disposses'd the devils.
Yet for all this he was not free
but had controllers many
To carpe and quarrel, pry and see,
if fault they could find any:
Among the rest, the Sadduces,
with those of Herod's train,
Scribes also and Pharisees,
did ever more remain,
His deadly enemies and did seek,
to trap him in a snare,
By crafty questions, rough or meek;
what way, they did not care.
But yet his hour was not come
he still preached painfully*
And them bequeathed a heavy doom,
For their hypocrisy.
Mat. 23. Mat. 24.
Jerusalem her fearful state,
he did with grief fore-say.
The manner eke he did relate,
of the last judgment day.
But comfort his chosen ones
John 14.
with spiritual consolation,
As sweetly may be seen in John's
divine, and long relation.
And so to Bethani he went,
where Simon him received:
And Mary's box upon him spent,
Mat. 26.
dissembling Judas grieved.
Then was the passover prepared,
and Judas pointed out,
A traitor to his Sovereign Lord:
and then he went about,
A work of grace, a Sacrament,
a Supper to ordain,
A seal of love, a testament
that should with his remain.
Thence went he to Mount Oliuet,
as was his use to pray:
Of scattering and of scandal great,
he told them by the way.
Section 6.
Mean while did Priests a Council call,
and did his death conspire,
They hired Judas in their Hall,
to work them their desire:
Who promised to effect it so,
as that they should not miss,
With him their Captain, on they go,
their token is a kiss.
As Christ in garden praying was,
with sighs and groans most deep,
That fearful Cup to have it pass:
the rest oppressed with sleep.
In comes this rude and bloody route,
which Peter could not bear
But drew his sword, and laid about,
and cut off Malchus ear;
Ioh. 18.
Which healed; they led him quietly,
with torches, clubs and swords,
Who at his very entery
Ioh, 18. 6.
did fell them with his words.
The poor Apostles scattered are.
Mat. 26.
yea Peter void of hope,
Denied his Master, cursed and swear
Mat. 27*
but Judas stretched a rope.
To high Priests Hall, they led him then,
and witness false suborned.
Mar. 14*
Spat in his face, and by their men,
he was both beat and scorned.
Mat. 27
Then did they him to Pilat send,
where being found most clear:
To free him Pilat did intend,
and that the Jews did fear,
Luke 23.
And then began with might and maine,
tumultuously to cry,
To let loose Barrabas again,
and Christ to crucify.
Mat. 27.
Nor were the common Soldiers slack.
to strip him of his weed.
A Scarlet robe put on his back,
and in his hand a reed,
And on his head a crown of thorns,
then do they bow the knee.
So, on him having spent their scorns,
to Golgatha goes he.
They forced Simon by the way,
to help his Cross to bear,
On which, his hands they did display,
his flesh they pierce and tear.
Betwixt to Thieves they did him place,
and gave him gall to drink,
They showed him all the vile disgrace
that heart of man could think.
Luke 23. 34. Mar. 15* 29
Which patiently he did endure,
from all that by did pass.
Until was come that blessed hour,
wherein all finished was.
Section 7.
Mat. 27.
THen rent the Temple veil in twain,
the rocks did cleave asunder,
The graves did open, the dead again,
did rise and walk with wonder.
The earth lay trembling, and the sun
abasht in darkness bode,
Luke 23* Mat. 27.
And then cried the Centurion,
this was the Son of God.
His body Joseph did take down,
and lap'd in linen sweet,
And in a new tomb of his own,
did bury it as was meet.
The Priests his resurrection feared,
and therefore took good heed,
To keep him sure with watch and ward,
and sealed the tomb with speed.
Mat. 28.
But he the third day did arise,
as he had them foretold.
Then did the Priests, to publish lies,
corrupt the guard with gold,
He being risen did appear
and charged the eleven,
To preach and baptize every where
by warranty from heaven.
And purposing to furnish them,
with knowledge tongues and art,
He bids them, from Jerusalem,
in no wise to depart,
Till promises performed were:
which said: out of their sight,
A cloud to Heaven did him bear:
and two in garments white,
Did check their gazing and foreshewd,
his coming back again.
Then to the City back they go,
where all as one remain
In prayer and request to God:
There Peter does propose
To fill the number that was od:
the lot Matthias chose.
Section 8.
Upon the day of Pentecost,
in cloven tongues like fire,
From Heaven high, the holy Ghost,
the Apostles did inspire.
Then did they in strange tongues report,
the wondrous works of God,
Astoni'st was their with each sort
of strangers that abode
Within the City; others mocked,
but Peter took their part,

three thousand at the heart.
John and he together ioin'd,
and healed the Creeple lame.
To prison though they were confined,

To preach the truth they were all bold,
and many wonders wrought,
Nor would they be by Priests controlled,
though often in danger brought.
For they in suffering did rejoice,
and God sent help at need;
Peter's voice,
were suddenly struck dead.
Then did they for poor widows moan,

Of which, was worthy Stephen one,
Jews.
Saul was consenting to this deed,

Scatered the Apostles far and wide,
but Gods word grew the more.
By Philip in Samaria,
with power it was taught.
And into Aethiopia,
'twas by the Eunuch brought.
Damascus was an harbourough,
for Saints: but Saul he frets,
And by high Priests commission now,
not one spares whom he gets,
But by the way he was withstood,
God turned all about.
Saul of a persecutor proud,
was made a Preacher stout.
At Ioppa Peter raised the dead
and did the Gospel plant,
And in Caesaria he sped,
Captain Cornelius want.
At Antioch the Word was spread,
by Preachers there dispersed,
Who truly following Christ their head,
were there called Christians first.
Now Herod storm's, kill's James, and close
in prison Peter cast,
An Angel sent, his chains does lose,
worms eat the King at last.
Section. 9.
But Paul) called Saul) surpast them all,
in patience and paines-taking.
To preach the word to great and small,
he evermore was waking;
By day, by night, by sea, by land,
by pen and eke by mouth.
Though perils great were often at hand,
yet published he the truth:
Four special iourneies did he make,
in lesser Asia one,
And twice he crossed the or Mare AEgaeum.
Grecian lake,
and then to Rome is gone.
With him also the holy Ghost,
Barnabas apart,
Their charge was in the heathen coast,
the Gentiles to convert.
From Antioch they first set out
and unto Paphos came:
Where Sergius to the faith was brought,
and Elymas to shame.
Then in Pisidia did he preach,
and in Iconion

till stirs cause him be gone.
Listra flee,
v. 11. 19.
and there he healed the lame,
For which, a god, then stoned, but he,
thence back to Antioch came.
The Apostles at Jerusalem

A false opinion to condemn
which did the Church befall.
A second journey they intend,
but John Mark does divide them:
Barnabas does to Cyprus bend,
but Paul and Silas hide them
Through Syria and Silicia,
and with them they consort
Young Timothe, of whom they have,
a special good report.
To Macedonia by night,
they called were and sent,
The Devil there gives God his right,
there ^ydia does repent,
And eke the Iailor: forthwith they
to Thessalonica come,
Noble Berea next with joy
does lend them ears and rome.
In Athens next he did dispute,
verse. 3.
and thence to Corinth came,
With Aquila he there does suit,
and Crispus christian frame.
There Gallio does shift his hand,
though hardly Jews complain.
verse. 22.
So, back he goes to Syria, and
to Antioch again.
Section 10.
THen did he his third journey haste,
toward Graecia once more,
Through lesser Asia he past,
as he had done before.
Ephesus he made some stay,
for their the word prevailed,
There was Appoll's showed the way,
and there Demetrius railed.
Philippi last he visited,

To Troas; where he raised the dead
and after, did not slack,
Unto Jerusalem to come;
yet sailing thither-ward,
The planted Churches al and some
to see, he had regard.
For in his iourneies as he went,
he preached and Churches planted.
Returning too, was diligent,
for to supply what wanted.
He them confirmed, ordained by choice,

And lastly did with cheerful voice,
commend them to Gods grace.)
At Ptolemais one day they bide,
and to Caesaria walked,
Where Philips daughters prophesied,
and Agabus fore-talked,
Of Paul his bands and sufferings great,
but he was naught dismayed.
To suffer death (though they entreat)
he ready was he said.
So, up he went, and being there
made to them full relation;
With praise to God they gladly hear,
the Gentiles strange vocation.
To please the Jews, they did advise
to purify him there.
But in the Temple stirs arise,
and like to cost him dear.
Had not the Captain ceased the striefe,
and by his great friendship.
Account he rendered of his life
and faith, and escaped the whipe.
Then was he brought before the Priest,
and smitten, but the fraie.
Twixt Saduces, Scribes, and the rest*
hindered the plea that day.
Then was he unto Foelix sent
his answer there to make,
Thither also the high Priest went,
and did Tertullus take,
The Orator, to plead their case;
but nothing yet they gained,
Till Festus came in Felix place,
before him being 'raigned,
Agrippa: he thinks well
to yield him up in bands,
Paul to Caesar did appeal,
and so escaped their hands.
To Italy then was he bound,

But perils great on sea they found,
the like have scarce been heard.
Tossed up and down, the ship at last,

And there was all to pieces dashed;
yet all came safe to land,
At Malta: where the Viper quick,
Barbarians quail,
Paul escaped the danger, healed their sick,
and thence to Rome did sail.
Where he arriving was by Jews,
both met and entertained,
He told the brethren ioifull news,
and two years there remained,
In his own house, and guarded by
a soldier of the train,
Until that Nero cruelly,
did cause him to be slain.
Revelation
Section 11.
AS Paul in preaching got the prize,
so, John did mount most high,
Gods holy hidden mysteries,
and secrets to descrie.
In Patmos on the Lord his day,
he ravished was in spirit.
Blessed from heaven are all they,
that read and keep his writ.
First, to the seven Churches he
sends healthful salvation,
Then sets he out Gods majesty
with a book of Revelation.
But seven seals this Book did close,
and none could be found out
Worthy the seals for to unloose,
till came the Lion stout
Of Iuda's Tribe, the Lamb once slain,
he every seal did open,
And each seal drew as in a chain,
some strange and special token.
The first, produced a Horse milke-white,
(the Gospels speed and power)
The second red, and did delight
by bloodshed to devour.
The third was black, and notice had
of plague and famine fell.
The fourth horse full pall and sad,
did Antichrist foretell.
The fifth Seal opened did bewray,
Saints souls that had been killed;
Which under heavens alter lay,
till were the number filled,
The sixth unsealed, their were seen
most fearful signs and wonders:
But God sealed (spite of Satan's spleen)

Last, opening the seventh seal,





And for the world would be so bad,
denounced naught but woes.
Section 12.

Christ Jesus is revealed,
And in his hand a little book,
but open and vnseled.
This Book St. John did take and ate,
and it the estate contained,
Of Gods Church present, and of that
her glory which remained.
For present state, she never wants,
the preaching of Gods spell,
Two Candlesticks, two Olive plants,
two witnesses this tell.
And though she clothed be with the Sun
and on the Moon do tread,
Yet wars against her are begun,
by foes that make her dread.
And first the Dragon caused her fly,
into Gods wilderness:
But Michael from heaven high,
his fury does repress.
Then did a Beast make war on her,
seven headed, and ten horned:
And after him there did appear
another Beast adorned
Like to the Lamb, with horns but two,
Yet Dragon-like he spoke,
And did what the first beast could do,
compelling all to take
His mark upon their forehead: yet
the Lamb has thousands still,
On earth that him with praises greet,
signed to do his will.
Section 13.
NOr does he Babylon forget,
the Idolatrous drunken whore,
Three Angels he against her set,
and after, seven more:

the next, to show her fall,
The third does torments notify,
bequeathed her lovers all.
Those seven, seven vials had,

Which they powered out as they were bad
on all the earth abroad,

and of the whore of Rome,
Antichrist:
for this her heavy dome,
Kings of the earth and Merchants proud,

But holy Saints, sing praises loud,

Unto the Conqueror of fame,
that clothed is with the word,
And bears on thigh, a mighty name,
and in his mouth a sword;
Who summoned triumphantly,
to his victorious feast,
The fowls that by mid-heauen fly.
As for his foe, the Beast,
He with the Prophet false were cast,
into the brimstone lake:
The sword devoured all the rest,
that part with him did take.
And then the Devil that Dragon stout,
that Serpent old (once chained,
A thousand years, and then let out,
he fiercely raged and reigned,
With Gog and Magogs armed strength,
whom God consumed in ire.)
The Devil (I say) was cast at length,
in lake of brimstone fire.
And with him, all the damned race:
for God comes on his throne,
A dreadful Judge* before whose face,
both heaven and earth are gone,
And hell and grave and sea and land,
deliver up their dead;
Who all before the Judge do stand,
and books are opened;
As they have done, doom does begin,
his work each one commends;
The wicked out, the godly in,
and so the Session ends.
Section 14.
Now does St. John lively describe,
the Church her glorious state,
Wife of the Lamb, th'espoused bride,
Christ Jesus heavenly mate:

in pure and bright array:
And was exhorted to be glad,
against her marriage day.
Jerusalem new, holy great,

God and the Lamb there hold their seat,
it lightning and defending.
The form is each way four square,
the matter gold and pearl,
The Citizens more noble are,
then earthly Lord or Earl.
Twelve gates there are for entrance wide,
the Porters, Angels stout,
A wall most high on every side,
does compass it about.
The weight of glory there reserved,
can no man's tongue impart,
Eye has not seen, ear has not heard,
nor enter can man's heart.
There is no sorrow, pain, nor care,
no want of cloth or food,
No filth, no darkness, curse nor fear,
no want of any good.
There is of life the tree and spring,
the storehouse of all treasures:
There Saints triumph, there Angels sing,
in paradise of pleasures.
There liu's our head, let us not slack,
but ever watch and pray:
Our Savior will come quickly back:
even so, come L^^d away.
Sine fine sit laus Deo.
Certain brief notes, collected out of late and approved writers, for the
better understand ding of the book of REVELATION.
SAint John received and wrote this Apocalypse, or Revelation of the mysteries
of God, when he was in Patmos. Patmos is an Island, lying in the Aegaean, or
Grecian Sea, which divides Asia from Europ, whither he was banished by
Domitian the persecuting Emperor of Rome, about the year -- 96.

The seven Churches to which he wrote were seven famous Cities of Asia the
lesser, and Greece, where the Gospel was planted.

The seven Seals.
THe first is referred to the times of the primitive Church, wherein Christ by
his Apostles and Ministers, subdued nations to the obedience of the Gospel,
Acts 2. 41.

Emperors, Caligula, Nero, Domitian, and the rest, until the time of
Constantine, who comforted the Church.

Goths, Hunnes and Vandals. And these plagues come on Horsebacke] noting the
generality or dispersion of them into many countries.

Antichrist; as King James is of opinion. See more in the description of
Antichrist following; and more at large in that Christian, learned, and
magnanimous premonition of his Excellent Majesty, prefixed to his Apology for
the oath of Alleagiance.



and commotions of states and kingdoms; the Devil stopping the course of the
Gospel; and Christ preserving his, in all corners of the earth. Cap. 7. 2.

The seventh shows the effect of the Devils rage, namely the springing up of
heresies, the fall of ministers and teachers, the height of corruption and
abomination in the Pope and Turk.

The 7. Trumpets.
BY these, God proclaims open war with the world; but his elect are still
in safe estate. Cap. 8. 3.

The four first trumpets show the hatching of heresies and errors, and the
increase of them after the first 300. years.

The three last show the full growth and devilish power of them, in the Pope,
and Turk, to the affliction of the Church and the final judgment and torment
of Atheists and Papists, denounced by three woes: Cap. 8. 13.

A Description of the Church.
SHe is called a woman, Cap. 12.

First because without Christ her husband she is weak, and can do nothing*

2. By conjunction with Christ she brings forth children unto God.

3. Because her love and affection is always set on Christ her husband.

She is clothed with the Sun) of righteousness Christ Jesus.

She treads on the Moon, that is, contemns the world and earthly things.

She has a crown of twelve stars, that is, the doctrine of the Gospel
garnished with the Ministry of the twelve Apostles.

She labors of child) namely and first of all Christ Jesus the heir of all;
and then of his members in all ages: the destruction of whom, the Dragon did
and does still watch. Cap. 12. 4.

A Description of the Devil.
HE is called a Dragon, Cap. 12. 3. for his cruelty and malice: and a red
Dragon, for his thirst and greedy desire after blood.

His 7. heads show his manifold sleights and subtilties.

His ten horns show his great and dreadful power.

His seven Crowns, signify the victories he has gotten.

His tail, of ambition, lust, and covetousness, reaches to Heaven, and
brusheth down the third part of the stars: that is, many of the ministers,
from their glorious firmament, to the earth of shame and obscurity. verse 4.

This Dragon was chained a thousand years* Cap. 20. 2.

These years the learned do account from the 36. year after the birth of
Christ, (for then the Devil began to be mad, because the Jews being cast
off, the Church of the Gentiles began to increase by the power of the Gospel
preached) until the time of Pope Hildebrand, or Gregory the seventh, who was a
wretched coniurer, and familiar of the Devil, and therefore a fit instrument
at hand, for the Dragons devilish and persecuting purposes, which with rage
and eagerness he executed, during the time of the seven Vials, the last seven
plagues.

A description of the first Beast.
HE is called a Beast, Cap. 13. 1. and signifies in scripture a monarchy
sometimes. Dan. 7. 17.

The reason is, for the tyranny of it.

He is said to rise out of the Sea) that is, out of the boiling and broyling of
heathen nations, did the great city, the Queen of the nations, or Roman
Monarchy arise, to tyrannize over the Church of God. Cap. 12, 15.

His seven heads signify the seven governments of Rome, namely Kings, Consuls,
Decemviri, Dictators, Tribuni militum, Emperors and Bishops. Which last was not
then come when Saint John wrote. Cap. 17. 10.

His ten heads signify ten Kings, that is, great power, large dominion and
command.

His ten crowns signify many victories: but in that they are on his horns,
and not on his heads, it shows he prevailed more by his power, then by
subtilty; contrarily the Dragon, whose heads are said to be crowned. Or as
petty Kings use to wear their crowns on their hats, in token of homage they
ow, so this beast, on his horns in token of subjection to the dragon, of whom
he received his throne and authority. Cap. 13. 2.

The Description of Antichrist, observed by the learned to be four times fully
and definitelie set down in this Book.
Cap. 6. 8.
The first description.
FIrst by a pale horse, having death for his rider, hell for his conuoy, and
power over the fourth part of the earth (or Europe,) to kill with the sword,
and with hunger (or the famine of the word, as the black horse did by corporal
famine) and by beasts, (as Locusts and frogs Cap. 9: 16) by whom she procured
the death spiritual of Kings, and nations, that drank of the cup of her
abominations. This being done, the souls of the Saints cry for vengeance, ver.
10. and their cry is heard and request granted under the sixth Seal, ver.
12. and. 17.

CAP. 9. 1
The second description,
MOre at large and in this kind, by his craft and strength etc.

He is called a star fallen from heaven (or some notable person of great
dignity in the Church: falling like Lucifer, from giving light unto the world,
and erecting a kingdom by a noisome pack of crafty and cruel vermin. He
has the key of the bottomless pit: (Or of hell it self, whither he sends
and lets in, thousands of souls, through the smoakie mists of darkness,
ignorance and superstition; out of which smoke, came those Locusts (or Abbats,
Cardinals, Monks, Friars, Priests and Shauelings) which sting like to Scorpions
(or, with damnable errors and heresies,) al save the green ones of God. ver.
4. And these so stung, finding no comfort in pardons, masses, merits, dirges,
crosses, and the like, shall in torment of conscience seek for death, and not
find it. verse 6.

These Locusts are strong and fierce as horses; and their crowns show them to
be conquerours. They have the faces of men (or fair pretenses of holiness) but
hair of women (or hearts full of lust) teeth of Lions (to catch enough, and
hold fast enough: witness the many fat morsels they did devour where-euer
they were seated.) Their King is a badde one or Abaddon: the Devil, and his
Vicar the Pope, the spoilers and destroyers of the Church of God. Their
doctrine is set down, ver. 20. Worship of devils and idols (or spiritual
fornication) murder (both spiritual and corporal) sorcery (by relics agnus
deies, enchanting prayers, to preserve, from shot, sword, thunder, and the
like.) Fornication (corporal, through inordinate lusts, and lechery,
increased by idleness, and bellicheere, in both sexes, restrained from holy
marriage, to a filthy monastical life, as by many proofs has been made
apparent,) theft, (robbing God of his Titles, and bestowing them on Antichrist:
and cosening men of their goods, by pardons, Jubilees, iugling wares and
merchandise.

The description is ended, Cap. 10. 6. Where the Angel swears, Time shall be
no more: and the next Angel or seventh, blowing the seventh trumpet, does show
the mystery of God to be finished. ver. 7.

CAP. 13. 11.
The 3. description.
THirdly by his growth and manner of government. He is called another beast
(because he dissers from the former (ver. 1.) or civil Roman Emperor, in
spiritual jurisdiction, tyrannizing over men by an ecclesiastical power,
which the Emperors had not. He is said to rise out of the Earth (or from a base
and low estate, to mount up thorugh the Emperors favor) by little and little.
He has two horns like the Lamb,) signifying his kingdom and his Priesthood,
his civil and ecclesiastical power, which he usurps from Christ but has
indeed from the dragon; like whom he spoke) in all his Decrees, Canons,
practices and proceedings. He did all that the first beast could do) that is,
he is strong and mighty, and nothing inferior to the Ethnic Emperor, priding
himself in lies and wonders: verse 13. sending fire) of excommunication from
Heaven; deceiving by damnable doctrines of Devils, verse 14. Killing and
burning for heretics, all that will not worship the beast, and marking all that
do worship, for slaves and vassals. And this mark must be set in their
foreheads) to signify their profession, and to acknowledge their subjection;
or in their right hand) to testify their absolute actual obedience to his
commands, upon supposition that he cannot err. None may buy or sell without
this mark, and therefore perjury and breach of promise and faith with
Christians, is a virtue in a catholic. Now that Rome is this Antichristian
beast, the Number does signify and show, verse 18 and (...), latin service,
Romish faith, Romish Church, answers to it in number and measure. Upon this
beast are seven Vials of Gods wrath and vengeance, propheced to be powered out,
cap. 16. and the seventh being emptied, it is said that Babylon came in
remembrance before God: Verse 19.

CAP. 17. 3.
LAstly by his dangerous and deadly allurements. As the true spouse (cap. 12.)
so here the adulterous spouse is likened to a woman; but yet a whore, for her
spiritual adultery; and drunken with the blood of the Saints, though a
gorgeous and glorious whore in outward show. Verse 6. The inscription by which
she is to be known is called a mystery: Verse 5.

First, as she takes herself to be the visible head of the Church, the
mystical body of Christ, and the dispenser of the mysteries of God.

Secondly, as she deserves indeed, and as the rest of her titles bear
witness: Verse 5. mother of whoordoms etc.) or a mystery of all abominations
under a pretext of holiness.

Now, this whore of Babylon, that rides on the beast, is not any one man, but
a succession in government, Cap. 17. 18. The beast is said to have seven heads.
cap. 13. 1. and cap. 17. 7. Which are expounded to be Roma Septicollis, or Rome
built on seven hills: the names whereof are these, Palatinus, Quirinalis,
Auentinus, Viminalis, Coelius, Exquilinus, Capitolinus* Or else seven forms of
government, as is showed before, of which the sixth. viz. the goruernement by
Emperors) was in being, when Saint John wrote: Cap. 17. verse 10. The seventh
was not then come, namely the Ecclesiastical government by Bishops; which
succeeded at Rome, upon the Translation of the imperial seat to
Constantinople, and was to continue but a short space) or, about two hundred
seventy six years, viz. from the time of Constantine, to the time of Phocas
the Emperor, who gave to Boniface Bishop of Rome, the title of Universal
Bishop, and head of al Churches. And by this means (the perfection of
defection, and popish corruption coming in) was brought forth (...) eight
beast, one of the seven) in show* (...) still seeming to succeed the Bishops in
Ecclesiastical form of government.

The means by which Antichrist shall be confounded.
CAP. 11. 3.
THey are called two witnesses, and they may signify, either the old, and new
Testaments, both which Antichrist has endeavored to disgrace, deface, corrupt,
suppress and destroy, calling the Scripture a nose of wax, a dead letter, a
leaden rule; and preferring the traditions of men above them. These witnesses
in the primitive Church, were clothed in sackcloth, and preached repentance,
by the space of five or six hundred years. But having done their ^^ssage, the
Roman beast made war upon them, and overcame them, so that they lay open to
contempt, cared for of none, understood of few, and feared of all to be meddled
withal. Yea they were killed) and the very throat of them cut, by a general
Censure, printed at Venice, anno 1562. Which condemns all for heretical,
that contradict their traditions.

Thus lay their bodies without vigor, verse 8. (as sometimes the Law, until it
was revived, 2. Chron. 34. 14.) and worldly men reioiced, verse, 10.) for now
they had liberty to do what they listed, a pardon for all might be procured by
their purse.

Yet at last (praised be God) we see these witnesses to arise again, and
beginning to shine in their former glory verse, 11.

Which happy alteration and exaltation of them, has bred such an earth-quak,
among the nations, that a good part of them that were in subjection to that
City are fallen from her, and have rejected her yoke, verse 13.

2 Or these witnesses may signify the preachers of the word. Two only are
mentioned, because two are sufficient in Law. These for preaching the foresaid
truth and doctrine, discovering the man of sin, and his corruptions, were put
to cruel deaths and torments; but rose again in the person of their
successors, supplying their room, and still bearing witness to the same
truth. Of which grew that memorable and miraculous observation, Sanguis
Martyrum, semen Ecclesiae, the Martyrs blood, the seed of the Church. The
mighty and marvelous power of this truth, has of latter times so increased
that many Kingdoms and great nations, have in few years been converted
thereby, to the true worship of the almighty God.

The seven last plagues, and vials of Gods wrath.
CHAP. 16. 1.
Pox, called Morbus Neapolitanus, a strange and loathsome vlser, which first
lighted on the ancient chief crutches and supporters of the Pope; namely, the
Italians, Spaniards, and Frenchmen, for their filthy whordomes and
beastilinesse, in the yeeare of our Lord -- 1494.

Turkish and Popish massacres, murders and mortal wars.



and drying) to torment with dearth, plagues, and sundry diseases.

Pope, and it is to them the greatest plague of all others, verse. 10.

Euphrates, (which was the best trusted defense of the old Babylon) that is,
consumed the riches, honor, glory, and strength of Romish Babylon. And this
makes the fish, nay, the frogs, to bestirre themselves: for it is said, that
three frogs came out] a plural number; noting their multitude and their
threefold direction, For, First they are raised and inspired by the Dragon the
Devil.

Secondly, they are maintained by the Beast, Antichrist.

And thirdly, they are instructed by the false Prophet, the Apostatique Church,
to defend the Triple-crowned Monarch the Pope of Rome.

Frogs they are fitly named, being indeed animals of either Element, Air,
Earth, or water; Churchmen by profession, Statesmen, by practice and politic
Trading. And they are evermore in action (mates for their walking-master the
Devil, Job 1. 7.) muddily croaking, and covertly crauling in every corner, in
Princes palaces, courts of Nobles, chambers of Gentles, and country cottages,
and all, to stop the leake, to fill up their Euphrates, and to gather again
the Kings of the earth, verse 14. murdering and massacring both Prince and
people that refuse lo be charmed, and inchaunted by their subtle insinuations.

That this is true, let the abominable and innumerable rabble of Jesuits
witness, who refuse no execrable means, to daube up their Antichristian
kingdom of darkness, without fear or respect of God and man: their
practices prove, and their positions published in Print unto the world, approve
the same.

Rome, by rents, conuulsions, confusions and commotions of their City and
Kingdom, and the fearful plagues of God upon them all, such as never were
felt, heard, or seen in any age before, Cap. 16. 21.

Go out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that
ye receive not of her plagues, says the Lord God, Reu. 18. 4

FINIS.

