THE Blinde-Mans Sermon: OR Confutation of the blind Pharisees.

By THOMAS GRANGER, Preacher of the Word, at Botterwike nere Boston in
Lincolnshire.

LONDON, Printed by T. S. for Thomas Pauier, and are to besold at his shop in
Iuie-Lane. 1616.

TO THE WORshipful, and my very good friend, Mr. Charles Leuenthorpe, Student
in Christ's College in Cambridge.
SIR, the duty that I owe unto you on the one side, and the consideration of
your worthiness on the other, moved me first to send this small present unto
you, desiring thereby to exhibit some testimony of my sincere affection
toward you, in the good opinion that I have of you for your good choice, and
hope of your happy proceeding therein: Trusting in the Lord, that as you have
devoted your self to Learning, and intend to consecrate your self to the
Church of God; so the Lord will bless you in all your studies, and make you a
powerful instrument in the building and maintaining of his kingdom.

Your Worships in the Lord to command, THOMAS GRANCER.

THE BLINDE-MANS Sermon.
JOHN 9. 31. Now we know that God hears not sinners, but if any be a
worshipper of God, and does his will, him he hears.
THese are the words of one that was borne blind, to whom our Savior Christ
had restored his sight. And he was occasioned here eunto by the envious, and
ignorant Pharisees, who said in the verse 24. that they knew Christ to be a
sinner. And in the verse. 29. that they knew not whence he was: that is,
whether his doctrine and miracles were of God, or of Satan. In the verse 30.
he closely reproves their ignorance by way of admiration: Doubtless this is a
marvelous thing that you know not whence he is! etc. Now in this verse he
goes forward, teaching them, and proving unto them that Christ is not a
sinner, and that he is of God. That Christ is not a sinner, he proves in this
verse, and thus he argues: God hears not sinners,
But God has heard this man:
Therefore this man is not a sinner.


The Assumption, namely, that GOD has heard him, he proves in the verse. 32.
his argument being drawn from the effect of Gods power in him, namely, the
wonderful Miracle that he wrought, in restoring him to his sight, which he
amplifieth by the comparison of all times: Since the world began, it was never
heard that any man opened the eyes of one that was borne blind. The greatness of
the Miracle appears herein, that being borne blind, he had no eyes, therefore
it must needs follow, that he made him new eyes: and he that can make eyes,
can also create a man, which none can do except God alone, and he to whom God
gives power to do it.

The Proposition is a doctrine, which he first confirms by the ground, that
is, the common knowledge and consent of all men, in the first words, [We know.]
Secondly, he illustrateth the same by the contrary, [But if any man be a
worshipper of God, and does his will, him he hears.] Herein therefore three
things are to be handled. First, the ground of the Doctrine. Secondly, the
Doctrine it self. Thirdly, the illustration thereof.

I. We know.
Which is as much as if he had said, all men learned, and unlearned, Jew and
Gentile, even all men, by the light of Nature, know that God hears not
sinners. And herein we are to observe, that whereas he says (we) he
alludeth to that proud and ignorant speech of theirs, in the verse 24. closely
deriding their ignorance. As if he had said, you Pharisees, that are puffed up
with pride and vainglory, whose hearts Satan has filled with covetousness,
whose minds the poison of black envy has blinded, and whose judgments,
worldly lusts have corrupted, that you neither will, nor can discern the truth,
nor judge righteous judgment, you know this man to be a sinner. Because this
man conuinceth you of open rebellion against GOD, laying open the foul
corruptions of your hearts, which with your subtle delusions of Alms, Fasting,
and Prayer, you keep secret and close within your selves, from the eyes of the
poor Commons; and because he glorifieth not your persons, neither any whit
respects you in the sight of the people, which would be honored and called
Rabbi of every man; but contrarily reprooueth your pride, covetousness,
cruelty in devouring widows houses, and hypocrisy, whereby you think your
selves greatly disgraced, therefore are you incensed in malice, envy, and hatred
against him, devising and plotting against him, seeking to ensnare and entangle
him in his speeches, if by any means, color, or pretense, you might bring him
within the compass of treason, or danger of Law. Hence it is that even
contrary to your own knowledge, you say that you know him to be a sinner. But
I that have been afflicted ever since I was borne, that have ever till now
borne this heavy cross of blindness, and now at length have obtained mercy,
that not only bodily eyes should be given me, to behold this comfortable
light of the Sun, but the eyes of my mind should be opened to behold the son of
God, I and such as I, even we know that this man is not a sinner, whatsoever it
pleases you to know and judge of him.

Here we obseruc, and see a poor and unlearned man teaching the learned
Pharisees, professed Doctors of the Law, and Prophets: and yet are they so
ignorant in both, as that a common man must teach them, yea, they are so dull
as that they cannot learn, which makes the man to marvel at them. Surely
indeed it is a marvelous thing, that plain, simple, and unlearned men should
teach learned Clerks, the wise and prudent: yet so it is; for the Gospel is a
Mystery, it is all wonder, for it is not grounded on any principle in nature,
therefore it is as great a wonder also, that any man should believe it, but that
it should be rather to the Jew a stumbling block, and to the Gentiles
foolishnes. In Mat. 11. Our Savior Christ had preached the Gospel to three
great and populous cities, Corazim, Bethsaida, and Capernaum, whereof Capernaum
was even lifted up to Heaven with the wealth, pomp, and pride of this world.
In this city there were many rich Merchants, that had knowledge enough by their
traffic to increase their substance. In it were learned men, and great
Scholars: In it were prudent and politic governors, yet for all this when
Christ preached the Gospel among them, there is none that repents, none that
believes, none that vnderstandech. They flockt about him to hear news, for
so his doctrine was accounted, and to see wonders, and when they had sufficed
themselves with novelties, there is no more repenting, believing, remorse for
sin, than if they had been at a play: but they returned back again like
the Dog to his vomit, and the Sow to her wallowing in the mire. Hereupon he
declares the causes hereof, by way of thanksgiving, for the instruction of
his Disciples then present, ver. 25. I thank thee O Father, Lord of Heaven and
earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise, and men of
understanding, and have opened them unto babes. It is so O Father, because thy
good pleasure was such. Herein the Disciples might learn. First, that the
Gospel cannot be comprehended with man's understanding and reason. Secondly,
that there is no power, disposition, or inclination in man's will to receive the
Gospel, being not only not congruous, but flat contrary to the same. For
these Cities, though they were not such brutish sinners as the Sodomites, but
ciuilly honest, or naturally virtuous, yet they were as unbelieving, and more
unbelieving then the Sodomites would have been: therefore they shall receive
the greater condemnation. Thirdly, the Disciples hereby might learn, that to
repent and believe is the mere mercy and grace of God. Fourthly, that this
mercy and grace, merely proceeds of the good pleasure of his will. Fifthly,
that God being absolute Lord of all the world, and maker of all men, respects
not persons, but has mercy on whom he will, and passes by whom he will, Romans
9. 15.

Therefore seeing that these old rotten rags, our dark hearts cannot retain
the new piece; neither that these old corrupt vessels can conteyne the new
wine of the Gospel, there must a new heart be given us, and a new spirit put
within us, Ezech. 36. 26. 27. We must be borne again, before we can enter into
the kingdom of grace, and of glory, John 3. 5. Now this second birth is not of
flesh and blood, nor of the will of man, but of the spirit of God, who
regards not persons, ages, sexes, worldly prerogatives. 1 Cor. 1. 26. 27. 28.
Brethren, you see your calling, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not
many mighty, not many noble are called: But God has chosen the foolish things
of the world to confound the mighty things, and vile things of the world, and
things that are despised has God chosen, and things that are not, to bring to
naught things that are.

Christ chose not, nor called any of the Politicians or Peers of Jerusalem to
be the planters and builders of his Church and Kingdom, nor yet any of the
Pharisees, Scribes, or Lawyers, for they were not fit nor apt to make Disciples
of; those rotten, tattered garments, and fusty vessels were too far worn,
and spent, and too much corrupted with fleshly wisdom, worldly policy and
craft, sensuality, bodily pleasures, pomp, and vanities of natural life: So
far were they ouergrowne, and thoroughly corrupted herewith, as they could not
empty themselves, nor lay aside these things, to prepare themselves for Christ,
unless they should lay their whole selves aside.

But he chose simple and silly Fishermen, which having their businesses, and
getting their living by sea, had least fellowship and smallest dealings with
men which were men of no employment, little acquainted with the subtilty and
craft of the world, and were as babes in comparison of Citizens, and such as
deal in great and many matters. These, and such like, as are least infected
with the world, and whose bodies are broken and tamed with labor and travel,
hunger and cold, are fittest instruments for the holy Ghost to work in. They
are the fittest by whom God might show forth his saving wisdom, and by, and
in whom his goodness, mercy, and grace might be most clearly manifested to
the world. And this is the glory of his mercy and grace, to exalt, honor, and
glorify the foolish, weak, and contemptible things of the world, by calling
them to be the greatest in the kingdom of grace: to whom the honor, glory,
and wisdom of this world must stoop, and yield it self in homage: yea, the
least in this kingdom is above all principality and power.

Another example hereof there is in the poor family of Lazarus of Bethania,
whether Christ often resorted to dinner, to supper, and to lodging, and where
he had his heartiest intertainement. Why? was not Jerusalem the most convenient
place for the Lord of Heaven and earth, the King of glory to be entertained in?
Was it not more fitting that Herod the King, that Pilate the Roman president,
or rather that Caiphas the high Priest, or that some of the Princes, or at the
leastwise, that some of the Elders should have given him royal intertainment,
according to the majesty of a King? Where were the Scribes and Pharisees that
sit in Moses chair, whose Disciples they boasted themselves to be? How could
they be better employed, then in receiving and glorifying the Son of God
before all the people, teaching all men by their own example to reverence, to
fall down, and worship him? Why do they not with all submission, and
prostrate humility, as their Master Moses commanded them: hear this Prophet
that the Lord their God has raised up unto them, which is greater then Moses,
than Elias, than Solomon, being the Lord of life, the Prince and Savior of the
world?

If Christ had appeared in earthly royalty, worldly ostentation, pomp, power,
dignity, then would Annas and Caiphas the high Priests, the Elders, the
Pharisees have gathered to him, and given him royal intertainment, because they
would have hoped by him to have been freed from the tributes, taxations, and
servitude of the Romans, from the pollage and pillage of the Publicanes and
Officers; because that by him they might be honored and graced in the sight of
the Commons, and because that by him they might be promoted to worldly
dignities.

But because his appearance was spiritual, not worldly, he has neither form
nor beauty, Esa. 53. 2. they saw nothing in him wherefore they should desire
him. They saw only out of their proud, covetous, and envious hearts, matter of
contempt, because that for the endless comfort of the meanest and basest
estate, he appeared in form of a servant. And though the brightness of the
glory of the Father, together with his mercy, compassion, and goodness toward
man more manifestly shined herein, yet they looking on him with fleshly eyes,
judge of him according to the outward appearance, Ioh. 7. 41. Therefore as a
servant they esteem him, and use him. And because he wholly did the works of
God, in gathering together and saving the Elect, to the only honor and glory
of God, and not to the honor of himself, and of them especially, therefore do
they condemn him for the most wicked man, and handle him like the vilest
creature of the earth.

Let our litterall teachers, that are so ripe headed, but dead-hearted, and all
common Protestants, commonly carnal Gospeliers, think and consider well of
this, and apply it to the present times, and their present selves, if so be
that in seeing they can perceive, and in hearing they can understand. For as
Christ the head was received, entertained, and used then, so shall his true
members be to the worlds end among them that profess his name. For this is the
mystery of iniquity. And the Apostle testifies that the afflictions of Christ
are accomplished in his members. And all that are in Christ Jesus shall suffer
persecution, though not at all times with extremity (as very many of the
children of God have done) yet in some measure and degree even in the most
reformed and established Church, yea, and almost in the best reformed house.
Noah's family was the most godly, and best in all the world, yet is there in it
an ungracious Cham. In Abraham's house a mocking Ishmael. In Isaaks, a profane
and reuengefull Esau: and amongst the Disciples of Christ, a covetous thief
and a traitor.

Where was our Savior crucified, but amongst his own? He came amongst his
own, but his own received him not. John 1. And where are the members of
Christ afflicted and persecuted, but amongst their own? The brethren of
Christ, even Churchmen, (as we say) betrayed him, sold him, put him to death:
so the brethren of the godly shall be their persecutors, even they (I mean) of
the same profession, as David complains. It was not mine open adversary, that
did me this dishonor, but even thou my companion, and familiar friend, we
took sweet counsel together, and went to the house of God as friends.

Use.
This teaches Christian men, not to think the better of themselves for their
worldly wisdom, wealth, honor, learning, degrees in the University, etc.
Seeing a man in the ample possession of all these, these may be the least in
the kingdom of heaven. (I speak not this to derogate from learning.) In Luke
10. 17. The seauenty Disciples, that Christ sent to preach in the Cities,
whether himself would come, returned again with joy, saying, Lord, even the
Devils are subdued to us through thy name: but in verse. 20. Christ curbeth
their rejoicing which sauoured too much of the world, Rejoice not (says he)
that spirits are subject to you, but that your names are written in the book
of life.

Whereby we plainly learn, that a man may be excellently furnished with
gifts for the discharge of any calling, and for the ministry as well as any
other, and yet notwithstanding be a reprobate: for the letter kills, but the
spirit gives life. Therefore let a man glory in a good conscience, which is a
continual feast. Let him rejoice in that he feels the love of God shed
abroad in his heart; and in the testimony of the holy Ghost, assuring his
spirit, that he is one of the sons of God.

Secondly, this teaches the poorest, not to think the worse of themselves for
their mean estate, because they want these outward things, 1 Cor. 7. 21. 22.
Art thou called being a servant? Care not for it: For he that is called in the
Lord being a servant, is the Lords freeman: likewise also he that is called
being free, is the Lords servant. And Iam. 1. 9. 10. Let the brother of low
degree rejoice because he is exalted: Even to be the brother of Christ, the
son of God, and heir to the kingdom of glory. Ver. 10. And he that is rich
in that he is made low; for as the flower of grass so shall he vanish away.
The inward man of the one is ever flourishing, and the outward man of the other
perishing. He that has much worlds wealth, and dignity, and but a small
measure of Grace is inferior to him that has a great measure of grace, and
but little, or no worlds wealth. For spiritual things among themselves admit
comparison, but between spiritual things, and earthly things there is no
comparison at all. This knowledge and consideration that worldly men want,
whose felicity consists in these outward things: this, I say, in the children
of God works lowliness of heart, humility of mind, meekness of spirit, in
such sort as that they had rather make themselves equal with them of the lower
sort, than to stand upon comparisons, and to strive for pre-eminence, as the
fashion of the world is. Lazarus the beggar found matter of rejoicing and
glorying in Christ, though deprived of all earthly things. David the King found
matter of rejoicing and glorying in Christ only, Psalm 4 6. 7. 8. As other
men, even the men of this world rejoiced and gloried in the increase of their
substance, with the rich man in Luke 12: So he on the contrary rejoiced in the
love, favor, and countenance of the Lord. And Psalm. 119. Thy Law is deerer
unto me, than thousands of gold and silver. And Paul the Apostle found matter
of glorying in Christ only: Phil. 3. 8. He counts all things loss for
Christ, and judges them to be but doung. And as concerning any worldly thing,
he will glory only in his infirmities, and rejoice in this, that he is
counted worthy to suffer for Christ's cause.

These three examples teach all men, of all estates, degrees, and callings, to
rejoice in Christ alone, and to esteem of themselves by their Christianity,
not by worldly prerogatives. For, as for the profane rich, though he had all
the world, with the glory thereof, yet the loss of all shall be his
inheritance: and the godly poor, though he want all, or rather seem to want
all for the time present, yet shall he have not only this world, but the
world to come for his inheritance.

Thirdly, this reformeth the erroneous conceit of them who measure men by the
measure of their learning: they have indeed the greatest means and helps,
but the grace of God is the only cause revealing the mystery of Christianity,
to whom he will. Otherwise the most learned men are often the most enemies of
Christ, and Christians, and when they think themselves to be most wise, they
become the greatest fools. To this purpose David acknowledges, Psalm. 119. 98.
99. 100. That he had more understanding than his teachers, than the ancient,
than either the man of great reading, or the man of much observation, and great
experience by reason of years, And why? because he kept the commandments.
For indeed how much a man practices, so much he sauingly knows, and
understands. He that knows a country, and can plainly describe it only by
the map, is not to be compared with him that has travailed it through,
although the one be learned and eloquent, and the other unlearned, and plain
of speech. The man that has no taste, may by relation of others, talk, and
discourse of tastes, and the differences thereof; even so may he talk much of
the Lord, that never tasted how sweet the Lord is, and speak much of the
Scriptures, in whom they were never powerful to his conversion. Hereof the
Lord complains by Jeremy; They say the Lord lives, and yet they swear
falsely, Ier. 5. 2. Likewise by Ezechiell: They say, let us go and hear the
word of the Lord, and sit before the Preacher, as the people uses to do, but
their heart goes after their covetousness, and after their pride, and after
their adultery: Ezech. 33. Their outward pomp shows their inward humility,
and not their heart-sicke, but braine-sicke devotion.

Thus much of the ground [we know.]

The Doctrine, [ God hears not sinners.]
The Interpretation of the words.

First, to hear, signifies two things. First, it signifies the infinite
knowledge of God, whereby all things lie open to his eyesight, neither is
there any thing hid from him, no not the most secret intention of the spirit,
and he is therefore called in Greek, Kardiognostos, a Searcher of the heart,
Psalm. 139. 1. 2. 3.

Secondly, it signifies the love and favor of God, whereby he does not only
know, but acknowledge, approve, and grant the prayers of the godly, whether
they be vocal, or the desires, and sighs of the heart. Contrarily, not to
hear, is to forsake men, and leave them to themselves, to disallow, not to
accept, to deny and not to regard their prayers, and desires.

Sinners,] Are all men unregenerate: whereof some are brutish, some civil,
some outwardly religious. As for the regenerate, though they sin, yet they
do not commit sin, 1 John 3. 8. 9. that is to say, sin does not reign in
them, Romans 6. 12. Sin reigns when men obey it in their lusts.

That God hears not sinners, it is evident, Prou. 28. 9. He that turns
away his ear from hearing the Law, even his prayers are abominable. Here is a
lesson for them that come to hear the Word in a statute pace. Esaias says, When
you shall stretch out your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you: and though
you make many prayers, yet I will not hear you. Esaias 1. 15. Zachary says, As
he cried and they would not hear, so they cried, and I would not hear, says
the Lord, Zach. 7. 13. As we are dead, dull, and drowsy in the worship and
service of God, and unthankful to him for his benefits, mispending the same on
our lusts: even so in affliction and trouble, the Lord will be also heavy, and
slow of hearing. Are you come to inquire of me says the Lord? as true as I
live when I am asked, I will not answer, Ezech. 20. 3. Here is a lesson for
them that never offer to the Lord, prayer, praise, and thanksgiving for all the
good things that they hold of him, enjoy by him, and daily receive from him:
And David goes further, Psalm. 66. 16. If I incline my heart unto wickedness,
the Lord will not hear me. Here is a lesson for hypocrites that babble much
and pray little, coming near to the Lord with their lips, but keep their
hearts from him.

There be sundry reasons why the Lord hears not sinners.

First, because they are not the Sons of God, but the servants of sin, and
therefore have they not the spirit of Sons, whereby they might call God Father:
but the spirit of fear: not of Sonne-like fear, which proceeds of love and
reverence, but of servile and slavish fear, whereby they rather avoid the
presence of God, as of an inexorable Judge, and are then most quiet in mind
and least troubled in Conscience, when they have the least to do with him, and
when they think, speak, and hear the least of him. Herein evidently showing
themselves to be sons of sinful Adam, who knowing himself guilty, shrouded
himself in the thicket from the presence of the Lord. This is the cause, why
sinners hate the Church, where God speaks unto them, and they should speak
unto God, and contrarily love the Tavern, Alehouse, and vain company, even a
filthy polluted Conscience, wherein the worm begins to gnaw upon every
occasion. This is the cause why they so hate, yea, persecute with deadly hatred
the most godly Preachers, even because they take them to be their greatest
tormentors, saying in their spirits as Ahab said to Elias, Have thou found me O
mine enemy? 1. Kin. 21. 20. Art thou he that troublest all Israel? 1 King.
18. 17. And as Amaziah said of Amos, The land is not able to bear his words,
Amos 7. 10. And as Ahab spoke of Micah to Iehoshaphat. There is one Micah, the
son of Imlah, by whom we may ask counsel of the Lord; but I hate him, for
he never prophesies good unto me, but evil, 1 King. 22. 8.

Secondly, the Lord hears not sinners, because they do not pray aright, yea,
their petitions are full of rebellion, and derogatory to Gods Majesty.
Therefore even as the Prince throws a wicked petition from him, and casts
the petitioner into prison, and it may be, punishes him with death, as King
Solomon did Adonijah for asking Abisag to wife: so the Lord deals with those
petitioners, as David says, let even their prayer be turned into sin. So
that the Lords answer to such requests is like the answer of Solomon to
Bathsheba, concerning Adonijah, God do so to me, and more also, if Adonijah
has not spoken this word against his own life.

Now the wicked cannot pray rightly, because they know not the Lord, nor his
ways, what pleases, what displeases him. And the reason hereof is, because
they despite the word of the Lord. The wicked know well what they would have of
God, but they cannot abide to know what God would have of them. Gods benefits
they love, but faith and obedience they love not.

Thirdly, the Lord hears not sinners, because they ask temporal things to
consume them on their lusts: and spiritual gifts, many desire to glorify
themselves therewith. Therefore, says Solomon, the scorner seeks wisdom,
and finds it not, Prou. 14 6. And S. James says, ye ask, and receive not,
because you ask amiss, that you may consume it on your lusts. Ye Adulterers,
and Adulteresses, know ye not that the amity of the world is enmity with God,
and whosoever will make himself a friend of the world, is an enemy of God?
James 4. 3. 4. Even as the Adulterous wife asks gold, silver, jewels, costly
apparel, etc. of her husband, that she may bestow them on her lovers; so do
all wicked men, even all the men of this world ask, and desire of God, all
good things for the sustenance of their bodies, and maintenance of their
persons only, to cheer and delight their flesh therewith: to adorn and
beautify their persons therewith, but not to glorify God with the same.
Herein they make use of God to serve their own turns of him; as it is now a
common practice of these wretched times for one man to love another, only for
the use that may be made of him, for his own gain. And as it is the practice
of rouing whoremongers, to marry a woman that is old, or of base parentage,
because she is rich, that with her goods they may maintain their Strumpets:
Even such is the dealings of sinners with God: They seem to draw near unto
God, but it is with flattering and dissembling hearts: for their heart goes a
whooring after his benefits, to set their whole affections thereon, to mispend
the same upon their bodily lusts, without fear. The wicked herein are like
Abimelech, the King of Gerar, that gave kind intertainment to Abraham, Genesis 20.
and to Isaak, Genesis 26. for their supposed sisters sake, because they were fair
and beautiful to look upon: so the wicked make a show of praising and
thanking God for his benefits, like dutiful children, but it is for the
benefits sake, to commit spiritual fornication therewith, whereby they anger
and provoke the Lord to burn in jealousy, and in the fierceness of his
wrath, utterly to consume them.

Fourthly, the Lord hears not sinners, because they are not thankful for
benefits received, therefore the Lord denies their requests, and in steed of
a blessing, sends them a cursing. And if God deal thus with his own
children, how much more with the sinner and the ungodly. Because that Ezechiah
rendered not according to the reward bestowed on him, but his heart was lifted
up, therefore wrath came upon him, upon Judah, and Jerusalem. 2 Chronicles. 32. 25.
And David says, that wrath came upon Israel for their unthankfulness, and
disobedience. And the great complaint that the Lord makes of their
unkindness, see Micah 6. 2. to the verse. 5.

Fifthly, the Lord hears not sinners, because they ask not in faith. They
repose no trust in Gods promises, but are tossed too and fro as waves of the
sea with the wind, James 1. 6. 7. The blind heart of the wicked lusts, and in
his lust, and for his lust, he comes to God, but when God hears not, then
he plays with his wit, and casts about every way to obtain his fleshly
desires: but if by his own devises, and devised means, he cannot prevail,
then he comes to God again: If God hear him not, then he goes to his
shitts again, ever and anon intermingling broken, rude, and untempered
prayers, with earnest expectation of his sinful desires, as though God should
be ever at hand to help and further him in his lustful proceeding. And if he
cannot obtain his desires, then is he angry with God, and leaves praying, as
the wicked say in Job. 21. 15. What benefit have we by praying to the Almighty?

Objection.
But God does often hear the unlawful and unholy prayers, desires, and
requests of the wicked, and grants the same, as well as to the godly.

Answer.
It is true: but not in such manner, and for such ends, as he hears his own
children. First, he grants the wicked, and rebellious their requests and
desires of indignation and wrath. The Israelites being weary of Manna, because
that to feed always of one dish, became wearisome and loathsome unto them,
wished that they were in Egypt again, where they had varieties, and change of
meats, as Fish, Cucumbers, Pepons, Leeks, Onions and Garlic, therefore they
required flesh of the Lord, and they were not disappointed of their lust, Psalm.
78. 30. They did eat, and were well filled; for he gave them their own desire:
But, while the meat was yet in their mouths, the heavy wrath of God came upon
them, and slew the wealthiest of them, yea, and smote down the chosen men that
were in Israel. The rich man, Luke 12. had his desires granted: for he desired
and sought for wealth all his life long, and that his worldly estate might
prosper and flourish, and so it did, he was not disappointed of his lust. But
as he withdrew his heart from the Lord, and set his affections on earthly
things, therein putting his confidence; even so the Lord withdrew his grace
from him, and for his reward, left him in the hand of hell. To this purpose the
wise man says, Eccles. 5. 12. There is an evil sickness that I have seen
under the Sun; to wit, riches reserved to the owners for their evil. The
like to this we see in that miserable caitife, Eccles. 48. that had neither
son nor brother, nor any kinseman that needed his wealth, yet was there none
end of his travel, neither could his eye be satisted with riches. Wherein we
may see that the Lord granted his covetous desires, but in his wrath does
withdraw his grace from him.

For he had not power given him of God to eat, drink, and to delight his
soul, and to reioyee in the good use of his goods, but to live in continual
labor, sorrow, grief, trouble, fear, despair, and drudgery all his life.
And herein is the witty, and wicked worldling deceived all way, that whiles
he thinks to make a friend of the world, it becomes his enemy in the end.
For thus the goulden Idol Mammon rewards his servants: He leaves them at
the last in the hand of hell, from which he is not able to deliver them. The
world like a stickering whore deceives them, causing them by her manifold
allurements to commit fornication with her. But as Dalilah having bound Sampson
(who doted too much on her) forthwith cried, the Philistimes be upon thee
Sampson: even so deceitful and lovely Mammon having tied and bound down to
the earth, the plunged hearts of her muddy Mammonists, calls for the Devils
to prey upon their souls. Examples hereof are the rich man, and Dives.

Secondly, God grants those things that the wicked desire, wish, and pray
foryet he hears not the wicked. The reason is, his own children request the
same, whom he hears, and so the ungodly are made partakers of their desires,
through the prayers of the godly, amongst whom they live. The men of the earth
desire earthly things, and they obtain the same for the godlies sake, whom
notwithstanding they hate, and despise. In Paul's dangerous voyage, both Paul
and the martiners desire safety, and for his sake were they saved, which
otherwise should have perished, yet the Soldiers would have killed Paul, Acts
27. 42. Whiles faithful Jacob dwelt with churlish Laban, his substance
multiplied, and prospered, yet when God blessed Jacob also with great increase,
Laban and his sons murmured, and hung down the countenance, envying his
prosperity. For this is the malice of the wicked, that whereas they enjoy the
fat of the earth, and the good of the land for the godlies sake that are
mingled among them, yet they hate the godly, snatching and catching all things
from them; yea, they judge them unworthy of any thing, and if it were in their
power, would make them their slaves and drudges: yea, and would deprive them,
not only of goods, but also of life.

And herein observe the darkness of their hearts, yea, their extreme
madness: for if the godly were taken from amongst them, as just Lot was taken
from among the Sodomites, then should fire and brimstone suddenly rain down
upon their heads. When as the wicked Jews had crucified Christ, chased away
the Apostles, and weeded the Christians out of Jerusalem, then came fire,
sword, famine, and utter destruction upon them: Even so, if all the godly were
taken out of the world at this instant, the day of judgment in a moment should
necessarily follow. For as soon as the wheat is shorn, then the tares must
presently be cut down. For they have done harm to the wheat, and do harm in
the land. There is no profit in their growth, but in their burning.

And here let all flowters, worldlings, disdainefull persons, polliticke
catchers, despisers of the word, and them that are good, know, that God does
not maintain the world, and preserve all things therein for their sakes, but
for his own children, from whom they snatch, and catch all that they can, to
dishonor God and his children therewith.

They are the children of Abaddon, or Apollyon the destroyer, that abuse all
things to the dishonor of God, the disgracing and harming of the godly, and to
their own condemnation? And this is the kingdom of the Devil here on earth.

Go to now you cunning catchers, you flouting politicians, you proud and
wanton damsells, you lustful and Epicurish Gluttons, and thou muddy Mammonist,
on whom have ye ieasted? upon whom have ye gaped and thrust out you togue? Are
ye not rebellious children and a false seed? Bastards and not Sons? Are ye
not witches children? the seed of the Adulterer, and the Whore? Esaias 57. 3.
4. You boast your selves to be the children of God, and the true members of
Christ: As for others, you make mocks on them with your mouths, and you devise
terms for them to make them sectaries, and hypocrites: they are your gazing
stocks, and taunting Proverbs: But where is your Devotion? Where is your Zeal?
Where is your Feruency? Sobriety? Prayer? Thanksgiving? Humility? What fruits
of the Spirit appear in you? What love of God in the zealous exercises of Gods
worship? What contempt of the worlds pomp, pride, vanity in your moderate
living, and sober conversation? What regard of the afflictions of Joseph? Yea,
your bodies are your Idols, and your souls like drudges do homage to your
bodies. This appears in your excessive fare, in your excessive apparel, in
your excessive varieties of fashions, in your excessive curiosity in the
putting on thereof.

In these excesses ye compare one with another, emulate one another, and strive
to go beyond one another. Your backs and bellies are grown to be so
chargeable, and require so great maintenance, like to the Idol Bell, as that
the land is hardly able to bear you. You grow so insupportable that the earth
groneth under you. I would ye knew (but mockers pleasing themselves in their
own fancies will know nothing till they be made sober, and taught by
judgments) that these are no fruits of the spirit, but of a sensual appetite,
they are no signs of Christianity, but of a dissembling and proud heart, and
of lust that reigns in your mortal and corruptible members.

It is to be feared that as God gives you your hearts desires in all these
things so some heavy judgments hang over your heads, to purge this shameless
corruption, and filthy rottenness out of this land, that has had rest for
many years. It is a shame, and an abomination to see what priding and decking
there is of these corruptible carcasses, how this earthly mass of mortality,
this lump of sin and death, does magnify and exalt it self.

It is a wonder to see what pride in apparel, what curiosity in the fashion,
and putting on of the same is to be seen on the Lords day, a day of humility
and denotion: but such fleshly shows and swaggering service the Lord abhorres.
For a penitent, humble, lowly, and devout heart, does not show forth it self
in such flourishes. Such were the conditions and practices of the Jews in
Esayes time, Esaias 3. and in Ezech. 33. 30. to the end. They come to thee as the
people use to come, and my people sit before thee, and hear thy words but they
will not do them; for with their mouths they make ieasts, and their hearts
goes after their covetousness. And lo, thou art to them as a ieasting song
of one that has a pleasant voice: for they hear thy words, but do them not.
Ciuility swallows up Christianity in this present age, and pride deuoureth
hospitality, the very name whereof is worn out of man's memory.

Thirdly, God grants the withes, desires, enterprises, and endeavors of the
wicked, as they are instruments of his justice, and rods of correction. For by
them, as by asword, a fire, a rod, the Lord does chastise his children, and
punish the hypocrites. Yea, by their wickedness, the Lord does effect those
things which may be for his own glory, and the good of his children, they not
knowing what they do. Fire naturally desires nourishment or fuel, and we
give it the same, that we may do our works with it: yet fire intends not the
doing of our work, but the consuming of it: Therefore we call it a good
servant, but an evil master. The Devil and the wicked are as fire in their
own natures, destroyers, yet by accident (as I may say) they are builders and
repayrers, for such is the power, wisdom, and goodness of God, as that he
does his own work by contrary means. In this respect the Lord calls
Nabuchadnezzar his servant, in that by him he punished the rebellious Jews.
Nabuchadnezzar did this out of his covetousness, and pride of his heart,
magnifying himself against God, and his people, yet he executes the Lords
judgments on the rebellious, and mercy on the obedient. But what was the
reward of this his service? what he did out of his own evil heart was one
thing; what the Lord did out of his power and wisdom, is another thing. His
wages was according to his own work, Esaias 33. Woe to thee that spoylest, and
wast not spoiled, and do wickedly, and they did not wickedly against thee:
when thou shall cease to spoil, thou shall be spoiled: when thou shall make an
end of doing wickedly, they shall do wickedly against thee, Esaias 45. 1. In
this respect is Cyrus called comparatively the anointed of the Lord. The Lord
will by him execute justice on Nabuchadnezzar for his tyranny, pride,
covetousness, cruelty, and by him show mercy on his people in their deliverance
out of their seauenty years captivity. Thus Judas, the Highpriests, and
Pharisees had their desires, they were not disappointed of their wicked
proiects, and crafty plots, but the end and proof thereof was the building of
Christ's kingdom, which they thought to overthrow, and the destruction of their
own kingdom, which they sought to establish by this means, Ioh. 11. 48. If
we let him thus alone, all men will believe in him, and the Romans will come,
and take away both our place and the nation.

The use of this. Have thou power? have thou wisdom and policy? have thou a
judicious, contriuing and plotting head? have thou a searching imagination, and
strong memory? have thou learning and eloquence? have thou wealth and friends?
have thou a healthful and strong body? these things are much desired, and
admired of the world. But consider what thou art, not what thou have. How do
thou use thy power, to build the kingdom and Church of Christ therewith, or to
build up thy self in the destruction thereof to thy power, how little soever
it be? How do thou use thy poli^y and wisdom, and wherein are these gifts
exercised? wherein art thou judicious, and what is the ground and end of thy
proiects? what use do thou make of thy learning? in what matter, and what
causes do thou practice thy eloquence? what do thou with thy wealth, and
what use do thou make of thy friends and assistants? what does thy soul work
with those instruments, the members of thy body? Let not the sword boast it
self of the good metal, the curious workmanship, and sharp edge, but rather
who does use it, and to what end: Whether the Magistrate does use it to the
terrifying of the wicked, and the comfort of the godly, in their preservation;
or the tyrant does use it to shed innocent blood therewith, as King Manasses
did. Whether the true man does wear it for his defense, or the robber to
spoil and kill. If thou be an ungodly person, and set thine heart to
do mischief, then all these excellent parts are but as a sharp edge, or
whetting, whereby Satan spoyleth and deuoureth; but yet so as the will of the
Lord, which is clean contrary to thy will, and Satan's will shall be executed
by thee, and him, to the punishment of the wicked, to the trial of the godly,
to the destruction of thy self, and to the glory of God, and good of his elect.

Fourthly, the Lord does grant the wicked their desires, as they are vessels of
wrath. Because he will magnify his power and justice in their just overthrow,
which is altogether their own seeking. For all that they desire, ask, wish,
and seek for, is is against themselves, and so they bring evil upon their
own heads. Romans 9 22. 23. What and if God would, to show his wrath, and to
make his power known, suffer with long patience, the vessel of wrath prepared
to destruction, and that he might declare the riches of his glory upon the
vessels of mercy, which he has prepared to glory? An example hereof in the
Amorites, Genesis 14. 13. 16. The Amorites and Canaanites, etc. must be spared
400. years, till their wickedness and strength were come to the full. They
must be strong for their multitude, the Giant-like Anakins must be multiplied,
their walls must be mounted up to heaven, their munition good, the land
affording store of iron and brass: and then will God magnify his power and
justice, in casting them out by a weak people, that were but as Grasshoppers in
comparison of them; and his mercy in planting them in, and the glory of his
name in both. So Goliath must be a strong Giant, trained up in feats of war
from his youth, bold and courageous, able to handle a spear and to toss a
pike as thick as a Weauers beam, and therefore so confident in his strength
and skill, as that he durst oppose himself against the whole host of Israel,
and even bid defiance to all men. Contrarily, David must be a Shepherd, the
youngest and meanest of all his brethren, not able to handle spear, shield, or
sword, or to wear harness; but with a little stone in a sling must he
deliver the people of God, and destroy their enemies, that the power of God
might be made manifest in the overthrow of his enemies, and his mercy in the
deliverance of his servants. The like we see in Nebuchadnezzar, in Senacherib,
in the four Monarchies, in Antichrist, in our own observation every where.

The use. If thou do excel other men in natural gifts, and worldly
prerogatives, and that the world, and all things concur together for thy
desired advancement, look well to thy heart, and to thy affections, what thou
aymest at, what thou seek for, and fear, take heed that thou oppose not
thy self inwardly, or outwardly against God, his Church, his Gospel, and
professors thereof, least thou prove a vessel of wrath, on whom God will show
forth his power and justice, when thou art at the height, and in most safety,
trusting in thine own strength, and his mercy in delivering his out of thy
oppressing hand. Examples hereof we have in Pharaoh, Haman, Antiochus, and
others before mentioned. For it is the glory of the Lord to catch the wise in
their own craftines, 1 Cor. 3. 19. To bring down the high looks of the proud,
to cast down Princes from the Throne into the dust, and to raise the poor out
of the dust, to sit with Princes. Psalm. 113.

Therefore, if thou be high and eminent in the world, be humble and lowly in
heart, disrobe thy self of all earthly royalty, and set the Lord always
before thine eyes, that so thou may with David be eminent in the Church and
kingdom of Christ. Then may thou, and shall thou with ioyfulnes, and with a
good conscience enjoy the blessings of God.

Moreover, seeing that God suffers the wicked to wax great, that in their
humiliation, and deiection the glory of his name may be more manifested to all
people, that they may fear him, and praise him: this teaches the godly being
oppressed by their might, to be patient till the Lord come, which is a sure
deliverer of his Servants: for, as David says, The patient abiding of the
meek shall not always be forgotten.

The consideration hereof also affoordeth great comfort to them that fear
God, that whiles the ungodly triumph, saying, who is Lord over us, who shall
control us, we will tread down on every side all that withstand us; that
whiles they are thus digging pittes to bury the children of God in, and with
Haman making gallows to hang them on, themselves shall fall into the same
destruction. Marvel not therefore if one be made rich, or if the glory of his
house be increased, as David says.

III. He illustreteth his doctrine by the contrary.

[But if any man be a worshipper of God, and does his will, him he hears.]
Here he shows whom God hears, to wit, the godly, which is opposed to the
sinner. The godly man he describes by his fruits of sanctification. He is a
godly man, that is, a worshipper of God, and does his will. Herein obserus two
things.

First, he says not that (does worship) but that is a [worshipper] which word
implies a continuance in worshipping, or habit, whereas hypocrites worship
God by constraint, by fits, and in outward show, and are therefore unconstant,
not being firmly settled on the foundation, as the graft is united to the
stock, growing together with it, but rather loose and tottering, as things
joined together called contigua, and not as things united called continua,
which have one spirit. or common form. He that worshippeth God in spirit
without hypocrisy, and in truth without will worship is one spirit with the
Lord, and there is none unrighteousness in him. 1 Ioh. 3. 9.

Secondly note that these words must be taken collectiuely, not distributiuely,
that is, they must not be parted, but go together. The reason is, because that
worshipping of God without obedience, is formal hypocrisy, and obedience
without works, is but civil honesty, and both are sins. The former is false
worship and hypocrisy, for disobedience discouers it to be so; the latter are
false works, or beautiful abominations, for prophannesse shows it, and God
will hear neither the false worshipper, nor profane liver.

Concerning the former, worship without works is counterfeit, and hypocrisy,
the Lord cannot abide it, Esaias 1. The Lord says that their sacrifices, burnt
offerings, incense, are abominations; that their new Moons, Sabaoths, solemn
feasts, solemn days, and assemblies, are a but then and wearisomnesse,
neither will he hear their prayers. But they must be washed, they must be
purged, the evil of their works must be taken away, they must cease to do
evil, they must learn to do well. This was the sin of Saul, he would seem
to be a true worshipper of God, offering sacrifice, and therein was he diligent
enough, but he was slow enough in doing the will of the Lord, when he was
commanded to slay the Amalekites man, woman, child, beast, etc. he spared the
King, and brought of the best of the things to sacrifice with, 1 Samuel 15. 21.
22. There be abundance of Saul's in these days. Therefore S. James teaches:
Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only; deceiving your own selves,
Iam. 1. 22. He that looks in the perfect Law of liberty, and continues
therein, he not being a forgetful hearer, shall be blessed in his deed. And
the whole second Chapter throughout. Therefore Worship without Obedience is
flat hypocrisy.

Again, concerning civil honesty, or moral life, wherein the common
Protestant rests himself with contentment, is odious in the sight of God
without sincere worship. For the frame of man's heart is evil continually, Genesis
8. 21. how good soever he seem to be to himself, and others that cannot
discern between natural and spiritual life, but make a confusion of both
under an outward profession, or rather bare name and title.

All our righteousness is as a menstrous cloth, Esaias 64. 6. and Job says, Who
can bring a clean thing out of filthiness? Job 144 vain therefore are the
supposed good works of Papists, seeing that they worship not God rightly, and
as vain are the works of vainglorious worldlings, seeing that they worship
not God truly. Therefore worship and obedience must go together, proceeding
from a right fountain, that is, from an humble and obedient heart, purged from
hypocrisy by a working faith, and unfeigned repentance, from sanctified
affections, and a good conscience. This is only acceptable to God, and those
actions and obedience that proceed from this fountain, though stained with
many wants and imperfections, God accepts as pure, the impurity not being
imputed, Psalm. 32. 1. 2.

Furthermore, there be sundry reasons why that God hears the godly: namely,
those that worship him sincerely, and do his will.

First, because that they being redeemed from the bondage of sin, are the
sons of God, they have the spirit of adoption, or of ingenuous and freeborn
sons, by which they both know God, acknowledge God to be their God, and love
God their Father, and consequently call upon him. Prayers proceeding from a
profane heart do not pierce the heavens, but those which come from Gods own
spirit, therefore S. Paul says, Ephesians. 6. 18. Pray always with all manner
prayer and supplication in the spirit. And Romans 8. 26. The spirit makes
request for us, with sighs that cannot be expressed. Such holy motions and
rauishments does the spirit of God work in our hearts, as that we are not
able to express the same in words, but with sighs, even as when words fail
us, we use to declare our minds by gestures. Such prayers come as it were,
immediately from the spirit, with little use of man's discourse, and fantasy,
and no use of the tongue. Esau prayed with weeping eyes, but with a profane
heart, therefore he is not heard. The Pharisees make long prayers with an
hypocritical heart, therefore they are not heard. But Moses prayed only in
mind, and his desire is heard, Exodus 14. 15. Yea, the Lord accepted his prayer
as much as if he had earnestly cried: therefore the Lord said to him, Why
cryest thou? Go forward with the people. So Anna prayed in her heart with
submisse and imperfect words, which caused Eli to think that she was drunk,
1 Samuel 1. 13. Therefore the Lord heard her. And hence it is that the Apostle
bids us pray continually, 1 These. 5. 17. For with the heart, mind, or spirit,
a man may pray always. This teaches us in praying to pray for the spirit of
Prayer.

Secondly, the Lord hears the godly, because they alone, being taught by the
word and spirit, do pray aright. As Romans 8. 27. He that searches the heart,
knows what is the meaning of the spirit; for he makes request for the
Saints, according to the will of God, both teaching them what to pray for, and
how to pray. Which prayers the Lord accepts, as S. John teaches. This is the
assurance that we have of him, that if we ask any thing according to his
will, he hears us. An example hereof, 1 King. 3. 9. 10. Because Solomon
prayed not for riches, nor for long life, nor the life of his enemies, but that
a wise and understanding heart might be given him, to judge the Lords people
righteously, therefore it pleased the Lord, and he granted his prayers. Thus
our Savior Christ prayed. Not my will, but thy will be done.

Thirdly, the Lord hears the godly, because they are truly penitent and
sorrowful for sin, and therefore come into the presence of God, clad with
the righteousness of Christ, Psalm. 51. 17. The sacrifice of God is a contrite
spirit, a contrite, and broken heart, O Lord will thou not despise. Psalm. 28.
7. Praised be the Lord, for he has heard the voice of mine humble petitions.
Our Savior Christ calls only such unto him, Matthew. 11. 28. Come unto me
all ye that are heavy laden, and I will ease you. For the Lord has anointed
me to bind up the broken hearted, Esaias 61. 1. Therefore the poor Publicane
confessing his sins with a penitent and sorrowful spirit, is heard before
the Pharisee justifying himself by his works. Luke 18.

Fourthly, the Lord hears the godly, because they pray fervently, I am. 5.
16. The prayer of a righteous man prevails much if it be fervent. Hereby two
things are specially necessary in Prayer.

First, a man must be a righteous man. He is righteous that by faith is
ingraffed into the righteous (Jesus Christ) and in him brings forth fruits of
thankful obedience to God.

Secondly, he must pray fervently, that is to say, seriously, or with earnest
desire. For this feruency argues that a man prays in the spirit, which
overcomes the dulnes and drowsines of the flesh, which quenches and
oppresses the spirit.

This we may see in the heavy and sleepy Disciples, Matthew. 26. 40. though they
had a willingness, and desire to watch, and to pray, yet the flesh quelled and
dulled the spirit. Secondly, feruency argues the necessity of the thing that
we pray for. We most of all, and most earnestly pray for that which we have
most need of. Thirdly, feruency argues Faith in Gods power, that he is able
to help, and in his goodness, that he is willing and ready to help. For
this we do know in common reason, that it is against reason to request
earnestly a thing of a man that we know he is no way able to do for us.

But it may be objected: if a man be willing and ready to help us, when we
have occasion to use him, accordingly as he has formerly promised us, what
need we be so earnest? So God has promised that he will help us when we
come unto him: why is feruency then so necessary.

To the former part or proposition I answer, that good manners require so much:
For otherwise, 1. We should seem rather to ask a thing of him, than to
entreat him, as though for some respects he were as much beholding unto us,
when there is no such matter. 2. We should seem rather to require a thing of
him, then to desire it. 3. We should cause him to think that we have no great
need of that which we request. Hence it is that the humble beggar which
craves earnestly, does speed better than he that asks carelessly, and much
better then he that asks commandingly.

To the second part or reddition I answer, that we must come unto God as a
poor harmeles beggar comes to a King to crave alms, in whose presence we must
esteem our selves as but a flea, as David terms himself before Saul, 1 Samuel
24. 15. Yea as dust and ashes, as Abraham terms himself, approaching near to
the Lord. The Lord will have us to call, and cry, and as it were, clamourously
to follow after him, when he seems to turn his back, even as the beggar
does, and as the poor widow in the Gospel did, that claue to the unjust
Judge like a Burre, till she had her petition granted. And this is indeed a
special fruit of true faith, and an evident sign of trust in God. For hereby
we acknowledge him to be our only help, and none other, and therefore we
cleave fast unto him, as being otherwise destitute, helpless, and hopeless.
This was the continual practice of David on this manner, to pray. This was the
practice of the Cananitish Woman whose daughter was possessed with a Devil,
Matthew. 15. 22. which Christ there takes for a special argument of her faith.

Wherefore was Balaak so earnest with Balaam to come and curse Israel? Even
because he was the only man in his kingdom, on whose help he relied, and
wherein he most trusted. I know (says he) that he whom thou blessest, is
blessed, and he whom thou cursest is cursed, Number. 22. 6. Upon this knowledge
and confidence was he so earnest with him. Likewise upon our knowledge,
acknowledgement, and confidence in God, are we earnest with him; otherwise our
prayers are cold, and drousie, heartlesse, and lippe-labour, yea almost saying
in our hearts with the wicked: what profit shall we have, if we pray to the
Almighty? A special example of this feruency in Prayer, see Psalm 143. 6. My
soul gaspeth to thee as a thirsty land. Likewise, 2 Chronicles. 32. 20. Ezechias
and Esaias pray to heaven against Senacherib, and were heard. Thus Anna prayed, 1 Samuel 1. Thus the faithful in afflictions pray, Psalm. 123. 2. The Jews in
captivity are taught by Jeremy to pray after this manner. Lamentations 2. 18.
19. O wall of the daughter of Sion, let tears run down like a river, day
and night. In the beginning of the watch power out thine heart like water
before the Lord.

Thus the Lord commands them to pray in the day of their visitation, Ierem.
29. 12. 13. Then shall they cry unto me, and I will hear you, and ye shall
seek me, and find me, because ye shall seek me with all your heart.

Fifthly, the Lord hears the prayers and supplications of the godly, because
they are not wavering minded, but constantly rely on the promises of GOD in
the use of those lawful means, that in his providence he has appointed for
them. Therefore that our prayers may be heard, we must pray. First, in the
spirit. Secondly, according to Gods will. Thirdly, in Humility; Fourthly, with
feruency. Fifthly with constancy.

A Godly Prayer to be said at all times, either in public, or private.
ALmighty and everliving God, maker and preserver of all things in Heaven, and
in earth, and in Jesus Christ our most merciful and loving Father, we thy
poor and unworthy servants, being desirous to offer unto thy divine Majesty
the fruits of our lips, even an Evening (or Morning) sacrifice of prayer,
praise, and thanksgiving, do entreat thy fatherly goodness, so to prepare our
sinful hearts by thy good spirit, as that, although in much infirmity and
weakness, yet in sincerity and true desire, we may perform this duty in
some sort acceptably to thy gracious will.

For, O Lord, we humbly confess here before thy glorious presence, that we
are altogether in thy fight a loathsome mass of corruption, conceived in
sin, and borne in iniquity, all our righteousness being like a menstruous
cloth, our minds full of ignorance, our wills full of rebellion, our
affections earthly, and sensual, our consciences full of pollution,
continually casting up mire and dirt, our lives a sinful race of iniquity to
iniquity, growing riper in trespasses and sins then we do in years.

Innumerable are the sins of our deceitful hearts, which for want of
knowledge of our selves, and due examination, we pass by, without confession,
without sorrow, without repentance and amendment. Our omission of all good
duties toward thy majesty, toward our brethren, and toward our selves is
infinite. And the sins that we daily commit against our own knowledges, and
consciences, through presumption, and carnal security, are without number. And
yet our Consciences accuse us, and we feel by woeful experience, how full of
wants, imperfections, and frailty we are, how prone to all evil, how backward
to all goodness, how doubtful, distrustful, fearful, and unconstant in every
good action, yea our whole spirits, souls, and bodies are full of vanity and
profaneness, deadness, dullness, and drowsinesse in thy worship and service.
And whereas thy goodness toward us is endless, in pouring plentifully upon us
all temporal benefits and spiritual blessings; Yet such is our
unthankfulness, as that the one we spend upon our lusts; and the other we
have contemned, and neglected, or in our lives have not sufficiently expressed
the sweet comforts thereof in thy Gospel revealed unto us.

But since (O dear Father) thou have taught us by thine own word, that thou
have loved us with an everlasting love in Christ Jesus, before all times, and
in time have heretofore declared, and do yet continually manifest thy
grace, and mercy toward all thy people, and to us in special, giving us thy
word and worship, in so peaceable and plentiful manner, and together with
the same all things needful both for soul and body: we beseech thee also
vouchsafe this special grace unto us, even a lively feeling of our sin, and
misery, that on the one side, through the sensible apprehension of thy wrath,
and sharp punishment, remorse, and sorrow may constrain our hard and stony
hearts to humble our selves before thee with dread and reverence, and on the
other side the saving feeling of thy love, shed abroad in our hearts by thy
holy spirit may comfort us in the steadfast assurance of the free forgiveness
of all our sins in the bloodshed and death of thy dear son Christ Jesus, and
encourage us with all delight and cheerfulness, constantly to practice all
good duties, both in time of afflictions, and troubles, and in time of peace
and prosperity.

And seeing that it has been thy good pleasure to call us with an holy
calling into the communion and fellowship of Jesus Christ thy only Son, to
the end that denying all worldly, and fleshly lusts, we should be unto thee a
chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an holy natition, a peculiar people,
to show forth the virtues and graces of thy good spirit: enable us to mortify
all evil works, and sinful lusts, that our lives may express our light, and
faith in thee. And principally give us victory over those personal sins, which
thou know our nature most prone to commit. Power upon us thy holy spirit of
wisdom, and grace; govern, and lead us by thy good word, that it may be a
lantern to our feet, and a light to our paths. So inlighten the natural
blindness of our dark hearts by thy spirit, as that we may daily be renewed
by the same. By the which we pray thee to purge the grosnes of our hearing, and
understanding, that we may euer-more profitably read, hear, and understand
thine holy word, and heavenly will. And to that end, O Lord, beget in us a true
love, and reverence of all the faithful Ministers of thy Gospel: Give us
melting hearts to fear and tremble at thy voice, turbing all worldly, vain,
and light imaginations in us, that commonly shut the door of the heart against
the effectual passage of thy word into the same. O Lord, our natural hearts
are so full of rebellion and hatred of thee, as that we cannot abide to hear
thy voice, or know thy will. All our devotion toward thee, is as the morning
dew, and the exercises of Christian duties, quickly become wearisome unto us.

Give us grace therefore to love thy word fervently, to search the Scriptures
diligently, to read them humbly, to understand them truly, to hear thy word
attentively, and to live thereafter effectually and carefully. Give us such
measure of wisdom, and discerning of spirits, that among the manifold errors,
opinions, and judgments that are in the world, we may stand upright, and
constant in thy truth, taught in thy holy word.

O Lord sanctify every one of us throughout in spirit, soul and body, that
we may be kept blameles, till the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ:
Strengthen our faith more and more, confirm our hope, increase our love
toward thee, and our brethren for thy sake, give us a fear of thy name, a
reverence of thy majesty, a zeal of thy glory. In time of peace and safety
keep us from contention, oppression, and cruelty. In plenty and prosperity
from pride, vainglory, wantonness, intemperancy, contempt of thee, thy word, thy
Ministers, and the poor. In afflictions comfort us, that neither we despair,
nor blaspheme thy holy name, but with patient thankefulnes trust in thy
deliverance. And as we daily fall into one sin or other through humane
frailty, so give us continual penitent hearts, and spirits, that we may be
sorry without desperation, and trust in thy mercy without presumption.

That we may more and more amend our lives, and become truly religious without
hypocrists, lowly in heart without feigning, faithful without deceit. joyful
without lightness, sad without distrust, sober without slothfulness,
conscionable in all our dealings without gripplenesse, content with that which
thou sendest without covetousness, ready to every good work, apt to draw all
men from vain and foolish behavior, by our sober counsels, godly speeches,
and religious carriage. To make much of them that fear God, and entertain
them gladly: to embrace the fellowship of the godly wise, and to eschew the
company of all profane persons, and despisers of them that are good: to
assist, comfort, and encourage the Ministers of thy word in that high,
weighty, and glorious calling, to our uttermost power: to gather together with
them, and constantly to withstand all scatterers, spoylers, and deuourers.

These virtues and graces of thy good spirit, (O heavenly Father) like as we
acknowledge to receive them from thee by virtue of our ingraffing into the
mystical body of thy Son Jesus Christ, so we beseech thee to beget, to
cherish, preserve, and increase the same in us, that we may daily more and
more be transtormed into the image of thee that have translated us out of
darkness into thy marvelous light, and that to thy honor and glory, the
destruction of the kingdom of sin and Satan, and to the utter and endless
confusion of all Inffdells, Idolaters, and hypocrites that exalt and magnify
themselves against thee, and thine holy ordinances.

And in these our weak and imperfect prayers, O Lord, we are not mindful of
our selves alone, but of the whole estate of the Catholic Church militant
here in earth, and every particular member thereof. Bless all Christian Kings
and Princes that call upon thy name, and especially pour down thy blessings
upon our dread Sovereign, whom next and immediately under thy self, thou have
appointed to be our King and Governor. Bless him both in body and soul,
enrich him with all gifts necessary for so high a calling, and make him long a
nurcing Father in Israel Bless him in his Queen, make her an help to him in
all good things. Bless the young Prince, and all their royal issue, on this
side, and beyond the Seas, and grant that there may not want one of that line
to sit upon this throne so long as the Sun and Moon endures. Bless all his
Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel, be thou present with them in all
their Counsels, and president over all their consultations, that whatsoever
they intend or do, may be to thy glory, the honor of the King, and comfort of
thy people. Bless al Judges, and Magistrates; give them thy heavenly grace
indifferently to execute justice, to the punishment of wickedness, and vice, and
to the maintenance of god inesse and virtue. Bless all the Ministers of thy
word and Sacraments, thou that art Lord of the harvest, thrust forth many
faithful, and painful laborers, that may feed thy people, with knowledge
and understanding. And give to all thy people, humble, loyal, and obedient
hearts to thy Gospel with love, and reverence to the Ministers thereof, whom
thou have appointed to be the Shepherds, Teachers, and Governors of their
souls in thy room and place, till thy coming to judgment at the last day.

Moreover, we desire to render unto thy heavenly Majesty, all hearty and
possible thanks for all thy mercies and blessings bestowed on us from the
beginning of our days till this present time, for thy fatherly care over us in
providing all things necessary for our souls and bodies, for our food,
raiment, health, peace, liberty, friends, which many of thy children want, that
are as dear unto thee as our selves. But especially above all, we praise thy
name, for the blessings of a better life, as namely for our election in Christ
Jesus, before the world was; for our creation after thine own image in the
beginning, for our estectuall vocation out of the darkness of this world into
thy glorious light and kingdom by the outward preaching of thy word, and the
inward operation of thy spirit: for our justification by the obedience and
bloodshed of thine own son; for our adoption from the thraldom of Satan,
into the glorious liberty and privilege of Sons; for our sanctification in
the crucifying of the body of sin, and quickening of the inner man; for our
continual preservation against the temptations, and conquest of sin, Satan,
and this evil world; for the free donation of thy holy spirit, the earnest of
our inheritance, until the redemption of the possession purchased, and for the
continuance of thy Gospel, the word of truth, and the means whereby we are
partakers of all these blessings.

O Lord open our blind eyes every day more and more to see, and consider of
thy great and marvelous love toward us in all these things, that by the due
consideration thereof we may be drawn nearer unto thee, to love thee much,
because thou have given much. And as thou do abound toward us in all
goodness, so grant that we may abound toward thee in all obedience, and
thankfulness.

And as O Lord, thou being infinite in mercy, have had mercy on us, when we
deserved judgment; even so we beseech thee, be merciful to all them that sit
in darkness, and in the shadow of death; cause the glorious light of thy
Gospel to shine in their hearts, according to the good pleasure of thine own
will: and in whom thou have already begun the work of conversion, vouchsafe
them also the grace of perseverance, that continuing to the end, they may be
partakers of glory with thy Saints in light. And whereas salvation came of
thine ancient people the Jews, but they through unbelief were cut off, that
we by faith might be grafted in: Lord call them in thine appointed time, take
away the veil from before their blind and uncircumcised hearts, and reveal
the knowledge of thy son unto them, that they and we may be one sheepefold
under one shepherd Christ Jesus. In the mean time destroy the kingdom of
sin, Satan, and Antichrist, every day more and more. Build up thine own
kingdom of Grace in the hearts of every one of us, and hasten thy kingdom of
glory, that when this miserable life is ended, we may reign with thee
eternally in glory.

Be gracious and merciful to them that suffer affliction for the testimony of
a good Conscience, deliver them out of the hands of their enemies, or so
strengthen them with the comfortable assistance of thy spirit that in dying
they may overcome the world death, and hell. Comfort all that are troubled in
mind with the burden of their sins, speak peace to their Consciences, say
unto their souls, I am thy salvation, Come unto me all ye that are weary and
heavy laden, and I will ease you. And to this end give the tongue of the
learned to thy Ministers, that they may know to Minister a word in time to him
that is weary.

Be merciful to them that are afflicted in body with pains, sicknesses, or
diseases, give them grace to bear the cross with patient thankfulness, and
to learn by those visitations to confess their sins, to acknowledge their
faults, to call upon thy name, and to amend their lives, that as heretofore
they have gone astray after the course of this world, through the inticements
of natural concupiscence, so they may now be brought to the knowledge of thee,
and of themselves. And also strengthen them that are any manner of ways
assaulted by Satan, give them a joyful issue with the temptation, that thy
grace in their deliverance by them may be glorified, and thy power conquering
Satan in their weakness, may be manifested, and for ever magnified.

Thanksgiving before meat.
WE thank thee O Heavenly Father, for all thy blessings, and mercies
heretofore bestowed upon us, and still continued, and renewed unto us.
Especially at this time for these thy good creatures that of thine own
goodness and bounty thou have ordained, and provided for the maintenance of
our bodies: give them virtue and power to nourish us, that thereby our
strengths being renewed, we may be more fit and able to serve thee in the duties
of our callings, to thine honor and glory, and to the comfort of our own
souls and consciences, through Jesus Christ our Lord,

Amen.
Thanksgiving after meat.
WE desire to return all honor, glory, praise, and thanksgiving to thy
Majesty, for thy fatherly care over us since the beginning of our days, till
this present hour. Chiefly for thy heavenly word the food of our souls, for
thy Sabaoths, and the peaceable exercises of all holy duties therein. And in
special at this time, for these thy good creatures, whereof at this present
we have been partakers by thy good providence, beseeching thee so to bless
and sanctify the same unto us, as that we may walk in the strength of them in
the performance of all good duties to thy glory, and our own comforts, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS,

