Galateo Espanol Ano Do^ 1640

Tho: Cross fecit

Reader stopp here, First fix thine eye,
On this quainte Spaniards gallantrye:
Then read his book, where thou shall find
He Is far less brave in Clothes, then mind.
W. S.



Galateo Espagnol, OR, THE SPANISH GALLANT, INSTRVCTING THEE in that which thou
must do, and take heed of in thy usual carriage, to be well esteemed, and
loved of the People.

Written in Spanish by Lucas Gracian de Antisco servant to his Majesty. And
done into English by W. S. of the Inner Temple Esquire. Full of variety, and
delight, and very necessary to be perused, not only of the generous youth of
this Kingdom, but also of all such as are exercised in their gentile Education.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for William Lee, at the Turks head in
Fleete-streete, near to the Miter Tavern. 1640.

To the high, Noble, and most Illustrious: CHARLES, Prince of Wales, etc.
SIr, let the strength of my desires to serve you, obtain your pardon, for
this my trivial dedication. Yet if the title of this book be true, (which is
not mine, but the first authors) it may prove worthy your inspection; if not,
your perusal. For, the few rules therein contained, (if he may be credited)
being well observed, will gain you the love of all men; and (consequently)
command their obedience. Two things, which Princes, above others, have greatest
need of, and wherein they become most happy, being made thereby, more
absolute, then either by rigor of Laws, or force of Arms. It is (I confess)
most true, that the great deeds, and heroic actions of Princes, are of
highest esteem: yet are they not (therefore) to be altogether regardlesse,
even of their ordinary behavior, and usual carriage. For as by them, they
become most powerful, and renouned: so by these, (if pleasing, and graceful)
they grow more endeered, in the peopls affections. This treatise was first
penned by a Courtyer. Therefore if it be not well translated, no marvel, for
how should a plodding Lawyer, make a neat construction, of a quaint and polite
Gallants meaning? rude as it is, I hope your highness will be pleased to
accept of it, not casting your eye so much upon the course visage, of the
present, as upon the fair intentions of the presenter. I confess there be no
dainties in it, fit for your curious palate, yet (I beseech you) be pleased to
taste of it, that others, for whom such course fare is far more proper, may
thereby be brought, to relish it the better. All I will say in its
commendation, is this: it is but brief, and is full of variety.

Inner Temple the 28 of March, 1640. Sir, I am Your Highnesses in all duty and
observance to be commanded, William Style.

The Approbation.
I Brother Augustine Arbole presentado, Reader of Divinity in the Monastery of
our Father S. Augustine, of Barcelona, by the commandment of the Illustrious,
and right reverend Lord, Micer Onofre Pablo celleres, Doctor of Law, and Cannon
in the Church of this City, official, and Vicar general, for the right
illustrious, and reverend Lord, Don Iuan dymas Loris, Bishop of Barcelona, have
seen, and examined, the Galateo Espanol, and I find nothing in it, which
contradicts, the faith, but is very profitable, and helpful to the good
instruction, and education of youth.

Dated in this monastery of S. Augustins, the 16 of May, 1594.

Brother Augustine Arbole, Vt. Celeres, vic. Genesis

The Approbation.
I Peter Torrens, Doctr of Divinity, by the commission of the Illustrious, and
right reverend Lord, Gabriel Marquet, official, and vicar general of
Tarraconensis, have read this book, entitled the Galateo Espanoll, and I have
found nothing in it, repugnant to the Catholic faith, and unto good manners.
In witness whereof, I here subscribe my self,

P. Torrens. Vt. Marquet. Vic. Generalis.

To The right illustrious Lord, Micer Francisco Bonnet, Viceroy of Catalunna,
and Counselor of Barcelona.
RIght reverend Sir, being of opinion, that the subject of this book,
entitled the Galateo Espanol, is of great importance, and of much furtherance,
to know how, and in what manner, men ought (ordinarily) to carry themselves, so
that they be not only not ill thought of, and hated of others, But very
acceptable, and pleasing to all: and considering on the other side, that for
want of Copies thereof, the common wealth loses this so great a good. I
determined to print it at my own charge. Because that it is not now in my
power, or ability, to do things of greater importance, I have (at least) done
what I could in this little: and as much as my skill would reach unto.
Afterward taking it into my consideration unto whom I were best to dedicate it,
as the custom is to do, in the like impressions of books; my phansy then
gave me, that I could not better dedicate it, to any body then your honor, who
with greater zeal and thought, desires, and procures, the good of this same
common wealth then any other, (as all do well see, and confess) as well in
the charge of a Counselor, as in that of a deputy, which your honor houlds,
at the present, and does order, and govern there in with so great diligence.
Therefore I trust, that your honor will be pleased, to receive it under your
protection: and although the service be not such, as is fit for the person of
your Honor, yet receive the heart and good will, with which it is offered,
together with the desire I have, to serve your Honor, and the common wealth,
(daily) more and more, in matters of greater consequence: for by this favor,
and reward, I recover more heart, and vigor, to undertake, and finish a
greater work. God keep your Lordship.

Right illustrious Sir, Bernat Cusana kisses your Honors hands.

To The right illustrious Lord, Goncales Argeto de Molina, Provincial, and
grand Iusticiar, for his Majesty, for the holy brotherhood, of Andalusia: Lord
of the Towns, of Veros, and Dagancuelo: and of the Castle of Gildolid.
Alderman of Civil, etc.
THe great and particular friendship, which Antonio Gratian, my brother, that
is in Heaven, Counselor of his Majesty, and Secretary to his royal person,
did find with your Honor, obliges me, to acknowledge it, and to account of
it, as all the good wits of this age do: behoulding in your Honor, those
testimonies, which you have afforded us in Arms, Government, and writings, of
his much virtue, great courage and clear understanding. For having at
thirteen years old, begun to serve his Majesty in the Wars, and not
forgetting the exercise of learning, as we may perceive by the pledges, which
Spain enjoyes, and expects from your Honors wisdom, in the governing of the
holy brotherhood, of Andaluzia: which your Honor takes charge of: he has
showed his worth, so that in one year wherein he served, by condemning a great
number to death and the Galleys, he has secured this Province, which was so
wasted with robbers; And I am confident the Divine, and humane Majesty, will
grant your Honor, the reward which such works deserve, which my Galateo did
rightly consider, in beseeching of your Honor, to accept of it, with the same
affection, it is offered. Our Lord preserve the right renouned person, of your
Honor, many days, with as much increase of wealth as is possible. From Madrid
the 10. of January, 1582.

Much renowned Sir, your servant Lucas Gratian Dantisco, Kisses your Honorable
hands.

To the Reader.
HAving seen (by experience) in the passage of my life, all the rules of this
book, I was of opinion, that I should do more good, if I did translate, out of
the Italian Galateo, these things, which ought to be considered of, in the time
of our youth, and to add other stories, and things, tending to this purpose,
which I have seen, and heard: which might be instead of dainties, and sweet
language, to make us passable, without an ill savor: the gilded Pills of a
loving reprehension, which are contained in this book, though they be
clothed in Tales, and jestes, do not cease to profit any that stands in need
of these admonitions: if his mouth be not so bitter, and his taste so
distempered, that nothing can please him; but for others, that are not such, as
are deciphered, in this Table, they may taste much of their own neatness, and
good judgment, and if any tittle of this, concern them, they may be
admonished thereby, and amend their fault, without any trouble of any, with the
bare reading, and observation of this treatise. I know well, that some will
say, that I have ill acquitted my self, by these instructions, though I make
my self master of them: but I answer with the same Galateo, where he says,
that the rather, as one that takes warning from faltring in them, do I now set
them forth, that others may not fall so unadvisedly as I have done, and so I am
excused; Alleging for my principal discharge to admonish thereby, to a
matter so proper for me, and at such a time as it cannot be taken for a
reproof, but an admonition. For that when I come of discretion, I consider I
shall receive content, in that I have bin admonished; for although I have
procured others to to live respected of all, yet might I have bin more wary of
my self. This I offer to the curious Reader, but my intention is to serve him,
subjecting my self, to receive with love, what reproof he can give me.

A Sonet of Galves de Montalvo, on the Book.
IN genious nature void of art
Is like a flint where fire's concealed.
Art is the steel that makes to dart,
The sparks unto our eyes revealed.
If any of these remain alone:
They both prove beggarly and bare;
But joynd more rich then gem or stone,
Each houlds his proper friendly share;
None is by nature learned or quaint.
And therefore void of good advise,
Like Birds for want of air we faint:
Lie still and cannot make our rise.
The rudest Clown is comely made,
By looking in this Crystal Glass;
Which Galate and Gratian had,
But now afford it thee to grace.
A Sonet of Doctor Francisco de Campusana.
WHat Fish to the bared hook will come
And there loose liberty, and life?
But bayted, all throng to their doom:
Easing the angler of his strife.
If profit be with sweetness mixed,
It must be well received of all:
The pleasure that unto its fixed,
More then the gain does me^ inthral.
Good counsel, as Nizander says,
Does seize on us, like the bare hook:
But Lucas so it bayted has,
He catches all men by the Book.
A Sonet of Lope de Vega to the Author.
A Blessed news, and happy day
Descends from heaven, in rich array:
Reward I ask, my boon I crave,
From you that hope this news to have.
You that search and hope to find,
Perfect court-ship, neat address:
Know, here comes wished to thy mind,
Of winning carriage, chief princess:
A glass to live by, Image rare,
For common profit, aad advise
Is offered here unto thy care:
Accept it freely, be not nice.
The Courtier that this ge^me does bring
If thou desire his name to have,
Is quaint, neat, fresh and glittering,
Gratian, and Galateo brave.
A Sonet to the Author.
THe fair and comely carriage,
Being daughter of the court of Kings:
Is found in Galateo sage,
Whose great renown, and valor rings.
I suck from hence, the courtly milk,
Of fair, sweet, gentle, lordly port:
Hither may the quaintest clothed in silk,
For counsel come, and hav't in short.
Here he presents in patterns rare,
Instructions for thee to receive,
That without pain, thou may take care,
Thy self from errors to relieve.
A Sonet of Lycenciado Gaspar de Morales.
A Happy lot, a blessed day,
An age that is full of sweet content
Is here discovered, and this ray,
Shows thee a wit most excellent.
The powerful heaven, with open hand,
Powers valor, wisdom, courtship down,
Gives grave discretion, brave command
To him that nature framed a Clown.
The Fool from hence become th wise,
The rustic swain can pass in Court,
The learners to perfection rise,
If in this Glass they will but disport.
THE AUTHOR directs this work, to one of his Brothers: advising him what he
ought to do, and what he ought to shun, in his ordinary carriage, to be well
esteemed, and beloved of the People.
Seeing it is certain, that thou art to begin that Journey which (for the most
part of my youth) I wasted, in this mortal life: for the love I bear thee, I
determined with my self, to show thee the steps, in which I walked, and am
experienced in: that when thou passest in them, thou may know how to leave
that, which is ill, and to choose the good in the right way of thy salvation.
And because thy tender age is not sufficient, nor apt to receive these rules
and counsels, (reserving them for their time) I may perchance begin to treat
of those, which some may think to be of little moment; And this is that, which
I am of opinion must be performed: so that in conversing and dealing with the
People thou may get a good habit and observe an affable, and acceptable
demeanor, and carriage: which is no less then virtue it self, or very like
her: as it is to be liberal, constant, or magnanimous, so is it to know the
manner, and way how to govern thy self, in thy words and behavior. And this
pleasing behavior, is of force to stir up and gain in thy praise, and
esteem, the affection and good will of those with whom thou must converse, and
live with all. And on the contrary: thou must avoyde a rude, and careless
carriage: which may procure thee hatred ill will and dispraise. And grant there
be no punishment by Law, for them that are harsh, and clownish, in their
conversation, (because the fault is not accounted heinous) yet it is enough,
they are punished by making themselves ill esteemed, of all People: so that,
(in truth) as men are afraid of fierce, wild Beasts, But make no account of
some little Creatures, as Waspes and Flies, which they fear not, yet for the
continual trouble and vexation, which they receive by them, they oftener
complain of them, then of the other great ones. And so it happens, that most
men complain as ill, of these troublesome men, by reason of their careless
carriage, as upon those that are full of mischief, and naughtiness. And
therefore none can doubt: but that he that frames himself to live, be it not
in hermitages: or other solitary places; But in Cities and Courts amongst much
People, to him I say it is a very profitable thing, to know how to be
pleasing, and acceptable in his manners: and that he so temper his behavior,
and dealings, that they content not so much his own will, and liking as they
be acceptable, and pleasing, to them with whom we converse withal. I know
well, that in thy first age, thou must pass through the beaten path of
infancy, passing it over in simplicity, and childish exercises, yet Seneca,
that was so wise (as he was from his youth) passed not them so over, but they
report of him, that two Roman Ambassadors, who held him wise went to Cordova
of whence they say he was, to see him, and as they saw him playing at Chesse
with other youths of the same age, they wondered much how (being so wise) he
could do so and not believing it was he, they went unto him, and asked him;
what do thou young man? Seneca lifted up his head and answered them acutely,
I am here bestowing upon Time, that which is its own. They stood astonished,
looking each upon the other and durst question him no further. Let every age
therefore observe his own puntillioes; According to this rule should I do
ill, to draw thee from thy course: indeed I am of a contrary opinion from it:
for it becomes not well a young man to be like an old man, and no less for an
old man, to behave himself like a young man: but that in every age a man
yield, and observe what is due to it. But let this relish well to thee, that
from the time that thou beginnest to make use of thy reason, and to enter into
the state of youth, thou observe, and read these things, that so thou be not
loathsome, but may understand, to give content; And this must be done
moderately, for he that takes pleasure to do things one upon the neck of
another, to please him that observes his doings, may be accounted a Jugler, or
perchance a flatterer, rather then a modest Gentleman: as he that takes no
care, either to please, or displease him that hears him, may be rightly
called a Clown. First thou must mark what belongs to thy office thou art in,
before thou come to quaintness.

Presuppose therefore that first before all other things men must take heed of
the office, charge, and place wherein they are, and whence they have their
livelihood, and to know well how to manage an estate, for in this a man is
much esteemed. For without this, there is none that will account of these rules
and instructions. Now to be well esteemed and loved of men I will begin in
giving thee this advise from what befell a discreet Citizen, who treating of a
marriage for one of his Daughters, who was accounted rich and fair, first of
all they informed him that the man proposed to him was a gentleman of good
parts, spiritefull, gracious, discreet, and very well esteemed of, and finally
such a one as I intend to decipher in this treatise, who (after he had
attentively listened unto all his good qualities) said unto them, my Lords all
this is very good: and it will be as necessary for him to Dine and Sup after
this also, but you tell me not in what office he lives and gains his living:
what profit can be made of his person, or what need can we have of it only?
and so they were at a stand, with all the virtues and good parts they had
reckoned up. And so now at length under this supposition, in that which
concerns policy, I say that our manner of conversation, is more pleasing in
taking heed how others relish us, then in our own proper conceit and esteem
of our selves.

1. What things we must shun.

And if we desire to find out what those things be, which do generally please
most men; and what those which offend them, we may easily find in this
treatise, what things we must avoid in our conversation, and what things we are
to make choice of, we say now, that every act, which is troublesome, or
offensive to any of the senses, namely that does distaste us and offer it self
in any ill manner to the phansy and things that are beastly, and loathsome,
ought not only not be done of us in the presence of the People* but also not to
be named, nor called to mind, by any motion or outward exercise.

2. Ill properties which are accustomed to be done for want of taking heed.

From whence we may take notice, that it is an ill quality of those, that
whilst they are talking with you, do so gaze and fix their eyes on your face,
as if they were to view some strange thing, and I have seen some who whilst
they are talking with one, they cling so close unto him, that they breath in
his face; and it is certain all do loath to be breathed upon, by others,
though they find noe ill savor come from them: what will it be then, if such a
man that does so have a stinking breath, or sputters as he speaks, as some
do? and so does sputter upon all that stand about him? I say, this is a
sufficient cause, to make a man abhorred. And I have seen some so puff and
blow so vehemently in relating a discourse, that they always driveled before
they could speak any thing.

3. In like manner it is ill for any to hide his hands under his Coat or
Cloak, in the presence of any, that thou art not well acquainted withal; but
thou must be careful, to let them be uncovered, especially amongst persons of
quality.

4. As unseemely a thing is it, that walking with others, in the street, (as
it is a usual thing to do) and seeing any dead Dog, or any loathsome thing,
that thou should turn to thy companion, and show it him, asking him,
whether he saw (as he passed by) that Dog, but that he take heed he be not
the first occasion that those that walk with him do either see, or receive a
loathing from it.

5. This is also an ill custom, when (by reason of thy full feeding, or
couldnesse of stomach, thou have a provocation to rasp wind) for thee to do it
so carelessely, and with such a noise, that all must take notice of it: but it
ought to be done so privately that it may not be perceived, and some are so
civil, that when they yawne or raspe wind, they smooth their hand over their
faces, as if they were smoothing their beardes, and at the same time, do cover
their mouths, so that you cannot perceive them. He did clean contrary to
this, who rasped wind with a great noise, and said it was all for his health,
because it was the evacuation of the Air, and the coldness of his body, and
thus commending himself in this manner as being for his health, one of the
company answered him, Sir your worship may live in health, and yet may continue
to be a Swine.

6. It also is plain, that it is very ill, to be careless concerning thy
nostrils, for there be some that breath very loud through them, and at times
wipe them with their hands and then rub one hand against the other, at other
times they thrust their fingers into their nostrils, and make Pellets of that
they pick out, even before every body, that is present: as in like manner,
some are wont to make cakes of the wax, which they pick out of their eyes,
and into this carelesenesse and slovenlinesse we have observed many to fall.
And much less ought any to use to take any thing in his hand, that smells ill,
or may give a loathing, and to put it to another Nose, that he may smell how
it stinkes: saying to him, as you love your life, do but try how ill this
smells; but thou ought rather to endeavor he may not see it.

7. Now even as all these, and many other things of this sort, do offend the
sense of smelling and of tasting, together with the sense of seeing, so the
gnashing of the teeth, and the grinding of hard stones, one against another,
and scouring of Iron, do offend the ears, and set the teeth on edge, and a
man ought as much as may be to take heed of them.

8. A man of quality must also take heed he sing not (especially alone) if he
have not a good and a tunable voice, of which thing few take any heed, but it
seems, that (naturally) those that have the worst voices, are least careful
of this, and are wont to commend such men that sing much though very ill, these
are like those that make such a noise in coughing and sneesing, that they
offend all that are present.

9. Others there be that spit aloft in the Air, who by undiscreetly behaving
themselves in such actions, do sprinkell the faces of those that stand about
them, and we may find in like sort some of them, who in yawning make a great
noise like the noise of a beast, for that with their mouths wide open, they
utter this voice, or to speak more properly make a noise like a dumb man in
the midst of their speech or discourse, if they be talking of any thing, so
that they cannot be understood, but are an offense to all that hear them. But
a well behaved man must avoid much yawning, as much as he can, (and by
consequence of the things before mentioned) because he that so yawnes seems to
be discontented, and to wish himself else where out of that company, and that
the discourse and manner of it does not like him; And though it be true that
you think it is not in any ones power to leave yawning; yet notwithstanding
all this, if the thought be busy upon any thing, be it in matter of delight, or
otherwise, we never yawne because we never mind it, but if it be idle then it
thinks on it, and thus it comes to pass, (as we have seen it often fall out)
that when any one yawnes in the presence of those that be idle, all of them
will presently yawne, and there is as it were a certain agreement in gaping,
which appears like a pastime amongst fools which might have bin avoided, if
one of them had not called it to mind: and to conclude, for one to yawne is as
much as to say, he is transported, or without memory: it is requisite then for
any one to shun this custom that is so unpleasing to the sight and to the
hearing of others: for in using it, it is a token, that we are of a sleepy and
sluggish disposition, which may make us to be ill beloved of those with whom
we converse.

10. In like manner there is another ill custom to be taken notice of, in some
that do blow their Noses, very hard, and do in the presence of all, make a
pawse, to look into their hankerchiefs, upon that they have blowed out, as if
that which were there were Pearls, or Dyamonds that come out of their brains.

11. It is also an ill custom, for any to put his Nose in the Platter, or
bowl of Wine, or over the Meat which another is to eat, in taking occasion
to smell unto it, or to look upon it, to give his opinion, and I approve not
that he taste more of it, then he is himself only to drink, or eat: for
something may fall from his Nose, which may cause a loathing to another,
although nothing (in truth) do fall. And to phansy a thing though it be not
so, is a great matter: much less ought thou to give another drink in the
same Cup, wherein thou have drunk thy self, except he be thy very familiar or
thy servant, nor to give any a Pear or an Apple, of which thou have bitten,
For in not taking good heed of these things (though they seem to be very
triuiall) they become reproachful, even like little strokes or wounds, which
if they be often given or repeated, may at last cause death unto thee.

12. I can now tell you of a thing to this purpose which happened in Verona a
City in Italy, where was a very wise Bishop, as well for his learning, as
policy, who was called Don Juan Matheo Gilbert, who amongst other his laudable
customs, was very courteous, and bountiful, doing honor to Gentlemen
travelers, by entertayning of them, with such provision as was fitting for his
quality, and so it fortuned that a noble Knight, called Count Richardo passing
by that way, abode a few days with the Bishop, and his family, who were all of
them, curious, neat and of excellent behavior, and because they found the
count, both in his behavior, and his discourse to be a discreet Gentleman and
a most noble Courtyer, they did much value and esteem him, only they found a
small defect in his behavior, (which the Bishop and his servants had presently
espied.) And so he consulted carefully with them, how they might tell and give
him notice of it in such a way, that he might take no distaste at them, so the
count being to depart the next day, when he had taken his leave, and giving the
Bishop thanks for his curtesy afforded him, The Bishop called to him a
discreet servant of his, named Galateo, (of whom this book took its name,)
and bad him take horse and accompany the Count on his way, and that when he
was on the way with him and saw his opportunity that he should in very smooth
language tell him of the defect he had, the servant took the business upon
him, and as he accompanied him, being now ready to take his leave of him, with
a very cheerful countenance did thus bespeake him, my Lord, the Bishop my
master, commanded me, on his behalf, to thank your Lordship, for your
thankfulness, which you showed him, for endeavoring to do you service at your
being at his house, and in recompense of this your curtesy, commanded me to
make you a present (and I humbly beseech you it may be acceptable to you.) The
present is this, my Lord you are the most discreet, gallant, and most sweet
conditioned cavaleere I ever saw or conversed with, so that having seriously
observed your excellent manner of behavior, I found nothing in you that is not
exceeding worthy of commendation, but only one thing, namely an untunable smack
which you use with your lips, and mouth in eating your meat, which is very
offensive, and I am sent to beseech you to receive this friendly reproof and
admonition from him, instead of a present, and I assure you there is none other
in the World but he that can present you with so good a present as this. The
Count that never observed this defect in himself till now, and remembering how
he had commended him, hearing him reprove him thus, blushed a little, yet like
a brave man, recovering his courage, (...) the Bishop, that if all men's
presents that they make one to the other were like his, they would be far
richer then they are, and give him (from me) infinite thanks, for his so
great curtesy and bounty showed me, assuring him, that from henceforth I will
take heed to avoid this my blemish, and so he took his leave of him.

13. Now then what shall we think that the Bishop would have said, and his
noble family, to those that we see having the Hicket in their eating, sit fixed
at the Table, never looking up, or moving their eyes, much less their hands
from off the meat, with both their cheeks stuffed like a trumpetters, or as
if they were blowing the fire: surely this is gluttony and not eating, who
besmearing their hands even up to the wrists, make their napkins in such a
pickle, that had they wiped their trenchers with them, they could not be more
foul, and are not ashamed oftentimes to wipe off their sweat with them, which
with greediness of eating runs down their foreheads and faces, and round
their necks, and after this, do also wipe their Noses: these surely do not
merit not only not to be received, into this Bishops neat house which we have
spoken of, but even ought to be expelled all civil men's company. That there
may be no swinishnesse committed in our eating.

14. Thou shall not make thy self loathsome at meats and festivalls, as some
do, who account it a virtue to do unbeseeming things, in tumbling up and down
the Meat, and Drink, measuring others stomachs by their own, for which
(although others laugh, and like it well enough) they cause themselves to be
accused of slovenlinesse and clownishnesse, and amongst civil and neat
People, it shows ill. And the curious waiters and servants, that are busy in
attendance of the Table, may not by any means scratch their heads nor any
part of their bodies, before their masters, especially at time of meals, nor
cover their hands in their bosoms pockets or else where, but they must be
uncovered: and so clean, that they show not the least token of slovenlinesse.
This they that wait must take heed of. And those that attend the Trenchers or
Cups to drink in, must at that time forbear to spit, or cough, and much more
to sneese, for such actions are as bad, and the suspicion of them does as much
offend their masters, as if it were very true, they had thereby committed some
incivility.

16. And if thou have laid Pears or Apples to roast or bread to toast upon the
Coals, thou must not blow the ashes off, that shall be upon them, for it is a
saying, that there can be no wind, without water, but thou must either shake
it (lightly) over the Trencher, or by some other such like way, to get off the
ashes. The like falls out to them, that to cleanse away any little straw, or
other thing, blow in the Wine, their friends are to drink, and it is an usual
thing, with some too stand blowing of a thing that is too hot, to allay the
heat, but if it be not a man's wife, (or some body else that we cannot take any
dislike for doing it) it is a rash part.

17. Thou may not offer any one thy Handkercher, for him to wipe withal (let
it be never so clean washed, because he thou offerest it unto, knows not so
much, and it may procure a dislike in him.

18. We must shun all ill customs, and qualities, and any other that bear
but a resemblance of the^, whereby we may at all offend the senses of those we
converse withal, as I have before said.

CHAPTER. 2. Of other things, contrary to the phansy and good liking.
NOw we will mention such things, which without offense of any sense, do give
distaste to most men, in whose presence we use them. First you must know, that
men naturally desire and have an inclination to diverse things, so that some
seek to satisfy their anger, some their belly, some their senses, some their
covetousness, and finally, some to satisfy one, some another passion, and
desire: to correct which there are many remedies in our holy Religion, and
every one putting his hand into his own bosom, shall perceive which of those
desires is most powerful, that so he may there make the greatest resistance
against that, that does assault him with the greatest fury.

1. It seems now, that men cove that which may afford unto them the act of
communication, and to converse one with another; and this may be, love, honor,
and recreation, or any thing that has affinity with these: so that we ought
not to speak, nor do any thing, in which we may give a token, to another,
that we do little love or esteem him.

2. And therefore it is a very unseemely custom, that many use. Namely to
sleep where a civil society and company are talking of any thing; by
careless doing of this, they seem to disparage the company, and set light by
such discourse. It is farther to be considered, that he that is a sleep, is
so far from care, and knowledge, of that he does, that he uses,
(oftentimes) to snort, or do some other displeasing thing to be heard, or to
be seen, and very often you shall find him sweating, and his mouth open,
with much filth in it. It is also an ill custom, to rise and stand upright,
where others are sitting, and discoursing, or at such a time, to pass through
the room; for they are like those, which move up and down, and stand skipping
and yawning and stretching themselves, turning themselves from one side to the
other, that you would think, at the very instant they were troubled with an
Ague or Palsy.

3. They do as ill in like manner: who being in such company, do draw a
Letter, or Bill out of their pockets, or bosom, and set themselves to read it
before them.

4. But they do worse, that with sisers, or with a Knife, prepare, to cut, or
scrape their nails: which is as much, as if they esteemed nothing of the
company, and that they must find other business to pass away the time.

5. Nor should we (as little) use the manner, that some accustom themselves
unto, to wit, to sing between the teeth, or to play with the fingers, nor to
shake our legs, for he that does so, may be thought to regard the company
but little.

6. Neither ought a man, so to turn himself, in his seat, or standing, that
he turn his back to another, nor to lay one Leg upon another, so high; that
the part which our garment should cover, be seen. Especially if he be a
Divine; but much more ought women to take heed of this, whom stillness does
best become, and not to shuffle their feet up and down, nor to move or handle
their Knees.

7. Nor ought any (as little) to lean upon his elbowes at the Table, nor to
make much noise by knocking his heels against the seat he sits on, for such
actions are not to be used, but by such persons, which show no respect to any
one. It is true, that if a master, do it before his servants, or if it be
done in the presence of a friend, that is of meaner quality then himself: he
shows no pride in it, but love, and friendship.

8. A man ought to keep himself upright, and not to rest or lean upon
another, and when he speaks to any one, he must not thrust him, with his
hand, or with his elbow, as many use to do at every word, saying is it not
true that I say? do you hear me? and all the while they continue jogging
them, with laying their hands on their breasts, or playing with their buttons;
and I saw one, that used this in such sort, that he unbuttoned al he talked
with. To conclude, you shall have some, that will always sit upon your Coat
or Cloak, or some other part of your clothes, that you may listen to them,
and are never still, nor can speak quietly. So that you may say, when you have
got out of their hands, that you are as if you had bin ground or stamped in a
fulling mill.

How we ought to be clothed.
9. Every one ought to go well clad, according to his estate, and age: for to
do otherwise, it seems that in seeking to be taken notice of, he despises
the Nation, where he is, and therefore, the Citizens of Padua run out of their
houses, in meriment, when they see any Venetian Gentlemen walk through the
street in a Jerkin.

10. And a man ought not only to cloathe himself in fine cloth, silk or
stuff, but to strive to come as near as he can) to the general fashion: and
to submit to custom, though (perchance) he suppose it less useful, or
handsome then the old fashion; And if through the City it be the fashion to
wear the hair very short, thou must not were a peruque, nor when others wear
great beards, thou must not be shaven, for this is to contradict others, and
we must not thwart use, and custom, but in case of necessity, as we shall tell
you hereafter: for this may make us hateful to the people, more then any other
ill custom.

11. None must, (at any time) oppose, or contradict, a commune usage in such
things, do not thou therefore alone wear in the streets a long robe down to
the feet, when every body else wears one very short, but a little below the
girdle: least it fall out nether better, nor worse unto thee, then to him that
has a crabbed countenance and rigid face, whose disposition is so unsavory,
that every body turns to look upon him, as upon a wonder. It is the same
thing with them, which wear their clothes out of the fashion, suitable to
their own humor and pleasure: or do wear long hair, and a great beard, or
extreme short and shaven, contrary to the custom: or who (being a young man)
does wear his Cap very flat and broad, or a low crowned Hat like a wives, or
his ruff and cuffes of his shirt of too unseeming a greatness and proportion.
For at all such every body stands gasing, and do point at them: whilst they
themselves are much pleased with this, being those, (in their own conceits)
who have sought to break a common custom, against all liking of the multitude.

12. Their apparel then must be very fit, and becoming their persons,
because those that wear rich, and noble apparel, but ill shapen, and
deformed, are not thought to have had them made for their bodies, and does
demonstrate, one of these two things, either that they are careless of
themselves, or that they are ignorant, what belonges to a good esteem, modesty
or the complement which is used amongst men.

13. As little good is it on the contrary, to be so extremely curious, in
this, that we should spend the most of the time in adorning and tricking of
our selves. And some there be of such an humor, that they place all their
pleasure, happiness, and study, upon their clothes and outward fashion; And
for ought else, are cold and unprofitable, and of little substance in their
carriage, and conversation. They serve but for gazing stocks, and to be
pointed at in the streets, and at meetings: so that others laugh and make
sport and are discomposed at their trappings: as is used to be done at a
maygame, or other like pastime; They are so punctually grave, and settled in
their carriage, as if they were mere statues, curiously painted and set forth.
And some of them are so self conceited, and well pleased with themselves, that
if they did see themselves in the water, as they do in their glasses, they
could not be kept from drowning themselves like Narcissus. These do also so
martyr their bodies, in pinching, and sweesing themselves, that we have seen
some that would not sit all day, that they might not ruffle their breeches, and
go so pent up, that they are so galled, that at night, when they go to bed,
they are as weary as if they had bin all day in a combat.

14. At the time when the fashion came up of wearing trunck-hose, some young
men used so to stuff them with rags, and other like things: so that you
might find some that used such inventions, to extend them in compass, with as
great eagerness, as some women do (at this day) take pleasure, to wear great
and stately verdingales, which matter I will not meddle withal, because it is
so large, and has so many croniclers of it, that it is every day spoken of; I
will only say that the wariness that the Women were wont to observe in
concealing of their feet is suddenly passed to their necks, and by custom
they have changed the place. So that now if you enter to see a Lady who
perchance is unready, or in a careless fashion, if you find her without the
starched, and set ruff, which women use to wear, (although you may see her
feet) by reason of her verdingall, she will first lay hand to cover her neck,
before she will stir to cover her feet, whereas heretofore, they did not
only not cover them in their houses, but did go abroad bare necked, and bare
brested, another extreme clean contrary, to what is now used: but let us
return to the masculine verdingalls, which is the pomp and the bays of their
verdingall-breeches.

15. I will here tell you what happened to one, that thought he excelled so
much in this fashion, that he stuffed a Follado of velvet that he did wear
with branne, and being set in seemly manner amongst some Ladies, to whom he
desired to show his bravery, and neatness, as he was talking merrily, of
something that pleased him, he was so exceedingly taken with delight that
possessed him, that he could not take notice, of a small rent, which was made,
with a nail of the Chair he sat upon, in one of his two pockets, of branne,
(who, though the harm was but in his hose yet he found it after in his heart)
for as he was moving, and stroaking himself (with much gallantry) the bran
begun to drop out by little and little without his perceiving of it, but the
Ladies that sat over against him, and saw it (it being by his motion like meal
coming from the Mill as it grindeth) laughed much at it and looked one upon
another, and the gallant, supposing, that his good behavior, mirth, and
sporting, was pleasing to them, laughed with the Ladies for company, and it so
much pleased him, that the more he strove to delight the company, the more his
Mill did grind forth the branne. The laughter by little and little increased,
and he appeared as confident as a man that has shed much blood by a wound,
until he espied the heap of branne, which came out of his hose, and then he
begun to recall himself, and dissembling his shame, he took his leave, and
departed, to mend the mischief that lay in ambush for him, as the proverb
goes, you may find out blood by the footsteps.

16. Better profit then this did a prisoner make of the lynings of his
breeches, who being to go before the Judge for a certain cause he was
accused of, it being at that time when the Law was in force against wearing
bays stuffed in their breeches, and he then having stuffed his breeches very
full, the Judges told him, that he did wear his breeches contrary to the
Law: who began to excuse himself of the offense, and endeavoring by little
and little to discharge himself, of that which he did wear within them, he
drew out of his breeches, a pair of sheets, two table Clothes, ten napkins,
four shirts, a brush, a glass, and a comb, night-caps, and other things of
use, saying, (all the hall being now strewed with this furniture) your
highness may understand, that because I have no safer a storehouse, these
pockets do serve me for a room to lay up my goods in, and though it be a
straight prison, yet it is a storehouse big enough for them, for I have many
things more of value yet within it. And so his discharge was accepted and well
laughed at, and they commanded him, that he should not alter the furniture of
his storehouse, but that he should rid the hall of his stuff and keep them as
it pleased him.

17. But returning to the customs, I say that there are some so wedded to
their wills, who though they much displease others, in the fashion of their
clothes, and may (according to their years) go more fashionable, they cannot
be brought unto it, because they will not conform themselves to the common,
and ordinary custom. And to this purpose, they tell a story of a neighbor of
Salamanca, who being a man of great means went clad in an antic fashion, and
he carried under his arms cloth and new silks to make clothes of, by which
men might see that he did it not out of lavishnesse or to spoil them, (for he
carried his expenses along with him, but to see who kept their fashion. For at
that time the fashions rid post. These are men very remarkable, and utterly
opposing policy and credit, and good court-ship.

18. It behooves then that thy garments be suitable to the custom of the
people of thy years, and manner of calling, for we have no power to alter
custom, at our pleasure and desire, so that we must move with the time. It is
very true that it may fall out, that we may take liberty, not to habit our
selves, (punctually) according to the fashion: as when a man has very great
legs, or very small, or extraordinary fat, in that case a man may enlarge, or
streighten his garments, a little more, then ordinary: and in like manner, if
any be crooked or misshapen he ought not to wear clothes of a very remarkable
color, that others be not thereby invited, to behold his imperfections:
neither ought a practiced, and neat Courtier, to wear extraordinay gaudy
clothes, nor too old and careless. Nor is it good at any time, to labor to
be remarkable in his apparel, to the end he may be distinguished from the
rest, but that every one appear conformable to his condition: therefore a
scholar should not go like a soldier, nor a soldier like a scholar.

19. Being in Rome with Lodowick de Bavere, Castrucio, the Duke of Luca and
Senator of Rome, they reported, that for gallantry and royalty, he sent to
have a robe made for him, of crimson Tabee, and that there should be written
upon the breast of it, a motto (in letters of gold,) in this manner: It is as
good wills it, and behind, upon the shoulders, another in these words, and it
shall be, as God will have it. This was a robe, (in my opinion) better suting
to his Trumpetor, then to Castrucio himself, for potentates ought not to make
such robes, though they be exempted from all rules. Nor do I commend King
Manfred, for going always clad in green, because we ought (always) to
esteem of that, which is in use, without causing any to speak of, or to
admire us. Even as a discreet Ambassador did, who being to go Ambassador, to
a strange Kingdom, and where it was said, they did wear many rude garments,
he sent before where they were to procure his lodging to one of the stewards of
his house to get him some apparel and household stuff fashioned according to
the custom of the Land: and to see if pack-sadles were in use, and if they
were, to buy one for him of the better sort, for that in such manner,
Ambassadors have bin seen, to go of Embassies, to foreign Kingdoms, and
when they first entered therein, to cloth themselves after the fashion of that
Land. For this is the way to obtain better favor, and better traffic for
his master. And so I conclude this treatise of clothing: That these that make
little reckoning, how they go clad, are ill accepted of, and gain little
love, in their conversations.

CHAPTER. 3. Of those that are unsavory in their deeds and actions.
WE formerly spoke of those that make themselves contrary to the most, and are
different in their apparel: And we have spoken (purposely) of the ill, that
extremes beget, but yet there are others, that exceed all this, whose
suspicious deeds, and works are such, that no man can endure them: or converse
with them: but by reason of their ill condition, they think all that they
hear, or see, to be naught: and do cool all society, and the delight of
those, that esteem well of it; and for the most part do overthrow all. And
like to these, are such who when they are joined in society, and set at the
Table, to eat: after they have washed their hands, or it may be when the
meat is upon the Table, do make all the rest to wait for them, by either
beginning to write some letter, or finding some other trivial business, or
do walk a little, saying, it is time enough, they may stay a little, what
have is there yet, etc. and make all the company displeased with them, as such
that respect nothing, but their own will: never considering how displeasing
this is to the rest of the company there.

1. The surpassing all the rest are such who setting themselves in the best
places, and being served first before the rest, yet nothing contents them, but
that which themselves, either speak, or do, making mouths and faces at any
thing else.

2. Some others are so strange, and so averse from restrayning their own wills,
that nothing may be done which is not according to their manner: And do
always make answer with a sour countenance, to all is spoken, and do never
leave chiding, and brawling, threatening their servants, and pages, and in this
manner do perpetually disturb all the company (speaking in this or the like
sort) you called me at a sweet time this morning, see how clean you have
washed this. Why did you not go to Church with me, you rogue, beast, how can
I forbear to break thy head? all these are very uncivil manners, to be used
before any body. And such, that though a man be in deed very humble, and do
not out of malice use this custom, but for want of taking notice of it in
himself, or by reason of an ill custom, yet for all this yet he seems to
be proud in these outward actions: and is ill thought of by the People, for
pride is nothing else but to esteem himself better then another, For so it is,
that every one ought to be esteemed of, and courteously used according as we
esteem him to be worthy of it.

3. As little ought we to do any thing before others whom we desire to give
content unto, which may savor more of command, then friendship: but we ought
to manifest, that we bear a reverence, and an account of the company, with
whom we converse.

4. For this cause it is esteemed a reproachful thing, to brawle and give ill
language to ones servants, much more to buffet them with our fists, or to beat
them with a cudgel, which is (in a sort) to seek to exercise ones power, and
authority: which we ought not to do, in their presence, whom we ought to
respect. Because it gives them distaste, and does much dash the company,
especially if it be at the Table, which should be a place of mirth, and not of
offense, and therefore we ought not to be there in choler. And if by chance one
be displeased, he ought not to show it, or make his trouble to be known,
especially if you have strangers for your guests, for having brought them
thither to serve them, and to give them content, in thus doing, they do
torment them, which is as if one were eating some very tart, or bitter meat,
which we see makes those that stand looking on, to show ill favored actions,
and (...) faces, so to see another troubled does trouble and vex us.

5. We may in like manner say, that they are crookedly made up, that are
contrary to others in all things: and so you may see, that all contrariety is
ill, for those that desire to gain the affection of others, and labor to be
well esteemed; for to persevere only in contradiction, and to thwart every man's
pleasure, is not the behavior of a friend, but of an enemy. Therefore let
every one labor to rid himself of this vice, especially those that desire to
gain the peoples love, for instead of gayning love, they will be hated and
have ill will, but rather should we subject our selves to another pleasure,
that no disgrace may arise to our selves by the contrary.

6. Nor ought any to show himself rude or harsh, but mild and affable, and we
must know that he is said to be courteous, whose conversation, and conditions
are such, (in his common use and custom) that he uses his friends like
friends, not accusing or finding fault with their actions, or with their words,
but he must bear with the infirmities they are subject unto, and make as if he
saw them not, for he that carries himself strangely, or leave the comcompany,
is counted uncivil and rude, on the contrary mild and affable men, are so good
Courtiers, that where ever they go, you would think they were amongst their
acquaintance, and that they were every bodies friend, gaining much applause by
their civil carriage, and sweet behavior: we must therefore salute men with
a pleasing gesture and good language, and answer in a sweet manner, as if
every one were his countryman, or acquaintance.

7. Some act this part very ill, who are so sad, and of so settled a
countenance, that they cannot show any body a good look, and do answer all
questions, with no such as these cannot receive the honor, acceptance, nor
endeerment that others procure, and are so rude that they are not to be
visited, nor do give any content, nor are stirred, or delighted with any
discourse, or matters of pleasure, but do refuse all offers, and if any be
sent unto them, to let them know that such a Lord commanded him to salute and
visit him, they answer, what care I for his visits, or salutes: or if he tell
them such a one sent me to see how you do, he will answer let him come and
feel my pulse: such as these deserve little love of any body.

Of punctualities and neatness.
8. Nor is it good for any to be melancholy, and sad, nor to show any sign of
it, to those we converse, and communicate withal, because this is fitting only
for some students and contemplative men, that are conversant in the studies of
some of the liberal sciences, And therefore they do contrive to pass their
sadness alone by themselves.

9. Much less should a man be so curious, and so apt to find fault, that men
must as they say, walk always in print: for to keep company with such, is
rather a torment then a society, and many of these are so britle as it were,
and punctual, that they will stand strictly considering, what title you gave
them: and if you be never so little negligent toward them then there arises
quarrels, and wranglings, saying, you called me not Sir, nor worshipful, nor
did you at the Table, give me place according to my desert, and that was fit
for me. You came not to visit me at my lodging, after I had bin at yours: you
should not do thus, to a man of my quality, and many such like speeches, that
no man can suffer or endure. For they so excessively love themselves, that they
have no leisure nor place to regard others: and so they easily and for very
trifles, spoil all their friendship, making it like to friendship that is
covered with a most curious veil, whereby it cannot be pleasing, but very
unacceptable: which tender delicatnesse, and behavior, should be left to
women, I mean to some, who are so nice, and full of fault finding that they
place all their reputation, in punctillio's, and spend more time to make good
their fooleries, then is needful, by reason of the jelousy, and little
reckoning they make one of another. I speak this without prejudice to the most
who are of a better behavior, and of so sweet a conversation, that we should
do exceeding well, to learn to imitate them.

CHAPTER. 4. How we ought to speak.
WE may err in our speech, many, and sundry ways: And first in the matter we
propose, which ought not to be frozen, or of no substance, nor base and vile,
least they that hear us, instead of receiving pleasure, do scoff both at us
and at our discourse also.

1. Nor in civil conversation, ought a man to show himself very subtle, or
curious, in his discourse: because so doing, he will make himself hardly to
be understood of the most: and he that is to speak, ought to take good heed,
that his speech be not such, nor his carriage, that any by stander be made
ashamed therewith, nor made to blush, or to receive any gird, or affront
thereby.

2. Much less ought one to speak beastly, or silthily, though the auditory
seem pleased with it: for it is not sit, for civil persons, to study to give
others content, but in honest and decent things.

That men ought to speak with reverence in things appertayning unto God.
3 Much more ought every one take heed, that in such meetings, he speak not
inconsiderately, of holy things, nor to make jests, and sport of them, for such
use belonges to ill mannered men, and we shall find many so discreet, that
they will presently depart such company that they hear to speak of such
things unadvisedly, and without reverence.

4. And we ought, not only to speak holily, and with much reverence, and
consideration, in things concerning God, but a curious man ought, in all his
discourse, to provide that his words may give a testimony, of his life and
works.

5. For if when we be in the company of people of quality and those that be
curious, we endeavor that we may not err in our discourse nor to give due
precepts, and advise, but more especially when we are before our parents, or
powerful friends, to whom we owe respect, and do tie our selves, to a decent
behavior, and an humble carriage, because we may be their creatures, and
favorites: how much greater care, and vigilance, ought we to use in the
Church, and holy places, especially at the time when any religious office is
doing there? This is a thing that every body well knows, therefore I need not
to speak much of it: yet that we may do that, which behooves us so much, let
us have Gods word always in our hands, out of which the Preachers, and
Ministers, do propose examples unto us. Consider therefore only what gravity
is there required, though it seem to be but policy, so to behave thy self in
the Church that no body may take notice of thee. Hence we may gather how ill
they do, that are talking and are unquiet in such places and at such holy
exercises: nor ought any there to make legs, and complements, with such
noise, as if they were at the Court, nor to depart the holy Table with a light
carriage, but showing modesty, and humility, nor ought any to behave himself
so, that he may draw men's eyes upon him; nor to lie lolling on one side or
curiously to gase upon those that are entering into, or are in the Church. Nor
to make antic gestures, and strange faces, when thou prayest, as many use to
do, often lifting up their hands, above their heads, and flinging abroad their
arms and stretching themselves, as those do that are newly awakened out of
sleep: kissing their fingers, and using such other exterior actions, and
gestures, which trouble them, that are near them, by drawing all their eyes
upon them. But God is better served, with the heart, then with outward shows:
therefore to conclude, show thy self there rather like the poor Publican,
then the proud Pharisee.

6. And if there be any thing there, that may procure laughter, yet let it not
hinder thy devotion; it is true, that sometimes, there fall out things in the
Church, that would require us to settle our countenances, and do even cast
those off the hooks (as they say) that see, or hear them: to this purpose I
cannot omit, though it be from the subject, to relate some impertinencies,
which have happened in this kind, as of an old woman, who every time the
Priest said Dominus vobiscum, or the Lord be with you, thinking the words to
be obispos, which signifyes in the Spanish tongue, Bishops: always prayed,
that the Bishops, Patriarchs, and Cardinals, would be her helpers: and to the
same purpose, I have bin credibly informed, that such a prattling woman as this,
recommending to God, the good estate of her family, amongst other things, that
she required, prayed thus, I beseech thee my Lord Jesus Christ, that for such a
one my daughter, thou grant me a rich and wise husband, a Gentleman, no
gamster, whoremonger, nor given to any vice, and a thousand like
impertinencies: and at last, when she could not remember, what more to pray
for, she prayed that whilst she was thus praying, her pot might not burn to,
or boil over, and that she might find it, at her return, well boiled, and
seasoned. No doubt any that hears such impertinencies, can hardly forbear to
laugh, and must either depart, to another place, or mar his devotion, with
these or the like things: wherefore if by chance, any hear, or see things,
that force him to laugh, let it be so wary, that those that are near him, may
not perceive it.

7. Let us now return, (with our Galatheo) to consider, what we ought to do,
in our conversation. I have said that it is very blame worthy, to talk of
things, which are much thwarting the times, and the persons, that hear us.
(Also in feasts, and at meals, we ought not to move sad discourses.) But men
ought to speak of such things, which are proper for the persons, and place,
and are well liked of. And therefore in meriments, and at feasts, melancholic
stories, are not to be told, as of sicknesses, and deaths, misfortunes,
pestilence, or the like: nor to call to mind, or mention, any mournful
matter, but if any fall upon such discourse, we ought in a merry, and sweet
manner, to divert him, from such talk, and offer other subjects, to talk of,
more convenient, and cheerful. I have heard say of an old Philosopher, that
he affirmed, that for the preservation of man's life, it is necessary, that
there be a time to weep, as well as to laugh. And that for that reason, he
said, that of old, those sad fables, which they called Tragedyes, were
invented, by acting of which, upon the stage, (as was then usual to do) they
might make those shed tears who had need so to do, and by such weeping, they
might be cured of their infirmities. But for that which concerns us, it
becomes us not, to make sad the minds of those we discourse with, but should
rather labor to solace, and delight them. For if it were true, that any should
be sick for lack of weeping, it would be a small matter, to cure that disease,
either with a little strong mustard, or by enduring a little smoke. And so
must we as it is said at such times, avoid melancholy discourses.

8. We ought also, to interrupt him, that talks impertinently, and wastes much
time, and talk, only for their pleasure. Like some, that even fattened with
the love they bear their little children, do talk of nothing but of them,
and their nurses, in this manner, this is so pretty a child, and makes me
always so merry that you cannot imagine it. My little girl, is very
delightful to me, she speaks already mum, Dad, and many other such words.
And they suppose that as they themselves are pleased with this, and do spend
their time therein, so must they, that hear them, take the like pastime:
although for certain, no man can be so much taken heerewith, that he can be
delighted, to spend his time, always in hearing the same things, especially
when the Fathers do bring in such discourse, by the head and shoulders as we
use to say.

CHAPTER, 5. Of those that set themselves to tell their dreams.
THey do ill that make a settled discourse, in the punctual relating of their
dreams, in such earnest, and so wondering at them, that the telling of them
becomes a torment to the hearer of them, except he that tells them do find
some wonder indeed in them, or at least so much witty conceit, in some of
them, that he knows that the humors of them that hear him being prepared for
such discourse, they will find pastime in them. And though some wise men of
old, did leave books behind them, written of dreams, and those composed with
great understanding, and acuteness of wit, yet we in our ordinary
conversation, ought not to discourse of them.

A dream of example:
1. And of all the Dreams I ever heard related, (though I have heard but few,
and given credit to none) that me thinks was the best which they report, that
one Micer Flaminio a Gentleman of Rome did Dream, which me thinks was very
material and of much consideration. He thought in his sleep, that he was
sitting in a rich apothecaryes shop, that was his neighbor, and not knowing
the reason, he saw that all the people, with great tumult took away all that
was in it, and one took an electuary, another took away sweet meats, one,
one thing, another, another, and then they fell of eating, in such a manner,
that there was neither box, glass, pot, or vial, but it was quite emptyed,
and amongst them there was a little vial glass, full of a clear liquour,
which all smelt unto, but none of them did eat it; and it was not long, but he
saw a man of a great stature, being ancient, and of a venerable countenance,
who beholding the pots, and glasses, and finding one cracked, another
overturned, and most part of them broken, he cast his eye, upon the little
viall-glasse, I spoke of: and setting it to his mouth, he drunk out all the
liquour not leaving one drop, and then went out, as the rest had done before
him; at which Micer Flaminio seemed to wonder much, and turning to the
Apothecary, he asked him, Sir what thing is this, and why has this honorable
old man, drunk up so savourly, the water in the little vial, which the others
refused. To whom the Apothecary answered: Son this venerable man, is our
Lord, and the water which he (alone of all the rest) did drink up, (which you
saw was refused) is the discretion, to judge rightly of things, the which men
do not seek to preserve, in any thing in this World.

2. Such Dreams as this may well be told, and be excused, because they rather
seem to be good thoughts, of a man awake, then a vision of a troubled phansy.
But for other Dreams, void of sense, or probability, as for the most part,
even learned men (themselves) do dream, as well as the unlearned, we ought
not to spend our time, in telling of them.

CHAPTER, 6. Of Liars.
THough we may think, that there is nothing of less moment, then Dreams:
yet for all this, we see other things that are worse, and more idle, and
vain: as namely lies, or false Tales, for of that which a man has seen in
his Dream, may be said something, because all a man's life is but as it were a
certain Dream, or Phansy, but a man never dreamt a lie. Therefore we ought
less to trouble the ears, and understandings, of those that hate lying, with
Lies then with Dreams. Because although they being but Jests, yet this danger
is in them, that sometimes, they are taken for truth; Yet amongst good
conditioned people, Liars do receive this reward, that becoming first
reckoned, but as Jesters, they are afterward people of no credit, and their
discourse is scarce excusable, as being frothy words, without substance. And it
is neither more nor less, then as if when such a one speaks, as if he said
nothing: or as if he did but draw, and breath out the air. And you must know,
that you may talk with some that love lying so well, that they will lie,
though it be to no end, nor profit to them: but only, because a lie of their
own, does much please them. Even as a Drunkard, that often drinks, not for
thirst, or need he has, but only for the love of the drink, and they are so
besotted in telling lies, that though they tell impossibilities, they think
they must be believed. As I once heard tell of a Liar, that related of himself
that he one day, being very thirsty, and being a very good markes-man, shot a
pellet at a Pitcher of water, that stood in a garret window, and made a round
hole in it, and that presently from thence, there came to him a Conduitpipe
with water, to which he set his mouth, and drunk his fill. And when he
perceived, that he had hitherto given content to the company, he continued his
discourse, in this manner: That afterward, he shot at the same Pitcher another
bullet that was somewhat bigger, and hit it so just in the same place that he
stopped the hole so tite, that on drop of water could not come out, and though
the lie were well laughed at, yet one that stood by, knowing it to be a very
vain glorious humor in him, and it being tedious to him, answered him, Sir
your worship spends your time in vain, and you tire us all, and he that
thinks he can make us believe this, must either take us for fools, or his
enemies. Another answered him thus, Sir I have seen Liars before, but your
worship may be the Kings Liar, better then any I ever yet saw or heard of.

1. Some others do lie only for vain glory, relating what wonders they have
done, and to be thought great Soldiers, and Statesmen, and strive to
entertain men, with things so incredible, that one may smell the lie, a league
off: and so can gain no credit from their auditory, except they bring witness
to prove all they say. That we may see how they come infected with the Plague
of vain glory, those I mean that belly their deeds and works, You may
understand.

2. Men may as well lie in concealing themselves (to wit) in their works, and
actions from every one, like some that being but of an ordinary quality, in
respect of their persons, and places, do pretend they are much more, and use
such ceremonies, and do so Lord it, in their manner of carriage, as if they
were Dukes, and Earls. These do set themselves to speak with such state, as
if they were speaking from the bench, going in such a posture, that they would
be thought to be the head, whereas they are but the feet: laboring in their
actions, to imitate men of great rank, and in the furniture of their houses,
that it is a torment to see, how ignorant they are of their weakness, and
that they cannot let their heads blood of these vanities.

3. There are some others that lie in this manner, who wearing but mean
clothes, do gild themselves over with Chains, and Ringes, and medalls, which
they fasten here, and there about them: that you would think they carried
them about, rather to sell them then to make themselves gallant; And you may
see their pride and vanity a mile off, that place their worth only, in the
back or outward appearance: which are things displeasing, and much disconsonant
to reason, and good fashion.

4. And you must know that in many and (those) the best Cities, it is not
suffered, that any rich man be seen much distinguished from a poor man, in
the alteration of his fashion, because the poor men think they receive
reproach, especially if they be honorable, or well borne: when others make such
difference in their clothing from them.

CHAPTER, 7. Of Gaming.
ANd before we proceed, we will here (by the by) speak of that, the doing
whereof, is ill spending the time, yea the worst spent, and sometimes more
hurtful, then either telling of Dreams, or Lies, namely that which we spend
in Gaming.

1. And therefore he that would be accounted a gallant Courtyer, must not play
for coveteousnesse to win: especially at Cards, or Dice: for it is plainly
seen, that he that spends his time, and means in gaming, has no leisure, for
Court-ship, or sweet and pleasing carriage, and behavior, suitable to the drift,
that this treatise aims at. For if he play for much, you may understand, that
his intent is no other, but a greedy desire to increase his estate, by his
friends loss: and so play, does by this means loose the proper name it
signifyes, which is sport, or jest and not earnest, nor to be so serious a
thing as it may seem to be by those that make it their whole business. And in
effect they make a vice of that, which may be virtuous, for in using it only
as play, and keeping a moderation in that we play for, and the time we spend
in it, it is a converse, to pass away our idle time, without prejudice, or
hurt to any: especially for those that have no offices nor charges to employ
themselves in, but are idle and want business, and have not to do but to
phansy Chymeraes in their brains. Those that play for pastime, must play for
little, and that with their friends, and acquaintance: and at such Games, as
are fit, for civil people, but having no skill in play, thou ought not to
bet, though it be never so little, nor to play with those, that are choleric,
and ill conditioned, but with those, thou may be merry, and pleasant
withal; for there are some, that are so quick, that they grow in choler, and
chafe like mad men, and beat the Cards against the Table, and give ill
language, tending to ill wishings, and reproach: And yet these Gamesters, do
ordinarily say, when they loose, that they are not so impatient, for loss of
their moneys, but for their ill luck.

2. The truth is, that let the game be never so small we play at, it troubles
us too much to loose: and such as these, if at first, we know their humor, it
is best not to play with them the second time. Here then I will make an end of
this matter, and that with a jest, that a certain Cavalleere broke upon some,
that were, playing at Primero, and it was this: it happened, there being
certain discontents, amongst the Gamesters, he asked them, why they were so
offended, and one of them answered, Sir because we are here playing at
foolery, if you play at that Game said he, you may vie it without fear, and
make large stakes, for you have all enough of that, left to loose: and in this
merry way they were contented to be jeered, and so will I leave them, to
proceed with my quaint Galateo.

CHAPTER, 8. Of Boasting.
AS little ought a discreet man, and one of quality to fall suddenly into a
discourse of his nobility, and descent, nor of his honor, and riches, much
less to commend himself for his former valourous acts: or to draw them into
his discourse, upon every occasion: as many are wont to do, seeming thereby,
to make comparisons, with every one that stands near them, by which means, if
(peradventure) they be of mean condition, they do as it were vilify them, and
hit them in the teeth, with their mistortunes, and poor estate. Which is a
thing much displeasing unto every one. And into this fault, we see them fall,
that have but very little spirit: and the little goodness they have, is not
very eminent in their bodies.

1. And for this reason, a man ought not, either to abase, or to exalt
himself, beyond reason, and should rather let some of his merits vanish as the
Air, then to show any arrogance in his words, for even the good which may be
found in this case, when it is much stood upon contenteth not; Being but vain
glory, cloaked with humility: on the other side, we must understand, that
those who (by words) do without measure, either extol their own worth, or
dispraise it, and seem to destroy those honors, which do manifestly belong
unto them, show more pride therein, then those that do usurp such honors,
that they never merited. And therefore some will say that (by chance) the wise
Giotto, did not deserve the title of master, which was given him, because he
refused it, for you must know, that at that time he was not only a master, but
the most famous master of all others. And therefore it is certain, that he
that shunneth to be called by the title that he deserves, and that which all
of his condition, do challenge to themselves, shows also that he undervalues
all the rest. And so in like manner to set light by the honor, and renoume,
which is so much set by, is a kind of bosting and extolling himself, above
others; For it is true, that none of sound judgment will refuse things so well
liked, and are obtained by a man's virtue and study, except he, that holds them
to be very idle, and superfluous. Nor ought we to be vain glorious, of our
wealth, and riches, like some who are so well pleased with them, that with a
little applause of those that are about them, do make circles on the ground,
and marks with their swords, or some other thing, very seriously deciphering
out, their purchases, and wealth, and making representations, of Towns, and
Armies, and that (most usually) before those that never knew what belonged to
war. Like some, that frame such like discourse as this, that follows; Here
is (Sirs) the Fort, the Enemy aproached on this side, and our men marched
there, I marched in the van, etc:

Of Bablers.
It is accounted but a sport to hear men talk thus, to those which frequent,
and devote themselves to Tavernes, and tippling houses; and are very loosely
given: who when they be well laden with wine do grow enraged, and adding
fuel (thereby) to their natural inclinations, they think they are able to
command all the World: and when such a talkative fellow as this, considers in
what account he is, amongst his Companions, there is no more to be said, for
he must only control and govern all; And then you shall see him frame
himself, to Babble thus, Sir the World is all naught, there is nothing cottens,
I wonder by the faith of a King, the Mores do not break in upon us, and even
come into our Houses: if I had the government in my hands, I would make the
Cock crow otherwise: and so he prepares himself for another full Cup.

2. I cannot omit, (here) to tell what I once (my self) did see, in
Vallodolid having my Lodging next the market place, and where was (usually) a
Tavern, and an Ordinary for those that came thither, to run races, where out
of a dyning Room, that overlooked the said Tavern, I could hear, and see all
the passages were done there. At that time, one Sacamuellas Castromocho, a
learned man, and one that then knew well, how to bang the Pitcher, was
president, who being there with others of his kindred, and camarades one day
after dinner, when they had well filled their bellies, one began to make a
doubt, and to move this question. Tell me now my Lord Castromocho, and you
other brave cavalleeres here present, which is the purest Plant which is at
this day to be found in the World: one said the Lily, another the July-flower,
a third named the Tulip: and so in this manner, were many reckoned up, every
one giving the best reason he could for his opinion. But Castromocho putting
forth his hand and commanding silence, said unto them. Now surely none of you
come near the matter, therefore confess you are conquered. And know, that the
purest Plant, that is in the World, is the Nettle, for whereas all the rest may
be made foul, and you may take them in your hand and do what you will with
them; the Nettle you cannot, for it defends it self against you. All the
company yielded to it, but when the matter was ended, Sacomuelas called for
Wine, and so did all the rest: and the most of them took such refreshinges, so
void of water, that it appeared very pleasing to their eyes, to be beheld in
the Glass. And then another of the company asked of another difficulty in this
manner. Tell me now my Lord Castromocho, and all your honors, whither the
soul goes to rest, when it goes out of the body. Castromocho answered, let
every one else, first tell his opinion, and then at the last, I will determine
the question; and then some said into Heaven, others said into Hell, and a
third into purgatory, according to every ones opinion, but Castromucho
concluded with his declaration, saying, give attention, you must know that the
soul going out of the body, goes directly to S. James of Galicia, always
excepted, that if he wear not a Drawer, for that they would not go that way,
but a worse; and with this conclusion, and with other noise that he made, he
fell asleep, to spend his drunken humor; and so concluded this illustrious
society. But let us leave him sleeping, till he may be awakened, peradventure
then he will be of another opinion, then he was formerly, and let us return
to them that wear black Cloakes, of whom we have purposely dealt withal
concerning boasting. I say that every one should be silent in things that
concern his own praises, as much as he may, but if by chance any occasion, or
opportunity, enforce any of us, to speak any thing of them, it is a
commendable Custom to speak the truth, mildly and softly, and in a certain
careless manner, without using much restraint: and for this reason, they that
take pleasure, in quaint Courtship, ought to abstain from this, which some
accustom themselves unto, namely to deliver their opinions so resolutely, upon
any thing, giving a definitive sentence, to hear whom it is irksome; But
exspect what they would say, is more torment to utter in vain preambles of
their good education.

3. Such are those men, that speak nothing but preambles, to show their
manners, as if they should say, Sir I beseech your worship, to pardon me: if
perchance I am ignorant, how to make your worship conceive me, because I speak
so rudely, according to my little knowledge, I am sure your worship, will laugh
at me, yet to obey you, I will not forbear to speak that you command me: and
so they stand so long in such circumstances, that any question how hard soever,
may be determined with fewer words, then they wast in such circumloquutions.

4. In like manner, are they very troublesome and tedious, in the overacting of
their carriage, or in taking their places, showing themselves mean, and humble,
and setting themselves in the lowest, whereas the first and chiefest place is
due unto them; and they always strive, to be one of the last, which is a great
trouble, to see, so much time spent, to make them go before, And oftentimes
they will stand hearing a discourse or some other thing, with much pleasure,
and attention: and so whilst the Gentleman is giving you testimony of his good
breeding by going on foot, he is troublesome to you in making you wait for
his coming, and so they strive vainegloriously to be thought humble, by
means of their feigned hypocrisy. So that the more you call them, the more do
they draw back, getting behind by little and little, and are like starting
Horses that cannot be gotten forward; and therefore those that are used to good
manners finding the inconvenience that arises from this troublesomenesse, that
they may not break the thread of society, hold it less inconvenient, to take
the place, or seat is offered them, though it be better then they should
have, rather then give occasion to this tumult, that may be occasioned by them,
in doing otherwise. And when men enter or depart such societies, the
experienced Courtiers, hold it for better breeding, to do nothing, but
readily to come in, and readily to go out, yea even without putting off your
hat, or taking leave, rather then to use endless ceremonies, as many use to
do.

CHAPTER, 9. Of Ceremonies.
BY that which we have said, you may understand that superfluous ceremonies,
are to be avoided, which were of less use, amongst the ancients, then now they
are; and this vain use of them, seems like to the Lies, and Dreams, which I
have before spoken of, for the much vanity is in them, and we do improperly
call them ceremonies. For of old, ceremonies were taken, for that solemnity,
that the Priests did use at the Altars, in their divine offices, belonging to
holy things, that concerned Gods Worship. But now that name has bin usurped
upon, ever since men began, to reverence one another, bowing, and wreathing
themselves in their congies, in an artificial manner, in token of their
observance vailing their bonnets, and calling men Lords, and giving them other
extraordinary titles, Kissing their Hands, as if they were hallowed: And some
seeing this custom so new, and of such importance amongst men, called it
ceremony, by a new phrase, or manner of speaking, as in like manner we call,
eating, and making merry, (in a jeering way) a triumph.

1. Ceremonies then if we look at the intentions of those that use them, are a
certain vain expression, of honor, and respect toward him unto whom we do
give reverence, and it consists, as well in the countenance, and gesture, as
it does in our words, stuffed with great titles, and high expressions. And I call
it vain, because we honor to the eye and in outward apperance, those that in
our heart we honnour not, and we nevertheless use this ceremony toward them
that we may not be out of the fashion; and we call one illustrious, or such an
one my most noble Lord: and do profess our selves their servants, and
creatures, when we never intend any service unto them. And so such ceremony,
may not only be accounted for Lies: but a certain falsehood, and treachery, and
such men as these, do so proceed in these illustrious titles, and other
ceremonies (which we formerly spoken of) that never regarding the merits,
nobility, estate or quality of the person, they do give them to any one, what
ever he be, so that oftentimes you cannot distinguish mechanic people, from
the nobility, and men of quality, by the manner of converse, and ceremonies,
that men use toward them. And as it is true, that anciently, there were set,
and distinct titles, appointed for every one, as a Pope, an Emperor, and the
like, which men could not omit, without being uncivil to him that had such
title; so could they as little be given to them to whom they belonged not,
without disgrace unto them. But now (in our age,) we see that such titles, and
expressions of honor may be used more freely. Because custom is a most
powerful commander, and now it gives us a larger privilege to use them.

2. That custom which seems good without, is within idle, and consistes in
shows, without substance, and in words without signification: and yet, we may
not alter them, but must imitate them, for it is not our fault, but the fault
of the age we live in, yet we must do it discreetly; in which we are to
consider, that ceremonies, and compliments, are performed in three manners,
namely for profit, for vanity, for obligation.

First Ceremony for profit.
3. For profit, we intend every Lie that is spoken, for the particular
interest, and profit of him that speaks it, and this is a sinful fraud, and a
dishonest thing, for a man cannot lie honestly, and this sin do flatterers
commit, who (As it is reported of the Chameleon, that he changes himself
into the color of that place they put him in) so in like manner, transform
themselves into the shape of friends, and are conformable to every bodies
humor, be it what it will, not to please us, but to gain something by us, not
to give us content, but to cosen us, and though this by chance may seem a
pleasing vice, unto those, that are vain gloriously given, get for all this,
it is (in it self considered) abominable, and damnable: and therefore a well
fashioned man ought not to use it, for if such ceremonies, as these, be but
Lies, and flatteryes, when ever we use them for our own profit, then surely we
do so often act the parts of naughty, and false-hearted men, and therefore no
such ceremonies should be used.

Secondly, Ceremony for vanity.
The second Ceremony, (which we said men used for vanity) is (as we have
formerly said) when to make our selves be thought to have bin well educated,
(Although we aim at nothing but vain glory therein) we give unto any,
greater titles then their due, and we offend thus by giving too much, that
they may do the like to us: and these, are plain and noted Flatteryes, so
that they that speak, and use them, to this end, besides that they are so ill
in themselves, are offensive, and troublesome to others: being so contrary to
all truth.

Thirdly, Ceremony for Obligation.
The third manner of Ceremonies, are such as are done for Obligation or for
desert, and are not to be omitted, and therefore they that forbear to use
them, do not only displease, but do an injury, and oftentimes it falls out,
that by this means, he that is thus negligent comes to be reprehended, and to
gain envy, especially when one Citizen, ceases to give such honor to another,
as the use is to do, as in not putting off the hat, nor speaking civilly, in
which he does very ill.

For the force of custom, is very great, and in such cases, ought to be
observed, like a Law: and so he that calls to another by his name being not
far better then he is, does undervalue him, and commits an uncivil act in
naming him, for he knows that in such language, men call unto workmen, and
laborers, and although in this place heretofore, and in other Countries, even
at this day men may use such mean titles, without undervaluing of any one: yet
we must not disobey the modern fashion: but are bound to observe it, as a
Law; And therefore it is necessary for us, that we diligently learn, the
actions and words, which are at present in use, to give, and receive, by way of
salutation, or speaking to any, even in that Country where we live. And though
in the time of Don Pedro of Arragon, the Admiral was many times called, his
Majesty, because it was the custom of that time, so to do, yet we ought not,
(for all this) to call our King on this manner: if we were now either to speak
or to write unto him. For such use as our age observes, such also must we do.
And these I call due ceremonies, because they proceed not from our free will,
and pleasure, but because they are become a Law, and common custom. But if by
chance they may be left: one ought not to be so singular, as to oppose, that
which is accounted good behavior: like some unpleasing men, that think, that
every one owes them respect, and know not themselves how to return any one a
good word, and do take pleasure to be taken notice of, for these extremities.
On the Contrary to these, there are others, so excessively abounding in good
manners, that we may say, they have as much too much, as those others have too
little, and they spend all their times, in Compliments, to show their good
breeding, and other like impertinencies. And they dwell so long upon things,
(which in themselves are nothing) to make them pleasing to others, that it
becomes troublesome, these are made of mere ceremonies, speaking after this
manner. Your honor has showed me so much favor, that, I hold my self most
obliged to serve you, as long as I live. If God please to grant me time for it,
I shall be most prodigal, to spend it in your honors service, and such like
stuff as this. A certain Bishops Chaplain, did purposely use such returning
of thanks, as these: the Bishop his master, having bestowed certain
benefices, and pensions, upon certain of his servants: to this Chaplain
though he had served him long time, he gave the least benefice: not being worth
above eighty Ducates a year and that will cure. But when the rest were to give
thanks for their pensions, and rewards, some to the value of five hundred
Ducats, others to the value of three hundred, and some to the value of four
hundred Ducats: it fell out, that he that had that but of eighty Ducats,
gave the greatest thanks, showing greater content then all the rest, at which
the Bishop (marvailing somewhat) asked him why he gave the largest thanks,
this reward which he had bestowed upon him, being the least, and of so little
value. He answered, that he esteemed it more then if he had given him one of
a thousand Duckates, it being so suitable to his necessities: he being (as he
was by nature, so choleric, that no master could bear with him; nor indeed
was there any servant that he could bear withal, and so that living not being
enough to keep a boy, and too much for him to remain with his Lordship (it
being with cure of souls) therefore he gave him so great thanks, for both
freeing him from a master, and also from a man. I say therefore some use too
many, and some too few ceremonies.

Of kissing the hands.
1. And although kissing in sign of reverence, is most properly used amongst
us, in holy things, as the kissing of relics, and dead men's bones, yet in our
Country also, We have a custom, to say, I kiss your honors hands: I beseech
your honor, to account me for your servant; and though we shun to speak it
usually, yet in saluting, and taking leave, and in our Letters, and Epistles,
that we write, we must use it, and it being grown a custom, we ought not to
tie our selves to the old way, nor to wonder at it, like some inconsiderate,
and weak men, that speak in this manner, do you see, who I must call my
Lord, And what Lord is he I pray? perchance it is the Curate of the Parish,
that I am thus bound to give the Besar las manos unto, etc.

But it is manifest, that another, that is not used to say my Lord, nor to be
called so, may think that thou do it, to affront, or disgrace him: and when
thy estate, and quality is not much above another, thou shall do ill, if in
acting a Cavallero, and a Lord, thou shall labor to be vaineglorious, in
undervaluing him, skruing thanks from him by far fetched speeches, saying, my
Lord, such an one, will do this very well: and some there are that will go
farther, making their voice to be heard: and confident to gain it, if they
can make it pass, like a gilded Pill, with such words as these; my Lord do
this for love of me, and sometimes with a feigned laughter, and giving them a
clap on the shoulder, entreat them they will sing by turn, saying by the faith
of an honest man, you have taken me much, and all these are but stratagems of
vaineglory.

2. Some also are so studious in these Ceremonies, that they have found out a
way, to distinguish between thou, and you: and her, and she, and your
worship, making six degrees of Courtship, so that no Nation did ever advance
so far, for if we mark it, the French make use of ^os, or you, to all
degrees, and qualities. And I cannot now treat of all that might be said from
the title of worshipful above said, nor of the greater titles, for this would
draw us into a great labyrinth. It suffices that though (heretofore) there
were a great deal: yet now the ordinary sort or common people have raised it
and filled it up with the titles of the Nobility: and that with such might and
combination, that the Gentry, and Nobility, magnificoes, and grandes, that used
to have these titles, are now robbed of them, and banished from their ancient
Country, and Nation. And so, the noble cavalleres, and people of quality,
seeing this, have profited so far, as to advance a degree, or two higher,
then ordinary, to be distinguished (especially in their letters) from this
generation, that robbes them of their titles.

3. I will here tell you what happened, (to this purpose,) to a Gentleman that
was a Courtier, who writing a Letter to a private man, with the title of most
magnificent Lord, which was the title that belonged to himself, according to
his condition, he answered him, that he thought it no Courtship, to put such a
title upon him. To which the Courtyer replying, in his Letter, he left a blanck
for his Complement, saying, Sir write (your self) that Complement, in the void
place, in my Letter, that likes you best, for which purpose I have sent it
blanck unto you subscribed with my Name.

4. There are some others that to show themselves humble, paint themselves out
for fools, and seek to show so much extremity of good behavior, that you can
perceive little understanding in them, and though they speak many tongues, yet
are they never the wiser, nor can give any content with them: like one that was
newly married, that writ to his Wife a Letter of many concepts, and concluded,
placing for his Complement, at the foot of his Letter, such an one the meanest
Husband of your Ladyship kisseth your hands.

5. Some others there are that by mere carelessness, make greater faults in
writing, and give either two or three titles more, (whether they be right or
wrong) then is needful, especially when they need any thing, and call them
most illustrious, most renonced, etc.

Of the Title Serenissimo.
This is an appellation belonging unto Princes. Except when it is sometime used
in sport; As a Cavallere did, who because his son walked in the night, called
him Serenissimo: and being asked the reason, made answer, that being such a
lover of the evening dewes (which are called in Spanish Sereno) there had so
much of this Sereno, (by this time) fallen upon his head: that he could not be
now called, less then Serenissimo. This Title of Serenissimo, was no less
offensive, to a certain Citizen; whom a Lord governor of estate, who^ all
called Serenissimo, had much vexed. It fell out, that as he was one evening
talking with some of his friends, concerning the troubles, the Governor had
put him to, they bidding that he should go out of the dew, that was falling
(which in Spanish they call Sereno) because it would do him hurt, answered,
Sirs you say true, if then the Sereno, will do me hurt, what think you the
Serenissimo will do.

6. Returning now to our purpose. I say, that even as the ceremonies, which are
in extremities, are to be avoided, so ought we not, (on the contrary) so wholly
to omit them, that we should return to the old custom, for it will show very
ill, to do like some rustic people, who would have, that those who write to
Kings, and great Lords, should begin in this manner, if thou and thy son be
well, it is well, I am also in good health: affirming, that in such manner, the
Latin Philosophers, did begin their Letters, which they usually writ from Rome.

7. We must then know, and observe, some instructions, and rules, that we may
not err in such things, as these: and first, we must consider the Country
wherein we live: for every custom, is not alike good in every place. For we
may speak in that manner in Italy, as (perchance) the Neapolitanes do use to
do, whose City is full of men of quality, and of great estate, which
notwithstanding, will not suit well, with the Luqueses, and Florentines, who
are (for the most part) merchants, and mean men, and having no Princes,
marquesses, nor Barons amongst them, and although the Venetian Gentlemen, use
much curtesy, one to another, and flatter one another, by reason of their
offices, yet will it not show well that the common people of Ro^igo, and the
Citizens of Assoli should observe this solemnity, to give such respect one to
another, upon all occasions. For this is the custom of the Seigniory of
Venice: and every one does in conclusion, of his own accord, follow the steps
of his Lord, and ancient Country, although he knows no reason wherefore.

We ought also in Spain, no less to consider of this solemnity, yet with this
caution, that amongst the common people, and poor places, that consist most of
laboring people, it is not fit to observe the same style, in our ceremonies,
which is used in the great assemblies, especially in the Kings Palace, which
would be to strike the people with admiration. As they report of a Lord of
quality, of this Kingdom, that held it for a custom, when he called for
drink, if it were in the night, that five or six of his servants, should march
before the Cup, with two lighted Torches; But as he did this in a poor
village, a man that was but simple, that was there, when he saw them come
toward him, bareheaded, and with such ceremony, he fell down on his Knees and
began to adore the Cup, beating upon his breast, with great devotion. The Lord
and they that were with him, bid him rise, And asked him why he did such
reverence, who answered: that seeing them (so solemnly) perform this ceremony,
he could not but kneel down, supposing, that they brought the holy
Sacrament, or at least some sacred relics, and so the Lord was warned, by
another man's ignorance, no more to use this ceremony, amongst such ordinary
people.

8. Moreover, we ought (as well) to regard the time, as also the age, and
condition, of the person, to whom we use these ceremonies: as well as to
consider the place, as also to consider our own age, and condition. And with
poor and mean qualitied people, to be very brief in our expressions, or at
the least to contract them somewhat and not to express them to the full, which
is well done in the Court of Rome. But in some other places they are accounted
very tedious, especially to those that have much business, who wast much time
in them. Be covered sir says the Judge, that is much perplexed, and is
scanted of time, to dispatch his many businesses. And he makes answer to him,
that speaks to him, (after all his cringes, and scrapes,) (with much gravity)
in this manner, my Lord I was very well before. And the other addressing
himself, to press the Judge, that is all this time was covered wreathing his
body, first on one side, then on the other, and crowching even to the ground,
with much vanity, and ostentation, makes this answer. I beseech you permit me,
thus to do my duty to you, for I am obliged unto it, and this combat lastes
so long, and so much of the stock of time is wasted, that there is scarce left
any time for business. So that those that visit Judges, and Ministers of
public offices, that are entangled in government, should use brevity, cutting
off all Compliments, and Ceremonies, especially if they be Lords, or persons of
quality, to whom we cannot speak so freely, as to others, who are at leisure
and void of business. But it often falls out, that poor suitors, must long
wait their turns, before their businesses can be heard, waiting at distance,
numbering the words spoken, and with a desire they may be seen, stand observing
the impertinencies, and mean while cursing them a thousand times, for anger to
see how they spend the time, and make them loose their meetings; and so are
forced to return home, disconslate, and with loss of their labors. And some
there are so dull, and so incircumspect, that they cannot perceive the signs,
that they might take notice of in such officers, whom they thus keep from
business, that they are troublesome to them: as in observing, how carelessely
they answer their questions, and that they make no apologies to them, or give
them that applause, which they would give them, if they did much relish them,
or were at leisure. And if (perchance) they tell them, that they must give them
leave to finish their businesses in hand, (Though they speak this to them,
very civily, and plainlly) they go from them grumbling, saying that they are
grown proud of their offices, and have buried all friendship, and do show
themselves, to be harsh and ill conditioned men.

9. Nor do such ceremonies, be fit young men, which old and grave men may use:
nor must mean, and poor people, use such ceremonies, one to another, as
Lords, and people of great quality, do use. And therefore, virtuous, and well
bred persons, do strive to avoid them, as (much as may be,) as being
distasteful: for spending all their time, and studies in such vanities. Neither
ought officers, of mechanic offices, or persons of mean condition, to use
solemn ceremonies, with Lords, and people of great quality: but ought to
approach to, and answer with humility, and plainness, unto that, wherein the
Lord has occasion to use them in, for there seems more obedience then honor
to be required from such men's hands. And therefore, that servant was in an
error, that offered his service to his Lord, when as it was his duty, to be
always ready, at his command, nor is it fitting, when a Lord stands
bareheaded, for thee to bid him be covered: nor if he be standing or walking,
within doors, is it fit for thee to be so bold, as to go abroad or to sit
down, although he bid thee: if thou be of a meaner condition, then he. But
when a great Lord, is pleased to set thee above him, to do thee honor, thou
must not be so bold, to refuse the favor he does thee.

10. Now I say, that amongst persons of equal rank or who are but a little
distinguished, in their persons, or places: this manner of good compliment, and
good carriage, may be used more freely, because, (oftentimes) that which we do
to perform our duty, is received as due and little honor is of us given unto
him that deserves it, therefore he that does a little exceed in that which he
istyed to do, seems to bestow a guist more then can be challenged, and does
gain love thereby and is accounted freeminded and liberal. And so was a
certain grave Grecia^ wont to say, that he that knows, how to converse with,
and to endeere great men, drives a great trade: and therefore those that are
pleased in Courtship, do (at this day) use thus to speak. My Lord such an
one, when he speaks to his friends, that are better then himself, but
especially when they talk with Ladies, that are married, or with the Daughters
of their equals, they will say my Lady, and this way make they themselves
acceptable, and gain the good will of all.

11. Thou must then use ceremonies, as a good Tailor does his cloth, which he
cuts out to make garments that makes them rather too long and too large, then
too short, and scanty, but he makes them not so big, that in cutting out a
pair of Breeches, you may mistake them for a Sack, or a Cloake-bag. And if
thou shall use a little tolerable largeness in thy ceremonies, toward them
that are somewhat meaner then thy self, thou may be accounted courteous, but
much more, if the person be somewhat better then thy self, thou shall be held
for a well fashioned and pleasing Gentleman. But he that shall extend them in
an unreasonable sort, shall but make sport with them, and be accounted for a
vain fellow: and this is the manner of ceremony which we formerly spoke of,
which proceeds from our own will, and not from custom, but naturally we may
pass our lives without ceremonies, and in them we may plainly see, that all
that is not in use, is superfluous, and of those which are received by custom,
we may say, that they are lawful jestes or lies, and we may also call them
vanities, and to noble minds, that are not pleased with such arrant vanities,
it is an odious, and unpleasing thing, to deal in them. Therefore great ones
ought to be more honored, by their own works, then by an others words.

12. It is storyed to this purpose, that a certain King, called Edipo, being
banished his Country, put himself under the protection, of King Theosio in
Athens, to free himself from the fury, of his persecuting enemies: and being
brought before Theosio, he heard a young daughter of his speak, who knowing
her by her voice only, (he being blind for age) did not address himself to
salute Theosio, but overcome with the affection of a Father, went presently to
make much of his daughter, and having a little remained so doing, he besought
Theosio to excuse him, and besought his pardon for his neglect. The good, and
wise King, forbear not to answer him, but said unto him, be of good cheer,
Edipo, for I honor not my life, with other men's words, but with mine own
actions. A saying befitting a wise man, and one, that esteemed not fawning, and
flattery. Wherefore the flatterer shows plainly, that he that is pleased with
his flattery, is vain, and arrogant, simple, and of little understanding, by
suffering himself to be overcome, and vanquished by so light a thing. And
vain and superfluous ceremonies, are plain and known flatteries, so that
they that speak, and use them, for profits sake (besides that they be so bad
in themselves, having their Foundations in false, and forged words) they
remain troublesome, and distasteful, for being so opposite to all truth.

13. There are others, besides these, which also consist in feigned actions, and
mere apparances, so that whatsoever they make aparent to you, is a lie, and
although their adorning seem natural, yet in it self it is not so, but only
to delude the sight: as those that being lean make themselves seem fat, and
being low, to seem very tall. This is the fault we now see, for the most part
to be in women, who do, if not all, yet the most of them thus dissemble. This
made a Traveller say, that in Spain (almost) all the women, were tall, fair,
and ruddy, either by nature, or by art. Some others have said, that the
Spaniard lay all their grounds, or principles, in bare Compliments, and
apparances. Therefore, if (by chance) they give thee, a fair good
complexioned, and well proportioned wife, yet will she prove no more then
half a Wife and without any hair, so that at the wedding night, it may be
perceived, that half of her was made of gilded cork, and though they put her
into the bed, yet the other part of the woman which is without the sheets will
be found in the morning tawny, yellow, bald, and ill complexioned, and so is
he thus cosened in half of his Wife. But they will say, she was seen, as
she was, and that she has found her self deceived, having discovered, far
more defects in her Husband, then was in her self: that he was far less,
and black, then she took him for. As I have heard tell of one such as these
who having married her self for advancement and for coveteousnesse of her
Husbands wealth, observed, when her Husband went to bed, that he pulled off a
counterfeit Nose he wore, and a glove wherewith he fastened on an artificial
hand, and last of all, putting his hand to his mouth, pulled out thence a set
of artificial Teeth, and so in this pastime, of her disorderly coveteousnesse,
both the lovers remained discontented.

14. But to return to our purpose, there is yet another sort of ceremonious
people, that make an Art, and trade of it, and keep a Book of account of
their ceremonies namely when you speak to such manner of persons, how your
Complement must be passed, or your ground traversed, with a little closing of
the eyes, and the head a little cast down; And when you speak to such an one,
you must speak smilingly, a little also bowing your head, And how these of
greatest quality, must be placed, in a Chair with Arms, and he that is of a
little meaner rank, in plain back-chayre, and inferiors upon a bench, although
it be true, that such a punctual distinction, of giving honor as this, is
accounted very offensive, and therefore, none ought to be Judge, to determine,
who is more and who less noble then another.

15. As little fitting is it, that ceremonies, or endeerements, be sold to any
to pay with them the debts we owe unto them, as some Lords do with their
servants, or inferiors to whom they owe money, whom they pay with ceremonies,
giving them leave to stand covered before then, paying them the wages they owe
them, with familiarity, and favor. By this we may well presume, that those who
take pleasure, in using these outward ceremonies, do it for pomp, and vanity,
if they exceed the common use, and manner used in them.

16. There are others also that are so fruitlesly ceremonious, that without
speaking any thing of substance, do never leave talking, and that very idly,
and yet with much Courtship, and so much, that it is an obligation, for them to
excuse you from hearing them, of these spoke he that summed up the life of
Mithridato the Court babbler in these verses.

That day he is placed by your side,
He makes you melt with scorching heat
Of the sharp torment you abide,
In hearing of his carriage neat.
17. These then, place all their diligence, and thought, to order their
clappering tongues, and tediousness of such their impertinencies: hammering
the people, (as it were) with their words: with which by reason of their
education they can make a reasonable show or flourish; But in grave matters, or
things of moment, they can show no wit: and they labor that all their converse
be spent, in outward apparances. And if any discourse of good judgment be
moved, they nor relish, nor understand it. And of these impertinent men, there
are an infinite number, that at first sight deceive men, and at the second do
tire them, for then is their silliness discovered.

18. One of these Mitridatos was ushering a Lady, and being to go through a
narrow passage, he stood urging her, that she would go first, thinking it to
be good manners for him so to do. The Lady made a stop, desiring him to go
first, because it was his place, who a while refused it, but at last he went
on: saying, I had rather be thought ignorant then to be too troublesome. To
whom the Lady readily retorted thus: go Sir, for both ways you may rightly
challenge the first place, and so she answered him as he well deserved.

19. And to conclude this matter of ceremonies, I say there are some others,
that are always full of complementall words, and courteous deeds, thereby to
supply the defect of their small means, supposing, that because there is
little substance or profit in their deeds, (if they should also want words and
compliments) no body would ever endure them, by reason whereof, they so much
exceed in superfluous ceremonies, that (generally) they weary those that have
good judgments: but for all this, every one desires to live, according to his
own pleasure, namely with liberty; which is more esteemed of, then any other
thing whatsoever.

CHAPTER. 10. Of affected words, That in our common talk, we ought not to use
Latin, or other words of another tongue.
1. AFfectation, and extremes ought to be avoided, in our carriage, and
ceremonies, and much more, in our words: and especially ought every one, to
beware, of mixing Latin, or other strange words, in our discourse, though they
be not Latin, to those that understand them not, into this error do they
much fall into that having a little studied the Grammar, thrust Latin words,
into all their discourses, but so improperly, that they disagree much from the
propriety of our Castilian Language, and they sound so ill, that there are none
does respect them: and men of good judgments do but laugh at them, and make
but a pastime thereof. One being in company with many others, asked this
question of one of them, did you (Sir) observe the last Eclipse, me thought it
continued long (using the Latin word Mora, for continuance, or tarrying: which
in the Spanish tongue signifyes, a Mulbery) The other in way of merriment
answered him in the same manner. I observed no Mora meaning the Mulbery, for by
applying this medicine they use to cure Adahalas of his headache.

2. Much like to this, I have known some use solemnly some words, spoken (as
they thought) very elegantly, which did only satisfy those that used them, but
the hearers of them do but jeere and make a sport at them,

Of those who instead of speaking elegantly do speak nonsense.
To this purpose a certain beneficed man, in a Village, that took upon him to
be very elegant, inviting to dinner to him two students of his acquaintance,
which at that time were passing by, spoke to them in this manner, Gentlemen, it
were good that for the present we Decapitate Choler. For I greatly desire a
scindill with so good society. To whom, one of them answered; beneficed Sir,
you have in conceit spoken very elegantly, and with this answer he was much
pleased, and satisfied for his eloquence.

3. Like to this, I will tell you here a jest (that fell out in Alcala) of a
certain Doctor, And though some say, to excuse him, it was spoken of him but
in jest and mirth (as we use to do) yet it is true it so befell him. And thus
it was, As he stood looking upon a Map of the World, which was drawn in a
great round figure, A Nurse that dwelt with him, came to him, and said, good
Sir what is that, that is so round? He answered her, sister, you must know,
that it is the Orb, which is also called tho Planisphere, the card of the
World, or the Globe. If you understand none of these terms, then know that it
is the whole World. But she with more curiosity, being much astonished, that
she had seen the whole World, asked him, but good Sir, where is the place
where I now stand? The Doctor answered, here you see it inclusively: if not,
behold it here intensively, what cannot be expressed extensively, and to
conclude, you may see it here vertually, and so the Nurse was as wise as
before, and the Doctor as ignorant to express his meaning, in the Castilian
Language.

4. He was also a bold Rethoritian, who when he should have said, I cannot
enlarge my self: because I want ink; said, I end because my horny vessel
furnishes not my Goose-quill, with Ethiopian liquour: True it is, that this
mingling of Latin words, is wont to be (sometimes,) for necessity sake, As it
fell out to a Spaniard whom I knew, who by remaining in Flaunders from a youth
in the University of Lovaine, and living there till he was old, and not being
able neither to speak good Latin, nor good Castilian, nor Greek, nor good
French, did one day amongst many other pleasing medlyes, which he spoke,
instead of saying, No veys La gente de guerra come viene assentar su real enter
las matas de los Escobares, Said in this manner, Ola no veys los Armigeros y
Catafractos como se vienen a castramentar enter las miricas. Therefore we must
take great heed that when we speak Castilian, we do not speak Latin, as a
Monk who instead of saying, that they should make him a Picture of S. Peter,
repenting, for denying his master: said thus, Sir such a one I entreat you,
that you paint me a very good Flevit Amare which is in English, he wept
bitterly. As ill shows it, on the contrary, if when we are to speak Latin,
we mix Castilian, as a mass Priest did, in certain Prayers, who when he was
to go out singing in Latin Ecce lumen Christi (in English, behold the light
of Christ) were it that he could not hit on it in Latin, or he had forgotten
what to say, went forth, holding the Candle aloft, and singing, behold this
burning Taper, in Spanish y Aqui el cirio encendido. Let these few examples
admonish us, to avoid improper, and affected words, which are not suitable, to
the matter in hand, always considering the time, place, and occasion, and
those that hear us, that we may not err, nor give them occasion, to say any
thing against us.

CHAPTER 11. Of Amplifications.
1. NOe less then affectations are wont to be ill taken, are Amplifications
ill accepted of and hard to gain credit, and in our common discourse, ought to
be omitted, and left to Poets, and makers of Fables. There are some, that do
so amplify, and enlarge themselves, in their words and dealings, that they are
accounted happy who are in favor with them, for they will extol them to the
Clouds, as in like manner, those that are out of favor with them, shall be
extremely vilifyed by their tongues. And so, they run altogether in extremes,
with great hazard of their own credits, as you may perceive, when I have told
you, what I my self have heard from one of them, at a certain meeting: where
dilating upon the beauty of a Lady there, he said that she was so wonderful
fair, that not to disparage the other beauties of the Nation, they were not
worthy of her presence, or company, nor to live in the same street, she dwelt
in; And that her confessor, had charged her, to go to mass either very early
in the morning, or else close veiled, that she might not discompose the
people, with her presence. And a Painter that was to draw her Picture, did
confess, and report, that her beauty was so admirable, that he was in
despair ever to be able to represent any likeness or shadow of it. Such as
these do transport the people with their enlargements, but they usually
receive this pay for their pains, that be the thing as fair as it will that
they magnify, it seems not so (when it is seen) as they have set it forth to
be, and they are accounted for busy men, and of little worth.

That we ought as little to speak ill of any, nor ought our jesting, and
jeeres to be biting.
2. We must as little (in our conversation) speak ill of any, nor of his
family, (Though we think that those that hear us, are pleased therewith, and
are willing to harken to us.) which vice usually happens, by means of the envy
which (for the most part,) we bear, to one another wealth, and honor, but at
last let every one beware of the kicking Horse. And therefore understanding
persons do fly from ill tongues, considering, that they that will tell us
such things, of others, will tell others as much of us: and as it is said, fly
from him, that reports such novelties, for he is the man that invented them;
and those that oppose contradict, and withstand all manner of discourse they
meet with, give a testimony that they do not well understand the nature of
men, and that every one loves to conquer, and hates to be overcome, no less in
words then in works: how much more for one man (voluntarily) to oppose and
contradict another, is it accounted a work of envy, and not of friendship?
Therefore he that desires to be pleasing in his carriage, and converse: ought
not to be so armed always in his discourse as to say, this you said was not
so: but as I tell it you: nor ought we to lay wagers of it, but in trivial
things, we ought to bend our selves, to incline to other men's opinions, for the
victory in such things proves but our loss: for it is very true, that by
gayning the Conquest, in a frivolous question, and a matter of noe value, we
oftentimes displease a dear friend.

Of domineerers and confident people.
And these Domineerers are so offensive to all people, that they dare not
converse with them: for fear of falling every hour into wranglings, without
profit, even to be at daggers drawing; But if (at any time) it fall out, that
any be drawn on to dispute, he must do it in a mild fashion, and must not
lash out with delight to overcome: or seek to order all the matter, and to
have all the honor, attributed to himself: but he must leave every body his
share: and in contending whether it be reason, or not, that every one
alleges, he must leave it to the judgment of the most, and if there shall be
any excessively confident: let him leave the matter to them, quitting the
plain field, for them to contend, to sweat and toil themselves. For these
are manners hateful to men that are modest and of good behavior. Besides
this, we cannot get the victory without hatred, and envy; And because for the
most part all people by nature, seek to attribute glory to themselves, and do
undervalue and dispraise other men's opinions, that they may every one show
himself wise, valiant and of much understa^ding, therefore it falls out that
many do advise, reprehend, dispute, and defend themselves, with Rapier, and
Poniard, as they say, against all men, and will incline themselves to no man's
opinion, but stand to their own: and are so blind, and obstinate in their own
way, that no reason is forcible enough, to alter them from it: and though these
do not find fault with the opinion of their friends, yet will they not leave
their own errors.

Fortune Tellers.
3. There are others, that if you fall into discourse with them, at that time
when you come into their company to refresh your self, from your labors, can
never get out from some lamentable discourse, and misfortunes, and ill
presages, that threaten the people, for the time to come: and when they hear
of any victory, or good success, they spoil all, with the love they bear to
ill omens, and their own only opinions, which do with mere phansy, and vain
glory, make themselves melancholy. Supposing by this their unsavory humor, the
more to give credit, to their foolish condition; and some, to whom, and their
years rest, and quiet is due, yet do nothing but talk lamentably, never
altering their discourse, saying that in their days, the men were more
valiant, and not as they are now, that there is not a man left worth a Button,
and the like.

4. It is also blame worthy, and that with great reason, for any, that is in
company with others, to whisper; so that all cannot hear what he says, but
especially for two, or three, to separate themselves, from the rest, and to
stand laughing, and looking upon the rest, or to desire to be covered, or
muffled when the rest are not, for this is after a sort a betraying of him of
whom we speak, and in all reason they must offend many, that use it:
especially any one that is suspicious or jealous.

There are others, of such a condition, that if they be not talking, they
stand in such a study, that never regarding what they do, they have their eyes
fixed upon another, laughing at their own phansyes, and never thinking of him
they look upon, and thence must necessarily arise suspicion, as an Author
says.

If any look me in the face,
Yet minds some other thing*
He seems in giving that the place,
Me with contempt to sting.
5. They must then be admonished that are in public, and in company, that
they be not so careless, that they stand with fixed eyes, on any side, and be
wholly taken up with their own thoughts.

6. Nor is it fit, that when we are in such company, we should draw out a
book, or to settle our selves to read to our selves to pass away the time,
though we take as much pleasure in reading, as one Collegiall Trilingue of
Alcala did, That did verify he took so much pleasure in reading of Martial,
that being desired to go to Gadalajaca (four leagues off) he put on his Gown
he used to wear in his House, and bid them saddle Martial for him, and with
that he went, reading step by step, never thinking on the wearisomnesse of the
way.

Of those that are always giving counsel.
7. Thou may not offer thy advise to him, that requires it not, for that ^s
nothing else, but to show thy self wiser then him to whom thou give thy
advise, and to cast his little understanding in his teeth; and to account him
for an ignorant man, therefore no acquaintance may enboulden thee to do this
to another, except they be also our very intimate friends, or be such, that
we have the tuition of or that we do see them in any apparent danger, whom
we thus counsel or give advise unto. But in our ordinary dealing, a man ought
to abstain from counselling much. Into which error many do fall, but more
often, those that know little themselves, for to men of gross understandings,
few things come into their heads, that others have need of. And (certainly)
there are some, that so much esteem of their own knowledge, that if others
do not follow their opinion, they are offended, and complain of those that
refuse it, as if they should say. It is well, a poor man's advise cannot be
admitted, such an one, will do as he lists, and will not hear me: and
other things of this nature, and to this tune. As if pretending another ought
to obey thy counsel, were not a greater arrogance, then for thee to follow
thine own mind.

8. A like fault are they guilty of, that find fault with other men's
imperfections, giving a definitive sentence, touching every thing; and
prescribing Rules, and Laws, to every one, whosoever he be. This ought not
to be, as for example, to speak thus, You spoke so, but it was not well
spoken, take heed of sleeping at such an hour: the Wine you drunk is not
good for you, you should drink Claret, you should use such a kind of bath,
and not such as you do: and thus are they always reproving, and are like
those that are always weeding another man's Garden, and never consider, that
their own is overgrowne with Nettles, and Brambles: and therefore we should
leave this work, to Fathers and Masters.

Of contemning others.
9. We ought not to despise any body, nor to set light by him, though he be
our enemy, for it is a greater sign of disgrace, to deride one, then to do
him a shrewd turn, for of him that we do an injury to, we make some
reckoning: but him that we despise we make far less esteem of, yea often none
at all, therefore to scorn, or deride, is a pleasure we take to shame another,
without any profit at all to our selves. And therefore in our common converse,
and dealings with men, those that would be curious, ought to forbear, to
flout any body: and therefore they do ill, that are ever sifting out, and
retorting other men's defects upon them, (although they have such faults) for
this is not a good way, to rid them of them, and understanding and well
fashioned persons, do avoid such a reprocher as they would the Devil: but
there are some, that when they cannot give ill language will grumble, and
inveigh aganist the defects of others, by often smiling, and other exterior
acts: and sometimes, they make jests, and solace themselves and make sport with
the imperfections and miseries of others, whereas they should rather mourn,
and grieve for them. It may well be, (as a certain Courtier was wont to say)
that the sharpness of the tongue, may relish well, and please the appetite
much, in men's acceptance thereof, yet this tartnes must not be done to endanger
or much disturb the sweet love, and friendship, which is mainteyned without
any hazard on either side: So then the jeere which any receaves from thee must
be light, that he who receaves it may without shame be excused. And although
these jeeres and quips of wit be but a laughing, and jesting at the faults,
and oversights of him that receives them, yet for all this, they are esteemed,
and liked in him that knows how to speak them, well, because we know his
intention to be very far from wronging of any thereby. And therefore without
doubt, those that can talk merrily, yet in a friendly manner, and without
prejudice: are better liked then those that know not how to do it, and are
received with open Arms, and esteemed, and regarded of all men. As on the
contrary they are ill thought of, that seek to follow this vain without all
discretion, not observing any Rules or good manners therein, and therefore, he
that will do this, must be a very able man, for he must take many things into
his consideration. But in effect (as I have said) this jeering is but to make
sport with the defects, and errors of those that we ought to love and respect.

Of those that take offense at words.
10. On the other side, jests can hardly be distinguished, from wrongs,
especially by some persons, who are so captious, that they take all jests, and
quips, for affronts, and are so unsavory, and so void of understanding, that
instead of being pleased, or delighted therewith, they grow into choler, so
that none can jest or meddle with them: And there are some, that suppose you
should bear with their necessities and troublesomenesse, and if you say any
thing to them, how slight so ever it be: they are of such a disposition, that
they are presently off of the hooks, and are so offensively disquiet, that
although they are (sometimes) quickly appeased, yet during that small time,
that their foolish anger does last, they may infect others, with such an
humor, that may be their destruction. But what will it be, if they be
headstrong, and that their displeasure do not depart, but that they sleep
with it, and they dissemble their intentions, and wounded mind, with cheerful
countenances: we can say no more of these, but this, that (if we fall into
merriment,) we must sow a Hose about their Legs, as we use to do to
Chickens, that we may know them a far off. To this purpose Doctor Villabos,
the great Physician, as it is related in a certain very pleasing Dialogue of
his, having put a jest upon another Physician, in the presence of the King, he
grew in choler, and to be revenged spoke thus to the King. Your Majesty may
understand, that I value my self more, for that I am a Physician, then to be
accounted a merry companion, or a jester, To whom Vilabos answered, Seignior
Doctor makes me to be very simple; for he is so great a master, that he
cannot be compted a wity companion, which answer being so readily given, was
well taken, and the other received the pay he deserved. And it so falls out,
that he who is jeered, but in mirth, and in a friendly manner, does often, by
inconsideratnesse, take it for an affront and a disgrace. And although it be
so, that quips and jeeres are many times well taken, yet will not I counsel a
civil Gentleman, to addict himself much unto them. Nor ought he to occasion
them often to be spoken, nor at all times, and upon all occasions. For jestes
well scanned, are nothing else, but bold, and subtle deceiptes. And therefore
we should leave the perpetual making of jests, to those that live by them.
Who though they jeere never so much, can prejudice none by it, but if they do
it wittyly are to be rewarded for it. But when a brave Gentleman speaks any
thing sharply, he is to consider that every one is offended with him, that
tells him of his fault or error. Therefore, for many reasons it seems that
he that desires to be well esteemed, should not make himself a master of
jests, much less to esteem himself for his ability, in being Satyricall, and
scandalous: like those that are full of censuring, although they be very witty,
and pleasing in it, nor let them take such jollity in it as to lose a friend
thereby. But especially it is worthy blame to make a jeere of the natural
defects of any one.

That jests should not be spoken to prejudice any body.
Although it has bin seen in this case, that those who ought to have bin
silent in a matter, and yet have spoken it to another, have bin answered
sharply, as it was in that which they tell, that an one-eyed fellow said to a
fellow with a Hogback, who to call him crooke-back said thus; Companion, thou
have carried that burden, ever since the morning, to whom he answered, surely
that has not bin long, for it is but very early days yet, for you have opened
but one of your windows, so that each of them, jeered the other, with the
imperfection that nature had marked them with. But satyricall speeches pierce
deeper when they touch upon our descent, or honor, like that which one that was
newly converted to Christianity did speak to another by a jeere, to decipher
him out, which other seeing the Christian being a Cavalleere, sit very back
upon his Horse, said to him, companion, why do you get up so back upon your
Horse buttocks? to whom he answered, if I get up so back, it is because I would
not gall him, with the Cruz, and so was he revenged on him by jeering him for
being a Jew. And so stopped his forward boldness. Touching this matter, I say:
that if our acuteness, and hability do vent it self, in such prejudicial
sayings, it were better we should never use it, for it cannot be done with a
safe conscience, but where a man may speak of things without hurt, to our
neighbor, and with discretion, and judgment. It is true, that to pass this
troublesome life, we may use some solace and pastime, and that jests and quips
are wont to be used, as instruments to move laughter, and to recreate us
withal, and therefore, they are loved, that can move mirth and speak wittily,
without offending any body, and there are very few that know how to do this:
therefore there are many things to be considered, that we fall not into
disfavour. And it falls out, that that, which uses to please, and gain the
favor of some, may displease, and loose the favor of others; And commonly
where laughter has no place, and to be pleasant pleases not, there to Jest or
Jibe any body, is not acceptable, for there is no worse jest then truth.

11. By which you may know, that there are some words which bite, and do
prejudice, and there are others that do not. Of the first I shall not need to
say much: one wise comparision, that a certain Italian Lady, called Lawreras
once spoke shall suffice: Jests, says she, must bite those they are give^
unto; like a Lamb, and not like a Dog; for if they bite like a dog, they are
not jests, but villainy and wrong; and as (by the Law) he is punished that
abuses another in words, so ought he to be, that by his jests, speaks
bitterly and disgracefully of his neighbor: for which reason, discreet and
well behaved men ought to consider, that the same Law that takes order against
wrongs, does also take order against biting jests; and therefore, when men
jest, they must prick but lightly.

12. It is likewise to be understood, that a jest sometimes biteth, and
sometimes not, and if it be not witty and pleasant, there is no delight taken
in it by those that hear it, but proves lukewarm, and grows cold and frozen;
and if peradve^ture they laugh, it is not at the jest, but at the silliness of
the jester; and because jests are nothing but frauds, and spoken to beguile;
and as it is an artificial thing, so it cannot be done, but by persons of a
sharp wit, (especially upon a sudden) and therefore it suits ill with dull men
and those that have a gross phansy, except it be, when speaking by chance in
such their simplicity, they utter words worth laughing at, which then takes the
more, because he breaks the jest naturally and unawares, and not by witty and
feigned art. As a certain labourer did who being asked by certain Citizens
why he came to them, looked steadfastly upon one of them, that had a thick
black beard, and said, I come to sell a Pig, with reverence to the venerable
beard of this Gentleman. But why quoth the Citizen do you ask pardon of me
more then of the rest? he replied (simply and without malice) because your
worships beard is so thick and bushy that it resembles a Hogs foot before it
is scalded. The said Citizen could do noe less then laugh with the rest, for
company, though he were somewhat angry at the Jest. Another Biscanoys that was
sent for to buy a Pullet bought a Cock, supposing he had done well, because
the Cock was bigger then a Pullet: and of this sort, there are infinite Jests,
that are merely natural, and without any malice. But all that have good wits,
know not how to Jest, for it is a peculiar gift, and readiness of wit, that
all cannot attain unto, therefore discreet men, understand themselves better,
then to think to do it at their pleasure, but are contented, with the talent,
and disposition, they are endued withal.

Of those that make jests and know not of it.
And when such men, have once or oftener made trial of the strength of their
wits in vain: they do find that they have no faculty that way, and do
forbear to busy themselves, in exercising it, for it is a certain faculty,
that few are excellent in. Some have this property, that no word can pass, but
they have a jest, or witty saying, ready to pass upon it. And you must know,
that another cannot relate, nor put in writing the jests that another invented,
and uttered, with such grace, and delight as the authors of them can,
therefore. I hope I shall here be excused (in part,) if those that I here set
down, for examples sake, do not give very good content to the Reader.

Forms of Jests.
13. And amongst the several ways of Jests, there is one very good, and
pleasing, namely to make sport with a word that has diverse significations. As
a Cavallere, that was traveling on the way, as he passed through a certain
Village, he asked what place it was, and how they, called it; they answered it
was called a Village, (which in the Spanish tongue, is called Casar, which
signifies also to marry) the Cavallere answered, in this Jest. Quien passa por
el Casar, por todo puede passar. That is, he that can pass through marriage,
may pass all places.

14. A certain ill favored old woman, saying to a Lord of quality, of this
Court, that she desired to marry, into Baldemoro, being the name of a Family
in Spain, he answered her thus, Madam, in all Ethiopia called in Spain
Baldemoro, you cannot meet with any so ugly that will have you.

15. Also in like manner did a gentleman of Valodolid make a Jest upon two
words that had two contrary senses, though they had the same Letters. A
certain ill favored Lady had spoken very disdainefully of him, and had
reported that she could not be persuaded, that any women thought well of men.
He contrived as she came to walk on the bank of Esgueva which is a little
stream, whereinto the people empty all their filth, to answer her with this
Sonnet.

In midst of Esgeve and the Flowers,
Her pudly streams, Pisverga sent
Where fresh, and new fruits grow all hours,
Two Shepherds the air with shrill notes rent.
O Nymph whose love procures no flames,
Whom one sole lover does not woe.
Being commandresse of these streams,
How can you pass with one or two?
Leest thou on Bridge in the Ford, or Bote,
Seated among such Flowers sweet,
Pouring clear liquour down thy throat,
Must needs be thought for thee unmeete.
That thou should have no sutering swains
That thrives by the peoples backward gains.
16. To this purpose taking only the literal meaning, one Catedratico in
Alcala, made a pleasing interpretation being to act a speech which was to
begine in Castilian (as the manner is) spoke the preamble in Latin as
follows, Amplissime rector, gravissimi Doctores, Nobilis iuventus: which is as
much as to say, most bountiful Governor, most grave Doctors, Noble youth: but
as he began in Latin, they gave many strokes with their Hands, and stampes
with their Feet, in token that he should have spoken in Castilian, he was
bold to bespeake them in this manner, saying, my Lords, your honors may
perceive, that it sounds not so well in the Castilian tongue, as in the Latin,
and seeing they continued to stamp the more, he began in the literal sense,
in this form; magnificent Rector, most grave doctors, Noble youth, casting
his eyes upon the Women, that sat in the windows, over against the Theater, in
which entrance, there was much pleasure taken, and wit, in interpreting the
sound only, and so it was received for a Jest and a pleasing speech.

17. Some desire to do this, but know not how: but speak words, that are
frozen and without sense, which are taken very unsavorily. As for example, if
you ask them, where such an one is, they will answer you, where his feet
stands, or between the Sky and the ground. So that they speak in another
manner, then was expected, and without any ingenuity at all, and with such
frivolous answers, they loose the esteem, of understanding, and well spoken
men. If happily they retain not the credit, that a certain poor man did (A
credit of a different and more witty sense) who laying a wager with others,
that he could have credit with the bankers, (or money lenders) for more then
thirty thousand Ducats, and they asking him how it was possible, he being so
poor, and decayed a man; He answered them thus. It is clear my Lords, that
if I demand of any banker, in this manner, my Lord such an one, do you not
believe that to be rich, and to purchase two thousand Ducats a year, and to
have my House well furnished, that I have need of thirty thousand Ducats, do
you not credit what I say? surely he will answer me, I speak great reason:
and so will the rest of the bankers. Then according to this manner of credit,
namely to be believed of them, I can now say, that I have credit of thirty
thousand Ducats. And in this manner he proved his credit, taking the word in
a different sense.

18. Some others there are that are so settled in this way of Jibing, and
Jesting, that you cannot know, when they speak in earnest, or when in Jest,
and by the long continuance they have held, in speaking pleasantly, and
disguisedly, when they are to speak truth, they are feign to use oaths, that
they may be believed. And therefore that we be not brought to this pass, our
earnest must be more then our Jesting.

Heavy Ieeres.
And if thou make any Jests for mirth sake, let them not be heavy, or bitter
ones. As to take any thing from thy friend which may vex and trouble him, in
looking for it, and may make him jealous of any thing or to walk about
discontentedly. As little do I hold it good, to strike or scratch, or pinch
men, in Jest: for from such Jestings, we have seen men fall to earnest.

20. But because it is not our purpose, to dispute here, what may be
accounted fitting or unfitting Jests, and Jeeres, nor to urge more to any
purpose, then what is needful, for the illustration of it: I omit many
examples, which are extant, of witty sayings, and stories to that purpose.

How you may know a good jest.
21. It is sufficient to know that jests do carry with them, either a certain
testimony of their pleasantness, and decency: or of their couldnesse and
unpleasantnesse. And to know if a Jest be good, or bad, he cannot be mistaken,
that observes this that folowes: And it is this, that he that Jests, be not
too confident of himself; for it is plainly seen, that when a Jest is good,
and pleasing, the company is pleased at the very uttering it, applauding it
with the laughter, and jollity they make at it: And when it is not liked of
those that hear it, he that makes it, is offended, and avoids making any more,
so that the defect being in truth his own, and not their fault that hears it,
and so not being so approved, he is to rest convinced as by a definitive
sentence, for he cannot appeal to himself.

Of making a witty and ready answer.
The knowing how to make a ready answer to any question, is no less requisite,
then to know how to make a witty and pleasant Jest, or to speak acutely. And
some there are, that are so ingenious, and endowed, with such a gift, that they
will answer so quick, to a question, or so wittily apply a pleasant speech, to
those that hear them, that you would think they had bin studying long to
bring it forth.

23. They report of that famous Dantes, that some of his adversaries searching
for him, when they could not know him by his Face, they sound him out, by his
ready and acute answers he made, to all questions they asked of him: And so
three of those that met with him, asked him three questions together to try if
they could distract him, one asked him, Dove venite? the second, Dove de laqua?
and the third, Quanti son di Luna? which is as much as to say, whence come
thou? whence comes the Water? how old is the Moon? who answered them all
three, in three words, saying, Davilla, Aloulo, in quinta: from the City, from
the Pitchers, five days old. And so was he discovered by his quickness.

CHAPTER, 12. Of speaking set speeches.
1. THere is another manner of giving entertaynement, which consists in
Knowledge how to speak, namely, when the pleasure thereof consists not in
Jests, and witty sayings, which are commonly very short, but in speaking a
continued speech, which ought to be done orderly, and with good expressions:
so that he that shall speak knows how properly to represent, the manner and
use, actions, and fashion of him he speaks of, so that he that hears him
speak, thinks he even sees acted before him, the things which he relates unto
him.

To know how to speak well.
2. And this Knowledge to speak well must consist, not in differencing or
extreme altering the voice, nor in imitating of actors of Plays. But it is
necessary for him that will speak well, to remember well the matter, story, or
History, and to have ready and fitting words, that he may not speak from the
purpose, As some use to do, after this manner. And so my Lords, as I said, and
to the end, that such an one, or another what do you call him, help me pray,
to name him: tell me his name, etc. All which are ill customs, and are
offensive to an understanding audience. And if he repeat an accident, wherein
were many names, he must not speak thus; such a one said thus, another spoke
so, or such a one answered in this manner, for all of them may be said to be
one or another. And he that hears it, may easily err, in not understanding
of whom he speaks, and therefore, he that relates such a passage, must recite
the names precisely, and therefore must take heed he forget them not.

3. It falls out in like manner, that some are so careless, that they forget
what they were speaking of, by suffering their thoughts to rome upon other
matters, so that they will ask you, what were we talking of, I have forgot
what I was saying. This cannot be done, without blame to him that was thus
discoursing: even as he that recites an oration or other speech, and never
minds what he is doing. For it seems that he that is thus forgetful, does
little esteem the content of his Auditors.

4. Besides this, a man must take heed, that he speak not superfluities, and
things of no substance, or which make nothing to the matter in hand, As if when
the auditors are waiting for the success of the story, he that relates it
shall speak thus, such an one that was the son of such a man, that went many
times, to such a Merchants house, that was married to a lean Woman, that was
called by such a name, did you not know her? how is it possible you should not?
you had better bin ignorant in another matter: A good old Woman, very straight,
that had a very thick hair: and well combed, and such stuff as this. For if
they make not much to the business, it is (at best) but to wast the time, for
by it, they hinder the pleasure, which might otherwise be taken, in their
discourse, and is of little benefit to them, that listen to them; But
especially if they be urgent, and desirous, to know the close of the story; we
ought not to punish them so much in circumloquutions, whereas all such their
discourse tends to no more, then that such an one, was the son of Peter or of
John.

5. And a famous Rhetoritian, was of opinion, that in telling of Tales, or
stories, if there must be a relation in them, of many things, in the first
place we must order, and dispose of the names, and sirnames, and after it shall
be enough, only to repeat the Christian names, because they are given,
according to the will of their Parents, and the surnames according to the
quality and decency of the persons. And if the person be not very well known,
in the place where we speak of him: we ought to frame our discourse, and
story, as if the thing were done in another place: and to fit the names, as we
please, that we may tell our stories, with relish, and without interruption,
or making rubbes, or pawses in them.

To use propriety of words.
By this means, those that hear us are the better moved to attention, and we
remain satisfied, and they pleased, and this manner of speaking, is of such
force, is so proper, and distinct, that (many times) it falls out, that it
seems to please much, though in it self, it be not very pleasing, and so,
that which in it self, has much pleasure, may in like manner, be delivered so
coldly, that all the mirth is spoiled thereby: and he discredited, that
relates it: And although good gestures, and the grace that a sweet voice
affords, are necessary in this, and is of great effect. Yet for all this, he
shall not be deficient, to please well, and to be understood in the dexterity,
of the propriety he uses, by him that knows what belongs to write well, and in
a good phrase.

Of Comparisons.
Examples, and Comparisons, must be apparent, because by them is presented to
the pha^tasy, the thing compared, as if it were really beheld: and we ought not
make Comparisons by talking or doing foolishly, As some who put in the dance of
their story those that are their auditors, saying, does your worship know who
such an one is, the other came in this manner, and I shook him off thus, and
in steed of Comparisons, they give them such thumpes on the Arms, and so
strike them with their tongues, that no body can avoid them. There are others
that speak a thousand fooleries, instead of Comparisons, so improperly and so
grosely, that they force men to laugh at them. As did a Priest in a certain
Village, who to make some friends, and persuading them to love one another, and
seek one another good, said unto them, you love one another, not so much as
my Mule, and Antonio, Madalenaes Horse, who went together to the Pasture, and
fed together and came home together again. But if two beasts keep company,
and love so much, why do you not take example by them? So that for the
propriety of that which is related, and compared, we find, that men give
ear, with more delight to have that preseuted before their eyes, that is
spoken of, and which falls out to persons we know: then that which befalls
strangers whom we never saw. And the reason is, for that we know that such an
one, of whom he speaks, was wont to do so, (having seen it as a thing
present) so that that which is told of strangers, is not so well received or
accepted of.

6. The words also, in a continued speech, as well as in other discourses, must
be clear, or plain, that every one of the company, may understand them
easily, as well in the sense, or meaning, as in the sound, to be good, and
beseeming: therefore if thou can make thy self understood, by saying the
mouth or the lips, it is not good for thee to say, the nose, and thou may
better say, thy belly is full, then the guts are full, and if thou may be
understood by saying, the belly is satisfied, it shall be better for thee to
say so, then, the panch is full.

CHAPTER. 13. Of Novellaes and Tales.
BEsides the things we have said, a Gentleman will be sure to tell a Tale, or
story, that shall be such, that it shall not have in it, uncivil words, or
obscene passages, or so beastly, that they make them loath them that hear it,
but such passages must be related by circumlocutions, and by civil, and
honest ways of expression: not speaking them in plain terms, especially if
Women be in the company, for then we should be more reserved, and the plot
in such Tale, must be laid so neately, and artificially, that the Auditors,
may be fed with pleasure of it, until that the Auditors do at length remain
fully satisfied, and out of doubt, with the close and conclusion of the story.
And Tales and stories should be such, that besides the entertaynement, and
pleasure of them, there may be also drawn from them, good examples, and
moralls, as the ancient makers of Fables were wont to do, who spoke very
artificially, (as we may read in their works) And in imitation of them, he
that tells a story, a fable, or such like discourse, ought to provide, that he
do not often repeat the same words, except necessity force him to it, (which
is that which is called rambling.) And so, that he do not confound his
auditors, or perplex their memories, he must labor to take away all
obscurity, especially of many names. So that if in the story, there be no
more, then one Prince, or one King, who is named in the beginning; it is then
enough (afterward) to say (only) the King, the Captain, the Doctor, etc. And
because in all parts of this treatise, we labor to urge comparisons, and
examples to the purpose, in this part which we are now upon, we will relate a
story of which (it being very pleasing to some comicall persons of good
judgment) there was made a famous Tragecomedy. And because in this book, we
would feed most palates with delight, he that shall not take pleasure in it,
may skip over the story, (if it seem redious,) and may proceed, in the other
matters of this Treatise.

The tale of the great Sultan, and of the loves of the beautiful Axa and the
Prince of Naples.
In the Vast Country of Tersia, was a Sultan, that by his prowess, and valor,
had conquered many Lands, who loosing his sight by a mischance that befell him,
was more sensible of the great loss thereof, in regard that he was thereby
disabled to prosecute the designs he had begun, then for any other trouble it
put him unto. He then calling together all the Physicians of his Kingdom,
that they might apply medicines, to cure his infirmity: his vassalls, (being
desirous of the recovery of his sight) brought unto him, a famous Christian
Physician, whom by misfortune, a Basha had taken prisoner: in this man the
Sultan had great confidence, to receave help, (he having already cured many of
his vassalls, of many dangerous infirmities) and so with large promises of
wealth and freedom he put himself into his hands. The Physician, used the
best practice he could, to recover his sight; but all humane means he could
use, not sufficing, he excused himself to his Lord, beseeching him, that he
would accept of his good will, and intention: but it was not accepted with the
like mind. But the Sultan was jealous, that because he was a Christian,
therefore he was regardlesse of his recovery: And commanded that they should
put him into a Dungeon, and ordained, that if within eight days following, he
prescribed not a sufficient medicine, to recover his sight, that he should be
devoured of his Lions. The Physician, when he had bin seven days in the
Dungeon, and considering, how near death aproched to him, determined to find
out a way, how to prolong his life, by entertayning the Sultan with feigned
hopes, and so desired, he might be (again) brought before him, that he might
try another medicine upon him (When he came into his presence, after he had
excused himself, that he had not all this time cured him,) he spoke thus unto
him, That he had found out that there was one only cure for him, but that he
must have patience, for a few days, wherein he must put off the cure (but it
should not be long) till he might search out (with diligence) a young man of a
noble race, valiant, of a pure complexion, fair, wise, and well esteemed of:
for, with the blood, and heart of such a one, with the Powders, and Herbs, that
he should add, he would recover his sight: and that they must (also) appoint
him a place, to gather certain Herbs, for this purpose. The Sultan, approving
his speech, gave him liberty, to walk (freely) up and down his Court, and
possessed with this hope, he imparted his content, to the Suleanesse his Lady,
and his beautiful Daughter, Axa, a Lady most famous, for her wonderful
fairness, and worth. After the Sultan, dispatcheth some of his Basha^s, to
diverse Kingdoms, that they might find out a prisoner that might be fitting,
for to make the medicine, to recover his sight promising great rewards, to him,
that should perform this enterprise. It fell out, that as one of his
Captains, touched with one of his gallyes, at a port of the Kingdom of
Naples, and had there bin informed, that certain young Cavalleeres, were to
pass that way a hunting, they lay in ambush to take them, at which very season
it fortuned, that the Prince of Naples went also that way to hunt, who in the
hard pursuing of his chase, was severed from his company: He was a young man of
three and twenty years old, and endowed with all those qualities, the
Christian Physician, had mentioned: who being assaulted by the infidells,
although he defended himself like a valiant cavalleere, after he had slain
some of them, and hurt many more, was nevertheless (at last) with much
difficulty, taken, and put into the Gally, and carried to the great Sultan, and
although they knew him not for a Prince, yet they guessed by him that he must
be a Cavalleere of great quality; you may easily co^ceive, what sadness did
possess the King, and Queen, of this Kingdom, this Princes father, and all
the subjects, for the loss of the Prince, and so leaving that, to its proper
time, and place, we will now speak of his voyage, which was so prosperous, that
in short time, they arrived in Persia, where he was presented to the Sultan,
who much pleased therewith called for the Christian Doctor, to the end that,
(this Cavalleere being such a man, as he had required to recover him withal)
he might put his medicine in practice. The Physician, seeing himself thus cut
off of his excuseand confounded in his plot, spoke to the Sultan in part after
this manner. Great Sir, I cannot deny, but this young man, is a man fitting for
the purpose to recover your sight: but he is now troubled, and his Spirits
unquiet, and it his humors be not settled and his complexion reduced, to its
due temper, his heart will not be useful, for our purpose, he must therefore
repose himself, a few days, and a way be devised, how this captive may
receave content, as by some vain hope of freedom, or such like means; The
Sultan thought well of this, and told it his Wife, and his fair Daughter Axa,
who offered him, (if he would employ them in this service,) to make him such
offers, and promises of liberty, that he should presently be pleased, and
contented. Which offer the Sultan accepted of them. Wherefore, afterward, the
Prince was brought to the lodging, of the Soldana (which was curiously seated,
and had a passage from it, to the bank of a great River, which not far
thence, disburthened it self, into the Ocean,) now he was employed for his
greater grace, in serving the fair Axa, who of purpose, and by the command of
her parents, made very much of him, and showed him, extra ordinary favor. In
like manner the Doctor, had order, to enter (when he pleased) into the Chamber
of the Empress, and the Princess, to observe, when the Christian should be
at the height of his content: that he might give the Sultan notice, when it was
a fit time to sacrifice him. The Prince seeing the good entertainment they
gave him, could not imagine, why (on the sudden,) he should be thus
cockered, but suspected, that they had discovered what he was. And he being
indeed very pleasing, and a perfect Courtier, knew (so well) to give content,
and to perform his service so readily, to his new Lady, the beautiful Axa,
that the feigned, and purposely counterfaited observance, she made show of,
was turned into a true and sincere love, and the Prince was the mean while no
less taken with her beauty. Yet so warily, and secretly they both carried
their loves, that when any beheld them, it seemed to be all in jest. The Doctor
whose thoughts were not all this while idle, seeing what have was made, devised
a way, how he might escape from them. For it was resolved that the fifth day
following, the Christian should be sacrificed, and so, he failing in his cure,
should be devoured of the Lions. About the same time he went out one evening,
into the Orchard, where the Soldana, and her Daughter, with the Christian, were
also walking together, And as they walked, the Prince, and Princess went
aside, and she laying her hand upon his shoulder, and looking wishly upon him,
conjured him by the great love she bare him, to tell her, who he was,
promising to keep it secret; who moved with much confidence of her love, and
faith of her promise, and with the sweet words, this Lady gave him, told her
the truth, that he was the Prince and only heir of Naples, beseeching her, by
all means, not to discover him, for the great difficulty, he should thereby
find, for his ransom. But as soon as she understood, what he was, and the
danger he was in, she began to weep bitterly, yet for fear of her mother
she dissembled it, as much as she was able: at this instant, the Soldana
winked upon the Doctor, that he should come, and see if the Christian were in a
good temper, showing him the great cunning her Daughter had used, to deceive
him, and to bring him into good temper, and to make him to be well satisfied:
and she in the while stood to behold, at some distance off, in the Orchard; But
when the Doctor came to the place where the two Lovers were, the fair Axa
begun secretly to curse him, and bad him, that he should take some course,
that he did not perform, what he had agreed upon, but that he should cure
her father another way: if not, that he was to know, that if he did, as he had
proposed, though he should cure him, yet she would kill him, (but especially
because she well perceived, that all was but subtilty, to prolong his life,)
And turning to the Prince, she said, Ah Sir, it is now no time to conceal
from you, what is determined concerning you, but that we presently study a
remedy. And so she told him the sentence, that was given against him: and all
the passages thereof, and in what manner his death was appointed (by the
consent of this Doctor) but that he should not be troubled at it, for she
would mark out a way, how he might free himself, which was, that they three,
(as they were) must take their flight, in a little Bark, that was in the
River, and so commend themselves to their good fortunes. And from thence, she
vowed her self, to be a Christian, and desired him by the says of a Husband,
that he would take her, to his Kingdom, and accept her for the Princess
thereof. And she declared unto them that by means of certain charms, that
she had learnt of her Mother, she would (next day) take order, to cast her
Mother, and her women, into a sleep: that in the mean time, they three, might
escape, with all her Fathers treasure, of which she kept the Keys. The
Prince, remained astonished, when he understood, what had passed, but much
more, at the ready ability, of his Lady, and of the great love she had shown
him. The plot pleased them exceeding well, but it not then being the time, to
put this business, in execution, they agreed to do it, the next day, as soon
as the Sultan had supped, and so they made the appointment, as the fair Axa
had chalked it out. The next day, she conveyed her self into the Chamber,
where her Fathers tresour was, and there she took out of certain Chests, the
best Jewels, and precious Stones he had, and took also much Gold thence to an
incredible value, being indeed the greatest part of that the Sultan and his
predecessors, had bin gathering together for many years past, when this was
done, she took order how to intercept a bark, one of the best on the River,
by an excuse that she made, that her self, and her Mother, and some other
Ladies, were to take their pleasure in it as at other times, they were wont to
do. When night came, and supper was ended, the fair Axa, by means of the
enchantments, and magic, she had knowledge in, put one in practice, which was
to pitch a scedule of partchment written with Dragons blood, and to stick it to
the gown of the Soldana, which was no sooner done but she fell into adeepe
sleep, and so dead it was, that she awaked not, till late the next day. Then
she commanded all the Women to retire, and hid the Prince and Doctor, in the
same Chamber, where the tresour was, and when she knew that they were all at
rest, and that the Soldana could not be awaked, she went cheerfully to her
Husband, and at last all three, helping one another, they put all this wealth,
in Chestes, and by little and little, put them into the Bark, and amongst
other things, of great esteem; they had taken a sword, which (besides the
richness of the stones, it was set withal) it was of such power, that
wheresoever it cut, it dissolved all charms and enchantments. And in like
manner she took a Ring of memory all of one Diamond, as well the hoope, as
the stone, made in two parts, which being joined together, had a virtue in it,
that he that had it, could remember what ever he had done, or had happened
unto him, unto that present time. With this treasure, and rich apparel, that
Axa had put up, they went all three abroad the Bark, who aided with sails and
oars, they were favored so much, that being now on the maine Ocean, in a happy
time, they doubled the Cape of Naples, which Kingdom they discovered one
morning at break of day. The joy of all three was great, but especially of the
beautiful Princess, who with amorous discourse did solemnize her great
content, in behoulding Christendom, and for enjoyng the company of her beloved
Prince. At this very instant, Axa behold a far off a Bark appear, that made
toward them, with all speed, and being much troubled, she turned to the
Prince, saying, alas my Lord, the Bark we have discovered, is the Soldanas
Bark, my Mother, who with her magic, and enchantments, is able to destroy us
without resistance. The Prince did comfort her, making it a sport that one
Woman should be able to conquer him, but the greatest comfort that she found,
was the remembrance of the Soldans sword, that the Prince wore, and so
(although with great fear, and many tears,) she was persuaded, that there
was no other remedy but that they must cut something, which belonged to the
Bark, and not suffer themselves, to be grapled with, that they might not be
overthrown; In the Interim the Soldana came up to them, with great bravery,
reviling them, and calling the Prince ruffian, and the Princes whore, and
threatening them, that now they should never escape her hands: the Prince
advised her not to come near him, except she desired her own destruction:
but the not regarding his counsel, came to board him, and fastening her
grapling hands upon part of the Princes Bark, to leap into it. The Prince
(that was very vigilant) cut them off with as much of the Bark, as they had
laid hold upon: and so (by force) severed her, from them. The Soldana, when
she saw that by the virtue of the sword, he had defended himself from her,
being able to do no more, spoke in a rage to her daughter, in this manner:
well Traytresse, though you have such confidence in your ruffian, I will bring
it so to pass, that the first Woman, that he shall embrace, he shall forget
thee: and so she returned as fierce as a Lioness, with the loss of her
fingers. They seeing themselves freed of this danger, and near the Kingdom of
Naples, got into the heaven with great content: where the Prince, dissembling
himself very much, because he desired not then to be known, made the
Captain of the Castle there, (being a man of his old acquaintance) to be
called unto him. To whom only, (in private) he discovered himself. The
Captain being amazed at this sight, was falling down upon his Knees, to kiss
his hands, and feet, but the Prince winked upon him, and commanded him to
conceal him: and that he should entertain him, but as an ordinary
Cavalleere, because he did not as yet desire, to make himself known, and so
causing the Bark to be unladen of his Coffers, they went to refresh
themselves at his House; where he imparted his great joy only to his Wife, and
his two Daughters. And you may well guess what joy this was, when as for the
loss of this their Prince, all the country (after a most sad manner) mourned
in black sackcloth. But being come thither, the first thing Axa did, was to
be Christend, by the hand of a Bishop, to whom they were feign to discover
themselves, for this purpose. And at the same time the Prince was also married
to the fair Axa. And so the next day, The Prince commending the care of her,
to the Captain, and his Wife, and Daughters, he and the Doctor departed in
strangers habites, to present himself to his Father, that himself might be
the first, that might (...) the reward, for this news: promising his new
married Lady to come back again to her thither, and to receive her into the
Country with great solemnity. She suspecting the success, bestowed on him,
and put upon his finger half the Diamond Ring of memory before mentioned, and
kept the other half by her self. In this manner, they went to the Court,
where his parents, the King and Queen were, and entered into the Palace. Then
the tears trickled from this good Princes eyes, as well for joy he received
to see his parents, as for the grief, that his absence had caused so great
sorrow throughout the Kingdom, And after telling the waiters, that he had a
business of importance, to impart unto the King, he was admitted into the
presence: and there being full of content, after he had passed a thousand
jests, and passages of mirth, with the Cavalleeres, he discovered himself
unto them: that they might (by degrees,) make his Father understand of (...)
coming* least excess of joy by the sudden knowledge of his (...) cause some
dangerous (...) in him. All this (...) well carried, and so at length the
Father, and Son received one the other, with many tears, and embraces. And
as the Prince was relating to the King, all the discourse of his captivity, and
how by means of the fair Axa, he was delivered, in comes his Mother,
trembling, and much altered, with her sudden joy, and embraced him, shedding
many tears, until the King interrupted her and said to the Queen; as you
love my life be stille. That my Son may proceed, in the most exquisite
story, (of his travells) that ever was heard: and so he requested him to
proceed, and to declare, where he had left the fair Axa he spoke of. The
Prince wholly forgetful what he had said, as if he were astonished, at some new
accident, made answer, that he knew not Axa, nor whether there were such a one,
or no, nor did he ever see any such person. And the more the King wondered at
it, the more the Prince denied it: so that the Queen (...) King, and encreated
him to leave this discourse, and (...) to him of (...) nothing then but to
(...) they all possessed. And so was the news divulged, and great expressions
of joy were made through the whole Kingdom; And because the King had
(formerly) bin upon treaty of a marriage for the Prince with the Queen of
Cicily, (which by reason of his being lost, was hitherto stayed) he now again
sent his Ambassadors to her, with the consent, and liking of his Son, the
Prince, who without thinking of his Lady Axa, approved well of it. But when the
Doctor saw this, and that the Prince did not only forbear to proceed, with
his great entertaynement for his Lady Axa: but did not so much as think of
her: being much grieved, he returned, to the place, where she remained, but he
found that she was not much altered by this accide^t, but showing a good
semblance, to the Captain, commanded him, and the Doctor to go to the Court,
and to provide her the best lodging, which was to be had, without the Palace,
giving them much Gold, and Silver, out of her treasure, and license to spend a
great part of it, in furnishing of the said lodging: she also sent a messenger
to the King, to let him understand, that a Princess of a strange Country, was
coming to his Court, about an important business, and that his Majesty should
take order, for her entertaynement, according as was suiting to her quality,
and estate. The King, wondering from whom so great a Lady, could come,
commanded she should be received, by the Cavalleeres of his Court: requiring
her to discover whom she was, that he might not fall short, in giving her the
honor due unto her; The fair Axa answered, that his Majesty should know from
her own mouth, who she was; so the Captain, having provided a stately House,
adorned with curious furniture, and well furnished with servants, and officers,
fitting for the House of a Queen, the King took order to receave the fair
Axa, with great preparation, curiously trimming the streets through which she
was to pass, and providing the best inventions, plays and dancing that could
be thought on to entertain her withal. In this manner she made her entry,
being habited in as rich a fashion, as ever Queen or Princess was beheld
attired with, And being indeed (for beauty) the paragon of the World, so she
seemed to all that beheld her, to be more then a humane Creature. The King and
the Queen, stood privately and by themselves, where they might behold her, as
she passed from her House to the Court, and so did the Prince, who as she
passed by him, veiled his Beaver, and she returned her complementall respect
to him, looking wishly and affectionately upon him, as one that had not yet
forgot him. Who although that shoe appeared to him, to be the most curious
Creature, that ever he beheld, yet did he not at all remember her, but he
took notice how passionately she had eyed him, by which, and by her
wonderful beauty, he became a fresh enamored. And thus the fair Axa, with
much astonishment to all the Court, made her entry, distributing many rich
gifts, and presents, unto the Courtiers. The next morning, the King sent to
visit her, by his Lord high Steward, who (though he were a brave Courtyer,)
when he entered to deliver the complement, his speech was taken from him, with
behoulding her wonderful beauty, nor could he call to mind what he was to
say. Axa entreated him to sit down, and gave him much respect, with which he
was the more astonished, not knowing, how to dispatch his errand, nor how to
depart thence: the Princess, (feigning that she de red much his company, and
that his good intentions did well satisfy her) gave way he might sup with her.
And by this favor, she increased his blindness so much, that he desired,
that she would suffer him, to lie there that night, though it were but upon a
bench, because he could not find the way thence. To whom the beautiful Axa
answered, that he should not only lie there, as he desired, but that he should
lie in her own Chamber. The high Steward, much pleased with this, accepted of
it, and when bedtime was come, he asked for a Comb and a Brush to comb
himself withal saying to the Princess, that he always used to do thus,
and that it was the custom of the Country so to do: then the Princess
presented him a Comb with her own hand, and he begun to comb himself
therewith, while she sat confidently by him, for he did nothing but call her,
to sit by him, and said the good of the high Steward, might excuse her, so he
stood (thus) combing himself, so long, that he much galled his head, for he
continued so doing till morning without ceasing. At what time, the Prince came
thither, and saw this, and took out of his hands the Comb and Brush, sending
him away like a block-head, telling him, he had need to comb himself,
because she would not do it for him. In this manner the poor Steward, much
ashamed, went to the King, with his arms very weary, and the skin galled off
his head, with the much combing it, complaining, what wrong the strange
Princess had done him, for which he was well laughed at by the King Queen,
and Prince, who did nothing, but jeere him for it; but much more the Queens
Lord Chamberlain telling him, that because he was thus finely combed; they
durst not keep him company. Wherefore the Queen commanded, that he should be
employed on the same business, that she might see, what success he would
have. He was very well contented with it, but there happened a like misfortune
to him, that did to the former, but by another way. For when he had dyned and
supped, and trodden the same steps, that the other had done, the Princess
offering him a Comb, and a Brush, he excused himself (thinking thereby, he
had overcome all) answering that he had no need of combing, but he had a very
great longing, to put out the Candle, that was there burning, and so he went to
blow it out, and still as he put it out, it was lighted again, and he still
renewed his blowing of it, and thus he continued all night, who still when the
Princess called him, answered, I will come Madam, when I have put out the
Candle, which shall never get the victory of me. At which the Princess, and
many of her Ladies, that were there, with her, made much mirth: And thus
exercised, he passed the whole night, and in the morning she sent him away,
much ashamed. He returned to the King, and the Queen, who desired to be
satisfied, why he stayed so long* the Lord steward that was so combed, was so
much pleased, to see him so much troubled, that his own vexation was thereby
much lessened: and the rather for that his head did now begin to be better, and
(The King, Queen and the Prince, standing in doubt, from whence so fair, and
wise a Woman, should come) there came a message, from her, requesting the King,
to give her audience, in the business she came for, which was granted her, and
he forth with commanded she should come thither, and when she ascended the
Palace, the Queen, and her Ladies were ready to receive her; and so she
entered most gloriously, and richly, desiring to kiss the Kings hands, which
might not be granted, before he knew what she was, and what she desired.
She prostrated her self before him, and took them by force, saying, that
presently they should see, whether they might give her them, with a good will;
and with that, she required Justice of the King, to cause half a Ring of
memory, that the Prince had robbed her of to be restored unto her, which Ring
she said, the Prince did then wear upon his finger. The Prince much blushing
said, that it was true, that he had such a Ring; but that he did not remember
that he took it from her: then the Princess pulled off that which she had
upon her own finger, and putting it upon the Princes finger, and joining, and
fitting it, into the other, the Prince came to himself, as if he had awaked
from a dream; and his eyes being opened, and seeing his Lady Axa, before him,
first falling down upon his knees, before her, he (presently) went and took
her in his arms, and said unto her; O my Lady, and true Spouse, and my
greatest bliss: and then he proceeded, to tell the King, and Queen, his
parents, his story: and how much he was engaged, to this fair Princess, who
with joy embraced, and received her for their Daughter, and being in the
midst of their joy, there entered the Ambassadors, that came from Sicily, and
declared, that the Queen was already married, to another King her neighbor:
who at the very time, they were in treaty, came with a great Navy, and carried
her to his own Country, and there married her, at which they were much
pleased, seeing how happily all things fell out, and so the Prince, and the
most wise, and beautiful Axa, succeeding their parents, in the Kingdom, did
long reign, with happy peace, and prosperity.

The end of the Tale, and proceeding of the Author, in his matter.
He ought also that takes upon him to tell any story or tale, (like this)
although he have many to tell, and that they hear him willingly, to give way,
that every one, may tell his own story, and not to exceed his lymits (so
far,) in this kind, that he should be accounted tedious or troublesome:
nor to invite men to be always telling such stories, for the principal use of
them, is but to fill up idle time.

2. One must also take heed in this, as in all other manner of discourses,
that he observe the propriety, and purity of words, and not leaving the common
use, and true Castilian tongue, rather striving for plainness, then
curiosity, so that if in common discourse, we be to say the Sun, we should
not say, the light of the world, nor to say he stood in the frontispice of his
House, when we should say he stood in the porch, or entry thereof. Nor when one
should say, he took the fresh air of the morning, to say that he received
the Zephirus of Aurora, nor in ordinary things, to use words, which are
strangers, in our language, like some, that think they show great learning, in
drawing old words, out of use, into their discourses.

3. But what shall we say of the coined phrases, of some I deots, that labor
to speak in metaphors, and high and excellent straynes, as they conceive.

4. A student, one Christmas coming home to see his parents, and kindred, as
he stood with them, by the fire, thinking to show his learning by speaking in
an extraordinary manner, instead of saying, lay this wood on the fire, said
thus, Lady Nurse, apply these materials, to the consumer of all things, for
you see, that the biting tooth of nature, makes me in a walking temper. His
Father that was well studied, and a good speaker, replied to this, me thinks
my Son, that the want you felt in the Castilian tongue you have as well met
withal in the Latin, and that in a worse manner, for you might have expressed
more in a plain Song, then you have done, in the counter point. I say then,
that our words ought to be such, as may be significant, and plain to be
understood, according to the custom of the place, where thou art, and not so
obsolete, that they are grown rusty, (as the proverb goes.) For it is better
to say Tapiz, which is Tapistry or French Cloth, then Paramentos, which is an
old word, that signifyes the same thing, and to say Ensenar to teach, then
Averzar, being an old word, that signifyes the same thing, And Accostombrado,
accustomed, and not as others use to say, Estoy hecho a esto, which signifyes
the same thing. I except Laborers, and Pesants, and other people of poor
places, although we make sport of their language: yet it becomes them well, and
if they strive to alter their ordinary way, it shows ill. And according to
their account, you shall find such understanding men amongst them, that they
may give us fifteen and a fault, as the proverb goes, that think our selves
wiser.

But it is not to be doubted, but for the most part, if we could hear the
passages betwixt some of them, in their consultations, and discourses, we
would be much taken with them.

5. A curious Courtier, walking in the habit of a labourer, passed through a
Village, at the time they were in council, and so by means of his habit, that
he wore, he was permitted, to behold what passed there, and at that instant,
he saw one of the country fellows, that sat there, stand up, and putting off
his Cap spoke thus to the Justices of the place. Noble Lords, Juan Gamorro and
Pedro Garcia se quieren chapar por cohadres if it please you. The most ancient
of the Judges answered him thus. No engemineys tantos in lo c^hadria, que
succedera eugobello, so that we cannot determine of it.

6. In another more obscure place he said he saw another Judge that being
troubled spoke thus, come you hither Meculas of Ana and tell me why you wear
that Dagger, Meculas de Ana answered him, I may wear it for my defense, to
which the Judge in anger answered as he sat upon the bench, take it from him,
and set him on the Pillory, and take it for Law, that I sentence him and
command it. The concept of the Author is not to be understood but in the
Spanish.

7. Returning then to our purpose, I say, that our words must be plain, and
this we may do, if we know how to use such as have their original, and
natural signification, from the Land we are in: and they ought not to be so
old, that they prove hard to be understood, and out of all use: like old
Clothes, and habites, so that if when we ought to leave them off, we shall go
abroad with them, we shall be pointed at, and derided for so doing. And
therefore, he that shall say, Membrose for Acordarse, or ome Bueno for hombre
Bueno, and sincar for que dar, and such like, shall do very ill.

8. In like manner, our words must be as proper, as may be, to express that
which we desire to show by them, and less significant, and common to express
other things by; As to say, he was known Enlas faciones, by his fashion, is
more proper then to say he was known En la figura o Imagen. And it is better
to say, Reclino le Puerta, que no grito la puerta, the door squeekes, and we
may more properly say, Et tremblor de quara^tana then El frio the shaking of
the quartan Ague, and many such like as these.

9. None can well speak to another, in the tongue which he unto whom he
speaks understands not, and for this reason, those that are curious, and
especially strangers do labor to understand Latin, because it is a tongue so
common in the World, and which they teach by art unto those that are to
travel, into strange Countries. And in my opinion, those who have or may have
means to learn it, ought not to neglect the knowledge thereof, that they may
enjoy the treasure, that is written in that language. And the reason that in
Spain, men do not ordinarily discourse so well, as in other Kingdoms, is,
because in many places thereof, they teach many rules, and do very little
exercise to discourse, but for a man's ordinary custom, none ought to alter his
mother tongue, except necessity require. And if a Spaniard be to discourse with
an Italian, or one of another language, whom he knows does well understand
the Castilian tongue, he is not bound to speak to him in any other then his
own Castilian tongue. Neither is an Italian, or stranger, that knows that the
Spaniard (with whom he discourses) understands him, tied to speak Castilian,
or to excuse himself for his foolish language: And it has bin seen that an
Italian has spoken in Spanish, with a Spaniard, for vain glory, and
oftentations sake, and a Spaniard to answer him in Italian, and both one, and
the other, to speak such broken language, that they might easily discover one
another to speak ill, and any other, that heard them, must needs laugh at
them, to hear the improprieties and fooleries spoken of them.

10. There was after this manner a Spaniard that met with an Italian his
friend, and each of them speaking the others language, when they had spoken
much on both sides without well understanding each the other: The Spaniard
spoke to the Italian in this manner, Sir I am of opinion, that except we change
tongues, we can proceed no farther, therefore let me have my Castilian
tongue, and do you take your Italian.

11. To this purpose, I can tell you of a great drinker, that called a Jew
newly become a Christian, drunkard, and the other called him Jew, and having
accused and sued each the other, for the same, the Judge being in examination
of the business, The drunkard said, Sir he confesses he called me Jew, and I
deny not but that I did call him drunkard, let them therefore pass one for the
other, and so we are even: if not, let him return me my drunkard, I will
return him his Jew, and so the Judge set them both free, and made them
friends. I say then returning to my matter, that we must take heed of
speaking in a strange language, when there is no necessity to do it.

12. A discreet Gentleman must (in like manner) be sure that his words be
modest, and honest and well sounding, I mean that they be well sounding or
delivered in a good tone, and have a good signification, for there are some
words, that sound in the meaning of them, and not in the letter of the^, as
when they say, she recoyled instead of she fell backward, which as to the
meaning of it, is better; and it may more honestly be said, his she friend,
then his harlot, and of a dishonest woman such a one is her servant, then to
say, he is ruffian to such a young Queen, and such like or worse words. And
when we may express things of this nature by one word, it is better to do it
so then with two, as to say, much good may it do you, and he gained, and
enjoyed her. Except he chang it into mirth, which a Country fellow found, who
coming for a dispensation said to the Justice of the Court, Sir, They have
made me come hither to buy a dispe^sa, or dispensation from the Sumo Ponfize,
meaning the Pope, and the notary asking him Si avi te^ido accesso o copula if
he had laye^ with her or had copulation, He answered I Sr. ya hemos tenido
eucientios y popula, and she is with child, that thanks be to God, they
cannot account me pro omnipotente, meaning an impotent fellow. There befell a
witty accident to a Lawyer of this Court, from a Country fellow, who being of
his counsel, after he had discoursed of his case, he said unto him, master
Lawyer, I desire with your worships leave, that I may give your wife two blows
on the buttockes, the Lawyer was something troubled with this, until the
labourer proceeded in this manner, saying, indeed I am the bolder to give them,
because the Bacon is good, and so the mistake was, that instead of saying
Lunadas de tocino, gammons of Bacon, he called them nalgadas, which signifyes
claps on the buttocks.

13. Of all these things we ought to be admonished of, in our common discourse,
and being to handle a larger subject, every one may make use of the rules and
instructions of Rethorick. But in that which we here call good courtship, we
must use modest, gentile, and sweet language, that may have no bitterness in
them, and so we should rather say. I do not well express my self, then that
you cannot understand me. We will try, if it be so as you say, then to say, you
are deceived, or it is not true, or you do not know it. For it is a courtly
and pleasing fashion, to excuse another, even in that that thou know he is
too blame in. We ought also to make our friends error, common to our selves,
and to take part of it, upon our selves, and after to reprove him, in a
seasonable time, saying, we were out of the way and we never thought to do
this, although the truth be, that the forgetfulness was in the other, and not,
in him that took the fault upon him. And if any one promise thee any thing, and
cannot accomplish it, or be forgetful of it, it is not civil to say, you have
broke your credit or promise with me, or you have not kept your word, you have
not regarded me. For such words are pricking, and sharp, and imply in them,
some suspicion of infamy, or reproach, and those that use such language, are
accounted harsh, and simple, and so men avoid them, and their friendship: like
unto them that shun to entangle themselves, with briars and brambles, which two
to one, (although it be for things of no weight) are occasioned to bring us to
destruction. And so we must never speak, except first, we have framed in our
minds, what to speak, that thy discourse may be well delivered, and be
consonant in it self. Nor as little ought thou, to seek to be the
speaker, in assemblies, or meetings, nor as little ought thou when thou art
amongst thy equals, to be always silent: yet in these two extremes, thou
can less err, in holding thy peace. As they tell of one Piobano that was in
Italy, a very pleasing man, and discreet, that when one gave him many
injurious, and opprobrious speeches, he heard them patiently, and said nothing
to them, and being asked why he held his peace, and did not answer for
himself: made answer, that whilst the other was speaking, he was considering,
that he never yet repented, for being silent, but for speaking he had often
repented him.

14. True it is, that those that speak well, and gracefully, without wronging
of others, are blameless. Yet for all this, it must be done so modestly, that
they give way with patience for others to speak, so that they do not speak
out of their course, to the end that they may have all the talk alone. For
there be some that in this error of talking too much, are so passionate, that
they place all their delight, and pleasure, in them, that will give them leave
to talk.

15. And if by chance there be two talkers, at one meeting, it is a wonder to
find them agree well: for each of them will strive, to be the Cock of the
company, where he is. As it fell out to a Cavallero, in this Court, that was a
great talker, that being to go to Cordova, the day he was to take his journey,
he entertained a lacquay, to accompany him, who (according to his ability) was
as great a talker as his master. And so it fell out that from the time he went
out of Madrid, till he came to the place whither he was to make his first
days journey, for four leagues they had traveled, the master never ceased
talking, to his new servant asking him questions, and telling him stories, not
giving his servant leave to speak one word. For which cause he took his leave
of him, saying, your worship has tired your self, and I give you no thanks
for it: For your worship is a great talker, and I have the same passion of
talking, and if I may not play my play, and take my turn, but must be forced
to go from hence to Cordova, without speaking, I should be so full that I
must burst, and therefore I would go no further with you, for more then I have
agreed with you for.

16. But except thou observe a little these instructions, I advise thee, that
when thou art to speak, thou be careful to understand the mind, of those
thou discoursest withal, and suit thy talk to the applause of those that
hear thee.

17. Be not so confident, to stand, listening, I say hugging and applauding thy
self, making faces, and mouths, and antique gestures, always reaching out
thy arms, and hands, as if thou were to act some body. For there are some that
all they fancy in their brains, they fashion it out with their hands, playing
it upon all their fingers.

18. The voice must not be hoarse, nor shrill, nor must we be very loud, when
we have cause to laugh, or for any other accident, like some, that skreeke like
carts, that want greasing, nor can any speak whilst he makes such a noise.
Nor to be so heedlesse of our memories as to begin to speak a word, and then
to stand stuttering a good while, ere we can utter it. And he that is hoarse
or has an ill utterance, should not desire to speak much, but let him correct
the fault of his tongue, with silence and attention to others, who may also
with care, and study, hide his natural imperfection. As little pleasing is it,
to lift up ones, voice, as one that calls out for help, nor to speak so
softly, that he cannot be heard, and except they hear thee at first, thou must
the second time raise thy voice, and not to be always wedded to one tone. Yet
must thou as little speak too shrill, because they did not before hear thee
when thou spakest so softly. Thy words must then be well marshalled, according
to the use, and custom, and not wound, and wreathen, here and there, nor
intricate, (as some in gallantry use to do) as to say my light is dislighted,
by your light, which are expressions only fitting for Poets. Except when with
consent of all, and for mirth sake, they are discoursing of poetry, and making
verses. Then if thou shall see that those of thine own profession, and age,
do entertain, and busy themselves in this, thou ought not to be out of
order, or strange: but to say something thou know, as it comes to thy turn,
and if thou have no faculty in poetry, let it be very little that thou speak
retiring in time like a good sencer. Wherefore to conclude, such exercise is not
ordinarily to be used, as we shall hereafter declare.

CHAPTER. 14. Of those that have no abilities to it, and yet will needs be
Poets.
BEcause we have hitherto treated, of the knowledge how to speak well, and to
jest, and of the readiness which is required therein, and also of those, who
without ability of wit, do adventure to discourse, and entertain company,
more to content themselves, then their auditors. I will now treat of boldness
that some use, in the subject of poetry.

1. For the which I will first give you for a rule, what wariness a curious
gentleman, is to observe in using of this subject: for his breeding, and
gentilenes, bind him not to have skill in it, neither let him spend his time
in it, if his natural inclination do not help him much in it. For though
there be many rules to be known, the principal to be learnt is, for every one
to know his own natural inclination, and ability to it, for poetry to make it
pleasing, must be very good. For if in any thing, there be no mean, it is in
this. True it is, that few make verses, that are not very confident, and that
think they are the best, that ever were made, and as the palate, and opinion
of the people, is diverse, so they may (always) find some, that will applaud
and hearken unto them, and peradventure some that will prefer them before
very good poets, for the novelty, and difference there is between them, and
those that have gone before them. As in like manner, there are some, that are
so wedded to antiquity, that no modern piece of poetry, does please them,
though it be more quick, and elegant, then those old poems, they have in
memory, which were made in their younger times. For there are some that but one
pair of shoes can fit (as they say) so that that which they hear first, does
so cloy their palate, that they have no room left, for any thing that may
follow, although it be better. Only they infer, that the goodness of
common poetry, is all one, as well of that which was written heretofore, as of
that which is now in use. But because my intent is not here to make a book of
the art of poetry, I refer my self to many ancient, and modern things, that
have bin exceeding well written of it, and I will only say, that a curious
gentleman, must know his proportion in it, and if he have a vain in it, having
seen, and read much, let him not govern himself, by his own phansy, but by
theyrs that endeavor to understand him. And in things that are grave and very
serious, except he find them ready, and easy, let him not trouble himself much
to reduce them to harmony. For they, not being very quaint, do only please
him that makes them, and do displease those that hear them, Especially if
they be amorous complaints, or of suffering and dying, without knowing how to
end. And therefore poetry that is made for mirth, and pastime, is wont to be
well accepted of, and if any small fault be committed therein, it is easilyer
winked at, then if it were in grave, and sad matters, as for example a
pastoral, or thing of pleasure, that represents (in its color) something
acted in a Country village; Accordingly as we have seen, many sonnets, and
pleasing madrigalls, of which I will set down one for example, which was made
of a Council held in a Village, that had purchased it self to be a Town, or
Corporation.

The Hedge, and Mill, in Council set,
Proclaym'd by voice, of common Crier.
Lord Pasquall, Merin, being met,
In judgment, with Paul their Grandsire,
They quit Apitius, keeping Swine,
Lorenzo charge over Bacon gave,
The Butcher's bound, as with a line,
Of Oaks, and Ac^^ons, ^are to have.
They give each massy Brass his charge,
Out-rusht, Marke-Gill, the Council fore,
That he o'th pillory at large,
Might treat of mending, ere they go.
Then in a rage says Gurca Gill,
All Is Ordered well; why prate you still?
All such things of mirth, which good wits have made, for mirth, and pastime,
do take much, without prejudice to his good repute, that in such a rude style
does manifest his great ability, and elegancy, And now and then, a flash of
this, does not take ill, like a good musician, who what Song soever he sings
(though it be ordinary, and composed without art,) can help it, and by his good
voice, and grace in singing, make it show well. But he that knows not how to
do it, yet is confident in making of verses, and relying merely upon his own
skill, shall publish his works, to the view of al, shall lay himself open to a
public censure. And such as these, when they invite a friend unto their
house, they torture him with their meeters and sonnets. And we may all wish, to
be delivered, from a work, or discourse of love, made in as long as long
tedious stanzaes: according as his loss or burden, is great or pressing, so
that all you read in two hours is but to play at fast and loose, and though
thou desire it not, yet hear it thou must, because it is the first time that
thou saw him. They say also, that to make verses relish well, we must not
look for any mean in them, as we do in other things so earnestly, but
extremes. So that they must either be exceeding good, for to please, or very
bad, to cause mirth and laughter.

2. Of those that are good, as well ancient as modern, the books, and writings
of the famous Laureat poets, (to which I refer the discreet Reader) are stuffed
full. But for those that are very bad, of base and poor conceit, there might
well be made a Song-booke, of the dull headed poets, which would not be a bad
entertaynement, and pastime, for the discreet sort, to taste of, in passing by,
as it were, to relish their palates withal.

3. We have, and may see (every day) the humors of most witty men, which
because some of them have come to my hands, I will not (to this purpose) omit,
to put a little in this sallate, and for our music, it shall suffice to touch
a false string, or (to speak more properly,) for this interlude of mirth, and
pastime.

One going to Toledo, to enquire about some business, an ordinante, presuming
much of his poetry, spoke to the examiner (thinking thereby by his conceits to
get his good will) in this manner.

4. Your worship may be pleased to understand, that amongst the variety of
gifts, the Lord has bestowed upon men, he has bin so gracious to me
(although far unworthy) to endue me with the gift of poetry. So that I find
the conceits of poetry, to spring so fast in me, that they even tread one
another under feet, in thronging to vent themselves, and some divine bymnes I
have made, (after the manner of the Church anthemes,) and thus he began to read
the first of them.

Let us rejoice, let us rejoice,
It is meet we should rejoice,
Let us rejoice, let us rejoice.
And many such things he repeated in this strain, which caused much mirth, and
pleasure, to see in what earnest, and how confidently he spoke them. In like
manner, another Country fellow in a Christmas night sung in this manner.

Ay dedesme la mano peccadores e salvaros he. And the letter of the words were,
Ay peccadores del euerpo garrido dedesme le mano y aun in escondido, y salvar
vos he.

6. And other things of this nature, which is not ill pastime, being repeated
in company, so they be but few, and naturally spoken.

7. He also, that cannot frame himself to poetry, and must speak in prose,
ought not only to take heed, of speaking incongruous words, but also, that he
spoke not, in a lofty way, and in the tone of a preacher. For though there be
more mastership, and difficulty, to preach then to discourse: yet that must be
reserved for its proper time, As he that is to pass through the street, must
not dance, but walk through, as all know. Though it be granted, that there is
more skill, in dancing then walking, yet for all this, it would show
ridiculous, for a man to pass skipping, or dancing, for such gestures, are to
be reserved, for weddings, and festivalls. And in like manner, must thou
forbear, to vary thy voice too much in thy discoursing.

8. Take heed also that thou avoid those that are ever talking, as I have
already said: for there are some, that are so pleased with their own
discourse, that when the matter is at an end, of that which they had to say,
yet will they not be silent, but will begin to repeat what they have said, or
speak other impertinencies. And if any thing be uttered, that they understand,
they will take it out of your mouth, like as one Hen does snatch away the meat
that another Hen carries in her beak.

9. And surely, they cannot choose but displease them from whom they (in this
manner) do take their words. And nothing so soon moves a man to anger, as
when before he is aware, his mind and pleasure is crossed, be it never so
little. As if a man have but lifted up his hand, to throw a stone, and at the
instant, one behind him should hold his hand.

10. All these things must be avoided: but in discoursing, we ought rather to
yield to another desire, then to hinder it. And therefore if any be relating,
any story, or accident, it is not good to interrupt him, or to tell him, thou
know it already: nor as he is in the midst of his story, to mix any
trifles, or jests of thine own, with this discourse, nor (to seem) to tax his
judgment, by upbrayding speeches, or actions, as wagging the head or
squinting, with thine eyes (as many do) saying thou can not endure, such
harsh discourse. Nor in like manner) to rend as it were a man's words, from his
mouth, being an ill custom, and is no less distasteful, then for a man to be
stopped by another as he is running a race. Nor when another is discoursing,
ought we to behave our selves, in such sort, that others that hear them, be
moved to leave them, and to listen to some new discourse and gain that
attention to themselves, which was before lent to another. For it is not
seemly, to dismiss one, whom thou did not invite, but to leave him to the
rest, to give him attention.

11. In like manner, thou must be attentive to him that discourses, and
therefore, it is not fitting at every turn to say, how was this, I pray, as
many use to do. Which is as little pleasing, to the speaker, as to tread upon
a man's gown, as he is walking.

12. So that all this, and generally all things, that may stop, or hinder a
man, to proceed in the discourse he has begun, ought to be avoided of us. And
if any be slow in his discourse, thou must not be so choleric, to prevent him,
nor to tell him words to express himself, although thou be rich, and abound
in language, and the other be not so, for many take this ill: and especially
those that think they know how to speak well. For they are persuaded, you
understand their ability, and that you labor to help them, in their own art.
Even as a rich merchant takes it for an affront, for another to offer him
money, as if he needed it, and were poor and beggarly. And you must know, that
every one thinks, he knows how to speak, though modesty forbid him to say so.

13. And I cannot tell you the reason whence it comes (yet so it is) that those
that know least, are the most talkative. So that every one should beware of
much talking, especially if he know little: for it is a rare thing, for a man
to talk much, and not to commit many errors, for he that talks, seems (in a
sort) to exercise some sovereignty over his auditors as a master does over his
scholars, and it is not fitting, for a man to assume more, then his share of
this superiority.

14. As much talking is troublesome, so also is much silence. For, for a man
always to be silent, where others are discoursing, shows they desire not to
interest themselves (as it were) in paying of the shot, or discourse. And in
this case, to speak, is to open the door, to entertain his friendship, that
hears thee and on the contrary, to be silent, is to show, that thou desire
to be unknown, and concealed. And so, in this matter of discoursing, and of the
extremes thereof, I conclude; desiring thee to make use of it as a model and
rule of policy to live in good esteem, As I found it storied in an ancient
cronicle, in this manner. There was in the Province of Morea, a famous Carver,
called for his great skill, master Clarissimo. He being now very old, made a
treatise, wherein he expressed all the rules, and secrets of his art (as being
a man very skillful) setting down, how to take the dimensions of the lymbes of
a man's body, that they might bear a just proportion, and good correspondency,
one with the other: and this book he called a rule, or direction, by which
book, according to his directions, therein contained, all the figures, of men's
bodies, which should (from thenceforth) be made, (by other masters) should be
proportioned: and the more plainly to demonstrate his skill, he made a statue
of fine marble, so excellent, and well wrought, that it might (well) be called,
the example of his Book, and receive the like name of Regla, or rule, with it,
which (together) with his Book, remained for a perfect pattern, to all the
master Gravers, that should succeed him. Now then if perchance it may be my
good hap, that this little book may come to be a rule and pattern for a young
man, to imitate, who desires to be pleasing, and well reputed of, for his
behavioure it will then serve in the place of the Carvers treatise or rule he
first made. But for the second rule, or statue of Marble, which is to put the
first rules in practice, I cannot (like that great master) leave you a visible
example. For it is true, that for the ordering of the manners, and customs of
people, it is not enough, to know the art, and to have a rule, how to carry
ones self: it is required also, to put them in practice, use, and custom.
Which cannot be learnt in a little time, but requires many years, and by
little, and little, and in those things, that a man has wholly spent his time
in, he can instruct another, the way, that he erred in himself. And so
those, who have stumbeld, and fallen, do far better remember, the deceiptfull,
and doubtful paths, then those that never had experience of them.

16. And if in my tender age, when the disposition is more tender, and
flexible) I had had one to admonish me, of these things, perchance I should
have bin as considerate as I now desire to make thee to be. And you may
understand, that though the force of a good nature, is much, yet for all this,
it may be altered, and made worse by ill custom. And so it is convenient,
that against this custom, we oppose good rules, and examples, before it grow
too strong, and obstinate: Al en hornar se hasen los panes tuertos. The Ioaves
became misshapen in the Oven.

17. This the greater sort do not observe, but follow their own mind, and
pleasure, and going whither it invites them, obeying their natural
inclination, as if reason were an unnatural thing unto man. But this reason is
a powerful Lady, and mistress, to alter the Ill customs, and to help, and
lift up nature, when she at any time does stumble or fall. And as we, (for the
most part) do not give ear unto her, so we may (for the most part) be fitly
said, to resemble those living creatures (whom God has not given reason unto)
such as are brute Beasts, in whom sometime we may notwithstanding observe some
work of reason, but not of their own, but something which we have taught
them, with our reason. As we may observe in horses, who naturally are wild,
and fierce, and yet, every master of them makes them gentle, and well
conditioned, (more or less) according to his skill, or experience, for we see
many of them having an uncomly trot, are taught by man, to go a smooth, and
easy amble, and to stand quietly, to run, to prance and bound, and all this
they learn, and are therein subject, to our will, and reason.

18. If then, the horse, the dog, and the birds, and many other Creatures,
(though much fiercer then these) do submit themselves to the reason of
another, and do obey it, and profit so far thereby, (A thing which by nature
they know not, but were utterly repugnant thereto) that they become so ready,
and useful, not by nature, but merely by custom: how much more ought man, to
believe, that he shall much advantage himself, by the rules, and documents,
that are drawn from our own reason, if we will give care unto them. But
sensual men love present delight, and avoyde that, which troubles them, and
detaynes them from it. They do not therefore reject reason, because they
think it bitter, the truth being, that they esteem it in the first place; nor
is the hurtful pleasure, (oftentimes) but even that which is good, noisome and
offensive to the depraved, and subdued palate; for while we live, according to
sense, we are like a sick man, to whom all food, though it be sweet, and
pleasant, relishes ill, and seems naught: and he finds fault with every one,
that gives it unto him, though the fault be not in the Meat, but the
bitterness he feels is in his own tongue; so that he tastes not the
goodness, and sweetness of the Meat. So reason, which of it self is sweet,
seems bitter unto us, more by our distemper, then that (in it self) it is so
indeed, and being tender, and delicate, we esteem it not, but do dissemble,
and cloak our own errors and weakness, objecting, that there are no
spurs, no bridle, sufficient, to govern our natural inclinations. And
surely, if we should meet with Oxen, or other unreasonable creatures, they
could not afford us a worse sentence, nor more senseless then this. We then
at ripe years, yea in old age it self would continue to be like young men,
were it not, that reason (that increases in us with our years) does turn us
from beasts, unto men. And thereby it prevails above our senses, and
appetite; and so is it our own fault, and our own neglect, and not our
nature, that makes us culpable in this kind.

14. Except we can blame her, by way of mirth, as a witty Italian once did,
upon the stage, before a great auditory, after this manner, Dame nature erred,
in placing a man's legs the wrong way, upon his body: for the Calves, and the
heels, which should have bin set foremost, were set behind; by reason whereof,
as a man walks, he does often break his shins, and hurt his Toes, (which is
a great pain to him) which he could not have done, if the Calfe of the Leg
had stood foremost, but especially, in going up a pair of theyrs, our feet
standing that way, do often make us stumble, and fall. A man ought also to
have had a door made in his belly, to open and shut, that when he should be
costive, or bound in his belly, he might open it, and unstop the passage, and
wash his Guts, and then there would be no need, to set such battering glister
cannons against the postern, nor to make use of so many medicinal Bullets, as
are used to force the passage open.

20. And it might (likewise) serve, that gallants might not cosen their
mistresses, but, that when they profess to them, in this manner, my fair
mistress, I here within me do carry engraven in my heart, your curious
portraiture, she might (then) presently open the door, and go in, and see,
whether he spoke true or no, and then they durst not be so bold, to lie so
incredibly, as they now usually do, unto their mistresses.

21. But leaving these fooleries, and returning to our purpose, I say, it is
false, and perverse to maintain there is no bridle can restrain nature, nor
master that can tutor her. For we have seen (formerly) that there are two
things that can order her; the first is custom, and the other is reason; and
that custom must not thwart, that which is in use amongst us. For this use or
custom is the son and heir of our times.

22. Therefore we ought, from our very youth, to begin to learn to be of a
good disposition, first, because then a man has most time to learn, and to
show it; And secondly, because that age (being tender, pure, and incorrupt,)
does easily receive any color: and in like manner, the things a man learneth
in his youth, are seldom forgotten: but stick by us as long as we live.

23. But besides this, we are to consider, that men are passionate, upon
beauty, handsomnesse, and good proportion, and on the contrary they are enemies
to foulness, and things extremly ugly. And this is one especial privilege,
which irrational Creatures are not partakers of. For they cannot distinguish
between beauty, and deformity. And therefore, as a thing which is not common,
with the beasts, but only proper to us; we ought to value it, and esteem it,
much in it self; and much more, those that are endowed with better
understanding, as being those, that are more capable to understand it: And
though we cannot precisely describe, what beauty properly is, nor in what it
punctually consists, yet for all that, (that thou may know something of her,)
I desire you to know; that where you find a decent proportion of the parts,
having relation to themselves, in particular, and to the whole in general,
this is beauty; and that thing, where this comely, and good proportion is found,
^s a perfect and beautiful thing. Which is the greatest beauty, that can be
imagined, as I have bin taught, by a very learned man; even so as thou may
behold in the faces of brave, and gallant Ladies For the form of each of whose
faces it seems each part of them has bin made by the pattern of some one
excellent face, on purpose to make them exquisite, which seems not so in ill
favored faces, but the contrary, namely to be many ugly parts, taken from
several ugly faces, to make them the more deformed. For put case, that an ill
favored Lady have great, and goggle eyes, a small and thin Nose, hollow
Cheeks* a pouch mouth, a long chin, an ill complexion; you would think, that
this face, was not made by one face, but taken out of many, and made of
several pieces, which you cannot think of a well featured face, as I have
already could you.

24. It may be, that famous Painter that made all the beautiful Virgins of
Calabria, come naked before him, did nothing else, but view the good
proportions, that many of them had taken from one excellent creature, (some of
them having one part excellent, others another) and made them (every of them)
restore that which they had thus robbed her of, whom he was to draw. For that
the beauty of Venus was to be such, as a Creature made up, of such several,
rare, and exquisite parts, would be.

25. I would not have you think, that this is to be understood only, of the
beauty of good faces, and comely proportion, of the body. But it falls out in
speaking, and in action, neither more nor less then, as if thou should
find a noble, and brave Lady, very hansome, washing of clothes, at a brook,
in the open street, though for any thing else, she offends thee not: yet even
this, thou see her doing, will make thee loath her, because she shows not
her self, one and the same she appeared, but diverse, and her original,
condition and estate, is such, as belong to a neat and noble Dame, But her
works, belong to a vile, and poor conditioned woman. And though there come
from her, no ill sent, or favor, nor any ill noise, nor has she an ill
complexion nor does any way offend any of thy senses: yet will this unsuitable
action, base comportment, and vile work (so unsuitable to her condition) be
very unpleasing to thee.

26. Thou must therefore, take heed of all things that are unsuitable to thee,
as of such like disagreeing manners, and behavior: But with greater care, and
circumspection, that thou give no example of scandal, to any by thy actions:
but especially take heed of such things as I have told you of: for it is more
hard, to know when one erreth in such things, then in other: for it is true,
that the sense is more active then the understanding. Yet nevertheless, it
falls out, (many times) that that very thing, that distasts the senses, does
also displease the understanding: but this is not by the same occasion, but by
diverse, as I said before, when I showed you, that a wise man must cloth
himself, according to the fashion of other men, and not according to his own
humor; that he may not show, that he desires to reprove, and amend others:
which (to most men) is a hateful thing, to those who desire to be commended.
It does in like manner, offend the judgment, of understanding men, and
therefore a man ought not only to be contented, to do things, that are good,
but he must endeavor, to do them bravely, and comely. And this bravery or
gallantry, is nothing else, but a luster, that proceeds from the convenience,
and conformity of those things, that, are well composed, without which
comeliness, even a good thing, is not fair, nor is the beauty thereof
acceptable.

27. And even as meat, though it be good, and wholesome, if it have no
relish, will not please the palate: so is it sometimes in the manners of men,
which though in themselves they be not hurtful, nor dangerous, yet are they
(nevertheless) simple, and bitter: except grace, and bravery, be added to
them, or that which we here call pleasantness. For which reason, every one
must needs displease by committing of faults, and errors, because he does
things that agree not together, and so settled, and reserved dispositions, do
take dislike at their disagreement, or unsutablenesse. So that he that would
be pleasing to the people, in his carriage, must fly all vices; but those
especially, which are most brutish, or Beastly: as are luxury, covetousness,
cruelty, and the like, some of which are base, as namely to be a glutton, or a
drunkard, both of which (for the evil property of them) are rejected and
abhorred, of most men, as being things dishonorable. But because we are not,
(here) to treat of the nature of vices, or virtues, but only of pleasing,
and displeasing manners, and neglects, into which people do fall, as was that
of count Ricardo, and others, of whom I have spoken, I will not dwell upon
them. It is only my intent to speak of that, which civil and well fashioned
people must observe, which is, to be careful to keep this beauty, and good
proportion, of the things I have told them of. Which we must make use of, in
our words, and works, in going, standing still, in sitting, and carrying our
selves, in our clothing, in our speech, and in houlding our peace, and in our
sleeping, and (generally) in what ever we say, or do. And this I find to be
the reason, why a man must not cloth himself like a woman, because his person
must not be of one kind, and his habit of another: as some do, that crisp
their hair, with hot irons, and lick their faces over, with a painting wash.

28. Nor should a man be either beastly, or else perfumed, for one is proper
for a boore, and the other for an effeminate body; but it is best, for a
Gentleman, to smell of nothing either good, or ill: this being indeed the best
kind of neatenesse.

29. Sometimes he may use this curiosity, by means of some rich perfumed
gloves, which he wears, in a careless way. But that which does please him
best, that reckons himself for a Gallant, is to have his Linen sprinkled, with
sweet waters, and to have his black Cloak or Gown, very fine, and clean
brushed. Which things he that may, yet will not have them, offends the sight
of his friend, for slovenlinesse is a vice, and neatness a virtue, as was well
said, by a grave Archbishop of Granado, to his Chaplain, who thinking to get
the Bishops favor, and so be the sooner preferred by him, distinguished
himself, from the other Chaplains, by his beastly and slovenly going, as with
his neck bare, without any appearance of a Shirt, and his head hanging in his
bosom. The wise Archbishop, finding his hypocrisy, said unto him, Father,
this is not holiness, but nastinesse; go neat; and cleanely, or else you get
nothing of me. It would consequently have pleased this prelate, as ill, to see
in his servants such extreme curiosity and niceness and tricking, that many
use, straightning their Necks so with their Collers, that if they be to turn
their Heads, on one side, they cannot do it, but they are forced, to turn
their whole bodies, and by their trimmings, and embroderies, their clothes
cannot be distinguished, from the clothes, which the gallant Ladies wear.
And so, all disproportion does ill become: As on the contrary, it beseemes not
a pleasing Courtier, to go poorly, or slovenly or carelessely, attyred: never
taking care, to button his Doublet, or to be trimmed, or to go in thrid-bare
or torn Garments. To this purpose it is storyed of a Lords younger son, Unto
whom his Parents never gave any clothes, but such as his elder brother had
left off, that both of them falling sick, and Chickens being provided for them
to eat, at the meal time the tenderest Chicken was made choice of for his
elder brother: the younger brother seeing it, spoke thus to his Parents, How
comes it to pass, that I must have the tough Chicken, and the tender clothes?
And for this speech, he was so esteemed, and got the favor of his Parents so
much, that ever after that, they gave him as good clothes as his elder Brother.

30. The clothes as we have said, must be according to the fashion that
others of thy age do wear their garments in, and in the company of the grave
Nobility, plumes, and springgs, (such as Soldiers wear in the Wars) are not
seemly, to be worn, nor Embroideries, and laced Garments; much less arms,
or buffe Coats, which only in the War, do show well. For the curious
Cavaleeres, and Soldiers, that are courtly; when they are in the Cities, or
Court, they lay aside their bravery and they be such Soldiers (for the most
part) that never were out of the Land, or in the Wars, that do use to flant
it, in this manner. And in Cities, and among quiet people, those that go
armed, (usually) and with plumes in their Hats, are not pleasing, for they are
like Nettles, or stinking weeds, in a Garden of sweet Herbs, and Flowers. And
so are ill accepted of, by the Citizens, being distinguished from them, in
their habits.

31. An honorable person must not run through the street, nor make much
have, like him that goes of an errand, which is fitter for Lackayes, and
footmen, then for people of worth to do: and besides this, they make
themselves sweet, and put themselves out of breath, to no purpose, there being
no necessity for them to do it.

32. Yet ought not one to go so softly, and slowly, as Women, nor so soberly,
as a Bride; nor when he walks in have, to go wreathing his body, or look
smilingly upon every body, like little girls.

33. Nor to lift up both his hands, clutched together, or to thrust out his
Arms, which is, as if a man, were going to sow Corn with them.

34. Some in their going lift up their feet like Horses, that start: and do
lash out their Legs as far as if they drew them out of the midst of a
Chest, or some deep Vessel: some drawle their Feet so, upon the ground, that
a Cart makes but a little more noise, then they do: and some there be, that
east one Foot out from them, ill favouredly, and others that rub one Leg
against another, or go shaking and in a dancing fashion; all which things, are
unseemly, and displeasing. For if (by chance) thy Horse goes with his mouth
open, or show his tongue, though it take not from his goodness, yet for all
this he is the less worth, for this ill favored quality: if then bravery,
and neatness, be esteemed so much, in unreasonable creatures, and even in
things without sense, as for example, two houses built in one place, and with
one charge, if one of them be more comely and more pleasant then the other, it
is therefore accounted more worth: how much more then this beauty, and
neatness is valued, by men, it is easy from hence to be understood.

35. It is not good, when thou art at the Table, to scratch thy self; and a
man must at that time, forbear to spit; and if he be forced to do it, it is
seemly, for him to do it, very concealedly. I have heard one say, he has
seen a people, that do never spit, therefore we may well forbear it for a
little space.

36. We ought also, to beware of taking our Meat so greedily, that by that
means, there be caused belching or any other unpleasing act, like as those
do, who make so much have, that they are forced, to fetch their breath
strongly, and to puff, and blow, with trouble to all the company.

37. Nor must we wipe our Teeth with our Napkin, or with our Finger, nor wash
our mouth, and so spit out the washing thereof, that all may see thee.

38. Nor after we are risen from the Table, to stand with a picktooth, in our
mouth, or any other instrument we use to make them clean withal: like a
Bird, that is carrying strawes, or sticks to her neast; nor to stick them in
our ears, like a Barber.

39. And he that has a clenser for his Teeth, hanging about his neck, let
him not draw it out; for besides that it is strange, to see a Gentleman, draw
out of his bosom, an instrument, belonging to a Tooth-drawer, it argues him,
(also) to have much thought of his belly. And according as he wears this, he
may as well also wear a Spoone about his neck.

40. We ought not, to lean with our Elboes, or Arms, upon the Table: nor to
stuff our mouths, with Meat, so full, that our Cheeks, may be swollen
(thereby) like a Bag-pipers, nor to show any action, by which we may make it
appear, to another, that the Meat pleases us very much, or the Wine, which
is the fashion of vintners, and of prattling Drunkards: nor to call to them,
that are at the Table, in this manner; you eat nothing to day, or here is
nothing you can eat, I pray eat of this. Which (me thinks) is not fitting,
though he thou have invited, be one of thy kindred, or very familiar friend:
for though thereby, it seems thou have a care of him, yet many times, it is an
occasion, that thy Guest cannot use his own liberty, in his diet, and so may
get hurt thereby. And therefore I hold it not fitting, to offer another any
thing, that thou have upon thy Trencher, except thou be a far better man,
then he: so that, he that receives it, may take it, for an honor done unto
him. For amongst equals, he that thus offers it, seems to make himself
better then him, to whom he offers it; and it may offend him, that the other
should thus (seem to) undervalue him. Yet notwithstanding this, thou must not
refuse, or return, that which he presents thee withal, that thou may not
seem, to take it ill, or to find fault with him.

CHAPTER, 15. Of Compotations or Drinkings.
An invitation to drinking by a strange word, we call Brindis, which is to
Drink a health to one; of it self, it is an ill, and clownish fashion; and
though some (in our Country,) do use it, and entertain it, yet we ought to
avoid it; and if any invite thee to it, thou may refuse his invitation, and
acknowledge thy weakness, giving him thanks, and accepting friendly the Wine,
without Drinking it.

These Drinkings, or Healthes (for so we may interpret them) are said to have
bin much used (of old) in some parts of Greece, where I have herd say, there
have bin some, that were very famous for this manner of Drinking: it is said of
a famous man, of that time, called Socrates, that he sat up bouldly, a whole
Night, to Drink with a famous Drinker, called Aristophanes: and the next
morning, he drew a curious Geometrical figure, without missing a hair, in
its true proportion, whence you may gather, the Wine had not stirred him: and
the reason was, because he had so much used to adventure himself, in this
bold way of Drinking. And though many show their strength, in drinking much,
and use to drink for wagers, that they will not be made drunk, yet we ought
to account of their victories, if they win but as of an infectious vice, and a
brutish sin.

3. Show not thy self troubled, at any thing thou can not help, and if thou
repentest of any thing thou have done, let no body know it, That none may
discover thy weakness; Yet by way of mirth, I will tell you a Jest that
befell a Gallant, and it was not an ill one, of whom it is said, That being
desired (by a Lady,) to come to a tilting in blew clothing, he promised to
do it, but because he had no money, nor other thing to provide himself this
livery withal, he sold a More that he highly esteemed, and having worn his
blew clothes, and being afterward sorry for the error, he had committed, His
More broke this jest upon him, of black comes blew.

None ought to put off his Clothes before another, especially his shoes: for
it may fall out, that the parts of thy body, which should be hid, may be
discovered, to thy shame, and his, that sees it. Nor must thou comb thy Head,
or wash thy Hands, before people of worth, but thou must do them in private,
in thy lodging, and not in public, excepting that washing of the Hands, may
be done before any Body, when thou art to sit down, to thy Meat, for in that
case, though one be clean already, yet ought every one then to wash, that he
that eats with him, may have assurance of his cleanelinesse, nor must thou
come before company, with the Cap thou wearest a nights, or with thy night
geere on, or come out, tying or untying it, nor to speak to any thou see in
thy House, in the manner as many usually do. O sir, pray stay there a little;
nor is it a good fashion at night to dress thy self, or to bind up thy Head,
as I have seen some do, with as great curiosity, as if they were Women:
except there be some extraordinary necessity for it.

4. A new married Gentleman, used this curiosity, who being a smooth faced
youth, without a Beard, being with his Wife, in his Chamber, a messenger came
in thither, to look for him, that had a message to deliver to him: and being
there, and seeing them both so trimmed up, and one as well as the other,
without a Beard, he asked, which of their Worships was the Gentleman to whom
he was sent to, that he might not be mistaken in his message? then the
Husband put off his Nightgeere, and resolved, no more to put it on, till he
should have a Beard.

5. There be some, that hold it for great ingenuity, often, to wreath their
mouths into diverse fashions, to roll and glance with their eyes, to swell
their Cheeks, like Bagpipes, to stand puffing, and blowing, and making of
variety of Faces: and some others there be that are so discomposed when they
do some certain things, that they put out their tongues, almost a
hand-breadth, as they are in doing it: these should altogether avoyde the doing
of such things: as it is storyed of the goddess Pallas, who was sometimes
delighted in playing on the Cornet, till it happened, that (one day) playing
thereon, for her pleasure, by a Fountain side, she beheld her self in the
water, and beholding those new and strange faces, which she must necessarily
make, while she played, was ashamed of her self, and presently broke the
Cornet, in pieces. And indeed, it was well done of her, it not being an
instrument, fitting for Ladies, nor yet for men, except for those that make it
their profession. And that which shows ill in the Face does as bad in the rest
of the Members, and therefore it becomes not a man, to show his Teeth, except
he laugh, nor much to scratch the Beard, or to rub one Hand against another,
nor to sigh much, or to seem much discontented, and to complain of his
misfortune as many do, more out of a custom they have gotten, then for any
just occasion they have to do it. Or to stand stretching, or rowsing up
himself: nor to cry out, woe, woe unto me, as I have seen some to do. Nor
is it good to make a noise with the mouth, in token, that we wonder at, or
dislike any thing: or to counterfeit a foul matter, for things counterfeit are
not very far differing from truth. One ought not to laugh sleepily making
ugly Faces, or to laugh more for custom then necessity. Nor must thou be much
taken with thine own speech, or gestures, which is to commend thy self, for
laughter belongs to him that is a hearer, and not a speaker. Thou must then
take care of the carriage of thy body, especially when thou speak, for it
falls out, that some are so besotted upon their own discourse, that they
regard nothing else. And some there are, that wag their Heads, or turn their
eyes or shrink up their eye brows, to the middle of their foreheads, or else
let them (skowlingly) hang down over their eyes. And some there are, that make
wry mouths, others that spit, and even sprinkle their Faces, with whom they
discourse; you may find others, that use such action, and quick motion with
their Hands, as they talk that you would think, they were driving Flies away,
all which customs, are very offensive. And as Pindar says, every thing that
is done sweetly and relisheth well, is performed in a free, and conformable
way. What then may I say of him, that goes into company, with a Pen in his
Ear, or a ruler in his Mouth, or of him, that lays one leg upon the Table,
or that spits between his Fingers? and of innumerable other sottish cricks,
which men may by observation find to be used? concerning which I here intend
not to enlarge my self, because I know there be many, will say, I have said
far too much. And so I conclude, giving thee to understand, that thou must
not think that of these little things one can make but a small fault, but that
by many little ones, a great one may at last be committed. And that the less
they are, the more care thou had need to take to leave them, because they
are so hardly discerned, nor does he that does them consider, that like as
small Unthrifty expenses, which by their continuance do consume our estates
before we are aware of them; Even so do these little faults, by their great
number, spoil our good behavior. Therefore they being of so great moment, we
ought not to make sport of them.

FINIS.
Imprimatur Tho. Wykes.


