AN ALARVM to England, Sounding the most fearful and terrible example of Gods
vengeance, that ever was inflicted in this world upon mankind for sin:

Serving generally as a warning for all people to eschew sin, lest they
partake of the like vengeance.

By Robert Gray, Preacher of the Word of God.

Luke 13.3. Except ye amend your lives, ye shall all likewise perish.

LONDON.

Printed by S. S. for John Budge, and are to be sold at his shop, at the great
South door of S. Paul's Church. 1609.

bookplate

To the Right Worshipful Sir William Crauen, Knight, one of the Aldermen of
the Honorable and famous City of London, Grace, health, and pr^speritie in this
world, and the perpetual favor and presence of God in the world to come.
RIght Worshipful, M^r. 14.9.
it seems by the words of our Savior Christ in the Gospel, that those
actions do chiefly continue our name and memory in the world, which are
performed upon Christ and his service: and that it is an injurious and
malicious practice, to conceal and smoother the bounty of those, who have
been liberal in contributing to Christian and Religious exercises. Forasmuch
therefore as you have powered your costly ointment upon Christ's head, more
abundantly than many other of your place and order, you may persuade your
self, upon the ground of Christ's own rule, which is infallible, that you have
laid a sure foundation for your name and memory, as long as the world endures:
and you have also given just occasion to those that have tasted your large
benignity, to give the world knowledge thereof, to the end that others may be
moved by your commendable example, to practice the like godly actions and they
that are not able to imitate you in performance, may yet praise God for you,
and pray unto God long to preserve you, for the further good of his Church, and
the benefit of this government wherein you are a Magistrate.

To imitate you in performance, is neither the will nor power of many: yet I
freely profess my self to be one of those, which both praise God, and pray
unto God for you, being obliged thereunto, by receiving some portion of my
maintenance, from your large contribution to the Lecture at Saint Antholines,
where I am one of the morning Lecturers. In which regard, I have presumed to
present to your Worships patronage, these my poor labors sometimes preached
there. If they may carry acceptance from you, and bring profit to any soul, I
shall be abundantly satisfied. Howsoever, I commend their success to GOD,
their patronage to you, their use to the world, desiring every one, into whose
hands this Book shall come, as to take knowledge of your goodness, so to pray
for your everlasting happiness. Amen.

Your Worships in all respectiuenesse, Robert Gray,
one of the Morning Lectures at S. Antholins.
To the Worshipful Master Boothby, Master Iay, M. Venn, M. Moody, M.
Dorington, M. Sprot, M. Moore, M. Washborne, M. White, M. Smith, of the Parish
of S. Antholins London, and to all the devout and zealous hearers of the
Morning Lectures there, Grace, mercy and peace be multiplied with God the
Father, through JESUS CHRIST.
SOLOMON says, that there is a time for all things. The wisdom of man
therefore, is, to know his time, and for all such actions as he undertakes, to
make choice of the fittest, and most commodious time, to effect and bring them
to pass. In worldly things which are most agreeable to our nature, we account
the Morning the best and most convenient time of all the day besides: for
reason and experience do teach us, that in the morning our memory is the
quickest, our senses the readiest, our natural powers the ablest, being
revived, as it were, and having recovered fresh strength and liberty, by reason
of that sweet sleep, and comfortable rest, wherewith they were reposed the
night past. And therefore the Student for his study, the traveler for his
journey, the labourer for his work, and every man in his place and calling,
for such proiects as he has, chooses the morning, as the fittest time, not
only to begin, but also to further their enterprises.

If therefore in things which are agreeable to nature, we use the morning, as
an help to further us in our actions, much more should we make choice of the
morning, for those things which are less agreeable to nature, or rather
contrary to nature, yea indeed, above nature, of which kind is prayer, and
hearing of the word of God: for nature does not stir us up to prayer, neither
does nature waken us early in the morning to hear the word of God. Prayer, and
hearing of the word, go with our nature, as against the stream: and therefore
it is very necessary, that the first thing that comes to our eyes in the
morning, should be the Temple, the first thing that comes to our ears, should
be the word of God, and the first thing that comes to our mind, should be
prayer and thanksgiving, that so we may walk with Eliah, all the day after, in
the strength of those things which we have heard out of the word of God: and
so we shall use our callings more carefully and conscionably, we shall be
directed what to do, and what to leave undone, and whatsoever we do, we shall
do all things the better to Gods glory, and the possessing of our own souls
continually in peace and patience.

And truly, if we consider the practice of the Saints of God, we shall find,
that they have observed the morning, as the fittest time for the exercises of
their piety and devotion. Genesis 22.3 Psalm. 119 147, 148. 1. Sam. 1.19.
Abraham rose very early to sacrifice his son. David prevented the morning
light, and cried: his eyes also prevented the night watches, to meditate in
Gods word. Elkanah and his household arose up early, and worshipped before the
Lord in Shiloh. Esaias 56.9.
And the Prophet Esaias in the person of the faithful, saying, With my spirit
within me will I seek thee in the morning. Mary Magdalene came to visit the
sepulcher of our Savior Christ very early, while it was yet dark. And as this
has bin the time, which the Saints of God have chiefly chosen for the practice
of their piety and devotion: so we read in the Scriptures, that God has
powered his blessings upon men, more usually at this time than at any other time
of the day. Manna, that heavenly food, Exodus 16 13. 2. Kings 3.20.
was by God given to the children of Israel in the morning. When the three
kings of Israel, Judah, and Edom made war upon the king of Moab, and were
greatly distressed for water, in so much as the king of Israel cried out for
fear of the present danger, it pleased God in the morning, when the meat
offering was offered, to send the three kings plenty of water, both for the
army and for all their cattle. Acts 2.15.
The holy Ghost came down on the Apostles in the morning: for it was the third
hour, which was between 7. and 8. of the clock: so that it may be truly
gathered, that they were before that hour exercised in hearing the word of God
and prayer.

Upon which grounds, you that are of the Parish of S. Antholins in London, and
you yt are the hearers of the morning Lectures there, are worthily to be
commended: the one, because you have founded a Lecture in that place, at the
fittest time of the day, which, as has bin proved, is the morning; wherein
appears your godly wisdom. The other, for repayring to hear the said
Lecture; wherein appears your zeal and devotion.

Many Co^gregations have done religiously in this kind, but you surmount them
all: for howsoever the word is to be preached in season, and out of season,
(and no time or season is unfit for the hearing of the same) yet they are to
be commended above the rest, which make choice of the fittest time for this
purpose. There be some, which dare deride and slander this morning exercise;
but this ought not to derogate from the worthiness and excellency of it; for I
never heard of any action, were it never so holy and virtuous, but it always
had adversaries to impeach it. And this is a sure argument unto me, that it is
a service acceptable unto God, above other of the same nature, because it is
more depraved and slandered than any other: for the more divine that any action
is, the more envy has the devil at it. Let none therefore be discouraged, or
take offense at this Lecture, if they hear it any way evil spoken of: but let
this be my exhortation both to you that maintain it, and to you that repair
to hear it* that you be not weary of well doing: for so is the will of God, 1.
Pet. 2.15.
that by continuing in well doing, you may put to silence the ignorance and
malice of foolish men.

Yours in the Lord, Robert Gray.

AN Alarm to England.
Genesis 19.23, 24, 25. 23. The Sun did rise upon the earth, when Lot entered
into Zoar.

24. Then the Lord rayned upon Sodom and Gomorra brimstone and fire from the
Lord out of heaven,

25. And overthrew those Cities, and all the plain, and all the Inhabitants of
those Cities, and all that grew upon the earth.


MAny and fearful have been the judgments, which Almighty God from time to
time has executed upon man for sin: But of all the examples of Gods
vengeance, this which he showed upon Sodom and Gomorrha for their impiety is
most horrible and dreadful: for whose ears do not tingle, whose flesh does
not tremble, whose heart does not melt, to hear of such a sudden, strange, and
merciless fire as this was, The destruction of Sodo^ and Gomorrha, the most
fearful example of Gods ve^gea^ce that ever was inflicted in this world upon
mankind for sin.
which like a shower of rain fell upon these cities and destroyed them? We
read of the torments of hell, that they are unspeakable, and as the heart of
man cannot imagine the joys which are prepared for the godly, no more can the
heart of man imagine the miseries which are reserved in hell for the wicked and
ungodly. Now of all the judgments which God has inflicted upon man in this
world, there is none which does more resemble the pains of hell, then this
wherewith Sodom and Gomorrha were overthrown. Esaias. 30.33. it is said, that in
Tophet there is burning fire, and a river of brimstone is there said to kindle
it: and Revel. 20.21. it is said, that the devil was cast into a lake of fire
and brimstone; and Revel. 21.8. all the wicked and ungodly are threatened to
have their portion in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is
the second death. So that the torments of hell, and the judgment wherewith
Sodom and Gomorrha were destroyed, are fire and brimstone. As therefore the
torments of hell are unspeakable, and pass all other torments: so this
vengeance which the Lord inflicted upon Sodom and Gomorrha, resembling hell
torments, is the most grievous and fearful vengeance, which ever was executed
upon any people in this world, and for this cause ought we more duly and
seriously to consider it, to the end that the horror and dread thereof might
strike and imprint a fear and trembling in our hearts, to offend so great and
mighty a God, which is able to punish and destroy the ungodly, even in this
world, with such horrible and fearful punishments.

And surely, if ever we stood in need of precepts to admonish us, of counsel
to forewarne us, or of examples to terrify us, we now stand in need of them in
this hard and flinty-hearted age of the world, wherein neither precepts nor
counsel, nor examples of other folks harms can any thing prevail with us to
make us beware: what things soever were written before, were all written for
our learning: all people before us have been made examples for us, yet nothing
can move us or make us wise, but we are as inrespectiue of Gods judgments,
and as careless of his displeasure, as though we had never read or heard any
thing, and so resolute are we in our impenitency, that if we should see Sodom
and Gomorrah burning before our faces, the fearful beholding of so strange an
object might happily breed admiration and wonderment in us, but repentance and
amendment of life it would not.

But Sodom lies in the ashes of her destruction, and we have raked by the
remembrance of her in the ashes of oblivion: Sodom is not so much as heard of
by report in the day of our pride: her destruction was a wonder indeed: but we
confirm the old proverb, The greatest wonder lasts but nine days. And as the
smoke of her and of her land sometimes ascended into the clouds, and so
vanished: in like manner, the remembrance of her and of her destruction is
perished like smoke, and forgotten as though it had never been: yet we
practice her sins, and are corrupted more then she in all her abominations:
she is a younger sister to us in iniquity, and we justify her in all our
transgressions. What a madness is this to forget the judgment wherewith she was
destroyed, and to practice her sins, which was the cause she was destroyed?
This is to be penny wise and pound foolish; for we may be well assured, If we
practice the sins of Sodo^ we shall taste of the judgments of Sodom.
that if we practice her sins, we shall taste of her judgments. Therefore in
her name I have undertaken to give an Alarm to this City and this land, to
eschew the sins of Sodom, lest they burn in the judgments of Sodom, and for
the same purpose I have made choice of this parcel of Scripture, containing a
true, plain, and perfect relation of that fearful overthrow, which Almighty
God brought upon Sodom and her Cities for their abominations.

In which overthrow we have four things especially to consider. 1. Five causes
why Sodom was destroyed.
The suddennes of it: it was by Sunrise. 2. The author of it, which was the
Lord from the Lord out of heaven. 3. The manner of it, which was with fire and
brimstone. 4. The generality of it, all the plain, and all the Inhabitants of
the Cities, and all that grew upon the earth, were destroyed in this overthrow.
Lastly, the cause of this sudden, fearful, general overthrow, which was
sin and iniquity.

The suddenness of Sodoms destruction appears, in that the History reports,
that it happened by the Sunne-rise in the morning: so that their destruction
came upon them unawares. Ouer-night, they were all gathered together about Lots
house, to break open his doors; and in the morning their own houses crackle
about their ears, and are burnt over their heads, and they themselves consumed
in the same fire: They made Lot and his ghests have an ill night; but now they
themselves have a worse morning: for in their sinful beds did the fire take
them, or if they were risen from their beds, a shower of fire and brimstone
gave them a woeful good morrow: And though this fire and brimstone came down
in a shower of rain, yet it was such a shower, as was not discerned, before it
came: the Sky was not ouercast, the Sun was not ouershaddowed with clouds,
The suddennes of Sodo^s destruction.
nor the firmament with gloomy and thick darkness, as usually it is before
other showers: but the Sun did rise as fair and bright upon the earth, as at
other times, so that there was no cause to expect or fear such a shower, and
by reason it happened so soon in the Morning, it took some of them in their
beds, some asleep some not thoroughly wakened, some apparrelling themselves,
others preparing themselves to go about their sundry occasions, but none of
them dreaming of such an hot service, as to have fire and brimstone to their
breakefast.

When Almighty God brought that universal flood upon the old world, Noah was a
Preacher unto them of that age, and by preparing the Arc, he gave them warning
what was intended toward them.

In like manner, when Jericho was laid level with the ground, the ruins of
that City were in a manner made manifest unto the Inhabitants thereof, by the
seven days compassing of it about, and the sound of the trumpets did, as it
were, sound forth their destruction unto them: and even unto Pharaoh was Moses
sent still the day before, to forewarne him, and give him knowledge of the
plagues which should ensue the day after: but in this destruction of the
Sodomites, there was no man to forewarne them of it, no prediction to foretell
it, no sign to demonstrate it; so suddenly does vengeance take them, even
unawares, and when they little thought of any such matter.

Doctrine.
From whence grows this instruction unto us, that such as continue and go on
still in their wickedness without repentance, Vengeance shall suddenly overtake
the unrepentant sinner. Job 34.20.
shall suddenly be destroyed, before they be aware. God sends down his
vengeance suddenly upon the wicked, even when they cry, Peace, Peace, and all
is well, then does vengeance come suddenly upon them, as sorrow comes upon a
woman trauayling with child. This Elihu noted in his experience. They dye
suddenly (says he) meaning the wicked, and the people shall be troubled at
midnight, that is, when they look not for it, and they shall pass forth,
meaning, the judgments of God, and take away the mighty without hand, that is,
quickly, or contrary to all expectation.

Many and fearful are the examples which we have in the Scriptures concerning
this matter: Genesis 19.26. Number. 25.8.
Lots wife turning her head awry, was her self at that very instant turned
into a pillar of salt. Zimry and Cozby were both slain amidst their filthiness.
Belshazzar in the height of his feasting, reuelling, and banqueting, had his
judgment laid upon him. David being astonished at the sudden destruction of the
wicked, makes an exclamation by way of admiration concerning this matter,
Psalm. 73.19. Oh how suddenly (says he) are they destroyed, perished, and
horribly consumed! And surely, the sudden destruction of the wicked is not
only terrible to them yt are stricken with it, but it causes as many to
wonder, as either hear of it, or behold it: When the earth opened and
swallowed up Corah, Dathan and Abiram with their wives and children, they
themselves did not only send forth pitiful and rufull outcryes at the
suddennes of their own destruction, Numb. 19.34.
but all Israel that were about them, fled at the cry of them: death, come it
never so gently, yet it is most terrible and dreadful to nature, because it
destroys nature: Sudden death is one degree more fearful then death.
but sudden death is a degree more fearful then death, because death is the
way of all flesh, and it is appointed for all men once to dye: and therefore it
is wisdom patiently to bear, and not to fear, that which cannot be avoided:
but sudden death is neither common to all, nor necessary for any, but it is
like a Kains mark, set upon some few for examples sake, to warn others to
fear and live preparedly. In all worldly reason, it is better to dye in a
moment, then of a long languishing sickness. Therefore Caesar was wont to say,
Suet. in vita Caesar.
Repentinus and inopinatus finis vitae est commodissimus. But howsoever a long
languishing sickness is grievous to nature, and tedious to flesh and blood, yet
therein a man has time to compose and set himself in order, to dispose and set
his house in order, to yield back his spirit to God which gave it, with old
Simeon to sing that Swanlike song: Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in
peace according to thy word: to give testimony to the world, that he dies in
the true faith of Christ, and in love and charity with all men; so that he
leaves a good report behind him, which as Solomon says, is better then a
precious ointment: But as for him that dies suddenly, he can do none of these
things, and therefore he leaves a suspicion behind him, neither can the judging
Nature of man hardly believe charitably of him: For indeed, to say the truth,
where God will have mercy, he commonly gives time to crave mercy: but when he
strikes suddenly, it is a fearful sign that he means to have no mercy; for
so he threatens to the ungodly: His destruction shall come suddenly, Pro. 6.15.
he shall be destroyed speedily without recovery.

These things being duly considered, we have just cause to pray with the Church
in her Liturgy, From sudden death, good Lord, deliver us. But you will say, We
ought to pray against sudden death.
that we ought continually to live so prepared and provided for death, that we
should be ready at all times, steal it never so suddenly upon us. True it is,
such in deed should be our readiness and preparation; But yet this is no good
argument, that therefore we should not pray against sudden death: for thus I
will instance against it: 1. Tim. 5.8.
Every man is bound to provide for his family, things honest and necessary for
their relief and mainetenance, and he that does not so, is worse then an
Infidel: yet every man notwithstanding must pray Give us this day our daily
bread. Our provision for bread must not hinder our prayer for bread, neither
must our preparation for death hinder our praying against sudden death. But you
will say unto me, Do you condemn all that dye suddenly? or do you think
that sudden death is always a spiritual judgment? What say you to good King
Josias, so much lamented by Jeremy, Lam. per. tot.
and commended by the testimony of Gods spirit in the Scriptures? What say you
to many good men, some drowned at sea? How to judge of those which dye suddenly.
some killed in fight? some going well to bed, and found dead in their beds? do
you affirm, that sudden death to all these is a spiritual judgment? Surely,
concerning Josias, I answer, that he dyed not a sudden death: for he was
wounded at Megiddo, 2. Chron. 35.23.24.
and after he was wounded, he complained to his servants, that he was very
sick: whereupon his servants removed him out of his own charret, into an
other, and afterward carried him to Jerusalem, and there he dyed. Can Josias be
said to dye of a sudden death? They do but f^atter the world, which
countenance the sudden death of their friends, with the example of Josias: for
where it is said, that he was taken in there nets, Lam. 4.20.
the Prophet does not mean by Nets, the suddennes of his destruction, but
rather the cunning devices and stratagems which his enemies used to work his
overthrow: and so is Net taken, Job. 18.8. and in diverse other places besides.

And as for such as perish at sea, they cannot be said to dye suddenly: for
when a man sets his foot into a ship, he well knows, that there is but half a
foots breadth at the most between him and death; so that a man's entrance into
a ship to go to sea, is, as it were, an entrance into some dangerous sickness:
and commonly there is some storm before a shipwreck, which is a good
premonition of ensuing danger; and when a man is under water, he is not
presently deprived of life, but there is some reluctation of Nature, in which
time of reluctation, there may be many a deep sigh sent unto God for mercy and
forgiveness; and as it is with those that go to sea, so it is with those that
go to fight: who knows not, that the chance of war is uncertain? and
therefore when a man goes into the field to fight, he should make account that
he lies him down upon his sickbed. The Drums and Trumpets are to him as so
many bells, that sound forth his doleful knell: The Arrows, the Pikes, the
shot of all sort, are messengers of death unto him, so that he cannot be said
to die suddenly: Who are said to dye suddenly.
but that man dies suddenly, who being in perfect health, and free from all
imminent danger, is so deprived of life, that there is no reluctation of Nature
to be perceived. And what are we to judge of such? Surely, concerning such, we
are not only to consider the present condition of their death, but also to
look back to their lives formerly past; and if we find them to have lived in all good conscience before God and men, and to have been busied in some holy or
charitable action at the hour of their death, these men, doubtless, dye in
the favor of God; and sudden death is but a temporal judgment unto them;
Sudden death not always a spiritual judgment. Amb. de obit. Val.
and it were against the rule of charity and piety, to judge otherwise of
them: for of what kind of death soever a just man dies, it shall be well with
him, and his soul shall be at rest: but if a man has all his life time lived
wickedly and unconscionably, and be also taken by death in some ungodly and
uncharitable action, out of al question, sudde^ death is a spiritual judgment
to such a man, as it was to the Sodomites here in this place, whom the Apostle
S. Jude does definitiuely condemn, saying, Jude. 1.7.
that they suffer the vengeance of eternal fire. Let this therefore be the use
of all that has bin said, even to pray against sudden death, and yet to live
always so prepared for death, that we may be ready at all times with the five
wise virgins in the Gospel, to go in with the bridegroom, Mat 25.10.
and be partakers with him of al his pleasures which endure for evermore. Now
we are in the 2. The Author of Sodoms overthrow.
place to consider the Author of this fearful overthrow, wherewith Sodo^ and
Gomorra were destroyed; and that was the Lord: for the text says, The Lord
rayned upon Sodom and Gomorrha brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven.
The phrase of speech here used, seems somewhat strange, and therefore diverse
men have diversely interpreted it; some have thought it to be nothing else but a
speech proper to the Hebrew tongue: others have thought it a redundancy of
speech: some again have thought, that the holy Ghost would, by this form of
speech, note unto us a miraculous and extraordinary action, above and beyond
the course of nature: but in reading the ancient fathers, we may find, that
they did urge this place against certain Heretics of their time, to prove the
eternity of Christ. So Marcus Arethusus in the Sirinian Counsel alleged these
words against Photinus, expounding them thus, The Lord Christ, to whom ye
Father has committed all judgment, did rain from the Lord Jehovah his
Father, brimstone and fire out of heaven. So that Almighty God by his Son,
did execute this fearful vengeance upon Sodom and her Cities.

There was never any thing which happened in the world, either so miraculous or
extraordinary, but there have been ever some, which have either douted of the
truth of it, or disputed about the true cause of it. ^er^. fict.
Some have doubted upon the truth of Noah's flood: P^trusab Al^aco. Guil. Par.
Others have attributed the cause thereof to the constellation of the Stars,
or to fatal necessity. Concerning the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrha, there
be that do attribute it to the nature of the soil: Strabo.
for the country (say they) being full of pitch and slime, and other
combustible matter, the fire that destroyed these cities, Against those that
ascribe strange accidents to natural causes.
did burst forth of the earth. Which assertion of theirs is clean contrary to
the Scripture here in this place, which says, that it came from heaven. And
amongst us at this day, if any strange accidents do happen either in the Air
or in the Earth, or in the Waters, we refer them to some natural cause or
other, being unwilling (as it were) to acknowledge God to have a hand in them.
And why should we be so willing to seek out causes in nature for such things
as fall forth strangely in the world, and so unwilling to entitle the God of
nature in them? God made the Stars, and the Planets, and the rest of the
celestial bodies of that kind, to be for signs, and seasons, and days, and
years: and this is the right and lawful use of them by their creation. Let
them be for signs, Genesis 1.14.
says Almighty God, but not for causes. Astra demonstrant, non necessitant:
The Stars do sometimes foreshew such things as happen, Against the vanity
and incertaintie of judicial Astrology.
but they are not the enforcing causes of such things as happen. Most impious
therefore and blasphemous it is, to ascribe these things to the influence and
operation of the Stars: for it is to rob God of his honor, to derogate from
his power, to overthrow his providence, and to tie God to secondary and
subordinate causes, and in respect of our selves, it extinguisheth the fear of
God in us, it hinders our repentance and conversion unto God, it draws us to
Atheism, and to a flat contempt both of God and his Judgments. Pharaoh was
not moved with all the miracles that Moses and Aaron could do, so long as he
saw his Sorcerers could do the same; because he attributed, whatsoever was in
those miracles to Art and Nature, and not to the power of God. The beasts of
the field do not tremble at the braying of an Ass: but they are horrible
afraid at the roaring of a Lion. So we tremble not, we are nothing afraid, we
are not moved with any thing, be it never so strange, so long as we are
persuaded it comes from natural causes: but when we acknowledge the hand of
God in such things as befall us, this breeds in us a fear of his Majesty, and
we are the sooner moved to repentance and amendment of life.

Origin is very bitter against these starre-gazing Naturalists, and says of
them, that Dum alias stellas beneficas, alias maleficas faciunt, os suum in
coelum aperiuno: Whiles they make some Planets beneuolent, and some maleuolent,
they open their mouth against heaven it self. And that ancient Counsel of
Toledo, holden in the four hundredth year after Christ, In assert. fidei cap.
^lt.
decreed thus against them, Si quis Mathesi aut Astrologiae existimat
credendum, Anathema sit: Let him be accursed, yt thinks there is any credit to
be given to Astrology, or Mathematisme. What comfort, I pray you, can any man
have, to think yt the Planets are the causes of such things as happen in the
world? Admit the Planets could hurt us: can they heal us, when they have hurt
us? can they relieve us, when they have plagued us? can they help us, when
they have crossed us? That man therefore must needs be comfortles in his
afflictions, that attributes the cause of them to the influence of the Stars,
or to Fortune, or to necessity, or to any other secondary cause whatsoever. But
as the Lord Jehovah did execute this terrible judgment upon Sodom and Gomorrha
by the Lord Christ: so we must confess and acknowledge, that it is God, and
not Nature, the Almighty, and not the Planets, the Lord of heaven and earth,
and not Lady Fortune, that is the cause of all such things as happen here in
the world, whether they be particular or general, whether they be cursings or
blessings, safety or destruction, loss or gain, judgments or mercies,
prosperity or adversity. This does the Almighty himself witness of himself,
Esaias. 45.7. I make peace, and I make evil. And the Prophet Amos affirms the
same thing of God, Amos 3.6.
Is there any evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it, says the
Prophet? Both which places do pregnantly prove unto us, that whether it be good
or evil that happens unto us, God is the Author of it, and it comes from
him, as the true and only cause thereof. Therefore the Prophet Jeremy demands
this Question of these that do so curiously observe the rules of Nature, Iere^
14.22.
Can the heavens give showers? is it not thou, O Lord our God, Ps. 147.4.
says the Prophet? God being the God of nature, ouer-rules nature, he calls
the stars by their names, and therefore disposes them at his pleasure, and
guides the Planets after his will. Let us not therefore employ our studyes in
such vain Arts, which have no certainty in them: Let us not believe, nor
consent, nor consult with the rules thereof: Hierom. in Esaias. cap. 27.
for as Hierome well says, such Arts and the professors, practisers and
inquirers after the same, do more harm in a city, then fire. Cano^. 16.
And therefore the Council of Venice, holden in the four hundred and sixtieth
year after Christ, decreed, that if any man did study Astrology, or gave
credit to any such as did study that Art, if he were a minister, he should be
deprived, and whatsoever he were, he should be excommunicate: For indeed,
these inferior, though celestial creatures, were made to serve man, and not
to rule man. Let us not therefore observe them, Deuteronomy. 4.19.
attribute any thing unto them, fear them, nor consult with them; for thereby
we prove both injurious to God, to our selves, and to the creatures.

But this is our wisdom, Micah. 6.9. Doct. God the Author of al such things as
befall man.
to follow the counsel of the prophet, which is, acknowledge the rod, and who
has appointed it: when any cross, affliction, judgment, loss, or
tribulation does befall us, we must confess and acknowledge, that by our sins
we have justly deserved the same: and in the second place we must confess and
acknowledge, that God has appointed, ordained, inflicted and laid the same
upon us, and not the stars, nor Fortune, nor Planets, nor Destiny, nor the
devil, nor man, nor any other creature in heaven or earth; but as the Lord
rayned fire and brimstone from the Lord out of heaven upon these cities, and
this country of Sodom and Gomorrah, so al our crosses, losses, afflictions,
and tribulations come from the Lord out of heaven. This Job well understood, and
acknowledged: for although the Chaldeans and Shabeans spoiled him of his Oxen,
Asses, and Camells, yet Job ascribes it all to God. Job 1.21.
The Lord has taken it away, says he. So likewise Satan is said to have
smitten Job with sore biles, from the crown of the head, to the sole of his
foot, and yet he lays it upon God: The hand of God has touched me, Job. 19*
21.
says Job. When Shemei cursed David, and threw stones at him, and rayled upon
him, howsoever the sons of Zaruiah took it to be the cursing of a dead dog,
yet David ascribed it to God. The Lord, says he, has bidden Shemei to curse
David. Whereby it is apparent, 2. Sam. 16.10.
that there is no evil that happens unto us, I mean the evil of punishment,
or affliction, but God is the Author of it, and lays the same upon us; and to
know and acknowledge this, is great comfort unto us: Use. 1.
for as God wounds us, so he is able to heal us; as he afflicts us, so he
can remove our afflictions from us: and therefore this breeds in us a
feruency in prayer, according to the counsel of the Apostle, James. 5.13.
Is any man afflicted amongst you, let him pray? But to whom should he pray in
his afflictions? to the Stars and Planets? to Fortune and Chance? to Fate and
Destiny? None of these can relieve us, they cannot heal us, they cannot help
us. But here is our comfort, that God afflicting us, he can also comfort us;
therefore this provoke us to be instant with God by prayer. Again, Use. 2.
to acknowledge God to be the Author of our afflictions, it breeds patience
in us: Every one of us by Nature are wonderful impatient, even in the least
crosses which can befall us: and the reason is, because we do not acknowledge
from whence our crosses come; for it we did, we would never be found to strive
against God. David confessing his infirmity in this case, teaches every man
his duty, and how to carry himself in his afflictions, I should have been
dumb, Psalm. 39.9.
and not have opened my mouth, says he, because thou did it. Seeing his
troubles came from God, he confesses, he should have endured them patiently.
Let us therefore learn what to do in the same case, even to be patient in our
greatest troubles, because God inflicts them and lays them upon us. The bird
being caught in the lime-bush, and not knowing the true cause of her calamity,
strives and struggleth to enlarge her self, but the more she applies her
self to procure her freedom, the more she plungeth her self into thraldom,
the more feathers she loses, and the more unable she makes her self to make
her escape, if she were at liberty. Even so the party afflicted, not knowing,
or acknowledging from whence his afflictions come, the more he laboreth to
recover and rid himself out of his troubles, the more he inwrappeth himself
into troubles; the more means he uses of his own devising, to relieve
himself, the less comfort does he feel, and the heavier are his crosses unto
him. But as the ship, which by the violent course of a springtide is driven
upon the maine, does patiently abide, til the next springtide come and fetch
her off, knowing that as she was driven upon the ground by the Tide, so she
must be brought off with a Tide: so that person which is crossed or afflicted,
knowing that his afflictions come from God, does patiently endure them, knowing
that he which laid his afflictions upon him, can also in his good time remove
them from him. Lastly, to acknowledge God to be the author of our afflictions,
Use. 3.
stirs us up more duly and seriously to serve and please him according to
his will. If there could have bin found, but 10. righteous men in Sodom, the
Lord would have spared the whole city for those Tens sake. So if the Lord
find any thing in us, that is agreeable to his will, or acceptable in his
sight, he will not punish us, nor afflict us, nor cross us further then may be
for his glory, and our good: None can promise to himself, though he be never
so righteous, that he shall be free from afflictions: but the afflictions of Gods
children are gentle chastisments, they come from the love of a Father, and not
from the rigor of a Judge. We never read, that ever he rayned down fire and
brimstone upon the godly: but if at any time he do correct them, his
corrections are mild, fatherly, and tending to amendment, and not to their
destruction. If therefore thou will have God favorable, and kind, and good
unto thee, serve him, fear him, and please him: so if he do chastise thee, it
shall be for thy good, and not for thy destruction.

The manner of Sodoms destruction.
Now in the third place, according to my first observations, let us consider the
manner of this destruction which the Lord brought upon Sodom and Gomorrha, and
that was fire and brimstone; fire, which as we say, has no mercy, fire from
heaven, which is more fierce and fearful then other fire, fire mingled with
brimstone; whereby the fire became more furious, and terrible, and the whole
Land made barren and fruitless for ever. And this mercylesse, fierce, and
terrible fire mingled with brimstone, came from heaven in a shower of rain;
but never was there such a shower of rain fell upon the earth. This was a
rain, not to cool and refresh the earth, but to burn and consume the earth,
and the Inhabitants thereof. This was a rain, not to make the Earth fruitful,
but to make it fruitless for evermore. This was a rain, not to moysten the
earth, nor to make it spring, and bring forth things necessary for man's use,
but it was a rain, to skorch and parch the Earth, and to destroy both man and
beast, from the face of the Earth; Genesis 7.12.
for it rayned fire and brimstone from heaven. In the destruction of the old
world, we read, that it rayned upon the earth forty days and fortynights: but
it was water simply, without any other mixture. Exodus 9.23.
Amongst the rest of the plagues of Egypt, rain was one, but it rayned
hailes^ones and fire mingled with the hail, and that rain hurt nothing but
what was in the field: but this rain which fell upon Sodom, was not water, but
fire, nor hayle mingled with fire, but fire mingled with brimstone, and it did
not only destroy that which was in the field, but whatsoever was either in
field, or city, within the house, or without, at home, or abroad, was
destroyed with this rain, man, woman, and child, beast, and cattle, trees,
and herbs, all perished with this rain. And the more strange was ye manner of
this judgment, because it is said, that brimstone came from heaven. We often
read of brimstone in hell; but it is very strange, that a thing of so stinking
and odious a smell as brimstone is, should come from such a sweet and pleasant
place as heaven is.

Lamentable and rufull has been the diuastation and overthrow of diverse
cities in the world, as of Troy, Carthage, Jerusalem, Thebes, and such like,
insomuch as the very relation of their ruins has moved men's hearts to pity
the perplexed estate of all degrees, distressed with such desolation. But the
manner of this destruction, wherewith Sodom and Gomorrha were overthrown, is
without comparison: Never was there people so distressed. If the rude and
barbarous soldier had entered these cities by force, and had put man, woman,
and child to the sword, imbruing their hands in the reverend blood of the old
men, ripping up the bodies of women great with child, taking the Infants and
sucking babes out of their cradles upon the points of their spears, deflowring
wives, rauishing maids, spoiling the widows and fatherless, sparing no age,
sex or degree, but destroying all before them with fire and sword: this had
been lamentable; but yet such is the condition of war, and no strange thing
had happened to these Cities, but such as had been common to other cities in
their overthrow. If the Lord had sent a famine upon the people of these cities
of Sodom and Gomorrha, and broken their staff of bread, and diminished the
oil in the cruze, and the meal in the barrel, and had dried up all their
springs and fountains, so that they had been enforced to have eaten and drunk
their own excrements, every man to have eaten the flesh of his own arm, and
every mother the child of her own womb, this had been very miserable, yet
such as diverse other people besides have tasted of. But this people were
otherwise surprised. It was no mortal enemy, but the immortal God, that
fought against this people. The heavens sent down their forces against this
people; and therefore in vain was it to lift up hands, head, or eyes toward
heaven, because from thence came their destruction. If an enemy of the same
mould that this people were of, had besieged them, there might have been some
treaty, some parley, some conditions of peace, of departing with bag and
baggage, of ransom, or tribute hoped for: but when they saw the heavens open
above their heads, and sending down fire and brimstone upon them, when they
saw their houses on fire about their ears, no place of refuge or safeguard to
fly unto, no means to escape, when they felt the fire fall upon their soft
and tender bodies, as thick as rain, when they felt it scorche their flesh,
when they saw one another lie sprawling upon the ground, drawn to, like a
scrowle of parchment, with ye scalding heat of the fire, none able to help
another, none able to comfort another, what a miserable face of a city was
there, think you?

-- quis talia fando
temperet a lachrymis?
For the Lord rayned upon these cities brimstone and fire from the Lord out of
heaven. Reasons why God brought this manner of destruction upon Sodom and
Gomorrha. Reason. 1.
Now the reasons which moved the Lord to send this strange and terrible
judgment upon these cities and people, were especially 3. This God so
wonderful in power and might, and so fearful in his punishment, had before
this time drowned the world, for sin; but the people of Sodo^ and Gomorrha were
nothing terrified with that judgment, but were as wreched and wicked in their
courses, as if they had heard of no example of Gods wrath against sin; and
therefore now God sends fire to destroy them, to let all the ungodly of the
earth know, that all the Elements and all creatures in heaven, earth and hell,
are ready, and pressed to take vengeance upon man for his sin, when it pleases
God to command and enjoin them: the Lord is not so bare of judgments, that he
has but one kind to revenge himself upon ye ungodly, he has more the^ one
arrow of vengeance to the bow of his wrath, he has water to drawn thee, fire
to consume thee, plague and pestilence to destroy thee, dearth and famine to
pine thee, a thousand grievous diseases to bring thee to thine end. The earth
is at his beck, to open and swallow thee up quick: the Angels are at his
commandment, to strike (...) sudden death: The devils wayt upon his will, and
if he bid them go, they have power to tempt thee to be thine own butcher and
executioner, as to hang thy self, to throw thy self down headlong and break
thy neck, to cut thine own throat. This God would have ye sinner know. And
therefore let all the ungodly of the world fear this God, tremble at his
judgments, be careful and co^scionable to serve and please him, and take heed
how they offend him; for if they provoke him, he will not spare them. They have
not so many ways to anger him withal, as he has plagues and punishments to
destroy them withal. And from hence an impenitent sinner may gather, that
there is no place of safety nor security for him; a walled city is no place of
defense for a sinner, his house is no castle unto him, his bed is no place of
safeguard for him; for in all these places God has messengers of death and
destruction to attach him.

Reason. 2.
The second (...), why the Lord brought this kind of judgment upon these
cities, and people, was, yt the manner of their punishment might be suitable and
corresponde^t to the manner of their sin: for whereas they burned in the filthy
lust of concupiscence one toward another, against the order and course of
nature, the Lord, to punish this unnatural heat of lust in the^, brought a
supernatural fire upon them: and as they delighted in the filthy and odious
pleasure of sin, and defiled themselves with the hellish contagion of impiety:
so the Lord punished them with brimstone mingled with fire, that as their sins
made them stink in the nosethrills of Almighty God: so they might be choked
and stifled with the detestable stinking smell of brimstone: and as the Lord
made the punishment of this people suitable to their sin: so he would have al
sinners know, yt wherewith a man sins, by the same also shall he be punished:
for it was not impossible to the Almighty hand of God, which made all the world
of naught, to have drowned this people and their land with the ouerflowing
streams of Jordan, or to have delivered them into the hands of ye four kings,
as once before, or to have sent the infectious and noysom pestilence among
them: but God chose rather to destroy the^ with fire and brimstone from heaven,
Genesis 14.10.
to give notice to all posterities, yt as they sin, so shall they be punished.
Aaro^s sons offered strange fire upon the Altar: and therefore a strange fire
from heaven destroyed them. Samson suffering the eyes of his mind, Leuit 10.2.
and the light of his reason to be extinguished, was for his punishment
deprived of his bodily eyes, and lost the comfortable sight of this world. And
as he suffered himself to be captiuated and inthralled to the will of a woman,
so was he made a slave to the will of his uncircumcised enemies, and compelled
by them to grind in a mill like an horse, then which there could not be a more
servile servitude. And it seems by the example of Dives, Luke 16.24.
that in hell there shall be some thing in the torments of the damned, which
shall have some correspondency with their sins: for Dives being unmerciful in
the world while he lived, can find no mercy nor compassion when he is dead,
either in hell or heaven: he that would not give a crum of bread to Lazarus in
his life time, cannot now get a drop of water to cool the typ of his tongue.
Howsoever therefore there be general torments in hell for the damned, yet it
should seem that there shall be some particular thing in their torments, which
shall have some semblance with their sins; and the reason is, because they
might, to their greater grief, be put in mind of their sins, which were the
cause of those torments.

The third and last reason, Reason. 3. Genesis 19.13.
why the Lord from heaven sent down this strange and fearful judgment upon
these cities and people, was, because their sins cried up to heaven,
therefore God answered the cry of their sins, with a punishment from heaven.
And this God does, to let us see how sin turns heaven into hell, and makes
the merciful Savior of mankind, to be an unmerciful destroyer of mankind. God
is by nature a preserver of men, The shepherd of Israel, Job 7.20. Ps. 23.1.
Ps. 18.2.
A refuge for men to fly unto for safeguard and succor: but such is the strong
effects of sin, and so strangely works it with God yt of a preserver of men,
it makes him a destroyer of men* of a shepherd, it makes him a leopard, and of
a lamb a lion. The heavens by nature give rain unto the earth in due season,
Deuteronomy. 28.12. Hos. 2.21.
to make it fruitful and fertile, to bring forth things necessary for the use
of man: But sin makes the heavens to be brass unto us, and causes them to
send down fire and brimstone, storm and tempest, to make the earth barren and
fruitles, and destroy both man and beast from off the earth. Most miserable
then is the estate and condition of a people or a land, when the sins of that
people or land become to be crying sins: for in vain is it for a people or a
land to cry for mercy unto God, when their sins cry for vengeance. In vain
do thou hold up thine hands, or lift up thine eyes to ye heavens for favor,
when thy sins with their cry have solicited against thee for judgment. When
Ziba has once accused Mephibosheth unto David, it is in vain for Mephibosheth
to excuse himself: 2. Sam. 16.3. 2. Sam. 29.16.
so if thou have practiced sin so long, that it now begins to cry unto
heaven, God that is in heaven will hear the cry thereof, and he will send down
some strange punishment or other upon thee to destroy thee. As Abigail therefore
prevented the wrath of David, by meeting him before he came at her husband: so
prevent thou the cry of thy sins, and meet God with thy repentance, before the
cry of thy sins bring him down to take vengeance upon thee: cry thou for
mercy, before thy sins cry for judgment: stop the mouth of thy sins with
contrition and sorrow; still their cry with repentance and amendment of life;
and as Pharaoh dealt with the children of the Israelites in Egypt, so deal thou
with thy sins; kill them in the birth, never let the^ trouble the house with
their cry: Exodus 1.16.
so shall you find God merciful unto thee, and the heavens favorable unto thee:
otherwise, if thy sins send their cries before thee into heaven, look for some
fearful judgment from heaven to light upon thee.

The fourth thing we are to observe in the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah,
The generality of Sodo^s destruction.
is the generality of the destruction. Wherein we are to consider 3. things:
First, that the whole country was destroyed. Secondly, the whole people, man,
woman and child, old and young, were all taken away in this judgment. Thirdly,
all that grew upon the earth, which Tremelius calls foetum terrae, the brood of
the earth, whatsoever the earth brought forth or nourished, was all destroyed
in the destruction of these cities. Concerning the country, we are to consider
it in two respects. First, in regard of the largeness and greatness of the
country: and secondly, in regard of the excellency of the country. The
largeness of the country of Sodom. Genesis 14.2.
The largeness of the country may be considered, either in the number of
cities which it contained, or in respect of the site and circuit of the
soil, within the compass and territories whereof it was bounded. Concerning
the greatness of this country, in respect of ye cities thereof; Moses describes
them to be five, Sodom, Gomorrha, Admah, Zeboim, Zoar, which was also called
Bela: of these five cities, four were overthrown in this judgment of fire
and brimstone, as you may read, Deuteronomy. 29.23. Genesis 19.22.
for Zoar was preserved at the entreaty of Lot. And the cause why Sodom and
Gomorrha are only named in this place which we have now in hand, is, because
these were the chief cities of this country, more populous then the rest,
more abounding in wealth, and more abominable in their sins.

The first thing then which we are to consider concerning the generality of
this destruction, is, that not villages, but cities, not one or 2. cities, but
4. cities, not 4. poor, base, beggarly cities, but four great, populous, rich
cities, were overthrown in this fearful overthrow, executed with fire and
brimstone.

The second thing to be considered in the largeness of this country, is the
site and circuit of it, which was, as Pliny reports, one hundred miles in
length, and 25. miles in breadth. But Josephus, whose report is thought more
true and certain, describes this country to be but threescore and twelve
miles long, and nineteen miles broad.

Whereby we gather, that not a few fields or acres of ground, not a small
parcel or quantity of ground, but a large country was overthrown in this
destruction.

The excellency of the country of Sodom.
Concerning the excellency of this country, Moses sets it forth unto us, Genesis
13.10. by comparing it to the Garden of God, or to that part of the land of
Egypt, which is watered with the ouerflowing streams of the river Nilus: so
that out of all question, this country of Sodom and Gomorrah was a most goodly
country, fertile, pleasant, and delightful; for as Paradise was watered with
the sweet, fresh, wholesome waters of Euphrates, and Egypt with ye fair, soft,
sliding streams of Nilus: so this land of Sodom, lying alo^gst the ouerflowing
banks of Iorde^, might well be compared to either of them for all ^ind of
riches, pleasures and delights. And surely, the sins of this country declare,
that it was a goodly, rich, pleasant country; Ezech. 16.49.
for as it is in the prophecy of Ezechiel, the sins of this country were pride,
fulness of bread, and abundance of idleness. The pride of this people showed
their riches; their fullness of bread, the fruitfulness and fertility of the
soil; and the abundance of idleness in this people, showed the pleasures and
delights of the country: but how populous soever this country was, by reason
of the cities that were in it, how large and great soever this country was, in
respect of the soil and circuit of it, how rich, fruitful, and pleasant
soever this country was, the Lord overthrew those cities, and all the plain,
even the whole country, with fire and brimstone, so that it is now as
unpleasant as ever it was pleasant: for there arise such filthy, and foggy
vapors and mists out of the ground, as none is able to abide the smell of
them, and as Borchardus reports, the neighbor mountains are made barren
with the contagion thereof: and how fruitful soever it was before the
desolation of it, undoubtedly, it is now as fruitles and barren; the waters are
so bitter and unsavory, that nothing lives in them: for if any fish do happen
to fall into the waters of this country, out of the river Jordan, by reason of
the inundation of ye said river, they dye presently: no grass grows in the
country: Trees there be, which bear fruit, which outwardly seems very
fair, but within ye rine there is nothing but dust and ashes. And lastly, this
country is now as desolate, as ever it was beautiful and goodly, for there is
not a man inhabiting there, no creature abiding there, Doctrine. Nothing can
privilege either place or person from Gods vengeance against sin.
not a cottage or a houell standing in all the country: for the Lord destroyed
all the cities, and all the whole country, with fire and brimstone. From whence
we for our instruction may learn and know, that when Almighty God takes
vengeance upon any land or country for sin, he respects neither greatness,
nor excellency, nor goodlinesse, nor beauty, nor any other outward thing
whatsoever: A fruitful land makes he barren, a populous country makes he
waste, Ps. 107.34.
a beautiful country makes he desolate: and all this he does, for the sin
of the people that dwell therein. Though Babylon sit as a Queen, and says she
is no widow, neither shall see any mourning, yet her plagues shall come upon
her in one day, death, sorrow, and famine, and she shall be burnt with fire.
The disciples wonder at the fair and goodly building of the Temple: but our
Savior Christ tells them, that there should a time come, even the time when
God should visit that people for their sins, at which time there should not
one stone be left upon another of all that beautiful building, that should not
be thrown down.

We therefore of this land and city ought to take this Alarm, for a warning
given us by Sodom and other places, most excellent and eminent in their times,
yet al destroyed and overthrown for their sins and impieties: for though
England be a Paradise for pleasure, a storehouse of wealth, and a rich
Exchequer of all plenty and delights; And though London be the Kings Chamber,
the seat of the Nobles, the Mart of rich and worthy Merchants, and indeed the
beauty of the whole land, yet if God once visit this land and city, for the
sins of the inhabitants thereof, neither this nor that, neither the largenes
of their territories, nor their beauty, excellency, riches, or multitude of
people, shall excuse them, but he will make them as Sodom, and like unto
Gomorrha. If God would have spared any place for the outward worthiness of it,
Ps. 50.2.
he would have spared Zion, in which place the Lord appeared in perfect beauty,
and of which place God gave this testimony, that he loved the gates of Syon
more then all the habitations of Jacob. And in another place the Lord has
chosen Syon, saying, Ps. 87.2. Ps. 132.13.14.
This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell: for I have a delight therein. And
yet this place is so defaced, spoiled, and ruinated at this day, that it lies
abhorred and desolate, being a cage of most unclean birds, and a filthy den
of Turks, miscreants, and Infidels. And how can England or London secure
themselves, or promise any immunity of Gods judgments unto themselves, by
reason of any outward worthiness or excellency, wherewith they seem to be
blessed above other Nations? for whenever God shall visit this Land and City
for their sins, nothing shall exempt us from his judgments, except we
prevent them by repentance.

Concerning the generality of this Judgment which the Lord brought upon Sodom
and Gomorrha, it is furthermore said, Man, woman and child destroyed in Sodoms
overthrow
that he destroyed all the Inhabitants of those Cities, the whole people of the
Land, not men only, but women too, not men and women only, but men, women and
children, even all the Inhabitants of those Cities perished in this overthrow,
not the poor only, but poor and rich; not the base and inglorious Pezant,
but the Noble and honorable amongst them; not the subject, but their Kings and
Rulers; not those which were in the field, but all that were in the cities,
even all the Inhabitants of those cities were overthrown in this destruction:
So that as God spares no place, for any respect of outward excellency, no more
does he spare any person, for his own worthiness or eminency: but when he
brings his Judgments upon man for sin, the wise and the fool perish both
together, the King that sits upon the Throne, and the beggar that sits upon the
ground, they bear both a part, and drink of the same cup, when he is angry.
This the Spirit of God does testify unto us by the Prophet David, You shall dye
like men, Psalm. 82.7.
and ye Princes shall fall like others. And the Prophet Jeremy tells Ieconiah
King of Judah, Ier. 22.24.
that though he were the signet of the Lords right hand, yet he should be
plucked from thence. No title of honor, eminency or excellency, can free a man
from Gods judgments. The plagues of Egypt were upon Pharaoh, as well as upon
the people. And therefore Kings and Princes, and the honorable and renowned
personages of the world, must not flatter themselves, nor suffer the pomp of
ye world to deceive them: for whether their honor and dignity consist in
authority, or in wealth and riches, 1. Kings. 22.31. The greatest men do
oftentimes taste first of Gods judgments. Dan. 5.30.
or in the voluptuousnes and pleasure of life, none of these can free them from
GODS judgments: Nay, if we mark the proceedings of God in the execution of
his judgments, we shall often see, that the me^ in chiefest place, do soonest
taste of his judgments. Ahab, king of Israel, was first slain in the battle
at Ramoth Gilead. Among all the people that met Iehu as he went to Izreel, we
read of none that was slain, but the 2. kings, Iehoram king of Israel, and
Ahaziah king of Judah.1000. princes did profane the golden and silver vessels,
which were brought out of the Temple at Jerusalem, together with Belshazzar
King of the Chaldeans, as also did his wives and concubines; yet the Scripture
makes mention of none that was slain that night, but only the King. This
should teach Kings and Rulers, and such as are of note and place, to take no
more liberty of sinning unto themselves, then those of the vulgar sort and
condition: for they are as subject to Gods Judgments, as the meanest among the
people.

But now wonder all ye that read this History, let your hearts melt with
grief, and your eyes be resolved into tears of sorrow, when you hear, that
not only those of discretion and years, but even children, Children destroyed
as well as those of elder years.
Infants, and sucking babes, that hanged upon their mothers breasts, which knew
not their right hand from their left, which never committed sin actually,
were also destroyed in this overthrow: The tenderness of their age might have
pleaded for them, they stuck to their mothers breasts, as Apples to their
trees, they could not speak, stand, nor help themselves: Their innocence and
harmless simplicity might have pleaded for them, they knew not their right
hand from their left, they could not distinguish between good and evil, right
and wrong, straight and crooked. Those of elder years had judgment, and will
in themselves, and therefore they were justly punished for their transgressions:
but what had these infants done, which had not as yet attained to years of
discretion? But so fierce is the wrath of God against sin, that nothing could
excuse these silly infants: for the Lord destroyed all the inhabitants of these
cities, he reserved neither man, woman, nor child alive. Neither was there any
cruelty or injustice in God, in destroying the children of Sodom, together with
those that were of elder years and discretion: for four reasons may be
yielded of this action.

Reason. 1. Reasons why Infants were destroyed.
The first reason why the infants and sucking babes in Sodom were destroyed
as well as those of elder years was, because they were the branches of such
cursed trees, and children of such ungodly parents: for howsoever it be true,
that the Lord speaks by the Prophet Ezechiel, that the child shall not bear
the fathers sin, it is true also that the Lord himself speaks in the second
Commandment, He will visit the sin of the fathers upon the children: So that
if a wicked and ungodly man beget a child, that child shall not bear the sin
of the parents spiritually, and eternally, if it walk in good ways, and
betake it self to holy and virtuous courses: but if the child of ungodly
parents live never so carefully and conscionably according to Gods will, yet
the Lord will visit the sins of the parents upon it corporally and
temporally, and if it walk in the ways of the parents, it shall bear the
sins of the parents eternally also. But admit that a child of ungodly
parents never come to commit sin actually, the Lord in his justice may visit
the sins of the parents upon that child both temporally and eternally,
because it is of the same nature that the parents are: even as the Hunts-man
finding a litter of some noisome and obnoxious beasts, killes them, though
they never did harm, because their nature is to do harm if they live: even
so, God in his justice may destroy the very infants and sucking babes both
temporally and eternally, though they never committed sin actually, because
their nature is corrupt and tainted by propagation from their parents. But you
will say unto me, The like may be said of the children of godly parents. No:
For the godly have a promise, that God will not only be their GOD, but the
GOD of their seed also: so that if the children of the godly dye while they
hang upon the breast, or in the womb, yet there is hope of mercy, by reason of
the promise: but if the children of the wicked dye before they be of power to
commit sin actually, there is no hope of mercy, but a fearful expectation of
justice, because there is no promise of mercy belonging unto them.

You see then the reason, why God destroyed those infants and sucking babes of
Sodom, with this temporal judgment of fire and brimstone, even because they
were children of ungodly parents. And if he has destroyed them eternally, he
has done no more then in his justice he might, because he never made promise
of mercy unto them.

The second reason why God destroyed these children, was to increase the grief
and sorrow of their parents: for commonly the miseries of our children are more
grievous unto us, then our own miseries. David took the death of his son
Absalo^ so heavily, that he wished he had dyed for him. And out of question,
when this people saw their children lie sprawling in the fire, scorcht and
burnt with the heat thereof, when they heard them screeke and cry, and could
not help them, it was as grievous unto them, as their own misery; and
therefore the Lord did it, even to increase and enlarge their sorrow.

The third reason why the Lord destroyed these children, was, Reason. 3.
because they should not walk in the wicked and abominable ways of their
parents; for if they had lived, the nature which they drew from their parents,
would have drawn them to the sins of their parents: lest therefore these
children should have traced the sinful steps of their parents, the Lord takes
them away in the same destruction with their parents.

The last reason why these children were destroyed, was, Reason. 4
because GOD would leave none of that wicked brood to remain upon the earth;
there were ouer-many of that rank already: Doctrine. Parents, even in regard
of their children, ought to live conscionably.
and therefore the Lord, to the end he might root out the memory of this
people, he destroyed children and all. Whereby man is taught to live holily,
justly, and soberly in this world, forasmuch as a man is not wicked only to
himself, but to his posterity also. The wickedness of the parents lies
heavily upon the children: and therefore if thou have no regard of thine own
soul, yet have a respect of thy children, and for their sakes cease to do
evil. Esaias 57.3.
The Prophet Esaias summons the children of Witches, the seed of the adulterer
and of the whore, and the children of the rebellious, he summons them all
before God, and he lays this heavy judgment upon them; There is no peace to
the wicked, 20.
says my God. It is a fearful thing to be the child of an Usurer, of an
Adulterer, or Whore, of a Drunkard, of a murderer, of a blasphemer, or of any
other notorious wicked person whatsoever: for surely God will visit the sins
of the parents upon the children, as he has threatened in the commandment,
temporally, live the children never so well, but temporally and spiritually
both, if the children do walk in the ways of their parents.

Last of all, concerning the generality of that destruction, which the LORD
brought upon this Country and people, it is said, All living creatures
destroyed in Sodoms overthrow.
that He destroyed all that grew upon the earth: or as Tremelius has
learnedly translated the same words thus, All that the earth brought forth,
and nourished, all cattle and beasts of the field, all creeping things, and
whatsoever was upon the face of the earth, was destroyed in this overthrow. And
here we may justly wonder at the judgments of God, which he extends not only
unto man, which has judgments and will, nor unto babes and sucklings which
are tainted with corruption by the propagation of nature from their parents,
but also to unreasonable creatures, which never sinned, but are subject to
vanity against their wills, which do not offend their Creator, but follow
the law of their creation, and shall never come into judgment; yet these
creatures, as void of sin as of reason, are oftentimes plagued and destroyed
for the sin of man. Thus was the earth cursed for the sin of Adam: Thus
were al these creatures destroyed with the flood, for the sin of that age;
and yet we may say of them, as Pithagoras sometimes said: Quid meruistis oues,
placidum pecus?
Quid meruere boues, animal sine fraud?


What have these poor silly creatures deserved, that they should be
punished? nay, destroyed, having never offended? We are the sinful wretches
of the world, workers of all iniquity, deserving not to be scourged with rods,
but with Scorpions: We (I say) being only nocent, cause innocence it self to
be punished for our transgressions. Behold then, O sinful man, thine own
ungraciousness, thou do not only procure vengeance to thy self by thy
sin, but to every thing else that does serve thy sinful use. Man by his
creation is a Lord, and a high commander upon the earth; for as it is in the
Psalm, Psalm. 8.
he has dominion over all the works of God, all things are put in subjection
under his feet, all sheep and oxen, yea and the beasts of the field, the
birds of the air, the fishes of the sea, and whatsoever walks through the
paths of the seas: So that man in reason should content himself with this
dominion and Lordship which he has over the creatures, and not seek and
procure the destruction of them: Man should satisfy himself with the use and
commodity of these creatures, and not seek the ruin and wrack of these
poor bond-seruants, both by ill entreating them himself, and by provoking God
with his sin, to plague, punish, and destroy them. And surely, but that the
providence of God does restrain these silly dumb creatures, it is a marvel,
that they do not break their league with man, and shake off the yoke of
obedience toward him: It is a marvel that ye earth does not rent in sunder
under man, as he walks upon it, seeing it is so plagued with barrenness for
the sin of man: It is a marvel, that our oxen and our horses, with their
horns and hooues, do not make war against us, seeing we are such
unrighteous and tyrannical Lords over them, not content to have their use and
service, except we plague them besides into such undeserved vengeance of GODS
wrath by our sins and transgressions. Let us therefore forbear and eschew
sin, and fly from it, as from a Serpent, seeing by it we do not only draw
down Gods heavy judgments upon our heads, but also we plague our posterity,
and the very dumb and unreasonable creatures into the wrath of Gods vengeance,
by our sins and transgressions. And let us further learn the perfect hatred
of GOD against sin, who does not only punish it in man which commits it,
but in all things which any way serve man in his sinful courses: and let us
esteem no sin small, seeing the infinite majesty of God is offended by it,
infinite torments are prepared for it, and nothing can satisfy for it, but the
inestimable price of Christ's blood, applied to the conscience by a true and
lively faith.

Now it remains, The cause of Sodoms destruction was sin.
that in the last place we examine the cause, why the Lord brought such a
fearful destruction upon this land and people. There must needs be some great
cause, that did exasperate the Lord to execute such a fierce and strange
judgment upon them. The cause is not hard to be found out: for nothing does
separate man from God, but sin; nothing does provoke God to punish, plague
and destroy man, but sin; nothing does draw down the judgments of God upon
man, but sin; and sin it was, that moved the Lord to revenge himself thus
severely upon this land and people, as it appears by the words of Almighty
God to Abraham, Genesis 18.20.
Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because their sin is
exceeding grievous, I will go down now, says the Lord. Sin brought death into
the world, they are twins, bred and borne in one day; sin and destruction
are Relatiues; admit the one, and the other follows; death and destruction
grows forth of sin, as fruit from the tree: and therefore if we sin, we
may surely expect to be punished; and if we be punished, we need not doubt of
the cause, but we may safely think with our selves, it is for our sins.
Therefore as we have considered the punishment of Sodom, so let us consider the
sins of Sodom, which were the cause of her overthrow and destruction. The
Prophet Ezechiel does make known unto us the sins of this people to be
four; Pride, Ezec. 16.49. The sins of Sodom. Genesis 19.5.
fullness of bread, idleness, and unmercifulness toward the poor. But
these were not all the sins of Sodo^: for the Scripture lays down another
sin practiced amongst this people, which because it did either begin
amongst them, or was more practise^ amongst them then amongst any other people
beside, derived the name from them, and so holds it to this day: but the
Prophet does recko^ the forenamed sins, to be the sins of this people,
because they were the principal causes of that unnatural sin, which wi^h the
cry thereof brought such a fearful vengeance upon them.

In speaking of the sins of Sodom, I will keep the same order, that the
Prophet observes in the place before cited, Pride.
placing Pride in the first rank, as though it were the Ringleader to the
rest, and the root from whence all other vices do follow: and so it is
indeed, and therefore it is called the Center in the sphere of man's life, from
whence are drawn lines to the circumference of iniquity. If a man have any
good gifts or qualities in him, pride does expel and abandon them: if a man
have none, pride will not give place for any to enter: A proud man cares not
for God. Ps. 10.4.
and the first thing that pride works in man, is an irrespectiue care and an
incurious respect of God; he cares not for God, he seeks not for God, he
does not trust and rely upon God, nay, he thinks always there is no God; for
the object of his pride is his God, and in it he does trust, upon it he does
rely, and he sets it up as an Idol, not only in his own heart, but in the
eyes and view of the world, to the end all men may applaud, admire, honor and
magnify it: as if a man be proud of his Nobility, of his dignity and
greatness, of his wealth and riches, of his credit and estimation, of his
learning and wisdom, of his apparel, of his costly and goodly buildings, or
whatsoever else is the object of his pride, he does not only set his heart
upon it himself, seeking all means to uphold and maintain it, deriuing all
his joy and contentment from it, depending upon it as upon the staff and stay
of his strength, but he must have all other men likewise to commit Idolatry
with it: and as the finger is always where the pain is, and the eye where the
affection is: so is the heart of a proud man always settled and fixed upon ye
thing whereof he is proud. And therefore it is true that David speaks of him;
he cares not for God, Ps. 10.4.
he seeks not for God, and he thinks always there is no God: and as he is
thus careless and inrespectiue of God, so is he most injurious to his neighbor,
in scorning, disdaining, despising, and vildly esteeming him. Superbus nes^at
esse socius: A proud man is injurious to all men.
A proud man acknowledges none to be his equal. A proud man is always
contentious, and by reason he is wholly possessed with self-love, a man shall
never have justice at his hands: for which cause, Moses gave warning to the
Israelites, Deuteronomy. 17 20.
not to choose a King, that should lift up his heart above his brethren: for
when the chief Magistrate is proud and haughty, all justice and judgment is
perverted, and he gouerns all things after the rule of his own proud conceyts:
And even as when a man winnoweth wheat, the chafe mounts aloft, though it be
light and unprofitable, but the wheat falls down unto the ground, though it
be more precious and excellent then the chafe: eue^ so, when a proud man sits
in government, vanity is preferred, but justice and judgment are depressed. Ps
119.51.69.
David complayneth of the proud, that they had him exceedingly in derision: and
in another place, that they imagined a lie against him: noting unto us thereby,
that in the first place, they scorn and disdain all men; and in the second
place, that they wrong, malign, and deal unjustly with every man. Thus is a
proud man found impious toward God, injurious to his neighbor, A proud man
not capable of grace.
not capable to receive any good gifts or graces, as a certain Philosopher told
Alexander, perceiving his pride, God (said he) is able to give wisdom unto
men, but Alexander is so proud, that there is no place for wisdom to take
place in him. And lastly, a proud man is in danger to lose those good gifts and
qualities which he already has, according to that old proverb, Inficit
egregios adiuncta superbia mores.

Where pride is, there all excellent conditions are infected and poisoned, so
that they either dye, or grow so weak, that they are not able to perform any
good office or duty.

Psalm. 36.11.
This made David pray, Let not the foot of pride come against me: for well he
was assured, that if pride set in a foot against him, he should have extreme
wrong offered him. Pride then being one of the sins of Sodom, it is manifest,
that there was no religion there, no seeking after God, nor any care of his
worship or service, neither was there any justice, judgment, or equity in the
land, but all kind of oppression and wrong, all grace and goodness was exiled
thence, neither was there any place for virtue and godliness in that place:
and therefore no marvel it was, if God brought such a fearful destruction
upon such a proud place and people; for pride brings always destruction with
it, as Solomon says, Pride goes before destruction, Pro. 16.18.
and an high mind before a fall. So that a man is never near a mischief,
till he grow proud: for the^ he procures Gods hatred toward him, as it is in
ye Prophet, Amos 6.8.
The Lord has sworn by himself, I hate the excellency of Jacob. And this
hatred that God bears against pride, Iam. 4.6.
provoke him to resist the proud, to cross them, and by sundry means to
revenge himself upon them. Zeph. 2.10.
This shall they have for their pride, says the Prophet. The Lord will be
terrible unto them, as he has threatened by the Prophet Jeremy, saying, Behold,
I come unto thee, Ier. 50.31, 32.
O proud man: And, The proud shall stumble and fall, and none shall raise him
up, and I will kindle a fire in his cities, and it shall devour all about him.
All these threatenings against pride, did the LORD bring upon Sodom and her
Cities, in such sort as they are here remembered, for an example unto all
posterityes: the same threatenings he will likewise bring upon all those that
are infected with it. The second sin of Sodom, fulness of bread.


The second sin of Sodom, was fulness of bread. By bread is signified all such
meats and drinks as are used for the nutriment of the body, which this people
of Sodom did use with such saturity, and ingurgitation, as did not relieve
nature, but destroy Grace: Nature is content with a little, Grace with less;
but where this fullness and repletion of bread is, there nature is depraved,
and grace destroyed. This sin is the bait which the devil uses, Gluttony,
the devils bait.
to provoke men to yield unto all his temptations; for as the Faulconer, when
he would call his Hawke to his fist, does not hold out his bare fist unto her,
but shows her a piece of flesh, unto which she willingly comes, and so is
taken: so the devil, when he would tempt a man to any sin, he offers him the
bait of deliciousness, knowing that the more the body is repleate, the more
empty is the soul of all grace and goodness. One cause why Dives was so
unmerciful toward poor Lazarus was, because he fared deliciously every day;
for a full belly is never touched with the feeling of others miseries. The
cause why the Israelites were not sorry for the affliction of Joseph, Amos.
6.4.6.
nor pitied the distressed estate of their brethren, was, because they ate the
lambs of the flock, and the calves of the stall, and drunk their wine in
bowls. The cause why every man among them neyed after his neighbors wife,
was, Ier. 5.8.
because they did rise in the morning like fed horses. And the cause why they
committed idolatry, and worshipped the golden calves which Aaron made them,
was, because they crammed themselves excessiuely with meat and drink, and that
made them forget God, which had done so great things for them. Whereby it is
evident, that the repletion of the belly is the confusion of the soul, and
that the devil has the greatest advantage against us to tempt us, and we the
least strength to withstand him in this repletion and fullness of bread: Psalm
69.23.
therefore David calls the table of delicious feeders, a snare: for even as
birds are caught in that place where they come to feed: even so are they that
fare deliciously, caught in the Devils net, whiles they feed. Pro. 23.20.
For this cause, the Wise man forbids us to be companions with those which
cramme themselves with flesh, lest by eating and drinking excessiuely, we give
the devil advantage to tempt us to some grievous sin. And in like manner did
Almighty God forbid the Prophet to go into ye house of feasting, Ier. 16.8.
to sit there to eat and drink: for as he says in another place, Hos. 13.6.
When men are filled, their hearts are exalted, and then they forget God. And
as this fullness of bread plungeth the soul into many inexplicable dangers,
and makes it subject to diverse temptations: so is this unmeasurable feeding
hurtful and obnoxious to the body: for when the stomach receives such
abundance, and so many kinds of meat and drink, it is oppressed rather then
relieved. Therefore says Solomon, Eccle^. 5.11.
that the saciety of the rich will not suffer him to sleep: his body is so
distempered by his feeding, that his quiet rest departs from him. We esteem
the goodness of a medicine, Meat and drink to be taken like a medicine.
not by the pleasantnes, nor by ye great quantity, but by the wholesome and
good operation of it: so ought we to esteem of meat, not by the deliciousness
of it, nor by the abundance of it, but by the health it brings to our bodies.
Nothing breeds a surfeit sooner, then this fullness of bread; and out of all
doubt, this unmeasureable feeding has brought many to an untimely death. If
therefore thou will keep thy body in health, use thy meat and drink as thou
use medicines; that is, seldom and in small measure: Five cautions to be
observed in eating and drinking.
for in five things do we especially offend in eating and drinking.

First, when we make it our first work in the morning, being no sooner out of
our beds, but our mind is upon our meat; for which cause Solomon denounces a
woe unto that land, whose Princes eat in the morning: for such as eat in the
morning, are fit for nothing all the day after. Secondly, we offend in eating
and drinking, when we are too curious and nice in our diet, not contenting our
selves with ordinary and common meats and drinks, but longing after strange
and unusual things, and those must be most costly and curiously dressed: this
was the sin of the Israelites, Numb. 11.6.
which loathing Manna, desired flesh for their lust: for which curiosity of
theirs, God destroyed them, even whiles the meat was in their mouths. Plutar.
in Romans Apoph. Caution 3.
And the Emperor Augustus did cause one Erotes, a Lieutenant in Egypt, to be
naild to the mast of a ship, because he bought a Partridge and ate it. And our
Savior Christ notes curious feeding, as a fault in the rich Glutton, even
because he fared deliciously.

The third sin in eating and drinking, is, when we eat and drink without
measure, not respecting what will suffice nature. Our Tables are called mensae,
as some think, a mensura, to teach us to measure our appetite, and not to eat
and drink vnmeasurably; for even as that rain, which comes down meekely and
gently upon the earth, does most good, and makes the earth most fruitful: so
that meat which is taken in measure, does most benefit the body and soul: and
this is the measure we must observe, we must not eat much, but rather for
necessity then for lust; then we must not eat nor drink often: and lastly,
we must not eat nor drink of diverse and sundry sorts: for all these things
do make our eating and drinking sinful and hurtful.

Fourthly, we offend in this kind, 4
when we study and devise what to eat or drink. These persons are compared to
those beasts, which are always either eating or chewing the cud: so these
persons are either always eating, or devising what to eat. This was the sin
of the sons of Hely; 1. Sam. 2 13, 14, 15.
they were not content with those parts of the sacrifice which the Law had
provided for them, but they found out new devices, and sometimes they would
have sodden flesh, and sometime they would have raw, sometime without fat, and
sometime fat and all. These deuisers are they, that make their belly their God.

Lastly, we offend in eating and drinking, when we greedily devour the
creatures like dogs, which have it no sooner in their mouths, but it is down
their throats. This was ye sin of Esau, who coming hungry from hunting, Genesis
25.30. Sine me haurire: Tr^mel.
desired his brother to feed him quickly, or to suffer him to devour those red
pottage. But he had better have taken more leisure, and eaten more advisedly:
for he lost the prerogative of his birthright by his greediness. And because
man should not devour his meat and drink with greediness, Nature has given
man a less mouth, then many creatures which are less then he; to teach man by
so small a receptacle, to receive his meat and drink with time and leisure.

Thus have we heard the five things, wherein we offend in eating and drinking.

Now this fullness of bread is such a grievous sin in the sight of God, that
he has sworn he will never purge it. And the reason is, Esaias 22.13, 14.
because we are called to other duties. Non nati sumus ad libidinem, hoc
possimus facere, sed non est opus nostrum: We are not borne into the world,
neither do we live in the world, to give our selves to delicious and full
feeding, to feasting and banqueting, nor to fulfill our own lusts and
desires; we may do these things, if we will run headlong into our own
mischief: but this is not our calling, it is not that we are bound to do, it
is not the work which we are commanded and enjoined to perform: and
therefore, as it is Crimen laesae maiestatis, a capital and treasonable crime
for an Ambassador, Fullness of bread most displeasing unto Almighty God.
to execute his charge contrary to the limitation of his profession: even so
it is most displeasing unto Almighty God, when we walk contrary to our
calling, crossing the end of our creation. No marvel then, if Almighty God
took such a fearful vengeance upon this people, which walked so contrary unto
him, filling themselves with bread, and cramming themselves with flesh, when
indeed the Lord calls men to weeping and mourning, Esaias. 22 12.
to baldness and girding about with sackcloth.

The third sin of Sodom was idleness.
The third sin of Sodom and her people, was idleness, which was twofold in
this people. First, they gave themselves to their ease, to unthriftiness and
sluggishnesse, not following their callings laboriously and industriously, but
living loosely and remissely, giving themselves to all dissolute and unthrifty
courses: This may be gathered out of the 19 Chapter of Genesis, the 4. verse,
where it is said, that all the men of the City, even from the young to the
old, all people out of all quarters compassed Lots house about, to have the
me^ brought out unto them, that they might know them. From whence it may be
gathered, that they were an idle and unthrifty company, giving themselves to no
good employment, but rather to vain and dissolute exercises. The second kind
of idleness in this people was, a careless security, and a certain respectles
regard, wherewith they were so possessed, that they never thought upon dangers,
they feared nothing. Abraham had slain ye five kings, which would have made
them tributarie, he recovered all the spoil, and gave it to the King of
Sodom, so that now they had no enemy to be afraid of; they had peace and
plenty, and therefore they lived idly, that is, securely and carelessly, fearing
no dangers, preventing no mischiefs.

As the pride of this people provoked God to resist them, and as their fulness
of bread gave the devil a greater advantage to overcome them by his manifold
temptations, so their Idleness made them a burden to the Earth: They were a
coomber and a surcharging trouble to ye place of their abode, living
unthriftily and unprofitably both to themselves, and to the land where they
dwelt. Luke 13.7 Idle persons a burden to the earth.
The fig tree in the Gospel being barren and unfruitful, is said to trouble
the ground; so those persons which live idly, do but trouble the world, and
ouercharge the earth: for which cause the Be drives from the hiue the Drone,
which takes no pains, but deuoures the honey, which others by their great
labor do get and bring in; teaching the Magistrates of the earth their duty,
which is, to correct, with all sharpnes of discipline, those unthrifty and
unserviceable Drones, which live idly in the common wealth, trifling out their
time in continual lazines, as though there never had a law bin given to the
sons of Adam to labor, nor to the daughters of Eve, with the sweat of their
brows to get their living. Pro. 6.6. All creatures in heaven, earth and hell,
painful in their places, but only man.
Solomon sends the sluggard to the Pismire, to consider her ways, and to
learn wisdom: for she having no guide, governor, or ruler, provides meat in
Summer, and gathers food in harvest. Man therefore may be much ashamed of
himself, that having reason to guide him, nature to direct him, law to govern
him, grace to rule him, lims strong and able for performance, yet provides
not, gathers not, labors not, but like a Drone consumes his days in
idleness, living unprofitably and vnseruiceably both to himself and others.

God sanctified not his rest, before he had finished his labor. The Angels in
heaven attend in their places, and stand before their Creator, and with all
alacrity, readiness, Job. 1.7. 2. Pet. 5.8.
and industry fulfill his will.

Job. 1.7. 2. Pet. 5.8.
The devil himself is said to compass the earth, and to walk about, seeking
whom he may devour. Seeing therefore God, Angels, Bees, Pismires, and the
despised worms of the earth, do all of them in their kinds and places give
themselves to labor: Nay, seeing the devil himself spends not his time idly,
they are worse then the devil, which suffer the days of work to slide away,
without laboring in the works of their vocation. Idleness, as Barnard says,
Idleness the sink of all lawless temptations.
is a sink of all lustful and lawless temptations. What was the cause that
Aegisthus became an Adulterer?

In promptu causa est, desidiosus erat. Idleness was the cause that provoked
him thereunto. And if you will know the cause of so many robberies in the
fields, ryots in the streets, disorders in every place: in a word, all these
and many more inconveniences proceed and grow from idleness; for even as that
water that has no curre^t, does in short time corrupt, and become offensive:
so that body or mind which exercises it self about no employment, becomes a
very sink of all lewdness and disorder. Pro. 24.
Solomon went by the field of the sluggard, and lo, it was all grown over with
thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof. And as the field of the
slothful is covered with nettles and thorns; Idle persons corrupt both in
body and mind.
so his body is ouer-growne with infirmities, his mind corrupted with the
infection of sin, his conscience destitute of a good testimony to it self,
and his soul void of all hope of eternal happiness. God has placed us in
this world, as laborers in his vineyard, as soldiers in his camp, as
travelers to seek a country to rest our selves in, as cursitors or runners
in a race: whereby we may gather, that idleness is not our profession: for we
cannot obtain, except we run the race: we cannot overcome, except we fight
manfully: we cannot have that penny, except we labor in the vineyard: the
fruitles tree must be cast into the fire. The unprofitable servant must be
bound hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness. This world no place of rest.
Therefore whosoever rests here in this world, where he should labor, shall
labor in the world to come, where he thinks to rest. Our Savior Christ
promises his disciples, that when he should rest, they should rest also. But
when did our Savior Christ rest, says Barnard? not in this world: for he went
about, doing good, and rejoiced as a mighty Giant to run his course:
therefore his disciples must not look to sit, and rest them in this world. It
is a shame, says Augustine, that the Sun, whose going out is from the end of
the heaven, and whose compass is to the ends of the same, should take any man
in his bed: for may not the Sun rightly say to such a sluggard, I traveled a
greater journey yesterday, then thou did, and art thou in bed after me this
morning? It should seem, that in Jobs time, Job. 30 5.
there was very straight order taken for such as lived idly, and unthriftily:
for they were chased forth from among men, and every one showted at them as at
a thief. 2 Thessalonians. 3.10.
And the Apostle Saint Paul makes a strict decree against them, that such as
would not labor, should not eat. So much has Idleness been always detested
among good men: and therefore no marvel if God brought such a fearful
destruction upon Sodom, whose Inhabitants lived in this abominable and
detestable sin.

But this people was not only possessed with a careless and secure slumber of
Idleness in their bodies, A second kind of Idleness which was in the Sodomits.
but in their souls also; they did not only live loosely and remissely in
their ordinary vocations and callings, but they lived without all fear of any
imminent danger, or future calamity that should fall upon them for their
wickedness: they lived sinfully in their lives, and securely in their hearts:
Their sins cried for wrath, but they cried, Peace, peace, there shall no
harm happen unto us: they provoked the Lord to vengeance, and yet they
promised themselves safety. This slumber of the soul is worse then that of
the body: for it is a present forerunner of destruction: when men shall say,
Peace and safety, 2 Thessalonians. 5.3.
then shall come upon them sudden destruction, as travel upon a woman with
child, and they shall not escape. Matt. 24.23, 24.
Our Savior Christ dehorteth us from this security, by the fearful example
of the old world; for whiles they in that age did eat and drink, and buy and
sell, and marry wives and were married, the flood came and drowned them all: so
if we live and lie snorting upon the careless beds of sinful security, the
wrath of God will come suddenly upon us and destroy us. 2. Cor. 5.11. 1. Pet.
1.17.
For this cause the Apostle persuades the fear of the Lord unto men. And S.
Peter exhorts men, to pass the time of their pilgrimage here in this world
in fear: and Solomon pronounces those blessed, Pro. 28.14.
that live always in fear: for they which harden their hearts, shall fall
into evil.

This security is one of the signs, Security a forerunner of destruction.
which shall go before that great and final destruction of the world at the
last day: and it is said, that the day of the Lord shall come as a thief in
the night; even when men are in the dead sleep of sin, then shall the last
judgment come upon them. Whiles the Mariner sleeps at the helm, the ship is
soon run against a rock. Judge. 4.21.
Iael does easily strike a nail in the temples of Sisera, whiles he sleeps
under a covering. 1. Sam. 30.16, 17.
David coming upon the Amalechites, and finding them eating and drinking and
dancing, slew every man of them, and recovered all the spoil. So when men
fear nothing, but pass their time in pleasures, delights and vanities,
without fear of God or his judgments, then does God come upon them suddenly,
and destroys them without mercy. Mat. 24.48.
Therefore our Savior Christ gives every one warning of this careless security,
and accounts him an ill servant, that shall say in his heart, My master does
defer his coming, and so begins to eat and drink with the drunken, and
smite his fellow servants: The master of this careless and secure servant shall
come in a day, says our Savior Christ, when he looks not for him, and in an
hour that he is not aware of, and will cut him off, and give him his portion
with Hypocrites, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. Seeing therefore
this people of Sodom labored of so dangerous a Lithargy, they were justly
surprised with so strange and fearful a judgment.

The fourth sin of Sodom.
The fourth sin of Sodom, was, They did not strengthen ye hand of the poor,
they were unmercifully, uncharitable and hard-hearted toward the needy: and
surely they could not otherwise be; for a proud heart, a full belly, and a
vain, careless, idle head never regards ye distressed estate of those that are
in want and misery. Other sins provoke God to wrath and indignation: but this
sin prouokes him to deny mercy, and to become inexorable, according to that
saying of the Apostle, James. 2.13.
There shall be judgment merciles to him that shows no mercy And the reason
why God will show no mercy to those that are mercylesse unto the poor, either
in oppressing them, or in not relieuing them, is, because he takes all
unmercifully and uncharitable dealing with the poor, to be an injury done unto
his own person, according to that saying of Solomon, He that oppresses the
poor, reprocheth him that made him.

Thus you may well perceive, that all the wrong that is done to the poor, the
LORD does take it as done to himself: for in every place throughout all the
whole Scripture, the Lord GOD does profess himself to be the Guardian and
keeper of the poor and needy, God the Guardian of the poor.
and acknowledges them to be his Wards and Pupils: and therefore God will
revenge himself in justice without mercy, upon all those, which either deal
uncharitably or injuriously with them. Whereupon the Lord expostulates the
matter with his people, Esaias. 3.15.
and demands of them, What they had to do to grind the faces of the poor?
As though it were a thing that they could not justify. And to the end that all
the cruel and unmerciful of the world might know, that GOD will not suffer
the wrongs that are done to the poor, to escape vnreue^ged, he proclaims it
to the world by the Prophet David, Ps. 12.5, 6.
that for the comfortless troubles sake of the needy, and because of the deep
sighing of the poor, I will up, says the Lord, and help every one from him
that swells against him, and will set them at rest. As if he should say,
Though I pass over other sins, and bear with patience other indignities,
Though God bear with other sins, yet he will not bear with the sin of
unmercifulness. Pro. 22.23.
though I sit still and wink at other transgressions, yet when the case
concerns the poor, when my Orphans and Wards are wronged, then I will up,
says the Lord, I Will bear no longer, but I will revenge their cause and relieve
them. For which cause Solomon gives all the unmerciful dogs of the world
warning, not to bite nor devour these silly sheep: for the Lord will defend
their cause, says he, and spoil the soul of those that spoil them. The
poor, says S. Augustine, are Gods barnes, in which except we lay our earthly
treasures of pity and compassion in this world, we shall not find that
heavenly treasure of everlasting life in the world to come.

Many and fearful are the plagues which are threatened against those which
deal unmercifully with the poor. Their prayers are abominable; The prayers of
the unmerciful, are abominable.
the Lord will not hear them, though they cry unto him in the bitterness of
their soul. Pro. 21.13.
He that stops his ear at the cry of the poor, shall also cry, and not be
heard.

In which words, Salomo^ does give us two things to understand; first, that the
unmercifully men shall cry, how rich, how honorable, how potent and mighty
soever they be, yet the Lord will lay some grievous thing or other upon them,
either in health or in sickness, either in this world, or in the world to
come, that shall make them cry, as upon their deathbed: the guiltynesse of
their own conscience, the fear of death, the horror of hell, and dread of
damnation. If God lay these things upon them, they will be enforced to cry: but
if not, yet certainly they shall cry in hell, with their fellow Dives; Psalm.
104.21. Psa. 147.9. Hose^. 2.21. Gen 4.10.
for cry they shall, as Solomon says: but the second thing is, they shall not
be heard. The Lions roar, and the Lord hears them: The young Ravens cry, and
he hears them: he hears the heavens, he hears the blood of those that are
murdered, and indeed he hears all things; but an unmercifully man, he shall
cry, and not be heard. Dives is a notable president to all those that are
dogged and hard-hearted toward the poor; he cried not in this world, he had
his pleasure, as many more rich men have: but for all that, the saying of
Solomon proved true upon him; for though he cried not in this world, yet he
cried in hell, I am tormented in this flame. But was he heard? Alas, no, he
could not have so much as a drop of cold water granted him. This therefore is
one plague, and a fearful one also, which shall happen to all unmercifully,
cruel and uncharitable persons: They shall cry, and not be heard.

The second misery, that shall befall those that do not stre^gthen the hand of
the poor, nor succor them in their miseryes, is, they shall not enjoy ye
things which they chiefly desire to enjoy, their present hope shall be
frustrate, and when they think themselves to be the surest of their wished
desires, even then shall they be deprived of al their hopes, and shall never see
the fruits of their labors. Amos. 5.11.
This does the Lord threaten by the Prophet, Forasmuch, he says, as your
treading is upon the poor, ye have built houses of hewne stone, but ye shall
not dwell in them, ye have planted pleasant vineyards, Job. 20.20.
but ye shall not drink wine of them. This is the misery of the unmerciful,
they shall purchase, for others to inherit, they shall build houses, for
others to dwell in, they shall get and scrape together, but others shall enjoy
their hopes, and carry away the fruits of their labors. Nabal, that foolish
Churl, may serve for an example to confirm the truth of this unto us, who out
of his hard, and incompassionate heart denied his bread, his water, and his
flesh to David and his followers in the wilderness. This Nabal did sheare his
sheep, but he never lived to sell his wool; he made a great feast, but he
never digested his meat: for he became as a stone, and dyed in ten days
after. So shall the hopes of all the unmerciful be frustrate, and they shall
not be partakers of their wished desires, but leave their labors for others to
enjoy.

Now, The sin of unmercifulness provoke God to punish a whole land. Amos
8.4, 8.
if the sin of unmercifulness did only provoke God to inflict private and
particular punishments upon men, it were the more to be borne withal: but
indeed it procures the fierce wrath of God, and his heavy judgments upon a
whole land, and against a people or nation in general: For so the Lord has
threatened by his Prophet, Hear this, ye that swallow up the poor, that ye
may make the needy of the land to fail, shall not the land tremble for this,
and every one mourn that dwells therein? So that, unmerciful men do not
only provoke the vengeance of God upon themselves, but to the land wherein
they inhabit, and to the people of the land where they dwell. No marvel then,
if the Lord God brought such a fearful and strange punishment upon Sodom and
Gomorrah, and the people of that country, seeing this sin of unmercifulness
was rooted amongst them so, that they did not strengthen the hand of the poor.

The last misery that shall befall unmerciful men, is, that last and dreadful
speech, which shall be pronounced unto them at the day of judgment, Depart,
ye cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels. The
unmerciful shall have the curse of God, which is woe everlasting.
Then shall all the unmerciful of the world know and feel, to their woeful
experience, that there is a God that reuengeth the cause of the poor and
needy. Then they shall pay dear for all that they have gotten by oppression
and wrong, and by hard and unmerciful dealing. Then shall they have as much
torments, as ever they had pleasure, and as little comfort, as ever they had
mercy: depart they must from the presence and favor of God for evermore. If
unmerciful and uncharitable persons would but think of such a day, of such a
speech, of such a departure, and of such a fire, they would distribute and give
to the poor, they would make friends of their unrighteous Mammon, that in the
world to come they might be received into everlasting habitations, and not
thrust into everlasting fire.

The last sin of Sodom, The last sin of Sodom.
was that unnatural sin, which taking the name of that city, has carried
it ever since, and is called Sodomy. In speaking whereof, I will follow the
advice of Simmachus, who says, that it is the safest, not once to name it.
Paul had not known what lust meant, but that the Law said, Thou shall not
lust. So that sin took occasion by the Law, Romans 7.8.
to work concupiscence in Paul. So, if I should discourse of this sin, you
might happily say unto me, We had not known what this sin meant, if you had
not taught us. Therefore Solo^ would not make any law against parricide, lest,
whiles he went about to repress it by law, he should teach it rather. So if I
should lay open this sin at large, I should rather teach the world it, then
do any thing else. I will therefore pass it over in silence, as not worthy
once to be named.

A comparison between the sins of Sodo^ and the sins of England
Thus have we heard the destruction of Sodom, and the sins of Sodom, which
were the cause of her destruction: and now it remains, that we compare the
sins of Sodom, and the sins of England together: For, if we find our sins
to be as great as the sins of Sodom, we have just cause to expect some such
like fearful judgment to be inflicted upon us, as was upon that City,
people, and country.

And first concerning the sin of pride, it is notorious, that we of England are
no whit inferior to those of Sodom in this sin: For, whether we consider
pride, as it is the botch of Nobility and Honor, or the leprosy of riches,
or the bile of apparel, or the scourge of authority, or the madness of
building, or the bane of good learning, certain it is, that pride was never at
such an height, as it is amongst us in this age. The pride of England equal to
the pride of Sodo^.
The Noble man will not be reproved, the rich man must not be mated, ye gay
coat must be honored, authority will not yield, sumptuous building must look
over the whole country, and learning makes us swell above the banks of modesty
and sobriety: So every one thinks better of himself then of others, and every
one in the height of their pride scorneth another: and hereupon comes those
dissensions, oppositions, contentions, divisions, envy and emulation amongst
us: Judges. 5.16.
for as Deborah sung of Ruben, so may we sing of our selves, The divisions of
England are great thoughts of heart. Ask the poor country Farmer, whereupon
it is, that such unreasonable fines are exacted of him, why his rents are so
rackt and enhaunst, and he will tell thee, it is to maintain the pride of his
Landlord and Land-lady. Hospitality, charity, patience, humility, and
almost all virtue both divine and moral, are by pride exiled and banished this
land. The subject is like the Prince, the servant like the master, the maid
like the mistress; and such a confusion and disorder has pride brought into
this land, that every one has forgotten their duty, calling and condition.
The faces of the Elders are not had in honor, that ancient reverence, which
sometime was given to the sacred calling of the Clergy, pride has now turned
into great contempt; devotion is scorned, we give nothing, for pride persuades
us, that all is too little for our selves. We forgive nothing; for our pride
still prouokes us to cruelty and revenge. That humble, homely habit, which
kings in former times have used in their apparel, is now of every base
unthrift and prodigal companion scorned. Those frugall fashions, and course
stuffes, both for woofe and workmanship, which ancient times delighted in, are
now turned into veluets and silks of most strange and hellish devices. The
pride and profusion in apparel, together with the fashions and inventions
which are usual in England, were not once heard of in Sodom, in the day of her
iniquity. Our women, as soon as they rise, put on a Pedlers pack upon their
backs, they paint their faces, pin their ruffes, frizzle their hair, and
then their days work is done. Many there be, whose apparel is more worth,
then all their estate beside: and very few there be, but their apparel is
better then themselves. Our Savior Christ noted the rich glutto^, for that he
was clothed in purple and fine linen: but how many may he brand with ye mark
of his heavy displeasure, which amongst us go as brave as he every day! O that
laws could redress ye pride of England, shame suppress it, or preaching
break the neck of it! but all men and women have so generally taken it up,
that neither laws, shame, nor preaching can take it away. There is nothing
that has undone Gentlemen, and men of other rank, so much as pride and
profusion. Neither are we ever to expect or look for happy and good days,
till such time as authority devise some means, to purge out of the body of
this Realm, the superfluous humor of this sin: for it confounds all,
consumes all, undoes all: Thus by woeful experience we have found our pride to
be grown to the highest pitch, so that the pride of Sodom could not exceed it.

Fulness of bread in England equal to that of Sodom.
Now in the second place, we are to compare the excess in meat and drink,
which was in Sodom, to that of our country of England, of whom it may be
truly said, that we build houses, as though we should never dye, and we eat
and drink, as though we should dye to morrow. The very creatures cry out upon
us for this sin, because we abuse them and kill them, not for our necessity
only, but also for our excess and riot: we kill them, not to eat only, but
to eat them deliciously and intemperately. Our fasting days are despised, and
we esteem it a point of superstitious Popery, to observe days, and abstain
from meats. Amb. Epist. 82. ad Eccle. ver.
The Church in the time of Saint Ambrose condenmed ye Iouianists for heretics,
because they called fasting, delirium, a mockery or madness. And have not we
them amongst us at this day, that hold fasting to be superstition? And although
in former times, the time of Lent was approved and commanded by nine several
Councels and Synodes, besides the Canon of the Apostles commanding the same,
yet we, making a God of our bellies, do, without any difference, serve the
beastly desires of the same. And although authority has taken order often, to
restrain this our excess in eating and drinking, yet when did we pull one
dish from our tables, or withhold one morsel from our bowels, in sign of
obedience to authority, and of contrition toward God? But what do I speak
of fasting, seeing our souls abhor it, and in stead thereof have entertained
feasting, in which we show our selves to be Gentiles rather then Christians?
Our feasts are the feasts of Sodom, and we imitate that villainous Emperor
Vitellius, Suet. in vita Vitell. sect. 13.
in his insatiable gluttony, of whom we read, that at one Supper he had
prepared for him 2000. sundry sorts of fish, and 7000. sorts of Foul. So the
multitude of dishes, and the variety of services, is our glory at our feasts.
And whereas one wood does yield sufficient sustenance for many Elephants, the
earth, the air, the sea will hardly minister provision for one of our feasts:
but still we say, We are sorry we have no cheer: and therefore it is not
possible, that the excess of Sodom in their fullness of bread, should be
greater then ours in England.

The third sin of Sodom, was, Idleness of England equal to that of Sodom.
idleness; in which sin, if we compare our selves with them, we shall find
our selves nothing inferior unto them. The Steward in the Gospel, that wasted
his masters goods, confessed freely that he could not work, and that he was
ashamed to beg: but we have them amongst us, that can work, and yet are not
ashamed to beg, being so impudent in this kind, yt neither shame nor laws can
restrain them. The Theaters, the Tauerns, ye Bowle-alleyes, the
Brothel-houses, ye fields, the streets of Sodom did never swarm more thick
with such vermin, then ours do, to the great displeasure of Almighty God, and
the unspeakable detriment of our country and Commonwealth. The rich sit down
to eat and drink, and rise up to play. The poor laborer was never more idle
in his calling, the^ at this day; he has learned to make two days work of
one, and he makes no conscience how he gets his wages, nor how he slubbers up
his work. The Tradesman does not live on the labor of his hands, but by the
tricks of his wits; and therefore is every thing so deceitful and full of
slight, because idle hands have the handling of it. Others there be, which
take the pains to rise to their dinner, and then walk to a play, and so
return home by a whore-house, the^ to supper, and lastly to bed: and thus they
pass their time from day to day, as unprofitably, as ever did Marg^tes, of
whom it is said, that he did nothing in all his life that might tend to good.
Thus our Land is become a poole of standing waters, and a hiue of Drones, and
except Authority draw forth the sword of correction against the idle lozells
of this Land, they will in time devour all the sweet from the paynefull and
industrious hand: for where no Oxen are, there the crib is empty; and where
none are that be paynefull, there is but want and beggary. Peter must be
commanded to cast forth his Nets: The watchman must be charged to stand upon
his watch, and not upon his honor, ease and reputation: Caesar must not
sleep, Suet. in vita Clau. 33.
when he should administer justice, nor the Captain must not be in the
Tavern, when he should be in the field, nor the Tradesman, nor the Gentleman,
nor the Laborer, must in no wise have idleness stick in their fingers ends;
for as it was one sin amongst the rest, that procured the overthrow of Sodom:
so will it together with other sins, hasten our judgment upon us, Want of
mercy and charity in England without comparison.
seeing we have it in as great abou^dance amongst us, as ever they had it
amongst them.

And now order leads me to ye comparison of a sin practiced amongst us,
wherein indeed we suffer no comparison, which is vnmercyfulnes toward the
poor and needy. Our unmercifully and uncharitable dealing with the poor, was
not heard of in the day of Sodoms iniquity; for their uncharitableness only
extended it self to strangers, as far as can be gathered by History. They
were inhospitales: they harbored no strangers, but if any stranger happened to
come into this country, they abused him strangely and villainously: and for
this cause they would have used Lot so il, because he entertained and lodged
strangers: following herein the custom of other nations, but especially of the
Egyptians, who offered al strangers that arrived there, upon the altar of
Busiris, being sometimes King of Egypt: Pined. in Job, tom. 2. in cap. 31.
in whose reign there was a great drought in the land for the space of nine
years: whereupon Busiris sent into Grecia for certain soothsayers to be sent
him, to the end that by them he might be certainly informed of the cause of
this drought: unto whom was sent Thasius, a man very expert in this kind, who
certified the king, that the ouerflowing of Nilus could not be procured, but by
the blood of some stranger offered up to Jupiter in sacrifice. Whereupon
Busiris -- fies Iouis hostia primas
Inquit, et Aegypto tu dabis hospes aquam:
And so offered this soothsayer stranger unto Jupiter: and ever after, these
Egyptians, in any calamity or distress, used to offer the strangers that
arrived amongst them, upon the altar of Busiris. From which custom of the
Egyptians, other nations became very barbarous, cruel, and unmerciful unto
strangers. But amongst us, Manasseh eats Ephraim, and Ephraim eats Manasseh,
and both of them eat Judah. And it may rightly be said of us, as the Prophet
sometimes said of his people, There is no mercy in the land. For whereas
mercy and charity consists in giving and forgiving, our hard and
vncompassionate hearts will suffer us to give nothing, and our malicious minds
will permit us to forgive nothing: there was sometimes an age of giving, and
lending: but now our pride, our covetousness, our self-love, persuade us,
that all is too little for our selves; and therefore this modern age neither
gives nor lends; It may be, when we dye, then we will and bequeath, but as long
as we live, we keep and hold fast. And surely, if the most charitable man that
lives in this age, would but compare that which he gives to the poor, with
that he spends and bestows idly, vainly, and upon his pleasures, he himself
would cry shame upon his charity. The crying and complaining of the poor in
our streets, does witness against us, that we do not strengthen ye hand of the
poor. There was an age, when men would have forborne much, and have forgiven
much: but now we go to law for every trifling trespass, and we take our
debtors by the throat, and cast them in prison, till they pay the uttermost
farthing. But it may be, the Sodomits were as unmercifully as we, in giving and
forgiving: but the name of an Incloser was not so much as heard of amongst
them: and happy had it been for England, if Enclosure had never been known.
Against Inclosers. Esa. 5.8, 9, 10.
Woe be to these Inclosers, even that woe denounced against them by the Prophet:
for they are the unmerciful men of the world, they leave no room for the
poor in the land, they appropriate that to themselves, which custom has made
common: injurious they are to common society, they pull down houses, overthrow
towns, send men, women and children of all sorts, the widow, and the
fatherless, from their known and accustomed dwelling places, to seek where
they can thrust in their heads. Injurious they are to Religion, Tho. More,
Eutop. lib. 1.
and to the worship and service of God: for either they pull down Churches, or
if they let them stand, it is not for devotion, but either to crooue their
sheep in, or else for some base and irreligious service: Injurious they are to
commonwealth, by straitning, stepping, or turning high ways out of their
right course, into a wrong course, so that travelers either cannot pass at
all, or else with great danger and fear of robbing and killing: they destroy
tillage, whereby corn is grown both very scarce and extreme dear. And now
that they have enclosed and converted their Enclosure into pasture, they farm
out their grounds at so dear rate, that Butter, Cheese, Milk, Beef, Mutto^,
Veale, is at so excessive a price, as never before among our forefathers. The
fields of England were sometimes compared to Christ's coat, which was without
seame: so were they either without hedge* or ditch: but now they resemble a
beggars cloak, being full of seames, pieces, and patches. These unmerciful men
were not heard of in Sodom; for of Sodom it is said, that it was a plain
country: Genesis 13.11. and 19.29.
therefore shall the Sodomites rise up in judgment at the last day against our
Inclosers. Cymon, the Athenian, commanded al hedges and pales to be plucked up,
and taken away from his grounds, to the end that both Citizens and strangers
might have free access into his fields for any thing they stood in need of:
but the Inclosers of our age do set down hedges and pales, where never any was,
to keep out both strangers and home-borne persons, and to abridge them of
that which custom once made common to all: therefore that heathen man shall
rise up in judgment against the Inclosers of our age.

Neither was the name of Engrosser heard of in the day of Sodoms iniquity:
These are they, Against Engrossers. Amos 8.5.
which swallow up the poor; for when they have got a commodity into their
hands, they make the Ephah small, and the shekell great, and falsify the
weights by deceit: then they buy the poor for silver, and the needy for
shoes, and sell the refuze of the wheat, and their commodities at their own
price. This is a wicked generation; for they appropriate that to themselves,
which nature has made common to others: they care not who weep, so they may
laugh: they seek to bring all the water to their own mill, neither do they
respect the public good of the Commonwealth, but only their own private
profit and gain. Nature does abhor this kind of oppression. For as it were
an unnatural thing in the body, if one member should draw unto it all the
blood and nourishment, which the other members should be strengthened and
preserved withal; so is that man an unnatural member in the politic body of
the Commonwealth, which by engrossing, forestalling, and regrating, does get
into his hands any commodity to enrich himself, without due respect of the
good of others. C. de M^n. lib. Iube.
The civil law does condemn these kind of men, as most pernicious and
hurtful to the State where they live, and therefore all their goods are by the
civil law confiscate, and they themselves for ever banished: and the
Magistrate which did conniue and wink at such persons, was to lose fifty
pounds, for suffering such persons to practice such unlawful means to enrich
themselves by. And all Divines do hold, that Monopolies are directly against
the eight Commandment, Thou shall not steal: proouing it to be a kind of
public theft. And yet though nature abhor it, the Civil law condemn it,
and the Law of God forbid it; the practice of it is common amongst us at this
day, and many have risen to the height of that greatness which now they enjoy,
only by this means, to the great dishonor of Almighty God, contempt of law,
undoing of many hundreds in particular, and the public detriment of the
Commonwealth in general.

The unmerciful usury of our age far exceeds all that ever has been before
us: Against usury.
All ages before us have condemned it for a sin, but we have those in this
age, that dare undertake to defend it to be no sin. Usury has always drawn
her name from biting: but now she may well have her name of devouring; for
usury, as it is practiced amongst us, does not only bite, but devour. The
Usurer in time past was excommunicated, as a man not worthy of the society and
communion of Saints; he was deprived of Christian burial, as though he were
not worthy to lie in the earth, but in hell; he was not permitted to make a
will at his death, as though his goods were not his own: but now they are
accounted worthy of the best company, our Churches are profaned with their
sepulchers, and their wills and Testaments have as good approbation, as theirs,
who have gotten their goods most truly and uprightly. Thus we do not only
defend the sin which our forefathers have condemned, but we approve,
reverence, and justify the sinner, which GOD will condemn: and therefore we
surmount all that have been before us in our sins.

What shall I say to the workemasters of our time? Against the unmerciful
dealing of work masters.
Never were there such unmerciful persons heard of, as some of them be: if I
should speak what I could, it might seem incredible, that ever there should
be such unmerciful courses among Christians. These are they which grind the
faces of the poor Tradesman, by changing his wages seven times, as Jacob said
to Laban: for either they deteyne the workmans wages, or they abate them, or
they change them, or reckon them short, or pay them in such commodities as is
to be wondered at. And surely, great pity it is, yt some merciful man or other
does not take in hand to redress this oppression of the workemasters: but if
the poor Tradesman should complain, or seek redress, then he should lose
all, and clean thrust himself out of custom for all work. Thus must he
take all, and hold himself content, or lose all, and be content whether he
will or not. Was there ever such a lamentable thing heard of, that the workman
living in his calling, according to the law which God first laid upon man, In
the sweat of thy brows shall thou get thy living, should notwithstanding,
contrary to that law, be wronged of his wages which are the stay of his
living? Oh ye unmerciful men of the world, have you none to oppress but ye
poor workman? have you not read, Thou shall not muzzell the mouth of the Ox
that treads out of the corn? If man owe a duty of mercy to the unreasonable
creature which labors for him, much more does he owe a duty and right to
man, which is his own mould, and should not muzzell up the mouth of the
workman, his wife and children, by unconscionable courses in his wages: for
the like was never heard of in Sodom. Thus are we unmerciful in giving,
unmerciful in forgiving, unmerciful in lending, unmerciful in paying,
unmerciful in buying and selling: so that it may justly be said of us, which
was said of the Sodomites, They strengthen not the hand of the poor and needy.

Thus have we found, by comparing our sins with the sins of Sodom, that we
are nothing behind them in our sins; if we exceed them not, we are surely
equal with them. It is said of the sins of Sodom, that they cried in the
ears of the Lord: and surely our sins are as saucy and impudent, as ever
were theirs; and if theirs cried, Sins of England, crying sins.
ours are not tongue-tide, I warrant you: we reach home to them with our
wickedness. The sins of Sodom were grown to their full height, and so are
ours. For it is impossible, that any man or woman in these days, should add
any thing to the sins which they practice: so that as in a general plague, it
is not such a marvel at those which dye, as it is at those which escape: so in
this general infection of sin, wherewith the world at this day is defiled,
we are not so much to marvel that there be so many bad, as that there be any
good. Now when the sins of a people grow to that height, that they come to be
crying sins, then vengeance loyters not, destruction comes speedily.

When the LORD had taken knowledge of the cry of the sins of Sodom, and had
found their sins to be according to the cry, even the next day he rained fire
and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all. So, when the Lord shall find
our sins at their full height, he will speedily bring his judgments upon us,
and destroy us: for as the husbandman thrusts the sickle into the Corn, when
it is perfitly ripe; and as the Ox is brought to the slaughter, when he is
fat: so destruction comes upon men, when the measure of sin is fulfilled.

Now, The sins of England at the full height.
that our sins are at their height, and are grown to their perfect ripeness,
it is manifest; because they are equal with the sins of Sodom, as has been
already proved, and also, because there can not be any addition made in the
several humors and dispositions of men, to the sins which they practice. But
admit, these two reasons shall not be thought of truth sufficent, to confirm
the height and ripeness of our sins, I will add four infallible arguments,
to prove the ripeness of sin.

First, when sin is directly committed The height and ripeness of sin,
proved by four arguments.
and against humane society, of which sort our sins be: they are directly
against God, witness our horrible swearing and forswearing, and our fearful
blapheming of the most holy and blessed Name of GOD, and our profane
unhallowing of his Sabbath, together with the contempt of his word, and neglect
of his Ministers: They are against nature, witness ye filthy sin of Sodomy,
of which this Land of ours can not clear it self; as also the Incest, the
Parricide, the Fratricide, the Coosen-germane marriages which are committed
amongst us: and they are against humane society, witness our enclosing, our
engrossing, our cruelty, extortion, oppression, robberies, murders, and such
like.



men of note, if it were expedient to particularize.

Lastly, when the sinner is not humbled, nor amended by punishments, and
judgments inflicted upon him, it is a true mark that his sin is at the
height: and herein have we showed our selves to be incorrigible: The Lord has
threatened us with war, he has plagued us with the pestilence, he has
pinched us with scarcity and dearth, and yet we are not bettered, there is no
turning unto God, More tokens of Gods wrath against us within few years, then
of long time before.
but we fall away more and more: our sins therefore being at the height, the
fierce wrath of God must needs be even near at hand, and ready to be executed
upon us. And will you have such likely-hoods, as may persuade the truth
thereof unto us? Then write my words in tables, yt they may be monuments for
later days; for when your childrens children shall hear of them hereafter,
they will be astonished at them. The months of the year have not yet gone
about eight times in their courses, wherein the Lord has showed more tokens of
his intended and approaching wrath, then the agedst man in our Land is able to
recount of in so small a time. The winds have been so outrageous and violent,
as though the four ends of heaven had conspired to turn the foundations of
the earth vpside down. The anger of the clouds has been powered down upon us
in such abundance, as has been both unseasonable for the time, and
unprofitable for the earth. The heavens above us have been turned to brass,
and the earth beneath us into iron, which has wrought such effects, that the
child unborn shall speak of it. The sea, with unwonted inundations, has
attempted to bring the Land within the territory thereof. The fire, as an
Ambassador of the last vengeance, has most fiercely raged in all parts of our
Land. Treasons many, mighty and monstrous, never before heard of, or imagined,
have been plotted and contrived against our most dread and Sovereign, our
Queen and Royal Issue, intending the utter overthrow of Kingdom, State, and
Country.

The Commons have risen, pretending themselves wronged in their commons,
indangering the common peace and tranquillity of the Commonwealth.

The arrows of a woeful pestilence have been cast abroad at large in all the
quarters of our Land. A present dearth without scarcity, does pinch us,
bringing poverty like a wayfaring man upon us.

Our Summer is turned into Winter, our cheapenesse of all things into dearth.

The skies lowre upon us, because their Creator is angry at us. The Sun
hides from us his gladsome light, as though we were not worthy to enjoy it.

The clouds, night and day, do let fall showers of tears, bemoaning the
miseries which God has determined to bring upon us. And thus all the creatures
do threaten and foreshew our approaching destruction: yet we, more senseless
then ye insensible creatures, neither fear any thing, nor suspect any thing.
Well, there must be an end of sinning, or else God will make an end of us.
There must be a turning unto God on our parts, before God will turn unto us.
There must be a turning unto God, or else God will not turn unto us. If our
sins be the sins of Sodom, our judgment must be the judgment of Sodom. There
must be some end of our sins, or if Moses and Samuel, with all the holy
Angels, were amongst us, to bestow both their preaching and their prayers that
we might be saved, they should save but their own souls, and neither us, nor
our sons and daughters: We are not sinners of yesterday* we are not Nouices
in the school of Satan: but we have long trodden the paths of ungodliness,
and wearied our selves in the ways of wickedness. We have wearied the tongues
of ye Lords Ministers, and grieved the souls of those Preachers that have bin
sent unto us, in seeing their labor lost upon us; they have preached in season,
and out of season, they have brought out of their treasures things both new and
old, they have given us milk, and strong meat, they have come in the spirit of
gentleness, and with a rod, they have entreated, threatened, preached mercy,
and preached judgment, and yet all this without success: for we have been
like ye deaf Adder, stopping our ears, and refusing to hear the voice of the
Charmer, charming sweetly unto us.

Hearken now, I pray you, and be judges your selves, O ye inhabitants of
England, if ye men of Sodom might have had those means to have drawn them to
repentance, which you have had, would they not have brought forth fruits more
worthy of repentance then you have done? Therefore shall they rise up in ye day
of Judgment against you. Let this Alarm, given you by Sodo^ and her Cities,
be a warning unto us all, to eschew their sins, lest we burn in their
judgments. Let us al, from the highest to the lowest, fall down and kneel
before the Lord our maker: let us lie low before the footstool of his Majesty,
and with all submission both of body and mind, acknowledge our sins, and
prevent the intended wrath of God against us, by our true and hearty
repentance. For the Lord is our God, and will, and must be served of us: he is
our Lord, and will, and must be honored of us: he is our Father, and will, and
must be obeyed of us: he is our Judge, and dreadful Revenger, and will either
be feared of us, or else he will revenge himself upon us.

FINIS.

