The true report of the form and shape of a monstrous child, borne at Much
Horkesleye, a village three miles from Colchester, in the Countye of Essex,
the.xxi. day of Apryll in this year. 1562.
O, praise ye God and bless his name
His mighty hand has wrought the same.



THis monstrous world that monsters bredes as rife
As men tofore it bred by native kind
By birthes that show corrupted natures strife
Declares what sins beset the secret mind.
I mean not this as though deformed shape
Were always linkd with fraughted mind with vice
But that in nature god such draughtes does shape
Resemblyng sins that so bin had in price,
So grossest faults brast out in bodies form
And monster caused of want or to much store
Of matter, shows the sea of sin: whose storm
Oreflowes and whelmes virtues barren shore.
Faultye alike in ebb and eke in flowd,
Like distaunt both from mean, both like extremnes.
Yet greatst excess the want of mean does shrowde
And want of mean excess from virtues means.
So contraryest extremes consent in sin
Which to be wray to blindest eyes by sight
Behold a calfe has clapped about his chinne
His chauderne reft whence nature placed it right.
And ^u^^d drives doutfull seers to prove by speech
Them selves not calves, and makes the fashion stale.
In him behold by excess from mean our breach
And midds excess yet want of natures shape.
To show our miss behold a guiltless babe
Reft of his limbs (for such is virtues want)
Him self and parents both infamous made
With sinful birth: and yet a worldlyng scant.
Fears midwyfes route: be wrayeng his parents fault
In want of honestye and excess of sin.
Made lawful by all laws of man, yet halt
Of limbs by God, scapd not the shameful mark
Of bastard son in bastard shape descryed.
Better far better vngyuen were his life
Than given so. For nature just enuyed
Her gift to him: and cropd with mayming knyfe
His limbs, to wreake her spyte on parents sin*
Which, if she spare unawares so many scapes
As wicked world to breed will never sin
Their lives declare their maims saved from their shapes
Scorchd in their minds (o cruel priuye mayme
That festreth still, o vnrecured sore)
Where thothers quiting with their bodies shame
Their parents guilt, often linger not their lives
In lothed shapes but naked fly to skies.
As this may do whose form tofore thine eyes
Through want thou see, a monstrous vglye shape
Whom friendly world to sin does term a escape.
ON Tuysday being the.xxi. day of Apryll, in this year of our Lord God a
thousand five hundred three score and two, there was borne a man child of this
maimed form at Much Horkesley in Essex, a village about three miles from
Colchester, between a natural father and a natural mother having neither
hand, foot, leg, nor arm, but on the left side it has a Stumpe growing
out of the shoulder, and the end thereof is round, and not so long as it
should go to the elbowe, and on the right side no mention of any thing where
any arm should be, but a litel stumpe of one ynche in length, also on the left
buttocke there is a stumpe coming out of the length of the thygh almost to the
knee, and round at the end, and grows something overthwart toward the
place where the right leg should be, and where the right leg should be,
there is no mention of any leg or stumpe. Also it has a Codde and stones
but no yearde, but a little hole for the water to issue out. Finallye it has
by estimation no tongue, by reason whereof it sucketh not, but is succored
with liquide substance put into the mouth by drops, and now begins to
feed with pappe being very well favored, and of good and cheareful face.

The aforesaid Anthony Smyth of Much Horkesley husbandman and his wife, were
both married to others before, and have had diverse children, but this deformed
child is the first that the said Anthony and his wife had between them two, it
is a man child. This child was begot out of matrimony, but borne in
matrimonye. And at the making hereof was living, and like to continue.

Imprinted at London in Fletestrete nere to S. Dunstons church by Thomas Marshe.


