THE ANATOMY OF HVMORS: WRITTEN By SIMION GRAHAME.

PRO. 21. CAP. Every way of a man, is right in his own eyes: but the Lord God
pondreth their hearts.

AT EDINBVRGH. Printed by THOMAS FINLASON. 1609. WITH LICENSE.

TO HIS EVERHONOVRED LORD AND MASTER, MY LORD GRAHAME, Earl of Montrois, etc.
Con il tempo.
LIKE A STORME-beaten-ship, with many unfortunate conflicts (in my long-some
journeyes) here and there have I still been tossed, till now at last I have
arrived to the safe harborie of your Lordships favor: being sore fatigated in
my troublesome travails, I am very eagerly willing to be comforted with the
rare fruits of your Honors admired Engine, who with a most generous spirit,
can temper thy greatness with benignity, thy Majesty with meekness, thy
Heroyick mind with courtesy, thy Noble hand with liberality, and thy
Herculian-heart with clemency, such is the inestimable riches (of thy
renowned worth) which has made (and still makes) conquest of many hearts. O
what can I say of my self (who without any merit in me) has so often felt
the force of your Lordships love, I am sorry that I shall never be able to
value the rich treasure of such great desert: Good will is all my wealth, and
yet my service (bound by duty) craves no thanks. Than most worthy (to be
named worthy) Lord, receive these my Labors as the true tributarie effects of
my affection, the beholding of this Humorous world, the strange alterations of
Time, and the inconstant wavering of my euerchanging Fortune, will afforde me
no other Subject, it may truly be said, Fortuna vitrea est, quae cum splendet
frangitur. My peregrinations enlarged my curiosity, my soldiers estate
promised to prefer me, and the smiles of Court stuffed my brains with many
idle suppositions. Here abruptly must I needs break off, fearing least the
great occasion of this discourse, make me forget my self, and become tedious
in reckoning up my loss of Time. So in my neuer-ending-loue, I end, wishing
your Lordships valor, good fortune, your estate all happiness, and that your
Honors discretion may sepulchrise this boldness of

Your Lordships euer-obedient servant, SIMION GRAHAME.

TO HIS EVER-HONOVRED LADY, MY LADY Countess of Montrois, etc.
GReat is the worth of thy triumphing Fame,
With Faith, Hope, Love, in thy sweet soul inshrind,
A endless world shall eternise thy name,
And crown the glorious virtue of thy mind.
Thy fervent faith to Christ is so inclind,
Which makes rich hopes up to the Heavens aspire
From thence thy love, descends in ruthful kind,
And helps the poor in their distressed desire.
Long may thou live, and long may God above
Increase, confirm, reward, faith, hope, and love.
S. GRAHAME.

TO THE READER.
IN A FEARELES HVmor, I have anatomized the humors of mankind, to the mouth of
the honest man, it has a most delicate and sweet taste, but to the wicked, it
is bitter as gall or wormwood, for if thou be a dissembling hypocrite, one of
the sect of fleshly and bloody Gospellers, Math. 7. Chap.
one of the generation of Wolves clothed in sheepe-skins, which are naught
else, but hatchers of deceit, to entrap souls, inventers of treason to murder
Kings, hellish instruments to ruin Countries, sworn enemies to God, and
diligent factors for the devil. If thou be a man of this Categorie, I hate
thee to the very death: but if thou first be true to God, and next to thy own
Prince: if thou be faithful to thy Country, if thou judge all men with equity
in spite of love or briberie, if thou wrong no man: and last of all, if thou be
all in all a good Christian, thou art an honest man, and thou art the man who^
I place in my hearts heart: if thou be a woman of a modest behavior, and
discreet in all thy actions, of a chaste mind, and of a good life, who still
aims at honesty, and prosecutes all thy desires with the fear of God: it is
thou who is the honest woman, and thou art the woman whom I honor to the
death. Then be what thou will who reads this Treatise, be sure to find thy
self set down in a true fashion, I have taken the pains to paint thy
portrate, if thou find thy self in fair colors, then be careful how to
entertain thy self in the true Luister, if thou find thy self in filthy
colors, wash, clainge, and purge thy self from such pestiferous blots, which
even infects thy very soul, and makes thee leath some to the sight of God. I
have searched thy feastred wounds, I have bared thy vlcered sores, and for
fear of putrefying cankers I have tainted thee to the very quick: so to keep
thy weakness in a good temper, I have applied this Cataplasme, to appease thee
of all thy pains: I am surely persuaded, that these my labors shall merit
thanks of the upright man who loves God, obedient to his King, and is true to
his Country, and that the good report of the righteous shall guard me, from
critical barking of wicked malice, and I am assured, that the honest Matron,
the wife true to her husband, and the chaste virgin will ever party me, and
ever be ready to countercheck the detracking reports of the shameless woman,
whilst my revenge shall be with silence, and simple patience to smile at
neuer-blushing- impudence. To conclude, I only expect to be quarrelled with
the deceitful villain, whom I will prove to be an arrant Knave: if thou
challenge me, I scorn to be a Coward, and therefore I will answer thee. So I
shall ever rest thy hateful Enemy, and the honest man's Servant to the death.

SIMION GRAHAME.

TO HIS EVERHONOVRED LADY, MY LADY COUNTESS of Erroll.
SWeet Lady look and grant this begd-for-grace,
My servile Muse does crave upon her knees,
Now here she comes before thy sacred face,
And of her Labors makes a sacrifees,
Then ouer-spread them with thy glorious eyes,
Let luster fair inritch my rural rhyme,
Thou have the power (great Potent) if thou plees,
To register my verse in endless time,
If quicknes of thy wit find any crime,
In thy discretion sepulchrize my wrong,
For why thou know my Muse in youthful prime
Did what she could to please thee in her song:
Great is the glory of my wish'd-for-gaines,
If dearest Dame, thou patronize my pains.
S. GRAHAME.

THE ANATOMY OF HVMORS.
A SILK WORM first eats it self out of a very little seed, and then
grows to be a quick creature: a while after, it is fed and nourished upon
fresh and green leaves, then it comes to a greater quantity, and again, it
eats it self out of that coat, and works it self in a coat of silk
engendered full of small seed for many young-ones to breed of, in the end it
leaves the slugh of silk for the Ornament of mankind: And last of all, it
dies in the shape of a white winged fly. A King may be compared to the silk
worm, which first of the earth becomes a creature, and then being fed and
nourished upon the grace, favor, and mercy of God, with the love, fear, and
obedience of his subjects; he becomes a King of more kingdoms, and so from
kingdom to kingdom he grows to be an imperial and free Monarch over many
Countries, for him and his posterity to possess for ever: in the end, he
leaves his virtues education, his good qualities, his upright justice, his
mercy, his compassion on the poor, and his love to all his people, to be a
mirror to the rest of earthly Kings, one example to his children, and a never
decaying Ornament to all his Offspring: then last of all, he returns again
to the earth; and his soul clothed with pure innocent whitenes, flies up to
heaven in the beautiful shape of a bright, winged Angel, Who shall ascend
(says the Prophet) into the mountain of the Lord, and who shall stand in his
holy place? even he that has inuocent hands, and a pure heart, who has not in
the rage of cruelty sucked the blood of innocents, who has not suffered the
greater powers to oppress his poor Subjects: it is he who extols Justice, and
triumphs in mercy. 21. Psalm.
O God, this man is he whose glory is great in thy salvation, both dignity
and honor have thou laid upon him: It is thou, O Lord, who governes all his
actions, and still instructs his mind what he shall do: Cor regis in manu
domini quocunque voluerit inclinabit illud: Pro. 21. Cap.
Then thou o earthly King, behold how the great and mighty King of all Kings
is thy sure bulwark, his strength guards thee against the malicious minds of
men, the poysonnous Calumny of wicked vipers shall not offend thee, nor the
subtle hatchers of unnatural Treason, shall never prevail against thee,
because God assures thee of thy life in all thy journeyes by day or by night,
he still says unto thee as he said by the voice of his Angel to Gideon: Peace
be unto thee, Judge. 6. Cap.
fear not thou shall not die: How bold may thou be to build upon this
assurance: if God be with thee, Pro. 20 Cap.
who can be against thee Thy anger is like the roaring of a Lion, he that
provoke thee to wrath, sins against his own soul. Who should not tremble
at thy fury, and who should not be afraid to offend thee? who dare calumniate
a King, or yet speak against the uprightness of his justice; God him self
gives this strait command, Exo. 22. Cap.
saying, Thou shall not rail upon the Judges, neither speak evil of the
ruler of the people. Then the Apostle Saint Paul tells thee why thou should not
do it: Romans 13. cap.
Because he is the Minister of God to take vengeance on them that do evil. I
say to thee, O King:

Thou earthly God, whose ouer-ruling hand
The Scepter swayes, and does vnsheath the sword.
Now servile Kingdoms stoupes at thy command?
Who dare control thy vnrecalled word.
Thou with great glory of thy triple crown,
Erecks the good, and throws the wicked down.
God has anointed thee a King, and placed thee here on earth to be a God, and
to do right to all men, without respect of persons. God him self calls you a
God, and commands you, saying: Do right to the poor and fatherless: do
justice to the poor and needy, because I have said thou art a God: And
therefore be sure that the great God of heaven, will judge you that are Gods on
earth: remember how he is to crave a most sharp reckoning at your hands,
therefore how careful should thou be ever to discharge thy great and weighty
charge which hangs over thy head: thou art a ruler of many, and many things
will be asked of thee; respect always the poor more then the rich, and let
not the complaints of thy people come to thy ears by the mouths of thy
briberous Minions; call the poor complainer before thee, stay and hear them
with patience, and weary not to examine their wrongs, when thy pity has
pondred their estate: Pronounce sentence with thy own tongue, then let thy
diligent eye see judgment executed, and delay not the poor man's cause, nor
let no senistrus request recall thy just resolution. And so shall the tears of
the distressed creatures imbalme thy soul, thy righteousness shall crown thee,
and thy mercy shall set thee on the majesticall Throne of Gods eternal glory!
O remember what thou art, where thou art, and what thou shall be, as I have
said: thou art a King anointed by God over many people: thou art here on earth
a Judge; and thou art to be called before the tribunal seat of God, to give a
reckoning of thy behavior! O then how narrowly should thou look to thy
journey, how perrilous is thy Prograce? what weighty burden hangs on thy
shoulders, what continual fashires, what incomprehensible care, and what great
memory craves thy careful estate? With eyes of wisdom govern thy sight
about thy self, and if thou chance to see sheltred under thy own wings, the
deceitful parasite, the male-contented Mutenar, the murmuring whisperer, the
detracker of honesty, the invier of virtue, the ambitious oppressor, or the
unmerciful briber: then if thou find such caterpillars about thee, sweep
them away; because they are consuming cankers to thy state, bloud-suckers of
innocents, vessels of treason, and sworn enemies to the true Union of thy
Kingdoms. O says the great King of wisdom, Pro. 25. cap.
Take away the wicked men from the King, and his throne shall be stablished in
righteousness. Shake off all kind of such infectious scabs, and purge thy
company of such pestiferous evils; keep ever with the men of truth, and place
such men in office as fears God, and loves thee. Let grave and honorable
counsailours conduct thee, and guard thy self with them. Command thou them as
God has commanded all you that are Kings, Deutro. 1. cap.
Say ye shall have no respect of persons in judgment, but shall hear the
small as well as the great: ye shall not fear the face of man, for the
judgment is Gods: Thou art the Lieutenant of God, therefore thou should look
well to thy officers, and how they are inclined. A true and faithful subject,
who does the will of his King, is worth the half of his Kings kingdom. O says
Solomon, Pro. 14. Cap.
the joy and pleasure of a King is in a wise servant. He puts the charge of
him self in his hands, he is the pillar of his state, and executes the actions
of his King with a sincere equity. It is not birth that makes thy subject
noble or honorable. The original of Nobility is like a small spring, which
good desert makes the grateful favor of a King to enlarge to a great river,
which by bound duty ought to pay their dutiful tribute to the King their
Ocaean: but how many are they that becomes ingrate, and swells with pride,
ambition, envy, treason, sedition, and emulation, they become rebellious
floods, and overflowes their banks, and in dispersing them selves, looses their
name, and becomes ignominious to the world. When such men beholds their own
ruin and swift destruction (which blind pride did never look for) then how
may their shame smother ambition in a helpless repentance, making the eyes of
man (which was curious to behold the glorious triumph of their vpraisd pomp)
turn with amazement to look upon their sudden fall, this tragical
spectacle of the great man's grovelling on the ground, makes despair cry out,
Qui jacet in terra non habet vnde cadit. O how should that man have his mind
tortered within his loathsome body, when he beholds how swiftly his glory
has left him, his honors drowned in disgrace, his salutations turned to
contempt: his bare-headed petitioners the spectators of his ruin, and the
voice of the world (mixtured with love and disdain) making many misconstrued
suppositions, his friends weeps and laments his estate, his foes smiles, and
makes the accidents of his destruction their discourse, whilst he poor
rejected soul cries out, Colocatus sum in obscuris sicut mortuus seculi. Here
is a just reward to an unjust subject. True service to God, obedience to thee
who is King, and upright judgment void of partiality nobilitates the man, it
crowns him with honor, and makes his glory to shine eternally: blessed is
that King who may freely give his subject this most glorious and honorable
Epithet, saying, I have a faithful servant: this man is he whom the book of
God calls the wise servant, in whom the pleasure and joy of a King remains: he
boldly tells thee thy error, his wisdom prevents thy evil, he whispers in
thy ear, and desires thee to read before thou set thy hand Litera
scriptamanent! O how secure may the just man be in his soul, his safe
conscience makes him fearelesse: he has compassion on the poor, Deutr. 16.
Cap.
he wrests not the Law, neither has he any respect of persons, neither takes
he rewards to blind his understanding, nor yet perverteth he the words of the
just man, but ponders the estate of all men with wisdom: this man may truly be
called a righteous Judge: when Augustus Caesar gave aucthority to any Judge, he
also gave this advertisement, I put not (says he) the treasure of my honor in
thy hands, nor do I commit my justice to thee, that thou should be a destroyer
of people, the blood shedder of innocents, nor ane executioner of malefactors,
but with the one hand thou should maintain the good, and with the other hand
raise up the evil man from his wickedness. Therefore I send thee forth to be a
preceptor and defender of Orphans, a helper of widows, a Surgeon for all
wounds, a staff for the blind, a pittier of the poor, and a father to all
persons. To speak fair to my enemies, and rejoice my friends. O how much is
that man to be esteemed, who with a fearelesse reguard executes the will of his
Prince, and in spite of envious malice, gives a true testimony of a good
conscience: this man is he who is blessed in the sight of GOD, his rich
treasure lays hoarded up in heaven, the glory of his GOD, the honor of his
King, and the weal of his Country is the only contemplation of his soul in
this present time: how perrilous is the estate of mankind: how is the honest
man's actions misdeemed, and his behavior misconstrued, if he be an actour in
the affairs of his King and Country, then is he censured to be a man of
partiality, and a busie-headed body, if he retire him self from Court, and
meddle with nothing, then is he suspected to be a Malevole, on who expects the
change of Court, a suborner, or else a faction-maker: then begins Envy to pick
quarrels, Malice will bark and invent false information! O how watchful
should the honest minded man be in this latter days of deceit, to save him
self from the subtle snares of secret envy. This inconstant world being so
full of subtle deceites, in whom can the upright man trust, how many in
external complementing shows vows affection, where secret grudge is
grounded. And besides, what a quarrellous pick-thank time is it, when a man
dares not trust him self, but doubts his dearest friend. Some reads so much
on Matchavell, that in the end they turn matchless villains; the honest and
plain dealing man is abhorred and termed a Gull, whilst politic they imployes
their wits to exploit other men's destruction, when extreme necessity and
misery of want does urge the poor men to steal or rob; then are they
presently taken, put in prison, and laid in chains of iron: But when a
politic Matchavilian robs the common wealth, and does oppress the poor, he
triumphs in golden chains: it is he who gets the Lawstouping salutations on
the street: it is he who makes his deceaving piety, his cutthroat flattery,
his dissimulation to God, to his King and his Country, poison the air. It is
he whose understanding could never reach to that imagination, that there can be
a God, and it is he, who for a swift passing glory damnes his soul eternally.
16. Cap.
This sort of men are they whom our Savior Christ speaks of in the Evangell
of S. Luke, that they are clothed in purple, in silk, and in fine linings,
well fed, and delicate in all things, in their secure sensuality they contemn
the poor Lazarus lying at their gate, they hear not his ruthful cries, they
are blind, and sees not his sores, their hearts are hardened and considers not
his miserable estate. These are they who lives in Kings Courts, Qui molibus
vestiuntur in domibus regum sunt: In brave apparel, in pride of life, and
choked with this worlds vain glory, what reckoning shall be taken of such
men, and what answer can they make to God Almighty, when he shall say, Read
rationem vilicationis tuae, Give me a reckoning of thy stewardship; Luke 13
and therefore the greater thy place, the greater thy reckoning shall be before
God: And the more thy pleasures in this life, the more thy pains shall be in
the life to come. O what a terrible sentence gives Christ in the Apocalips when
he says, Quantum in dilitiis suit, tantum date illi tormentum. What pleasures
has the rich man had in this world, let him have as many torments in the
world to come. All thy senses which did abound in delectation, shall become
most loathsome, thy delecate ears, shall for their sweet music, receive most
detestable howling of tormented spirits; thy feeling which was used to fine
linnings, and soft silks, shall feel the burning fire of brimstone: Thy sight
which had the prospect of fair buildings, rich and curious Architectors, and
pleasant gardings, shall see the ouglie sight of fearful and terrible devils;
thydian tie gust which did surfeit with all sorts of sweetness, shall be
tormented with thirst and hunger; and thy smell which was fed with rare must,
and filled with art of fine oders, shall now be perfumed with stink and sent of
most intolerable filthiness. This shall be the reward given to the rich
gluttons of this world. God speaking by his Prophet Esaias, he bids, Tollatur
impius ne videat gloriam Dei; Take the wicked man away, that he may not see the
glory of God. Then thou who sucks forth the heartbloud of the poor, think on
this, and thou who art a grievous oppressor, look to thy self, or rather thy
heart is hardened and can not see, thou triumphs in the abundance of worldly
glory; thy conscience feels not the forceable stroke of sin; thy too much
sensuality has made thy soul sensles. But o when sickness the fore-running
harbinger of agonizing death does sease upon thy body, and wills thee to pay
that doubtless debt, no surety will be taken, nor no shifting excuse can help
thee, thy soul must needs be sequestered from thy body, all thy friends will
forsake thee, thy flattering troops which does attend thee, will leave thee,
thy pleasures shall loath thee, and in thy loathsome bed shall thou lie
destitute of all comfort; the devil in most fearful and terrible form shall
haunt thee, houlding thy heinous sins before thine eyes, and still crying in
thine ears, Despair and dye. What miserable estate shall this be, when thy
wicked life lays this before thee, and tells, this must thou suffer, and
this way must thou go. And when the malediction of the oppressed man, the
destressed widow, and fatherles Children, whose ruth-begging-clamours,
disturbes the Heavens, and brings thee (O wicked man) to this miserable end.
Can thy riches rid thee, or set the free from the horrible pains of Hell?
Where is the glory of thy wealth and substance now? Divitiarum jactantia quid
vobis contulit? And besides all this, how infamous shall thy name be amongst
the Commons still, like a Tennice ball, tossed from mouth to mouth, Saying, the
most pernicious instrument of our age has left this world; The only Glutton
of Ambition whose insatiable desires could never be filde, one who subornde
the ear of his Prince, and made him believe that every strange face was comde
to cut his throat, on whose envy would suffer no man rise but himself. When
ever he did mark any aspyring branch, flourish under the shining favor of the
King, then did his seditious wits, and his Luciferian pride, search by all
means how to destroy him. This ever biting hound whose teeth was a contagious
canker, when his heart was most full of mischief, then was his tongue most full
of flattery. O filthy disease of flattery, it were better for a man to follow
a dog, and live upon his surfating vomet, then to be a flatterer. O flatery
the very intysing snare of deceit, under the which all kind of dangers lies
obscured in Ambush, to be short he was such a one, that still did impoverish
the Kings coffers to inritch his own, he did not love to se these to whom he
was beholden, to al his friends unthankful, of all good deeds forgetful, and
to al wel-deserving minds ingrate. O thou filthy ingratitude, thou art even
the very excrament of all evilles, ill faring, man fair ill: J must leave thee
for my breath is putrified with sounding the Trumpet of thy ignominious
imperfections. Ride on thy posting journey, for indeed thou may ride a swift
gallop to hell, when thou have the Arch-diuell thy guide to wind his horn
before thee, let him who is hulcerus shrink at his own smart, when his sores
are serst. Now as for the young aspyring gallant, J have most rare and excellent
Colors to paint thy portrate in a true lustring form; take Physic to
engender thy patience, although my speech be Satyrick, What then? bitter
drinks are good for the stomach, Therefore come on thou ungracious Boy, for J
must have about with thee, Thou child of unthrift, when thy parents gives thee
store of wealth, before God give thee wit to govern: Then be sure thou selst
all, pawnst all, and spendst all. How carles art thou of what is to come? Thou
never think on want, but plays the infant perdu freely, still assuring thy
self, that thy father has a fatted Calfe to be kilde at thy Conversion. Upon
the hope of this, thou letst all go, like the smoke of Tobacco, or like a
soppy billow, which flees from the shell of the walnut, and straight does
vanish in the air. It may be thy father or mother, hes scraped this substance
together with labor, hunger and pinching of their belly: How beggarly
perchance has thy parents lived to provyde for thee? How careful were they to
get it? And how careless how they got it? evil and unlawful conquesse makes
such Impes of perdition come after and spend all. Thou art like a raging
Courser, which runs without a bridle, or rather like a storme-beaten-ship
amidst the Rocks, having no Rudder at all. Thou does quintiscens thy
understanding, and imploys thy wits, leaving no deceit unsought how to get
money. Thou intrudest thy self in the Kings favor, building great authority
on his smyle; if he grace thee with his ear, then beco^mest thou homely, bold,
and audatious lying, cogging and flattering, that the behoulders and hearers
may think thee a true and perfect Courtier in deed. By this means, many men
employes thee to speak to the Prince in their afaires, suits, complaints and
requests, are put in thy hands. What is offered thee for thy pains? Thou will
do nothing till thou get half, or all in hand; then thou selst the poor man's
suit to some other, and so makes thy shifting delays excuse thy shameless
deceat. If thou be sometime altogether out of money, thou calst thy wits to a
reckoning, and then disguises thy self in some strange apparels; and on the
his way will rob the passenger of his purse A King may give honor o^
knighthood, but he cannot give moyen to maintain it. After thy robery, then
come to Court with thy bold erected face, and an impudent gesture most
majesticall, to mask thy rogish villainy in a vagabounding humor, thy nights
are spent in whowring, so thou makst thy bawdrie and spending in a Bordell.
Increase thy reputation, and then thy lecherous life makes the blew circle
under thy eye. Tell the world how much thou art over-spent insubstance of
body. Besides all this the Paliards token which thou caries of a Mersenary
woman, most pleasant for the Apotecharie, and very profitable for the Barber.
Thou affirmest thy self to be of the Iudayecall law, and much more in going
beyond the Jew in thy upright Circumcision. Notwithstanding, of all this, every
Lady in the Court, must be thy mistres, but thy chief choice is a gallant, and
most quick-witted Lady, whose experience knows what duty belongs to the quiet
opening of a back door, perfumed smocks, a whispering voice, and
cloath-shooes, and who in a veneryan discourse, with the want of shame, will
make her fan serve to cover the bloudles blush of her never blushing face, thy
want of purpose is supplied with many apish triks, and in thy interluds does
praise her mistaken beauty, affirming, that it is not painting makes her
fair, nor that her perfumd breath gives delicacie to the smell, no thou swerst
nature hes done all The crew of unthrifts are thy comrades, such cumpanions as
hes made compaction with the devil to ride post to hell; when thou come to
a tavern, and enters in the second degrie of drunknes, then playest thou the
Rodomontado, and in thy Orlando Furioso humor, calls for Oceans of vine, a world
of Tobacco, and whole mountains of sugar, who will refuse to carouse thy
mistres health, then is he called the son of a whowre, the wine thrown in his
face, and straight cartalisde to a combat, thou must be stout and out-swagger
al, and still curse the celestial signs which are not in Cancer or Scorpio,
to the effect thou may let out thy colerick blood, in thy swearing most
horrible, so that the greevous terror of oaths, makes the hair of the hearers
head stand right up, when the host brings thee a reckoning, then thou will
swear to pay all, and so takes it in trust, for J grant it is the true
pendeckles of gentilitie, to black books with reckonings, to hunt with dogs,
to play at dyce, and dally with drabs, and sometime to make a cuckold of thy
furnisher: when a married man becommes a Monster, what kind of glory is it to
see him walk on the streets, with a pair of egregious erected horns, and every
one poynting their finger at his horned-worship. Thou art of no Religion, but a
mere Athiest, then assure thy self to live vnquerrelled, thy room and large
conscience will make thee to escape excommunication, because the Libertine goes
always fry, yet for all this thou go to Church for fashion sake, and makes
thy seming piety wear thy brieches on the knees, as the young Lawyer goes to
the house of Justice, and without profeit, wears the fore-breast of his gown
on the Bar, so that he is forced to make a summer cloak of the posterior part:
All this misery proceeds of the want of Clyants, and fearful complainours,
who dares not trust the defense of their action in the hands of such a
skil-wauting Novice. Thou imitating all kind of strange humors, still becomes
inconstant in thy clothes, Thy traffic is with the Lumbard, thou makes it thy
Gwardarobba, and thy serce is amongst the Phrepryes, and oft-times a purpose
thou stayest from Court a pretty while, that occasion may offer thee to
return with a new fashion of clothes, not unlike a Citizens young wife, who
in curious pride of a newe-fangling Humor, will take the advantage to change
her buske when she comes from her childbed. Jf thou have any thing, sell,
pawn, borrow, and beg, to buy knighthood, thy wife must have a hoode, and
be called Madame, although thou and she should live beggarly, and lay the most
part of your clothes in lavender, to maintain the naked style; it is a base
ambition, which brings nothing with it but the bare name. Poverty maks such
sort of people turn Cunny-catchers, take up commodities, skambell, beg and
borrow of their betters, and still live by the trial of their wits, attended
on by brokers, who spares not to seek and search be al means to know who will
give their money out for intrest, making large and fair promises, damning his
soul to confirm his lies, till at last with vows and oaths, he deceaues his
neighbor; and that which an honest man hes gathered with great pains, and
longsome travel, gotten and scraped together, to maintain him and his family:
Then is it put in the hands of a deceitful villain, who never thinks to repay
a penny of it. How soon his credit is lost? then is he gone, and becomes
bankerout. So is many a poor man left with his wife and children to make new
shift, this is a voluntary robbery, which a good conscience could never yet
excuse. The serjants attends like pages of honor upon such careless unthrifts,
whose ears are ever attending, I arrest you sir. The dambd Crew, and the
swaggering Consort of companions, hants commonly about the Court and capital
Cities, and waits on Taverns, the ordinaries, stages playe-tilting, balling,
and revelling, so are they at al sorts of conventions, and with cunning
authority becomes pocket-sersers, and purspykers their promynado is in some
other part like Paul's Church at London, where many poor gentlemen dines with
Duck Vmphra, and then comes to to the strets spaniard-like with an emytie
belly, piking his teeth, in this abused place, these imps of unthrifts makes
their meetings, and there invents new stratagems how to get fresh money, some
by horse, and some by foot, will walk like night Owls on the fields, waiting
scollers coming from their friends, farmorers coming to London, merchants
going to mercats, and lawiers coming from the visitation of their clyants, and
so transforming the word of God save you sir, in rander your purse sir, they
become obsolut commanders. O they have no revenues of lands, this purchese
makes them go gallant in fair clothes, and entertain an horse and a whore,
and sometime for necessity sake, himself will be Pandor; of what proceeds
all this villainy? It is true, the King has no wars, nor will not grant
Commissioners, nor letters of Mark for the sea, every Galies and Galias lying
idle and waist without slaves, so that my Lord chief Justice is forced to fill
prisons, and floorish Tyburn with the lewd consort of this dambd Crew. These
sparks of perdition, caries the name of Gentle-mens sons, having great
revenues and rents, and for the most part are calde Capitaines, or else
Lewtenants, ask him where he was made Captain, he will presently answer in
eighty eight, that time when the king of Spains great Armado was overthrown;
or else in Ireland, when the Earl of Essex was general. O to hear them tikle
a discourse of valor, what great bravados (as the Spaniard says) Que son Mais
los amenazados, que los acuchilla dos, and how they kill men be apprehension,
leads on troops, and never takes them off again, Como vno spanzola
Rodamontado, that says, his beard grew with smook of muscats, and the hair of
his head decade with the noise of Cannons, such sort of men makes the wind
of their stomach become firmeaer, so that every word (by self consate, and a
lying discourse) appears in his own mind a brave man. These are the men who
affirms transmigratioune, and makes it the chief Article of their belief, as
when he says, Bota adios io sta hidalgo Nassido, So by imagination, he is the
most valorous man that ever lived, he will have a ragement, and all his
Soldiers must have Monarchs minds; all his drums must be made of kings
skins, and presently he will vow and swear that his sword shall kill none
except it be Cornels, Capitaines, e Cavelleros muy honorados. What man of a
soled wit would not smyle to hear such base Cowards discourse, and chiefly in
a Tavern, or else in a bordell amongst whowres, away with such cogging
villains, which are naught else but the very excraments of mankind. What may be
thought of the bussie headed man, who ranges from Country to Country, he
haunts Courts, and becomes a spy, still curious to search news and very
diligent to know the secrets of all estates; in this point he proves a rare
intelligencer, and so much the more by ingyring himself with hanging on the
company of young and lightheaded Courtiers, with a counterfoot gesture, still
plausible to their idle humors, at his coming to town before he come to
Court, he takes his lodging in the sub-vrbs and inquyres for the Phrepry, and
then, be sure he will enter like a Polonian, a Sweish, or a Flemiug; But o how
swiftly will he be chainged in ane Italian, a French, or else in a Spanish
suit? In this new Metamorphus, he comes boldly to the street, and makes his
promynad toward the Court, pressing (as it were) to accompany his
unacquainted apperrell with a borrowed gesture, making the world point at his
oulde garment, furnished with new fashions, till some poor Gentleman take
notice of his own late pawnded suit. Then (even then) begins poverty to
make the true owner blushe at the Bastard behavior of baisnes it self,
whilst the boy of the Phreprey is set to attend on his hyrde apperrell, and
still to remember the stranger to come back, and make restitution, and that he
may lean off the wall, and always keep his clothes clean. When he circuits
the Palace, he scorns to be ashamed, but needs will intrude himself amongst
Gentlemen and Ladies, then begins Curiosity to inquyre what is he? O says
one, he is a Traveller, a man of a most rare wit, and of a very quick
discourse, he is an Heretic Poet, who can ryme extempore, Mitolat-lynes,
Stropyat-verses, with halting-feete, and make any object his subject, and more
then this, he has the true art of face painting, he knows the secreet virtue
of complections, and he can lay an upright vermilion color upon the pale
cheeks of bloudles Ladies. What folies and superstitious vanities may the eyes
of Wisdom behold in the affronted and damnable customs of wicked mankind,
whose minds are a mirror of mischief, a bordell to vice, and an excramentle
corruption of all inormities, it smells of treason to knock at the door of a
Kings minion, so with scretching (the long waiting petitionar) nay wear his
nales to the flesh, before he shall be dispatched, this makes many
mal-contented minds stand upon the Thaeater of impatience, behoulding the
glittering stage of an evil furnished and deformed Court, where blind Forton
plays a prologue to the triumph of Time, acted with the abominable sins of
Envy, Pride, Ambition, Gluttony, Avarice and Licherie, etc. But o how happy
is that man whose heart is not polluted with the imperfection of Court, whose
head is not stuffed with a world of fascheries, and whose mind is not crossed with
tormenting refusals. This man is he who lives at home void of treason, secure
without fear or danger, and most rich with sweet contentment, it is he who
scorns to climb a falling Tower, and whose chief felicity is not fixed, nor
placed upon uncertain toys, so very well may it be said,

HOw blessed is he whose happy days are spent
Far from the Court, and lives at home in ease:
It Is only he whose rich with sweet content
And builds no nest on top of Caedar trees:
No storming strife, nor yet no Viprich kind
Of treasons gilt, does harbor in his mind.
He eats that bread, which sweating labor yields,
With open doors, secure in his repose;
He walks alone, abroad on spacious fields,
Go where he please, he needs not fear his foes:
He trades on that, which proud ambition brings,
And scorns the threatening terror of great Kings
I grudge to see when many a scurvie Clown,
Of no desert traumphs, in their desire,
And from the top of Honor does throw down
Heroyk spirits, presuming to aspire:
shame where is thy blush? ca^ heavens content with this
To see good Kings, deceived with Judas kis.
Thou hellish Court where cutthroat flattrie dwells,
Where simple truth no kind of shailter finds,
Where baser minds, with pride and envy swells
Where rueling hearts are like inconstont winds,
Where Forton blind plays to a poultrons chance,
And makes deceat in glittring robs to dance.
You painted snakes, whose bitter poysning gall,
With want of pity, plagues the poor man's purse,
Gasping damnation, does attend you all,
There Is no Relax ^or your Eternal curse:
Then cursed be Court, thou monstrous Map of Hell,
Where envy, pride, and treason loves to dwell.
O time, what a precious thing art thou to be thus abusde and wrongde with so
many? When thou art lost, who can find thee? When thou art gone, who can
recall thee? How happy are they who employes thee well, and spends the not in
hunting idle and uncertain toys? What a pity is it to see brave spirits so
careless of time, and still waisting of their wits in vain? Consuming their
youthful years in such slavish service, where virtue could never harbor, and
at last guardond with ingratitude, how often has the cowardly flatterer cropen
in favor, and catched the gallant man's reward? O but the disgrace of
indiscretion pertaines to the distributer, and not to the wel-deserving man.
Let the man whose meriet is great, put on Patience, cross his arms, and smyle
at shameless ingratitude, what a shame is it for such as are borne to great
riches, and yet wants nobility! O to be noble now in these days, it is
thought to be prodigal, and so the hearts of higher powers, are transformed in
the hearts of avaritious usurers, who makes their gould their God, he houlds
his hand fast, his blind pride, and voluntary forgetfulness, thinks every man
bound by duty to serve and do his vtermost, without so much as thinks, how
shall brave men in this miserable extremity live, or keep good clothes on
his back? seeing his service is all his revenues, Poor man, he is forced to go
seek his forton be some other means. Because when he goes to the wars, every
Captain will be his Comrad, and if his courage deserve honor, he shall get
it, and what he has by hazard is sweet content, he gets elbo-roume to eat
his meat, he needs not lay down his cloak in vain to sit at the greatmans
table, for if there wants room, he must stand like the pillar of salt which
Lots wife was turned in, or else steal to his cloak, and stay for the latter
meat, where never yet was ceremony of sitting down, for he that comes first,
sits first, and then sits like one flightred in rops, if he hold not his hand
on his trinsher, he may be robbed whilst he drinks, if he eats at leisure, he
may be sure to rise with an empty belly; if he be hungry, he must swellow all
with vncivilitie, and put himself in perrell of chocking. I think the stomach
of a latter-meateman, and the stomach of a dog, must be very like of
disgesture, and their throats of a like measure, for they without use of their
teeth swollows all. At hunting after the Dear is killed and cwird, then is his
intrals thrown to the hounds, whose greedy appatide, and eager strife,
without regard, slabring the guts about their ears, and every one pulling
from another gormounds filth and all. In treuth me thinks, there is nothing in
similitude, can come so near the form of a Courtiers latter-meat breakfast,
the savage rudnes of such creatures, tells modesty, that they never learned,
Quos decet in mensa mores servare docemus, They are altogether ignorant of
civil instructions, their quick expedition, makes their patience cry, either a
short grace, or else no grace at all. O what a heavy cross is it for an
honest heart to live in such a graceles and slavishe life, let him serve,
wait, ryd, all is in vain, and without profit. Behold the Catigorie of
whisprers. One will round in his Lords ear an errant lie; another forge and
invent a slattring discourse to please the humor of his masters mind, some
will do no good service except it be in sight, that he may gain thanks, and
the villane proves naught else but a pyk-thank knave, and a back-byter of his
dearest companions. I wonder but some of the wiser sort of noble men, should
ponder and consider very well, sic villainy, and still grace the pyk-thank with a
listing ear, take good heed to his detracting discourse, and ever aim at all
his actions with a diligent eye, protect his knaverie with a smyle, why?
because such men are mali necessarij, o but good my lord, believe him not
without great triell, take a reckoning of his relation, and keep not malice in
a misconstring mind toward an honest man, if it be a matter of importance,
which concerns both honor and credit, then spare not to call the suspected
man before thee, and ask him in secracie, if this or that be true, if thou
findst any knavery, either be malice, or be just tryell, guerdone the honest
man with honor, and ^asleir the knave with shame, contrare-poyson such
consuming cankers, and keep not such venomous vipers in thy company, but still
away with savors of discention, and breeders of mutanie, for how can a city
stand, or yet hold out against the enemy, when it is divided in it self: Or
if the members of thy body be cresd or feistred with filthy sores: thou who is
the head, can never be well; thy followers are thy guard; and therefore thy
guard that guards thee should be sound and of one mind, accompanied with love
one to another, without envy, grudge, or malice: and above all things, they
should carry a great and awful respect, to thee who is their only head and
master: thy glory is to see all that attends thee in good equipage; and it is
thy shame to see men that corrupts good manners, to bide in thy company, or to
attend thy person. The honest gesture decores the grofnes of the apparel, but
evil education would spoil a diadem. If thy servant or retainer, after two or
three admonitions refuse instruction, decard him, and let him go: because
simple ignorance can be no excuse to arrogant wilfulnes, be courteous to thy
friend, and still be noble to thy followers. Because they who attends-thee, are
as strengthie pillars of thy estate, and without them thou can not stand. Be
liberal, but no ways prodigal, and as a contagious Pest, ever eschew that
filthy and detestable vice of avarice. Contemn that beggarly Canalze, who
counsels thee, to shame thy worth with a niggards mind, great is the
great-mans honor, which consists in a wise servant. It is not the discreet
holding of a great house, will impoverish thy state. And it is not thy noble
heart to thy followers will empty thy cofers: No, it is when the unthrift in
his prodigal humor, most vngratiously spends his rent upon change of whores,
and diligent Pandors in secret villainy, when the darkened clouds of the quiet
night, brings silent rest to the honest sort: even then is the sparks of
perdition ranging the streets, and making their ritcht triumph in bordels. O
heavens why made thou night to cover sin: it is this and such abuse as this
be, that cankers the state of many a man: these abominations breeds many
beggars, and draws down Gods irresistable wrath upon them selves, their house,
and their offspring. And again, how will other misers spend their riches so
narrowly, and yet how swiftly will it consume, because God has not blessed
their portion, some will hoard it up, and neither has joy nor comfort of it:
they hold in their hand, and with earnest eyes over-looks every thing
niggardly: it is they who ever takes a sharp reckoning of the kitchen- Counts,
and still gives strait command to the Butler and Pantry keeper, betwixt meals
to go take the air in some quiet corner, where he can not be found. O these
be they who subscriues their precepts with a counterfetted Character, to the
effect the deburser should not answer his Masters warrant, but only make
payment with shifting delays. These sort of men wears their clothes till
they wear out of fashion, and than transformes them in the last edition. When
this ma is called to any convention concerning his King or Country, or yet to
pleasure his friends in any affairs, to eschew the journey, then be sure he
will have the meagrime in his head, a pain in his teeth, some colic in his
intrals, either Siatike, or else by guttish, then must his beggarly worship
keep his chamber, and take some Physic to expel the humor of expenses: they
are always deaf when they hear of any thing that sounds of asking: they can
never be found in their giving humor, but are always stark blind at the sight
of the well-deserving man: this ignobilitates honor, it crowns shame, it
treads down virtue, it inthrones vice, and makes hellish ingratitude, to become
the triumph of time. Should a Princely spirit be so base, as not to have a care
of the man whose merit is great: should he have that ingratfull mind to make a
forged fault, rob him of his reward, and then send him to thee yet: or should
he have that unchristian heart, to let him know of want. O worse (yea ten
thousand times worse) then the very hearts of brute beasts: Cursed be thou
ingratitude, the chief of all evils: fie on such beggarly breasts, which are
borne to be Noble, and then contains naught else but pinching avarice.
Ocancro, le Spalle d' un huomo da been non debbono portare la somma di tante
injury. O it grieves me mightily that I can not rail enough, and it grieves
me more, that nothing else but bare railing should work revenge upon the base
abuse of such strange monsters, whose degenerate haerts from true Nobility are
gilt overwith golden words. But what ca^ be said to a cautarisd conscience, a
remorsles mind, or to a hardened and sensles heart, who never died the face of
honor with the blush of shame, the gentle heart of an honest minded man, bolds
his turret of reco^pe^ce upon the ruinous ground of idle promises, still
credulous, and ever rich in naked hope, till at last his merit grows so
great, that his sight becomes loathsome to him, who should reward him. Who is
it then that gets and gathers all the gains? flattering pick-thanks, unworthy
fowls, cowardly poltrones, and canailies, who still keeps begging in request.
So idiots, stoyicks, and parasites, are rich, when Princes and gallants are
poor. Such is the subtilty of snakie hatchers of envious treason, and subtle
villains. To see two crafty knaves meet in Court, in street, or any where, how
will they salute one another with shaking of hands with low courtesaies, annixt
complements, offers, vows, and large promises will pass betwixt them: how
ware will they be ever doubting, not unlike two cunning and sure Fensers lying
at a safe guard: O that then their body were transparent like crystal, and
that an honest man might see what hid mischief lies in their hearts. I think
the honest man might gnash his teeth, to see the hot rancounter of equal
deceit, the true race of Babilonian rascals, the slaves of pride, and
generation of Haman. If any such villain have the credit to gather and take up
his Lords rents and revenewes, in receaving and debursing: then be sure he
keeps the two rules of Arthmetick, to wit, Substraction and Multiplication,
the one helps him in his receaving, the other in his debursing, he must
enterline his counts, enlarge his sums, invent new journeyes, exploit all
kind of courses that may be expensive, only a purpose to make great volumes
of reckonings, that his vantage may be the greater, and his theift the better
covered. He robs his Master of his revenewes, and makes him self a great
rent, and with a godless purchase he lives like a Prince, enritching his own
posterity, and puts his Master ever in debt: the Noble man thinks him self
to be well served, and that he has a faithful and trusty servant, when the
villain is a cutthroat, a vnderminder of his Masters state, and brings his
lands in morgage: this man will counsel his Lord to sell his lands, and this
villain will be the first will offer him money; these kind of deeeaving
Parasites are made rich with falls and godless conquest. O this man is he
that has no soul, he plagues the tenants, and stops the ear of his Master
from the poor farmourers complaint: he has no compassion on the widow or
fatherless, in giving of rewards he robs his Lords honor, being commanded,
he either gives little, or none at all: he pays the well-deserving man with
fair excusing-words, and the poor distressed beggar with God help you, but
when the purse-bearers reckonings are produced, how large, how liberal, and
how honorable will he make his Masters rewards to be. O this affronted
villain with a shameless face, and with perjured oaths, will damn the very
soul of him self. O that the King, the Duke, Lord, Lord, Master, or the
superior, be what thou will, would take such a treacherous knave by the neck,
and say, Sir, give me a reckoning of my goods; thou art a cogging villain,
thou art a traitor, and betrayed me: thou have stolen my substance and begirt
me, thy deceit has over-siled my Parents, robbed their lands, and made me to
live in poverty: thou have woone all with false dice, lay down again, or else
thou shall smart for it. I think, be what thou may be, thou may do this, and
thou may do it with authority of a good conscience, and so give an example to
all cosoning rascals, to cogging flatterers, and to all treacherous villains.
When Generals, Coronals, or Captains, receaues pay from the Prince or his
Pagadore, to do good service to the Country, they who are commanders of the
Army, will make new Callenders of their own enlarging years and months: for
sometime they will make the year to be 15. months, the month five or six
weeks, to the wrack of the soldiers: and again, their monters shall be given
in to be thirty, forty, fifty, or a hundredth thousand strong, when they
shall scarce be half so many men, so that false monters is the ruin of a camp,
the robbing of a Prince, and the only destruction of poor soldiers by the law
of Arms and counsel of wars, such caterpillars of a Camp should be
hanged, cashiered, raked and tortured, and at lest get the strapado. Many a
Captain goes gallant, and plays the bravado with the poor soldiers pay: how
can a soldier live, when he gets no pay to maintain him. Js it not a great
and worthy glory, and a mighty courage to the Generals heart, when he sees
all his Army of gallant men in good equipage, and his Camp well furnished. And
to be more careful for the soldiers then for him self, seeing the soldier is
his defense, and the only fortress of his estate. O that the eyes of Princes
would not wink at such villainy, and that their wealth should not be so
unworthily bestowed. A kings minion that knows all the secrets of the king,
and next to the Kings body, perchance will be an intelligencer, a factor, and a
doer for neighbor Princes, pressing to raise and keep them up, and
vnderminding his own King and Master, taking large sums, so that he becomes a
Pentioner to a foreign Prince, yea if it were to ten Kings, he will take of
all* this busie-headed and crafty knave, for all this he is not mistrusted,
but still advanced and esteemed to be a true subject, and still thought a man
who does good service to his King and Country. Now in this chirping time of
peace, when none triumphs but cowards and poltrones, soldiers and scholars
are banished Court and Country, they are counted a contagious Pest, and
unprofitable instruments. What shall we all turn cowards, and still try our
patience in suffering wrongs? when the courageous soldier begins to discourse
how he has spent his time in wars he begins to tell in the Winter how he lies
in garrison, and in the spriug-time like a well managed ship going to her
voyage, so in brave equipage goes he to the fields commanded by his Chieften,
and animated in his march with sound of Trumpet, and tuck of Drums, if they
approach the enemy in fair fields, they must march in battle, if the Camp
defend or pursue a Town, they must enritch them selves, make redoubts, and
conques ground, defend their Cannon, set their Gabions, and palisade their
weaker places, the soldier must stand his hour sentinel perdew, under the
mercy of Musket and Canon, and what is all their sport? naught else but flying
of Colors, sounding of Trumpets, touking of Drums, clashing of harness,
shooting off Muskets, roaring of Cannons, thundering of vp-blowne-Mines, giving
assaults, and getting repulse with sundry and thick sorts, making retreats,
and with fresh courage joining hot and fierce rancounters, bringing
destruction, rape, bloodshed, murder, and cruel vengeance. O this fearful
discourse makes the hairs of a coward stand right up, he will not buy honor
at such a perrillous rate, he will stay at home and be knighted either by moyen
or money: such is the abuse of worthy knighthood, that now every kitchen-fellow
may attain to, be flattering credit of euil-purchasd wealth. Non venit ex
molli vivida fama thoro, Dolours, pains, guts, avarice, ambition, envy the
stony gravel, the plague, inventing of treason, and thousand worse
infirmities, and worse diseases are found and bred by idleness and staying at
home, much more then in travail or going in far journeyes. I hate this
miserable sect of Epicurians, who only loves to eat, sleep, and drink.
Look on a drunkard, how the continual exhausting of drink enflames his face
with fire, and transformes his nose in a red rock of spurtled and white-headed
rubies, whose glistring luister yields a vermilion reflex to palenes it self:
and yet the more the stomach be oppressed with the strength of drink, the more
it heates and dries up, Quo plus sunt potae, plus sitiuntur aquae, such sort of
tiplers who loves and has pleasure in bibbing and continual supping of strong
drink: this Epicurian sect, I say, makes their back and their belly their
summum bonum. O I blame the great abuse of companionrie, who can not keep
society, and be merry in honest and civil pastimes: they think all nothing
if that they drink not drunk: what a beastly thing is drunkenness? and what an
abominable mother is it to all other sins, it is the very gate of hell.
Alexander the great, when he had conquest the world with valor, yet drink
overthrew him, and killed him: how many branches of mischief springs from that
filthy rowt? J say to thee who has been a drunkard, and has been an abuser of
the benefits of God, perchance rather for the love of company, then for the
love of drink: If thou have remorse, and is angry at thy self, thou art happy.
And I will entreat thee to behold the beastly behavior of a drunkard, when he
is in his drunkenness, and it will make thee hate drunkenness worse then any
thing: Eccle. 26. cap.
in man it is more then filthy, and in woman ten thousand times worse, because
she can not hide her own shame. J confess and allow that both men and women
should drink moderatly, for the better health of their body: but J think it
odious, when one shall (as it were) force another to drink more then measure,
to surfeit and spoil them selves to this, I say with the Italian, e qual e di
pazzia signo peu expresso: Che per altri, voler perder se stesso: It is a great
sign of madness, when any body for the love of another will kill him self: To
whom is woe? Pro. 23. Cap.
to whom is sorrow? to whom is strife? to whom is murmuring? to whom are wounds
without cause? (and) to whom is the rednes of the face and the eyes? even to
drunkards. This insatiable custom is so enlarged within this Island, that it is
in all sorts of estates changed from vice to virtue. How many sundry sorts of
sins has intruded them selves amongst us; strange and new invented sins
comes from the Court to the Country, like the new fashions of apparel: how
new fangled are we to follow them, discending by degrees, for we may still see
the baser sort striving to imitate their betters, and rather in wickedness then
in goodness: the Clown strives in his fashious to follow the Gentleman, and the
Court waiting Ladies is counterfaited with the Country drab, few or none
follows the honest man's manners honesty, and truth are becomd banished
traitors, nor yet dare Charity come near Court: the civil and upright man
has waited long in the glorious Coutts of Kings, and can not find favor, he
is turned back wearied, he weeps to see a scurvie and ungodly consort of
villains, crowned with deceit, and wrapped up in the painted robes of flattery,
in the Triumph of thieft, adorned with inequitie in the Chariot of
forgetfulness, drawn to hell with the seven deadly sins. What can heroyick
spirits say to the heinous abuse of precious time in this last and miserable
age. Let him pity forgetfulness, and sigh at villainy, or rather let him turn
home again to burden his friends when his lands are engaged, when he has
spent all, and left nothing, and when moyen and money failed him both at once,
he could not beg a suit: he could not buy an Office, nor he could not get one
church benefice gratis: such was the rage of ingratitude. Let this man J say,
who has spent his time, turn; and say with that most galant man, Awful regard
disputes not with Kings, but takes repulse, and never asks why. We may see
what strange pains the worldling takes on him, to be rich, what inventions,
and with what great industry: behold the Merchant what he undertakes, to be
rich: what restless travailes with great hazard of his life, compassing (as
it were) the whole earth to fly poverty, and leaves no corner in the world
unsought: Impiger extremos currit mercator ad indos per Mare Pauperiem fugiens
per Saxa per ignes. Then look again on the Machanike or artisant, with rare
inventions of his spirit: the diligent labourer of the ground, with the sweat
of his body, and every one by lawful or unlawful means wrings their wits,
and still travailes to be rich. Now let us consider what it is that riches
will not do? We may behold and see how it mendes all deformities, and
oft-times transformes Virtue in Vice: first, it makes the base Poltrone proud,
the foolish esteemed wise, the ignorant stoyick to be preferred. And it makes a
Lord or Chief Commander, to honor a borne Rascal, and a very slave by
Nature, he will make him speak with a covert head, wash with him, sit at
meat, and eat in his own dish, with a flattering ear he will entertain his
discourse, sometimes with gravitie, and sometimes with smiling, as it were to
give a counterfeit grace, to the ignorant Ass: why will it please his Lordship
to do all this? Because his honor thinks such men are needful instruments
to engage them selves, and become Cationers for the Lords debt. A help to
furnish his house, to store his Citchin, and still to lend him money. O but
when this poor deceaved sot, begins to be beggerd, then his Lordship presently
decards him, because he can not serve more to make up a full hundredth. At
last, this gulld rascal comes with cap in hand, with low-stouping courtesy
licking the way with his slavish knees, and half weeping begs his own; then
his Lordship becomes deaf, and has no more Judas kisses to bestow on his
foolish worship. What may this man think of him self, and of his dear bought
courtesy, the Lord leaned on his shoulder, the Lord called him Sir, and still
bad him cover his head; the Lord set him at his side, and drank healths to
him: and now when all is gone, the Lord pays him with a promise, and so bids
him farewell. What will riches do more? it will cover villainy, invent
mischief, and bring forth treason, it betrays beauty, and makes love
mercinarie, it corrupts justice, and with damnable deeds damnes the soul of
mankind. This desire of riches has made, and still makes many a man to
hazard all, there is nothing but the worldling will do for gold, even all in
all: This made that heroyick and learned Poet cry out, Quid non mortalia
pectora Cogis auri sacra fames: What shall I say to thee who is contented with
sobriety, and caries truth in thy heart, when thou see the great abuse of
riches, it makes thee desire no more then is sufficient to maintain thee with
all, yet for all this, thy good deeds perchance can not purchase it: thy Lord
or Master enranks thee with the deceaved sort, and so forgets thee! O thou,
had I wist what an excellent plaster art thou for the incurable disease of
repentance. What a great grief is it to the well-deserving man, who has a
promise to be rewarded, and becomes ashamed to importune his debtor? but O,
when he stands in his sight, what a loathsome book, becomes he to desired
forgetnes, which yields naught else but flattering smiles, and never performd
promises. Now I speak to the young aspiring gallant, learn in time to beware
at other men's harms, Provide for age and sickness. Look on the aged Conrtiers,
who has spent their youth in waiting on, they go scambling like Butchers dogs
in Lentron, they are like old cart-horse, like out-worne hounds, and the very
scoff of time. Therefore when thou looks on the Anatomy of time, and has
considered the secrets thereof, O how dear should it be to thee, and how
should thou behave thy self in this time, to provide for the time to come, if
thou be poor, who will care for thee, suppose thou art of the most rare wit in
the world, adorned and made perfect with all the chief, and principal gifts of
nature enricht and decoird with the aditions of Art, yet for all this, if
poverty hant thee, few or none shall esteem of thee now in thy youth-head. I
counsel thee to think well on the time past, consider the time present, and
have a care of the time to come.

Front Capelata est Sed post Ocasio Calua.
SWeet lovely flower, in gallant flourish fair
Whilst beautie's prayed, does youthful fields decore,
Take time in time, for time in time is rare,
Once past and gone, it never comes no more,
Than take this time, so long as it is in store,
And hunt not toys, to perrill thy estate:
Wise may thou be, but yet be wise before
Thou shall repent, and then it is to late:
Dear friend believe, I wish thy sad annoyes,
Times altring Fates may turn them all in joys.


Learning has no Micaenas, blind Avarice has banished Charity, good works
now a-dayes does no good, it is only naked faith that serves the turn. O
happy is that man who can do for him self, and puts no trust in the pinching
mercy of great men's liberality for my own part I say:

O That I might, then should I live content,
And not complain on Fortunes wotthlesse worth:
What Is gone let go, it is I must needs repent,
Whilst silence sad, my sorrows shall set forth:
My outward show, can not bewray my heart;
I smile, but none can Judge my inward smart.
How shall I choose but pity the distressed estate of other men, when Memory
calls my own deere-bought experience to a reckoning, and the^ revolues the
great volumes of Fortunes strange Enigmatizing Characters, painted with the
ruthlesse pensil of time, whose tragical Map is still outstretched before my
eyes, where I find all the flourish of my fruitless hopes lying
Winter-blasted, and scattered with the merciless storms of ingratitude.

Si ingratum dixeris omnia dixeris.
WHilst I did hazard, for uncertain toys
Vain flattering hope, expeld my present fears:
O hapless I, who for momentall Joys
Must pay long pain with sad repenting tears.
This inward grief my burdened soul now bears
With outward show I strive to make it light:
But when the course of bypast time compeares,
And Tragick-like out-spreads before my sight.
Even then I give my rigours rage all right,
With passion strange, transported here and there,
I spend the day and wast the wearying night,
Imparting plaints unto the idle air.
O what remedy, time past has no remorse,
Then must I needs endure this pain perforce.


I thank my God, who with his outstretched arms has borne me through seas,
and over land, giving his blessed Angel charge of me, who never left me in all
my far and wearisome journeyes, so that in every course and hazard of my
travailes, his eyes of mercy has ever shined on me, and many times has he
delivered me, when despairing dangers did threaten my life. All honor and
glory be to thee my God, and give me grace that my experience of time past, may
govern the time te come. O this is a perrillous time, the time of mischief
and misery, the latter days full of calamity: now is the age of deceit, when
the father does oppose himself against the son, the son against the father,
brothes, and sisters, and all are at strife, every one laboring how to deceive
his friend, and every one seeking how to betray his neighbor, Bonds, Seals,
Obligations, Sureties, all can not serve the turn to maintain truth: if thou
have to do with a man of greater worth then thy self, then be sure he will
minas thee, and so pay his debts with threatenings. Will thou appeal him before
a Judge, with new invented shifts of Law he will out-wearie thee: with briberie
he will beggar thee, and thou shall never be the better. O thou wicked
oppressor, and thou false and partial Judge, what shall thou answer to the
head Justice of heaven, when God says by his Prophet Jeremy, Ego sum Iudex
and testis, I am both Judge and witness. O says the wicked man in his heart, I
fear not God, therefore I can not love him with my soul, nor yet can I love
my neighbor, because J envy his good estate, and covets his riches, and
would wrack him: so J own no duty to God at all, nor love to my neighbor, I
scorn, spurn, and treds on the laws of God. O let me never think on that
terrible and fearful day of Judgment, nor of the horrible and endless burning
pains of hell. I will altogether forget it, because it will make me despare,
take away this frivolous word Religion, why? because it keeps me from my
pleasures, and does imprison all my fleshly liberties, the foolish man says
in his heart, Reu. 22. cap.
there is no God. He that is unjust, let him be unjust still, (says Christ)
and let the deceiuer be still deceitful, let him dwell in his abominations,
and triumph in all kind of wickedness, For behold I come shortly, and my
rewerde is with me to rander every man as he does deserve. The custom of
sin and continual use, makes sin pleasant, abundance of impiety, and
couldnesse of Charity destroys all, and makes many Atheists. What fruits of
Charity may we behold in sundry Countries? naught else but the pitiful
spectacle of Envy and Malice, Oppression and Bloodshed, Justice wreisted with
brybrie, the negligence of magistrates suffering victual and provision to part
from our Country, leaving derth and famine amongst us, the lame^tations of the
poor is not heard behold the youths and scollers going idle, some becomes
merchants, or else machaniks, learning is held in disdain, Scoles, Colleges, and
Universities are not me^taind, al decaies out of memory. O how may the heart of
a true chistia^ bleid to se the lamentable sight of down-fallen bridges,
decayed hospitals and ruenus churches, Nunc seges vbi Sion fuit, through
Holland, and in many parts of the low Countries, what great objects of
destruction, what overthrowe of fair and rich architectors, what large
prospect of abusde policy? and what deformation is now found in reformation?
where shall the murderer be condemned, or the theif receive the censure of his
punishment? Jn the Church, where shall the Judge hear the oaths of perjurie?
Jn the Church, where shall meetings, blockings, buying, and selling be? No
where but for the most part in the Church, My house (says Christ) it should be
called an house of prater, Mat. 21
but you have made it a den of thieves. And besides all this, what sacraledge
is committed, and how is the riches, goods, and lands, (which be proper duty
belongs to the Church) how are they desperst amongst the Commons, and keep it
(as it were) in contemp of God, O says Christ, Give unto Caesar those things
which are Caesar's, and give unto God those things which belongs to God. The
greatness of our sins has procured the wrath of God his punishment threatens
us, and his judgments are laid before us, Who can hide himself from Gods
anger? Let us cry out with Jeremy the Prophet, O thou sword of the Lord, Cap.
47
how long will it be ere thou cease? turn again into thy scalbert, rest and
be still. But o, the dulnes of understanding, and the arrogant strife against
verity, makes the hearts of man like Pharos hardened, and considers not this,
our ears are deaf, we hear not, our eyes are blind and sees not his great
wonders, Gods displeasure comes by sin, and nothing can appease him but
repentance. But the devil who is prince of this world stands like the master
of a fair lotry, and foolish mankind looks upon his deceauing vanities; at
last their sight being insnarde, and their heart tempted with his glittering
allurements, they hazard their soul in hope of gain. O man, how art thou
deceaved, and how many strange ways seekst thou to come to the kingdom of
heaven? Mat. 7.
Many cries Lord, Lord, that shall not enter in the Kingdom of our Lord. Many
professes Christ, that shall never be pertaker of Christ's glory. What a great
consort of Antechristians are now desperst amongst Christians. Revel. cap. 13.
Now is the mother of whoredoms mounted upon the seven headed best, that
ten-crownd-hornd Monster, that oulde Dragon the devil, 17. cap.
has given him his power, and has given the beast authority, and has
printed on his forehead the name of Blasphlemie, he spews, and vomets forth
unclean spirits, which are Ambassaders to enlarge the kingdom of Satan,
Bahilon is drunk with the blood of Saints, and with the blood of Marters of
Jesus Christ, the pitiful lamentation of the Church, spoken be the Prophet in
the person of our Savior, Ier. 1. cap.
saying, Have ye uo regard all ye that pass by this way, behold and see, if
there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow. Our long suffering GOD at last being
forced to speak, I have long time (says he) holden my peace, I have been
still and refrained my self* now will I cry like a traveling woman, and I
shall both destroy and devour at once. In that day of Gods wrath what shall
the Idols of the Gentiles help thee made of gould and silver, the workmanship
of man's hands, they have a mouth and speaks not, they have eyes and sees not,
and they have ears and hears not, such sensles stocks and stones can not
help thee. The Prophet David cries out, Similes illis siaut, qui faciunt ea,
and omnes qui considunt in eis. Let them be like unto Idols who makes them,
and let them be deaf, dumb, and blind, let them be altogether senseless who
puts their trust in them; GOD is a Jelous God, he will not be mocked, nor
deceived, he knows all them who boweth their knies to Baall, and looks on the
filthiness of them who commits fornication with the whore of Babel, He has
marked all them that drinks the poysonus dregs of her abominations, what
answer gives the dissembling Hypocrite to this? O says he, I did it to save
my life, my lands, and my possessions, or to get miantainance to sustain me. O
thou faint-hearted coward, thou fearst that man who has power to kill the
body only, Mat. 10 cap.
but thou fearst not God who has power to kill both soul and body, and to
cast thee in hels fire. If thou think either riches, thy wife, or thy
children, or thy Country, better then Jesus Christ, thou art not worthy of
him, nor thou shall never be pertaker with him in glory. Yet thou will reason
farther, and say, O I did it only in outward show of body but not with my
heart. Now I will ask thee again? if thou had a wife whom thou loved well,
and if thou fand thy wife, lying in the bosom of a stranger, adulteratting her
body? would thou not say, O wife thou have wronged me, thou have violated thy
matrimonial vow before God, the world and me: Then if she should say, dear
husband, I have lent this man only my body, but I keep my heart to you, what
a villainous excuse would this be? would thou not repudeat her, Reave. 3. cap.
abandon her, and forsake her? Even so will our living God do to thee, he will
spew thee out of his mouth, because thou art neither hot nor cold. And yet
for all this, hear the comfortable speech of God his kind intretie, his
unspeakable mercy (says he) Although the man forsake his wife for her
adultery, yet I will not forsake thee; Ier. 3. cap.
thou have played the harlot with many lovers, after many strange Gods have
thou gone astray turn again to me, says the Lord. I will receive thee, and
if thou will not turn again, what says the Prophet David, Nisi conuersi fuerit
is gladium suum vibrauit, arcum suum tetendit and par auit illu^. Psalm. 7.
If thou convert not, God has sharped his sword, he has bent his bow, and
made it ready. O that it would please God to end the discord amongst
Christians, and that they would go against the Turks, Jews and Infidels,
either to convert them, or else to confound them, Vt edificentur muri
Jerusalem, that the walls of Jerusalem may be builded. These are the latter
days wherein we stager with the drunknes of sin, and the dulnes of our
understanding can not reach to this, the hypocrit will sigh and groan at a
preaching, and be his behavior he will appear to the world to be a reformd man.
But o the villain will not make restititutio^ of wrangous geir, nor will pay
duty for oppression, so that the iniquity of the impious and hypocritical
presitian leans always to the mercy of God, they never think on his justice O
ignorant fool, is he GOD of mercy, so is he GOD of Justice, Deuteronomy. cap. 32.
Vengence is mine (says the Lord) I visit the sins of the fathers upon the
third and fourth generations. Exodus cap. 20.
Want of fear makes the sinner sensles, they build so much on faith, that the
pride of their faith makes them faithles: in whom I (say again) shall the
upright man trust when the world is so full of deceitful villainy? Beware of
that man (says the Italian) who gives thee fairer words then he was wont to
give thee, for he is either minded to deceive thee, or else he has deceaved
thee already, then again the Italian cries out, De gli 'amici mei guarda me
dio d' gli inimici mei, guardro benio. And yet for all this, what if a man had
Argus eyes to watch deceit? Yet he may be deceived, such is the craft of the
subtle deceiuer. O thou deceiving Hypocrasie, what an Eie-blinding behavior?
What an external show of chirping piety putst thou on to mask thy damnable
deiling? The pride and envy of the heart, covered with out-ward dissimulation,
seems to correct vice, and spit at sin, thou walkst on the streets with a
down-east look to Hell? thy modest apparel is the only coverture of
Gluttony, Ambit on and Venery, this is the true garment of civilitie, thy
common and smooth speeches, is all compunde with borrowed spcriptures, thy be
yea and na is no swearing, but both crossed and cursed is he who believes thee,
Quoniam non est in ore cornm veritas. How bravely does S. Peter paint such
men in their own colors when he says, 2 Epist 2. cap.
Through covetousness shall they with fained words, make marchandries of you,
their judgment is not far off, and their damnation sleeps not. And again,
hear what our Savior cries out, O generation of Vipers, how can you speak
good things, when you are evil your selves. Thou atr a sighing ^ulla-fidian
brother, who is not ashamed to call thy self a brother in Christ, sigh and sob
forth thy villainy, and be dambd. How many (and wondrous) damned sects and
opinions are spread on the face of the earth, and every one to affirm their
own erraesie, will lay hand on Scripture, wresting the word of GOD to be a
warant to their dreaming inventions. O thou Religion how art thou changed? And
with what strange and diverse colors art thou painted with? How is thy face
disfigurd, and thy apperrell polluted? And with in grate worms of the Earth,
how art thou transformde? How can the simple soul know thee? Or to what hand
shall he turn to, when so many contrare opinions are at such a miserable
strife? 2. Cor. 4. cap.
It is only to the humble heart that the treuth is manifested, and the true
passage of Heaven is discovered, Esaias. 2. cap.
because Jesus Christ has placed his Tabernacle in the Soon, and he has
builded his Church like a great City on the top of a Mountain, Mat. 5.
blind Arrogance can not (nor will not) see it. Ephesians. 5. cap.
Our Savior, has bought it with no less price, then the price of himself, he
has made it a glorious Church without spot or wrinkle, having no blame at all.
Let Heretics bark, and hellish spirits rage against the truth, what then? Et
porti inferi non preualerunt. Let detestable errors, and all the authors of
sects, let all such vipers, (I say) turn their infectious stings in their own
bosoms, Sed vestrum quis basiliscus erit, woe be unto you adulterers of Gods
word, and woe he unto you, who shuts up the kingdom of heaven before men, Mat.
23 cap.
for you your selves will not enter, nor will ye suffer them to enter who
willingly would enter. O serpents the generation of Vipers, how can ye escape
the damnation of Hell. Dira tibi cum sis vt Cham, execratio certa est, nam
matrem rides, risit ut ille patrem. Ye shall know them be their fruits of
vain- glory, Mat. 7. cap.
pride, emulation, sedition, contention, and vndantoned lust of the flesh. And
more then all this, you shall know them by unpardonable sins against the
holy Gh^st, to wit, Impugnatio veritatis, inuidentia fraternae gratiae, Mat.
12 cap.
presumptio, impenitentia, obstinatio, and disperatio. The heinous blasphlemie
against the holy Ghost shall never be forgiven in this world, nor in the world
to come, Deu. 32. cap.
For their vine is of the vine of Sodom and Gomorach, there grapes are of gall,
their clusters are most bitter, their vines are the poison of Dragons, and of
the cruel gall of Cockatrises. O thou man of God, J request thee to say with
the Prophet David, Iudica me Deus, and decerne causam meam, de gente non sancta
ab homine iniquo and doloso erue me Deus. Let wisdom furnish the patience, to
contrare-poyson the contagious teeth of such mad dogs in these Canicular days,
what detestable a thing is it, to see and hear a fraternity of obstinat
ignorants, barking (amongst themselves, at their own errors, to spoil
scripture, wrong Religion, and pratle of divinity, still arrogant and ever
scorning to be censurde with the more ancient and grauer judgments. It is no
wonder, but the wonder of this (wondrous error) should make the hearers amasd.
Who would not smyle at the gesture of a young Philosophical fellow (who in his
youth-heid hes been anointed with Oleum Philosophorum) to hear him in his
tedeus talk of Juggling sophestry, in superfluous circumlocutions, in his
far-fetched exemples, in base applications, and in a never-ending discourse,
seems to himself a most rare scoller by art, and then by nature he proves
not else but a redicolus fool; these are they whom the Apostle S. Paul bids
you be ware of, that their vain deceiving Philosophy corrupt you not, which are
not else but the traditions of men. Let al men of a soled understanding allow
the Spanish Proverb, Colos 2. cap.
A palabras locas orejas surdas, y que a mucho hablar, mucho errar, The
Charleton or as the Dutchman calls him, the Quicksilver. This cogging rascal
will stand upon a Market place, and there with a boulde errected face, he will
begin and tell of many invented miracles, how his Oils and Waters has done
such rare wonders in restoring health to the diseased persons, in curing (as it
were) incurable wounds and presently he will produce some fained Charter sealed
with walx to approve his villainy, and be this means he persuades poor
ignorants to buy his poisoning drogs. This is he who will undertake to mend
any thing what-som-ever. The Mutebanky in Italy are not so full of deceit, but
I grant in their subtle villainies, they go far beyond them, yet they are
less hurtefull to their auditors, and are more merry with less offense, yet I
will not purge them of knavery. Who is a more selfe-deceiving fool in
wisdom? or who is a greater Ass? then a Prognostication-maker, who says,
that the Conjectures, which they have is founded upon probabylities, and not
upon absolut necessities, and so consequently, the most perfect Prognosticators
sometimes must err; but why may not ane Astronomicall villain, joynd with a
dreaming Astrologitian villan, make and invent leisings, it is they who will
take upon them to tell what is to come, and seek to prejudge God of his glory,
it is they who will tell the alterations of time, the change of weather, and in
what estate a man's body shall be in, for that year into come. I think such
Fortun-tellers or such Aegiptian-palmisters, when they set down such Physical
rules to a man or woman's body, should be prejuditiall to the wise Physician,
because he lives him nothing to say, seeing he in his Mathematical humor
circumvolves the Heavens, and so audatiouslie intrudes himself in the
secreetes of the Omnipotent GOD. But as for you ignorant Medicenars, I think
you are not much prejudged, because your opinion is doubtsome, your judgment
is void of understanding, and your experience is naught else but mere poison.
And I say unto you with learned Antonie d' Guevara, Medesyns de Valance,
longues robes and peu de sciance* But you whom I honor and reverence, that you
may rather allow (I mean you who fears GOD) and whose understanding is great)
I hope (ye, I say) will excuse me to rail upon the abuse of this rare and
wonderful Science. The Book of GOD says, Honor the Physician with that
honor which is dew unto him, because of necessity, Eccl. 38 cap.
for the Lord has created him. Then I will speak against such fantastic
fellows, which I have seen here in this Isle of Britain, and in many other
foreign Countries (where I have traveled) profess the Art of Medicine, and
produce their great Charters, and Patents, sealde and subscrived where they
have been made Doctors, and then they are noght else but the very abusers of
Physic, what a derision is it, to hear and se Domine Doctor discourse with a
borrowed Countenance, and commonly at meat over the table, without respect of
persons? O says he, you must not eat of this, it offends the stomach; such
and such is restoratiue, and this again breeds constipation, this is laxatiue,
this breaks wind, and expels the Colic, and this is your only meat for
confirmde stones, it purges the raines, and dissolues quickly, O what a scurvy
discourse is this for the ears of a chest and skunring-hearted Lady? and
chiefly at meat to talk of confirmde stones, purging of raines, and dissolving
quickly. Fie upon it, I think it should not be suffered, and yet for the
fashions sake, my Lord Doctor will not spare to produce some place of Gallein
to make his leysings good and current. Then begins he to frame a large
Comenter upon a borrowed text, interluding such a long Parenthesis, till at
last his haulting speeches makes him altogeher forget the origenall of his
former subject. O how will he hesitat when his long discourse begins to
challenge memory, then obruptly will he change purpose not unlike a bloud-hound
which has lost his sent. Woe be to poor patients comes under the Cure of such
ignorants, who scarce can descerne a docken leaf from Tobacco. And yet he will
say, that he is a rare herbest, how often he visits the sick, as often must he
visit gould, or else his visitation is stark naught: When he feels the punses
of any diseased person, O says he, it is an Ague, a raging fever, houlde you
warm, keep your self quiet, let no body molest you, I will come again, and
see your water: Then the next time he comes with a consort of Cut-throts like
himself, and after many whispering doubts, they call the Apotechar, and gives
him a Recepie of I know not what, which poysones the poor distressed patient,
and so sends him to his everlasting home. Then does their ignorance lay the
fault on God, or else on the poor Patient, saying, he would not be reuld, nor
commanded, he would not obey their precepts; and they make the man or the woman
author of their own death. When the Painter is asked why he left his trade of
painting to become a Doctor of Physic. O said he, when I was a Painter, all
the world saw my errors, but now being a Doctor of Physic, I make the earth to
bury my wrongs, they seek forth the life and riches of mankind. Well may
such ignorants be calde, the Officers of death, for the life of mankind, is
the tryell of their drinks, and with their poysning drogs, they furnish graves,
and feeds worms. When the Patient is dead, the Doctor must be paid for all
his visitations, the Apotechar for his drogs, the Barber for his Insitions,
Fmmetings, Unguents, Cataplasms, Emplasterings, Balmes, and mollefying
Ceir-cloaths, this must all be paid and much more. What if worse, none except
it be Charlytous, Brokers, and Vsurars, flesh-flees, that still gnawes upon
glad backs, bloud-suckers, and a contagious pest to a commonwealth. Why should
not such devoring gulfs be discovered? and why should not such hulcerous
phisters be bard and tented, and Rogry striped naked? wno should not unmask the
worlds shedowed villainy? The beggarly inventio^ of a subtle Pandros, the
exploits and tricks of a mercenary whore, the false reckoning host, the
merchants perjurie, and the Lawyer deceit; but O I do not mean be that Lawyer
whose conscience and soul is not spotted with murdering brybrie, who has
compassion on the poor complainour, and takes the tears of the distressed
widow for good payment: No, I mean be a Ianus-headed Lawyer who has one face
to his Clayant, and another to the Compeditor, whose ever-gaiping hand must
still be anointed in the Palm with the holy ounction of Gould, who must be
courted like a whore with the sight of Angels, strange pieces of gould, and
purse pennies. Woe be to many heart-tortred Clyants, whose right dependes upon
the defense of an avaritious Lawyer. It is such poor souls who has their
ever-warsling minds intreacated in a Laborinth of woes, circumveind with
innumerable fasheries, and still deceived with delays.

Patientia pauperum non peribit in finem. Therefore, O man, arm thy self with
Patience in this miserable time, and courageously fight it out; for so long as
thou art here into this little progress of thy life, great is thy battle, and
many are thy miseries which does oppose themselves against thee; like unto the
restless motion of the sea, one trouble being gone, another follows. Many
sorrows, and few pleasures, when we expect joy, then comes grief, every one
has their own cross, some les, some more. As poverty to an honest heart
brings misery, greef of mind, and melancholy, because he conceals his want,
and can not practice shameless shifts to perrell honesty, sickness, and many a
languishing disease, which is lade before mankind. Oppression, when thy
betters does abuse thee, taks thy wealth, and thy lands, puts the widow and
the fatherles to begry. Lose of friends; when they who should help thee are
gone, and hes no body to comfort thee in thy destres. Shipwreck when thy
substance is lost by sea, and thy life endangered. Banishment, when thou in a
strange country, becomes a poor stranger, far from thy own soil, thou live
an outcast, and thy enemies injoyes thy riches at home. Prison, when the
cross of rancountring misfortunes, does imprison many a man within a Jaill, or
casts him in chains within a Galies, triumphed over with Raskals (and as it
were) the very resting place of all wrongs, when a gentle heart is forced to
harbor patience; and when revenge in a gallant breast turns coward, O this
earthly hell, which hes no other Music, but locking of doors, the noise of
irons and chains, the heavy complaint of distressed prisoners, locked with bonds
in misery, consuming in stink and filthiness. This said the Apostle S. Taul,
Remember them that are in bonds, as if ye were in bonds with them, so that every
one aught by charitable works to have compassion on the poor distressed
prisoners. Says not the Prophet David with great grief of heart Let the sighing
of the prisoners come before thee O Lord: as though he would say, O Lord God,
consider the great anguish of their hearts, take mercy on them, and releue
their wants, how heavy and comfortles is this grievous cross. Some again are
crossed with lose of honor, when a man either falls in disgrace, and commits
some base and filthy fact, or when he suffers wrong, and can not repare
himself, the cross of marriage where there is no peace, quietness, nor rest,
void of all contentment, and ever barking, and so makes the devil smyl at
their dissension. And what can be said to the cross of idle love, which hangs
on the shoulders of all sorts of people, as well married as unmarried. In this
Frenasy many old dotardes begins to renew their declyning age, and takes
upon them the apprehension of youthheid, whilst their gray hairs, and hairles
heads, reckones up their years, and tells the world their folly, Turpe
senilis amor, it is more tolerable in youth, so that it be not superstitious
love; as sometimes to fast from meat and drink, watching the nights, and
sending their lamentations written with bloody letters, railling on cruelty;
and being alone in their retearing walks, they surfat the solitary deserts
with the sorrowful voice of a discontented mind, with weeping eyes in splaine
of passion, O says he,

THe furious force of loves consuming fire,
No time can quench, nor thought can not expel:
Such is the restles rage of my desire,
Which makes my wits within my self rebel:
Thus am I wronged, and ever saikles slain,
I shift my place, but can not shift my pain.
They ever esteem their pains worse then the pains of hell, such are the
sort of penetential lovers, who are always Anatomisd with humorous folly. and
yet how often comes it to pass, that they who taks most pains to please, are
most displeasd, for it is known be vnfallable experience, that the duetifull
lover in a respected persute, is often rejected with many ingratfull disdains.
For some they are which are Monsters in the womanish sex, will hate that man
most, who loves her best, and yield her self to a cowardly pultron of no
desert. And again, we may evidently see, how some men of a currish and mastish
kind, will be most careless of that woman who is most careful of him. Such
are the unthankful discords and interviewing controversies, of this frivolous
thing which the world calls Blinde-loue, it is not the rich apparel, nor
the rare beauty, nor the art of curious engines, nor yet is it the gorgeous
gesture of a glorious woman, which makes the woman: it is the good education,
which brings forth good qualities, and it is the virtue of the mind, which
does produce discretion, makes the woman a perfect woman; and that man, may
truly be called a perfect man, who makes wisdom the inseparable companion of
valor, whose liberal mind aims at honor, and whose courageous heart treads
on fear to conques fame. O it is not the external show of a Peacocks pride,
who with the gesture of his painted plumes, seems to threaten Kingdoms: it is
not the man of personage, nor the robust nature, neither is it the quantity,
but only the quality does the turn. A woman may seem very coy in brave
attire, with a fair face, and yet a whore: a man may be clothed in fine
clothes, he may be very strong of body, of a great stature, and he may in a
fearelesse humor discourse of valor, but when it comes to the push of Fortune,
he may prove naught else but a faint-hearted-coward, a turne-back to courage,
and a runne-away from honor. What a world of vanity is it to see a painted
fellow, that can do nothing else but court a woman, how effeminate will he be,
and how prodigal will the tongue be to lend vows to the heart: Nec jura
retine, veneris per juria venti
irrita, per terras and freta longa ferunt.
How perrillous is it to believe a Lover, how tempting will their words be, and
how will they strain them selves to speak with vehemency. Lady Rethorick
ever hants the mouth of a Lover, and with borrowed speeches of braver wits,
does enlarge their deceit, his perjured promises, his oaths, his vows, his
protestations, his waiting-on, and all his iron senses drawn to feed upon the
actractiue humors of her Adamantall beauty, as when the song or lisping speech
of a Syranicall wench does enchaunt his ears, the feeling of her too-much
tempting flesh, does entangle his touch, her perfumed breath does sweeten his
smell, the nectar of her lascivious kissing, gives delicacie to his taste, and
her petulant beauty feeds his sight, her smile is his heaven, and her frown
is his hell, she is the only idol of his mind, for when he should serve God,
he worships her, if he comes to Church, his looking on her behavior takes
away his hearing, robs him of devotion, and makes him a senseless block, with
staring in her face, he learnes the Art of Phisiognomie, his vain
apprehentions will read a woman's thought in her visage, and when he looks on
her hands, O then he becomes a rare Palmister, for he will not spare to read
her fortunes by lines, for here (says he) is the true score of death, and
there goes the score of life, from this part comes the venerian score, and if
this close with that, ye may be assured to loose your Mayden-head, it is only
this makes the too-much believing wenches despair of their virginity, his
brains are tormented with new inventions, fancy leads him to a frenzy, next
lunaticke, and if he escape madness it self, he may thank GOD. He spendes
the time in his Chamber, with no other thing but with a great Looking-glass,
how to take off his Hatt, how to make his gesture, and in a discourse how to
frame the motion of his hands, to kiss his finger, to make courtesy with his
leg, to set his arm, to smile, to look aside, to walk, and then he stands
gazing on the full proportion of his own body, which J swear is not else but
the very true image of superstitious vanity. When the Mistress of his
desires beholdes the Lovers dilligent attendance, then to keep the Lover still
proud in a slavish service, often times she will in a willing sloathfulnesse,
make her Glove or any such thing fall, that he stouping may attain to that
looked-for-honour, to kiss what he takes up, and so receive a smile for his
offitious humor: He will entertain her dog, keep her Fan, call to light
Torches, hold up the Tapestrie, bring the Coach, and with a loud voice he
will call, to make way for my Lady, to make vows, wear favors, and do
penance, they are the true follies of idle love, but once being cooled of
that hot and lunaticke frenzy, O how will he then blush at his own folly,
when he begins to examine his wits, and considers with him self how far
he has gone astray. But what can be said to such who wants grace to make a
retreat, but still dwells in that endless misery, they never weary, but
thinks all slavish pains pleasure, some by night with music, some with
walking in her sight, some with gifts, songs, letters, and convoyes, every one
by degree does pouse his Fortune, and every one by degrees counterfets their
betters. I often smiled to see a Pandorly-fustian-Rascall, lead a
mercinarie-Perpetuana-drab, there is nothing invented and put in practice by
higher estates, but the baser sort do still strive to imitate, and chiefly in
apparel. It is most true that a man is to be commended, if he be cleanly, and
chiefly in his linings, his hair well dressed, his beard well brushed, and
always his upper lip well curled, with an fresado vp-start, as if every hair
would threaten to pull out his eyes, for if he chance to kiss a Gentlewoman,
some rebellious hair may happen to startle in her nose, and make her sneese,
so by this means, he applies both physic and courtesy at one time, then he
may freely say, God bless you Lady, receaving back the chirping Echo of I
thenk you sir. But look again on the other part of snotty nosd Gentlemen,
with their drouping mustaches covering their mouth, and becomes a harbroy to
meldrops, and a sucking sponge to all the watery distillations of the head, he
will not spare but drink with any body whatsoever, and after he has washed
his filthy beard in the cup, and drawing out dropping, he will suck the hair
so heartily with his under lip. I ask at Civility, if such a poysonnous sup can
be wholesome? of if the kiss of such a slavering mouth be sweet? Far may such
beastly filthiness be from handsome and perfect men, who still attends upon the
handy labor of pitiful Ladies, if a Lady be a perfect woman indeed, and
still aims at honesty: what although she hit not the mark of gentilitie? yet
the pendicles of her desires should be cleanly: as she her self is most
dainty, neat, pollite, and fine in all things, and chiefly in her sleeping
chamber, to see the whitenes of her linings, the cleanliness of her
night-cloathes, her chamber pot filled with sweet flowers (to stay the stur of
water) her perfumed odours, sweet-washing-balls, Pomanders, sundry sorts of
smelling waters, fannes, hatts, feathers, glasses, combs, brouches, ruffes,
fallingbands, red and white face-colours, scarfes, vardingales, artifitiall
locks of curled hair, with vp-standing-frisadoes, their smoothing-skin-clouts,
night-smocks, muffels, maskes, petticotes, waistcoates, gowns, picadels,
attires, chains, carkats, cases, coffers, boxes, and many things more, that if
a man intrude him self in a Ladies bedchamber, and look upon every thing
about him, he shall think him self to be no else where, but in an evil deformed
shop of Merchandise. But on the other part, look upon filthiness it self,
when some women in a sluttish estate, has their bedchamber like a
swines-stie, ill-favored (and vnscoured) Pispot, their combs and brushes, full
of loose hair and filth, their foul smocks ill laid-vp, their knotty phlegm
and spetting on the walls and floor, the black and slaverie circle on their
lips, sweating, smoking, and broathing in their vncleane-sheetes, that if any
would hold their head within the bed, I think the strong smell were an
excellent preservatiue against the Pest, and none like it, except it be the
jumbling of a Jakes, or of a Close-stoole: for it is a true Maxeme, that the
force of such odious and hateful smells, does occupy the sense, and holds
out the pestiferous air of the Plague, GOD forbid, but the beastly filthiness
of some women, should make the delicate and fine fashions of other women (who
are civil and honest) appear pleasant. And even so, why should not the grave
and good life of a discreet woman (who fears GOD) make the filthy fashions
of an harlot (whose actions are most abominable) appear loathsome to the
world? and still to be disdained and hated of all honest Matrones. What a
monstrous thing is it, when a shameless woman caries the jewel of impudency
on her forehead, giving her boldness to exploit any thing, and to execute all
her filthy actions without any reguard: Far be it from me to cry out
against the modest Matrone, the chaste Widow, or yet to misconster the civil
behavior of an honest Virgin, whose education is true Virtue, who resolves
constantly, and performs wisely, and whose doubtsome actions, are all
mixtured with fear, and accompanied with a Virgin blush, in every thing
discreet, a grave gesture, a spotless speech, a moderate smile, and a chaste
mind, and whose thoughts are not polluted with leacherous exploites: Such sort
of women are to be valued at a high price, they are of great worth, and most
worthy to be honored and esteemed of by all men, when vilde and brutish women
(that is robbed of all virtue, and laden with vice) makes the transparent
perfection of a good woman seem glorious to the secret sight of God, and to
the outward show of the world? so J do what I can to imitate the skild Painter,
who makes a dark shadow, give a bright luster (and an shining life) to his
upright colors. Why should not filthy kennels avoyde the corrupted excraments
of Nature from fair streets? And why should I not strive to make an honest
behavior, spurn at a shameless gesture? and I do not doubt but the wiser
sort will spurn at the increase of such superstitious vanities that are in
this present age, and the great abundance of idle, strange, and new invented
toys: as when some women deckes and trimmes themselves of purpose to tempt the
eyes of man. And setting forth their wantonness (which is compounded of all
kind of farre-fetched fashions) that every one may read in their apparel,
as it were in a Cart. The description of all foreign Countries, with such new
additions of Art, as seems in dumb shows, to say, What lack you Gentlemen.
This sort of women do not follow the command of Saint Paul, 1. Timo. 2. cap.
3. Cap.
That a woman should be arrayed in comely apparel, with shamefastness and
modesty: And what says the Prophet Isaiah, The daughters of Sion are
haughty, and walk with stretched out necks, and with wandering eyes, walking
and minsing as they go, making a tinkling with their feet. And what says he
more, 5. Cap.
Woe be unto them, that draw iniquity with the cords of vanity, And are not
these things the true cords of vanity, which draws both man and women to
eternal destruction: Our Savior affirms it, 5. Math. 5. Cap.
saying: Whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, has committed
adultery with her in his heart. And for all this, how often falls men upon the
stumbling blocks of iniquity: the wise man says, Stumble not at the beauty
of a woman, beware of all her insnaring-engines, for they are many and very
tempting.

CAn not thy eyes, the eyes of man command:
Has not thy face sufficient force to kill,
But that thou must vngloue thy juorie hand,
Whose beauty robs proud Cupid of his skill:
So with thy hand thou shootes Cupidous darts,
And shootes at naught but at poor Lovers hearts.
But how can that man eschew, such fleshly temptations, who makes their
company his summum bonum, when all his felicity is placed upon their dancing,
singing, speaking, playing, and with sweet and serious notes (moving her
fingers upon a Violl d'Gambo) enchants his ears, and allures his sight. Can a
man (says Solomon) take fire in his bosom, 6. Cap.
and his clothes not be burnt, As he would say, can a man hant the company of
wanton women, and not be allured with their lascivious stratagems, when a man
beholds their legs clothed with silk stockins, rich garters, fine pearled
and well wrought smocks. Such Hermophradites, such pretty tempting instruments
with ten thousand more artificial tricks, which does enrage the lustful
man, and makes him,

Fremitando Come vno Stallone, che a veduta la Caualla.

SOme Martial men bewitched with beauty rare,
Are intricate in Laborinths of Love:
And forced to try in fancies flattering snare,
What sweet-mixt-sowre or pleasing pains can prove.
Then Nymph-like-she with strange enticing look
Does so enchant the gallant minded men,
The bayte still hides the poison of the hook
Till they be fast, and thus betrayed, what then?
Poor captive slaves in bondage prostrate lies,
Yielding unto her mercie-wanting-will:
She in disdain scorns all their carefull-cries,
And Circes-like triumphs in learned skill.
With ambling trips of beauties gorgeous grace,
Aurora-like in fiery colors clad,
And with bright reflex of her fairest face,
She tempting goes with brainsick humors lad.
Fearing that if she should but look below,
Then Beams would from her burning eyes descend
On Juorie breast proud swelling hills of snow
Would melt, consume, and all their beauty spend.
And so she lets her curled locks down fall,
Which do allure the gentle cooling wind
To come and play, still wrapping up in thrall
Chains of her hair, fond Lovers hearts to bind.
Beauty in prime adorned does feed the sight
From crimson lips sweet Nectars gust forth flows
Odours perfumes the breath, not Natures right
White Iuorie hands a sacred touch bestows.
And when those pearl of Orientall-rankes
With treasure rich of tempting sound deuides
From two bright dainty mouing-corall-bankes
In-circkled ears calm smoothing speeches slides.
Each senseless sense on doting pleasure fast
Does in a careless Register inroule:
Wishing that course of swift-wing'd Time to last,
Which spots the spotless substance of the soul.
But oh behold, Nature in mourning weed
Weeps to be wronged with superstitious Art,
For what can brains of rare invention breed?
Or what is unsought which pleasure may impart?
The sharpest wit whose quick deceauing still
Makes restless musing of their mind to try
Vain trifling snares, mixtur'd with Magicks skill,
So Art adds that which Nature does deny.
And thus much more sweet Sirens songs she sounds,
To charm, conjure, and tempt his listening ear:
Oh, then the poor Captiued wretch abounds
In perverse vows, and monstrous oaths to swear.
By furious force of Fancy more than mad,
With fond desire in restless course he hunts:
Blind Love can not discern the good from bad,
When on the eye-plum'd tail of pride it mounts.
The curious mind makes choice of good or ill,
Then scales the Fort of his Engine to clym
Above the top of Art exceeding skill,
Perfect in that predominates in him.
Drunk with the wonders of a worthless worth,
From prospect of a looking-glass he takes
Strange Apish tricks to set his folly forth,
Mocked with the gesture that his shadow makes.
When foolish feats no ways will serve his turn,
All hope is drowned in despaires groundless deep:
In restless bed (he martir'd man) must mourn,
Thoughts, sighs, and tears admit no kind of sleep.
Thus lays the Conquest Conqueror of fields
On his hurt heart he caries Cupids skarre.
The scuruie fainting Coward basely yields
To idle Love the enemy of war.
Now Trumpets sound, brave Martial music turns
To fidling noise, or else some amorous song,
That glorious Fame her wings of worth now burns,
When golden youth in prime must suffer wrong.
Thus gallant sprights do quintesence their wits,
Spending the rare invention of their brains
On idle toys, at which high honor spits,
Nor memoriz'd memorials remains.
IS it not said? that fair windows, lascivious looks, curled locks, the
discovered mountains of the moving breast, often crossing of streets, and the
hanting of assemblies, are the true harbingers, and forerunners of venarie. A
leacherous bed, is commonly decored with all kind of allurements, for the
better execution of vulgar actions, and the secret discharge of Venus
lascivious mysteries, painted with the true colors of Ouids works, as the
disguising of naked Gods, and Venus dallying with Adonis, Tarquin at strife
with Lucrece, Hero sporting with Leander, and such other wanton Objects with
pretty conceits, to encourage the unwilling, and to warm the cold humor of
frostie desires: besides all this, the sheets must be perfumed, and sundry
fine drying clothes, some well furnished glasses of delicate reviving liquors,
to give a new life, and to make a more swift resurrection to the fatigated
creatures. The often change and mixtures of many sundry natures, does hinder
the propagation and issue of children, and so reguardlesse women by this means
gives lust free liberty, so to the eyes of the world, with simple denials they
live long honest. There is nothing more profitable to a Tavern, then
well-skilled (and pretty wenches) it makes the wine to have an excellent gust,
it covers the imperfections of the house, and gives a Curtain to all kind of
corruption. To mercenarie women all sorts of men are welcome, the Clown as
well as the Courtier, the Rascal, the Gentleman, the Boy as well as the
Master, it is only gold and gifts makes choice, if they conceive with child,
what then? some women fearelesse of Gods heavy wrath, will take drinks to
destroy her conception, and so commits a murder against Nature: and what is
more against Nature, then that abominable sin of Sodomie? O what filthy and
strange inventions has mankind, to sloken the fiery lust of the flesh? but
behold what is the end of all such filthiness, such beastly lust, worse then
beastly, because the brute beasts keeps the rule and direction of Nature, and
they against Nature has no appointed time in particular, but takes their time
in all manner of times. And I say again, what is the end of this abomination?
and what reward has God prepared for such wild creatures, Gli scadali, Gli
homicidi, la pregione, le Crapuli, gli morbi, ele bestemmie, sono la legitima
prole del putanisimo, They are the true children of whoring, and the true
offspring of filthy lust: the tormented Italian lying martired, cries out,
Donna ma fatto, E donna ma disfatto. Who should pity such sort of miserable
Caitiues?

Non si doilga d'altrui, non si lamenti,
Chi da Cagion, ai sui propitormenti:
That honest and universal woman, Mistres Werolle gave a general command,
that Mounsieur Camuis should by no means brangell his joints, nor yet play at
Iaktaleg: Is it not said, that fire, water, and women, are the greatest three
dangers in this world. The old and learned Father giving his opinion of the
lustful person, and what harm it brings with it, he says, Luxuria sensum
habetat, confundit intellectum, memoriam obdurat, euacuat sensum, obnubilat
visum, reddit hominem pallidum ac foeaum, senectutem inducit, mortem denique
maturat. All these miserable things are the true revenewes of leacherie, when
vanishing beauty begins to decay, and then looks in a Mirror, then it shall
see the strange ruins of time, the wrinkled impression of unwelcome age, which
blind vanity never did look for: they shall behold their eyes sunk in
their head, and their face all disfigured. Let the most beautiful body that
ever was in the world, be but four hours deprived of life: how hard favored
will it be? how loathsome both to the sight and smell will it become? then
where shall the Prophet of Painting be? where is the virtue of complexions? and
where is all the Engines that did abuse beauty? all thy fairding can not help
the defects of Nature, at last, it will bewray it self. O but hear what that
learned and godly Father S. Augustine says, Fucare figmentis quo vel
rubicundior vel candidior, vel verecundior appareant adulterina fallacia est:
quanta amentia effigien mutare naturae, picturam querere: tollerabiliora prope
modum in adulterio crimina sunt, ibi enim pudicitia hic Natura adulteratur: And
what says that devine man Saint Ambrose, Deles picturam Dei mulier, si vultum
tuum Materiali candore oblinisti. Again, Saint Cyprian with the rest of these
learned and devout Fathers, says, Foeminae manus Deo inferunt, quando illud
quod ille formauit reformare contendunt. How detestable a thing is it to see a
filthy creature seek to reform the handy-worke of God: how unthankful and
ingrate art thou to thy Creator, when thou see the blind, the cripple, or
any stricken with Gods hand? how should thou thank God, who has created
thee with all the joints of thy body stretched and even, and has given thee
all thy right members, he might have made thee a monster to the world: But O!
thy pride considers not this: but thou with Art will correct the wondrous works
of God: O come e indegna e stomacheuole cosa il vederte talhor, con un pinello
pinger le guance and occultar le mende di natura e del tempo, e veder Come il
liuido pallor fai parer di ostro, Le rughe apiani e il bruno imbianchi e togli
col defetto il defetto. All their inventions, their ever-devising conceits,
are naught else but snares to entrap our own souls: the man with enticing
vanities, does allure and persuade the women, and the women with superstitious
and superfluous follies, tempts the man, and yet for all this, there is many
women (no doubt, who means well) are deceaved with the subtle deceites of
false and perjured men: they will make their own sex by an instrument to
overthrowe them, when a woman will for gold or money tempt another woman, and
use all deceaving tricks to ensnarcher: so I say, a woman to a woman is a great
enemy; such Pandrosses cares not the wrack of young damsels, and then the
distressed woman becomes an outcast to her friends, ashamed of themselves, and
a slave to all kind of misery. But can such sort of women be excused, who
desiring to be deceaved, will compound and yield upon reasonable conditions.
This sort of women are the weaker vessels, who imputes their wantonness to their
too-much weakness, and whose natural infirmities must be excused with their
simple ignorance, who trusted so much to oaths and vows. O God, was ever man
bewitched to think that the conques of a woman can crown honor: or can it
raise any Trophies to virtues victory: or was ever the stealing of a Maids
virginity registered in any chronicle for a valorous act of worth, and being
got, what is it? A hastie-past-pleasure, with a speedy following repentance,
where a swarm of tortring thoughts still works, a swift revenge, a trifling
toy, and like a feather blown with the wind before children, for when one boy
gets it, he opens his hand to see it, the^ the wind blows it straight away
again, then others runs and gets it again, again, and again, and so it goes
still from hand to hand. And what is all this they run for, it is but a
feather, let it go, Who builds his hopes upon the ruenous ground of a wavering
woman's Constancy, shall have a sudden fall: And well may he with a pare of
crossed arms breath forth and say,

Donna adorata, e, un nume del inferno. IF haples I, had harbord in my heart
The festred sting of euer-tortring grief,
Reuthles disdain had never scornd my smart,
Nor I have baisde my self to beg relief:
But O, my Mistres, has a woman's mind,
Who loves her best, there proves she most unkind.
Do what she can, O cruel faithles fair,
Be still ingrate, and never grant me grace:
For why? the proud triumph of my Despare
Has lade my hopes before her slaughtring face:
There must they sterue, murthred with mis-regarde,
My Love is loathed, and I have no reward.
Then farewell Love, a woman is a toy,
Which being got, some other gets again:
Cursed be that man, whose jelousie is joy,
And yields him servile to a Sluaish pain:
Who courts a woman, must not think it strange,
That want of wit, still makes her mind to change.
O man whom GOD his cheifest wonder made,
And Treasure rich of his al-seeing Eye,
The winter blast, thy floorish fare shall fade:
Swift-posting-time, still tells thee you must dye:
In fancies lap spend not thy days for shame,
Go spend thy days where honor lives with fame.
Then get you gone, sweet Syrins of deceat,
Full well I know your strange enchanting skill:
I scorn that Coward of a base conceat,
That Pandor-like waits on a woman's will:
O let him dye deceaud, that will not doubt you,
And happiest he, who best can live without you.
When a man hyreth an horse, either to ride Post or Journey, as it pleases the
ryder, at his journeies end he receaues but a hyrelings pay, and so he is
presently gone. But when a man hes an horse of his own, he will have a care of
him, and spare for no expenses to see him well furnished, well fed, and well
dicht, neither will he burst him, nor spur-gall him, but he will ride him
softly and spare him. Now what if his horse should learn gades, and do
nothing without the Bastenado, kick with his feet, and not be answerable to
the Rainzie, but must be ridden with a French bit; in faith then I think that
man had better ridden on a Caronze hyrling, when his own horse proves noght
else but a wearied jad. If a man could say this word My own, he were happy so
being he could say it with contentment, as my own house, my own wife, my own
children; 1. Cor. 7. cap.
is it not written, Let every man have his own wife. But now in these days,
such is the detestable abominations cropen into the hearts of men, which makes
them to polut the sacred band of Matremonie. Now in this godles time a man
cares not to put away his own wife, and take another; he will allege a thousand
lies, he will corrupt men and women to bear false witness, or else he is not
ashamed to discover his own filthiness, and take the fault on himself, Mark.
10. cap.
What God has coupled together, let no man separate. Luke 16. cap.
And again, our Savior says, Whosoever shall put away his own wife, and
mary's with another, commits adultery: And if a woman put away, or deuorse
her self from her own husband, committed adultery, incase she marie with any
other man. Said not the man to the woman at their first Creation, This is now
bone of my bones, Genesis 2. cap.
and flesh of my flesh, and for that cause she shall be called woman. And
again S. Paul speaking of the love should be betwix the wife and the husband,
and what authority he has over his wife, he says, Cor. 11. cap.
The man is not of the woman, but the woman of the man, for the man was not
created for the woman's sake, but the woman for the man's sake. And why then
should a man hate his own flesh and bones. Why should not a wel-deserving wife
be well cherished, and above all things, most respected, as his second-self,
yea, even all in all as himself. But many men are to blame, who mary's a woman,
and presently after he is married, goes to far Countries, and longsome
journeyes, and lives her to the mercy of all misery, it is a great sign and
token that this man whatsomever, hes neither respect to GOD nor shame of the
world, and he is a Rebel to the command of GOD, Deu. 24. cap.
When a man takes a new wife, he shall not go a warfare, neither shall he be
charged with any bussinesse, but he shall be free, and remain at home one
year, and rejoice with his wife. It were better never to marie, then to mary
and abuse Marriage. But the original of this mischeef proceeds partly of
Parents, and partly of the parties themselves, whose avarice and gread of
gear is such, that they care not whom with they join, so being they be rich;
they look not to education, to qualaties, not birth, riches hides all
imperfections, and what follows, noght else but hatred, grief, a languishing
repentance, a mutual contempt, a continual battle, and a loathsome bed when
days of anger, and nights of sorrow, are waited-on, with Argus-eid jelousy.
The wise man says in his Canticles Jealousy is cruel as the grave, cap. 8.
and the coals thereof are fyrie, and coals of a vehement flame. And the
Italian making a description of jelousie, he cries out, with a vehement
passion, Da quell sospetto rio, da quell timore, da quell Martyr, da quella
frenesia, da quella rabia detta gelesia. How many are they who are robbed both of
shame and honor, yielding to insatiable lust, no restraint, nor yet setting
limits to modesty, but gives their own desire fre scope to a more then beastly
appatyte, intertainde with all kind of delicat allurements, that their filthy
flesh may ever be craving, and the better furnished with that consuming
pleasure. And again, when some shameless creatures makes their body the moving
stage of licherous sin, where all the fates of activaty, and walting tricks
gives a general trial in a particular form; when base blood corrupts
Nobility, and makes wrongous heirs possess other men's lands, when voluntary
ignorance becomes a Nurse to unlawful children: And when the sacred vow of
Matrimony is made a juggling mask to oversyle the eyes of true simplisetie:
The wrongde Spaniard cryde out, De la mala muger te guarda, y de la buena no
fies nada. Alas, poor horned bucks, whilst they judge charetably and makes
their foolish ignorance impute all to a kind courtasie, which brings nothing
with it but an homely honesty, even then is least misdeming minds made a
mocking stock to secret villainy, and if the party (who is wrongde) appear to
misconster any thing, or to smell knavery, then presently is there a
complementing application of borrowed imbracements accompaned with urged
tears, fained kisses, false perjuries, flatring speeches, with broken vows,
and a number of vnperformde protestations. All this villainous dissimulation
hoodwinks verity, and maks one become the pointed-outsport of another
pleasure, one beat the bush whilst others catch the bird, and the righteous
owner feed on idle shows, whilst strangers injoies the true substance. This
tricking Humor takes both chesses and belles from many a one, and sends them to
the Rangild. Prove. cap. 5.
But hear what opinion the word of GOD has of such, The lips of a strange
woman drop as a honey comb, and her mouth is more soft then Oil, but the end
of her is more bitter then wormewod, and more sharp then a two edged sword.
And again to that same purpose, Then why should thou delight, my son, in a
strange woman, or embrace the bosom of a stranger? With what eyes can thou
look upon thine own wife when thou give thy body to another woman; is not
her face a book that unfolds a volume of accusations to thy spotted soul: Is
not the Echo of these words, I take thee before God, still sounding through the
corners of thy Conscience, took thou not her to thy wife? did thou not vow
before GOD and the world, to keep thy body clean only for her. Why should
thou then embrace the bosom of a strange woman. And here again what
description the word of GOD makes of an Harlot, and how it paints forth the
filthiness of a shameless woman, And I saw among the fools, Prover. cap. 7.
and considered among the children, a young man destitute of understanding, And
behold there met him a woman with an harlots behavior, and subtle in heart, so
she took him, and kissed him, and with an impudent face said unto him, I have
peace offerings, this day have I paid my vows, therefore came I forth to meet
thee, that I might seek thy face, and now I have found thee, I have decked my
bed with ornaments, Carpits, Laces of Aegipt, I have perfumde my bed with
Mirrh, Aloes, and Cynamon, Come let us take our fill of love till the morning,
let us take our pleasure in dalliance, for my husband is not at home, he is
gone a journey, far off, and he followed her straight ways, like an Ox that
goes to the slaughter. The price of such pleasures are great, and ever brings
with it a swift repentance, and the end of it is noght else but Misery,
Poverty, shame and Beggary. O what pleasure is it to see the man and the woman
both of one mind, comporting with others imperfections, and still yielding to
others waiknes, El consejo de la muger es pocoy quien no le toma es loco, When
a modest discretion, and silent patience is applyde to their own infirmities;
for when the woman is in rage and storms at her houshald affairs, correcting
wrongs with the furious rage of her tongue. O then the man should labor to
pacify her with sweet words, gentle admonitions, and large promises. Is it
not a common Proverb, that wyles helps wake folk. And when the man is in rage,
the woman should not then tempt his patience, but hold her peace, and with
loving words, obedient duty, and all kind of courtasie carres him, and be
quiet. 1. Tim. 2. cap.
Says not S. Paul, I permit not a woman to usurp authority over the man,
but to be in silence. This is the true duty of a woman toward her husband,
and this woman is the woman of wisdom, as it is written, A peaceable woman,
and of a good heart, Eccl. 26. cap.
is the gift of the Lord, and there is nothing so much worth as a woman well
instructed, this is great riches, and a rich treasure. This woman bringes
peace with her, she hes a careful desire, and an earnest love toward her
husband, and discharges an upright duty to her children, with many eyes
watchful over her house. And what is such a woman worth? The Scripture tells
thee, That her price is far above the pearls, the heart of her husband
trusts in her, and he shall have no need of spoil, she will do him good and
not evil all the days of her life, she seeks wool and flax, and laboreth
cheerfully with her hands. This is the woman whose ears does not itch for
strange teddings, nor is she curious to search secreets of others affairs, nor
yet goes she abroad to seek news, nor hes she any disease to be curde with
the air taking, she breeds not her child with the languishing disease of a
new fashiond gown, nor yet needs she any molefying Ceir-cloath to be lade at
her stomach, because she can not get her will, her domestic affairs is a
pleasant pastime, which brings profiet by the purches of her own hands, She
puts her hands to the whele, and her hands handle the spindle, she is it not
afraid nor ashamed to fyle her fingers for the well of her family, and so by
her handy-labor helps to sustain them, Her husband is known in the gates,
when he sits with the Elders of the land, she has a care to see him civil,
in all things his honor is her glory, she is not a pratler, but she opens
her mouth with wisdom, and law of grace is in her tongne, she over-seeth the
ways of her household, and eats not the bread of idleness: her children
rise up and call her blessed, her husband also shall praise her. O what a world
of happiness lives that man and woman in where mutual concotde, peace and
quietness, true tranquillity of mind triumphs, where external dissimulation is
not aplyde to cover the inward deceit of the heart, and where a modest
discretion excuses and dantons the fleshly desire of insatiable lust. This may
be called felicity. All their prayers are acceptable to GOD, what they pretend
is prosperous, because all their actions fears the Lord, it is only to such
as these that GOD will keep his promise, spoken by the mouth of David the
Prophet, He has given a portion unto them that fear him, he will ever be
mindful of his Covenant. And what is it? Even this, Thy wife shall be as the
fruitful wynes on the sides of thine house, and thy Children like the Olive
plants round about thy table, thus are they blessed that fears GOD. For all
these kind promises and large blessings bestowed on mankind. Yet there are
many men and women whom God has blessed with children, who are unworthy and
unnatural Parents, they are careless, of their childrens education, and cares
not what becomes of them; how far is it against Nature to see a woman carry the
Infant in her belly nine Months; and that while vexed with so many sundry
sorts of intolerable pains, and when she approches near the delivery of her
birth, what a fear and terror will posses all the parts of her body? what
pitiful exclamations will she make through her grievous tortour? what an
extreme agony and perrell of her life will she be in, before the Child part
from her belly? This is a great and stupendeous miracle of Nature, ordained by
GOD Almighty, and for all these torments, greefes, and vexations, some
unnatural mothers will forget their children, she will be so delicate, she
will not nourish them, nor fyle her fine clothes with slobbring younglings,
she must have a stranger to nource her child, for the beauty of her
snowe-white skin must not be blabered with sucklings. It appears very well,
that these sort of women gettes and ingenders their children only for
pleasures sake, and delivers them to the world for mere necessity, to empty
their womb. Again when they come to perfect years, some Parents will give
over their children to all kind of misery. When GOD in his super-aboundant
mercy speaks to Sion be his Prophet, he says, Esaias. 49 cap.
Can the mother forget her own infant, or can she not be merciful to the
child of her own womb, if she could be forgetful, yet I will not forget
thee, nor can I reject thee, for behold I have written thee in the flesh of
my own hands. In this comparison our GOD shows how far it goes beyond all
natural reason that the Parents should forget their children. But there are
many children who deserves the wrath of their Parents, through their own
ingratitude, and through their great oversight of duty, Honor thy Father and
thy Mother, that thy days may be long in the land which the Lord thy God has
given thee. Let ingratfull children go look on that wondrous work of Nature,
and of Love; the young Cigonz^is will vomet up their meat from their stomach
to nurisch their parens, when they are oulde and can not flee. Look to all
beasts by Nature, what love they carry one to another, and what mutual concord
in their own kind; and how much more ought reasonable creatures, the Parents
to the children, and the children to the Parents: Ye Parents (says S. Paul)
provoke not your children to wrath: Meaning be over great austeirnes, when
Parents and Children lives all in peace and quyetnes, and in charitable
concord. O how good a thing is it (says the Scripture) and how joyful is it,
to see brethren and sisters, and the whole family to live in love and peace,
they eat their bread with sweet contentment, and spends their days in great
happiness. But woe be to seditious tail-tellers, to leying lips, to harkners
and rounders, to back-byters and slanderers, who are sowers of dissension, and
with their wicked and malicious tongues, are inventers of mischief: The wisdom
of GOD says, A wicked person sows strife, and a tail-teller makes
dissension. It is upon such wicked instruments that the great GOD has promest
to rain fire and brimstone, with stormy tempests: this shall be the portion
of their cup, with many more greevous and endless torments, which are provided
for detracters and slanderers. Iam. 3 Epist.
All beasts are tamde be man, but the tongue no man can tame, it is an unruly
evil, full of deadly poysone. Contentment is great wealth, and sobreatie with
love, is better then Kingdoms with strife, Eccl. 25 cap.
I had rather dwell with a Lion, then keep house with a wicked wife. And
again says the Scripture, A wicked wife makes a sorry heart, an heavy
countenance, and a wounded mind, wake hands, and feeble knees, and can not
comfort her husband in hauines. Can any go more near the husband then the
wife? are they not both one flesh? But such is the wake fragility of our wicked
nature, that even they who lies in others bosoms some-time will discord; but
the discord amongst friends should be short, as betwix the Parents and the
Children, betwix Brether and Sisters, and chiefly betwix the Man and the Wife;
Is it not written, Let not the Sun go down upon your anger: The anger of
some women are dangerous. the wise and learned man Ausonius speaking of a
woman's anger, he says, That the wild Boar persewed of dogs, the Viper whose
tail is tread upon, the Lions bitten with hunger, the Tiger robbed of her
young-ones, are not more cruel and fearce then an angry woman. Eccl. 42 cap.
Melior est iniquitas viri, quam mulier benefaciens. There should be no
vp-casts betwixt the man and the woman, as to say, thou art come of this, or of
that, we are all the children of Adam, and also what ever secrets are amongst
them, should not be reveild, were the occasion never so great. Many times great
mischief hes bred of such things, for this cause woman should not be curious of
the man's particular affairs. Judges. 14. cap.
Sampson being married with the uncircumcised Philistanes, his wife did never
rest, but importuned him to know his secrets, and then she reveiled all to his
great harm. The wise man Solomon says, A virtuous woman is the crown of her
husband, Pro. 12. cap.
but she that makes him ashamed, is as corruption in his bones. But many times
it falls out, that the man is author of his shame, blowing and sounding abroad
the Trumpet of his own ignomy; in this respect, that when he knows a
particular imperfection to predominat in his wife, he will not be secret, but
makes the world point their fingers at his turpritude; when he is to come
home, he should send word before, and tell he comes, and if his mind assure
him that Occupata ela stanza, then should he be very ware to enter his house
upon a suddainty, least he catch a moat in his eye, and then his eie-sore will
sting his heart with impatience, turning all the misty-clouds of his dark
doubts, in a clear-shining verity, it will bring Jelousie to a true and perfect
resolution, it will give him possession of Horns, and so by this means, it
inrolles him amongst the Cathegory of voluntary Cuck-colds, then must he
maintain a back-dore for the ingresse and egresse of his wifes vulgar
actions. A sentenall must have a good ear, a quick eye, and a swift retreat,
that the al'arme may be the more tymous, and to make a more large preparation
for Patience. O what a spacious subject is this, and how endless appears this
profound discourse, like a stranger Pilgrim in a wilderness, J have lost my
way; or like the Seafaring-man fatigated in a longsome voyage, sounding his
lead where he finds no ground, in such groundles deepes; then at last he
returns hopeles to end his (seeming endless) journey, with a dissembling
courage, and a heartles cry, he comforts his company. So ( good Reader) I am
forced here obruptly to break off, for so long as this Subject is the
load-star of my discourse, I think, and am assured that my Ship shall never
arryue to the sight of Capa dell buena asperanza. Then in despair I bid this
large Ocaean farewell, for this fearful, and tempestuous storm threatens
Shipwreck, I must stand by my Taik-ling, shut my Rudder a lee, and seek up
for the next shore.

Away vain world, thou Oaecan of annoyes,
And welcome Heaven with thy eternal joys.
O How far (behold) does it go beyond the reatch of man's capacity to
ponder the great and wondrous works of GOD, when we meditate upon his
miracles, to see the frame of every thing, presenting such strange objects,
this large prospect of Heaven and Earth, the admirable operations of every
thing which has been wroght, and still works in the swift course of time; and
when we have considered all that we can, or may, we shall see that mankind of
all other creatures, are most ingrate to his Creator. So that this great and
universal Glob, whose spacious shoulders is over-lodned with the wickedness
of mankind, and wearied with the heavy burden of weghtie sin, and the
unnatural strife in all kind of estates, even from the rich Monarch to the
poor beggar. We may see Kings opposde against Kings, these great and earthly
powers triumph in other men's spoil, we may see mighty ruelars usurp
Kingdoms, subjects mutein against their own natural Prince, contemn his
Laws, and in spite of GOD, oppress the poor, and turn careless Rannegats to
all Christianity, Virum sanguinum and dolosum abhominabitur Dominus, GOD abhors
and detests the bloody and malitioue man, he shall never get mercy, all his
abominations shall not leave him, but shall follow him and accuse him, his
ambition, and the complaints of the oppressed, shall condemn his Soul. And
what is all this world, it is noght else but a stage where every one acts their
part, and then makes an eternal retret without return, Heavens inclostred
powers looks down, and they see all the dulfull Tragedies of vnrecalled time,
and marks the unspeakable wickedness of mankind, how many folies are acted
upon this stage, for the most part plays the Buffone, and all their life is
but a pleasant Comedy, and with the Ethnic they cry out, Ede, bibe, dorme,
post Mortem, nulla voluptas. Upon the other part we may behold the picture of
true repentance, painted with ten thousand miseries, the pitiful gesture of
men, how unlawful Law hes made miserable, the beggerd Merchant, who has
bankerd-out his credit: the Artisan whom age and sickness brings to poverty, and
we may see how the threed-bare Cationer goes with melancholious groans,
dispersing the sighs of his greeved mind in the Air: we may see how the
curious Alchamist in seeking the Philosopher-stone, with continual travel,
and far-soght inventions has wrung out all the substance of his wits, and
seeking to find wealth, has lost all his wealth, so till at last, his
sweating labors, rypes nothing else but smooke. O then, his repentance begins
to challenge time, when all his smooking hopes are vanished in the air, in
end, he pays his debt to Death, and dies a beggar. And we may see the
Necromancer, one who has studied the black Art, for a little borrowed (and yet
a very uncertain) time dambs his own soul, and gives it as a proper tribute
to Hell, and why? because with the Arch-deuils direction, he will command all
the infernal spirits. O most vain illusion, and deceatfull pleasure which
brings nothing with it, but eternal horror. Now when all men has acted their
part upon this universal stage, then comes Alcommanding Death, and swiftly
cries to every one, Away get you gone, your part is playde. So with his
Imperial Darte, he streaketh all kind of Creatures without respect, and then
with his reuthles hand, he draws the dark Courtaine of the Grave, over the
paill body of mankind. So shall thy soul compeare before the Great Spectator
of Heaven, who has seen all thy actions, and how thou have plaide thy part
in this world, there the book is opened where all thy doings are in Register,
if they be upright, then art thou crowned in the Majesticall Throne of Eternal
Glory; if thy actions and doings be false, and found deceatfull, if thou have
stopped thy ears, and would not hearken, Revel. 20. cap.
nor hear unto the voice of Gods Messingers, then shall thy name be blotted
and scraped out of the Book of life, and thy soul and body shall be
condemned to burn perpetually in the Everlasting fire of Hell. O what a
pitiful thing is it to see so many catiue creatures careless of the life to
come, and what great debt they take on their soul to be paid at the letter
day. The wicked abominations of man's heart made GOD in his great wrath, Genesis
6. cap.
Cry out and say, I repent that ever I made man. And why did our Savior Christ
hate this world, he tells the reason, Quia mundus totus in maligno positus
est. Because the World altogether is placed in wickedness. For we may
behold, what wickedness possesses mankind, even from their very youth-head?
of what evil inclination? how perverse in their actions? and how contemptious
to age? how will they mock, scorn, and disdain the reverend Father, and the
aged Matrone. O says the word of God, Pro. 16. Cap.
Age is the crown of glory, therefore we should honor age, help and
reverence age, the pernicious nature of man is such, that it breeds contention,
emulation, and continual discords, how uncharitable without law, reason, or
religion, so that man to man are the most cruel enemies of any other
creatures: when the Neronicall heart of man being in a tirannicall humor, what
kind of strange tortures will they devise one against another? how unnatural
is this? and how far is it against all Christianity? it has kindled the
wrath of the Almighty, when anger calls Israel, Gentem apostatricem dura
facie and indomabili cord, an apostaticall Nation with a shameless face and
encourageable heart, who will not acknowledge the wondrous mercies of our
loving God, Miseros facit populos peccatum sin makes people miserable, and
when holy Job speaking of wicked men and of careless sinners, he says, Bibit
quasi aquam iniquitatem, they drink up sin like water, even like a thirsty
stomach, with as little care and as much pleasure drink they up wickedness, and
that thou who read this, may the better believe me: go and with experience
thou shall see (go I say) and walk abroad into the streets, and behold the
doings of mankind; look and mark well their behavior, and fashions,
consider well and attentively what is done in Marketplaces, in Kings Courts,
in Justice houses, in common meeting places, what lying, and deceaving? what
slander and shameless villainy? thou shall see nothing in this world so little
accounted of as sin, thou shall see Justice corrupted with briberie, and
variety sold for money, and impudent faces despise equity, thou shall see the
innocent condemned, the wicked and malicious malefactor delivered and set free,
the villain advanced, and the virtuous despised, thou shall see the proud
oppressor triumph, and thieves command, usurers and Brokers deceaving their
neighbors, extortioners at liberty to execute their own desires: and thou
shall see ignorant fools preferred to great authority, because they are rich,
worthless men reverenced, honored, and drawn up to great dignities, and thou
shall see how the eager desire of ambition cuts innocent throats, treason
covered and cloaked with flattery: and to conclude, thou shall hear the
general voice of the people, to be nothing else but of vanities, bawdrie, and
whoring, detraction and backbiting, pride, envy, deceit, drunkenness,
dissimulation, wantonness, dissolation, flattery, lying, swearing, perjuring,
and blaspheming. And so this shall confirm (that in their perrillous and latter
days) how mischief abounds, and what abominations are spread on the face of the
earth, having no regard to law or justice, to reason nor religion, but in an
insatiable appetite of beastliness, are become drunk with sin: how glad may
the man of an upright mind be? how quiet may his soul be? at what sweet repose
may his conscience be? when all his actions are upright before GOD: Pro. 15.
cap.
the Scripture says, Secura men's juge conuiuium, a secure conscience is a
blithe banquet: but O thou wicked man! O thou malicious oppressor! O thou
deceitful and avaritious villain: how shall thou have thy soul and
conscience tortured? the terror of thy unrighteousness shall torment thee,
thy nights shall be void of rest, and thy soul shall be wrapped up in the
pricking thorns of thy own wickedness, every thing shall affray thee, all
objects shall threaten thee, and restless despair shall hant thee with ten
thousand devilish temptations: Pro. 28. cap.
Solomon says, the wicked man flies though no man pursue him: He will start
at his own shadow, the heart of him is always aloft, Conscientia mill
testes: O but hear in the end what is prepared for such wicked and insolent
sinners (who has such pleasure in this world, and with their abominations
procures the heavy wrath of God) even this is prepared for them, Cruciabuntur
in saecula saeculorum in stagno ardente igne and sulphur, they shall be
tormented for ever and ever in a burning lake of fire and brimston. O that the
horror of this sentence might make us mark our own blindness, and amend our
beastly life, Nol ti fieri sicut equus et mulus quibus non est intellectus: Be
not like the horse or the Mule, which has no understanding, as the Prophet
would say, be not so brutish nor so void of reason, nor yet set not thy
salvation to such a small reckoning. O thou reader, I will request thee, and
all mankind ever to remember and hold this most worthy and infallible sentence
printed in thy heart, Hoc momentum vnde pendit aeternitas, This short life is
the very moment, whereon depends all eternity either the eternal joys of
heaven, or else the eternal pains of hell. O J say again, remember this true
sentence, and have a continual care of this moment, and spend it not in such
idle vanities, Math. 5. Cap.
Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way going with
him, least thine adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver
thee to the jailer, and the jailer cast thee in prison, where thou shall not
come out till thou have paid all. How careful should we be in this little
moment of our life, to prevent the intolerable and endless burning pains of
hell. What would the damned souls in hell do, if they were in this world
again? how would they spend this moment, to escape that unspeakable torture,
that ever-burning Gehenna, where nothing else is but goashing of teeth and
everlasting horror, yea, and worse than the tongue or heart of man can tell or
think, out of the which part there is no redemption. Good Christian Reader,
again I will request thee, and all sinners, to print this in the depth of thy
heart: And I my self, I confess to be a most greevous sinner, when I think
upon the loss of precious time, it shrills my weary soul with grief, it
wearies my days, and disturbs my rest: with that holy Prophet David, I cry to
God with a repenting heart: O Lord, remember not the sins of my youth, nor my
ignorance, but according to thy great mercies remember thou me, even for thy
goodness sake, O Lord: The works of our Lord God are great and wondrous, they
are incomprehensible, and yet his mercies exceedes all his stupendous works,
therefore once more let us consider so near as we can the great works of God,
the creating of all things. The heavens (says the Prophet David) sets forth
his glory, and the firmament shows the works of his hands: The earth, the
seas, and all living creatures therein, the strange course of every thing in
heaven in earth, and the natural inclination of all living creatures. Look on
the seas how they are limited, that they shall not pass their bounds, but
keeps their due course: Look on the creation of mankind, he has made us
according to his own image, and of the very dirt and slime of the earth has
he created and formed us, he has also made us subject to many infirmities of
Nature, the filthiness of our flesh, the excrementall corruption of many
sundry and strange diseases, which are natural, and insident both to man and
woman: And what would this carcass of ours be, if it had not the change of
clean clothes? it would be naught else but a mass of vermin, and with time
the smell of our flesh would be loathsome, and so in the end we would putrify
and consume to naught. O man, why is all this done? only to base our pride,
and God has done it to let us see what stuff we are made of: and what bath
our good God done more? Within this earthly vessel of our body, he has placed
a soul made of a devine and heavenly substance, adorned with all her
faculties, and garnished with reason: The Prophet David says, Hebr. 2. Cap.
Little inferior to the Angels. And besides all this, he has cast under our
feet all kind of other creatures, Genesis 1. cap.
and above all his works that work of vdspeakable love, that miraculous work
of our redemption, and yet the mercy of our Lord God goes far above, and
far exceedes all his wondrous works: for the holy Prophet David says, The
Lord is good and kind to all, and his mercies are above all his great and
wondrous works, And hear what our good and loving God says more with his own
mouth: Esaias. 5. 4.
The mountains shall remove, the hills shall fall down, but my mercy shall
not depart from thee: neither shall I break the covenant of my peace, says
the Lord, that has compassion on thee? What great and true confidence may we
then have in Gods mercy? he says again by the mouth of his Prophet: Esaias.
30. Cap.
The Lord does attend the sinners conversion, to the end he may take mercy on
him, and thereby be exalted: Yet hear more what God speaks to Ezechiel the
Prophet: Say unto them, as I live, says the Lord God, I desire not the death
of the wicked, 33. Cap.
but that the sinner should turn from his sinful life and live: And farther,
with what great compassion goes he on to allure and persuade his people to
convert: O says he, Turn you turn you from your wickedness, for why will you
perish and die, O you house of Israel: How many kind and loving persuasions
does our loving God give us to draw near, and come home to him. What gentle
and kind corrections? what large and great space of repentance? what wonderful
and sweet Parables of our Savior Jesus Christ in the Evangell: Of the good
shepherd who brought back the sheep upon his shoulders, which had gone
astray, what joy and feasting makes he with his friends, and of the honest
woman when she finds her lost peace of silver. And the pitiful father with
tears of mercy and compassion received his forlorn son, with what joy and
gladness did he embrace him. Here does our sweet Savior Jesus, show what great
joy is in heaven at the convertion of a sinner. Our loving God again entering in
more conference with the sinner, he begins to reason with him: Thou say that
I am rich, Revel. S. John. 3. Cap.
and increased with goods, and full of substance, and that I have need of
nothing, and do thou not know how poor thou art? how wretched? how
miserable? how blind? and how naked thou art? Then our Savior goes on with
sweet persuading speeches to allure the sinner, saying: I counsel thee to buy
of me gold, tried be the fire, that thou may be made rich, and white
raiment, that thou may be clothed, and that thy filthy nakedness may not
be seen, and anoint thine eyes with eye-salue, that thou may see: And when
he with chains of love keeps his own fast to him, he says, As many as I
love, I rebuke and chasten, be zealous therefore and amend. Now again at last
he concludes with fervent compassion, Behold I stand at the door and knock, if
any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in unto him, and I will
sup with him, and he with me. What more comfortable speeches would the heart
of mankind crave? or what greater consolation can we Caitiue and distressed
sinners desire, who would refuse to open the door of his heart to entertain
such a worthy guest of infinite love and mercy, even Christ Jesus the only
son of God omnipotent: he gave his life to ransone the souls of sinners, he
left the glorious heavens for our cause, and clothed him self with our wild
and filthy nature. Many years did he preach, he suffered cold, hunger, and
reproach, he was tempted, and fasted forty days in the wilderness, in the agony
of his Prayers, he sweat blood, he was tortured, sold, and imprisoned, his head
was crowned with sharp thorns, his body torn with scourges, he was mocked,
buffeted, and spet in the face, his body hung on the Cross betwixt two
thieves, and his arms outstretched, his hands and feet peirced with nails
of iron, and his side and heart wounded to death, neither was we bought with
silver, gold, or precious stones, but with the infinite price of the blood, and
life of our Savior Jesus Christ, the only son of our ever-living God. O it
was our sins and wickedness put him to death, and laid all his cruel torments
on him, it was our wickedness made him fast forty days when he was tempted in
the wilderness, we crowned his Imperial head with sharp thorns, we bound his
delicate arms with cords, we mocked him, we stripped him naked, and scourged
his blessed body, we buffeted and spat in his most glorious face, we laid the
Cross on his patient shoulders, we cast lots for his upper garments, we
crucified him betwixt thieves, and nailed his innocent hands and feet to the
Cross: it was for us he sweat blood and water in his prayers, and it was we,
even only we who peirced and wounded his heart, and it was we who made him in
his cruel pains of death, cry out in his last passion, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me: All this, and much more has our wickedness done to the
incomprehensible Majesty of almighty God. Hear with what great admiration the
Prophet Isay cries out, speaking of the Passion of Jesus Christ long before his
coming: 53. Cap.
Who will (says he) believe our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed? Then he begins and tells of his sufferings and torments for our
sins, saying: Surely he has borne our infirmities, and carried our sorrowee,
yet we did judge and esteem him plagued, and smitten of God, and humbled, but
he was wounded for our trasgressions, it was for our iniquities he was
punished, The burden of our sins was laid on his back like a simple
sheep, so was he led to the slaughter, in patient silence suffered he all
sorts of pains, neither was wickedness with him, fraud nor deceit was never
found in his mouth: this Innocent was put to death amongst thieves and
malefactors, for the sins of the world: The Evangelist S. John says, For God
so loved the world, 3. Cap.
that he has given his only begotten son Jesus Christ, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have life everlasting. And what shall
this life everlasting be? the Apostle tells thee, 1. Corin. 2. Cap.
That eye has not seen, nor care has not heard, nor yet the heart of man can
not imagine what happiness and glory is prepared for them that shall be saved.
Now dear and loving Reader, consider with what little pains thou may (in this
little moment of thy life) prevent the everlasting pains of hell, and make
conquest of the eternal glory of heaven, to see and behold the unspeakable
Majesty of God, set on his triumphant Throne, evironed and compast with the
glorified Saints, and the innumerable Martirs, who has suffered for the faith
of his son Jesus Christ, when the woman in travail and bitter pains of her
birth is releeved of her natural burden: how will the pleasure of her child
expel the pains, and give her comfort? Even so after the weariednesse of this
world, Isay, 25. cap.
the pains and anguish, then comes the joyful pleasure of heavens, which
expells all our vexations, Revel. 7. cap.
comforts our souls, and wipes all the tears from our eyes, Revel. 21. cap.
what persecution? what cross or worldly temptation should hold or keep us
back from such an infinite treasure, from such an endless joy: Let us say
with that constant and blessed servant of Jesus Christ, Roma. 8. cap.
Who shall separate us from the love of Christ, shall tribulation, or anguish,
or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or perrill, or sword, as it is written:
for thy sake are we killed all the day long, we are counted as sheep for the
slaughter: nevertheless in all these things we are more then Conquerours,
through him that loved us: for I am persuaded that neither death nor life, nor
angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. And a little before, this
happy and godly Apostle says in this same Chapter, For I count the afflictions
of this present life are not worthy of the glory which shall be shown to us in
the life to come: And for this respect, When he considered of the joy of
heaven, Phil. 3. cap.
he esteemed all the riches, all the glory, and all the honor of this
world, but vayled filth and stinking dirt: How careful then should we be of
this word Eternal? and that in this moment we should be good provisors: Our
Savior desires us saying, Luke 19. cap.
Negotiamini dum venio, Be diligent, and lay much treasure to thee fore against
I come, and seek for a reckoning of thee: For behold (says he) I come
quickly, Apoca. of S. John 21. cap.
and my rewardis with me, to give every man according to his works: And what
shall this reward be, if thou be upright, constant, and continue firm and
faithful to the end, 2. Cap.
Be thou faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the crown of life, In
hope of this glorious Crown, how gallantly should thou fight against all the
woeful miseries of this world, and still contemn all their earthly
temptations: In the word of GOD the wise man forwarnes the saying, My son,
when thou art to come to the service of GOD, stand fast in Justice, and in
fear, and prepare thy mind for temptation. Here thou art forwarned in what
estate thou shall be in time of battle, and how to lie at thy guard against
thy three ghostlle enemies, Ephe. 5. cap.
The Devil, the World, and the Flesh: Stand therefore, and your loins girde
about with viritie, having on the breast plate of righteousness. What should
hinder us to fight against our own infirmities, having such a Captain to
encourage us, and fight for us, to strengthen us, to hold us up, and help us.
Our Savior says, You are they who have stood with me in my temptations, and
therefore I prepare for you a Kingdom. And I pray thee hear good Keader what
a Kingdom, even to be pertataker of his own glory, to sit crowned with him in
all eternal joy and happiness, but our infirmities, and weakness, and want
of faith, and our strengthlesse hearts, and our great faintness has made our
Captain Christ to say, You have left me in time of temptations: this lets us
see how feeble we are of our selves, and that without the help of God we are
nothing, nor can do nothing. Our omnipotent God diminished the Camp of
Ierubaall, and with a very small number made him overcome the great and strong
army of the Midianites, Judge. 7. Cap.
least Ierubaall should have said, It is the strength of man has woone the
victory, and so taken away the honor, glory, and power from God, Non nobis
domine, non nobis sed nomine cuo da gloriam. O man, base thy pride, for of thy
self thou art naught else, but a miserable and strengthlesse worm, and all
thy resolutions are but mere folly, for behold the foolish hearts, and thou
shall see what course, and what strange decree they will make to them selves.
What vows and promises sealed with oaths will they make to perform wonders:
but O let the foolish man hear what the wisdom of God says, Prou. 19. cap.
Many devises are in a man's heart, but the counsel of the Lord God shall
stand: Thou may flatter thy self with many fair promises, but all in
vain, because God almighty must be the chief actour of all things. This made
the Apostle Saint Paul say, Philip. 4. cap.
I am able to do all things through the help of Christ which strengthens me,
and when it pleases God to lay a cross upon the shoulders of any Christian,
that he may be glorified, and to be a chain of love to bring thee to him, and
to keep thee fast with him: how will he help thee to bear thy Cross? how
will he draw the forward? and how will he peace, and peace relieve thee and set
thee free: 1 Cor. 10. cap.
is it not written, Our God is faithful, and he will not suffer us to be
tempted above our strength, He will lay no more on thee then thou art able to
bear, he will not suffer one hair of thy head to perish: Deuteronomy. 13. cap.
he says, I chastise them whom I love, for the Lord your God does try and
prove you to know, if you love your Lord God with all your heart, and with all
your soul. Now in this mean time of his adversity, what comfortable
speeches? and what great assurance gives he by his Prophet David, He called on
me (says he) and I heard him when he is in trouble, I am with him, and I will
deliver him, and set him free, and I will glorify him. Now when a man or woman
is burdened with any worldly cross, can he go to a better (or can he go to
a more loving and wiser) Counsailer, to discharge the burden of his grief to,
then to our Lord Jesus Christ, who knows what is meetest for the Intellectum
tibi dabo et instruam te in wia hac qua gradieris, firmabo super te occulos
meos, J will (says he) give thee understanding, and I will teach thee how and
what way thou shall win free of thy trouble, and I shall ever fix my eyes
upon thee. Now will thou but look on all the great rulers and principalities
in this world. From the mighty and rich Monarch to the base and poor beggar.
And tell me who can say he has no Cross: believe me not any, for that man
has not been, nor for the present is not, but he has vexation, a grief, and
a continual cross. What although he appear to the eyes of this world, most
content in earthly glory, in riches or authority, yet for all that, before
night that day was never but he had somewhat to repent him self of. Then thou
who art crossed, will think in thy heart, and say: O this man or woman are
happy, they have no tribulation, they have no fighting with this world, their
mind is in peace and quietness, they live secure, and are crowned Kings of
their own desires. O fool, thou art deceived, for what is all our chiefest
joy in this vale of misery? even nothing else but a sunshine pleasure,
bringing nothing with it but a grievous storm of infinite cares: O but what
remedy, even this must be thy only remedy, to say with the Prophet David,
Tribulationem and dolorem inueni and nomen domini inuocaui, In the time of my
tribulation and grief, I called upon the name of the Lord, he is the true
Physician that must heal thy sores, and be assured he will say to thee as he
said to S. Paul in his great temptations, Sufficit tibi gratia mea, My grace is
sufficient to strengthen thee, to keep thee, and defend thee in thy greatest
conflict, and to be a strong and mighty bulwark against all temptations, and
above all things, let us that are sinners and grievous offenders of GOD, think
and assure our selves that it is only our own iniquities, and wicked life,
which procures our cross of tribulation: O then let us not murmr against
GOD, but let us look to our own sinful life, that is the only original of
all our miseries: how ought we then to repent, for it is only sin
displeases GOD, and nothing can please him but repentance and mourning. Here I
will set thee down this comparison: Take eye-salue and apply it to any
feastred part of thy body, it will neither help nor relieve thee of thy
pain, but take that eyesalue and applied to thy eye, it will help and relieve
thy eye. Even so take mourning, and apply it to the loss of riches, it does
no good, apply mourning to the loss of friends, it does no good, apply
mourning to the loss of honor, it does no good: but apply the tears of
mourning to thy feastred soul, it will do good, it will bathe thy feastred
soul, it will embalme and mollify her wounds, and give thee a true comfort in
thy sweet Redeemer Jesus Christ. It is only he who will hear thy
lamentations, consider thy distress, and exhaust up thy remembrance in his
mercy. When thou art wearied and faints, he is the true fountain who will
refresh thy wearied spirit, he calls upon all that are fatigated and oppressed:
If any man be thirsty, let him come unto me, and he shall have drink. How
joyful may the thirsty sinner be, John. 7. cap.
to have access to come and drink of the true fountain of life: hear yet
again what sweet consolation he powers in thy heart by his Prophet: Nahum.
1. cap.
I have afflicted thee already, and I will not afflict thee again: As he
would say, there shall not come from me a double tribulation. Now good
Christian, how may thy troubled soul repose upon this loving and infallible
promise. Holy and constant Job, in the mids of his torturing grief, Job. 18.
cap.
cries out to God, Although he kill me, yet will I trust in him: and to animate
thee, and to give the more stoutnes, that in adversity thou be not
overthrown: The royal Prophet David cries to thee with great courage, Expecta
dominum viriliter age, and confortetur cor tuum and sustine dominum: Trust in
the Lord, and fight manfully, our Lord will comfort thy heart, and therefore
abide his will, for the Lord our God will not leave thee, he will not depart
from thee? what great confidence has this holy man had in GOD, for in the
beginning of this Psalm, he says, Seeing God is the protector of my life, who
can harm me: And again, with great assurance he says, Si consistant aduersum
me castra non timebit cor meum: si exurgat aduersum me prelium, in hoc ego
sperabo, Give whole armies were coming against me, I shall not care, but hope
in God, then he follows with this request: I have sought one thing of thee my
God, that I may dwell all the days of my life in thy house, and that I may see
the glory and beauty of thy Temple. Then when this blessed man begins to
think upon the wondrous benefits of God bestowed on him with joy and gladness
of heart, he cries out and says, What shall I render the Lord for all his
benefits bestowed upon me, I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the
name of the Lord: If we poor ungrateful creatures, would meditate upon the
incomprehensible love of GOD of his long suffering, and gentle patience. How
slow is he to wrath, and how swift is he to mercy, what wrongs does he
receive? They have (says he) repayed evil for good. Then when he perceaved
their great unthankfulness, their dullness and hardness of heart, and that
all what he did, could not move his people to turn to him. Then he cries out
in great passion, O ye Heavens be astonished at this, Iere. 2. cap.
be affraied, and utterly confounded. And yet with more vehemence be his
Prophet, he says, Hear O Heavens, and harken O Earth, Esaias. 1. cap.
for the Lord has said, I have nurished and brought up children, and they have
rebelled against me: The Ox knows his owner, and the ass knows his
masters crib, but yet my people knows not me: Woe be to this sinful Nation,
a people laden with iniquity, a wiked seed, and corrupt children, they have
forsaken their Lord, they have prouocked the holy one of Israel to anger, and
they have gone backwarde. What an heavy lamentation is this, how grievous was
this complaint to the Almighty GOD to make upon base and filthy, wake and
worthless, creeping vermeine of the Earth, whom the twinkling of his eye,
might have destroyed, and with the smallest breath of his anger, brought an
infinite number of worlds to nothing. Who can stand before his wrath, says
the Prophet Nahum, or who can abide the fearcenesse of his wrath? Nahum. 1. cap.
his wrath is powered out like fire, and the rocks and mountains are broken
with his anger. How often has our sins (even now in this present age) procured
that heavy and terrible wrath of GOD, even that wrath, I say, which moves the
Mountains and makes the hills to trimble. Look (good Reader) and thou shall
see how the sparks of GODS furious wrath is spread through many parts of this
world, we may with tears houle and lament, and with vexation of mind
complain and cry out with that holy Prophet, Thine holy cities lywaist, Zion
is become a wilderness, Esaias. 64 cap.
and Iarusalem a desert, the house of our Sanctuary, and of our glory where
our forefathers praised thee, is brunt and consumed with fire, and all our
pleasant things are waisted and destroyed. How heavily does this man of GOD
complain, how does he bevaill this desolation and destruction, and in the
bitter passion of his heart, he cries out, Will thou hold thy self still at
these things, O Lord, what will thou hold thy peace, and afflict us above
measure? As he would say, will thou not take compassion upon us, and will thou
not withdraw thy heavy wrath from us? What, without all kind of mercy shall we
be utterly destroyed? No, not so, because in his superaboundant love, and
wonderful great piety, he comfort us, and says, Esaias. 60 cap.
In my wrath I have punished thee, but in my mercy I had compassion thee. And
yet farther with great regrate he makes a sweet and comfortable promise,
Whereas thou have been forsaken and hated, so that na man respected thee, I
shall make thee an Eternal glory, and a joy from generation to generation.
And what more will our GOD of mercy do? And they shall (says he) build
the oulde waist places, 61. cap.
and raise up the former desolations, and they shall repair all the Cities
that were desolate, and waist through many generations. What great store of
Consolation does this promise of GOD give to us? and with what meekness of
heart does he say, Indignatio non est mihi I am not angry, wrath is not mine,
I will freely forgive thee, I will forgett all thy sins, and cast them
behind my back, I shall blot all thy wickedness out ot my memory, and believe
me, Esek. 18 cap.
I shall never think on thine offenses any more. Have I any desire that the
wicked should dye, (says our Lord God) or shall he not live, if he return
from his wickednnsse. And again he persuades us, saying, Cast away all your
transgressions, whereby you have transgressed, and make you a new heart and a
new spirit. Let the tears of remorse purge the filth of sin from our soul.
O that we in all humility would consider, what and how many earnest
persuasions our loving GOD has laid, and still lays before us to turn home
to him! Again, hes our abominations and wicked life beniched us from his
love? O yet let us not despare of his mercy! Although our sins were rid as
scarlet, Esaias. 1. cap.
God will make them white as snow. Math. 20. cap.
Come unto me all ye (says our Savior) that are weary and laden, and I will
refresh you. And then he begins to reprove the sluggard, Go labor in my
vyne-yarde, why stand ye all the day idle? Although we come with the last, yet
we will be rewarded with the first. Let us throw and cast away al hinders that
lats us and stays us from GOD. Let us (I say) in time mend our life, our good
GOD will help us, he will make all impossibilities, Mark. 16 cap.
possible. Marie Magdalen, and Marie the mother of James all the way, how
careful were they to get the great stone rolled away from the sepulcher
door; and how soon they came to the door, there they found the stone rolled
and turned away. Even so in this happy journey of our conversion. Let us cast
away all worldly cares, and take up our cross and follow Christ, His yocke is
sweet, and his burden is light, we shall not walk in darkness. Let us say
with S. Augustine, Et tu Domine vsque quoquam diu? quam diu? Cras and cras,
quare non modo? quare non hac hora? finis est turpitudinis meae. O Lord, how
long will thou suffer me thus? How long? How long? shall I say to morrow, to
morrow, why should I not convert now? Why should there not be an end of my
filthy life, even at this very instant? And let us all say with the holy
Prophet David, O Lord create a new heart in me, and renew my spirit, and that
we May cast off the old man, and put on the new man. O Lord give us grace
hereafter that we may walk circumspectly, Ephesians. 4. cap.
and not like mad and insolent fools, in ignorance, Ephesians. 5. cap.
blindness and error, that we may redeem the time that we have spent in
sleuthfulnesse, and idleness. Try me, O GOD, and search my heart, (says
David) prove me, and examine my thoghts: Consider if there be any way of
wickedness in me, and then O Lord lead me in the way of eternity. I pray GOD
let us never like dogs turn to our vomet, stay still with us O Lord, because
it is near the night. When S. Peter says, And if the righteous scarcely can
be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear. 1. S. Pet 4. cap.
What a perellous speech is this, for us poor and miserarable sinners, who
still heaps sin upon sin. Therefore dear brother, let us cry, O Lord
enter not into judgment with us, take all our sins and iniquities, and bury
them in the bleeding wounds of thy dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ. Let the
temporal punishments of this life, deliver us, and redeem us from the eternal
pains of hell. Let us all say with S. Austein, Hic ure, hic seca, vt in
aeternum parcas. O good GOD mollify our hearts, and let us not be hardened when
we hear thy voice, give us that strength of grace, that the filthy vapors of
our sins extinguish not thine holy spirit in us. Da seruo tuo Domine cor
docile: Give unto thy servant, O Lord, a tractable heart to receive
instruction. And O GOD we pray thee to remember thy promise, Esaias. 66. cap.
Ad quem respitiam nisi ad pauperculum and contritum cord and timentem
sermones meos? To whom will I have regard, or show my favor, but unto the
poor and humble of heart, unto the contreat spirit, and to such as trimble at
my speeches? Thou never yet, O Lord, despised the sacrifice of a contreat
heart. So long as the sinner remains within the darkened and misty vapors of
all wickedness, he can not behold the odeous and vylde leprosy, nor the
filthy apparel which sin cleideth his soul with all, the devil blinds him:
but when he reteares himself from wickedness, and walks on the fair way of
Repentance, or when he stands upon the Mountain of Amendment, and then looks
forth from the turrat of a good-life, beholding the filthy shape, and the ougly
portrate of sin. O how will he then detest himself that has been so long
swatring in that filthy mire, in that stinking puddle of sin, putrified with
all abominations, and how loathsome will such company be to him thereafter, he
will eschew them as a contagious pest, and say with the Prophet David, Discedi
te a me omnes qui operamini iniquitatem quoniam exaudiuit Dominus vocem fletus
mei, Go from me all ye workers of iniquity, because my GOD has heard my
weeping voice, and has received my prayer, or else he will entreat the wicked
man with gentle persuasions, with good examples, and loving admonitions to
shake off that filthy and contagious habiet which infects the soul, and
keeps him back, and debarres him from the love of GOD and makes the Death of
Christ to be for him in vain. S. John the Evangelest says, It is only to
them who believes in him, 1. cap.
that he has given power to be the sons and children of GOD. It is most
sure that only want of faith makes the sinner obstinate, he is a liar and can
not believe in GOD. O thou poor and distressed creature look upon thine own
miserable estate, how thou gallops post to hell, and will not look back but
goes on thy cairlesse journey! When we walk alone on the fields, when we walk
solitare in our chalmer, when we ly in our bed, will we but meditate upon the
fearful and terrible Majesty of GOD (whom all the Heavens can scarce
contain) of his unspeakable glory, of his Almighty power. And it is only
this great and Omnipotent Jehovah that we offend, To thee only have I sinned,
says David. And let us remember how for the eating of a silly apple, contrare
the Lords commandment, he condemned all mankind, and nothing could appease
his wrath, nor yet ransom the world, but the blood and death of his own
dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ. When we think on this severitie, and of
GODS terrible anger against sin, how loath should we be to offend GOD, and
yet in very contempt of GOD the wicked man will perseveir in all kind of
wickedness, and still defer his Repentance, till at last there shall be no
time given him, yea, not the half quarter of an hours minute granted to him.
Hear how the Prophet David says of such men, Convertentur ad vesperam, and
famem patientur vt canes and circuibunt civitatem: And in the evening they
shall convert, they shall run about the City, and bark like dogs, they
shall houle for meat, but surely they shall not be satisfied. O that in time
we would take heed to this woeful speech! And what more? GOD will mock them, and
hold them in derifion. It is to these that our Savior will say, Mat. 25 cap.
Nescio vos, I know you not. Why? Because you had no Oil in your lamps. And
when he has known them, and all their wicked deeds (which shall be accusers
of them, and laid open to bear testimony against them) O what will he then
say to them? Ite malidicti in ignem aeternum: Go you accursed unto the
eternal fire of Hell. And besides all this, remember the sharp reckoning must
be made, when the least idle word we speak, we must give a count of it. O GOD
according to the multitude of thy mercies, be merciful to us miserable
sinners, in that fearful and terrible day of judgment. In time convert us O
Lord, and we shall be converted. How happy is that man who can withstand the
dangers of this life with a well resolved mind, and still calls on GOD to
assist him in all his actions, for the temptations of this world, are many, and
wondrous strong. The devil is subtle, and we are easily ensnared, and this our
flesh is exceeding subject to many infirmities. So that without Gods help we
are not able of our selves to fight. Then with the Prophet David, Let us all
say, O Lord fight for us, how feeble, how weak, and faint-hearted are we? When
the least blast of affliction ruins, all our strength, we can not stand after
we are raised up, but presently falls again, and turns to our former
wickedness, notwithstanding of our repentance, and promeist amendment. We
have no force to command our selves. We perish in our own passions, and most
cowardly yeeldes to all sorts of sins. Thus are we made slaves to our own
infirmities, in so far that we make no kind of resistance to the smalest
motion. Concerning the passion of anger S. Paul writting to the Ephesians, he
says, Be angry, but sin not, 4. cap.
neither let the Sun go down upon your wrath. This passion of anger is
exceeding perilous, for in that time that it does possess the heart, it for
cares nothing, nor has no respect to things present, nor things to come:
the fury of anger is is the highest degrie of self-madnesse. The Italian
speaking of the nature and condition of anger, He says, Ira e breve furor, e
chinol frena, e furor, longa che el suo possessore spesso a vergogno e talhor
mena a morte, Anger is a short fury, and to him who will not bridle it, it is
a longsome fury, which brings the possessour, either to shame or death. That
happy and learned Father Saint Agustein, makes a very godly and religious
discourse in his conflict of virtue and vice; first he makes anger to speak,
Quae aequanimiter ergate ferri non possunt haec patienter ommino tollerare
peccatum est, quia nisi eis cum magna exasperatione resistatur, contra te
deinceps sine mensura cumulantur: Who will not behave themselves well toward
you, it is a sin to suffer such wrongs with patience, because if thou resist
them not with great bitterness, and malicious heatred of heart, they will
(without all kind of measure) heap more vengence on thee. But dear
Christian, hear how he makes Patience to answer, Si passio Redemptoris ad
mentem reducitur, nihil tam durum quod non aeque toleretur, quanta enim sunt
haec quae patimur comparatione illius? ille opprobria, irrisiones, contumelias,
allapas, sputa, flagella, spiniam Coronam, Crucemque sus^inuit, and nos misert
vno sermon fatigamur, vno verbo deijcimur. But if thou would call to mind
the Passion of our Master and Savior Jesus Christ, There is nothing in the
world so grievous or heavy that thou would not suffer. Alas, what can we
suffer in respect of him, he suffered shame, and mocking, contumelies, buffets,
spitting in his face, scourges, and the Crown of thorn; and last of all, he
was Crucified: and we poor souls are over-throwne with simple speech, a word
casts us down. O what a bright mirror may the Patience of Christ be to man,
even in his greatest wretchedness and misery. Let him call to mind the
Passion of our Savior, and then we shall see what great odds is betwix his
suffering and our suffering. It is only the example of such a kind and loving
master, will give the patience, if thou confidest in Christ and art a true
Christian, Doctrina viri per patientiam noscitur. Again, will we deeply
consider, and we shall find that in this transetoreous life, that our estate is
but mere misery, and a continual change of sorrow; so our best is not else,
but vexation of mind, and greef upon greef. We are here in this world like
the diseased creature, warsling, and still turning on a bed of sorrow, burdained
with sickness, and can find no repose, no satled lare, nor no rest to our
restles tortring-tribulations. Or we are here like the wearied Pilgrim, who in
many foreign Countries, far from his own soil, lives exiled from his
natural home, and still wandering through many strange parts, in sundry
perels, and diverse dangers of his life, spending his days, and most part of
his nights in restless travel, he walks the solitary deserts, and wanders
along the spacious wilderness; sometimes oppressed with the vehemence of
heat, and sometimes tormented with the extremity of cold, when charitable
hearts affords him hospitality, and refreshment to his hungry bowels, how
contented will he be, and how welcome will that rest and repose be, then he be
ginneth to recall his past perrels to a reckoning, when all his pains are
turned to pleasure, and when his longsome journey ends, which brings an end to
all his miseries, when his fatigations is refreshed, and his peregrinations
has no farther course, then rypeth he a fruitful harvest, a joyful season,
and all the wearied Pilgrims pains are transformed in pleasure. We are all on
earth going our pilgramage, tosting and tumbling upon the large and deep Seaes
of this world, threatened with the devouring gulfes of temptations, and still
allured with the glittering vanities of this present life. Christ Jesus being
our careful Pilot, he cries to us poor passingers, and bids us take heed to
our journay, that we perish not in our passage, but that we may be still
earnest and watchful, how to arryue to that saif harbery of all tranquillity,
that heavenly and eternal joy, which shall finish all our troublesome travels.
How may the thought of this progress make us to hate, to disdain, and
contemn the vainglory of this world. O how should we close our eyes, and
wink at such abuse, such superstitious vanities. Tell me who ever lived in
greatest pomp? or who ever yet (to this hour) had most command over this
world, but was forced to dye, and after death, be (as it were) quyte forgotten.
Holy Job says, That their memory should be like ashes, troad under foot. And
the Prophet David says, That they should be as dust blown abroad with the
wind. For what is all our glory? orwhat is all our ornaments? Noght else but
filth. Our silks and velvots which we wrap our selves in, is noght else bot
the excraments of worms, and all our estimations are but borrowed from beasts,
our retches comes from the Centure of the earth. And so all this that makes us
proud is but very filth. Then what art thou, O man? Or what shall I compare thy
self to? to noght else but to dust, and all thy glory is but earth and dust,
blown before the wind, thou art a mass of earth, wraped up in earth. This
made the wisdom of GOD say to mankind, Quid superbitterra and cinis? Why does
earth and dust become proud? When we have tried all things in this world, then
with experience we will say, all things are vanishing like smooke, and nothing
is durable excep the glory of GOD, all must turn to noght. What then shall
rest to that soul who trusts in this earthly Paradise? Let his terrestial
estate first consider the sight of the star-spangled-heavens, the glorious Sun,
the light-borrowing Moon, the beauty of women, delicat meats, savory gusts of
sweet fruits, pleasant harmonies of fine and wel-sounding instruments,
odeferous and fair floorished gardens, brave buildings, lassivous dansing,
mirry companions, quick-witted-discourses, and many more pleasures, all must
end, all must be changed: Hear this Proclamation, The voice of God said, Cry:
and the Prophet said, Esaias. 40. cap.
O Lord what shall I cry? Cry out, that all flesh is grass, and all the glory
thereof is like the flower on the field: the grass widreth, and the flower
faideth. The Prophet David says, Vniversa vanitas, omnis homo vivens. And
what said great king Solomon in the top of his glory, All was but vanity of
vanities. And S. James calls our life noght else but a vapor. How swiftly
are we gone, some by one means, some by other, man against man, beast against
beast, every one becomes a prey to other, all must pay that doubtless debt of
Death, no creature can escape, there is nothing more certain, and there is
nothing more uncertain; we know not when, nor where, because statutum est
omnibus semel mori, it is ordained that we shall all once dye. Then in our
greatest mirth let us ever say to our selves, Memento homo quod pulvis es, and
in pulverim reverteris. O man, remember that thou art but dust, and in dust
thou shall return again. It is said of the ambitious wretch, Mendicant semper
avari.

THe mal-content hunts Fortune here and there,
His euer-tortring-thoughts disturbs his brain,
Till all his hopes be drowned in deep despare,
Then Time tells him his travels are in vain,
O earthly-wretch, what glory can thou gain?
When fruteles-labor thy short life has spent:
A restles mind with stil-tormenting pain,
Even whom a world of worlds could not content.
From such base thoghts heavens make my heart aspire,
And with a sweet contentment crown desire.
Let us behold, and we shall see how in one day, (yea, even in one instant
time) some making riatous bankets, some triumphing in all pleasures, some going
to the scaffold to be executed, some women traveling with child, and with
great pains bringing their children to the world, some lying in sore
sickness, exspecting death, the prisoner in bonds, looking when he should bid
his last fair-well to the world, some carrying their children with honor to
receive the Sacrament of Baptism, the bryd-grome going with his bryde to
solemness Matrimony. And again, at that same instant, we shall see murnfull
companies, celebrating the funeralles of the death, carrying the dead
carcatches, both of age and youth to the grave. It may truly be said of our
inconstant estate. Laeta sit ista dies nescitur origo secundi
An labor, an requies, sic transit gloria Mundi.
Sometimes are we merry, and sometimes are we sad, Nunquam in eodem statu. We
are not perticepant of the secrets of GOD, It is only his providence derects
us, we know not what sudden change may come, such a swift course has Time,
and in this meane-time, the glory of this world goes away, the most part of
our life is spent in sleep, and how many in their mid-age is taken away, scarce
are we come in the world, when we return again to the grave, very few comes
to the period of Nature. O when we truly think on Death, and calls to mind
that perellous passage, how fearful is it, and what a strange horror brings it
to the heart of mankind, and chiefly to the vnresolved, who lives in all
liberty of pleasure, environed with all worldly contentment, O mors quam amara
est memoria tua homini pacem habenti in substantiis suis: O Death how bitter is
thy memory to that man who hes hurded up riches? how loath will he be to leave
his beutiful buildings, his fair allurements, and his many pleasurs? What a
grief is it to his heart that he must depart and leave them all behind, and
he needs must go and compeir before that great and terrible Judge to give a
sharp reckoning how he conquest all that riches. O man think on thy end and
thou shall never sin. Remember that thy glass shall once be run, and that
thy Son shall set, and the horror of Death shall over-shadow thee, and that
there shall no pleading be heard after sentence is once given, Quia ex inferno
nulla est redemptio, Thy pains shall have no end, thy torments shall have no
diminishing. Therefore to you J call, to you that careless lives, and premeditats
upon mischief, and how to execute the damnable exploits of the ever-laboring
mind. To you who are the ritch-gluttons of this world, and to you who feels
not with what sense I speik. Consider from whence you came, where you are for
the present, and where you shall go. You are here on Earth, Vbi spectaculum
facti est is Deo, angelis and hominibus, where you are in sight of GOD, of
Angels and of Men. Now when ye are going, look well to your journey, your
passage is all straude over with thorns, it is a perelous way, full of
Ominus-threatnings, planted with an hedge of many Prodegyous Objects, Non est
vitae momentum, sine motu ad mortem, There is no moveing of life without a
motion to Death. Live well, that you may dye well. For look in what estate you
dye, so GOD will find you; and as he finds you, so he Censureth you; and as
he censureth you, so he lives you for ever and ever. His decreit shall never
be controlled, nor his sentence shall never be recalled. As a growing tree when
it is cut down falls to that side where it did extend the branches when it
was in growth; Even so if thou desire to fall right, learn in thy grouth to
extend such fruitful btanches as may sway thee to the right side, and make
thee fall well. Sweet (says Saint Chrysostom) is the end of the laborers,
when he shall rest from his labors. The wearied traveller longs for his
nights lodging, and the storme-beattenship seeks up for shore, the hyreling
often questioneth when his years will finishe and come out; the woman great with
child, will often muse and study upon her deliverie. And he that perfitelie
knows that his life is but a way to death, will with the poor prisoner sit on
the door threshold, and expect when the Jailer shall open the door; every
small motion makes him apprehend that the commander with the serjants are
coming to take him from such a loath some prison. He looks for death without
fear, he desires it without delight, and he excepeth it with great devotion,
he acts the last (and tragical) part of his life on a dulefull stage before
the eyes of the world, his gesture thirls the beholders heart with sad
compassion, his words of woe seasoned with sighs, does bathe the cheeks of the
hearers with still distilling tears, with a general relation of his former
wickedness, he gives a loud confession of his secret sins, with weeping eyes,
he calls for help of prayer, and like a hungerstarued beggar, he howles and
cries to that honorable householder, saying, O good God open the gates of thy
mercies to the greatness of my miseries. Cast up the Ports of thy unspeakable
pity to my wearied spirit: receive my soul in thy hands, and anoint her
feastred wounds with the blood of thy immaculate Lamb Christ Jesus.

T's true indeed this age is very strange,
For why? behold great men of rich renown,
Time comes by turns with unexpected change,
And from their Tower of pride does pull them down:
Then what are we? but fools of selfe-conceate,
All what we have stands in a stag'ring state.
We weeping come into this world of cares,
And all our life's but battles of distress,
Scarce is our prime when wint'ring age declares
What weighty grief our body does oppress,
Bred with sin, borne with woe, our life is pain,
Which still attends us to our Grave again,
Then earthly slime wherein consists thy pride?
Since all thy glory goes into the ground,
That bed of worms wherein thou shall abide,
Thy fairest face most filthy shall be found:
Our sunshine joys, time swiftly sweepes away,
This night we live, and dies before the day.
Homo natus de muliere breui tempore viuens repletur multis miserijs. CAn thou
part from thy best beloved friends to go in a far Country, and not remember
how it resembles the parting from this world to a more strange place. When thou
rises in the morning what know thou will chance thee before night. And if
thou escape the days perrill, what know thou will chance before the
morning: Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum, When thou go to bed,
remember how it is the very image of thy grave: thy merry companions are
parted, thy day being gone, and come is thy night, thy riotous banqueting is
finished, and thou in a solitary retreat, puts off thy gorgeous apparel, and
strips thy self naked to thy shirt: so the pleasures of this inconstant world
shall part, thou shall be stripped naked of all thy riches, and shall carry
nothing with thee, but a simple winding sheet this shall be, and this must be,
Vt hora sic fugit vita: Therefore every day take a reckoning of thy self, and
every moment examine thy actions. Mark thy behavior first toward God, and
next toward thy neighbor. Consider how the all-seeing eyes of heaven looks
upon all thy doings: and ever beware of that sin which thou know to
predominate most in thee, seek by all means to oppress it and overcome it:
take away all the occasions thereof, or else it with the rest of thy sins, will
draw thee to hells fire, where nothing else is, but gnashing of teeth, and
eternal horror. When thou have committed any greevous sin, have thou a true
repentance, a unfeigned remorse, and that thy heart shrill within thee with
angry grief against thy self, then thou may be assured that the spirit of God
works in thee: for it is a sign of true and unfeigned repentance, when the
sinner (without all kind of hypocrisy) mends his wicked life, making first
satisfaction to the great God by fasting and praying, making restitution to thy
neigbour, give to the poor for Gods cause, visit the sick, comfort and help
the prisoner, and give hospitality to the distressed stranger: Isay. 58. Cap.
Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that
wander into thine house. When thou see the naked, that thou cover him, and
hide not thy face from thine own flesh, For in the poor miserable creature,
thou see thy self as in a Glass: And what (says the Prophet) shall be thy
reward, Then shall thy light break forth, as the morning, and thine health
shall grow speedily, thy righteousness shall go before thee, and the glory of
thy great God shall embrace thee, etc. Thy upright conscience shall give thee a
great security of thy souls health, thy mercies shall meet thee, and doubtless
thy end shall be most happy: that blessed Evangelist S. John says, Revel. 14.
cap.
Blessed are the dead, who dies in the Lord, because they rest from their
labors, and their works follow them. Now (good Christian Reader) J must end
praying God that every one of us all may have an earnest consideration of our
own estate, what we are, where we are, and how we shall be hereafter: and once
more J pray to our Lord God, that we may still remember ( hoc momentu^ vnde
pendet aeternitas) that this little moment of our life, is the short space,
whereon depends all eternity of eternal joys, or else eternal pains: Jf
we have bin wickedly inclined, let us with the deep of our hearts repent and
think how the Axe is at the root of the tree, and let us all endeavor our
selves with the grace of God, to amend our life, that our filthy nakedness may
not be seen in that fearful and terrible day of judgment, Domine secundum
actum meum noli me judicare, nihil degnum in conspectu tuo egi: O Lord judge me
not according to my actions, J have done nothing worthy of mercy in thy sight.
Cloth me with thy righteousness, that I may appear righteous before thy
pitiful eyes. Jesus esto mihi Jesus, When the thundering voice of thy Angels
shall descend from the heavens, and cry out: O vos mortui qui Iacetis in
sepulchris, surgite and occurite ad juditium saluatoris: O you dead creatures
that lies in your graves, rise and run swiftly to the judgment of the
Savior, who with all his glorious Saints and triumphing Martirs, shall sit in
his throne of unspeakable glory, and judge both the quick and the dead, to him
be all honor, power, and glory now and for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.
THE SPIRIT OF GRACE To the wicked sinner.
ISAY. 55. CAP. Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous his own
imaginations, and return unto the Lord, and our God will have mercy upon him.
O Man the treasure of Gods glorious eye,
Thou art ingrate, and to thy self unkind;
Poor Caitiue wretch who sees and will not see,
Nor to eternal bliss will turn thy mind:
Rise sloathfull rise, forth of thy senseless sleep,
And for thy sins, go sigh, bewail, and weep.
Hear how thy Savior Jesus Christ does call,
Come wearied and you burth'ned both to me,
Come, come, says he, I will refresh you all,
What sweeter words would thou have said to thee?
Thou art that sheep, which wa^dring went astray,
Christ on his back will bring thee to thy way.
Thou sinful man is so with sin allured,
That pleasure of thy sin does hold thee fast;
Thy wit, thy will, thy reason all obscured,
And now behold, forgets thy God at last:
Thou art intrapp'd within ten thousand snares,
And blindlins rins to hell, thou never cares.
The flying motions of thy mind still burns,
And forward goes, her fury to fulfill:
Youth and desire, whose raging humor turns
To execute the horror of their ill
With no les price, the^ with thy soul is bought,
And when all is got, they are but things of naught.
Both day and night thou does thy self annoy,
To work great mischief with thy own misdeeds,
Less travail far would gain eternal joy,
Which sweet Reward, all earthly pains exceeds:
But thou art mad, and in thy madness strange,
To quit thy God, and take the devil in change.
At threatening ever senseless, deaf, and dumb,
Thou never looks on thy swift-running-Glasse;
Nor terror of the Judgment for to come,
But still thou thinks, thy pleasure can not pass:
All is deceit, and thou have no regard,
Gods wrath at last, the sinner will reward.
To pray to God: why? then thou art ashamed,
For sin in thee shall suffer seandalies,
Thy rusty filth of conscience shall be blamed,
Besides, thy soul has spoiled her faculties:
Thus does the devil so hold thee still aback,
Even to the death, and then thy soul does take.
Alas poor soul, when God did first thee frame,
Most excellent, most glorious and perfect:
But since thou in that carnal body came,
Thy favour's lost, spoiled is thy substance quite:
O that thou would repent, and turn in time,
God will thee purge, and clange thee of thy crime.
God is a God of vengeance, yet does stay,
And sparing, waits if thou thy life will mend
With harmless threatenings often he does assay,
And often he does sweet words of comfort send:
If thou repent, his anger will assuage:
If not, he will condemn thee in his rage.
The son of God, he for thy sinful sake,
To save thy soul, with care he did provide,
Man's filthy nature on him he did take,
That he both cold, and hunger might abide:
He many years on earth great wonders wrought,
Still persecute, and still his life was sought.
When as his time of bitter death drew near,
The agony was so extreme he felt,
That when he prayed unto his Father dear,
In sweating drops of blood he seemed to melt:
Nailed on the Cross he suffered cruel smart,
when as they pierced his hands, his feet, his heart.
Great torment more was laid, on him alone,
For thee and all mankind who will believe:
Thou was not bought, with silver, gold, nor stone,
But Christ his life and precious blood did give:
O let not then his blood be shed in vain,
Whilst thou have time, turn to thy God again.
THE SORROVVFVLL SONG OF A CONVERTED SINNER.
JOB. 7. CAP. I have sinned, what shall I do unto thee? (O thou preserver of
mankind.)
LEd with the terror of my grievous sins,
Before Gods mighty Throne I do compeare,
The horror of my halfe-burst heart begins
To strike my sinful soul with trembling fear.
Where shall I seek secourse, or find redress?
Who can my fearful torturing thoughts devorce?
Who can me comfort in my great distress?
Or who can end the rage of my remorce?
I at compassions door has begged so long,
That I am hoarce, and yet can not be heard
Amids my woes, sad silence is my song,
From mirthlesse-me, all pleasure is debard.
O time (untimely time) why was I borne?
To live sequestered solitar alone
Within a wilderness of Cares forlorn,
Which grants no limit to my mart'ring Moan.
My mart'ring Moan with woeful words does pierce
The air, and next from hollow Caves rebounds
This aequiuox my sorrow does rehearse,
And fills my ears with tributarie sounds.
These sounds discends within my slaught'red heart,
And there transformed in bleeding drops appears
Next to my eyes drawn up with cruel smart,
In water changed, and then distilled in tears.
My tears which falls with force upon the ground,
Jn numbers great of little sparks does spread,
And in each spark my doleful pictures found,
J in each picture tragic stories read.
I read Characters both of sin and shame,
Drawn with the colors of my own disgrace,
In figures black of impious defame,
Which painted stands in my disastred face.
I breathless faint with burden of their woes,
Such is my pain it will not be expelled,
Do what I can, I can find no repose,
All hope of help against me is rebelled.
Gods mercie's great, I will expel despair
With praying still: I shall the heavens molest
Both night and day, unto my God repair,
He will me hear, and help my soul oppressed.
The thought of hell makes all my hairs aspire,
Where gnashing teeth sad sorows does out-sound,
Where damned souls still boiles in flaming fire,
And where all endless torment does abound.
Had they but hope, it might appease their grief,
That in ten thousand years they should be free:
But all in vain, despair without relief,
Gods word eternal, most eternal be.
When as our Christ in Judgment shall appear,
Clothed with the Glory of his shining light,
And when each soul the tru^pets sound shall hear,
They with their corpse must com before Gods sight.
The Angels all, and happy troops of heaven,
Incirkled rounds theatred in each place,
A reckoning sharp of every one is given
Before the Saints, and Gods most glorious face.
The sloathfull sinner then shall be ashamed,
Who in his life would neither mend nor mourn
To hear that sentence openly there proclaimed:
Go wicked to eternal fire, and burn.
And to his blessed company, he says,
The Angels to my Kingdom shall convoy
With endless mirth, because ye knew my ways,
Come rest with me in never-ending joy.
O let me Lord be one of thy elect,
And once again thy love to me restore,
Let thy inspiring grace my spirit protect,
With thee to bide, and never part no more.
Once call to mind how deerly I am bought,
When thy sweet corpse was spread upon the Rood,
Thy suffering torment, my salvation wrought
Thy pains, thy death, and shedding of thy blood.
O seek not then my soul for to assail
Against thy might: how can I make defense,
Thy bleeding death for me will naught avail,
Jf thou should damn me for my lewd offense?
Try not thy strength, against me wretched worm,
I am but dust before thy furious wind,
Nor have I force to bide thy angry storm,
Then rather far, let me thy favor find.
I Caitiue on this earth does loure and creep,
I prostrate fall before the heavens defaite,
On thee sweet Christ with mourning tears I weep
To pity this my weak and poor estate.
My poor estate which robbed of all content,
And nothing else but dolours does retain,
The treasure of my grief is never spent,
But still in secret sorrow I complain.
Hear my complaint, mark well my words, o Lord,
Thou searcher of all hearts in every kind,
Thou to my true conuertion bear record,
And sweep away my sins out of thy mind.
I sacrifice to thee my Savior sweet,
And patient God who gave me leave to live
My sighing-teares, and bleeding heart contreit,
I have naught else nor ritcher gift to give.
Thou God the Father, thou created me,
And made all things obedient to man's will:
Thou son of God to save my soul did die,
And Holy ghost thou sanctifiest me still.
Thou Father, Son, thou holy Ghost divine,
On my poor soul, let your rich glory shine.
FINIS.
TO THE ESTATE OF WORLDLY ESTATES.
Tempora mutantur et nos mutamur in illis.
EAch has his Time whom Fortune will advance,
Whose fickle wheel runs restless round about
Some flattering lie often changes others chance
Dangers deceit in guilty hearts breeds doubt.
It Is seen
What yet has been
With tract of time to pass,
And change
Of Fortune strange
At last has turned their glass.
Envy triumph's on tops of high Estate
All over-hung with veiles of feigned show.
Man climbes above the course of such conceate
That loftie-like, they loath to look below.
And what?
All Is hazard that
We seek on Diceto set,
For some
To height's do come
Then falls in dangers net.
The gallant man, if poor, he is thought a wretch,
His virtue rare is held in high disdain,
The greatest Fool is wise, if he be rich
And wisdom flows from his lunatic brain.
Thus see
Rare sprit's to be
Of no account at all.
Disgrace
Has got such place
Each joys at others fall.
The brib'rous mind who makes a God of gould,
He scorns to plead without he have reward,
Then poor men's suites at highest rates are sold,
Whilst Au'rice damned, nor Ruth has no regard.
For here
He has no fear
Of Gods consuming curse
His gains
Does pull with pains
Plagues from the poor man's purse.
The furious flames of Sodom's sudden fire,
With fervent force consume vain Pride to naught,
With wings of wax let soaring him aspire
Above the stars of his ambitious thought.
And so
When he does go
On top of Prides high glory
Then shall
His sudden fall
Become the worlds sad Story.
Ingratitude that ill, ill-favored Ill
In noble breasts has builded Castles strong,
Oliuion sets-vp the Troph's that still
Bewrayes the filthy vildnesse of that wrong.
Ah mind
Where deu'lish kind
Ingratitude does dwell
That Ill
Coequals still
The greatest Ill in hell.
On poisons filth contagious Error spreads,
Heavens spotless eyes looks as amazed with wonder,
Their Vip'rous minds such raging horror breeds
To tear Religions virgin-roabes asunder.
What then
O wicked men
And Hels eternal pray
Go mourn
And in time turn
From your erroneous way.
What course wants cross? what kind of state wants strife?
what worldling yet could ever seem content?
What have we here in this our thwarting life?
Joy, Beauty, Honor, Love, like smoke are spent.
I say
Time goe's away
Without return again
How wise!
Who can despise
These worldly vapors vain.
FINIS.
OF A BE.
Del' Ape ch' Io prouai Dolce, e Crudele
L' agonel Core, enela bocca iL mele.

MADRIGALL.
ONce did I see
a sounding Be.
Amongst her sweetened swarm
still would she flee
and favor me.
Then did I dread no harm.
Now whilst in Nectred-glory of her gains,
She sits and suckes the fair well-flourish'd flower:
My sugared hopes are turned to bitter pains,
And look'd-for-sweet is nothing else but sower:
Ah cruel sweet, Be sweet and cure my smart,
Honey my mouth, but do not sting my heart.
FINIS.
HIS PASSION ADO, When he was in Pilgrimage.
Quo fata vocant.
THou Phaeton thy fiery course do end,
And Cinthia thou with borrowed light do shine
These woods their sile^thorrors do out-send
And Valleys low their mistie Vapors shrine,
Each lively thing by Natures course does go
To rest, save I, that wander now in woe.
My plaints imparts these soli'd parts to fill,
Weil'st roaring Rivers sends their sounds among,
Each dreadful Den appears to help me still,
And yields sad Consorts to my sorr'wing song:
How often I breath this woeful word, alace,
From Echo I sad accents back embrace.
I will advance, what fears can me affraye?
Since Dreades are all debarred by high dispere,
Like dark-nighs Ghost, I Vagabound astraye,
With troubled spri't transported here and there,
None like my self, but this my self alone,
I martir'd Man be wail my matchless moan.
You flintie-stones take ears and eyes to see
This thundring-greif, with Earthquake of my heart,
That you may sigh and weep with miser- Me,
Melt at the tragic Commentes of my smart:
Let these my tears that fall on you so often,
Make your obdurate hardness to be soft.
You liquid-drops, distilling from mine eyes,
In Crystal you my second-selfe appears;
Pattern of pain, how do thou sympathize
In visage wan, and Pilgrim's weed thou bears?
And on these signs of miscontent-attire.
Still do I read, debard from my desire.
This hairie-Rob which does my corpse conteen,
This Burden, and my rough-vnrased-heade
A Winter and a Summer have I been
In dangers great, still wandering in this weed;
Lo thus the force of my disasters strange
Has made me make this vnacquainted-change.
I am dried up with Dolors I endure,
My hollow eyes bewray's my restles night,
My visage pale, self pity does procure,
I see my soars deciphr'd in my sight,
A Pilgrim still, my Oracle was so,
And made my name, AH MISER MAN I GO.
Now do I go, and wander any way,
No strange estate, no kind of trau'ling toils,
No threatening Cross, nor sorrow can me stay,
To search and seek through all the sorts of soyles.
So round about this Round still have I run,
Where I began, again I have begun.
In strangest parts, where stranger I may be,
An outcast lost, and voyed of all releife,
When saddest sight of sorrow I can see,
They to my grave shall help to feed my grief:
If Wonders self can woeful wonders show,
That sight, that part, that wonder I will know.
Thus do I walk on foreign fields forlorn,
To careless Me, all cares do prove unkind,
I do the Fates of fickle Fortune scorn,
Each cross now breeds contentme^t to my mind
Astonish of stupendous things by day,
Nor howling sounds by night can me affray.
You stately Alps surmounting in the skies,
The force of floods that from your hights down falls
There mighty Clamors with my careful Cries,
The Echoes voice from hollow Caves recalles:
The snow-froz'n-cluds down from your tops do thu^der
their voice with mine does tear the air a su^der.
And Neptune thou when thy proud swelling wrath
From gulphs to mountains moved with winters blast
In anger great when thou did threaten Death
Often in thy rage, thy raging storms I past,
And my salt tears increast my saltnes more,
My sighs with winds made all thy bowels roar.
The spacious earth and groundless deep shall bear
A true Record, of this my mart'ring moan;
And if there were a world of worlds to hear,
(When from this mortal Chaos I am gone)
I dare approve my sorrow has bin such,
That all their witt's can not admire too much.
On the cold ground my Caytife-carcasse lies,
The leaueles-trees my Winter-blasted-bed:
Noe Architecture but the Vap'rous skies,
Black-foggie-Mist, my weari'd corpse has cled,
This loathsome Laire, on which I restles turn
Does best befit Mee-Miser-man to mourn.
With open eyes Nights-darknes I disdain,
On my Cros'd-brest I Cross my Crossed arms;
And when repose seeks to prevent my pain,
Squadrons of Cares do sound their fresh alarmes
So in my sleep (the Image of pale- Death)
These sighing words with burthe^-brus'd I breath
I ever rolled my Barge against the stream,
I scaled those steps that Fortune did me frame,
I Conquered, which impossible did seem,
I, haples I, once happy I became:
Now sweetest joy is turned to bitter gall,
The higher up, the greater was my fall.
What passing Follies are in high Estates,
Whose foolish hopes gives promise to aspire:
Self-flatt'rie still does mask the fear of fates,
Till unawares deceived in sought desire:
This breeds dispare, the^ force of Fortunes change
Sett's high Estates in dread and perrill strange.
There secret grudge, Envy and Treason dwelles,
There Justice lies, in Dole-bewraying weed:
There flyding Time with alt'ring feats still tells
The great Attempts ambitious minds do breed:
They who have most, still hunts for more and more
They most desire that most ar choked with store.
Henceforth will I forsake Terrestiall Toys,
Which are naught else but shawdowes of deceat,
What covered danger is in earthly joys,
When vilde Envy, triumphs on each Estate.
Thou Traitor Time, thy Treason does betray,
And makes youths Spring in flourish fair decay.
What Is in Experience which I have not sought,
All (in that All) my will I did advance,
At highest rate, all these my wits are bought
In Fortunes-Lottrie, I have tried my Chance,
So what I have, I have it not by show,
But by Experience which I truly know.
Long have I searched, and now at last I find
Eye-pleasing Calmes the tempest does obscure,
When I in glory of my prosperous wind,
With white-sweld-sayles on gentle seas secure,
And when I thought my loadstar shinde most fair
Even then my hopes made shipwreck on despair
My sight is dark, whilst I am over-throwne,
Poor silly Bark that did pure love possess:
With great ungrateful storms thus am I blown
On ruthlesse Rocks, still deaf at my distress.
So long-sought-Conquest does in ruin's bost,
And says behold, thy love and labor's lost.
Since all my love and labor's lost, let Fame
Spit forth her hate, and with that hateful scorn
In dark oblivion sepulchrize my name,
And tell the world that I was never borne.
In me all earthly dream'd-of-joy shall end,
As Indian herbs which in black smok I spend.
Al-doting pleasure, that all tempting-devill,
I shall abhor, as a contag'ous Pest
I Will purge and cleanse my senses of that Evil,
I swear and vow, still in this vow to rest,
In sable-habit of the mourning black,
I Will solemnize my oath and vow I make.
Then go vain World, confused Mass of naught,
Thy bitterness has now abused my brain,
Avoid thy deu'llish Fancy from my thought,
With idle toys torment me not again:
My Time which thy alluring folly spent,
With heart contreat and tears I do repent.
FINIS.
FROM ITALY to SCOTLAND his Soil.
TO thee my Soil where first
I did receive my breath,
These mournful Obsequies I sing
Before my Swan-like Death,
My love by Nature bound,
Which spotles love as dew,
Even on the Altar of my heart
I sacrifice to you.
Thy endless worth through worlds
Beginning still begun,
Long may it shine with beams most bright
Of vneclipsed-Sunne.
And long may thou Triumph,
With thy unconquered hand,
And with the Kindomes of thy King
Both Sea and Earth command
At thy great Triple-force,
This trimbling world still stoup's;
Thy Martial Arm shall over-match
The Macedonian trup's.
And thou the Trophies great
Of glory shall erect,
The Confeins of this spacious Glob,
Thy Courage shall detect.
O happy Soil Vnyt
Let thy Imperial breath
Expel seditious Muteners,
The excraments of wrath.
With Honor, Truth and Love,
Maintain thy thre-fold-Crowne,
Then so shall thou with wondrous worth,
Inritch thy rich Renown.
In spite of Envyes pride,
Still may thy florish'd Fame;
Confound thy foes, defend thy right,
And spurn at Cowards shame.
Amidst my sorrowing greef,
My wandering in exyle,
Often look I to that Arth, and says,
Far-well sweet Britains Iyle.
TO THE GHOST OF THE right Honorable JOHN GRAHAME Earl of MONTROIS, sometime
ViceRoy of North-Britaine.
THy meriet great to Honor gave a Crown,
In Invyes-spight thy spotles- Faith did shine,
Thy stately Fame inthrond thy rich renown,
And Deaths triumph has made thy soul divine.
Death killed thy mortal Corpse,
But not thy glorious Name:
Whose life is still with wings-born-vp
Of Honor, Faith and Fame.
AGAINST TIME. SONNET.
Go Traitor Time and authorize my wrong,
My wrack, my woe, my waiting on bewray;
Look on my heart, which by thy shifts so long
Thou Tyrannized with Treason to betray,
My hopes are fled, my thoughts are gone astray,
And senseless I have sorrow in such store
That pain it self, to whom I am a pray
Of me has made a mart'red-man and more.
Go, go then Time, I hateful thee implore,
To memorize my sad and matchless moan
Whilst thy decepts by Death I shall decore,
My loss of life shall make them known each one,
So I (poor I) I sing with Swan-like-song,
Go Traitor Time and Authorize my wrong.
FINIS.
HIS DYING SONG.
Circundederunt me dolores mortis, and pericula inferni in venerunt me.
NOw hapless Heart, what can thy sors assuage,
Since thou art gript with horror of deaths hand
Thou (baleful-thou) becoms the Tragic stage,
Where all my tortring thoughts theatred stand,
Grief, fear, death, thought, each in a monstrous kind
Like ugly monsters muster in my mind.
Thou loathsome bed to restlesse-martred- Me,
Void of repose, filled with consuming cares;
I will breath forth my wretched life on thee,
For quenchlesse woe and pain, my grave prepares
Unto pale-agonizing- Death am thrall,
Then must I go and answer to his call.
O Memory most bitter to that man,
Whose God is Gold, and hoords it up in store;
But O that blind-deceiuing- Wealth, what can
It save a life, or add one minute more?
When he at rest, rich-treasure in his sight,
His Soul (poor fool) is taken away that night.
And strangers gets the substance of his gain,
Which he long sought with endless toils to find,
This vilde- worlds-filth, and excraments most vain,
He needs must dye, and leave it all behind:
O man in mind remember this, and mourn,
Naked thou came, and Naked must return.
I naked came, and naked must return,
Earths start'ring pleasure is an idle toy;
For now I swear my very Soul does spurn,
That breath that froth, that moment-fleeting-joy;
Then farewell World, let him betrayed still bost
Of all mischief that in Thee trusts most.
Burnt Candle, all thy store consumed thou end's,
Thy lightning splendour threats for to be gone,
O how do thou resemble Me that spend's,
And sighs forth life in sighing forth my moan?
Thy light Thee lothes, I loath this lothed life,
Full of deceit, false-envie, grudge and strife.
I call on Time, Tim's alt'red by the change,
I call on Friends, Friends have closed up their ears;
I call on Earthly-powers, and they are strange,
I call in vain when Pity none appears.
Both Time and Friends, both Earthly-powers and al,
All in disdain are deaf at my hoarse call.
Then Prayer flow from my heart-humbling-knees
To the supreme Celestial power aspire
Show thou my grief to Heavens-al-seing-eies
Who never yet denied my just desire:
Mans-help is naught, O GOD thy help I crave,
Whose spotles-bloud my spotted-soule did save.
Then take my soul, which bought by thee is thine
Earth-harbring-worms take thou my corpse of clay
O Christ on me eternal mercy shine,
Thy bleiding wounds wash all my sins away:
I come, I come, to thee O Jesu sweit,
And in thy hands I recommend my spirit.
FINIS.

