A Direction for the Health of Magistrates and Students.

Namely such as be in their consistent Age, or near thereunto: Drawn as well
out of sundry good and commendable Authors, as also upon reason and faithful
experience otherwise certaynely grounded.

Written in Latin by Guilielmus Gratarolus, and Englished, by T. N.

Imprinted at London, in Fleet-streete, by William How, for Abraham Veale. 1574.

To the Right honorable Master Francis Walsyngham Esquier, one of the
Principal Secretaries to the Dueenes most excellent Majesty, and of her
Majesty's most honorable privy Counsel.
IN Physic, and curinge of the Sick (Right honorable) three things only
(says Hippocrates) are to be considered, the disease, the Pacient, and the
Physicion, who in his office and function in that behalf is the minister of
Art and the deputy of Nature. The Physician and the disease do mutually
oppugn one an other and strive for maistrie. For the Phisicions charge and
only care is, and ought to be, to recure his Pacient with Sickness attaynted.
The Sickness co^trarywise employeth his whole deuoire and bends all his
force to the destruction, spoil and ruin of the body whereinto he has made
breach and entrance. Now, is the Patient (all this while) the Subject and
party in whom this conflict and combat is darreigned: who if for his part, he
do wiselye and politikely resist the somonce of his enemy Sickness, directing
the order of his diete and daily usage by the Dyal of the Physicions learned
prescription and counsel, and abstain from things hurtful and inconvenient
by practizinge that which is wholesome and expedient, he is ioygned in
commission and made (as it were) fellow in office with the Physicion against
all raginge assaults of Sickness. Whereby they twain being thus firmly
confederate and linked together, the disease and Sickness shall be easily
driven to a narowe exigent and glad to disclaim his interest, and great hope
is to be conceived of the victory and vpperhand.

As contrariwise, if the Pacient reuolte from the Physicion, wilfully refuse
and stubbornely disobey his lore and advise, altogether framinge himself to
serve the humor and will of his Sickness, little hope and less help is to
be expected of his recovery. For in flyinge to the one, and startinge from
the other, he adds great increase to the disease and provoke it to show the
uttermost effect of his tyrannical force and quality upon the body that is
so willinge and ready even at the first onsette and Alarm to surrendre. The
Physician for the better atchieuing and compassing of his purpose, uses. iii.
special weapons or Instruments whereby and wherewith he works his feact and
supplanteth his adversary, Diet, Medicine, or else some actual woorkmanshippe
of the hand called Chyrurgery. Which. iij. are in the Greek, termed by apt
and several names more lively and plainlye expressinge their properties
natures and operations, the first being called Diaetetice, the second
Pharmaceutice, the third and last Cheirurgice. Beside these three, is there
none, for by whatsoever names any remedies for Sickness or preservatives for
health are called by otherwise, they are to be referred to one of these three
necessarily. For either they belong to diete, either else they are too be
done by receipt of medicinable drouges, potions and applications, or else
finallye by the ministry and artificial woorkemanshippe of the hand, called
(as I said) Chyrurgerie. The best and surest of all these is Diet, the which
oftentimes of it self alone is hable and sufficient to cure the discrased, and
without which, the other two cannot well and conveniently to purpose be
practiced. Be the Chirurgian never so skillful, yet unless the party
passioned use good respect in daily diete, his cunninge hand not only turns
to no profitable consequence and effect at all, but rather many times the
party is thereby brought into further hazard and danger. Medicines (be their
virtues never so sovereign and effectual) are not hable to help in such
extremities as they be employed unto, if Diet be not respected accordingly, as
Galen in his book De Theriaca written to Pamphilianus most learnedly
aduoucheth. Thus is Diet the safest, the surest and the pleasantest way that
can be used and far to be preferred before all other kinds of remedies,
unless the disease be of such vehemence quality, condition and extremity that
it seem to require some great special consideration otherwise, and in time of
sickness is not only a special and harmless recuratiue, but also in time of
health, the best and almost the only preservative. And for that I saw the same
in this little Pamphlet, so clerkely and compendiously decyphered, I have
adventured to deuest him of his Latin weed, and after a homely sort forced
into barbarous English, whereby although I have ministered large occasion to
the world, to think in me some spice of presumption and folly, for thus
entermedlyng in an Art nothing appendant to my profession, yet do I not
mistrust but the equanimitie of the honester sort, weighyng my goodwill and
meaning in the balance of reasonable consideration, will freendly dispense
with my oversight that way, and suspe^d the sinistre doom of all opinionatiue
affection. Man is subject to very many diseases. Antiquity reckened up in a
beadrolle, and registered in sundry of their Monuments left behind them for our
erudition and furtheraunce, three hundred and odd several kinds of Maladies,
beside casualties. Since when, there has increased and sprung up a fresh
supply and swarm of many strange and new diseases erst not known nor heard
of, seemyng as it were to denounce defiance and continual war to all the
cunnyng that Phisicions have. Which by good counsel and advise to prevent, or
maturely to remove and take away (as far as Art has his limitation)
deserves in mine opinion to him that beats his brain for others avail in
that behalf no small commendation. This caused learned Homere, after he had
taken a perfect survey of man, and compared his state with every other kind of
Creature to geeue verdict and affirm that man among all Creatures was most
miserable. Silenus judged it best, either not to be borne at all, or else most
quickly and out of hand to dye and be rid out of worldely thraldom. Plini
held opinion that shortness of life was the greatest and best gift that ever
the Gods gave unto man. In Lucian also we do read, that Pythagoras after he
had oftentimes changed his sex, and shape and dwelled (Pylgrymelike) in the
bodies of all men, women, and fourefooted beasts of every degree and calling,
plainly confessed that he lived a great deal more pleasantly, when he was a
Frogge then when he was a King. And al these, although absurd in report, yet in
sense iarred not far from a truth, if that heavenly Philosopher had not
otherwise assured our weak consciences of an everlasting felicity after this
life, laid up in the storehouse of his mercy for so many as unfeignedly repose
all their affiance, trust and ankreholde in him and do frame their lives and
conversation by the squyre and level of his sacred word. Christian it is
therefore and natural also, every one according to his talent to help an
other. And if Christian examples were scantie and hard to find (whereof there
be almost infinite) yet let us consider and call to memory the manner and rite
that was among the old Egyptians and Assyrians, among whom, if any happened
to fall sick, he was streightways laid abroad in the high way, that every
man passinge by and beholding the manner of his sickness, might tell, if he or
any other of his acquayntaunce had ever been discrased with the like, and if
he or they had so been attached, what Medicine or thing it was that had cured
and healed them, that the same remedy might likewise be applied to the pacient
there languisshing. By which means and way, it is thought, yea constantly
aduou ched by Historiographers that the Art of Physic was at the first found
out and practyzed. This poor myte of mine, such as it is, I humbly offer unto
your good worship as unto him, whom the very Title and argument of the Book
did peculierlie inuit me to make choice of. Not doubting but even as God and
nature has enfraunchysed you with a special privilege of wisdom, learning
and dignity above many thousands of others, so your Honorable disposition
will not estraunge, your worthy patrocinie to the simple doings of other
inferiors, who in a far lower degree by such honest ways as this, do seek
to in sinuate themselves into your acquayntaunce, and desire to be enrolled in
the Calendar of your most faithful Suppliauntes. The Lord perform and
finish that in you which he has richly beegunne, and grant unto you a
most healthful mind within a healthful body even so long as natures
bounds may stretche to the advancement of his glory and the commodite of
this your Country, and after your Pilgrimage here ended, mercifully conduct
you to the joys of his glorious hierarchy.

Your H. most humble Thomas Newton.

The Preface.
THAT MY Meaning and order wherein I purpose in this little Book to proceed,
may be to ye Readers the better notified: I think it not amiss, nor
impertinent to our matter, first briefly to declare, how that the indications
or tokens used in the order of Physic, are namely taken and learned out of
four principal poynctes: either of the nature of health, and the causes
thereof, or of a sound and healthie body: or of the nature of Sickness and
the causes thereof, and the body that is discrased: or else of the mean and
Neutral body, that is neither perfectly whole, nor thoroughly sick, or of
certain things common to all men. Such indications and tokens as do proceed
of the nature of health, and of those bodies that are sound, have one common
or general indication, notwithstanding bipartite and divided into two parts,
that is to wit, Conservation, and Preservation. Conservation, when the body
is of it self perfitly sound (as seldom is to be seen) but Preservation is,
when the body begins to be enfeebled and like to fall into some
infirmity. And these two Indications and common medicines appertain to us in
this present work to be discussed. For since Conservation and Preservation
belong either to the Gymnasticer or else to the Physician, and Gymnasticke
Art, which is the trade of exercising men in feats of Actiuitie, is in these
our days antiquate and grown out of use, therefore they do only appertain
to the Physician, as Galene, not only in one little several book of this same
Argument, but also in others of his works plainly affirms. The other
Indications gathered of the nature of the disease and the causes thereof, and
the body distempered and discased (which are things against Nature, whose
general and common Indication is Correction and Ablation) belong to the
Physician, whose office is to cure diseases. But the Indications of the
Neutrall or mean estate between health and sickness, the causes of things not
natural, do show, so that sometime Conservation and sometime Ablation therein
must be used. And the causes not natural are these: Air, meat and drink,
moouinge and rest, Emptiness and Repletion, Sleep and watch and the
affections of the mind: whereunto are added the Age, Temperature, Custom,
Art, and the proper nature of every several person. And they be called
mean, because they do sometimes the office of Conservation and sometimes of
Ablation. Ablation when (for example) the Air is hurtful to sickness: For it
is either altered with contraries: or else clean changed: if it be wholesome
and profitable, we do conserve it with his like, and thus do we in conseruing
them yt be whole. These Indications are called commune, because as well the
Conseruer or the Preserver of health, as also the Curer of diseases uses them.
I therefore meaning to entreat upon these two poinctes of Conservation and
Preservation, will follow Hippocrates his order in the discourse of those five
things, which are also avouched by Galene, in diverse of his works and namely
in his second book, De Tuen. Sanit. And these be they: Labor or exercise,
Meat, Drink, Sleep, and the act of carnal copulation. These being
orderly, conveniently, and competently used, have great power and efficacy to
keep a man in health, and in the^ chiefly (as these two Graunde Capitaines and
Ancient fathers of Phisicks do affirm) consists the whole poyse and cause
of healthinesse. Unto these five, (through God his assistaunce) I entend to
annexe a Surplusage and addicion of other things not natural and such as
seem needefulll and expedient hereunto.

Let us therefore begin with the first which is Exercise, with humble prayer
to Almighty God, to further our attemptes, for his dear sons sake Jesus
Christ our Lord and Savior. But this by the way must we admonish the Readers,
that for as much as the natures and complexions of men be diverse, they also
require a diverse trade and order in diete and exercise. And therefore says
Lib. 5. detuend sa.
Galene, even as a shoemaker cannot make one shoe to serve every man's foot,
so neither can a Physician describe and appoint any one general order and
dietarie for all manner of persons. For there be some, which if they should
refrain exercise and intermit their wonted Agitation but three days, would
straitwayes be sick: again, there be other some, which give themselves
altogether to ease and rest, and yet be healthful and lusty, and in other
things, is like diversity to be found. Now, whereas there is both diversity
in bodies, and also diverse trades of living, it cannot be that any one
absolute way should be appoincted to serve every nature in every faculty
generally. And therefore to write a special dietary for such as either because
they be Seruitours and must give their attendaunce on there masters and other
charge whereby they may not, or for such as be continually so encombred with
other affairs whereby they cannot observe any precise diet, it were but a
thing vain and superfluous. For their sakes therefore that live of them
selves freely and are not enthralled or mancipated to the inconveniences
abouesaide, we have compiled this treatise, how and in what sort they may live
a long life in prosperous health and welfare. Furthermore that which in every
kind is simple and faultlesse ought always to be preferred before all others.
And in bodies that same is called simple and faultelesse, which is in a very
good plight and likinge: but in the trade of life, that is to be accounted
best, which is free and not in subjection. For it behooves that such a one as
would live long and never be attached with any Sickness, should be exempt and
free from all turmoiling troubles and public affairs in the Common wealth,
living only to himself, cherishinge his body and tendringe his health. For
there is no means to make that immortal, which naturally was begotten and
created mortal, but to make the same to be of long life and continuance, may
be done and brought to pass. Galene says, that if he which has his body in
good likinge and temperature do not intermeddle with the laborious cares of
worldly business, but geeue himself only to quietness and tender regard of
his own health shall not at all (as far as is possible) be arrested and
vexed with any malady, neither be prevented with death until he have lived a
merueilous long age. But who is he not only among us Christians, but even
among Paymms and Epicures, so blockishe and insensate, to think that he is
borne only for himself and for his osone private commodity without having any
respect or regard at all, either of matter or person in the society of
human life? unto such as these (if any such be) we do not address these
our precepts, but unto those which at such times as they have convenient
leisure to surceasse from their charges and offices according as their
calling and vocation is, do measurably and for healthes sake tender their
bodies to the intent they may be the better able to continue about their
needful and urgent business, and not to addicte themselves to voluptuousnes
and bellychere, as though they believed there were non other life but only this
frail and transitory life, and therefore securely to wallow in their
disordered and lascivious appetites, tendryng and cockeryng their wanton
Carkases, for whose toothe and appetite Galen has fully written their desired
diet in his six Books, De tuend. Sanitate. Where he does so copiously and so
exquisitely depaynt out the Art, that I suppose a man shall vnethe find any
among a great many of Princes and Potentates (who live freely without check
at their own pleasure and ease) that does observe all his precepts in those
books mentioned. That which here we write shall be good and auayleable in
manner to all Ages (Childehoode and extreme Oldeage excepted) wherein my
counsel is to all men, that what every man shall find, and by experience
prove best to agree with his nature, the same to use as near as he may.

Of Exercise and Labor.
BEcause a great part of Healthinesse consists in a convenient and oportune
exercise of the Body, as Auicen and before him Hippocrates and Galen affirm,
needful it is to have a diligent eye and consideration thereunto. It is
commended for many special causes, The commodity of Exercise and labor
but namely because it being duly and seasonablie used, will not suffer the
substance of overmuch meat engendrynge Surphet to clotter and co^gele within
the body, and also makes the whole body light, nymble and active. Furthermore
it keeps and merueilously stirs up natural heat, restores the powers of
the whole body, and strengthens all the virtues thereof. Small and weak heat
it increases, and daily dissolueth the superfluities by little and little
gathered within the body, and conuaieth the same to such places from whence
they be conveniently sent out and expelled. It also makes the members a great
deal the apter to receive nourishment, because the filth and excrementall
matter of the body is thereby scattered and avoided. Moreover it opens the
cunduites of the body, and the courses or passages wherein the blood (having
thereto the convenient ministry of the natural powers appointed for that
office) is easily received and converted into the substance of the member:
which continual nourishment is most necessary unto man's life. For without
this virtue, present death ensues. This gain and commodity is also gotten by
exercise, that by expellyng superfluous humors it excuses a man from the
usual receipt of Purgations and Medicines. For we must be very circumspect
and take great heed, Purgations dangerous and hurtful
as Plato says in Timaeo, that we move not the body with medicines, and
specially Electuaries soluble, if we may otherwise choose: because although
they do purge, yet do they inueterate: And although there be no poison in
them (as in deed in the most of them there is) yet are they very paynefull to
be taken inwardly, because their office is contrary to nature. For they draw
away from the members those humors which the powers of nature do draw to the
same for a nourishment: and also because beside the ill humors which they
draw out, they do for the most part also draw out those which be good, and
the vital spirits which maintain and comfort life. It is not therefore
without good cause, that the learned and wise Doctors of this Art have
written so much and so diligently of Exercise, that men thereby might shun
and avoid many sorts of diseases, which else would assault the body, by
reason of sundry surphets, and gurmandise. For the substance remayninge after
digestion and distribucion of the meat and drink, (which Nature being
ouercharged, is not able to concocte and euacuate, being eftsoons increased
by eating and fillynge gorge upon gorge, must needs engendre diseases: In this
case to avoid and eschew the recept of purging medicines, which serve either
to recure the body being thereby sick, or else to preserve it from being
sick, Exercise is a thing most commodious as the causes of maladies do
begin so daily hereby to expel the same. These noble writers therefore were
of this mind, that if the residue of their precepts (which hereafter shall
also by us be recited) were observed and kept, bodyly health might very well
in this consistent Age be conserved, yea and not in this age only, but also in
the Age which goes before, and the Age which comes after, a very few
points being thereto either added or else altered. As for any particular
Regiment for old age, we do not in this place namely pursue, because beside
Galene it is also at large described and set out by diverse 3. De tuen sanit.
other learned Phisicions, and namely in a several book penned and published
by that famous and excellent Grayehead Antonius Fumanellus of Verona.

Thou shall therefore (Gentle Reader) with all thy deuoyre and diligence, so use
thy self, that thou may pass over and lead this flourishing time of thine
age by thine own wisdom and our wholesome counsel in health and welfare, to
the glory of god and the profit of thy neighbor, for this age of Consistence
is the very flower and prime of a man's life.

And by this means shall thou so do, if thou geeue diligent ear to the
sound counsayles of approved Phisicions, by me in this little Book breefely
noted, the chiefest whereof is Exercise. And therefore Galen plainly writes
that all such of his friends as took diligent and special regard to
Exercise were never sick. But because not every kind of Exercise, nor every
time and hour is convenient and meet for it, therefore will I declare both
the time when it should be used, and also the particular kinds thereof.

Then is it a fit time (says Auicenna) to exercise the body when there be no
ill humors in the same, least exercise When exercise is to be used. Ill
humors.
by motion and calefactio^ should disperse the same through the body or cause
them to decline and go to some principal member and part of the body and so
to putrefie. Also when there is in the Stomach or Bowelles no great quantity
of meat undigested or humors crude and raw, least inconvenience might ensue
by the conueighance of them into the official members, before they be
thoroughly boiled and concocted in the Stomach. Furthermore to go to the Stool
and exonerate nature before the time of exercise, is very wholesome.
Hippocrates, his counsel is, that a man should labor and 6. Epid. par. 4.
Aph. 28. and Gal. 5. de tuen. sanita.
chafe himself before his meal: and therefore I think it very unwholesome
immediatetly after meat to use exercise, because the vehement accidents of
the mind and the strong mocions of the body do hinder digestion and cause
Putrefaction, but an easy and soft walking, that the meat may the better and
the sooner descend to the lowest part of the Stomach where the same is better
concocted) is not to be misliked but is thought to be very wholesome and
expedient. Therefore when the meat is passed down from the Stomach and the
time approaches eftsoons to eat, then is exercise both fit and profitable. In
Somer, about the Sun risinge, least otherwise the body should be annoyed
with a double heat: and in the beginning of the Spring, and Autumn about
two hours after the Sun rising, that the coldenesse of the morning may be
avoided. For as the heat of the noone time of the day is hurtful and noisome,
so is the cold of the morning, and namely in Autumn, and winter to be
eschewed. Notwithstanding a man may exercise himself at home as soon as he
arises. In winter Auicen counsels us to exercise our selves within the
house, or in some close covert place, about noone, having the air a little
warmed, for fear least cold else should take away or hinder that commodity
that exercise brings: For nothing is more hurtful to the virtue Regitiue
then cold, namely if it be much, and at such time as the body is hot. Now
whereas there be sundry sorts of exercise, I will only recite here such as I
know to be best and most agreeable for them, unto whom I namely have penned and
written this compendie.

And first to begin with walking: which if it be soft, and not fast, nor
apace Walking
is a weak exercise and may best be used in hoate moonthes, and in the
beginning of Autumn, for at those times heat and dryness chiefly reigns.
And therefore the body ought not to be more inflamed and dried by strong
motion and exercise especially in a Cholerique man. For truly there is no time
in all the year, wherein the body ought less to be exercised then in Summer,
and therefore in hot Regions and Climates, a soft and gentle motion is a
great deal better, and more requisite then strong motion, because nothing
does so much incende and inflame natural heat, as labor and moving. Often
and long walking used without intermission, is a strong exercise and meeter
too be used in the Spring season, because exercise in the Spring time by good
reason ought to be greater and stronger then in So^mer. And therefore somewhat
long deambulacion being pleasant withal, not wearisome, nor excessive, is in my
oppinion very meet and apt for this season of the year. I mean, it must be
somewhat long, to thend it may with more facility resolve such superfluities
as about that time were gathered and congeled together duringe the winter
precedinge: and I would have it to be somewhat gentle and pleasant, least the
bodies should be set in a chafing heat with too much Agitacion and stirring,
especially of them that are of a hoate complexion. For this kind of soft and
long continuinge exercise is most agreeable and commodious to hoate and moist
bodies. A strong and vehement walking, especially up and down high and
unequal places, as manytimes to go up and down a ladder, or a stiepe hill,
till a man pant and fetch his breath thick and often with difficulty, is a
very good and comendable exercise, and best to be frequented in cold and moist
seaso^s.

There is an other kind of exercise, whereof Galene wrate, but not convenient
Tenise and ball play
for such as be grave personages and men much busied with weighty affairs,
or for such as have not their heads in good temperature, which is called the
Tenise. In which kind of pastime, all members and parts of the body are
equally moved, but it is hurtefull to the head by reason of often stowpinge:
and therefore I counsel all them that delight to play thereat, to stand
holdinge their heads upright, which may be easily done, by striking and
receiving the balle with a raquet.

There is an other kind of pleasant exercise fittest to be used in the
country in seasonable and tempestiuious times of the year, called Riding. It
is highly Riding.
to be commended and is good for the head stomach and intrayles, whereby men in
the old time got both health and pleasure.

That exercise which Auicen teaches to draw and bring down humors from the
head to the lower parts of the body is very profitable and to be done in this
sort following: Tie and make fast Hanging by the hands
a strong roape to some Beam or post, and through the same roape put a good
big wodden Cudgel overthwart, and taking hold with your hands at both
ends of the Cudgel, lift up and poyse your body so, that your feet touch
not the ground, and move your legs to and fro, hangyng still by your hands.

But the body must be very well purged, lest when the superfluous humors be
drawn down to the lower parts, there be engendered an Abscesse, which is some
impostume or course of evil humors to some one part of the body.

As for wrestling and daunsing, which be accounted among vehement exercises
(because they be nothing agreeable and sitting for a sage Magistrate nor for a
serious Student) I have nothing to say: but this by the way I may not omit,
that those persons which feed upon gross meats, and such repast as brings
strong nourishment, may use vehementer exercise and stronger ambulations, as
running, wrestling, hunting, quoytes, handeball, and to be breife all such
exercise as best agrees with their nature, which may bring difficulty in
fetchyng the breath, augment heat and humecte the skin and exterior part
of the body, with a thin subtle sweat.

For quick and nimble exercise makes the body lean and slendre, and the
contrary makes it gross and thick: much exercise dries the body, but
mean and conuenable makes it fat and corpulent. Notwithstanding, for them
that use a slender diet and spare feedyng, a shorter ambulacion and smaller
walking will suffice. Now, there be some which be of a very hot temperature
and complexio^ which ought not at all to be exercised: for such persons, a
moderate walkyng, baynyng or a gentle Fricasie and rubbing Fricasie
shall be fully sufficient. Al such are slender, lean and very Cholerique. And
this is evermore to be noted, ye a man must use such moderation in his
exercise, that be get not a lassitude or weariness therewith, but as soon as he
perceaueth the same to come upon him, it were best for him to desist and leave
of. For the body with all his parts ought so to be exercised, that
excremental matter by idleness and rest, be not gathered. But when you begin
to sweat, and the exercise seems not to be so pleasant as it did before,
cease and leave of, wypyng away the sweat from your body: then again after
that you have a little paused and rested your self, the body must be
refresshed. For in exercise as well as in meat and drink and all other
things, there ought to be a convenient measure used, so that the thing it self
be neither ouercharged with to much, nor yet debarred from that stinte and
sufficiency that is needful and requisite, because by excess, the powers
are enfeebled and dissolved, and by want or defect, there is so much of the
utility abated, as there lacks of due sufficiency. For our powers are much
strengthened and cheered, if with moderate and fit exercise they be refreshed
and cherished. Now let us breeifly declare the kinds of small and gentle
exercises, which (notwithstanding) to the health of the body are needful and
expedient. The first sort we have heretofore declared, that is to say a
sweet and soft walking.

Then there are Fricasies or Rubinges, which are the exercises of them that be
sickly. For unto them that be in perfect health, they are not sufficient, as
Plato most elegantly, and after him Galen affirms. But we adiudge and think
the^ to be very good both to mu^defie the head and divert the fumes thereof to
the uttermost and extreme parts, and also to open the pores and conduites of
the body thereby to extenuate and expel subtle humors. In old time, men
used fricasie and unction before and after every kind of exercise: before, to
the end that the passages and pores of the body being opened by fricasie, the
humors might have more easy egresse: and after, because the matter, which
did exude and come out, might be wiped away from the skin, and that which
remained in the flesh, might be extenued and dissolved, which order in my
oppinion is not to be misliked. And therefore my counsel is, that before thou
arise out of thy bed, either to rub or else to make some body else to rub,
with warm hands or some warm linen clothes, thy back, breast and bealy
easily and softly, and thy arms and legs hardly and strongly, but such
parts as thou can reach and come unto, use to rub thy self. For this
fricasie and rubbinge concocteth crude humors, and also nourishes and
comfort the whole body. And if thou chance to sweat, cause it with a soft
rubbing and fricasie to be wiped of Hippocrates says that hard fricasie does
bind and consolidate the body, soft does loose and mollify, much does
extenuate and diminishe flesh, mean augmenteth and makes it wax bourlie. It
is good also when you gee to bed if your head be heavy or payned with the
murre or reume, to rub and wringe hard your legs and hands, for by such
means the vapors that ascend upward are derived and brought downward. Also
fricasie and rubbing the whole body in the eueninge, is profitable for them
that be thoroughly weary, or with drives to much molested, or with the Atrophie
and consumptio^ pined and troubled: which being done, there should ensue an
oyntement or perfusion of temperate oil (if the ancient and laudable custom
of unction were not antiquated and growe^ out of use as many other good things
are) for it helps to the speedines and velocitie of frication, it loses and
suppleth the members that be stiff and indurate and it comfort and
mollifieth the members that are wearied.

To be rowed upon the water in a Rowing.
wherrie or barge is an exercise gentlest and easiest of all other. Now over
and beside the fricasies aforesaid, let us particulerlie recite those motions
that do exercise not all, but certain parts of the Exercise for diverse parts
of the body
body. To shoot in a long Bow, to pitche or throw great Stones or any
other heavy things sittinge or standinge is the exercise of the arms and
other parts next unto them, albeit the whole body may seem to be therein
exercised, In readinge, to speak at the first with a soft voice, and
afterward to speak louder and louder is the exercise of the Tongue, Breast,
Throat and Lunges yea it is good for the ventricle or Stomach also. But the
exercise of the head must very carefully be looked unto, because How the
head must be used.
among all the parts of the body the brain is the coldest, and therefore his
natural heat must with all diligent heed be conserved and kept, that it be
not distempered nor oppressed with the multitude and abundance of superfluous
humors. Therefore every day when thou arisest, after that thou have been at
the stool, rub thy head with a clean dry linen cloth somewhat warm, from
the foreparte of thy head backewarde ^^ the hinderparte, and at the first, let
thy fricasie be small and easy, but afterward harder and faster. Then kembe it
with a clean comb, beginnynge at the former and upper part of the head
bringing the Comb backward, and then again mundify and make it clean with
linen clothes as is aforesaid. And if the same clothes be a little perfumed
with poudre of Lignum Aloes, or Gelouers and dry Roses, their virtue is a
great deal the more to help the brain and comfort the senses. Certes thou
shall feel a merueilous effect for the healthinesse of thy head if thou use
this order of fricasie and combyng. For thereby natural heat is excited and
stirred up, the pores are opened, (which being stopped, superfluous matter and
humors are retained and consequently the brain payned and affected) but being
opened, the same il humors and fumes are propulsed and dispersed, and the
brain is made sincere, strong and healthful. There is an opinion settled in
the heads of many now adays and especially among the common sort, that it
is not good for the head to be washed, alledgynge for their proof an old
saying, common almost in every man's mouth, nevertheless for yt most part
untrue, which is this: Wash thy hands often, thy feet seldom, but thy Washing
of the head.
head never. Unto whom I do breeifly make this answer, that such persons
ought namely to wash their heds, which have a moist brain, or such as love to
have their hear grow long, because the inward superfluities which nature
would expel, cannot have passage to euaporate and vente out, but be retained
still, by reason that the pores be stopped with filthe that lies at the roots
of the hear next the head, which filthe by convenient and orderly wasshyng is
taken away and cleansed. And for this cause Auicen affyrmeth that it is not good
to suffer the hear of the bead and beard to grow long, because they gather
and retain much gross filthe and baggage, stoppyng the pores about the
roots, if they be not washed away. To these namely, and to all others
generally that use washing, Auenzoar geeueth in charge to be washed with
warm water or Lie, and if you put into the same water or Lie, so it be not to
strong, a small handful of dry Roses, and Lignu^ Aloes, and a little Camomile
or Betony for such as he somewhat of a cold nature it is very wholesome. He
that has a weak head, cold and moist, and his memory thereby empayred,
shall in my little book of the Art of Memory find most sovereign, singular
and easy remedies to satisfy his desire. As soon as the head is washed, it
must diligently and speedely be wiped and dried with warm dry linen
clothes, and well looked unto, yt it catch no harm through cold or wind.
But better it is, not to be washed at all, especially in winter or often, and
namely for such as use to be shaven and notted, but the Fricasies and
combynges aforesaid must duly be used, because (beside the aforenamed helps
that they bring) they merueilously preserve the sight. The proper and peculier
exercise of the sight is to behold and look upon small letters and lightsome
The exercise of the sight.
things: foreseen, that a measure therein be adhibited, notwithstanding
Auicen supposes that small and confuse figures and subtle or little letters
are hurtful to the sight and not to be looked on.

The exercise of the Hearing is to hear Hearing
pleasant sowndes, yea and sometimes great clappes and hideous noise: but in
any wise as well in this as in all others, too vehement and strong objects must
be warely and circumspectly eschued.

Of Bathes.
BAynyng sometimes supplieth the office Bathes or Baines
of Labor, and stands in steed of exercise, being either ayrie or watrie in
sweet water, for of Mineral waters, which we term Bathes I will say
nothing, since they rather serve for curyng of diseases. They must use the
ayrie Bayne fasting, that are corpulent and gross or have abundance of
concocte superfluous humors and excrements: but ye watrie better accords
with them that are slendre, whose use is diverse and manifold, according as
the degree of heat is more or less, whereof Galen writes thus: Sweet warm
waters if they be temperate, their virtue is hoate and moist, if they be well
and hoate, their virtue and force is moist and cold, but if they be hoater then
they ought to be, their strength is in deed hoate, but not accordyngly moist.
For they cause the body to shiuer and quake, and purseth together the subtle
pores thereof, in so much that it can neither be humected 3. De Tu sanit. ca. 3
outwardly with access of humor, neither send out any of the excrementall
matter that is within. Furthermore he says, that Bayninge orderlye used,
mollifieth and soupleth hard and indurate flesh, and fetches out all the
excrementes and liquide matter that cleaneth and adhereth after digestion to
the exterior part of the body. They that have fat and corpulent bodies or
else be replete with abundance of humors, may soon take harm by using
disorderly and vnduelie this bayning, but if they be first purged and rid
from them they may use the benefit thereof, because it does humect and moisten
the pores and passages, and makes the fumosities too be dispelled and sent
out. But as in all other things moderate use is always to be preferred before
immoderate, even so fares it by bayning. For a man may not be over hasty in
aduenturinge to use it, especially if the party that is minded to be bained,
be troubled with many humors gathered through continual cruditie and
vndigestion, or have not long before enfarced himself with plenty of meat
vnboyled and vncocted in the stomach, which crude humors being within the
body (by reason of the vehement force of heat) cause obstructions. In very
cold seasons, and in Summer time they should also be forborne. For in winter
the humors being stirred and disquieted and a cold sodeinlie succeding, they
are driven to some necessary part of the body, and there breed diseases and
great annoyaunce. And about midsomer when heat chiefly reigns and of
itself resorteth to the exterior parts, Bayninge does disperse so much of
the same heat as is yet remaininng, and by yt means much weakeneth the inward
powers. And unless the age and place of man seem otherwise to require, they
are at this time a great deal more to be eschewed. In deed no man doubts
but baines used at due and seasonable times, help the body very much (for
nothing does so well concocte and drive away il humors and corrupt juice as
sleep after bayning) but I say that the use thereof is very hurtful, if they
be used at inconvenient times and when they ought chiefly to be refrained. Now
as concerning washing in cold water, I do say that it is utterly to be
forborne of all such as are not thereto accustomed, as being more hurtful then
profitable, unless urgent occasion of great heat and lusty youth do
otherwise seem to crave it. But he that would use it, must be slender of body
and somewhat of a cold constitucion, for it is apter to pearce into such cold
within the body and inner parts. It brings all the humors in a manner to one
place of the body and makes the sinews and muscles stiff and numme, and not
nimble or ready to move, yea and sometimes it brings a man into
distemperaunce and passions much worse then these, if it be not very advisedly
used. And among all others, a healthy and sound body so long as it is in
growing and waxinge, must not be washed in cold water, least his grows and
waxing be thereby rebuked and hindered. But when he is come to his full
growthe, then may he acquainte himself with cold bathes, because the body is
thereby cooled and strengthened, and the skin made harder and thicker. And the
fittest time thereto is the beginning of Summer, that ere winter come, by
frequent custom, it may not turn to any hurtful distemperaunce of the body,
and let it begin in a very hoate day the place where it is used being
likewise hoate.

Of Meats
NOw let us say somewhat of meat and drink. And herein I do first geeue the
to understand, that it is best and holsomest to use meats that be simple. For
simple meat by good reason is most profitable, but many and sundry dishes and
diverse sorts of Viande and Cates is most hurtful and a great enemy to
health. Our predecessors which lived very long without Sickness were wont (as
Galen and Auicen affirm) to eat at one meal flesh, and at another bread
only. Yet would I not wish thee to accustom thyself to one only meat
specially if thou be in youth: for Galen expounding one of the Aphorisms of
Hippocrates says: Such things as we have long times been used unto, yea
although they be not of the best nourishing meats, are not so dangerous and
hurtful as other things are which in deed be far better, whereunto we have
not be accustomed. We must therefore (says he) now and then altre our diet,
and use to eat such meats as before we used not. Neither ought we to bind
ourselves to any one kind, least if we should (perchance) be driven at any
time to change that custom, we should straightwaies thereupon fall sick. And
Cornelius Celsus, counsaileth such as be in health, to use their ordinary
fare and plain usual diet. But to eschew and forbear much variety of meats
is undoubtedly both better and wholesomer, because the stomach Meats most
commendable Sundry sorts of meats at one time eaten are not holeso^.

Meats most commendable.


is to much set a work and labors greatly in the digestyng and concoctyng
of sundry meats at once. It is thought good (and so it is in deed) to mingle
moist with dry, cold with hot, and hot with cold, sweet and toothe some
with sower and eigre. But those meats which be in the mean or mediocritie of
all excess are most commendable. Of which sort is Bread, made of clean
corn, sufficiently leauened, well molded and moderately baked: also the flesh
of Hens and Capons, Phesants, Partriches, Woodcockes, young Pigeons,
Blackbirdes, Thrushes, Turtles and such like small birds: Semblably, such
fishes as breed among Rocks, and stones, or about the Sea side, and such
as in taste are neither unpleasant and unsavory, nor yet clammy and unctuous,
of whom heareafter we will particulerly speak. Notwithstanding meats must be
used according to the diversity that is in bodies: for they that have very
melancholique blood, must use moist and hoate meats, they that be Cholerique
must use cold and moist. But phlegmatique persons must eat such meats as
have virtue to dry and calefie. Furthermore the blood is made What makes good
blood.
most perfect and pure by using moderate exercise and such meats as engendre
good juice, being eaten at due and seasonable hours, and in such quantity as
is required and by moderate and tempestiuious drinkyng. And in meats, nothing
so well increases and makes good blood, as for them to be thoroughly concocted
and perfitly boiled in the stomach. For thereby is more easily finished, the
second concoction which is in the veins and Liver, and also admits the
third digestion which is in ye particular members and parts which be
nourisshed. A due order therefore is to be kept in meats: as for example:
that which is Order
slippery and moist before that which is stipticke and hard: again that
which is more easily concocted before yt which is of slow digestion: as
potched Eggs before flesh and such like. Likewise such as are of their own
nature soon corrupted, as Milk and moist fruits, as we shall hereafter more
largely declare. For when meat of easy digestion is eaten after that which
is slowly concocted, it is holden back, and stopped by the meat of slow
digestion before taken that it cannot pass into the entrayles, and therefore
the meat of easy digestion being perfitly concocted remains and is forcibly
kept in the stomach longer then it ought to be, whereby it is made very apt to
corruption, which to health is very hurtful and a great hindrance. But there
be some meats between whem there is but small difference of digestion, as
between a hen and a sucking Calfe, a Chicken and a Kidde, the flesh of a big
old Calfe and a young Bullock, or Steer, in such respects as these where
the difference is so small, it skilleth not greatly, if they which be somewhat
hard to digest, be eaten before other of so^what lighter digestion. This
(unless I be much deecaued) was the opion of Galen, and not without good
consideracion. For heavy meats and such as be of slow digestion, require a
stronger and greater power digestive. And all men (without exception) do
confess and know that the lower part of the Stomach or Maw in the act of
concoction is stronger then the upper and middle part is. Therefore meats of
easy digestion ought to be taken before those, which do differ so far from
them in easiness of concoction as the power of the lowest part of the
ventricle differs from the first and middle: which difference ought to be
referred to the discretion and judgment of the skillful Physician. Thus may
the flesh of a Bullock be eaten before the flesh of a big calfe, and the
flesh of a suckinge kid or young tender calfe after veale of a calf of bigger
growthe: thus also may young Pigeons, Hens, and Capons be well eaten before
Partriches and Chickens. Neither needs a man to fear least they should be
corrupted in his stomach, because they are not easily corruptible, and also
because there seems to be such proporcion of digestion in a manner between
these meats for facility or difficulty of concoction, as is between the
upper and the lowest part of the ventricle, and therefore they may at one and
the same time be concocted in the stomach, because meats of hard digestion are
sent to ye lower and stronger part, and they of lighter digestion to the
weaker.

And also this must not be omitted, that we must altogether abstain from crude
and raw meats, and take beede that al our Cates be cleanly dressed, well
seasoned and thoroughly boiled or else roasted. But in any wise we must beware yt
we do not infarce and pamper our selves with to much, and that we do not
irrit^ our Stomach and provoke an appetite with fine Iunkets and delicious
Sauees. For meat excessiuelie ingurgitate and eaten although it be of good
juice and nourishemtnt Raw mear
commonly engenders and breeds cruditie, laskes and vomit. Again, less
then necessity and nature requires, is the cause why the body is not
nourished, but weakened and enfeebled, and made unable to do his business as it
did befeore, because the body is empty The hurt of too much meat The hurt of
too little
and not able to distribute sufficient and conuenable nourishement to the
spirit. For even as Repletion hinders nourishment and rebukes nature and
the poor Animal: so all manner of abstinence causes vomites, hurts the
ventricle, resolves the powers of the body and increases ill humors. And
even as an ill diet brings heaviness and drowsy lumpishenes to the body and
a dulnes to the wit and senses: so a convenient and orderly diet quickens
the spirits and reuiueth the mind, making it more active and courageous to
know and practice virtuous operations.

Of Bread.
NOw let us particularly declare the several kinds of meat and drink, and
first let us begin with bread, which (as Nouius affirms) is called in latin
Panis, a Pascendo, of feedinge. The best Bread is made of fine wheat flower
Bread.
clean boulted from all branne and other baggage, which grew on wholesome
ground sufficiently leauened, moderately seasoned with Salt, well molded and
thoroughly baked, but not burned in the oven. Auenzoar would that bread should
be eaten the same day yt it is made when it is cold, which then (as he
thinks) greatly conserueth health, and after it be a day old, he says it
should not be eaten, because it has lost his tymperatenes of complexion and
the more it is hardened, the heavier is it to be concocted. Auicen his opinion
is, that bread ought not to be eaten before it have stood one night, and as
for hoate bread he utterly discomme^deth it, saying that it ought to be
eschewed, because it is not (as he there affirms) receptible of nature, and
also by reason of his warmenes causes thirste, and by reason of his vaporous
moisture swymmeth in the Stomach, and is long ere it pass and descend into
the entrails. It does also send an unnatural heat into the stomach or
ventricle, whereby it is checked, maistered and damnified. Therefore hoate
bread must be eschewed, and also in summer when it is above two days old, and
in winter after three days age, it ought to be forborne. And we must be very
circumspect in the fanning and making clean of such grain and seeds as we
shall afterward eat. For of this let us be well assured, that although, we do
not presently feel Bread corn must be well cleansed and picked before it be
grinded.
the daily harm that by little and little increases (vnperceaued of us for a
while because of the smalenes thereof, yet notwithstanding in continuance of
time, it brings much inconveniences and disquietnes. And at length bursteth
out to our great pain. Having spoken of bread which Homer terms the pithe
and marow of man and the sacred Scriptures affirm to corborate man's heart, and
nature, let us now likewise make the like discourse of wine, which of the same
Author is called the Strength of man and in holy writ is said to cheer up
the mind and make the heart merry.

Of Wine.
Wine has great virtue and sundry Wine.
singular effects come by drinking thereof, as not only Aristotle and Galen
but other phisicions of later days have noted and namely the absolute and
learned man Andrew Matheolus Senensis, Com. Dios. lib. 5. ca. 7.
out of whose work I do not excerpe and allege any thing, least I should
vainly seem to make a Commentary out of Commentaries, and like a vain
glorious person seek to trim up my self with other birds feathers,
speacially since his Books are to all persons and in all places to be had. And
briefly to declare my opinion, I say that wine moderately dronken clarifieth
the Spirit and makes it lusty, and lightsome and of competent The profits
that come by moderate drinking of wine.
substance, it nourishes and comfort it, and greatly refreshes the mind,
wherefore not without good reason it is endued with great power and singular
virtue to letifie and conserve nature.

But being immoderatelie dronken and ingluuiouslie swilled (as now adays many
The harm that comes by the contrary.
use to do) it is most hurtful and the special cause of many grievous
diseases. For it endamageth and hurts ye brain and all the sinews and
senses, and does too much humect and moisture the whole body. Therefore it must
be temperately dronken and good regard had that it be of the best kind,
growinge in the best soil, and here I will reken up some kinds of the best,
for all I neither can declare neither will the brevity of this small compendie
permit.

That wine is best, which is neither to old nor to new, but mean between
both, well fined and clear, reddish or of a citron color, pleasant in taste
and of a sweet smell, of such relish (I say) as in taste seems neither to be
very tarte and sharp, nor yet very doulcet and sweet. For things sharp and
pontique, yea and sweet also do quickly cause obstructions: the one because
they bind, the other because they pass into the veins and members
unconcocted, of which sort sweet wine is one of the chiefest. In so much that
Auerrois (although he be a man not of the greatest authority in physic)
affirms wine to be drawn of the Liver undigested even as soon as it is
dronken. But the drinkinge of white wine being subtle and clear and
specially White wine.
in summer time, as it does unto other famous and expert doctors in physic
so also unto me does it seem very good and commendable. For this is it, that
Galen the prince of phisicions by actual trial and experiment (yea Auerrois
says the same also) affirms that he found in diverse places of Italy,
wherein was to be found neither sowernes, ponticitie, stipticitie, bitterness nor
Sweetenes, which also engendered no inflacions and fumosities, and this wine
only is without all such dangers and inconveniences as commonly happen and
chance after the drinkinge of other wines or of water. And therefore this wine
is most agreeable and fit for strong and mature age or the age of
consistencie, and for hoate complexions and namelye in Summer for many causes,
but chiefly because it causes no headache but rather drives it and takes it
away if it come through heat of the stomach. Near unto it in goodness is an
other wine which in the old time was named Ablutum, and in Italy (specially
in Lumbardie) it is commonly termed by the Ablutum or the wine of Auicen.
name of Auicen his wine. And in this manner is it made, Take three parts of
Must and one part of water, boil the^ together till the fowerth part be
wasted. Other some use, when the Grapes be trodden and the juice wringed out, to
put water to it, in proporcio^ according to the strength and power of the wine,
and the^ after a few days to put it in vessels. But when the season of the
year is somewhat cold: or when the temperature of the body by reason of age or
otherwise is faint and weak, Claret and Citron colored wine (if no
impediment and cause to the contrary) is best and to be preferred before any
other.

Which if it be endued with any fumositie, How to alaye wine.
the same may be qualefied and alayed with water least it stuff the head, and
cause thirst. Yet may it not be to much alayed and made thin, for then does
it debilitate and weaken the stomach, causing many fumosities in the same: but
being moderately alayed and tempered it is much praised of Galen, because it
qualefieth humors, exciteth and stirs up natural heat and without harm
pearceth the members.

Certes every one of these kinds of wine are greatly avayleable to them that
therewith be acquainted and accustonied.

For it strengthens virtue, expels Choler and Melancholy by provoking of
urine, quickly ripeth the good juice and humors wherewith the body is
humected, and makes the ill humors to descend from the upper parts to the
lower, whereby the head is eased and helped.

But in drinking of Wine, there must be no less consideration had of the
countries, times and exercises, then of the affections, appetites and
complexions of men, that we may conserve them od^rate with that ye is
agreeable thereto, and amend the immoderate by their contraries. Therefore (as
before I have noted) to cold and dry complexions, the claret and sweet Wine
(because it is very hoate) is best, and the contrary serves best for hoate
temperatures. Furthermore those wines are to be forborne What wines are to be
eschued.
which be either very old or very new: because the one heateth vnmeasurably,
and the other never a whit, so long as they be new, which not only helps
nothing to digest the meat, but is itself rather very slowly and with much a
do decocted. Now, I think I need not to counsel men to refrain drinking
of Wine when they be fasting, or before wine must not be dro^ken with a fasting
stomach.
they have eaten so^what, because I write to such men as be sobre and modest
and not to tossepottes and drunkards. For being drunken at any such times,
commonly brings many inconveniences and diseases proceedyng of Fleame, and
namely the Apoplexy in such case is much to be feared. After meals also to
drink much is hurtefull, because it makes Much drinking after meat is to be
forborne
the meat in ye stomach, to descend before it be sufficiently boiled and
concocted. For while ye meat is in digesting in the stomach, we ought to
refrain much drinking. But after yt the meat is descended from the mouth of ye
Stomach and is sufficiently concocted Auicen permits large and great
drincking, to wash and mundefie the stomach and to make the meat the better
to pearce and be diffused into the veins: But till such time, he lessoneth To
que^che thirst.
us to abstain unless great occasion of thirste otherwise require. And to
quench a dry thirste, it shall suffice either to drink a little at once, or
in the Summer time rather to rinse and wash your mouth with cold water. And it is
very good to have Pomgranards in store being of a middle relice, for they are
good to eat, when through drinkinge of wine thereis any vpbraidinge and
mordicatio^ in the stomach. Also to drink after such meat as increases ill
humor (of which sort are Musheromes) Auicen utterly forbids: semblably
after such fruictes, as Melons, Pompons, yealow Quinces and such like. For
wine being drunk after such fruictes, enforces them to perce to the veins,
whereby their corrupt juice is mixed with the blood, and so is cause of the
corruption thereof. But men now a days do clean contrary, for they love to
drink with these and such like fruictes the best wine they can get as a
remedy (for so they say) of fruictes, yea and sometimes they have the
phisicions themselves compaignions with the^. But if thou would keep thy
stomach from the harm that proceeds by the coldness and moystnes of these
fruictes, it were a great deal better to use to take Aniseede, or Cinnamome,
or ginger, or Honey and such like.

Here as it were in the way of an addicion to the declaration of Wine, I will
speak a word or twain more, to teach you to know whether your Wine be
pure, or else mingled. It is sometimes seen (as now in many things there is
much legierdemayne and deceit used) that Wine is mingled with Honey, to How to
know when
make it sweet and pleasant. If it be there wine be made sweet with Honey.
thus abused and mixed, it may be easily known by this means. Take a few
drops of it, and power them upon a hoate plate iron, and the Wine if it be
pure being resolved, because it is thinner and subtiler, the Honey will remain
and thicken, because it is of a groser and thicker substance. If you suspect,
that your Wine be mingled with water, you may easily know whether it be so or
no by How to know whether wine be mingled with water.
putting a Pear into it: for if the Pear swim a lofte and descend not to the
bottom, then is the wine pure and unmingled, but if it sink to the bottom,
it is an infallible token that it is mingled with water. Many such pretty
conclusions might here be showed, but these for this matter are sufficient. As
concerning the hour when to eat these aforesaid and such like fruictes shall
hereafter be declared, but first we will show of such meats as nourish best.

Of Fleash.
AFter Bread and Wine (two of the cheifest mainteiners of man's Flesh.
life) fleashe is next in order to be spoken of. For Auicen says, that fleash
is a meat comfortynge the body and of near transubstantiation and conversion
into blood, specially the fleash of those beasts and fowls that be of the
best nourishyng sort. And the wise Sages of our profession, commend as most
profitable for the conseruacion of health, among four footed Beasts, the
Flesh of young Kiddes and suckyng Calves, which be so much the better if
they be nourished with wholesome milk and in good pastures. For this is to be
noted ye of al Beasts which be of sound complexion and quality, the youngest
are most wholesome, as Kiddes, Calves and such like: but of them that be moist,
the youngest are most harmefull. And therefore Auicen says, that Lambs should
be a year old before they be eaten. Notwithstanding in this poinct the
disposicion and temperature of the Country must be respected, where upon
Auicen said that in the East and South parts of the world, Lamb and Mutten
nught without danger be eaten, which in our moist Country, and in moist
bodies is not always expedient. Seldom therefore and warelie must Lamb be
eaten, Lambs flesh.
and rather in the summer and Autumn then at any other time of the year,
because dryness then bears sway. And if we eat thereof in the Winter or in
the beginning of the Spring, it were much better roasted then boiled. Young
Beeif bred up in wholesome pasture and well exercised and chased, is in the
winter Beeife.
and Spryng not to be misliked, for then Ventres be most hoate of nature, and
sleep very long as Hippocrates affyrmeth, and therefore they may the better
digest heavy meats: but in summer and Autumn, meats of light digestion must
be used, because the internal and natural heat is then weaker by reason of
the heat of the Air. As for gross meats that are dry and hard as cowes
Beeif and such like I utterly disalow: because beside many other Cowes flesh
harms that it brings by reason of the hardness of it, and difficulty to
be digested, this namely is one, that it infers harm to the reasonable
part of man which is the mind. Porke or Hogs flesh nourishes very much,
and is pleasant and toothsome in taste, but if they be very young, there
fleash is too moist and heavy of digestion, and therefore we must leave it to
ploughmen and laborers of stronger Stomachs. But being of middle age, as from
six months to a year old (if they be not to fat) their fleash is
restoratiue to them that need meats of such operation and have strong
Stomachs: for no kind of flesh (says Galen) more nourishes the body then
it does. The flesh of wild hogs are much commended, for by reason of their
exercise and dry feedinge they are not greatly moist but in a manner
temperate. The flesh of an Hare is not good to be eaten often, but it is best
about the beginning Hare.
of the spring or winter because of ye dryness of it, for it makes gross
blood and melancholique humor. But the brain is good for them that have
very moiste brains and tender soft bodies.

Of fethered fowls there be many sorts: whereof Hens and Capons are
holesomest in winter and in the beginning of the spring, and Chickens in
Summer, and Autumn because they increase good blood and humors, and qualefie
those that are ill. In this season also Quails, phesantes and young Partriches
Quail Phesant. Partriche
are excellent, for they be of a good concoction, nourishe singularly well,
and causes few or no superfluities: and also they help the stomach and bind
the mouth thereof. I mean them that be young because they are more temperate
then the elder. Auicen says that the eatinge of Quails is to be feared,
least thereby be engendered the crampe and the disease called Tetanus (which is
a stiffenes and incensibilitie in the sinews) not only because they feed on
the herb Elleborus (which of itself is venomous) and be therewith nourished,
but also because the same perilous infection is in their flesh.
Notwithstanding this their venenositie attributed to them by Auicen, and
auowched by Galen, Lucretius and Pliny, I would not willingly refuse them
for sustentation, neither would I fear a whitte the incurring of any the
aforenamed disease. For those kind of Quails that they wrate of, differ and
are not the same that the Quails here in this country are. The difference
between whom and the other, is largely set forth and described by Alexander
Mundella in his sixth Epistle.

As for Sparrowes because they be exceeding hoate and dry my counsel is to
Sparowes. Dooues Pigeons Wood culuers or Stockdoues
be forborne and because they stir up Venus marvelously, they are fittest to
be left for old men that have you^ge wives. Culuers and home doves are a little
heavy in concoction, specialie the you^ge Pigeons that are not yet flidge and
cannot fly, because they have in them superfluous humors. But when they be
able to fly, they are excellent good meat and wholesome, making good humor
and are lightly digested. Wood Culuers because they bestirre and exercise
themselves more then the domestical dooues do, are lighter of digestion.
Auicen thinks them best to be eaten in Summer (I think for their moystnes)
for else if they be eaten at any other season be apointeth the juice of a lower
grape called Agresla and Coriandre to be eaten withal, to remove and take
away the heat that is in them. But I am of a contrary opinion, for I think
it is much better to eat them in Autumn which is cold and dry and
likewise in winter and beginning of the Spring, and Northernly seasons, whose
moisture is a good deal taken away in the rosting. But Turtles are far
better because they have less Turtles.
moisture, albeit many think that they be of a dry complexion, and yet not to
hoate: yea they have a singular virtue to Auerr. 5. Coll.
comfort the brain and sharpen the wit, and may safely be eaten in the later
end of Autumn and in winter. The flesh of big water fowls are not very
wholesome, because they make ill and black Water Fowls.
humor. The flesh of a ducke as well the wild as the tame nourishes very well
Ducke.
but it is heavy to digest. Therefore it is better for Labouringe men and
strong stomachs then for quasie and weak bodies. The wings of fowls do
nourishe commendablie, because they be well Wings
exercised and easier to digest, retaynyng very few superfluities by reason of
their frequent motion. The fleash that is about the bones is sweeter and better
to digest then other: so is also the Fleash Flesh near the bone.
of the right side. Loose and spoongie flesh as the Vdders and the roots of
tongues is toothsome in taste, but slow of digestio^ but being concocted,
sometime they make phelgmatike nourishment, yet commonly none but good. Marow
and Marow. Brains.
the brains are (as Auicen says) hurtful to the stomach. Also flesh that is
fat is easily converted into Choler mixed with phelgme, and ill vapors. And
therefore fattinesse in meat makes very small and the same ill nourishment,
Patte meats.
and puffs up the meat in the bealy, Which made Auicen to think that very
little of it, should be mingled with other flesh even according to that measure
that best agrees to every man's delight. Also every kind of flesh is
commended or discommended according as Kinds of flesh.
it is in quality: for the more that the flesh of Beasts does degenerate
from whytenes, the less good iuyee is therein it. And by all men's confession
this is true, that of those beasts which be of one kind, so long as they be
young and tender the make moist nourishement: being in their middle or
consistent age, their nourishement is hoater and dryer. But when they be old,
their flesh is worst of all, because it increases melancholique and
excrementall humor, yea and the bigger bodied the worse.

Wild beasts and they that live abroad in the fields, are hoater and drier
then homishe and domestical. All which (notwithstanding) being used and
taken at convenient times and in due order that is to say according as the
quality of their temperature requires, are thought nothing at all to
imbecile and hinder health. Salt meats meats (although Salt meats
they were moist before) do retain a vehement power to dry and heat and
geeue ill nourishement: and to be short, all manner of salt meat generally
engenders putrefiynge and rotten menlancholique blood, and greatly offends
the lieuer. Therefore it must be seldom eaten and in moist times of the year,
to wit in winter. Furthermore this saying of Auicen may not be pretermitted,
that the flesh of any black colored beast and also of the male, is
plesaunter and lighter then of others.

And I have thought good here also to recite the opinion of the expert man
Auenzoar, who writes that it is best to eat flesh immediately or not long
after it is killed. And if they be somewhat barde (as the flesh of wild
duckes and old Turtles is) he thinks it best, to have them boiled in water
within twelve hours after they be killed, and in Summer within seven, of the
which opinion Galen is also, which is in deed not to be Gal. de atten. vic.
ratione
misliked, but both to be praised and followed. For the air does alter them,
where by they are made apt to putrefaction, when they remain long after their
killinge, especially in a hoate and moist air. And this is verified and
plainly to be seen in fishes, which (doubtless) are much better if they be
dressed and eaten immediately after they be taken out of the water: and I am
not ignorant that by reason of their watrish moystnes they will quickly
putrefie. And flesh is better hoate then cold, specially in winter and
Autumn: except kiddes flesh which Auicen supposes to be better and
holesomer Whether hoate or cold flesh be better
when it is cold, because it then yeldeth no vapoure, but Lamb (he says) is
better when it is hot. If the flesh be somewhat fat, tender and very moist,
it is best to roste it and specially in winter and the Spring, but otherwise
it is best to boil it, namely in So^mer and Autumn, because thereby they are
of lighter concoction and keep away siccitie or dryness which at those times
chiefly reigns in man's body. Of roasted When to roste and when to boil flesh.
flesh the inner part (because better moisture is gathered inwardly) is
better to be eaten then the utter part. The Spittes or broches being of
Juniper, Spittes or broches
makes all the meat to have a pleasant and delightful sauoure. Roasted flesh
is then best to be vnspitted and taken from the broche when it smells
sweetest. For smellinge is the discouerer and token teller of taste. Thus much
of flesh.

Now we speak somewhat of other sorts of nourishment, among whom Eggs
we do affirm the Eggs of a Hen, Partriche and Phesant to excel any
other. Dioscorides commends them being half roasted that is to say mean
between rere and hard, so that they may be supped, because they be then easily
digested and increase good blood. Auicen reckeneth them among sovereign and
cordial meats, affirmyng the yolke to be of a laudable temperature: albeit he
says in his second Canon, that the yolke inclines to heat, and the white to
coldenes, but the whole to be temperate.

Serapio thinks it to be more cold then hoate and not without good reason:
for the whight of the egg is more cold then the yolke is hoate, because the
yolke is thought to be temperate or very near to temperatenes. Eggs wooulde
be eaten before other meats because they are quickly digested and soon
descend from the mouth of the Stomach, and nourish very quickly. For they have
all the proprieties that belongs to good nourishment, and are soon
transmuted into blood, and leave small superfluities: finallye they make
subtle and clear blood where by the principal member is nourished.

For it goes to the very heart, and for the dissolution of the substance of the
spirit and cordial matter it is a present remedy. Being hard roasted, they
be of illnourishment, Hard Eggs.
heavy to digest, causinge stinking fumes in the stomach, and making the
lower part of the belly stiptick, but poched, they do assuage and lenifie it.
Wherefore Galen has these words about the beginning of his book De Euchym.
and Cacochym. Cockels (says he) are accounted to be of a gross juice, and so
are Eggs, which are either sodden or roasted hard. If they be fried, they
make il juice and cause fumes in the stomach ere they be decocted, and do also
corrupt other meats with whom they be mingled. But being measurably sodden
and used, that is to wit somewhat rere, they are apt to digest, nourish, and
increase good blood: so also are poched Eggs good to assuage soreness and
rough nesse of the throat. In milk and eggs there is great abundance of fat
and clammie moisture, the one appropriate to aliment and nouriture, the other
to Sperm or seed of generation. The Eggs or Spaune of fishes are nothing so
calefactiue and nutritive: for so far as the flesh of Birds is better then
fish, so much are the eggs: of fishes inferior in goodness to the eggs of
birds Auicen allows the eatinge of Milk in ripe and Milk
consistent age better then in adolescencie and therefore he thinks it good
for collerique persons, but ill for them that are phlegmatic. Albeit he also
says that it is not good for th'entrayles, nor for the stomach, and also
causes dimnesse of sight, hurts the teeth, annoyeth the sinew, engenders
obstructions in ye Mesaraike Veins is soon corrupted, quickly sowreth and
causes headache.

Wherefore that all these discommodities may be eschued, he would that it
should be drunk alone, and after it is drunk to rest from labor, and then to
sleep and to eat nothing until it he descended from the stomach. But
chiefly he warns that in no wise vineigre, or sower meats be eaten after it.
Yet do I counsel them that eat it, for fear least it should congele in their
stomachs to put a little sugar or Salt, or pure honey unto it, and to stir it
all together.

Salt seasoneth and takes away ye harms that come by Milk and all other
kinds of victualles, so does Honey also make Milk much the better. Now the
commodities ye come by eating of Milk The commodities of milk.
are the moderate deiection and purging of things in the bealy superfluous,
good nourishment and making of wholesome tuyce. The pastures wherein the beasts
What milk is best.
feed, whose Milk we use, is of great force and validity to this purpose.
And whereas there be many sorts of Milk of all others, woman's Milk is the
excellentest, because it is very good and beneficial Woman's milk
to man's body, namely to the brain, for it is thought to increase it
merueylously, and preserves against consumption. Next unto it, is Goats
Milk, for it is temperate and has in Goats milk
it but small quantity of Butter. Likewise the milk of Camels and Asses,
which by reason of the nature of the Camelles milk and Asses milk
beasts themselves, has in it but little Cheese, and therefore does purge
excellently, and is very wholesome. The Milk of Ryne and Ewes is fatter: but
if the beast that geeueth it, feed in good and wholesome pastures, out of
Fennes and Marshes, and with temperate fodder, it is much better the^ if they
should feed in small closes or watrie grounds. And it should be drunk warm
from When to drink milk
the vdder, or not very long after, it is milked, for the air does soon
alter it, and of good and wholesome, makes it il and noisome. But here may
some marvel, why Milk should be forbidden young men and not to men of ripe
and consistent age, considering that unto young infantes it is geeuen by the
special benefit of Nature as a most fit and convenient nourishment. But this
and such other ambiguous quiddities are else where to be sought, for in this
small book we write a Regiment how to conserve health and not arguyng
disputations.

The upper part of the milk is not to Cream.
be praised, for it loses the stomach, and by reason of his vnctuositie is
soon turned into yelow choler. The Cream or thick summitie of Milk which
is gathered after the milk has been sodden and suffered to stand a night is
unwholesome and hurtefull.

Butter is very unctuous, and all unctuous Butter
meats especially Butter (by the opinion of Auicen) is prejudicial and
harmefull to ye stomach. For the power and virtue of the stomach consists
in the union of his parts, and in a certain stipticitie and byndyng, which
is by unctuous food hindered, and many times quight taken away and destroyed.
The best Butter is that which is made of Cowes milk in May. In hoate and
moist complexions it is soon conuertible into Choler. The thick and curdie
Milk, which first comes into the Dugges incontinently after the Cow
Biesting
has calued, commonly called Biestings is very dangerous, for it is slow of
digestion and descends slowlye from the stomach, and is also gross of
substance, causing gross humors and consequently is thought to engender the
stone.

Fresh and new Cheese (says Dioscorides) is beneficial to the stomach, but
Fresh Cheese.
Auicen doubts thereof. But I think, that in hoate seasons and about the
beginnynge of Autumn it may without danger be eaten. But being old, and yet
not rotten nor hard with age, conveniently salted, I judge better to be eaten
in cold seasons and at the latter end of meals: yet herein as in all other
things, Nature and Custom is of great force and much to be considered. For
there are some, which do abhor Cheese and cannot in any wise brook it: as
some others do loathe Wine and so forth of others. Auicen says that such
individual proprieties as these, are without the compass of reason, and that
experience and trial herein is above reason. The thinnest part of the milk
called whaye being used by way of medicine rather the^ Whaye
for meat, and specially in May with Sugar is very good to scower, cleanse
and purefie the blood and also to quench choler and purge melancholy without
any pain or greeuance. For it washes the breast, provoke urine, makes
clean the bladder, and without any pain or excoriation draws out ill
humors, and (as Auicen says) rectifieth nourishment and opens the parts
of the body that are with obstructions stopped. All which virtues and
operatious make Auicen to think that it makes men fat.

Into it may be put a convenient quantity of Roses or Seen (according as the
pacient shall be opplete with humors) the space of a night with a little Anyse
seed or Cinamome to make it work more strongelie. But then were it good that
the humors should be concoct and prepared. For the approved wise Hippocrates,
commands us to minister 1. Aph. 22.
Physic to those things that be concoct and to move the vncrude. Finally
all those meats are discommended that are compounded and made of Milk, Eggs
and Cheese or such other like things. For although they be all of easy
digestio^ being severally taken, yet being mingled together they are hardly
concocted and much endamage the stomach. For sundry meats of diverse
substance and quality is a great enemy to health, and by reason of the
grossenes of some, and the finenesse of other some, there is required to be
diverse operations of nature, and diverse temperatures of the stomach, for it
is greatly busied in the decoction of them all And because some tarry longer in
the stomach then some other does, it causes fumes and vapors to ascend and
strike up into the head, whereby health is much appayred.

Of Fish.
FYshes for the most part are not wholesome, or they are of small and
illnourishement Fishes
and leave many sufluities in the body and also are easlie corrupted. And
therefore Auicen counsaileth us not to eat them after vehement and strong
exercise, because they will soon be turned into corruption and do also corrupt
the humors. And in an other place (which is also avouched by Galen) he says
that fish being new and fresh engenders phlegm and mollifieth the
ventricle, and is not to be eaten but of them which have very hoate stomachs,
because they be very cold and moist. Being salted they are hoate and dry,
Salted Fishes
and therefore for them that be phlegmatic it is better to eat them salted,
and in winter or at the beginning of spring: but for cholerique persons and in
hoate seasons they are best when they be new and moist, but the surest and
best way is altogether to abstain from them. The Greek poet Homer for his
manifold knoweledge in all faculties worthy to be called the perelesse Phoenix
of learning most learnedly brings in, that Ulysses when he had travailed
long upon the Seas, and all his victualles were spent, was by necessity
enforced and driven to fish. Meaning thereby, that so long as we may live
without fish, we should refrain it. But for as much as every man may not
always eat eggs nor flesh, nor at all seasons without any respect and
difference, and also appetite many times bears swaye above reason: Therefore
I will declare and describe such fishes as are lest hurtful. And first this is
to be known, that those fishes are best which be neither very hard and dry,
Best fishes.
neither yet full of stimie and clammie toughnes, nether opplete with much
fattinesse (for all fat is ill, but of fishes the fattenesse is worse then
any other) neither of ill sauoure and relice: but pleasant sweet and
toothsome in taste, and which will not soon stink after they be taken out of
the water. It is further also to be noted that of those which are soft and
tender, the greatest are best, but of hard fish take the smalest. For that
which among moist things is found dry, must be taken as moderate as that is,
which among dry things is found moist. Yet let a convenient measure
as well in the bigness as in the smalenesse be observed. Also the fishes that
live about clear Rocks and in stony places are (as Galen says) better then
any other.

And it is not without good cause that such fishes be preferred and win the
commendacio^ from others. For they exercise and move themselves much and
often, and lie in such places, where they are often tossed and beaten with the
continual surges and waves of the tempestuous Sea, and never are embroyned
with any filth or diertie slimishnes.

Those fishes also are greatly commended that come swymminge out of the Sea
into Rivers, since they come against the stream, and the farther of that they
be from the Sea, the holesomer and better they are. Next unto them are those
that live in sandy places, and those that breed in clear and fresh runninge
water, that is without much mudde. Furthermore those fishes that feed upon
sweet herbs, roots and weeds about the bank sides are better then those
that live by mudde and slime: among which ill sort are those fishes that are
called Mugles or Lompes, which are not wholesome although they seem to have a
pleasant Mugles or Lompes.
taste and sauoure. Therefore al such fishes as live in filthye puddles,
fennes, marshes, dyches and standinge waters which move not are to be
eschewed.

This general warninge now premised briefly and namelye let us touch such
sorts of fyshes as are best and most sufferable, supposed to be of good
nourishement and of lightest concoction. Good and wholesome is the Gilthead
(called Gilthead
Aurata and of the Greeques Chrysophris because it has in his forehead a
thing congelate which in the water shines like gold as in the old ones it
is to be seen) they geeue much nourishement and therefore are difficulty
digested. So is the Rochet and Seapearches. But River pearches (which are like
in Rochet Pearche of the Sea River Perch
manner to the other) are of pleasant taste and good to be geeuen now and then
to them that have a fervent Ague, when their appetite is quight gone through
vehemency of heat. Carpes are pleasant and toothesome: so are also Troutes
and Troute Gogeon
Gogions, but those are best that are white and little, for they be soft,
mollefiynge, of good juice and concoction, but those that are green and
blackishe are worste. Of good juice also are Mullets and Barbilles, being
mean between hard and tender as Cornelius Celsus 3. de Re. Rust. 3. de
aliment. virt.
writes and Galen affirms the same They bind the belly specially being
broyled on the Coals: but fried they are heavy and hard to digest Athenaeus
writes that if a living Mullet be put into wine and choked or strangled
therein, whatsoever man drinks of the same wine, shall not be able to do the
act of generation. Dioscorides says that much and oft^n eatinge thereof
dymmeth the eyesight. Pliny writes that the pouldre made of the head of a
fresh Mullet, has great virtue against al venime and poison, specially if it
happen through the stinging of any living Creature. And they be called
Mullettes and Barbilles, because they have two barbes or wartes on their
neither jaws.

Eeles are not wholesome because they Eeles
be moist and slymie: of whom I will here geeue a note or twain, not hitherto
of any almost marked. All alonge the backebone of an eele, there goes a
black stringe like a small vein (as it is in the tail of a Crabbe) in which
black vein a certain poison is included, which ought to be drawn out
before the Eele be boiled, and he requires longer time of seething then any
other fish. Being broyled, it nourishes better then when it is boiled,
because the fire takes away his vicious and naughty humors.

Phisicions do altogether reiecte the eatinge of them about Midsomer. They that
are most firm, solid and fat are best, and specially the femalles (there
snoute or nose is turned upward more then the males) but if my counsel may
be followed, it were best for such persons as in this treatise are meant to
forbear them altogether, at all seasons in the year, for they be of hard
concoctio^ and engendre very gross and flimie humor, albeit to cormerauntes
and Epicures they seem to go down their throfe pleasantly. I once read this
of an Eele, in a work of a certain natural Philosopher and have taught the
same to many, albeit I know no man that as yet has put it in proof, neither
yet my self. Now whether his conclusion be true or no, let the Authoure
himself shifte and answer it. If you would make some A way to make common
drunkardes to loath and abhor wine.
notorious drunkard and common swilbowle to loath and abhor his beastly vice
and for ever after to hate the drinking of wine: put an Eele alive into some
wide mouthed pot with a cover, having in it such a quantity of wine as may
suffice of itself to suffocate and strangle the Eele to death. Which done
take out the dead Eele, and let the party whom you would have reclaymed from
his bibacitie, not knowing hereof drink of that wine only, even as much as
he lists. The same virtue (as some write) An other way
has the water that distilleth out of a vine when it is cut and pruned, if
it be mixed with wine, and geeuen to drink twice or thrice to one that knows
not of it. But let us again retourn to fishes. Crabbes for the most part are
to be eschewed Crabbes.
for they be ill for the head: and under Crabbes we also mean all Periwincles
and Shrimpes. All kinds of Shelfishes as Oysters, Cockles, Limpettes, Shrimpes
Periwincles. Oysters Cockles. Limpettes. Muscles.
Muscles etc. are seldom and sparingelie to be eaten. The dressinge of the^
must be such, as the nature of the fishes themselves, time, season and custom
requires: but those that be moist and soft specially in moist seasons are
best roasted that is to say, dressed only with fire without any water or any
other licoure. Notwithstanding, we may use Oil and Vinegre to sauce and
relice the same the better. But hard and toughe fishes were better to be
boiled (...) well sodden then either roasted or broyled. Finally this I say for
a general rule, that al cold or moist meats are helped and qualified by
drinkinge good wine and eatinge good Spices withal.

Of Sauces.
But now let us say a little of those things that serve for seasonyng and
powderyng Salt and the nature of it.
of meat and first of Salt, and afwardes of others. And as for salt there is
no man that doubts but it is most necessary and convenient almost in all
kinds of meats, because it makes them more concoctible and pleasant in
taste. Also it has a virtue abstersive and resolutiue, and by reason of a
siccatiue or drying power which it has, it keeps them from putrefaction and
corruption, and comfort the body with a bynding or stipticke power. Further
more it makes the meat to descend from the ventricle easily and expediently,
expels superfluities, subtileth phlegm and helps digestion in them that
have cold stomachs. But it must with measure and moderation be used, for with
his sharpness it hurts the Ventricle and Bowels, causes vomit, induces
lothsomenes, and fretteth the guts, greatly yea, if the weight of one dram
thereof be eaten in the morninge with a fasting stomach it makes the bealie
soluble, and disposed too the stool. Now follows Oil, very good also and
requisite Oil.
to sauce many and sundry meats, but in the particular recital of al sorts
of Oils I will not now stand, since I only study for brevity. Al Oils
(says Auicen) do louse ye ve^tricles unless it be ye Oil of nuts and of y^
kind yt are called Pistacea and the oil of Olives. The oil of Pistacea is
better then any other, but we have never seen it made in any place: the oil
of Nuttes is not good for the breast and tongue, and therefore it remains for
us to entreat of the oil of Olives. The sharp and sower licoure that is made
of unripe Olives for those that are healthful and have hoate bodies Auicen
does greatly commend as very fit and congruent for them, and not with out
cause. For it is not greatly unctuous nor hoate, and by it the ventricle
obteyneth a convenient bindyng and oportune stipticitie. And therefore if you
make oil of these Olives before they come to their full ripeness, truly in
hoate seasons you shall find the eating thereof very wholesome. For it greatly
helps the body without any harm and stops over much thinness and
fluxibilitie of blood in choleric and sanguine persons. Auerroys gives much
praise to the Oil of ripe olives
oil of ripe Olives being new and sweet, because the nature of it is in a
manner temperate, having in it but small heat. And also he thinks it to be
very agreeable to man's temperature, according to the whole nature of
substance of it, and to fatten the Lieuer and augment the substance thereof: and
therefore he reports how that in his Country they used to season and sauce
their flesh therewith and that many by using it, became very fat and
corpulent. We in these our Regions think it best, to eat that which is sower
and bytinge in So^mer, and sweet in the winter and Spring seasons: because the
one is cold, and the other somewhat hoate. Oil of sweet Almondes is good for
them that have the Oil of Almondes.
Stitche and other grief in their breasts. For it asswageth and lenifieth the
Jaws and rough arteries, and makes the humors that are in the Breast apt to
be proiected and expelled: and of the thick Cream of Almondes being boiled,
Cream of Almondes.
there is made an excellent broth or suppinge, good both to nourishe and purge
the Reins, and also to scower and cleanse the bowelles and bulk of man, but
it is not so good for the stomach. Honye and the water of it is very good for
a cold and Honey.
moist stomach, for old men and them that be of cold complexions and in the
winter and Spring seasons: But it is not good for them that be Cholerique, or
in the Summer time. In making of honey water (that is to wit seethinge water
and honey together with a soft fire) the foam or froath must be scummed of
clean, for if it be not, it is provoked to be windy and inflatiue. It has a
virtue abstersive, opens obstructions, resolves humors and educeth them
being far within the body, and keeps the body, from rottenness and
putrefaction. But the best honey must be taken for such purpose, that is to
say such as Best honey.
has a true and perfect sweetenes, a good pleasant smell, and a somewhat read
color, not thin, not subtle, but clammie and viscious. The best honey is
gathered in the Spring, the second in Summer, but that which is gathered in
winter is worste and most hurtful. Also sharp and sower honey is the worst of
al others forasmuch as it is of some thought to be pestilent and venomous.
Sugar is heater and more subtle then honey, for it is Sugar.
thought to be hoate and moist in the end of the first degree: but by
artificial handlinge that is to wit, by further and longer boiling (whereby
it is made white) it becomes not so hoate and yet more dry. It has in all
poinctes as great virtue and power as honey has, both to lenifie, mitigate and
open obstructions, and also to dry up and wype away il humors, and it is good
for the stomach if no yellow choler be therein, for it is easelie converted and
turned into choler. Also it pur geth phlegm that is found in the fromacke,
and comfort the bealie. This therefore is very good to be eaten at any time
of the year, but honey is best in winter to be eaten and in the second part of
Autumn. Vinegre is said to be good for them that are melancholique but naught
Vineiger.
for them that be cholerique, and therefore it agrees best to a stomach that
is hot and moist: it stirs up appetite, helps concoction, represseth
choler and stops humors from being diffused into the inward parts, it
makes them subtle, cutteth them a sunder and preserves against phlegm,
specially if it be mixed with Cinamome and Corraunts to take away and alay
the ouermuche coldenes and egernesse of it. Also being in this order and manner
tempered it is good for a cold stomach. And this way do we think best to be
used when you would alay the sharp and bytinge sowernesse of vinegre: boil it
wc very good Raisons or Corrantes, and (if need be) make it sweet with the
odorifirous smell of good Cinamome. For Cinamome over and beside the heat
which Cinnamon.
it has (for it is said to be hoate toward the third degree) it is also very
good for the stomach and Lieuer. It opens obstructions and comfort them
both, and also it dries up the humiditie or moisture of the stomach and
keeps it from corruption and putrefaction, it confirms and corborateth all
the virtues and powers of the body, and restores them that be appayred and
decayed, it cleanses and mundefieth the head by educinge and fetchinge out the
humors that be in it, yea it lenifieth and helps the Coughe and Breast,
drawing out all that is naught and hurtful. And thus much for Condimentes and
Sauces.

Of Grain, Pulse, Rotes, and Herbs
NOw let us speak somewhat of such grain and herbs as serve at the table to
be eaten. Rice is of Rice.
much nourishement enclininge to heat and dryness and may be best eaten in
winter. Ryce sodden in milk causes a good habit and plight of the body and
increases seed of generation. Panick and Mill may be eaten in moist Seasons
either hoate or cold. But in Autumn, because Panike. Mill.
it is a cold and dry time, such grain as is hoate and moist is more
expedient. Barley is better to be eaten in Summer, because it is cold. These
grains must be sodden with flesh potage or else in water, puttinge afterward
therinto sweet Almonde milk: or else let them be condite with oil, which done
you may put thereto some Sugar according to your own discretion. Of small
pulse, Phisicions most commend Cichpease, and specially the potage or broth
Cich pease Potage of Cichpease.
wherein it is sodden, but they must (says Auicen) be eaten at the midst of
Meals, and not at the beginning nor end. They nourishe the body strongly
and purelie if they be eaten moderately, for otherwise they be windy and
require a strong stomach and a good virtue digestive, but the broth made of
them is preferred before any other, because it chaseth, away il humors and
provoke vryne. Lintelles are misliked and disco^mended, because the annoy the
stomach, Lintles.
fill the Lieuer with obstructions, engender melancholique humor, cause a
dazelinge dimnes of the sight, and among al kind of pulse are worste to be
eaten, for they breed gross, terrestrial and melancholique blood. Being
twice or thrice or oftener warmed and eaten (the broth being cast away) they
bind the bealie, but the best and surest way is altogether to abstain from
them as most hurtefull, and fitter rather for Laborers and Rural people then
Magistrates and Students. Beans are very windy, and tarry long ere they be
digested Beans
yea although they be decocted the full space of three days yet do they still
retain their windines and ventositie. They make gross juice in the body, and
send ill vapors to the brain, which cause fearful and strange dreams, and
they engender thick gross blood.

Therefore use them not in diet although otherwise they seem to have a
certain abstersive and nutritive power. But if thou be so be sted, that needs
thou must eat of them, it were best to make potage or broth with them, for
so, they have more virtue to cleanse the Reins of the back, and the bladder,
and loose much of their windiness in the boiling. And if thou be disposed to
put any other grain or seeds unto them which have semblable power to expel
and drive away windenesse (called of the Greeks Aphusa) and put a little Honey
unto them, it shall be a mean to avoid much farther harm and inconvenience.
Among which sort of seeds, these followinge are the best and chiefest:
Carawayes, Anyse, Fenell, and Cumine. Phaselles are not so good, for they be
hoate and earthie, Phaselles
and greatly disturb the spirit of the brain, causinge many unrestful
dreams through their vapors, together with giddines and swimminge in the
head called Vertigo. Hither to of pulse, and by that which we have here
declared, thou may discern and have judgment of those which be not here
recited. Among the which, those are accepted best, which be green, because
they yet retain a light moystnes: but when by continuance of time they be
withered and have lost their verdure, they are more gross and terrestrial.
And even as they which are full of juice are more to be set by, then they that
are dry and wythered: so also are they that are boiled better then those that
be crude and raw, and the sodden better then the vnsodden.

After Pulse, let us speak of Potherbes Roots and such fruits as grow upon
Rapes
Trees. Rape roots (notwithstanding Democritus deemeth them altogether
hurtful and to be eschued) yet Galen approuinge the saying and opinion of
Diocles, praises and much commondeth them because they concect Melancholy
and provoke urine conveniently: and as Auenzoar witnesses, whom also Auerrois
follows, they have a merueylous great power and virtue to clarefie the eyes.
And although they abound with much moisture, which commonly annoyeth the
stomach and minstreth matter to windiness: yet may this moisture be
qualified, if they be first boiled in water and Salt. Which being done, and
the watrie humor wrynged out of them, thou need not to cast any doubts
in the eatinge of them being sufficiently boiled in flesh potage, and (if
need so require) seasoned and spiced with a small quantity of Anyse seed or
Cinamome. Caret roots are much like unto rapes, if they be decocted and
sodden, they may Caret roots. Smalladge Persely.
without harm be eaten in the winter season. The roots of Smallage and
Perselie, being in this manner and time sodden in pottage, are very good in
winter and chiefly at the beginning of meals, because they bring down
humors and provoke urine. Succorie both the leaf and the root young and
tender and boiled together, are very good to keep Succorie
the stomach and head in good plight, and does temper Choler wonderfully,
specially in the Summer and spring seasons. As for Radish roots, Galen
affirms Radishe.
to be unwholesome, yea he plainly says that the roots of all potherbes
engender excremental matter and be hard of digestion. Endive and Lettise are
wholesome herbs to be eaten in Salets Endive Lettise. Mint very wholesome for
many purposes.
and with meat in hoate weather. And if Minte be added and put to them or to
other cold things, the salet is much the better and wholesomer. For Minte
has virtue to comfort the Entrayles, and specially the stomach and Mawe, and
increases thick generatiue sperme.

It does also strengthen and confirm the vessels and conduits of the seed,
and therefore it has a special force and efficacy against the profluuious
issue of the seed called Gonorrhea: and the juice thereof drunk with vineigre
stencheth blood. Yea it is very delectable and pleasant in smell, and much
comfort and cheereth up the spirits of man.

Sorrel is also good about the same Sorell
time to be eaten, because it is cold and very comfortatiue, and (as Auicen
writes) has a certain subtle stipticitie in it. Purselayne is to be
forborne because it is to cold, to wit, in the third degree, and Purselan
also makes small, and the same noughty nourishment, and quight marreth
appetite: notwithstanding it quenches burning choler, and is good against the
spitting of blood and the blouddie flixe, the Emorroydes and blood proceeding
from the breast. The great frigiditie and coldness of it (if we should at
any time chance to eat it) may be tempered and qualefied with Minte or with
Fenell.

Borage (which is the true Buglosse) and Langue du buefe are for the spring
Borage Lang debeefe.
and summer seasons, yea and for the other two parts of the year also either
in Salets or meats right soueraygne and cordial. For they are said to be
temperate of complexion and quality and to engendre good blood, and to
exhilarate the heart. Hoppes semblably are good to eat at that time wherein
they be gathered at the beginning of meals, because Hoppes.
they are named among the medicines of the Liver and are temperate, aperitiue,
and provoke urine.

But Sperage (we know) has in it greater prouocacion, for it makes a
pleasant Sperdge
odoure in m^ate, and brings sweetness to ye whole body, cleanses slinkinge
urine, mundifieth the ^l^d^^r, makes sweet the other official vessels and
members and is soon converted into good I loud also it nourishes excellently,
and is best to be eaten before other meat.

White Beetes (by reason of a inti^sitie or bitter saltishnesse which they have
White Beetes
are good for the bealy and obstructions of the Spleen and Liver, and also they
do not engendre such Melancholicke humor as Colewortes do. But black Beetes
are not commendable, because Black Beetes
they make black juice and humeur.

Beete roots that are yelowish and red have stronger nourishment, and make
blood a great deal thicker then the leaves do: and this property they have
further, that they cause windiness and loose the bealy, wherefore at sometime
they may be used. Colewortes and Cabages Coleworts Cabages.
may without harm be eaten in cold and moist seasons, since they be hoate
and dry: for they have a virtue abstersive, and lauatiue, and provoke urine
conveniently, but the brothe or Potage wherein they be sodden is much better to
be liked. Being lightly sodden and not having lost their moisture altogether,
they mollify the bealy, but they bind and stop it if they be eaten when their
licour has been four or five times cast out and taken away from them. Albeit
there are some harms that come through these herbs, being eaten out of due
time, order and quantity. For being to much used in meats, they enge^der
evil and melancholique juice, hurts the mouth of the stomach, dim the
Eyesight, and trouble the sleep with fantastical imaginations. And therefore
unless it be upon some urgent cause (as for lack of other better meats) let
them be rejected and forborne. The great Cabages which Pliny calls
Lacuturres are not so good. All Colewortes are thought to have in them a
singular virtue against drunke^nesse, Coleworts resist drunkenness.
by reason of the repugnant contrariety and natural enemitie that is between
the Vine and them. For it has been and is often by experience proved, that if
Colewortes be sowed near to the roots of a Vine tree, the Vine of his own
accord will spread on the other side, and turn away from them a pretty
distance. Also the juice of Colewortes is clean contrary to Wine, and
therefore whereas the Vine with his tendrelles will take hold and lap about
all other things, it will never turn toward the Coleworte. And for this
cause many Nations and namely the Germans use ofter to eat Cabages and
Colewortes at their meals, thereby to avoid the harm that comes by
excessive bibbynge of Wine, which ought to be drunk not ingluuiously, but
temperately and sparingly. Those that are of color somewhat enclining to
redness are best for this purpose. And I once saw a certain learned man
being a good natural philosopher when he sat down at the table in a
certain banquet (where he knew would be stout quaffinge, privily and
unknown to the rest of the compaignie) eat a leaf of raw Coleworte, which
partly help him and kept him a good while from being Cuppeshotte: but yet
notwithstanding the much drinking of wine showed his force upon him ere he
departed.

Nauewes are very gross, heavy to Rapes Nauewes Perselye
digest making crude and raw juice in the veins and engender black humors.
Perselie abundantly and largelye eaten in winter is expedient and healthful
for it is hoate and dry in the third degree, it opens obstructions and
makes the urine to pass well. If thou eat of it in Summer, use it with such
fruictes and herbs as are cold, as the juice of Gourdes. Cucumbers
bitter grapes, sodden or boiled in potage and also with Gourdes and Cucumbers.
But these are seldom to be used because Cucumbers make raw juice and make the
body apt to long continuing Agues, and are of a very cold and moist
temperature: and Gourdes are noisome to the stomach and almost never digested,
and also are very ill for the gutte called Colo^ through whom the ordure
should pass, and generally for all cold phlegmatique and melancholique
persons. Being eaten raw, they are mean between Pepons and Cucu^bers: but
boiled they are a great deal better and of their proper nature geeue cold and
dry nourishement to the body. Cheruile is very fit and Cheruyle
profitable for cold stomachs, and has a pleasant and delightful taste.
Mushromes (because they have a cold and moist nature Mushroms
and engender gross and crude juice) agree best to a hoate and dry
complexion. But if the Musheroomes be kept in bryne, they will be much the
better, and nothing so much hurtefull, because thereby they loose much of
their toughe clamminesse and glewishe humor. As for sharp and bytinge herbs
as Onyons, Garlic and Leekes we think better to be forborne, as not fit for a
Studient or magistrate: unless peradventure Onions. Garlike Leekes
in winter they that are phlegmatique may use them being boiled or in Sauces
to purge phlegm withal. Leekes are better and more tolerable the^ either
Onyons or Garlic if they be boiled, for the boylinge takes away much of
their ill and sharp juice: albeit after a sort, they be thought hard to digest
by reason of the small stringes that are in them but they are very good to
make one to spitte out easily the fleume that is in the breast, extenuate and
cleanse the body: and to provoke urine competentlie.

Of Fruits
THere be many sorts of fruictes, whereof some are very nutritive, and
among them figs and raisons, ripe Grapes and Dates in those Regions and
Cities where they grow and are much used, but in my judgment they are
seldom to be eaten and then also Figs
very temperately for new Figs are windy and (as Galen says) are ill for
the stomach, and the blood that is engendered of dry fygges is ill, and both
of them as well the new as the dry breed lyce, as well because of the
corruption of their humor as also because they drive matter from the internal
parts of the body to the external, and therefore Auicen is of opinion that
they be dangerous for the Falling sickness and Apoplexsie.

They are also said to make one fat: but although such fattinesse
continues but a while, and differs much from the nourisheme^t that bread
makes, yet they geeue greater nourishement and are of more strength then other
fruictes. And because figs do quickly descend and are soon distributed into
every part of the body, and mundefie and scower the passage and way whereby
the meat goes down, therefore they are best to be eaten before other meats.
The best are of a white color, read are next, and black are worst as Auicen
writes.

And they have power to cleanse the gravel being in the Reins of the back.

Dry fygges says Galen eaten with nuttes, are an excellent meat and
likewise if they be eaten with Almondes, for so, they open obstructions, but
they nourishe not so well neither engender they so good blood and juice when
they be mixed with nuttes. And therebe some, which plainly affirm, that dry
figs Against poison
eaten with rue and nuttes, are a Sovereign remedy against all manner of
poison. White Grapes are a great deal better then black, so that the place
Grapes
of their growyng and ripeness be like. And those that have been hanged up two
or three days in the Sun ere they beeaten are best, and most wholesome, and
make nourishment very near as good as figs, which ought to be eaten before
other meats as well as figs. For they lenifie the bealy, but much vsinge of
them is ill for the bladder, and therefore those that have the gravel or stone
either in their Reins or Bladder must forbear them. For they leave much
feculent and dreggie matter in the body and send many fumes to the brain, as
it may appear by the vessel wherein the Wine that is made of them is put. Also
Grapes and Figs annoy the Bowels and Intrayles drawing them like a purse into
hard lumpes or kernels, also for them that have infarced themselves with
replecion and surphet they be very harmefull. Being old they loose much of
their excrementall humiditie.

Raysons of the Sun cleanse the body and comfort digestion and be very
wholesome Raysons
for the stomach, but specially for the Liver totally. They are also good for
the bladder and reins and for the pain and excoriation of the Bowels and
geeue good nourishment to the whole body and may both at beginning and
latter ending of Meals be boldly eaten. Of fruictes which geeue very small
nourishment or rather none at all to the body, there be some which pass from
the stomach easily and which ought to be eaten before other meats: and some
there be, which are best to be eaten after other meats. Of them that should
be eaten before other meat, Auicen among other kinds reckeneth these,
Melons, Pompons, Mulberies, yealow Quinces Peaches, Plummes, Prunes, Sloes,
Bullasse, Cheeries etc. For these kinds of fruictes engendre very much humor
and such as is easily corruptible.

Therefore it is best to drive them out of the body as quickly as may be
conveniently, which by this way and mean may be done, if they be eaten alone
with out any other meat and after the eating of them to walk and then to eat
something to make them slipperie and descendible. And he says further, that
these fruicts being new are good for none but them which are exercised and much
troubled with read Choler, and in Summer season, and geeueth counsel also
that it is best to abstain from them because they make watrishe bublinge
blood which will soon putrefie. Notwithstanding by reason that they be great
coolers, they are good for them that be hoate, even the very same hour that
they be eaten, because they be cold and moist. Yet this their moisture
engenders putrefaction and corruption and likewise makes the blood full of
raw and crude humiditie, as the green Melon which is commonly called Auguria:
which also must be foreborne Melon
for an other special consideration, and that is because it is turned into
any humor that it finds in the stomach. For if it find phlegm, it is
turned into phlegm, and if it find choler it is turned into choler etc. And
because some peradventure are desirous to know these aforesaid fruictes, which
be best, or rather which be lest hurtful I will briefly run over them. And
among these fruictes, the Melon makes better juice and more nourishement then
any of the other and is not so soon converted into that humor which it
finds in the stomach as the green Melon called Auguria is: it is abstersive
and provoke vryne, but it must be eaten in such sort as before is declared,
for else it putrefieth, and of his putrefaction causes fervent and sharp
diseases.

Mulberies although they have a certain stipticke virtue, yet does Auicen
Mulberies.
think that they annoy the stomach, and in him that is weak, are soon turned
into corruption and rottenness. They which are sweet are hoate and moist,
but they which be tart and sower are cold.

Much like unto them in nature are Cheries, for they are soon corrupted and
Cheries
putrefied: and those Cheries (undoubtedly) are most wholesome, which are
both sharp and bitter and also sweet and ripe, which are commonly named
Maraschae. For they are not so easelie corrupted as the other and do
refrigerate and cool a great deal better. Al Cherics are cold and moist in
the first degree and of them some are soft and sweet, some hard and
harrishe, and which do bind more. The first sort are better because they be
sooner digested and descend from the stomach quicklier. The second sort agree
better to the stomach encombred with choler, because they are uneath at all
corrupted and confirm the Stomach with a certain binding or astrictiue
power: but much vsinge of them if they be not turned into corruption by the
inward humors engender watrishe humor.

Peaches and Abrecockes are endued Peaches. A brecocks
with a cold and moist temperature: being well concocted they make thin
and moist blood. But their property is, unless they be eaten before other
meats and go easclie down the bealy to be turned to corruption and altered
into such humors as they find in the stomach. Therefore those that can not
easelie digest them, but have them long abydinge in their stomach, I would
advise and counsel not at all to eat of them.

For Abrecockes being moist and new, are much subject to corruption and
therefore engender Agues and Fevers. Auicen says that Masticke and Amse minged
with Wine made of dry and withered grapes or else with honey ought to be drunk
when we eat Abrecocks. Peaches (says Dioscorides) are profitable to the
stomach and if they be ripe, Peaches
they mollefie and comfort the bealy being eaten before other meats: but eaten
after other meats, they are both corrupted themselves, and also corrupt the
other meats that are near unto them. Dry Peaches and Abrecockes must be
eaten not before but after other sustenance, because they are not only heavy
to the stomach, but also geeue very little nourishement. Notwithstanding
Auenzoar says, that peaches are good for them that have stinkinge breathes,
proceeding of distemperaunce of the stomach: and as for any other virtue he
says they have none. Plummes and Plummes Damesons.
Damesons are better then they, if they be well digested and sent down into
the mawe, for in some persons, these also are many times corrupted, by reason
that they abide long in the stomach ere they be expelled. Plummes that are
sweet make the stomach weak with to much moisture, but those that have a
mean taste between sweet and sower are of more force to quench and repress
choler. And as for the coldenes of them (says Auicen) it may be qualefied by
drinkinge honey, water and wine of grapes withered in the Sun.

But now it is time for us to entreat of some such fruictes as may be eaten
after other meats. For there are many which let vapors from ascendinge and
molestinge the brain, and which do strengthen the mouth of the stomach, of
which sort are Pomegranardes, Quinces, Pomegranardes Sweet
Pears and such like. But first let us confuselie speak of them that may
be eaten either before or after meat indifferentlye. Of Pomegranardes there be
three kinds, sweet, sower, and mean between both. Sweet Pomegranards being
cold and moist in the first degree be very profitable for the stomach and
Lieuer, and marvelously help and comfort the natural spirits, and are
reckened among those things that make a man fat. They also direct and
prepare the ways and passages of the urine much better then the sower do. And
therefore they are highly to be praised, and may without any harm be eaten at
any time of the year, but specially in Autu^ne at any time of meals. They of
mean Mean
taste between sweet and sower, are colder then the sweet are, and therefore
they best agree to them that have hoate Stomachs: and they are of an
indifferent good abstertion with stipticitie and refrigeration. Auenzoar
tells a wonderful virtue that they have, and Auerrois confirms the same,
that they do not suffer any corruption of the meat in the stomach if it be
fumous or like to the sauoure of Eggs. But if the corruption be eigre or
sower, he warns us to be ware how we eat them, but sweet Po^granardes in
that case (he says) do no harm. Sower, are of more coldness then the other,
and are good for non but them Sower
which are very cholerique, because thorough their sower tartnes they annoye
the Entrails and Sinews. But yet their tartnes may be alayed and taken away
by eating a little Sugar or Honey or some such sweet thing: They have a great
virtue to quench hoate burninge choler and to repress the euaporation of
fumes in the head. To conclude, al Pomgranardes generally are of a light
nourishement and ever make thin blood, and are very amicable and wholesome for
the stomach, and do abolishe and drive away all frettinge juice and biting
humors. And therefore thou may very conveniently and well use them at all
times, when thou feel in thy body much heat to abound, or else when the
time and season of the year shall seem to require. For it were but a vain
and superfluous thing, to use such things as be taken and reputed for
medicinable, none otherwise, but as other commo^meates usually and daily
taken.

Quinces among Autumnall fruictes are Quinces
reckened in the number of those that are bindinge and suppress the bealie.
Being taken before meals, they are wont rather to bind and restrain the
stomach, but after meats they mollefie the bealie and cloase or draw the
stomach together, which is not to be merueyled at: co^sideringe that the mouth
of the stomach by a certain astrictiue power which is in them is shut
together, and the nourishement or meat before eaten, forciblie protruded and
thruste forward, as we see by experience in a bottle or in a bladder when we
wring hard and thrust out of them being full the licour.

In the noumber of fruictes also, Service bearies, Cornell bearies and Medlars
Service bearies Cornel beries. Medlars
are of all others most constrictiue, and may be very well used as medicine,
but not as meat, because they increase no commendable blood, but bind the
bealie to much and bring much harm to the head and the whole body.

Of Apples, those that are sweet (says Aegineta) have more power to heat
Apples Lib. 1. Cap. 81
then others, and are more easily digested, specially if they be roasted or
boiled. Sower apples do cool more and cut a sunder the congeled humors in
the stomach. The harrishe and roughe tasted apples do confirm the stomach
that is weak by distemperaunce of heat or much moisture and suppress the
bealy but yet Quinces for that purpose more then any others. But in goodness
those apples excel all others that are called Regia poma, which are not
altogether so cold, and are thought to be very holesom and comfortatiue to the
heart because they repel and drive away al fuligiuous moist vapors which
trouble the heart and strike up into the head. Finally when the head is
distempered through drinking much wine, they have been found right commodious
to alaye and redress the inconveniences thereof: but they be thought to be
hurtefull to the Sinews and to hebetate or dull the memory, specially if
they be of nature sower. For they be cold enough and by the slynesse of there
substance pearce and are conueighed even into the very innermoste parts. But
sweet apples which are kept til the next winter, are far better. For being
then through tract and continuance of time, come to a full ripenes and perfect
maturitie are thereby also made more wholesome and apt to be digested and are
not so soon corrupted, being orderly used. For them that have weak stomachs
they be excellent good being roasted in the ashes or trimmelie sodden in water
when they be eaten. Pears also Pears
in like manner being kept they be mellow and fully ripe, have the same virtue:
but they geeue more plentiful nourishement to the eaters and are more pleasant
to the stomach. As for Pome Citrons, Limons, Orenges, and Adam Apples, since
they rather serve for medicine then for meat, I will here say nothing: they
that be disposed to know the history and operations of them, may at large see
them most learnedly and truly described and set forth by Mattheolus in his
commentaries upon Dioscorides.

Olives (although Auicen reckeneth Lib. 1 Cap. 131 Olives
them, among those fruictes that hurt the stomach and Eyesight) yet in another
place he affirms that they being conduict in salt licour or Pickle, do
stir up appetite, corroborate and comfort the stomach and loses the bealie,
specially if they be eaten with vineigre. And Capers being in like sort
used, are right Capers Chestnuts
commendable for the same purposes.

Chestnuttes because they are of heavy concoction and engendre gross and
crude humors (albeit not very ill) and cause windynes very greatly, I judge
fitter to be left to them that use labor and much exercise. Notwithstanding
they cool and dry and somewhat bind: but being boiled they nourish well and
loose much of their windines, specially if they be sodden with the seeds of
Anyse or fenell or such like. Hasill nuttes are hoate and dry in the first
degree, they cause headache Hasil nuts.
and inflate ye stomach if they be much eaten they be hardly digested, they
degrauate ye tongue and hinder ye speech: albeit being new they are somewhat
more frie^dlie to the stomach for they bring less harm thereunto, although they
engender gross humors. Being eaten with figs, they are the better to be
borne withal, because they are sooner conueighed from the stomach down into
the mawe and thence expelled. But to eats them aloane or often, specially out
of winter is not so wholesome. Filberdes because they be astrictiue Eilberdes
and restrain Reumes and Catarres, might be thought to be profitable to the
stomach, but for all that, they are very ill and hard to be digested, by
reason of the thick substance that is in them, and consequently because they
bind the bealie the more. But Auicen commends them, because they are good
for all Lieuers, by reason of the small heat wherewith they be endued. For they
are hoate and dry in the first degree: and therefore they do no hurt so a
Lieuer that is hot, and unto it that is cold they do much good. Also they
are aperitiue and open oppilations and obstructions and make good juice in ye
body: but they inflate and engender windiness in the bottom of the bealie,
and cause headache with augmentacion of the brain. They are slow of digestion
and provoke vomit, and the ryndes of them bind the bealie, and therefore they
are but seldom and not of al men to be eaten. And if thou happen at any time
to eat of them to drive away the coughe and to help spettle (for they do
easily cause spittinge and heal an inueterate cough) it is best first to
draw out and extract the juice out of the substance of them: for by that means
they are made lighter of digestion, the subtiler substance being taken out of
the grosser left behind. And if a little Anyse or Cinamome be stamped and put
unto them, all their inflation and windines is taken away. And both of them as
well the filberd as the hasill nutte, eaten with figs are preservative
against all small poisons as Auenzoar and since his days Auicen have written.
Sweet Almonds Almonds
are almost equal in heat with these aforesaid, sauinge that they somewhat
decline to moisture, unless they be vinewed and restie, for then they are
dry. The nourishement which they geeue, although it be small, yet it is good.
Also they extenuate and cleanse with out any binding, they do open and comfort
the passages and vessels of the urine and take away all obstructions,
specially of the Spleen and Lieuer, and they be very sovereign and good for
them that have any diseases in their Breasts or Kidneis or have any
inflammation of the Lunges. But because they cause Sleep and tarry long in the
stomach (for they be hard of digestion if they be eaten alone) they send up
fumes and vapors into the head, and trouble it with the Murre and Reume. And
therefore I would wish that the juice should be taken out of the^ Almond
milk
(which is called the milk of Almonds) and this is the best way to eat them
being made in little dishes, rather then to eat the whole hard Almondes,
specially in Autumn. For by this means it will easily descend and bring
much profit without doing any harm. Moreover there is made a right excellent
confection, of the Cream of these Almonds being made in a Ptisan or the
decoction of Barley or such like, but specially the fine wheat called
Amylum. It is most cordial for them that be short wynded, or payned with the
coughe, and it is best to be made in Summer and Autumn. It surpasses any
other, and is most subtle and fine, it easily digesteth, makes good juice and
engenders clean, thin and perfect blood. The kernelles of Pyne apples are
almost temperate, for Pyne apples
they have but small heat and moisture, they geeue strong nourishment and the
same not ill. They are good to help a man to spette matter out of his Breast
and Lunges, they restore and help the debility or weakness of the body, they
purefie corrupt humors, help the cough, amend and qualeu^e putrified matter of
the body and stir up Venus. They are barde of digestion, and further (says
Auicen) there is in them a certain mordication and sharpenes: but if they be
stieped in hoate water, he says, they are clean altered from the same. For
so they have great power and virtue to nourishe, and do infer no hurt to the
body. He also commands them that be of a cold complexion and habit to
eat them with honey: but them that be hoate of complexio^, he wills to eat
them with Sugar.

Furthermore they purge the ^eines and cleanse the bladder, they coroborateth
and keeps them from ulcers, and have a singular virtue in helpinge them that
cannot piss. The nuttes called Pistacia (as Galen writes) geeue but little
nourishement, Pistacia 2. De alimont
notwithstanding they are very good for the Lieuer, cleansing and expellinge
evil humors from the same, and making way for them to have passage out, and
discharge it from all harins grieves and encombrances. Auicen says: that they
have a singular power against the noisomeness and lothsomenesse of the
stomach and do corroborate all the ventricles: which may plainlye be
perceived by the somewhat bitter and sower quality that is in them. And
therefore they are good to be mixed with meats, as well for nourishement as
for medicine, both against the infartion of the lieuer, and also to strengthen
and corroborate as well the stomach as the lieuer. Also they be good to stir
up Venus, and to make them fat that are lean, or which have that kind of
consumption that is called Marasmus. They be hoate and dry measurably, so that
they may be thought to be in a manner temperate. In Summer they may be eaten,
so that no great quantity thereof be taken, but in winter they may be eaten
copiouslie and in greater quantity, specially of the^ that are hoate
complexioned. The rindes of Cittrons (specially if they be condite) Cytron
ryndes
may be eaten in winter, because they corroborate the heart and the other
principal members, as Auenzoar (approving the opinions of other ancient
writers) affirms. And although by reason of there hardness they be
difficultlye digested, yet has it ben, (undoubtedly) proved that they bring
much help to the stomach, and the mouth being gargarized with the decoction
of it, has a sweet breath. Moreover the flower and leaves of it do comfort
the stomach, and so does the wine or other licoure wherein the ryndes have
been stieped. But as for the meat or inner part of them within the paringe,
is both il for the stomach and breast, and also engenders the Colicke,
unless the hurt that may thereof ensue, be prevented and taken away by eatinge
clarefied honey and some cordial Spices. Anyse seed I much commend, because
A nyse seed
it takes away windines, and opens the obstructions of the Lieuer and
spleen not without a certain stipticke virtue. Also if a man do smell unto it
with his nose, it cures the swimminge and ache of the head and provoke
urine. Fenell is somewhat hoater and of slower digestion, Fenell
and geeueth but ill nourishement, and is somewhat dangerous for exulceracion
and inflammation of the Reins and bladder, notwithstanding it opens
obstructions and causes one to piss, and also has an excellent virtue to
clarify the sight, in somuche that Democritus y^ Philosopher was of opinion,
that Serpents when they come out of their dens use to eat of it and to rub
their eyes therewith. Coriander (of whose quality Coriandre
and temperature Phisicions cannot agroe for Galen says it is heat, but
Auicen and others say it is cold, is slow of digestion, and as Auicen
witnesses comfort a hoate stomach, and drives fumes (especially
cholerique) from the head, whereby the stomach is helped, (which it does
rather by reason of the vineigre wherewith it is prepared) but yet it causes
dimnesse of sight: yea and which is more, Dioscorides says that it troubles
man's wits with great ieoperdie of madness, and in an other place he reckeneth
it among poisons: therefore often vsinge of it ought to rejected, and not to
adventure to eat it upon trust of any kind of preparing whatsoever it be,
for ye nature of it cannot be taken quite away.

Of Repletion
Forasmuch as we have already showed such kinds of meat and drink as we
thought worthy and needful to be noted (for we purposed not to declare al
because that would have been a long piece of work and almost infinite) now
let us address our selves to speak of some other poinctes that are expedient
for health, I mean such as among phisicions are reckened in the number of
things not natural. And first great heed and care must be taken, that thou
do not infarce nor pampre thy self with any manner of excess either in meat
or drink: but to take of every kind of meat Meat.
such quantity, that the stomach may not be cloyed and glutted with
sacietie, but to leave eatinge (as it were) with an appetite. For by this
means, natural heat retaininge his full power and bigoure, will be the better
able to concoct those meats that are in the stomach.

We must also have an eye to consider the qualities and natures of meats: as
if they be such that geeue strong nourishement to the body, they must so
temperately be eaten, that we may leave a pretty while before our appetite be
filled. But of those meats which nourishe but lightlye and smallie, we may
eat more largelye. For the one requires good space ere they be concocted, but
the other do soon descend down into the bealie. In drink we must use such
conjecture and quantity as the meats shall Drink
seem to be either in moisture or dryness. It were better to be mixed with
the meat by many small draughtes, then with one great draught at the end of
the meal. For the mixture tempereth well the meat without annoyance, but a
great gluttinge draught droweneth the meat and rebukes natural heat that
then works in concoctio^. And although Hippocrates has left in writing, yt
excess of drink does less harm and is more tolerable then the ingluuious
repletion of meat: and Auicen (alleging the opinion of diverse others)
says, that to be dronk once in every month is wholesome Dronkenes
and healthful to the body: yet we (because it may do more harm then good and
specially in them that have weak and feeble brains) are, and ever were of a
contrary mind and opinion. Wine (I cannot deny) is most congruent and
agreeable to natural heat: but even as too much Oil quenches the light of
a Lamp, so does excessive bibbinge of wine, oppress and suffocate natural
heat. In so much that many have been brought to their long home by this
superfluous bollinge and beastly swilling of much wine. Now, if (perchance)
thou pass beyond the limittes of sobriety and exceed natures measure,
either in meat or drink, the former error and fault of excess must be
recompensed with spare feedinge and as it were almost with abstinence
followinge. For after repletion, abstinence ought to be used as the propre
remedy to redress the same, and if at diner thou do ouercharge nature, let
thy supper be very little or none at all, and use longer sleep then at other
times thou art accustomed, and the^ some exquisite exercise. But the best way
of all is, to desist and leave eatinge and drinkinge, while yet thy stomach
would serve to eat and drink more.

For thy hungrye lust yet remaininge, will within one hour pass away.

And that kind of eating (says Auicen) is worste, that makes the stomach
heavy: and that drinkinge is most vituperable, which passes the bounds of
temperaunce and swimmeth in the the stomach. Therefore that the meat may be
the better concocted and the more conuenientlye distributed into all the parts
of the body, let drink be used by a little and a little at once.

Of Emptines.
EVen as to much repletion and gurmandize is most hurtefull and pernicious: so
is to much hunger and abstinence most noyfull and dangerous. For excess and
defect (that is to say superfluity and want or to much and too little)
engender and cause (as the phisicions affirm) many maladies and diseases. But
here to enter into a disputacion whether of these is worse, neither place nor
time will permit, because our purpose is to write a compendious Dietary for
health, and not physical quiddities.

Therefore in any wise refrain to much abstinence, because it brings great
annoyance to the whole body, and chiefly The harms of much hunger or
abstinence.
to the stomach which is the servant and official minister to the whole body.

The whole body is thereby harmed, because by to much abstinence and hunger
his moisture is withdrawn and diminished, and consequently it is debilitated
and made lean, and natural heat is to much incended, insomuche that not
findinge humor to work on, it tourneth his violence and power to the radical
and substantial humor, and exhaustinge that moisture, brings the body into
a consumption. The stomach is thereby annoyed, because beside the common
discomoditie and hurt done to the whole body, it is also replete with rotten
and putrefied humors. Therefore at convenient and ordinary hours and when
appetite well serves (which may be known by the alacrity or lustines of the
body, and when the Stomach is not over laden with heaviness and po^derisitie of
other meat) and after a conuenable space of certain hours between meal and
meal, it is best to eat. The Arabians, appoincted xvi. hours between meal
and meal: For they thought it best to eat no oftener but thrice in xlviii.
hours or two days. But I suppose that ten hours are sufficient for
Studientes and them that be not altogether of hoate temperatures, espectallie
for them that use neither to infarce themselves with repletion, nor yet to eat
meats of hard digestion. Some others, very well, appoincte eight hours to be
between meals. But this by the way may not be omitted, that every one must
be wayned and reduced to such and so many meals, as their custom and
education has been used unto, unless their custom has been very ill and
disco^mendable, and as their natural appetite serves them. If thy business be
such, that thou must watch much of the night, or if thou have a weak brain
or Diner and supper
a heaviness and swimminge in thy head, or if thy stomach and power digestive
be weak and feeble, it is best to take but a light supper: but other wise, let
thy dinner be less in quantity then thy supper, if custom will so permit,
which in an old man cannot be altered, but in a young man by little and little
(if it be ill) must be reduced to better order. For a large supper, is by the
aid of sleep much better digested, for sleep comfort natural heat
which is occupied about the matter whereof proceeds nourishement, and so
digestion is made better, the body fatter, the mind quieter and the humors
temperater. And in the night the Air is cooler and darker, whereby the
spirittes being gathered and collected unto the inner parts, and without the
cares and functions of ye mind and senses, are very conducible to help
digestion. And also there is longer time between supper and the next meal on
the morrow after, then is between dinner and supper. Notwithstanding, Custom,
as is before showed, may not be forgotten. Finally at supper it is best to eat
dry meats: and therefore roasted meats are very commendable and best then to be
lyked, to cut a sunder and drive away superfluous humors, but in the
morninge or day time boiled meats are better.

Of Purgation by siege or other wise.
IT is expedient and healthful also for a man every day to purge his body
and exonerate nature by convenient euacuation and tempestiuious Sieges or
stools Going to the stool.
for these excrementes of ordure and urine are matter superfluous and
unsavory, which by the natural powers may not be converted into flesh, but
remaininge in the body, corrupt the members, and therefore nature abhorringe
them, desires to have them expelled. For as the noble Arrabian Auenzoar
says: All Phisicions do agree that in the bealie being not costiue, but
measurably soluble and soft, rests much of the health and soundnes of all
the whole body, by benefit whereof it is preserved from many diseases and
namely the Pleuresie. How to make the bealie so suble.
But if the bealie be sore bound and costiue, Raisons being thoroughly ripe and
eaten in winter or at anyother time of the year with Sugar will help that
inconvenience. They be (as before we have declared) great friends to the
stomach and Lieuer. There be also other fruictes but not in all poinctes so
wholesome as these, which are good to be eaten in summer and Autumn, of whom we
have sufficientlye spoken before, as Mulberies, Plummes, Damsons, Mellons,
Pompons, Fygges and ripe Grapes. Which being eaten before meat, have virtue
and power to mollify and loose the bealie. And there be other fruictes, which
being taken after meat, are stipticke, as Pears, Quinces Medlers and such
like. Also Beetes eaten before meat Beete.
are very good, specially in the Spring season, at which time herbs have
their most strength, virtue and validity.

Old ancient writers have highly extolled Mallows, whose proper office and
virtue is to loose and mollify the belie: Mallows.
If these do not suffice, add the herb called Mercury unto them, or else
take Mercury
it alone by itself. But if there be in the body great plenty and abundance
of humors, we must assay and try whether they will be resolved and wasted by
abstinence or diet. For abstinence (says Galen) Diete
is one manner of euacuation. And Damascene says, if we may cure any malady
or grief by diet, we were not best to try any other way, for all things
touching bodily health will fall out prosperously. But if their be such
abundance of ill humors, that diette or abstinence is not hable to purge
them, then must those humors be educed and drawn forth by easy and light
purgacion, specially in two quarters of the year, Spring and Autumn. In
summer the the fittest purginge are Cassia fistula or a Siruppe of Roses
solutiue. But in spring and Autumn, Rhabarbe, Agaricke, and Seen: and also
the communelie known Electuaries as Lenitiue, Diachatolicon, Diasabeste:
foreseen that the Ingredientes be well concocted, sod, and prepared with such
things as belong and pertain to the humor then reigning, least otherwise
the confection should be over raginge or endued with any venenositie. And the
dryness and heat of Rubarbe, Agaricke and Seen, may be mitigated and taken
away, if they be mixed with such things as be moist and cold: of which
sort are Plummes, Sebestens and cordial flowers. And unto them it were not
amiss, to put a little quantity of Anyse or Cinamome because of the weakness
and imbecilitie of the stomach. And if great extremity and need seem to
require, to take some purgation or medicinable potion for healthes sake in a
great heat, let the confect be dronk with the waters or rather with the
decoctions of Sorell, Endive, Borage, Violettes, Succorie, Hoppes and Raisons,
accordingelie as it shall seem expedient by the advice and counsel of the
skillful Physician. Provided always, that non of all these which are here
rehearced, nor yet of any other, be taken in any great quantity. For some
(says Galen) are glad when they often and largely make great Stools: But
the more they be emptied, the more is their bealie bound within few days
afterward, which to be true, not only good reason, but also daily experience
persuades. And therefore in such case it it were better to provoke siegez, by
some gentle suppositories of Glisters or Oil infused at the foundiment, or else
some other softeninge substance, that may dissolve the matter which stops
the passage of the ordure in the straicte gutte Colon. But the nature of our
Country men is (rather the^ they would willingly use those helps to take
confectionate and medicinable drouges downewarde at the mouth then upward at
the foundement: fear of dishonestie and a certain shamefastnes enforcing them
thereunto.

Of Sleep.
ANd because they which are in health ought to have a special regard to
Sleep, that it neither be superfluous nor less then nature requires, but
used in due and convenient moderation, to the end that the commodities which
come thereby may be felt and taken, and the harms coming by long watch
avoided: we will here briefly entreat of both. And first, this must
diligently be inculcate, that neither the one nor the other pass measure. For
being used out of measure (as Hippocrates affirms) they bring so much
hinderance and annoyance 2. Aph. 3 Much Sleep
to health as nothing more. For immoderate and too much sleep fills the
body with many humors and retains not only sweat but also all other
superfluities makes the body dull and heavy, weakeneth and in a manner
boyleth all the senses and makes the^ blunt and unapt to honest exercises,
even as if much store of ashes should be cast upon fire, they cover and
quight quench it out, yea Auicen also doubted not to say that it dampnified
and hurt the soul or reasonable part of man. Contrarily, moderate sleep
after meat does moysten the whole body and is thought to humecte even the
very innermoste parts of the body, to stir up and exuscitate the powers and
virtues thereof, to make the actions of the Senses more fresh and lusty, to
revive and quicken the spirits Natural, Vital and Animal and as it were to
refreshe and repair the whole body new again. Being used before Sleep
before meat.
meat, it dries up the body, while the natural heat works inwardly
extendinge his force and violence against itself. For sleep is nothing else
but a pleasant and delightful detention of the senses and a reuocacion of
heat into the inward parts of the body: where, if it find nourishment ready
to work upon, it digesteth and distributeth it into all the veins, Arteries
and members of the whole body. The same effect has it, if it find crude and
raw humors vnconcocte. Thus sleep before meat is commended. But if natural
heat find no alyment or moisture inwardly, then is it too much incended, and
tourneth all his violence against the radical and substanciall moisture of the
body, and for want of other exhausteth it. Semblably immoderate and too much
watchinge is as Watch
hurtful to the powers and hinders the chief functions of life, for thereby
natural heat is cooled (as Auerrois says) like as fire which with too much
moouinge and stirringe is blown abroad and dispercled. Thereby also the
spirits be resolved, and the power Animal troubled, digestion let, the
body made apt to Consumptions, the brain debilitate and filled with many
noisome vapors and fumosities. But moderate Sleep, as before is said,
strengthens the vital power, and makes the virtue natural hable to
accomplish and completelie dispatche all her operations, whereof the chiefest
is digestion and concoction of the meat. Furthermore it makes the virtue
Animal to take rest, and remooueth and takes away the weakness and debilitie
that comes by study and labor. But some will stand in doubt concerning
the measure and time of sleep whether it ought to be so great and so long as
Hippocrates appoints it. For he says, that that Sleep is laudable and
natural which lacks no part of the night, neither hinders any part of
the day. Which seems to be the custom and manner of men in the ancient
time (if we believe Homere) who has diligently described the manners, rytes and
studies of men. For as soon as the Sun is down, he writes and describes
that men surceassed from their labors and betook themselves to rest: and when
the Sun was risen and up, he always lightly seems to stir up and call
men to their business and vocation. Whereby he signified and meant, that all the
night we ought to sleep, and all the day to watch. Neither is it without
good respect and consideracion that the same Hippocrates in an other place 1.
Aph. 16
writes, that ventres in winter and Spring are very hoate and sleep very
long. As concerning what hours of the day time are fittest to sleep in, he
in his book entitled De praesagiis affirms 2. Prae. 11.
the morninge to be lest hurtefull until the third hour of the day which is
nine of the clock. But because common custom may not be forgotten and
neglected as he the same Hippocrates also notes, therefore I think, that we
ought not to sleep the whole night long in winter. For eight hours for the
age The time and space of Sleep
and common custom of them for whose sake this small Treatise is purposelye
written, is enough or rather too much unless it be in them whose stomachs
are very weak and of slow digestion. In Summer let sleep be equal with the
night in length because the^ ye nights are short: and it will not be very
ill, to recompense the dissolution and dryness of the Spirits with longer
sleep and to take a little nappe in the morninge or at noone days (if need
be) Albeit it is much better not to sleep at all at noone, unless Sleep at
noone
common custom be to the contrary, or else that thou feel yt it does thee
good, and guardeth thee from further and worse inconveniences. For it breeds
many moist discrasies and maladies and makes humors to fall down, marreth
the color of the face and body and makes it salowe, inflateth and puffs
up the Spleen, loses the sinews, causes dullness, weakeneth and enfeebleth
appetite, and is a foremessanger or waymaker to Fevers, Apostumations, and
Abscesses. But custom (as before has been often noted) is of so great force,
that it becomes and is made nature. For as we daily see by experience that
some do and have a long time accustomed themselves to very ill diet and to
meats of naughty nourishement, and yet have not thereby been endaungered and
hurt: so is it also to be thought by Sleep, specially when necessity
enforces, as when we have watched before and our Spirits through heat and
labor of the body or mind be greatly dissolved and wearied. For then they
seekinge a refreshing and instauracion again gather and conueyghe themselves
into the inward parts, whereby the senses being for a time left and
forsaken, there happens Sleep. For Sleep is nothing else but a bond or
detencion of the senses, whereby they intermitte their offices and functions for
the time, and is therefore called by the name of Rest. But in Summer specially
I do advise and counsel thee for one hour at the least after diner, to sit
and recreate thy self with reading of some light and merry matter, abandoning
cares and fancies out of thy mind, and not in any wise to sleep. For
commonly this rest does no less good, yea perhaps it is more wholesome to a
great maignye then sleep, because it brings a commodity without any
discommoditie. For thereby the spirits are gathered together and (the
cogitacions of the mind being relaxed) are wonderfully refreshed and
comforted. But if sleep will needs come upon thee, and as a thief steal upon
thee (for the ancient Sages of Greece termed sleep by that Epithete) look
that thou sleep with thy head upright, having all the windows of thy chamber
fast shut for the space one hour. But in any wise beware of sleep
immediately after supper, for there ought Sleep very ill immediately after
supper
to be a convenient space between supper and sleep, to wit an hour and a
half at the least. For thou must not sleep, until the meat be descended
from the upper part of the stomach to the lower: which thing that it may the
more easelie and speedily be done, it shall be best after supper to walk
softely and temperately. For by that means sleep shall be both the quieter and
longer, and the brain shall not be so much troubled with fumes and vapors,
which are wont to strike up into the head when the meat tarieth to long in
the mouth of the stomach. If the space between supper and goinge to bed be
somewhat long, and the walkinge has made the meat to descend to the lowest
part of the stomach thou shall first lie upon thy left side, because in this
liynge the Lieuer approaches The manner of lying in bed
better to the Stomach and helps the better to hasten digestion. To sleep
prostrate or grouelinge upon the bealie is very good and namelye for them that
have feeble digestion, for that kind of liynge contains and keeps in the
natural heat wherewith the meat is concocted. But if sleep come upon thee
before they meat be descended from ye mouth of thy stomach, first lie on thy
right side, until it be descended from ye upper part (for ye mouth of the
stomach is on ye left side) and then must thou turn thee on the left side
or upon thy bealie, that the meat may more easily be concected in a more
fleshie and hoate part, not without the helps and furtherances aforenamed.
But lyinge upright upon the back is utterly to be abhorred, for it causes
many perilous diseases and fond passions, as the Lethargy, the Mare, the
Apoplexy etc. and not without cause why: for this manner of liynge brings
the humors backewarde to the hinder parts of the body and head and hinders
them that they cannot have egresse and vente out by their proper and conuenable
issues which are the palate and nosethrils. When thou have slepte conveniently
and measurablie, thou shall find an excellent commodity if thou use fricasie
and rubbing over thy body, first with thy shirte sleeue or bare hand to rub
and chaufe thy legs, then thy arms, and afterward thy whole body both
before and behind, and then to put on thy clothes What is to be done in the
mor, ninge at our vprisinge
and go to the stool, then to rub and kembe thy head and to stretche thy
self and to wash thine eyes (if need so require) with water of Roses and
Fenell, and to cleanse thy teeth with some handsome Toothpicker, and to chawe a
little Masticke or Galingale, for they draw superfluous humors from the head
and are most sovereign both for the head and the stomach. And if thou be
driven to sleep straightwaies after supper or if thy stomach be full gorged
and replete, or if it be weak and feeble and specially in moist and wette
weather, it shall be very good to chawe these or else to swallowe down a grain
or twain of the whitest frankencense.

Of the Accidents and affections of the mind.
ANd forasmuch as there is a very great connection or knittinge together
between the body and the mind, in so much yt many times we see sundry and
diverse great alteracions of the body (yea now and then) death to ensue, only
through careful thoughts and fantastical immaginacions, it is very
requisite and expedient that unto the conseruatio^ of the body in good health
the mind should be in perfect frame and soundnes. And therefore Auicen
geeueth De Ca^^.
us a learned note, that we should have a diligent care to our mind if we
desire to propulse and eschew maladies and diseases: which opinion also Galen
held before him, saying that we must abstain from the intemperance and
deformity of al these passions and affections of ye mind, Anger and sorrow
furiousnes and fear, envy and thought. For they alinate and bring a man from
the use of reason, and transform him from that state and order that is
according to nature. For moderate mirthe helps much to accomplish all the
offices and functions of the Mirth.
mind, specially to further and make excellent concoction: as contrariwise
heaviness and sorrow is the greatest hinderaunce and obstacle to let it. Beware
therefore in any wise of heaviness or desparation (for a heavy and sorrowful
spirit says Solomon dries up the bones) Prouer. 17. and. 25.
and geeue thy self to honest mirthe and Christianlike joy. For as Auicen
says, The often use of mirthe disposes a man to be merry, and thereof come
two no small commodities. One is, that natural virtue is corroborated and
strengthened, and continual regeneration of the spirits is caused and very
small or rather no dissolution of them at al ensues. The other is, that the
same spirits thereby are dilated, and consequently life prolonged. Moreover it
is expedient, temperately to recreate ye senses, as for example, the sight with
viewinge and beholding fair shows and beautiful things, How the senses are
properly refreshed and delighted. Sight. Hearing Smelling
the hearing, with harmonicall and melodious Music, the smellinge, with soote
savors and fragaraunt odours, (such as in somer the smell of Rose water is) I
do not say, Roses themselves or violettes, because through their moystnes,
they stuff and fill the head with vapors and fumosities. But in winter, with
the smell of Lignum Aloes, which comfort, and cheereth up the Heart, Brain,
Entrails and all the senses of Man wo^derfullye. But beware of too hoate and
sharp savors for they send vapors to the brain. The tastinge, with a mean
Tastinge
relice and taste, as that which is confectionate of Sugar and the Juice of
Pomegranades or Quinces, thickened by decoction, or some other of like
temperature, being not harmefull neither exceeding in the excess of any
quality.

Of Venery or the Act of Generation.
THe delectation and pleasure that comes by touching must be well measured
by mediocritie: for if it Touching
exceed and be used intemperatlie, it resolves the spirits and natural
heat above measure, and dries up the radical moisture, whereby natural
heat is preserved and nourished and so, dangerous diseases (I will not say
death) happens unto man sooner then otherwise by nature they would. Therefore
since in the act of Generation, there is so great resolution of the spirits,
excess thereof (specially of them that be Studients and lean of body) is to
be eschewed. Albeit (as has been before often showed) great regard and
account must be made of custom. We must (says Hippocrates) go from one
thing to another by little and little and not change upon a sudden. Therefore
Galen and before hs days Aristotle in his Problemes affirms that 2. Aph. 51
Custom.
sudden alteracions and changes are very noisome to nature, and concludes
how that the Tiranne Dionisius, being expulsed and driven out of his Kingdom,
fell into a grievous malady and disease, by forbearing his former
lasciuiousnes and wanton order, because contrari to his custom (which he had
before used) he suddenly gave himself to continency, and of a monstrous
whoremonger became a very chaste liver. Therefore let us conclude with Galen:
that the use of carnal copulation does little or no harm, so that so much
space and time Art. med. cap. 86
in the use thereof be adhibited, that neither any resolution of the spirits
be felt, and also that a man may thereby after a sort seem to be lighter then
he was before, and to fetch his breath the better and with more facility. But
this I will further aduouche, which both reason and experience proves to be
true, that it is much better to use it seldom then often: because among many
other harms and dangers, which much Coiture and carnalitie brings, this is
not the lest, that it weakeneth the heart, debilitateth the The hurt of much
using carnal act.
brain, and dries up all the body, because it wastes the substance of the
last alime^t. For Sperm or Seed of generation is (as Aristotle says) the
last substance of profitable aliment. And also, as we have before declared,
because through the great pleasure that is in it, the spirits and natural
heat are to much resolved and the stomach principally endamaged: as
contrariwise, by convenient continency and oportune forbearing thereof it is
cherished and preserved. It was not without good cause that Auicen thought if
never so little Sperme or Seed over and above the measure and stinte of nature,
Sperme
do pass from a man in doing this act of generation it harmeth him more, then
if he should bleed forty times so much. For the Sperme is a thing more
conform to natural heat and moisture and more spiritual then blood is.
Moreover carnal apetite is a deadly enemy to dry complexions and likewise to
cold: but unhurtful (being moderately used) only to them that are hoate and
moist and which have naturally great abundance of Sperme. Galen says, that
the Venerie whom it hurts and whom not. De tuend. Sanit. 6.
state of those bodies is worst, which have abundaunce of hoate Seed, because
it does prorite and tickle them to expel it since both the mouth of their
ventres is resolved, and all their body is not only relaxed and made weak,
but also they be dry, slender, pale, and holow eyed, unto whom he in that
same place prescribes store of remedies. But if a man would abstain from
very hoate meats and wyndie, and much drinking of How to eschew venerie.
headie wine and refrain venerous imaginations, and such like pleasures, he
shall not lightly be much assailed and tempted with desire of any carnal
appetite. Likewise if he ernestly addicte himself to the study of Moral
Philosophy and of the sacred Scriptures, banishinge Idleness and forbearinge
the company (so far as he conuenientlye may) of beawtifull damselles and
amorous women. Or if a man use the Seed of Agnos Castus (which is also called
Viter) he shall see and feel a merueilous effect to repress his fleshly
concupiscence. If thy loins be to hoate, annointe them with the Oil of
Henbane or Popie, and do likewise to thy Genitories, and do not use to lie in a
soft feather bed. Some there be, which cool there Priuities in cold
water, and find thereby a present remedy, They that drink the juice of water
Lilly (called of the Apothecaries Nenuphar) the space of xij. days together,
shall have no manner of desire to carnalitie. And therefore it is good for
wiuelesse Bachelors and husbandlesse maidens to drink, to drive away their
unclean dreaminge of venerie and the filthy pollutions that they have by night.

But in fine, bid dainty fare a dieu, and use not to pamper thy self with
much gurmandize, but only so much as nature requires to keep thy body in
perfect health and soundnes. For there is an old Proverb and a true saying:
From frequent Venus, much cheer and sleep, Each Studient ought, himself to
keep.

I remember that I have read in saint Chrysostom, that our Savior Christ
when he dwelled here among us on earth used to eat and drink so little and
so seldom, that he encresed not this superfluous Seed. But as in this poinct
so in many other Christ has but very few Imitatours and folowers whereas
(notwithstanding) there be many which have still this saying in there mouths
how that every action of Christ is our instruction.

But let us draw toward an end of our purpose. When nature is desirous of
carnal conjunction and is neither provoked The time of carnal copulation
thereunto by imagination and thought, nor any other outward cause but with
multitude and abundance of Sperme it must be used in a fit and convenient time.
And that is when the meat is thoroughly concocted and yet no hunger nor desire
to eat approaches: that Sleep or rest immediately after it, may take away the
lasitude gotten and caused through the action there of or at the least mitigate
and lenifie the same. But if we should err in either part it were much better
(as Galene says) to offend being replete and armed with a full Stomach then
when it is empty and pynched with overmuch defect and want of food. For it is
better, that is to say, it does less harm to use when the body is warm and
calefied then when it is cold and infrigidate: and full infarced rather then
when it is empty, and when it is humected rather then when it is dry. But he
the same Galene taught before, that measure and temperatenesse therein ought to
be chosen and observed that the body neither should be too hoate nor too cold,
too moist nor too dry, too much replete nor to much emptied. Neither do I
here allow the Law and ordinance of Solon whereby the enacted that a man
should carnally know his wife at least Solons Law
thrice in a month For often use thereof to many men is harmefull, yea to
some, once is to much. Again, this act is not a thing necessary to
conserve the party that uses it, but only to repair and increase the Spece
or kind, which otherwise in short time would decay. Therefore let Solon
being an heathen Eathnique take his law to himself.

Studientes many times are troubled with a phlegmatic humor descending from
their heads into their stomachs being of them selves cold: which
inconvenience may easily be remedied, if they take in the morning a dragme or
twain of the confection named Diatrion Piperion. Or else, they may drink
Pepper alone (specially that which is white) being brayed and put into water,
or let them take betime in the morning a little Ginger condite, or else a
Chebule condite, which is a kind of mirobolanes.

Of Air Wholesome and unwholesome.
Air although we describe it last in order, and what quality thereof is best
for bodily health: yet is it a principal poinct and no less to be regarded
then the other preceding. For needs must it inspi^^^^d breath into us
continuallye, that the heart and lunges may thereby be competentlye and
conuenablie cooled. This among all other, is so needful and necessary unto
man, that he is uneath able to live one moment of an hour, unless new fresh
Air coming in and out, cool and refrigerate his heart. Therefore unto all men
without any exception, it is hole some and expedient, to draw into lunges, the
best that is to wit the purest Air. For corrupt and vnpure Air is unto all
age a great backefriende and enemy. Now, the diversity of Airs, procedinge
of heat, cold, drought or moystnes, accords not to every man's nature
alike. For unto those bodies that are of the best temperature, the most
temperate Air is holesomest. But in whom, any excellinge quality bears
domination, unto such, that Air is most wholesome, which in like degree
resists and oppugneth that quality.

For temperature is altered with contrarious diete and order, and is conserved
with his like. Thou shall therefore (as farreforth as may be) (...) thy self
to live neither in a troubled and contagions air, nor in that which is very
cold, or too hoate, or too moist, or which is open to vaporous blastes and
pestilent winds, such as blow out of the South. In winter it is best to live
in a warm and open Sunnye place, lyinge open to What dwelling is best for
winter
the Cast: but we must always turn our heads from the Rays and Beams of
the Sun, specially about noone: because beside calefaction and heat which
they bring to the head, they do also draw unto it humors and matters, wherefore
many times they cause headache and bleedinge at the nose. But the Rays or
Beams of the Moon are a great deal more to be eschewed and taken heed unto,
that they shine not upon us, specially when we sleep, for they cause ill
diseases. For as much as the Moon is Lady of moisture and moves humors.
Also the night air is not wholesome, because the Sun geeuer of life, is gone
out of our Hemisphere. In winter if the Air be troubled and dark (which as
Auicen says makes ye soul sorrowful) it must in part (if it may not in all)
be qualified and by some artificial means bettered. Which is done either by
remaining in a house, or in some covert place, shrouded from the sturdie
storms of dismal Boreas certain hours of the day, and also by purifinge
the Air with a good fire in our Chamber, made with good woodde, or else by
making in it a perfume with Juniper or Lignum Aloes. In Somer it is best to
dwell in such a Dwelling for Somer.
temperate place, that the windows of our house may open toward the North or
if we will, we may sprincle our Chamber with Rose water and vineigre, specially
when the Air is corrupt with any stinkinge favor, or any other fulsome
exhalacion. Auicen praises the Air of Mountains and Downs for the Somer
time, and thinks it best for a man in the night to lie in the upper part or
Garettes of his house, but in the day time, he says the lower rooms are
fittest and holesomest. Aristotle choose him a dwellinge place that stood
high and lay open with prospectes toward the South and the East, in a
subtle Air Choice of air.
neither moist nor cold. Plato found very old and aged persons dwelinge in
high and temperate regions. And this is to be noted and known, that the Air
in high places (which by repercussion and reflection of the Sun Beams are
not warmed) be cold, and the higher the place is, the colder is the Air,
Therefore the middle loftes of the house are fittest for winter, and the highest
for Somer. You must also beware, that when you be hoate you stand not long in
the wind or cold Air, because every sudden alteration and change hurts
nature very much, and cold, stoppinge the pores and passages of the humors,
hinders convenient refrigeration and difflation of vapors: and also is a
great Enemy to natural heat, but chiefly to the brain and sinews. To be
short, the sentence and opinion of Hippocrates is always to be set before
our eyes, whose words I have here recited. For he says, that to euacuate
much and suddenly, or to be filled with repletion, to warm, to 1. Aph. 51.
cool, or by any other means to move the body, more then natural course
tolerateth, is dangerous. For too much of any thing is hurtful and a great
Enemy to nature. But being orderly and by little and little done, there is no
peril at any time. Finallye when the Air is hoate, the best dwellinge is in
a cold Climate and Air and to eat such meats as do humecte and cool. In
fine, to use a cold and moist diete, thereby to quality and countreuaile the
heat and dryness of the Air. As when the winter is very cold and moist, a
somewhat hoate and dry dietarie is most profitable. Now, in the beginning of
the Spring, such an order of diete is commended as is exsiccatiue or dry,
and in Autumn, a humectinge or moist regiment is most allowable. But in Somer
all dryness and exsiccation must be eschewed. In Somer and toward the end of
the Spring and beginning of Autumn, a reasonable and convenient order must
be used: But in the beginning of the Spring and later end of Autumn such
diette to be used as was in winter.

The whole Sum of wholesome diette.
IN steed of a final Peroration, I would wish thee (Gentle Reader) to bear
well in memory, how that to refrain Repletion and excess of meat, to be
precise and active in exercise, and to conserve the Seed of Generation are
three things for healthinesse of the body most wholesome and profitable and
forget not, how that Aristotle in his Problemes, imitatinge Hippocrates,
refers Probl. 47 6. Epid. Par. 4. Aph. 20
all the cause of prosperous health unto temperate moderature of meat and
drink, and an expedient Mediocriture of seasonable exercise. But sithen for
our sins and offenses adversity and sickness is laid upon us, let us not be
stiff necked neither forgetful so show our selves thankful to Almighty
God for whatsoever he shall send unto us for our better amendment, and in our
vocation and trade of life whereunto we be called verteouslie, soberly, and
Justly, to live to the honor of Almighty God: renouncing all ungodly ways
and worldly concupiscences, expecting and looking for that blessed hope and
illustration of the glory of God and Jesus Christ our Savior, who offered up
and gave himself a Sacrifice to redeem us from all iniquity and from the
tirranie of the devil, and to puriefie and make us a peculiar people to
himself, to walk in the pathe of good works and godly conversation of life
to his Glory.

FINIS

