THE BLACK BOOKS MESSENGER.

Laying open the Life and Death of Ned Brown one of the most notable
Cutpurses, Crosbiters, and Conny-catchers, that ever lived in England.

Herein he tells very pleasantly in his own person such strange prancks
and monstrous villainies by him and his Consorte performed, as the like was yet
never heard of in any of the former books of Connycatching.

Read and be warnd, Laugh as you like, Judge as you find.

Nascimur pro Patria. by R. G.



Printed at London by John Danter, for Thomas Nelson dwelling in Silver
street, near to the sign of the Red-Crosse 1592.

To the Courteous Reader Health.
GEntlemen, I know you have long expected the coming forth of my Black
Book, which I long have promised, and which I had many days since finished,
had not sickness hindered my intent: Nevertheless, be assured it is the first
thing I mean to publish after I am recovered. This Messenger to my Black
Book I commit to your courteous censures, being written before I fell sick,
which I thought good in the mean time to send you as a Fayring, discoursing Ned
Brownes villainies, which are too many to be described in my Black Book.

I had thought to have joined with this Treatise, a pithy discourse of the
Repentance of a Conny-catcher lately executed out of Newgate, yet for as much as
the Method of the one is so far differing from the other, I altered my
opinion, and the rather for that the one died resolute and desperate, the other
penitent and passionate. For the Conny-catchers repentance which shall shortly
be published, it contains a passion of great importance, First how he was
given over from all grace and Godliness, and seemed to have no spark of the
fear of God in him: yet nevertheless, through the wonderful working of Gods
spirit, even in the dungeon at Newgate the night before he died, he so
repented him from the bottom of his heart, that it may well beseem Parents to
have it for their Children, Masters for their servants, and to be perused of
every honest person with great regard.

And for Ned Brown of whom my Messenger makes report, he was a man infamous
for his bad course of life and well known about London: He was in outward
show a Gentlemanlike companion attyred very brave, and to shadow his villainy
the more would nominate himself to be a Marshall man, who when he had nipt a
Bung or cut a good purse, he would steal over into the Low Countries, there
to taste three or four Stoapes of Rhenish wine, and then come over forsooth a
brave Soldier: But at last he leapt at a daysie for his loose kind of life,
and therefore imagine you now see him in his own person, standing in a great
bay window with a halter about his neck ready to be hanged, desperately
pronounsing this his whole course of life and confesses as follows.

Yours in all courtesy, R. G.

A Table of the words of Artlately devised by Ned Brown and his associates, to
Crosbite the old Phrases used in the manner of Conny-catching.
HE that draws the fish to the bait, the Beater. The Tavern where they go,
the Bush. The fool that is caught, the Bird. Connycatching to be called,
B^tfowling. The wine to be called, the Shrap. The Cards to be called, the
Li^twigs. The fetching in a Conny, beating the bush The good Ass if he be
woone, stooping to the Lure. If he keep aloof, a H^ggard. The verser in
conny-catching is called, the Retriuer. And the Barnacle, the pot hunter.
THE LIFE AND death of Ned Brown, a notable Cutpurse and Conny-catcher.
IF you think (Gentlemen) to hear a repentant man speak, or to tell a large
tale of his penitent sorrows, ye are deceived: for as I have ever lived
lewdly, so I mean to end my life as resolutely, and not by a cowardly
confession to attempt the hope of a pardon. ^et, in that I was famous in my
life for my villainies, I will at my death profess my self as notable, by
discoursing to you all merrely, the manner and method of my knaueries, which
if you hear without laughing, then after my death call me base knave, and never
have me in remembrance.

Know therefore (Gentlemen) that my parents were honest, of good report, and no
little esteem amongst their neighbors, and sought (if good nurture and
education would have served) to have made me an honest man: but as one self
same ground brings forth flowers and thistles; so of a sound stock proved an
untoward Syen; and of a virtuous father, a most vicious son. It boots little
to rehearfe the petty sins of my Nonage; as disobedience to my parents,
contempt of good counsel, despising of mine elders, filching, pe^ilashery,
and such trifling toys: but with these follyes I inurde myself, till waxing
in years, I grew into greater villainies. For when I came to eighteen years
old, what sin was it that I would not commit with greediness, what attempt
so bad, that I would not endeavor to execute; Cutting of purses, stealing of
horses, lifting, picking of locks, and all other notable coossenages. Why, I
held them excellent qualities, and accounted him unworthy to live, that could
not, or (...) not live by such damnable practices. Yet as sin too openly
manifested to the eye of the Magistrate, is either sore revenged or soon cut
off: So I to prevent that, had a net wherein to dance, and diverse shadows
to color my knaueries withal, as I would title my self with the name of a
Fencer, and make Gentlemen believe that I picked a living out by that mystery,
whereas God wot, I had no other fence but with my short knife, and a pair of
purse stringes, and with them in troth many a bowt have I had in my time In
torth? O what a simple oath was this to co^firm a man's credit with all? Why, I
see the halter will make a man holy, for whilst God suffered me to flourish,
I scornd to disgrace my mouth with so small an oath as In faith: but I rent God
in pieces, swearing and forswearing by every part of his body, that such as
heard me, rather trembled at mine oaths, than feared my braues, and yet for
courage and resolution I refer my self to all them that have ever heard of my
name.

Thus animated to do wickedness, I fell to take delight in the company of
harlots, amongst whom, as I spent what I got, so I suffered not them I was
acquainted withal to fether their nestes, but would at my pleasure strippe
them of all that they had. What bad woman was there about London, whose
champion I would not be for a few Crowns, to fight, swear and stare in her
behalf, to the abuse of any that should do Justice upon her? I still had one
or two in store to crosbite withal, which I used as snares to trap simple men
in: for if I took but one suspitiously in her company, straight I verst upon
him, and crossebit him for all the money in his purse. By the way (since sorrow
cannot help to save me, let me tell you a merry ieasthow once I cross bit a
Maltman, that would needs be so wanton, as when he had shut his Malt to have
a wench, and thus the Jest fell out.

A pleasant Tale how Ned Brown crossebit a Maltman.
THis Seuex Fornicator, this old Letcher, using continually into White
Chapel had a haunt into Petticote Lane to a Trugging house there, and fell
into great familiarity with a good wench that was a friend of mine, who one
day revealed unto me how she was well thought on by a Maltman, a wealthy old
Churl, and that ordinarily twice a week he did visit her, and therefore bad
me plot some means to fetch him over for some crowns. I was not to seek for
a quick invention, and resolved at his coming to crossebite him, which was
(as luck served) the next day. Monsieur the Maltman coming according to his
custom, was no sooner secretly shut in the chamber with the wench, but I came
stepping in with a terrible look, swearing as if I meant to have challengd the
earth to have opened and swallowed me quick, and presently fell upon her and
beat her: then I turned to the Maltman, and lent him a blow or two, for he
would take no more: he was a stout stiff old tough Churl, and then I rayld
upon them both, and objected to him how long he had kept my Wife, how my
neighbors could tell me of it, how the Lane thought ill of me for suffering it
and now that I had my self taken them together, I would make both him and her
smart for it before we parted.

The old Fox that knew the Ox by the horn, was subtle enough to spy a pad
in the straw, and to see that we went about to crossebite him, wherefore he
stood stiff, and denied all, and although the whore cunningly on her knees
weeping did confess it, yet the Maultman faced her down, and said she was an
honest woman for all him, and that this was but a coossenage compacted between
her and me to verse and crossbite him for some piece of money for amends, but
since he knew himself clear, he would never grant to pay one penny. I was
straight in mine oaths and braued him with sending for the Constable, but in
vain, all our policies could not draw one c^osse from this crasty old Carle,
till I gathering my wits together, came over his fallowes thus. I kept him
still in the chamber, and sent (as though I had sent for the Constable) for a
friend of mine, an ancient coossener, and one that had a long time been a
Knight of the Post, marry he had a fair cloak and a Damask coat, that
served him to ^ayle men withal. To this perjured companion I sent to come as a
Constable, to make the Maltman stoop, who (ready to execute any villainy that
I should plot) came speedily like an ancient welthy Citizen, and taking the
office of a Constable in hand, began very stearnly to examine the matter, and
to deal indifferently, rather favoring the Maltman than me: but I complained
how long he had kept my Wife, he answered I lied, and that it was a coossenage
to crossebite him of his money. Mas Constable cunningly made this reply to us
both: My friends, this matter is bad, and truly I cannot in conscience but look
into it. For you Brown, you complain how he has abused your wife along time,
and she partly confesses as much: he (who seems to be an honest man, and of
some countenance amongst his neighbors) forswears it and says, it is but a
devise to strip him of his money: I know not whom to believe, and therefore this
is my best course because the one of you shall not laugh the other to scorn I Will
send you all three to the Counter, so to answer it before some Justice that
may take examination of the matter. The Maltman Ioth to go to prison, and yet
unwilling to part from any pence, said he was willing to answer the matter
before any man of worship, but he desired the Constable to favor him that
he might not go to ward, and he would send for a Brewer a friend of his to be
his Bail.

In faith says this cunning old Cosener, you offer like an honest man, but I
cannot stay so long till he be sent for, but if you mean as you protest to
answer the matter, then leave some pawn and I will let you go whither you
will while to morrow, and then come to my house here hard by at a Grocers shop,
and you and I will go before a Justice and then clear your self as you may.
The maltman taking this crafty knave to be some substantial Citizen, thanked
him for his friendship and gave him a seal ring that he wore on his
forefinger, promising the next morning to meet him at his house. As Soon as my
friend had the ring, away walks he, and while we stood brabling together he
went to the Brewars house with whom this Maltman traded and delivered the
Brewar the Ring as a token from the Maltman saying he was in trouble, and that
he desired him by that token to send him ten pound. The Brewar seeing an
ancient Citizen bringing the message and knowing the Maltmans Ring, stood upon
no terms since he knew his Chapman wogld and was able to answer it again if
it were a brace of hundredth pounds, delivered him the money without any more
adoo. which ten pound at night we shard betwixt us, and left the maltman to
talk with the Brewar about the repaiment. Tush this was one of my ordinary
shifts, for I wa^ holden in my time the most famous Crosbyt^^ in all London:
Well at length as wedding and hanging comes by destenie, I would to avoid the
speech of the world he married forsooth and keep a house, but (Gentlemen) I
hope you that hear me talk of marriage, do presently imagine that sure she
was some virtuous matrone that I chose out. Shall I say my conscience, she was a
little snowt fair, but the commonst harlot and backster that ever made fray
under the shadow of Colman hedge: wedded to this trull, what villainy could I
devise but she would put in practice, and yet though she could foyst a pocket
well, and get me some pence, and lift now and then for a need, and with the
lightness of her heels bring me in some crowns: yet* I waxt weary, and
stuck to the old proverb, that change of pasture makes fat Calves: I
thought that in living with me two years she lived a year too long, and
therefore casting mine eye on a pretty wench, a man's wife well known about
London, I fell in love with her, and that so deeply that I broke the matter to
her husband, that I loved his wife, and must needs have her, and confirmd it
with many oaths, that if he did not consent to it, I would be his death: where
upon her husband, a kind Knave, and one every way as base a companion as my
self, agreed to me, and we bet a bargain, that I should have his Wife, and he
should have mine, conditionally, that I should give him sieve pounds to boot,
which I promised, though he never had it: so we like two good Horse-corsers,
made a choppe and change, and swapt up a Rogish bargain, and so he married my
wife and and his. Thus Gentlemen did I neither fear God nor his laws, nor
regarded honesty, manhood, or conscience, but these be trifles and venial
sins. Now sir, let me boast of my self a little, in that I came to the
credit of a high Lawyer, and with my sword freebooted abroad in the country
like a Caualier on horseback, wherein I did excel for subtelty: For I had
first for my self an artificial hair, and a beard so naturally made, that I
could talk, diue, and sup in it, and yet it should never be sp^ed. I will
tell you there rests no greater villainy than in this practice, for I have
robbed a man in the morning, and come to the same Inn and bayted, yea and
dyned with him the same day, and for my horse that he might not be known I
could ride him one part of the day like a goodly Gelding with a large tail
hanging to his feetlockes, and the other part of the day I could make him a
Cut, for I had an artificial tail so cunningly counterfeited, that the Ostler
when he dressed him could not perceive it. By these policies I little cared
for Hues and Cries but straight with disguising my self, would outslip them
all, and as for my Cloak it was Tarmosind (as they do term it) made with
two outsides that I could turn it how I list, for howsoever I wore it the
right side still seemed to be outward: I remember how prettily once I served a
Priest, and because one death discharges all, and is as good as a general
pardon, hear how I served him.

A merry tale how Ned Brown used a Priest.
I Chanced as I road into Barkeshire to light in the company of a fat Priest
that had hanging at his saddle how a capcase well stuffed with Crowns that he
went to pay for the purchase of some lands: Falling in talk with him (as
communication will grow betwixt travelers) I behaved my self so demurely,
that he took me for a very honest man, and was glad of my company, although
ere we parted it cost him very dear: and amongst other that he questioned me
if I would sell my horse (for he was a fair large Gelding well spread and
forheaded and so easily and swiftly paced, that I could well ride him seven
mile an hour) I made him answer that I was loath to part from my Gelding, and
so shapte him a slight reply, but before we came at our ba^^te he was so in
love with him that I might say him no nay, so that when we came at our June
and were at dinner together we swapt a bargain: I had the Priests and twenty
Nobles to boot for mine. Well as soon as we had chang^e I got me into the
stable, and there secretly I kuit a hair about the horse feetlock so straight
upon the vein that he began a little to check of that foot, so that when he
was brought forth the horse began to halt; which the Priest espying marueld at
it, and began to accuse me that I had deceived him. Well quoth I it is nothing
but a blood, and as soon as he is warm he will go well, and if in riding
you like him not, for twenty shillings loss I Will change with you at night, the
Priest was glad of this, and caused his saddle to be set on my gelding, and so
having his Capcase on the saddle pummell, rode on his way, and I with him, but
still his horse halted, and by that time we were two miles out of the town he
halted right down: at which the Priest chaft, and I said I wondered at it, and
thought he was pricked, bad him alight and I would see what he ayled, and wished
him to get up of my horse that I had of him for a mile or two, and I would ride
of his, to try if I could drive him from his hault. The Priest thankt me, and
was sorrowful, and I feeling about his foot, cracked the have asunder, and
when I had done got up on him, smiling to my self to see the Capcase hang so
mannerly before me, and putting spurs to the horse, made him give way a
little, but being somewhat stiff, he halted for half a mile, and then began
to fall into his old pace, which the Priest spying, said: Me thinks my Gelding
begins to leave his halting. I marry does he Master Parson (quoth I) I
warrant you hele gallop too fast for you to overtake, and so good Priest
farewell, and take no thought for the carriage of your Capcase. With that I put
spurs to him lustily, and away flung I like the wind: the Parson calde to
me, and said be hoped that I was but in jest, but he found it in earnest,
for he never had his horse nor his capcase after.

Gentlemen, this is but a jest to a number of villainies that I have acted, so
graceless has my life been. The most expert and skilful Alcumist, never
took more pains in experience of his metals, the Physician in his simples,
the Mecanicall man in the mystery of his occupation, than I have done in
plotting precepts, rules, axioms, and principles, how smoothly and neately to
foist a pocket, or nyppe a bung.

It were too tedious to hold you with tales of the wonders I have acted,
seeing almost they be numberless, or to make report how desperately I did
execute them, either without fear of God, dread of the Law, or love to my
Country: for I was so resolutely, or rather reprobately given, that I held
Death only as Natures due, and howsoever ignominiously it might happen unto
me, that I little regarded: which careless disdain to die, made me thrust my
self into every braule, quarrel, and other bad action whatsoever, running
headlong into all mischief neither respecting the end, nor foreseeing the
danger, and that secure life has brought me to this dishonorable death. But
what should I stand here preaching? I lived wantonly, and therefore let me end
merrily, and tell you two or three of my mad prauks and so bid you farewell.
Amongst the rest I remember once walking up and down Smithfield, very quaintly
attired in a fustian dublet and buffe hose, both laid down with gold lace, a
silk stock and a new Cloak, I traced up and down very solempnly, as having
never a cross to bless me withal, where being in my dumps there happened to
me this accident following.

A pleasant tale how Ned Brown kissed a Gentlewoman and cut her purse.
THus Gentlemen being in my dumps, I saw a brave Country Gentlewoman coming
along from saint Bartlemewes in a satin Gown, and four men attending upon
her: by her side she had hanging a marvelous rich purse embroydred, and not
so fair without but it seemed to be as well lined within: At this my teeth
watered, and as the pray makes the thief, so necessity and the sight of such a
fair purse began to muster a thousand inventions in my head how to come by
it: to go by her and Nip it I could not, because she had so many men
attending on her: to watch her into a press that was in va^ne, for going
toward S. John's street, I gest her about to take horse to ride home, because
all her men were booted. Thus perplexed for this purse, and yet not so much for
the boung as the shells: I at last resolutely vowed in my self to have it
though I stretched a halter for it: and so casting in my head how to bring my
fine Mistress to the blow, at last I performed it thus. She standing and
talking a while with a Gentleman I stepped before her and leaned at the Earre
till I saw her leave him, and then stalking toward her very stoutly as if I
had been some young Caualier or Captain, I met her and courteously saluted
her, and not only greeted her, but as if I had been acquainted with her I gave
her a kiss, and so in taking acquaintance closing very familiarly to her I cut
her purse: the Gentlewoman seeing me so brave used me kindly, and blushing
said, she knew me not. Are you not Mistres quoth I, such a Gentlewoman, and
such a man's Wife? No truly sir, quoth she you mistake me: then I cry you mercy
quoth I, and am sorry that I was so saucily bold. There is no harm done sir
said she, because there is no offense taken, and so we parted, I with a good
bung, and my Gentlewoman with a kiss, which I dare safely swear, she bought
as dear as ever she did thing in her life, for what I found in the purse that
I keep to my self. Thus did I plot devises in my head how to profit myself,
though it were to the utter undoing of ante one: I was the first that invented
the letting fall of the key, which had like to cost me dear, but it is all
one, as good then as now: and thus it was.

How Ned Brown let fall a key,
WAlking up and down Paul's, I saw where a Noble man's brother in England came
with certain Gentlemen his friends in at the West door, and how he put up
his purse, as having bought some thing in the Churchyard: I having an Eagles
eye, spied a good bung containing many shells as I gest, carelessly put up into
his sleeue, which drove me straight into a mutiny with my self how to come by
it. I looked about me if I could see any of my fellow friends walking there, and
straight I found out three or four trusty foists with whom I talked and conferd
about this purse: we all concluded it were necessary to have it, so we could
piot a means how to catch it. At last I set down the course thus: as soon as
the throng grew great, and that there was Iustling in Paul's for room, I stepped
before the Gentleman and let fall a key, which stooping to take up, I staid the
Gentleman that he was feign to thrust by me, while in the press two of my
friends foisted his purse, and away they went with all, and in it there was
some twenty pound in gold: presently putting his hand in his pocket for his
handkercher, he mist his purse, and suspected that he that let fall the key
had it; but suppositions are vain, and so was his thinking seeing he knew me
not, for till this day be never set eye of his purse.

There are a number of my companions yet living in England, who being men for
all companies, (...) once conuersing with a man, so dr^ him to them, that he
shall think nothing in the world too dear for them, and never be able to
part from them, until he has spent all he has.

If he be lasciuiously addicted, they have Aretines Tables at their fingers
ends, to feed him on with new kind of filthiness, they will come in with Rous
the french Painter, and what an usual vain in bawdery he had: not a whore or
queen about the town but they know, and can tell you her marks, and where and
with whom she hosts.

If they see you couetously bent, they will tell you wonders of the Philosophers
stone, and make you believe they can make gold of Goose-greace: only you must
be at some two or three hundred pounds cost, or such a trifling matter, to
help to set up their Stylles, and then you need not care where you beg your
bread, for they will make you do little better if you follow their
prescriptions.

Discourse with them of Countries; they will set you on fire with travailing,
yea what place is it they will not swear they have been in, and I warrant you
tell such a sound tale, as if it were all Gospel they spoke: not a corner in
France but they can describe. Venice, why it is nothing, for they have
intelligence from it every hour, and at every word will come in with Strado
Curtizano, and tell you such miracles of Madam Padilia and Romana Imperia, that
you will be mad till you be out of England. And if he see you are caught
with that bait, he will make as though he would leave you and feign business
about the Court, or that such a Noble man sent for him, when you will rather
consent to rob all your friends, than be severed from him one hour. If you
request his company to travel, he will say In faith I cannot tell: I would
sooner spend my life in your company than in any man's in England, but at this
time I am not so provided of money as I would, therefore I can make you no
promise: and if a man should adventure upon such a journey without money, it
were miserable and base, and no man will care for us. ^ut, money say you (like
a liberal young master) take no care for that, for I have so much land and I
will sell it, my credit is so much, and I will use it: I have the keeping of a
Coosens chamber of mine, which is an old Counselor, and he this vacation time
is gone down into the Country, we will break up his study, rifle his chests,
diue into the bottom of his bags, but we will have to serve our turn: rather
than fail, we will sell his books, pawn his bedding and hangings, and make
ridda^ce of all his household stuff to set us packing. To this he listens a
little and says: These are some hopes yet, but if he should go with you, and
you have money and he none, you will domineere over him at your pleasure, and
then he were well set up, to leave such possibilities in England, and be made a
slave in another Country: With that you offer to part halfes with him, or put
all you have into his custody, before he should think you meant otherwise
then well with him. He takes you at your offer, and promises to husband it so
for you, that you shall spend with the best and yet not wast so much as you
do: which makes you (meaning simply) put him in trust and give him the purse:
Then all a boon voyage into the low Countries you truoge, so to travel up into
Italy, but per varios casus and tot discrimina rerum in a Town of Garrison he
leaves you, runs away with your money, and makes you glad to betake your self
to prouant, and to be a Gentleman of a Company. If he fear you will make
after him, he will change his name, and if there be any better Gentleman than
other in the Country where he sotournes, his name he will borrowe, and
creep into his kindred, or it shall cost him a fall, and make him pay sweetly
for it in the end, it he take not the better heed. Thus will he be sure to
have one Ass or other a foot, on whom he may pray, and ever to have new
inventions to keep himself in pleasing.

There is no Art but he will have a superficial sight into, and put down
every man with talk, and when he has uttered the most he can, makes men
believe that he knows ten times more than he will put into their heads,
which are secrets not to be made common to every one.

He will persuade you he has twenty receiptes of Love powders: that he can
frame a Ring with such a quaint devise, that if a Wench put it on her singer,
she shall not choose but follow you up and down the streets.

If you have an enemy that you would feign be ryd of, heel teach you to
poison him with your very looks. To stand on the top of Paul's with a burning
glass in your hand, and cast the Sun with such a force on a man's face that
walks under, that it shall strike him stark dead more violently than
lightning.

To fill a Letter full of Needles, which shall be laid after such a
Mathematical order, that when he opens it to whom it is sent, they shall all
spring up and fly into his body as forceably, as if they had been blown up
with gunpowder, or sent from a Calleeuers mouth like small shot.

To conclude, he will have such probable reasons to procure belief to his
lies, such a smooth tongue to deliver them, and set them forth with such a
grace, that a very wise man he should be that did not swallowe the Gudgin at
his hands.

In this sort have I known sundry young Gentlemen of England trained forth
to their own destruction, which makes me the more willing to forewarne other
of such base companions.

Wherefore, for the rooting out of these slye insinuating Mothworms, that eat
men out of their substance unseen, and are the decay of the forwardest
Gentlemen and best wits: it were to be wished that Amasis Law were revived,
who ordained that every man at the years end should give account to the
Magistrate how he lived, and he that did not so, or could not make an account
of an honest life, to be put to death as a Fellon without favor or pardon.

Ye have about London, that (to the disgrace of Gentlemen live gentlemen-like
of themselves, having neythere money nor Land, nor any lawful means to
maintain them: some by play, and they go amumming into the Country all
Christmas time with false dice, or if there be any place where gentlemen or
Merchants frequent in the City or Town corporat, thither will they, either
disguised like young Merchants, or substantial Citizens, and draw them all
dry that ever deal with them.

There are some do nothing but walk up and down Paul's, or come to men's
shops to buy wares, with budgets of writings under their arms, and these will
talk with any man about their suits in Law, and discourse unto them how these
and these men's bonds they have for money, that are the chiefest dealers in
London, Norwich, Bristowe, and such like places, and complain that they cannot
get one penny. Why if such a man does owe it you, (will some man say that
knows him) I durst buy the debt of you, let me get it of him as I can: O
says my budget man, I have his hand and seal to show, look here else, and
with that pluckes out a counterfaite band, (as all his other writings are) and
reads it to him: whereupon, for half in half they presently compound, and
after he has that ten pound paid him for his band of twenty, besides the
forfeiture, or so forth, he says faith these Lawyers drink me as dry as a
sieve, and I have money to pay at such a day, and I doubt I shall not be able to
compass it. Here are all the Leases and Evidences of my Land lying in such a
shyre, could you lend me forty pound on them till the next Term, or for some
six Months, and it shall then be repayd with interest, or I Will forfeit my
whole inheritance, which is beter worth than ahundred marks a year.

The welthy Gentleman, or young Nouice, that has store of Crowns lying by him,
greedy of such a bargain, thinking (perhaps) by one clause or other to defeat
him of all he has, lends him money, and takes a fair Statute merchant of his
Lands before a Judge: but when all comes to al, he has no more land in England
then a younger brothers inheritance, nor does any such great Occupier as he
faineth, know him: much less owe him any money: whereby my covetous master is
cheated forty or fifty pound thick at one clap.

Not unlike to these, are they, that coming to Ordinaries about the Exchange,
where merchants do table for the most part, will say they have two or three
ships of Coals new come from Newcastle, and wish they could light on a good
chapman, that would deal for them altogether. What Is your price says one?
What Is your price? says another. He holds them at the first at a very high
rate, and sets a good face on it, as though he had such traffic indeed, but
afterward comes down so low, that every man strives who shall give him
earnest first, and ere he be aware, he has forty shillings clapped in his hand,
to assure the bargain to some one of them: he puts it up quietly, and bids
them enquire for him at such a sign and place, where he never came, signifying
also his name: when in troth he is but a coozening companion, and no such man
to be found. Thus goes he clear away with forty shillings in his pursse for
nothing, and they unlike to see him any more.

A merry Jest how Ned Brownes wife was crossebitten in her own Art.
BUt here note (Gentlemen) though I have done many sleights, and crossbitten
sundry persons: yet so long goes the pitcher to the water, that at length it
comes broken home. Which proverb I have seen verified: for I remember once
that I supposing to crosbite a Gentleman who had some ten pound in his sleeue
left my wife to perform the accident, who in the end was crossebitten her
self: and thus it fell out. She compacted with a Hooker, whom some call a
Curber, and having before bargained with the Gentleman to tell her tales in her
ear all night, he came according to promise, who having supt and going to
bed, was advised by my wife to lay his clothes in the window, where the Hookers
Crome might crossbite them from him: yet secretly intending before in the night
time to steal his money forth of his sleeue. They being in bed together slept
soundly: yet such was his chance, that he suddenly wakened long before her, and
being sore troubled with a laske, rose up and made a double use of his Chamber
pot: that done, he intended to throw it forth at the window, which the better
to perform, he first removed his clothes from thence; at which instant the
spring of the window rose up of the own accord. This sodaiuly amazed him so,
that he leapt back, leaning the chamber pot still standing in the window,
fearing that the devil had been at hand. By and by he espied a fair iron
Crome come marching in at the window, which in stead of the dublet and hose he
sought for, suddenly took hold of that homely service in the member vessel,
and so plucked goodman Iurdaine with all his contents down pat on the Curbers
pate. Never was gentle Angl^r so dressed, for his face, his head, and his neck,
were all besmeared with the soft ^^rreuerence, so as he stunke worse than a
^akes Farmer. The Gentleman hearing one cry out, and seeing his mess of
altogether so strangely taken away, began to take heart to him, and looking out
perceived the Curber lie almost brained, almost drowned, and well near
poisoned therewith: where at laughing heartily to himself, he put on his own
clothes, and got him secretly away, laying my wives clothes in the same
place, which the gentle Angler soon after took: but never could she get them
again till this day.

This (Gentlemen) was my course of life, and thus I got much by villainy, and
spent it amongst whores as carelessely: I sildome or never listened to the
admonition of my friends, neither did the fall of other men learn me to
beware, and therefore am I brought now to this end: yet little did I think to
have laid my bones in France, I thought (indeed) that Tyburne would at last
have shakt me by the neck: but having done villainy in England, this was
always my course, to slip over into the Low Countries, and there for a while
play the soldier, and partly that was the cause of my coming hither: for
growing odious in and about London for my filching, lifting, nipping, foysting
and crosbiting, that every one held me in contempt, and almost disdained my
company, I resolved to come over into France, by bearing Arms to win some
credit, determining with my self to become a true man. ^ut as men, though
they change Countries, alter not their minds: so given over by God into a
reprobate sense, I had no feeling of goodness, but with the dog fell to my
elde vomit, and here most wickedly I have committed sacrilege, robbed a Church,
and done other mischeeuous pranks, for which justly I am condemned and must
suffer death: whereby I learn, that revenge deferd is not quittanst: that
though God suffer the wicked for a time, yet he paies home at length; for
while I lasciuiously lead a careless life, if my friends warned me of it, I
scoft at them, and if they told me of the gallows, I would swear it was my
destenie, and now I have proved my self no liar: yet must I die more basely,
and be hanged out at a window.

Oh Countrymen and Gentlemen, I have held you long, as good at the first as at
the last, take then this for a farewell: Trust not in your own wits, for they
will become too wilful often, and so deceive you. Boast not in strength, nor
stand not on your manhood, so to maintain quarrels; for the end of brawling is
confusion: but use your courage indefence of your country, and then fear not
to die; for the bullet is an honorable death. Beware of whores, for they be the
Sirens that draw men on to destruction, their sweet words are enchantments,
their eyes allure, and their beauties bewitch: Oh take heed of their
persuasions, for they be Crocodiles, that when they weep, destroy. Truth is
honorable, and better is it to be a poor honest man, than a rich and wealthy
thief: for the fairest end is the gallows, and what a shame is it to a man's
friends, when he dies so basely. Scorn not labor (Gentlemen) nor hold not
any course of life bad or servile, that is profitable and honest, least in
giving your selves over to idleness, and having no yearly maintenance, you
fall into many prejudicial mischiefs Contemn not the virtuous counsel of a
friend, despise not the hearing of Gods Ministers, scoff not at the
Magistrates, but fear God, honor your Prince, and love your country, then God
will bless you, as I hope he will do me for all my manifold offenses, and so
Lord into thy hands I commit my spirit, and with that he himself sprung out at
the window and died.

Hereby the way you shall understand, that going over into France, he near
vnte Arx robbed a Church, and was therefore condemned, and having no gallows by,
they hanged him out at a window, fastening the roape about the Bar: and thus this
Ned Brown died miserably, that all his life time had been full of mischief
and villainy, slightly at his death regarding the state of his soul. But note
a wonderful judgment of God showed upon him after his death: his body being
taken down, and buried without the town, it is verified, that in the night
time there came a company of Wolves, and torehim out of his grave, and eat him
up, where as there lay many soldiers buried, and many dead carcasses, that
they might have prayde on to have filled their hungry paunches. But the
judgments of God as they are just, so they are inscrutable: yet thus much we
may conjecture, that as he was one that delighted in rapine and stealth in his
life, so at his death the ravenous Wolves devoured him, and plucked him out of
his grave, as a man not worthy to be admitted to the honor of any buryall Thus
have I set down the life and death of Ned Brown, a famous Cutpurse and
Connycatcher, by whose example if any be profited, I have the desired end of
my labor.

FINIS.

