The ret^ne of. M. smythes enuoy servant to the Kings Royal Majesty and
Clerk of the Queen's graces counsel (though most unworthy)
Trolle here, trolle there, trolle out, trolle in
Ye trolle away and trolle about like a blind sym.
Even with the same commendacion that to you does pertayne
I send you here mine answer, which is no great treatise
Desiring you to mark, and to understand plain
That I have received your enuyous and proud enterprise
The matter whereof, I trust, all honest men does despise
But brag and face what you can, I care not a whyt
I take time as time is, though hereafter comes not yet.
You ruffle and you rail for malice and despyte
And as a loftye lurden, you show your self full plain
For asmoche as you are grieved with the good that I did write
Which I will never deny, but earnestlye maintain
Having causes ynowe, on your malice to complain
For your manasynges and threatenings, wherein I am sure ye do but guess
For layenge popery to your charge, your heart granting there no less.
Though with the point of my pen I did you so spur and pryck
That thereby you were grieved, and greatly styrred to ire
Yet I council you to sit sure, and that you another wynche nor kyck
For and if you do, I will surely lay you in the myer
Take no more upon you then is mete, lest your self ye do tyer
Or some other myschefe chance you, take this proverb for a token
That a sick man is sone beaten, and a skalde head sone broken.
I was nothing grieved that yourselfe so openly ye did declare
Nether with the descrybynge of your name, nor of your service the pyth
Nor yet will any honest man so judge, and therefore I nothing care
Though mad malice moved you, to be despyted therewith
Ragynge because I compared a coblet with the smyth
Your folyshe dysplesure wherewith, is easy enough to be found
Namyuge me as ye arre, an vpryght vagaboude.
Of the opening of your name and service I knew not your intent
But yet for your doings, I thought ye worthy blame
Not countynge you gyltlesse, and therefore I did you shent
Consydrynge I regarded your deed, more then I did your name
And therefore unto your offyre, I wysshed no manner of shame
But entendynge my purpose I write as in my mind it lay
Howbeyt, you being naught your self, turn it another way.
Sometime a thief shameth not to show both his name and face
Where the true man hydeth him self, and stands in great doubt
Least that this theuyshe malice should present it self in place
To the destruccyon of him that his thefery would try out
So in likewise you, do seek all corners round about
But it will not help you, though awhyle there be delay
Time may bring you forth, as well as it does pour graye
For romblynge in the scryptures in deed I did you reprove
Wysshynge with all my heart that your doings ye would amend
Descrybynge your fault plainly, as honestye did me behoue
You might gentely have spoken with m^^^ ye could me reprehende
But I am sure ye minded it not, but did it least intend
For all your bragges and krackes, on your ale benche when you sit
Let time be as time is, though herafter comes not yet.
To a taylour in deed I aduysed you that ye did resort
For the shapynge out of scripture / your text the better to frame
A sect I am sure more catholyck / then are your popysshe sort
Being the members of christ / and him self the head of the same
Neither heretyckes nor papists / but men of honest fame
That always are obedyent and use not / for to rebelle
Though you and soche other / would help thereto with your council.
I another bluster nor blow / any false matter to prove
Though you do desyer of every honest man the fall
Another laid I popery to your charge / but thought ye did it love
For if by you / popery I could prove / then a traitor I would you call
And would it not concele / but bring you to your trial
Our doings will apere / though ye defer them for a space
And I will be forth coming / before your betters to show my face.
The rest of your raylynges I will as now omytte
Upon soche braynles braggery my time I will not spend
They do nothing else but manifest the lewd use of your wit
And the myschefe of your heart which to other ye do pretend
You have no another buckler your self for to defend
Who rebukes your sect / or would reform your popery
Among you strayte / he is a mayntayner of heresy.
Thus / though ye would be hydden / yet men may easily know
What traiterous hertes ye bear / to god and our good king
His grace has given in functyons / which clean to overthrow
What councelles do ye hold / to euydent is the thing
We should beware of your treason / for surely I fear ye would bring
Your romyshe tuffeler to be our heed / by some manner of shyft
To the which your papisticall flock / not long agoo gave a lift.
There saw we plainly / a myscheuous and detestabell sort
Of false feigned hertes / that against our good king did arise
Seeking his destruccyon / and all theyrs that him did supporte
Being armed with customs / and soche feigned lies
But god (who of his grace) ever prouydeth for his
Gave soche knowledge thereof / that they had not their intent
Some fled / some taken / some were hanged on the galowes and brent.
Which thing I do desire / all true subjects to regard
And to god and our good king / to bear a due obedyence
And to all false feigned hertes I wyshe the same reward
Even like as the others had / worthily for their offense
And now Master. T..S. mark well this sentence
Consider that as you be / so have you used your wit
And I take time / as time is / though herafter come not yet.
Parauenture Sir. T. S. you will yet brag and bost
As ye do here in that ye will drive me out of the way
But be not to busye I advise you / lest you come to your cost
Though in mine own cause / I will but little say
For and if you work much / ye shall perceive I will not play
Nether holding down my head / nor yet bear it to much aloft
For all your bragging countenance / it will become you to speak soft.
Now for an end (Eternal God) I beseech the grant long life
With prosperous contynuans, to Henry our most noble king
Andd to Katherynge our Queen also, his most Laufull Wife
And grant between them both, like other branches to spring
(As is Edward our Prince? that most odoriferous thing
Preserve them long together Lord, and grant them all the bliss
Where Angels incessantly, sing (Gloria in excelsis) Amen.
God save the king.
Trolle here, Trolle there, Trolle out, Trolle in
Ye trolle away and trolle about, like a blind Sym.

Imprynted at London by Richard banks, Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.
And be to sell in Lombard stret / nere unto the stocks by Richard Kele.


