THE APPLICATION OF SCRIPTVRE. OR The manner how to use the Word to most
edifying.

By THOMAS GRANGER preacher of the word at Botterwike in Holland, near Boston,
in Lincolnshire.

GOD IS MY HELPER



LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Thomas Pauier, and are to be sold at his shop in
Yuie lane. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful and virtuous Lady, the Lady JOAN LEVENTHORP,
temporal, and eternal happiness.
MADAME:
THe sincere conceit of your worthiness, consisting partly in those heavenly
endowments, wherewith the Lord has beautified and adorned you, as solid
wisdom, piety, humility, sincerity in all things: herein showing your self
the express image of that worthy, and judicious man Sir John Brograue your
Father; and chiefly in your Christian love toward all that love God, and live
a godly life: even these sole considerations have moved me to dedicate this
small and worthless work to your Ladyship, which if it shall please you to
accept as the Widows mite, into the treasury of your other Books, esteeming
it rather by the mind of the giver, then valuing it by the weight of it self,
you shall fully satisfy my desire. The Lord continue still his wonted
goodness, and loving kindness toward you, who as he has made you a joyful
Mother of many fair children, and careful of their virtuous education; so it
would please his heavenly Majesty to fulfill your joy, in your latter days, by
beholding their virtuous courses and desired establishment here in the earth;
that in the end both you and they may rejoice together for ever in the promised
Canaan, when your Arabian pilgrimage is here finished. Amen.

From Botterwike in Holland, near Boston in Lincoln. Your Ladyships

THE APPLICATION OF SCRIPTVRE.
2. SAM. 12. 7. Then said Nathan to David, Thou art the man.


KIng David had provoked the Lord to wrath by committing two grievous sins,
Adultery, and Murder which commonly follows the same by one means, or
other. Therefore he sent the Prophet Nathan to reprove him, and to denounce
these judgments against him. First, that the sword should never depart from
his house. Secondly, that his own son should take his wives from him.
Thirdly, that the child begotten in adultery should die. Wherein we observe:
first the justice of God, in that he will punish sin, and the sins of them
especially upon whom he has more plentifully poured his benefits: And again,
the mercy of God, in that he will not suffer his children to lie in sin, and
so to perish by sin, but awaketh their consciences and stirs them up to
repentance by correcting them, least they should perish with the world. Out of
his justice therefore mixed with mercy, he sent the Prophet, and the Prophet
coming, propounded his sin by way of a parable, that not being blinded with
partiality, and self-love (as all men are) he might give righteous judgment
against himself in the person of another. There were, says he, two men in one
city, the one rich, and the other poor: the rich man had exceeding many
sheep, and oxen; but the poor had none at all, save one little sheep which
he had bought, and nourished up, and it grew up with him, and with his
children also, and did eat of his own morsels, and drank of his own cup,
and slept in his bosom, and was unto him as his daughter. Now there came a
stranger unto the rich man, who refused to take of his own sheep, and of his
own oxen to dress for the stranger, that was come unto him, but took the
poor man's sheep and dressed it for the man, that was come unto him. Hereupon
David makes answer. verse. 5. He was exceeding wroth, and said that the man
which did that thing was the child of death, and that he should restore the
Lamb fouresold. In the verse. 7. Nathan makes particular application.

Thou art the man.

From this practice of the Prophet, we learn that the true Prophets and
Ministers of Christ must make particular application of the word of the Lord,
whether of commandment; exhortation, admonition, reproof, etc. to those to
whom they are sent, whether it be to a kingdom, to a particular people, or to
private men, and though worldly men being stiff-necked, and hard hearted, will
not yield themselves under the yoke of obedience, and are therefore always
ready to make resistance, yet must we know who has sent us, both with promise
of protection and reward for the faithful discharge of our duties, and also
with denuntiation of vengeance for our disobedience, and rebellion. Ier. 17.
19. Speak all that I command thee; Ier. 17. 19.
be not affraide of their faces, least I destroy thee before them; they shall
fight against thee, but shall not prevail against thee, for I am with thee to
deliver thee. And in another place, Son of man, though they be rebellious,
yet be not thou rebellious.

Besides this, we have many examples to encourage us hereunto. 1 King. 22. 13.
14. Four hundred Prophets 1 King. 22. 13. 14.
had prophesied victory to Ahas at Ramtoth Gilead, and at Iehosaphats request,
Micah the Prophet of the Lord was sent for: the messenger advised him (wisely
and discreetely as he supposed) to do the like, but he answered, As the Lord
lives, whatsoever the Lord has said unto me, that will I speak. 1. King. 18.
17. 18. 1. King. 18. 17. 18.
Thus faithfully also dealt Elias with him, It is not I that have troubled
Israel, but thou, and thy fathers house, in that ye have forsaken the
commandments of the Lord, and thou have followed Baalim. In the objection of
Ahab, verse. 17. observe the nature of blind and obstinate sinners, they make
the true Prophets and Ministers the causes of their calamities and plagues,
whereas the cause is in themselves, that refusing instruction, and reformation,
contemn and persecute the servants of God sent unto them, and despise the word
of the Lord sent by them. To this purpose, note well that ignorant and
rebellious speech of the high priests and Pharisees. Ioh. 11. 48. If we let him
thus alone, all Ioh. 11. 48.
men will believe in him, and the Romans will come, and take away both our
place, and the Nation. Here you see, that they would make the Gospel to be the
cause of their utter overthrow, and the overthrow of the Gospel, to be the
only means of their, safety. But these faithless, and godless politicians
were deceived, for that which they feared came upon them, through the wrong
avoiding thereof. In the Primitive Church, what evil soever happened to the
city or provinces of Rome, whether famine, pestilence, earthquakes, wars,
unseasonable weather, etc. the Christians were thought to be the causes
thereof: whereupon arose great persecution against them: yea, in these present
days, many ignorant and blind people do yet think, that preaching makes the
world so bad as it is: whereas indeed, it is the want of preaching, and want
of faith and obedience in them to the same, that makes the word so bad, and
which brings Gods judgments upon our heads, even as the unbelief and
rebellion of the heathen against God and his people, brought those heavy
plagues of God upon them, which they 2 King. 3. 13. 14.
imputed to the Christians. In 2 King. 3. 13. 14. Iehoram and Iehosaphat, and
the king of Edom, entered wars against the King of Moab for denying tribute to
Iehoram King of Israel, and when they had no water in their journey by the
space of seven days, they come to enquire of the Lord by Elisha the Prophet,
who returned this answer to the idolatrous King of Israel; What have I to do
with thee? get thee to the Prophets of thy Father, and of thy Mother: as if he
should say, thy heart is profane and idolatrous, and thou not loving to serve
the Lord, do come to serve thine own turn of the Lord, and of me:
therefore, as the Lord of hosts lives, in whose sight I stand, if it were Luke
3. 19.
not that I regard the presence of Iehosaphat, I would not have looked toward
thee, nor seen thee. Likewise in Luke 3. 19. John the Baptist reproved Herod
for his incest, and all his other evils. And the constancy and boldness Act.
3. Act 7. 51. 52. Ier. 20. 3. 4. 5.
of Peter in the particular reproof of the Jews. Act. 3. of Steven, Act. 7. 51
52. of Jeremy, Ier. 20. 3. 4. 5. yea, of all the Prophets, Apostles, and
faithful Pastors since the beginning, may and ought to encourage us to the
faithful discharge of our duties herein.

For the further clearing of this point, four things are to be considered.

First, the necessity of particular application.

Secondly, the person that is to make application in particular.

Thirdly, to whom it is to be made.

Fourthly, how it is to be received, and taken.

Application in particular, is necessary for diverse causes.

1. For the sound conversion of a sinner. For men do commonly receive the word
formally and historically, being generally delivered and taught, evermore
applying the same confusedly, and uncertainly to all, or one to another, but
none to himself for his own particular instruction, and reformation. In this
case the word is made like a certain medicine which Dorneus.
some Physicians write of, that it will cure all diseases, but when a man comes
to take the same, he shall not find himself cured of any disease by it, but
he is sure to be in great hazard of his life. And such effect has this
general drinking in, or hearing of the word: But on the contrary, the
particular plaster clapped on the particular soar does work the cure, if it be
possible to be done. Now if in our natural knowledge, and with our bodily eyes
we can see this, let us also in our spiritual knowledge, consider that the
diseased and wounded soul is in like manner cured.

The reading of the Scriptures with general instructions, admonitions,
reprehensions, exhortations, and consolations, I grant are most necessary,
being the groundwork and matter of the cure: but what sound conversion is
wrought thereby in any man, without discreet application, let every man that
has profited any thing in the school of Christ, be judge. Put the case that
some one of you had some hurt, or wound* or had some mortal disease reigning
in you, would you not gladly have the help of the skilfullest Surgeon, or
Physician, if you could? would you not redeem your lives with the expense of
your goods? What if when your Physician came unto you, he should begin to read
some part of Galen, Hypocrates, or other Physic books, and to make a long
discourse of the four Elements, with their properties, and qualities of the
four humors of the body, and diseases incident to man, with their remedies
and cures, and so having taken your money shall take his leave of you, saying
that he hopes you shall be as strong and lusty ere it be long as ever you
were; what would you think or say of such a Physician? how well would you
think your money bestowed? If in case of your bodily health and welfare you
would have an honest, plaine-dealing, careful and wise Physician, that had not
only a general knowledge of bodies diseases and remedies, but that could
moreover apply and bend all his skill to the particular and lively discerning
of your body, of your disease, and of the particular cure of the same: yea, and
if you will discover, and show unto him the state of your body to your utmost
knowledge for his further help and direction; how much more ought you to do
the same for your souls health? but most men are like to children, and foolish
patients, that had rather die then drink a bitter potion, or have their soars
launced and dressed.

Secondly, particular application is necessary to bring us to the knowledge of
our selves, for naturally we are so blinded with self-love, that howsoever we
can discern and judge other men, and sift them very near, and too near, yet
when we come to look into our selves, to take view and to make examination of
our own knowledges, consciences, hearts, affections, we find all well, little
or nothing amiss, we have enough to say for excuse and defense of our selves,
if any objection be made.

I speak not this to open the mouths of profane persons, which being partly
pharisaicall, partly heathenish, count none hypocrites, but honest professors
(I mean such as fear God, and do love his word, receiving the same with all
willingness and ioyfulnesse, and are loving and obedient to their Prince, and
to all that are in authority, temporal, and ecclesiastical under him) because
they see some infirmities and imperfections in them, being quick-sighted enough
to epsy their least infirmities, but lightly pass over all the virtues, gifts
and graces of Gods spirit in them, like the bumble-Bee or Beetle, that flies
over all the pleasant flowers, and lights on the horse-dung, where she
makes her abode: but I speak of the blindness of man's corrupt nature, which
raineth in the unregenerate. An evident and plain example hereof there is in
Matthew. 23. 30. If we had been in the days of Mat. 23. 30.
our fathers, we would not have been partners with them in the blood of the
Prophets. These hypocritical Pharisees condemn their fathers for murdering
the Prophets; but they being blinded with their lusts, and self-love, cannot
discern that they are worse then their fathers, in that they go about to
murder the Son of God. Hereupon it comes to pass, that the most profane,
being of civil carriage and conformable to outward worship, are the greatest
iustifiers of themselves, branding the best and most sanctified men with notes
of hypocrisy, aggravating their infirmities, mistaking their deeds,
misconstruing their sayings; whereof the holy man David complains; they daily
mistake my sayings, whereby Jesus Christ was accused and condemned; whereby
Elias was accused by Ahab to be the troubler of Israel, and whereby Amos was
accused by Amaziah to be a traitor against Jeroboam.

Yea, this blindness prevails much often times with the godly, as here we see
in the example of David, of whom God testified that he was a man according to
his own hearts desire: though Nathan propounded his sin in a most plain
parable, in every particular answerable and proportionable to his sin, which
he could not in so short a space forget (especially having Bathsheba every day
in his sight, which might occasion him to remember his sins) yet here we
see, he is far from making particular application thereof to himself: yea,
and is so blinded with selfeloue, as that he utterly condemns that in another,
the like whereof he approves in himself.

Therefore seeing that you are as young children that cannot cook, divide, and
cut their own meat, it is necessary that the same be prepared for you by your
spiritual nurses, and fathers, if you desire to reap any profit thereby. You
see how the great world affords meat, drink, and clothes unto you, and all
things serve for no other use then the sustenance of the body, and maintenance
of the person: and you see how all these things must pass through the hands of
the Tradesman and Artificer, by whose labor and preparation they become meat,
drink and cloth. The corn in the field, and the beasts of the earth, the
fishes in the sea, the fowls of the air, are no meat for you, the wool on
the sheep backs, the skins on the beasts backs, the flax on the stalks,
are no clothing; the trees in the wood, and stones in the earth, are no
buildings, till they be prepared and wrought by the Craftsman or Tradesman:
every one cannot work and prepare them, but they that are called and appointed
for the same purpose. And although every man having the grounds of Art in him,
may make a shift to feed, clothe, and build without the Artificer, yet it is
but a bad and very mean shift, and as good as no shift in many things.

This you see to be true in bodily things; even so is it in spiritual things.
The word of God contained in the old and new Testament, is the spiritual
world, having all things necessary for the sustenance and maintenance of the
soul to eternal life therein contained. These things must pass through the
hands of Gods artsman, or tradesman, who is to work, prepare, divide and
impart the same to every one according to his estate, and want. You cannot
serve your selves thereof, no more then the Eunuch could do without Philip.
Your Tradesman, or Artificer, whom God has called, must do it for you: of him
must you learn to serve your selves, as the child learnes of the nurse, and
the Prentice of his Master. Hence it is that Paul says to Timothy. 2. Tim. 2.
15. Study to show 2 Timothy 2. 15.
thy self approved unto God; a workman that needs not to be ashamed,
dividing the word of truth aright. And in 1. Cor. 3. 10. He calls himself a
skillful master 1 Cor. 3. 10
builder.

If then in the preparation of bodily things we desire a cunning and skillful
workman that can handle his tool according to knowledge for our bodily
profit; how much more then skillful Pastors and teachers, that can handle the
word according to knowledge, for the good of your souls, to feed you, to
clothe you, to prepare, and fit you for Gods building.

Therefore seeing that you cannot come to the knowledge of your selves without
particular application of the word, how should any man come to true conversion?
for if you have not the knowledge of your selves in particular and special,
you cannot make particular confession of your own sins, even your personal
sins, whereby no other men but even you alone have offended God, you cannot
be truly humbled for your sins, having no lively touch or feeling of sin;
you cannot seriously repent, for so long as you shuffle in your selves with
all, you will not repent till all repent: you cannot pray for graces necessary
because you know not your wants, being poor, and blind, and naked, and yet
thinking that you are rich; you cannot hunger and thirst after Christ and his
righteousness: you cannot be truly thankful for the endless love, and
mercy of God in your redemption, because you know not what God has done for
you, in not knowing your own sins and misery: you cannot receive true and
sound spiritual comfort by the Gospel, for want of knowledge, and feeling of
your particular miserable estate. These things most necessary to be done for
your souls health, can ye not do, unless all men do the same, so long as
you stand on generalities. Now all men will never do these things, neither
will you so long as you depend on this All.

Nay further, the want of this knowledge of your selves, which by particular
application of the Scripture you must come to, will make you secure,
unthankful, presumptuous contemners of the word, and altogether irreligious:
wherefore every man in particular ought to desire personal application of the
word, and to pray unto God, that his Pastor might speak to his heart and
conscience, that he in particular might receive instruction and edification by
him, and that he might not go away empty, but return bettered in knowledge
and affection.

It may be objected, particular application is not for all Auditors, for some
are so learned, and so wise, as when they hear the doctrine, they can make
application thereof to themselves. Ans. It is one thing what they can do, it
is another thing what they will do, and it is a third thing, what is our
office and discharge of our duties. We may not presume of other men's doings and
neglect Gods commandments, and the practice of the Prophets of Christ, and the
Apostles.

Again, men, even the best men, will make application general, and favorable
enough to themselves, having so many withdrawers, the continual motions and
surges of original sin, the manifold allurements and prouocations of the
evil world, the continual suggestions of Satan, implacable enemies of the
best and most sanctified men, so that although they be good servants, and good
scholars, they may forget their duties without their masters ever and anon
calling on them.

The second point herein to be considered, is the person that is to make this
particular application. The person is the Lords messenger, not speaking from
his own spirit and affection, but showing forth the virtue and power of the
Lords spirit in him, as Micah said, that which the Lord has bid me to speak,
that will I speak: And seeing that the Lord speaks by him, being a man of
like nature and infirmities with his brethren; he must so speak, and apply the
word, as to his own self amongst the rest (being no Lord over Gods heritage)
urging, and enforcing the word upon the conscience, as he does the same upon
his own; urging the practice of Christian duties upon others, without show of
taking liberty to himself; speaking from a feeling in himself, and showing
forth his love of the godly, and his commiseration and pity of the hard
hearted, after the example of our Savior Christ. Mark. 3. 5. he looked angerly
on the Mark. 3. 5.
Pharisees that watched him to ensnare him, but mourned also for the hardness of
their hearts. Of Jeremy. Ier. 9. 1. Oh that my head were full of water, and
Ier. 9. 1.
mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the
slain of the daughter of my people. Of Paul. Rom 9. 3. He would redeem the
reiection of Romans 9. 2.
the Jews with his own damnation. Otherwise, he that uses the word
deceitfully, serving his own turn therewith against his brethren, poysoneth
the pure word of God, with the corruption, and contagion of his own humors
and affections, and though he particularly apply the word, yet he profits his
hearers nothing at all, neither to godliness, nor mortification of sin, but
rather fostereth, cherishes, and incenseth the same in his flock.

Solomon says, that the heart of man answers to man, as the face does to the
face in the water; the natural and unsanctified heart of the hearer to the
natural and unsanctified heart of the speaker; the spiritual heart of the
hearer, to the spiritual heart of the speaker: and the spiritual heart of the
hearer has a secret perceiuance in it, to discern between the word coming
from a sanctified heart, and the same coming from a corrupt heart. Hence it
is, that among other reasons, the same word taught by diverse men has not the
same effect in the hearer; for the Lord is powerful by his word sent by his
own messengers, and the same word brought by them that are not sent, becomes
fruitless.

In Act. 19. 14. 15. 16. The seven sons of Scheua took upon them to adjure
evil spirits, by the name of Jesus, whom Paul Preached: but the spirit
answered; Jesus, I acknowledge, and Paul I know, but who are ye? Here you see
the evil spirit obeyed not those coniurers using the name of Jesus against
them; and why? because they were not sent of God as Paul was, but being without
faith use his name as it were to magical enchantments. Therefore this holy
name, used by Paul, being faithful, and called, was of force to bind and cast
out devils, but being used by them, being unfaithful and not called, is as a
dead letter, or idle word; yea it has a contrary effect: even so wicked men in
whom sin reigns, and Satan works, despise the word preached, and utterly
hate the particular application thereof by them that are not sent; for because
they use the word deceitfully and politikely for their own advantage, it is
not of force to expel Satan, and to convert the sinner, but has rather a
contrary effect, namely, to harden them more, and to destroy the weak. An
example hereof we have in the false Apostles of Corinth that preached the same
doctrine of the Gospel that Paul did, yet had it not the same effect, but
stirred up strife, envying, wrath, contentio^s, back bitings, swellings and
discord; for though they were big in words, showing learning and eloquence,
yet had they not the power of the spirit in them, therefore their doctrine was
but a dead letter. 1 Cor. 4. 19. 20. When I am come I will 1 Cor. 4. 19. 20.
know, not the speech of them that are puffed up, but the power, for the
kingdom of God is not in word, but in power.

Objection. The true and faithful shepherd, that speaks in plain evidence
of the spirit is contemned and derided of the wicked many times, and his
particular applications are not only unprofitable for their conversion, but
they have power, like the m^n possessed with the evil spirit against him, to
wound him and to overthrow him.

Answ. To this I briefly answer, that howsoever profane, and irreligious
persons may persecute the messengers of God with derision, railing or otherwise
for his plain and round dealing with them; yet notwithstanding their spirits
and consciences convince them of folly and obstinacy, and tells them that
God spoke to them by him, and that he does faithfully discharge his duty; and
therefore they cannot but have a fear and reverence of his word, and of his
person, though they strive with themselves to do the contrary; yea, and
outwardly do the contrary; Ioh. 7. 46.
As for example, in Ioh. 7. 46. The officers of the high Priests and Pharisees
came to apprehend our Savior Christ, but being come into his presence and
hearing his words, they had no power to take him, though they had a desire to
take him; but returned Ioh 18. 6.
this answer? Never man spoke as this man does. Ioh* 18. 6. When the band of
men, with the officers of the high Priests came to take Jesus, and he coming
forth, said unto them, I am he, they went backward, and fell to the ground: for
these wicked wretches being convinced of their own consciences, were not able
to abide his presence: yet notwithstanding Act. 24. 26.
the hour of darkness being come, they laid hold on him. In Act. 24. 26.
wicked Felix trembled when he heard Paul disputing of justice, temperance and
the judgment to come; yet notwithstanding he left him in bonds. And the
Pharisees when they were in Christ's presece* were touched with a sense and
perseuerane of his godhead; therefore he charged Mat. 12. 13. 32.
them with sin against the holy Ghost. Math. 12. 32.

To conclude this point then, the person that is to make this particular
application of the word with profit, is the true messenger of God, in whose
person, behavior, words and conversation of life, the spirit of sanctification
appears, which confirms the godly, comfort and strengthens the weak,
conuerteth the sinner, bridleth the obstinate, and stops the mouth of the
adversary.

The third point is, to whom this particular application is to be made.
Application of the word is to be made to all men living, from the highest to
the lowest. The word of God is the rule of life, and every man is to be guided
and governed in mind, will, heart, affections, words and works by the same,
which he cannot be without particular application thereof for his own
instruction in knowledge, and reformation in manners: for the word of God must
not be made a vain and idle story, no more then the Kings laws are, seeing
that it is the book of spiritual life, for all men that look to be saved,
even as the Kings laws are the book of temporal and civil life for his
subjects. Therefore seeing that the life of the word stands in practice, and
the practice of the word is our life, even our spiritual and Christian life;
the application thereof is most necessary for all men whatsoever, for
instruction, exhortation, admonition, reprehension, consolation.

Objection. Who dare be so bold as to reprove great men, they have
understanding, knowledge and learning, therefore they need not that any man
should instruct, exhort, admonish or reprove them.

Answ. Satan indeed by his messengers dare not admonish, dehort or reprehend
great ones, because it would hinder the building up of his kingdom, and turn
souls away from him; therefore does he by his messengers sooth and flatter
them, as he did Ahab, Iezabell, Jeroboam: and such like false Prophets there
has ever been, and ever will be, which at the very instant of visitation and
destruction, shall cry, Peace, Peace; there shall be prosperity, health,
liberty and plenty, all shall be well. But contrarily the King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords dare admonish, dehort and reprove all men living in the world by
his messengers: It is not they, but the Lord by his own word that admonishes
and reproves, and who dare be bold to resist the word of the Lord, in whose
presence the greatest potentate of the earth is but dust and ashes? The wrath
of the King (says Solomon) is as the roaring of a Lion, much more the wrath of
the Lord, who tormenteth not only the body, but casts body and soul into
hell fire.

Again, where it is objected that they have understanding, knowledge and
learning, hear what Ier. 5. 4. 5.
Jeremy says. Ier. 5. 4. 5. Surely they are poor, they are foolish, for they
know not the way of the Lord, nor the judgment of their God. 5. I will ge^ me
to the great men, and will speak to them, for they have known the way of the
Lord, and the judgment of their God; but these have altogether broken the
yoke, and burst the bonds a sunder. Riches and honors are strong temptors,
and Satan is there most busy: therefore says Solomon, let me not be too
rich, least I forget thee. If Satan be most busy there, then the word of the
Lord had need to be most plentiful there; for Satan neither can, nor will
have any nay, resistance or reproof, but by the word of the Lord; it is that
only that binds Satan, else be will bear rule wheresoever he comes.

Again, where riches and honors are, there are, or at leastwise would be
soothers and flatterers, Amaziahs and Doeggs, Satan's instruments, and
inueiglers to bend and turn riches, honors, power and learning, yea all gifts
and blessings against God, against his Church, and the faithful, that in the
fall of them Satan's kingdom may be erected and set up in the earth, who ever
since the Lord threw him down from heaven, seeks like a rebel and usurper
to thrust the Lord out of the earth, to which he lays Luke 4. 6.
claim, and whereof he makes open challenge, Luke 4. 6. All this power will I
give thee, and the glory of these Kingdoms, if thou will fall down and
worship me; where he makes himself Lord and disposer of the earth and all
worldly things. Now if riches, honors and powers be followed upon with
tempting Amaziahs, Doeggs, Zedkijahs and such like, if they see any way laid
open for them, how great need is there of the word Lord, and the particular
application thereof in plainness, uprightness, truth and sincerity, to
encounter the sophistry, and particular temptations of Satan?

Mark this one thing, Satan's word, to wit, his temptations and prouocations
are very strong and powerful. For first, he deals with men in particular.
Again, he provoke them but to that to which they are themselves inclined.
Thirdly, his messengers and all his instruments are deceitful workers like
himself, cunning to humor, please, and to flatter men, thereby to blind
their eyes, and to corrupt their judgments, that in doing evil they might not
know what to do. Now if we contrarily shall handle the word generally and
doubtfully, and also man's nature being so blinded with self-love, as it can
make no use thereof for it own conversion and reformation, what great
advantage give we to Satan? we shall stand as it were like fools talking of
by-matters, and pleasing our selves with our prattle, whiles the old crafty
fox, the old beaten soldier, steals away Gods sheep (the souls committed
to our keeping and feeding) out of our hands; whereas like faithful shepherds
we should give him the encounter according to Ephesians 6. 12.
the onset, Ephesians. 6 12.

Does Satan deal with men in particular to subvert them? how much more then
should we deal particularly with them (I mean not to particularite men's
faults in public) but in love to give private instruction, exhortation,
counsel, admonition, which is too little used now a days; yea, we have run
out so far from that Antichristian auricular confession as that we are fallen
into the contrary extremity, like them that avoiding the rock Scylla, fall
into the gulf Charibdis, and as fools, that shunning one vice run into the
contrary vice, having no wisdom nor discretion to keep a mean: Even so now
is the whole work of the Ministry in many places brought to a mere
formalitie of a general and roauing sermon on the Sabbath day, and what they
have heard they know not, neither can make any use thereof; but for any other
matter, the people neither regard their Pastor, nor the Pastor the People,
unless in Tithes gathering, and looking well to have all his due; which (to
say the truth) this devouring and Epicurish age thirsts rather after, then
after the food of their souls. Satan in these days changing the sheep into
wolves, as in former days he changed the shepherds into wolves.

Hereupon comes this general ignorance of the work of the Ministry in
most people: hereupon comes the contempt of the person of the Minister:
hereupon comes this light regard of the word preached: hereupon comes this
petulancy, stubbornenesse and wildenesse (as I may say) of young people, and
profaneness of old people of all sorts; yea upon this cause comes this
general corruption of manners and Epicurish living.

To conclude this point, if we do consider with our selves how the men of God
dealt personally with Kings, Princes, false-prophets and Priests, as Eliah with
Ahab, Elisha with Iehoram, Jeremy with Pashur, Amos with Amaziah, Micah with
Zidkijah, John the Baptist with Herod, our Savior Chrst with the Scribes and
Pharisees, Stephen with the high Priests and Elders, Peter with the people of
the Jews: Saint Paul with the Apostle Peter, and the same Apostle with Elimas
and the high- Piest; we have great encouragement, and confidence given us to
apply the Scriptures to the corruption of the times to the worlds end, which is
only the true and profitable preaching, such as the Lord has commanded; yea
if we shall also consider the plainness, uprightness, sobriety, devotion,
humility and reverence to Gods word of Christians in the primitive Church
(comparing our selves I say with them) we shall find our selves too generally
to be but slippes and counterfeits, rather the Apes of good Christians, then
good Christians indeed, being full of pride, dissimu ation and craft, commonly
termed policy; full of intemperancie, mockers of true devotion, stubborn
and wilful, full of subtlety to serve our own worldly turns and uses, of
the word it self. But if we compare our selves with our selves, these foul
corruptions in these latter times will little appear to us, seeing that in
these days we can so cunningly varnish over, yea beautify sin with
counterfeit Christianity and heathenish civility. And this is the cause why
the common sort so call for the Gospel, but love not to hear the law, their
consciences foaming up mite and dirt which the world sees not, and because the
hard heart will not humble it self to walk with God, being of unbridled
affections; therefore it seeks for false comforts, soothings and flatterings
in the Gospel (the leaven of malice not being purged out) the law being a
bondage to them and a heavy burden, whereas it is a law of liberty to the
Godly: and for the deeper blinding and hardening of themselves, they lay false
imputations upon the true and plaine-dealing Shepherd, as rashness,
indiscretion, too much stricktnesse and preciseness, affectation of
singularity, phantasticalnesse, by which terms they show themselves like to
the bloody and earthly Edomites (for so the word signified) which under the
title of circumcision, and the children of Abraham, claimed to themselves the
chief religion, and hated the true worshippers. Psalm. 137. 7. Remember Psalm.
137 7.
the children of Edom O Lord, in the day of Jerusalem, how they said down with
it, down with it, even to the ground.

The fourth point herein to be observed, is how this particular application
ought to be taken. It ought to be taken as the word of the Lord, and therefore
in good part, whether it be with us or against Luke 4. 22. 28
us, howsoever pharisaicall people, that are like the Nazarens, Luke 4. 22. 28.
do hear the word applied, not as the word of God, (as indeed it is) but as
the word of man, contrary to the practice of 1. These. 2. 13.
the faithful Thessalonians. 1 These. 2. 13. To this purpose the Jews said well
(had they done as well) to Jeremy, Ier. 42 6.
Ier. 42. 6. Whether it be good or evil, we will obey the voice of the Lord,
to whom we send thee, that it may be well with us, when we obey the voice of
the Lord our God.

For the further explication hereof, there are but two sorts of people, some
good, some bad, some sheep, some goats: The sheep do hear and follow Ioh.
10. 27.
the voice of the shepherd. Ioh. 10. 27. the goatish hear with the outward
ear, but they go away into strange ways and uneven bypath. Now as touching
the word and the particular application thereof, the wicked in some things
agree with the godly, in some things they differ.

First civil wicked men, whose lives and conuersations are according to their
own hearts lusts, can very well abide doctrines and general discourses,
especially those which flow with human learning and eloquence, for there the
natural ear finds some matter to feed upon.

Again the wickedest man can indifferently abide two particular applications,
the first is of instruction, for instruction presupposes virtue, and stirs up
to good life, which the worst would gladly have the name of, and so for praise
and reward-sake will list to it: the second is of comfort, and preaching of
peace, which none will refuse.

But here is the difference, when we come to make use of the doctrine, to
conuincement of sin, to reproof, and to correction, the hard-hearted and
impenitent sinner will at no hand abide it; such words sound in his ears like
Micahs in Ahabs, never good. Herein they differ from the godly, and leave them
alone to themselves. Now begin they to show their goatishnesse, to accuse their
shepherds of indiscretion, of malice, of private grudge, of believing false
reports, of particularizing and naming men in the Pulpit, when there is no such
matter intended or thought upon, and therefore they cannot with a patient eye
ever after look upon him.

But contrarily in whom there is the love and fear of God, and the hatred of
sin, which have denied themselves and worldly lusts, and warring against
their spiritual enemies, do desire the particular application of the word,
that their consciences, hearts and affections may be wrought upon in
particular, that they in particular may be stirred up and awaked, least they
fall into the deadly sleep of sin.

This particular applying strengthens them, incourageth them, and keeps the
enemy a far off, it weakeneth him, and daunteth him. This application is as
the trayning of Christian soldiers, and as it were a standing by them to tell
them how to ward the stroke, and to give the stroke, to avoid the assault, and
to give the onset. We are sluggish, sleepie, heavy, our eyes are ever down, I
mean our minds and affections are ever on the earth and earthly things; we
have need therefore not only to be called on, but often times to be rouzed,
iogged, pulled by the arms, and to be fet on our feet, for as much as that
original corruption, the world and the devil, are ever giving us Opium to
drink, that causes deadly sleep, if we take too much of it.

The godly that are grown to some good measure of perfection, for these
respects, as also that they desire that God alone may be glorified in the
earth; and for the love they bear to all men, do desire both conuincement,
reproof and correction of sin in time and season convenient: and they also
that are as yet but weak, yet true Christians, can with patience abide the
word as well against them, as with them. And how harsh, and distasteful soever
it be unto them; yet do they not cast it off, nor hate their pastors, no more
then gracious children cast off their parents admonitions, counsels and
commandments (though in most things they be not to their liking;) or do run
from them when they are reproved or corrected: though lewd servants and wicked
children do so, yet the loving child and good servant will not. As for
example: David in his place; being reproved by Nathan, and having heavy
judgments denounced against him for his sins, what does he? falls he to
excusing, defending and mittigating of his sin, like Saul, and turning it
lightly off as but an infirmity, as many mockers do now a days? Does he
scorn, grudge at and revile the Prophet? Does he accuse him of pride,
impudency, or indiscretion, or too much boldness for dealing thus plainly
with the King? No, but being stroke with fear and reverence of the true word
of the Lord, with compunction and sorrow for his sin, he makes humble and
penitent confession before the Lord, in verse 13. I have sinned against the
Lord. The like penitent, and humble answer gave the good King Ezechiah to Esaias,
chap. 39. reproouing him for showing ambitiously and vaine-gloriously all the
treasures of his kingdom to the Ambassadors of Babylon, and also threatening
the judgments of God upon him in his posterity for the same: The word of the
Lord, says he, is good, which thou have spoken. Wherein he shows his
humility to the word, his penitencie for his sin, and thankfulness to the
Lord for sparing him till his sons days. In the 1 Samuel 3. 18. When Samuel
had told to Ely the judgments which God had threatened to bring upon him and
his house for ever, for not chastning his sons wickedness, his answer is in
penitencie and humility; It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good;
and this has been always the practice of the godly, with penitent, meek,
humble and obedient hearts to yield themselves to the word of the Lord.

Now on the contrary, the wicked will acknowledge, reverence, or regard the
word of God no further then they may make use of it for their own carnal
turns, and so far forth as it is agreeable to them, otherwise they reject it
as superfluous and unprofitable for them. When the word, by the application
thereof, like a sovereign salve begins to work upon the conscience, heart,
affections and conversation of life, for their true and sound conversion, then
begin they to show forth the stubbornenesse, rebellion and hypocrisy that lay
hid in them, unknown to others, and even to their own deceitful hearts.

So long as the word concerns all, and in particular none, they acknowledge it
to be the word of God, but when it comes to be applied to the heart and
conscience in particular, then it is the word of man: the Preacher speaks them
of malice, of some false information, of his own uncharitable disposition, of
indiscreete zeal, or from a fantastical spirit, nothing can please them; he
must walk warily, he had need to be as wise as the Serpent, and as innocent
as the Dove, neither for all that can he escape mockes, by-words, or one
disgrace or other. Examples hereof we have in Ier. 43. 2. 3. Then spoke
Azariah, Iohanan, and all the proud men, saying to Jeremy, Thou speak
falsely: the Lord our God has not sent thee to say, go not into Egypt to
dwell there. 3. But Baruch the son of Neriah provoke thee against us, etc.
In the former chapter they beseeched Jeremy to pray to the Lord for them, that
the Lord might show unto them the way wherein they might walk, and what they
should do, promising, yea, taking God to witness that they would do
whatsoever the Lord commanded them by him.

Now after ten days the word of the Lord came to Jeremy, which Jeremy
faithfully declared unto them: That if they would dwell in their own land, the
Lord would build them, and not destroy them, plant them, and not root them
out, that he would be with them, to save and deliver them from the hand of
Pharao, but if they would go into Egypt for safety and protection, that then
the sword, famine and pestilence which they so feared should overtake them. Now
they hearing the commandment of the Lord to be contrary to their plot which
they had laid already, and preferring their own devises and policies before
the Lords will, they begin to find excuses and delays, thereby to shufle off,
and put away the commandment of the Lord, as plainly appears in these two
verses before alleged. Wherein observe, first that Hypocrites determine with
themselves what they will do, and how, and after what manner they will live,
even according to their own judgments, and after the imaginations of their
own hearts: and then in the second place, they will hear what the Lord says.
Now that which they think to be agreeable to them, they praise, commend, and
approve as the word of GOD; but when it dissenteth from them, and is contrary
to their own liking, when it conuinceth, reproves or touches them (as we
say) then it is the word of men, and not the word of the Lord: And for this
purpose they have excuses, arguments and reasons at will, for the confirming
and hardening of themselves in their own course and trade of life. Secondly,
observe herein that pride of heart is the cause of rebellion and contempt of
the Minister, and consequently of the Lord in his person, in these words (And
all the proud men.) Thirdly, observe the quality of secret hypocrisy, when it
is plainly and directly convinced and reproved in particular, it breaks
forth into open rage, laying imputations on the Minister, for the excuse and
hiding of it self, in these words, [Thou speak falsely.] Fourthly, observe
that Hypocrites will be counted good Christians, and call God their God, and
yet will despise their Pastors, and contemn the word of the Lord spoken by
them, (The Lord our God.) Fifthly, note the nature of Hypocrisy, they would
obey God, and embrace his word, if they were sure that his messengers spoke
truth: whereas indeed they are far from all obedience, (has not sent thee.)
Sixthly, note the common slanders and imputations of common Hypocrisy, (But
Baruch etc.) Another plain example hereof there is, 1 King. 22. 8. Iehesaphat
and Ahab being to fight against the King of Aram, for Ramoth Gilead, Iehosaphat
prayed him to ask counsel of the Lord; and so Ahab gathered together four
hundred false Prophets, which agreed all in one tale: For this is the
resolution of every false Prophet, to please; But these Prophets Iehosaphat
much regarded not, therefore he asked if there were never a Prophet of the
Lord; yes, says Ahab, there is yet one man, Micah the son of Imlah, but I
hate him, for he never prophesied good unto me. Likewise in Amos. 7. Amos
having prophesied destruction to the wicked King Jeroboam for his Idolatry and
other sins that accompany the same; the covetous King Amaziah accuses him
secretly to the King of conspiracy, but when by that way he prevailed not, he
assayed by another practice to stop his mouth, in the 12. and 13. verses. A
notable example hereof also there is in Luke 4. the Nazarens could willingly
here our Savior Christ read his text out of Esaias, and interpret the same
Scripture of himself; but when he came to reprove them for their infidilitie,
and prefers strangers before them, that should believe in him; they were
presently incensed with wrath and great indignation, and carried him out of the
city to the top of a rock to cast him down headlong.

Furthermore it was the common practse of the rebellious Israelites always to
lay slanders and false imputations upon the true Prophets, and to term them
false Prophets. If they prophesied of peace and prosperity, then they
generally believed them, and if some one or few were doubtful or distrustful,
yet they would not count them false Prophets; but if they convinced them or
reproved them for sin, denouncing vengeance upon them unless they repented,
then on the contrary, generally they counted them fals-Prophets, having them,
mocking them, giving them by-words, imprisoning them, stoning them, excepting
some very few.

If the false-Prophet spoke of peace, victory and prosperity, and the same
came not to pass, yet they were not punished (though by the law they were
commanded to stone such to death:) but when the true Prophets spoke of Gods
judgments for their sins, they were out of hand and without any delay
persecuted, imprisoned, murdered before the time of their trial came. As I
King. 22. 27. Micah must be kept in prison, and fed with the bread and water of
affliction till Ahab return from victory; because he prophesied destruction;
but the four hundred false-Prophets were at liberty both then and after. They
dealt scornefully and cruelly always with the Prophets of the Lord, but the
lying Prophets and flattering covetous Priests wanted no preferment, favor,
nor countenance, though their flatteries were never so gross and palpable.

FJNJS.

