THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD. A Sermon preached at Botterwike in Holland, near
Boston, in Lincolnshire. By THOMAS GRANGER, Preacher of Gods word there.

JOHN 95. As long as I am in the World, I am the light of the World. LONDON:
Printed by T. S. for Thomas Pauier, and are to be sold at his shop in Yuie
lane. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Mr. THOMAS LEVENTHORPE Esquire, Son and heir to
the renowned Knight, Sir JOHN LEVENTHORPE, T. G. wishes all happiness, and
eternal blessedness.
RIGHT Worshipful. The special affection that I bear to that lovely Olive,
whereof you are a special branch, and the duty, wherein I ever remain obliged
unto it, having heretofore received pleasant nutriture from thence, and
delightful refreshing in the shade thereof, have often solicited me by one
means or other, to show and testify my thankful mind to the same, and to
your self in particular. Silver and gold have I none, nor any costly present,
but such as I have freely received, I freely offer unto you. The water is a
common element; yet when one Synaeta having nothing to offer to Artaxerxes
passing by, he took water out of the river Cyrus, with both his hands, and
offered it to the king, who accepted it as a special gift, (as Aelianus
records) first, because water is the best element. Secondly, because it was
taken out of Cyrus. So the Air and the Light are common, and I not having any
gift to present you withal, am glad to offer the Light unto you, which I hope
shall find special acceptance with you. First, because that of many lights this
is the best light, giving light to all other lights of the natural soul,
without which they are utter darkness, even as the lesser lights of the
firmament are but dark and dead bodies without the light, and vital influence
of the Sun. Secondly, because this light arises, and shines out of another
world then is either the Macrocosme or Microcosme, to wit, the spiritual
world, which is the word and Church of God: But though this light be common,
because it is offered to all, and shines unto all, yet it is received of few,
because dark earthy bodies cannot receive the light: in which respect it
becomes a proper and special light, and I make no doubt, but that you are
one of those few, who delight in this light: and therefore I trust will also
accept this as a special gift, which is precious and special in it self,
though it be not specially, but vulgarly set forth by me, to whom the
exhibiting, and showing thereof to the world is also committed. The Lord
protect and conduct you in the way everlasting.

From Botterwike in Holland, near Boston, in Lincon. 1616. Your worships to
command ever in the Lord THOMAS GRANGER.

THE LIGHT OF THE WORLD.
JOHN 8. 12. Then spoke JESUS again to them, saying, I am the light of the
world: he that follows me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the
light of life.
THESE words contain a Sermon of our Savior Christ, preached to the Jews in
the Temple: Wherein two things are principally to be considered, the Preface
and the principal Scope. The Preface is in the former words [Then spoke Jesus
to them etc.] Wherein consider these circumstances: First, The person speaking
[Iesus spoke:] his speaking is amplified by a note of sedulitie and oftennesse
in speaking [Spake again.] Secondly, The persons to whom he spoke, [to them]
viz. the people of the Jews, flocking together about him, not to the
Pharisees. Thirdly, The time when, [then] that is, either after this time when
the Pharisees had tempted him, upon occasion of a woman taken in adultery, or
else in the great and last day of the feast of Tabernacles, as some think; but
whether, it mattereth not much.

Whereas it is said, that he spoke to them again, hence we observe, and learn
that Christ was most diligent, laborious, and painful in his calling, being
in all things answerable to the commandment and will of his father. He was
often weary, hungry, thirsty with travailing, and preaching; neither fainting,
nor failing therein through want of earthly reward (as the manner of earthly men
is) nor discouraged therefrom with the fear of his enemies In the Chapter
aforegoing the Jews seeking to kill him, he travailed into Galilee, and from
thence about the middle of the Feast to Jerusalem again, where he taught
continually in the Temple till the end of the last day of the Feast, then he
went into the mount Oliuet to rest and refresh himself, and early in the
morning he came again into the Temple to preach. By which History, and many
other places, it is apparent, that Christ was continually employed in the
actions of his calling. Hereupon it is that John says, Cap. 21. 25. If all
John 21. 25.
things were written that Jesus spoke, and did, I suppose the world could
hardly contain the books, that should be written of him: which words he
uttered out of the consideration, and reuiew of Christ's great and daily pains
in teaching, preaching, and working miracles, which he thought could not more
fitly be expressed than by such an hyperbolicall kind of speaking. Likewise,
Ioh. 4 34. Christ was wearied with travail, and thirsty, having neither
drunk, nor eaten any thing since the morning, it being now midday, therefore
his Disciples John 4. 3 4.
prayed him to eat; but he answered, I have meat to eat that ye know not of:
My meat is, that I may do the will of him that sent me, and finish his
work. As if he had said, though meat be now necessary for me, I having
fasted thus long, yet is the doing of my fathers will, and finishing of his
work more necessary; therefore occasion of preaching, by the coming of the
Samaritans, at this instant, being offered, I must forget bodily hunger, I must
not now regard bodily meat, but I must redeem the present occasion, with
neglect of my body and bodily sustenance. Likewise, Math. 26. 55. I sat daily
Math. 26. 55.
teaching in the Temple among you, etc.

Hereby the Ministers of Christ, are taught by his example to be laborious and
painful in the faithful discharge of their office, in the destruction of the
kingdom of sin and Satan, and in gathering and building up the Church and
kingdom of Christ, seeing that he has sent them in like manner as his father
sent him, as himself says. In Ioh. 4. 35. Christ exhorts his Disciples to
perform the duties of faithful laborers in the Lords harvest, to be careful
in reaping his fruits; his argument is drawn from the comparison of earthly
haruest-labour. Say ye not, there are yet four months, and Ioh. 4. 35.
then comes the harvest? etc. As if he should say, you are so careful for
this earthly harvest, that you count the months, the weeks, and days till
harvest come, so hungarly do you look for it, and painefully labor in it;
but the Lords harvest, for which you ought to be as careful, is even now at
hand, for ye may see the regions already white to the harvest, therefore you
must not now be so careful for bodily meat, as to labor in the Lords
harvest, and to delight your souls in his work doing, even in reaping and
gathering souls into his barn, redeeming all times and occasions with loss
of your meat, drink, rest, sleep, pleasures, etc. even as earthly men do in
the reaping and ining of their fruits. Furthermore he inforceth this
exhortation by an argument drawn from the effect; namely, the reward of the
haruest-labour, verse 36. He that reapeth receives wages, and gathers fruit
to eternal life. The wages is eternal Dan. 12. 3.
life, and the believing souls are eternal, Dan. 12. 3. They that turn many
to righteousness, shall shine as the John 15. 16.
stars, for ever and ever. Ioh. 15. 16. I have chosen you, and ordained you,
that ye go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit remain, i. to eternal
life. Hence it is, that Paul says, 1. These 2. 19.
1 These. 2. 19. What is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing, are not you
even it, in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? yes, you are
our glory and joy. The Lord inioyneth Jeremy this duty, with denunciation of
vengeance Ier. 1. 17.
annexed, if he failed therein. Ier. 1. 17. Trusse up thy loins, and arise and
speak unto them all that I command thee, be not afraid of their faces, least I
destroy thee before them. 1. Cor. 9. 16.
The consideration hereof is a spur to Paul, exciting him to the serious
performance of this duty. 1 Cor. 9. 16. Necessity is laid upon me, and woe is
unto me, if I preach not the Gospel: And hereupon is it, that he so
straightly 2. Tim. 4. 1. 2.
charge Timothy, 2 Timothy 4. 1. 2. I charge thee before God, and before the
Lord Jesus Christ, which shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing,
and in his Kingdom: Preach the word, be instant, in season and out of season,
etc. These considerations of the reward on the one side, and of the punishment
on the other, stirred up the Apostles to preach the Gospel with all boldness
and constancy. Act. 3. 14. 15. Act 4 13. 19. 20. Act. 5. 29. 30. Act* 7. 51.
52. Yea, joyfully to suffer afflictions, Act. 5 41. They rejoiced that they
were counted worthy to suffer rebuke for the name of Christ. 2 Cor. 11. 23. to
29.

Secondly, this teaches every man to labor in his calling carefully and
conscionably, approving himself in all things to God, to a good conscience*
and to good men, Romans 12. 6. 7. 8. Ephesians. 4. 28. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10. Genesis 3. 19.
Genesis 31. 6.

Furthermore, whereas it is said that he spoke to them, it is to be understood
of the multitude, though the Pharisees in the next verse make reply. For Christ
preached not to the Pharisees, but by accident, some of them ever being amongst
the people that came to hear him, as spies, to watch him, and to catch some
thing from his mouth, that they might have whereof to accuse him, Luc. 11 54.
Therefore, because they were but dogs, and Luc. 11. 54.
swine, i. contemners, and persecuters of the Word, utterly forsaken of God, and
left to themselves, he casts not the holy things of God, the pearls of the
Gospel, before them, Math. 7. 6. but in all places where he has Math. 7. 6*
to deal with them, he either conuinceth them, or confuteth them, or reprooueth
them, or curses them, neither instructing, exhorting, nor dehorting them,
which had been in vain, and to no purpose. Thus much of the Preface.

Concerning the Scope, It is an exhortation, which is not simply propounded,
but employed in the reason thereof. The exhortation is [follow me:] It is
enforced by two reasons, the first negative, [He that follows me shall not
walk in darkness.] The second affirmative [but shall have the light of
life:] These reasons are confirmed by their principle or ground, [I am the
Light of the World.] Of these four things in order as they lie in the text.

I. I am the Light of the World.
It is an usual thing in the Scriptures to represent spiritual and heavenly
things, by bodily and earthly things, that therein, as in glasses, we may
behold heavenly things, although obscurely, which notwithstanding we cannot
otherwise perceive, and see immediately, being too glorious, and vehement
objects for us. Therefore as we cannot behold the light of the Sun in the Sun,
but by reflection thereof in the Moon, in the stars, in the water, or other
bright body, or else by refraction thereof in the mistie air: so the soul,
while it is in the body, hears, sees, understands, imagines, with the
body, and in a bodily manner; and therefore is not capable of such hearing,
seeing, understanding, imagining, as it shall be when it is separate from the
body. 1. Cor. 13. 12.
Hence it is that Paul says, 1 Cor. 13. 12. We now see through a glass,
darkely: We conceive of Heaven by a City, whose walls, pauements and mansions
are of gold, pearl, crystal, Reu. 21.
emerald, etc. Reu. 21* We conceive of Hell by a dark dungeon, a stinging
serpent, a gnawing worm, a burning river Esaias 30. 33.
of brimstone, Esaias 30. 33. So here the wisdom, love, mercy, and goodness
of God in saving his elect, revealed by, and in Jesus Christ to the world, is
call ed Light.

And because light and darkness are much used in the Scriptures, I will
speak a little of this material, and bodily light; because it gives light,
and understanding not only to that, whatsoever may be spoken of in this text,
but to many other places of Scripture.

The Light is in substance clean, pure, beautiful, subtle, simple, uniform,
void of all mixture, free from outward pollution, and may more fitly be
compared to the substance of the highest Heaven, which is the tabernacle, or
Sanctum Sanctorum of God, and his Angels, than to any earthly thing. Such is
the glory of the light, that the eye cannot behold it, being in a subject of
nature like it self, as the Sun is.

Again, the light is pleasant, delightful, cheerful, comfortable, joyful,
hopeful. For the light is the life of the world, and of every living creature,
and the absence of light is the destruction of every creature. It is the life
of the world in a double respect: first, in respect of the vital virtue:
secondly, in respect of the shining.

1. The vital power of the light is dispersed throughout all nature, from the
highest Heaven, to the center of the earth, comprehending, and containing all
things in it. And though it gives not light to the eye in all things, yet it
shines inuisibly in every thing* whose virtue sustaineth, inuisibly, sense,
motion, and life in all creatures, and without which the virtues, and
operations of the stars above, and elements below, are fruitless, liuelesse
and dead: so that Light being a material creature August. Basil.
in it self, is the common life, and form of every creature. And this is the
light that God created the first day.

II. The light is the life of the World, in respect of the shining* for if
there were no light, all things should be hid in darkness, and invisible, and
therefore could nothing move without stumbling, and falling, neither know
whether to go, Ioh. 12. 35. And what could be Ioh. 12. 35.
looked for but sudaine death? Again, without light we should have no knowledge
of any thing: the firmament, and elements, with all their creatures should be
invisible to us, there should be nothing but blindness, ignorance, fear,
horror, sorrow, despair, we should be far worse than the prisoner that lies
in the bottom of a nastie dungeon: Yea, if the light of the Sun were not,
the World should be a very picture, and resemblance of Hell, a confusion of
beasts, fowls, and men, every one treading other under foot, yea all things
should be mingled together into one Chaos, or mass: there should be nothing
but hunger, thirst, cold, nakedness, fears, terrors, mourning, and wailing,
continual dying, one thing devouring another. Consider therefore what is the
necessity, excellency, glory and felicity of the light, which is the life of
the World. Hence it is that light is used in the Scripture to signify good,
and darkness evil. Light signifies the glory of Heaven, the essence, and
holiness of God, the son of God, the doctrine of the Gospel, natural
understanding, knowledge, and wisdom in the mind, the knowledge of the glory
and wisdom of God in the salvation of the elect, holiness of life,
Christians, felicity, and prosperity, life. Contrarily, darkness signifies
Hell, the pains and of Hell, sin and wickedness, the blindness and
ignorance of man since the fall, sinful and lustful living, the Gentiles that
know not God, calamity, and misery, death. These things are generally
signified by Light and Darkness.

But for the clearing of this particular place, the light has four special
significations. First, It signifies God, that is, the Trinity in the Unity.
Secondly, It signifies the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, that is the Unity
in the Trinity. Thirdly, it signifies the Doctrine of the Gospel. Fourthly,
it signifies Christians, and Christian life.

1 Ioh. 1. 5.
Concerning the first signification; It is said, 1 Ioh. 1. 5. God is Light, and
in him is no darkness. As if he should say, God is holy. This holiness of
the Divine nature stands: First, in the life, and incomprehensible essence,
or being of God: Secondly, in his other essential properties, as his power,
wisdom, justice, mercy, goodnesses Thirdly, in his unspeakable, complete,
celestial joy, blessedness, and felicity. And as God is all light, so there
is no light without him, for all that is without him, is ignorance, darkness,
and impuritie.

Concerning the second signification. I. God the father is the light of the
world, but this light in him is invisible 1 Timothy 6. 16.
to the world, and to Angels, 1 Timothy 6. 16. Who only has immortality, and
dwells in the Light, which none can attain Ioh. 1. 18. Wis. 9. 13.
unto. Ioh. 1. 18. No man has seen God at any time. Wis. 9. 13. What man is
he, that can know the Counsel of God; or who can think what the will of God
is? Also, No man knows the father but the son, etc. Therefore this light of
the world in the person of the father is hid and invisible.

II. God the Son is the light of the world, by communication from the father,
and in him is the light, and life of the world manifest, and visible, which was
hid in God from everlasting. Ioh. 5. 36. As the father has life in himself,
so has he given to the Son to have life in himself. For this cause is he
called the image of the invisible God, and brightness of his glory, whose
glorious nature, wisdom, and goodness shines in the son, who with the
father, is one and the same God. Heb. 1. 3. Hence it is, that he is called the
wisdom of the father, because he perfectly knows all secrets hidden in the
father. And he is in special manner called the Word, because he reuealeth
these secrets, and this light to the Nazian in orat. de filio Dei. Basil. in
praefat. ante euang. Ioh.
World, in man's nature, and by man's voice. Ioh. 1. 18. No man has seen God at
any time: the son which is in the bosom of the father, he has declared him.

The Son therefore is the light, and life of men in a double respect. I.
Christ is the light and life of man in the work of creation: for by
participation of his life, and light, he received life, motion, sense, and
knowledge. Ioh. 1. 4. In it was life, and the life was the light of men. Ioh.
1. 4.


II. He is the life, and light of man in the work of redemption: in which
respect, here he calls himself the light of the World. The former natural
life, and light, which we received from him in the creation, is turned into
darkness and death, through the envy of the Devil, and sin. So that
naturally we are without God, without light, without life, lying in the
darkness of ignorance, and the pollution of sin. Ezech. 16. 4. Romans 1. 18.
Now therefore, seeing that we are darkness and not light, death and not life,
even dead in trespasses and sins. Ephesians. 2. 1. God out of the hidden
treasures Ephesians. 2. 1.
of his wisdom, goodness, and mercy, has quickened, revived, and begotten us
again, by application of his lively light, communicated from before the
beginning of the world to the son, and participated to us by, and through the
son in the world. The son therefore is the light* and life of the world: he is
the wisdom and word of the father revealing, declaring, and applying life and
light to the world, and for this purpose the word was made flesh, and dwelt
among us, 1 Ioh. 1. 1. That which was from the 1 Ioh. 1. 1.
beginning (even Christ, God eternal) which we have heard (even the same
Christ made man) which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon,
and our hands have handled, of the word of life declare we unto you. The Son
therefore i^ our life, light, and felicity: he alone of God is made unto us,
wisdom, righteousness, 1 Cor. 1. 30.
sanctification and redemption, 1 Cor. 1. 30. This place is a plain exposition
of these words, [I am the light of the World;] for here the Apostle excludes
a man wholly from himself, as nothing but darkness and death, and sets
forth our spiritual, and lively being, and manner of being in Christ. I. He
is our wisdom: All saving and true wisdom is in Christ, for God has fully
reueiled himself in Christ, and by him to us, Colos. 2. 3.
and by no other means, Colos. 2. 3. In him are hid all the treasures of
Wisdom and knowledge, and if all be in him, then without him is nothing, II.
He is made our righteousness, that is to say, by him, and in him, alone we are
accepted and beloved of God* For, first he alone by himself has purged our
sins: Secondly, his obedience alone is imputed to us for righteousness. In
which two things stands the righteousness of faith, by which God is our God,
and we are his people. III. He is our sanctification: By nature we are profane,
without God in the world, a mass of filthiness, and impuritie, Genesis 8. 21.
Esaias 64. 6. Job. 14. 4. but by the spirit of Christ, we are mortified, and
renewed in affections* will, and even in the spirits of our minds* Romans 8. 10.
Ephesians. 4. 22. 23. 24. IIII. He is our redemption: As if he should say, by him
alone we are redeemed both from the bondage of sin, and misery that comes
by sin. This redemption is begun in this life, being delivered from the
bondage of corruption, and accusation of an evil conscience, and perfected in
the end of this life, when the soul is separate from the burden of the flesh;
but consumate, and finished in the resurrection of the last day, when body and
soul being reunited and joined together, shall remain for ever with Christ in
his kingdom of glory.

Now, that which the Apostle says there, that Christ is our wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification and redemption, is all one with that, which
Christ says here, I am the light of the world: Therefore if any man desire to
know more wisdom, or other wisdom, more righteousness, or other
righteousness, more redemption, or other, in whole, or in the least part, let
him hear the Apostle, Colos. 2. 8* 9. Beware least there be any man, that
Colos. 2. 8. 9.
spoil you through philosophies and vain deceit through the traditions of
men, according to the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ: for in him
dwells all the fullness of the godhead, bodily.

III. The holy Ghost is the light of the world, Though God the Son be the
wisdom and word of the father, giving light and life to the spiritual world,
that is, the company of the regenerate, even as the Sun gives light and life
to the material world: yet the world, that is the unregenerate, living in the
darkness of ignorance and sin, do not comprehend, nor receive this light
of life, no more then the dead eye, or body is beautified by the light of the
Sun to see and live therewith. Ioh. 1. 5. the light shines in the darkness,
and the darkness Ioh. 1. 5.
comprehended it not. 11. He came unto his own, and Esaias 53. 1.
his own received him not. Esaias 53. 1. Who will believe our Ioh. 12. 37.
report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord reueiled? Ioh. 12. 37. Though he
did many miracles before them, yet they believed not in him. So that the father
is the fountain of light, the Son is light begotten of the Light, and took
flesh on him to manifest, and participate this light to us, and the holy Ghost
is light proceeding from both, being sent of the Father and the Son to
enlighten us. But the Son is the light of the World in a more peculiar manner,
because he is Emanuell, and in, and by him, is the work of our redemption
wrought, but yet with the cooperation of the father, and the holy Ghost, as if
three men should weaue a coat, and the third wear it. So that the Trinity in
the Unity, and the Unity in the Trinity, is the light of the World.

Concerning the third signification. The Doctrine of the Gospel, is the light
of the World. There be sundry Doctrines, and arts in the World, which are
lights also; but they are natural lights, not lights of life; there is no
virtue in these lights to quicken the mortal body, or to revive the dead
soul: the Doctrine of the Gospel is only Ioh. 6. 63.
the light of life. Ioh. 6. 63. The words that I speak to you, are spirit and
life. Ioh. 17. 3. Psalm. 119. 105. Ioh. 24. 13.

Concerning the fourth signification: Christians, and Christian life are the
light of the World, and especially 2 Cor. 4. 6.
the Ministers of the Word. 2 Cor. 4. 6. God that commanded the light to shine
out of darkness, is he which has shined in our hearts, to give the light of
the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus. Math. 5. 14.
Ephesians. 5. 8.
Math. 5. 14. Ye are the light of the World. Ephesians. 5. 8. Ye were once
darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord, that is, you are now enlightened
by the word of truth, Phil. 2. 15.
let your conversation be according to the truth, Phil. 2. 15. Be blameless
and pure, and the sons of God, without reproof in the midst of a naughty
and crooked nation, among Pro. 4. 18.
whom ye shine, as lights in the world* Prou. 4. 18. The way of the righteous
shines as the light, more and more unto the perfect day. Hereupon the works
of the regenerate, Romans 13. 12.
are called the works of light. Romans 13. 12. Put on the armor of light, i.
honest behavior.

Notwithstanding all that has been said, we must know, that although Christ,
the Gospel, and Christian life, be the light of the world, yet the world,
namely the unregenerate, comprehend not, nor see this light, because they take
darkness to be light, and light to be darkness.

Know therefore, that as Christ was reputed in the world, so were the Prophets
before him, and the Apostles after him, and in such sort are the true
Ministers, and true believers esteemed in the world. Mark what Esaias says of
Christ* chap. 8. 18. I and the children which thou have given me, are as signs
and wonders in Israel, i. as monsters. As David says, Behold I am become a
monster unto many. And John says of him, Ioh. 1. 10. He was in the Ioh. 1. 10.
world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. John 9. 29.
Christ himself says, Mat. 11. 19. Mat. 11. 19.
The son of man is counted a glutton, a drinker of wine, a companion of
Publicans and sinners. Mat. 27. 63. He is counted a deceiuer. Mat. 9. 34. A
sorcerer. Ioh. 8. 48. A Samaritane, and to have the devil. Mark. 3. 21. His
kinsfolks lay Ioh. 9. 24.
hold on him, supposing him to be beside himself. Ioh. 9. 24, The Pharisees
know him to be a sinner. If Christ was thus reputed of, who never sinned, and
in whose person, words and works, the Majesty, power, and glory of God
appeared, yea through which, as through a crystal, his divinity shined forth
to the world; how much more then the children of God that are clogged with
infirmities? No marvel is it, though they be counted the vilest, and most
contemptible persons of all other. See the cause hereof. Wisd. 2. 22, They do
not understand the mysteries of God, nor can discern the honor of the souls,
that are faultlesse. The cause of this ignorance and going astray is, verse. 21.
Their Ioh. 3. 19.
own wickedness has blinded them. Ioh. 3. 19. This is the condemnation of
the world, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness more then
light, because their deeds were evil. The wicked hate the light because it
discouers sin, which they love; again the righteous love the light, because
it discouers sin, which they hate, and manifests the right way unto them,
into which they desire to enter, and wherein they delight to walk.

The world knew not the Prophets that were before Christ. But what part or
people of the world? The Pharisees, Amorites, Ammonites, Moabites, Edomites? No
marvel if these knew them not. But the Church of God, the Israelites knew them
not: yea, they were worse then the Aliants. For the Ninevites persecuted not
Jonas, but Jonas 3. 4. 5. etc.
believed God. Jonas. 3* 4 5. etc. But the Israelites persecuted all the Prophets
with derision, contempt, imprisonment, death. Act. 7. 52. Which of the Prophets
have not your Acts 7. 52.
fathers persecuted, and they have slain them that showed before of the
coming of that just, etc. Which were the slaughter-houses of the Prophets, and
Saints, before Christ? even Samaria and Jerusalem, Mat. 23. 37. Even Jerusalem,
where was the Temple and worship of God, Ezech. 16. 46.
where above all places in the world, Gods name was called upon. Ezec. 16. 46.
Thy eldest sister is Samaria, thy younger sister is Sodom.

Acts 5. 28.
Again, the world, knew not the Apostles, that were after Christ. In Acts 5.
28. the preaching of the Gospel is counted sedition, and rebellion. In verse
38. 39. Gamaliel a Doctor of the Law doubts whether it be of God, or of men,
comparing the Apostles to Theudas and Judas of Galile, that made insurrection
in the days of tribute. Acts 24. 5.
In Acts 24. 5. Paul is counted a pestilent fellow, a moouer of sedition, a
maintainer of the sect of the Nazarites, In the verse. 14. his doctrine is
called Heresy, chap. 26. 44. Madness. 1 Cor. 4. 13.
1. Cor. 4. 13. We are counted the of-scourings of al things. And John the
Baptist, that came in the way of righteousness, is said to have the devil.

In the primitive Church what evils soever happened to the City, or provinces
of Rome, whether famine, pestilence, earthquakes, wars, unseasonable
weather, the Christians were thought to be the causes thereof: whereupon rose
great persecutions; whereas indeed they themselves were the causes thereof,
which by reason of their unbelief, and malice, brought these judgments of God
upon they own heads. And herein note the condition of this blind world, it
always has been and is suspicious of the truth, and the true profession
thereof, fearing and dreading the same, as an enemy to their peace, and safety.
Worldly peace, rest, safety, liberty, prosperity is all that the carnal man
seeks for, or cares for, making the end of their own doings and Gods doings
also, the rest, ease, and pleasures of their bodies, and the pompous gloryfying
of their persons.

Whatsoever is above this, and for God, they take to be against them, because
they are against God, though not in outward show, yet in spirit, yea, making
themselves their own Idols, Ioh. 11. 48. If we let him alone, all men Ioh. 11.
48.
will believe in him, and the Romans will come and take away both our place,
and the Nation. These worldly Politicians, whose policy was not guided nor
seasoned with grace, are afraid of Christ and Christian profession. If we let
him thus alone, say they* all men will believe him to be the Prophet and
Messiah that should come, and so make him King: which when Caesar hears, he
will come with an invincible host against us, and utterly destroy this City,
and the whole nation: Therefore our safest course is, by some means to plot
his death: which plot and which means was the cause of the same destruction
that they feared: for the Roman Emperor came, and took away their place and
nation, because they slew the son of God, and persecuted the Gospel. These
wicked wretches never feared that their infidelity, pride, covetousness
oppression, hypocrisy, should be the causes of their ruin, but they feared
the Gospel, and godly life. Again, Acts 5. 24.
Act 5. 24. The chief Priest and Saduces had put the Apostles in prison, but
an Angel delivered them in the night, and commanded them to preach in the
Temple the next day. Now the chief Priest and the Captain of the Temple and
the high Priests, hearing what was done, doubted of them whereunto this would
grow. These carnal and graceless politicians regarding only the establishing
of their place, and of themselves, and of all things for themselves, feared an
alteration, and doubted whether it would in the end prove to be with them or
against them. And because indeed that it could not but be against them (for the
preaching of Jesus to be the son of God, the Prince and Savior of the world
must needs convince them of rebellion and murder, to their utter disgrace,
shame, and confusion, among all the people) therefore they labored by all
means to murder the Apostles, and to quench the light of the Gospel. In like
sort very many in these times, hanging between Popery and protestancy, doubt,
and have long doubted what this gear will grow to in the end: In the mean
time not regarding at all what their unbelief, pride, oppression,
covetousness, epicurisme, and mocking will grow to.

Furthermore, as the world in all times and ages heretofore has not known the
straight paths of God; so in these present days of ours the true and right
profession of Christianity is counted of many puritanisme, and preciseness,
phantasticalnesse, affectation of singularity, and hypocrisy. True it is
indeed, that as there are true Preachers, and true believers, so Satan stirs up
counterfeits, that have an outward show and resemblance of them, but are not
purged from their inward filthiness: These are they that worldlings stumble
at, concluding thus, even so are they all, therefore their profession is but a
kind of sect; and to follow the common course, and practice of the world, is
the surest and safest way. Here Satan has his desire. Again if any godly man
that has always made conscience of his ways, shall offend, though of mere
infirmity, or occasioned by some strong temptation, but yet so as he may justly
be taxed, why then the matter is now out of all doubt; both he and all of his
rank are hypocrites, and none else: such is the blindness of the world, and
their praeiudicate opinion of the children of God. But now to conclude this
first part, let me leave this as a bone for the world to gnaw on, that
stumbling blocks shall ever be cast before the feet of the wicked, yet shall
the lantern of Gods word shine unto them, to guide them without stumbling or
erring; notwithstanding stumble they will, and fall down, even to the breaking
of their neck; for their own wickedness blinds them, yea and they do
wilfully out of tbe hardness of their hearts close their eyes against the
ways of truth, because the ways of error, death, and destruction are more
pleasant unto them. Thus much of the principle or ground of the reasons
enforcing the exhortation, which follows next in order to be spoken of.

II. He that follows me.
There are sundry sorts of followers. I. Young gentlemen, that are trained up
for education sake under great personages, and for experience, countenance, and
preferment sake in the world, are called their followers. II. They that hold on
some sect of the Philosophers schools, are called their followers. III. They
that fashion and conform themselves to the example of any man that excels
in any faculty, are called his followers, but these are secular followers, and
not pertinent to this place.

When Christ the light and life of the world preached the Gospel of salvation
to the world, in the outward form and appearance of the Prophets that were
before him, and of his Apostles and ministers after him, confirming his
doctrine with miracles, he had diverse followers. I. Some followed him to be
cured of their diseases, and infirmities, Mat. 15. 30. Great multitudes came,
having Mat. 15. 30.
with them the halt, blind, dumb, maimed, etc. Thus the ten leapers followed
him, and especially the nine, that returned not to give God praise. Luke 17.
17. II. Some* followed Luke 17. 17.
him to gaze on him and his miracles, and for this purpose Herod was glad when
Pilate had sent him to him, having been desirous of a long season to see him,
because he had heard many things of him, and trusted to see some Luke 23. 8.
sign done by him. Luke 23. 8. III. Some followed him for their bellies sake,
as many do in these days. Thus Judas followed him; not because he loved him,
and embraced his doctrine in sincerity, but because he was a thief, and Mat.
8. 19.
had the bag, and bare that which was given. John 12. 6. Thus the Scribe
followed him. Mat. 8. 19. Master I will follow thee whither soever thou go.
He imagined in his earthly heart, as did Judas and the people of the Jews,
that Christ should in the end be crowned King of the Jews, and that he would
prefer and advance his followers, as earthly Princes use to do. Therefore
Christ shapes him an answer accordingly, verse 20. The foxes have holes and the
birds of the heaven have nests, but the Son of Man has not where to rest his
head; consequently he has nothing at all wherewith to gratify his followers
and welwillers. Thus also a great multitude followed him over Ioh. 6. 26.
the sea of Tiberias, and from thence back to Capernaum, John 6. 26. Verily,
verily, I say unto you, you seek me not because of the miracles, but because
of the loaves that ye ate, and were filled. Fourthly, some followed him of envy
to entangle him, in his speechs, as did the Pharisees, Scribes, Sadduces,
Lawyers, and the Herodians, which thought that Herod was the Christ. These are
carnal and hypocritical followers, which neither are meant of here in this
place.

The true following of Christ, which here he speaks of, is expressed by
diverse similitudes in the Scripture. Ioh. 10. 21.
John 10. 21. My sheep here my voice, and I know them, and they follow me,
etc. where hearing signifies Faith, and following Obedience. In other
countries the shepherds drive not their sheep, but they call them and they
follow them. Every flock knows the voice of their own shepherd, by often
hearing him, and they follow him, but after a strange voice they will not
follow: Even so Christ's sheep, the elect, hear his word, they know it and
acknowledge it, and are obedient to it, that is, they suffer themselves to be
ruled, and governed by their chief shepherd Jesus Christ, speaking to them
and calling them to him in his word, yea clocking them together as the hen does
her chickens. Mat. 23. 31. But mark the cause why they hear and obey him, in
these words (And I know them.) This knowing is not only understood of Gods
foreknowledge, whereby he knew who were his from before all times, but of his
knowing of them effectually in time. I call it effectual knowledge when the
elect are possessed of this knowing or acknowledging them, by the inward
calling of his spirit. And this assurance of Gods knowing them, acknowledging
and owning them, is the cause why they know and acknowledge him, and are
delighted with his word.

Again, this true following of Christ is farther expressed in Ephesians. 5. 1.
Therefore be ye followers of God, as dear Ephesians. 5. 1.
children. This verse is a conclusion of an exhortation of the last end of the
verse before going, forgive ye one another, even as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven you: Therefore be ye followers, etc. Children we know do imitate
their parents, not only in deeds and words, but even in the affections of
their hearts, and imaginations of their minds, resembling them inwardly, as
they do outwardly; so that a man may say, this is right the fathers child, or
the father will never be dead whiles the child lives. Now the reason hereof
is, because he has received the spirit of generation from the father, which
frames, fashioneth, and works him into the image, similitude, identity or
selfenesse (as I may say) of his father: And this is a dear child, because
the father does not only love his child, but himself also in the child; and
the child not only loves his father, but himself in the father; so that the
one cannot hate the other, unless he hate himself; and never man hated his
own flesh* Therefore this union is most firm, and perpetual: even so the
children of God do carry the resemblance and likeness of God in the inner
man, in holiness by obedience to the first Table, and righteousness, by
obedience to the second Table of the Commandments, which both proceed from
Love, and Love from Faith.

Therefore as God is holy, so are his children holy. Leu. 11. 44.
Leu. 11. 44. I am the Lord your God, be sanctified and be holy, for I the Lord
your God am holy. As God is righteous, 1 Ioh. 3. 7.
so are they righteous. 1 Ioh. 3. 7. He that does righteousness is righteous,
even as he is righteous. As God is merciful even so are they merciful. Luke
6. 36. As God is love, so walk they in love. Ephesians. 5. 2. Walk in love, even
as Christ 1 Ioh. 3. 14.
has loved us. 1 Ioh. 3. 14. We know we are translated from death to life,
because we love the brethren. As God is true and just in all his words and
works, so are they without hypocrisy, and doubting, both in respect of God
their father, and in respect of their brethren. For the first, it is Ios. 24.
14. 1 Samuel 12. 24.
commanded Ios. 24. 14. Fear the Lord and serve him in uprightness and truth,
1 Samuel 12. 24. Fear the Lord and serve him in truth with all thy heart. For
the second, it is Ephesians. 4. 25.
commanded, Ephesians. 4. 25. Cast away lying and speak every one truth to his
neighbor. The reason of the commandment is in the words following, drawn
from the conjunction of our members (for we are one another members) but whose
members are we? that the 15. verse declares, of Christ our head, into whom we
grow, and by whose spirit we are knit together. Therefore if we be the true
members we follow Christ our head: Contrarily, if we be not true members, but
false, counterfeit, and dead limbs, we are cut off from him, separate to the
world, and bodily lusts: or at least if we be not apparently separate from him,
but do still outwardly profess him, yet do we draw no virtue from him,
leaving no feeling thereof in us, either mortifying sin in us, or quickening
us to newness of life; but are as the dead branches growing in the tree, but
drawing no suck or juice of life out of the tree. Secondly, if we be false and
dead limbs, then are we separate from the other members, having no hearty
fellowship with them.

I need not to amplify this following, whereby Gods children follow him, by
any more specialls; for as they follow him in holiness, righteousness,
mercifulness, love, truth, uprightness, so also in all other things. 1 Pet. 1
Pet. 1. 15.
1. 15. As he which has called you is holy, even so be ye holy in all manner
of conversation. Mat. 5. 48. Be you perfect as your father which is in heaven,
is perfect, 1 Pet. 2. 9. Ye are a chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, an
holy nation, a peculiar people, that ye should show forth the virtues of him
that has called you out of darkness into his marvelous light. To this
purpose also Christ says, Mat. 5. 16. Let your light so shine before men that
they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.
Yea, this is the end of your election, redemption, and calling, even our
sanctification. 1 Pet. 2. 2. 1 Pet. 1. 2.


Now the cause why the children of God do so resemble him in true wisdom,
righteousness, and holiness, is because they have received from him the
spirit of regeneration. Ioh. 3. 4. Except a man be borne of water Ioh. 3. 4.
and the spirit he cannot enter into the kingdom of God; that is, neither into
the kingdom of grace, nor into the kingdom of glory. He is called the spirit
of adoption, Romans 8. 15. You have not received the spirit of bondage Romans 8. 15.
to fear again, but the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba, or call God
father. Whatsoever we are, how morally good soever we be, we are but children
of wrath, quite cut off from God, having no part at all in him; wild Olives,
Romans 11. 24. Bastards and runnagates, Romans 11. 24.
as Cain and Cham, until God adopt us into his family, giving us the spirit of
sons, of his own free mercy, and grace, Tit. 3. 5. 6 Ezech. 36. 26. 17.
Because this political term of adoption is used often in the Epistles, I will
briefly declare the meaning thereof.

Generation or begetting of children is natural or legal: legal generation
is a political act maintaining nature, ordained for their comfort, which have
no chidren, the law providing children for them, whom nature has failed. And
thus may a man be said to beget children legally.

Legal generation is also twofold, Adrogation and adoption. Adrogation is when
he that is a free man, and under no man's power, authority or command, viz.
neither of father, or master, is received into the place of a son, by an
other, which thus by law becomes his father. And if he that is thus adrogate
have children, they are also under his power, as Nephews, that is, his sons
children.

Adoption is when he that is under the power of an other, whether father or
master, is taken by another man to be his son and heir. And if he have
sons that is thus adopted, they are the nephews of the adoptour. And
although the adoptour cannot give the spirit of a son unto him (which only
the natural father can do) yet is the adopted so obliged and bound to him for
those so great benefits both of freedom and inheritance, as that he cannot but
for ever be most thankful to him, yea always ready and desirous to testify
the same by his love, dutifulness, obedience, and all means toward his
adoptour, even as he were his own son, and he his natural father.

To apply this. We, even the best that ever was, were under the power of
others, to wit, in the bondage, and under the tyranny of the devil, and sin,
who had absolute power and command over us: and we miserable wretches yielded
our selves willingly, yea with delight, into subjection, and homage unto them,
being destitute of the knowledge of God and godliness. Now God of his own free
love, mercy, and grace, redeemed us out of the thraldom of those tyrants with
the bloodshed and death of his own son: which willingly submitted himself in
obedience to his father herein; for by no other price, nor other means could
this purchase be made. Who because he was not only perfect man, but perfect God
also, did by the spirit of sanctification free himself from the grave, the
punishment, and imputation of our sins; and by the power of the same raised
himself from death unto life, corruption, and death having no power over him.
This sanctifying spirit of the son has the Father given us, that by the
power thereof our bond-mens minds, wills, affections, might be mortified and
crucified; and that sonne-like and spiritual minds, wills, affections, might
be put into us, daily renewing us into the nature of ingenuous, and freeborne
sons. This is more then the legal father or adoptour can do. For he can do
no more but bind his adopted son to thankfulness for his benefits of bodily
freedom, and earthly inheritance; but God has given us the spirit of his
son, whereby we are made and transformed into natural sons, and therefore
affectioned toward him, as the child is toward his natural fathel. Much more
thankful therefore, loving, dutiful and obedient ought we to be (if we be
true sons) to God our father, and Christ our redeemer, that has so dearly
bought us out of the power of sin, death, and damnation, and brought us into
the glorious liberty of sons, and hope of everlasting inheritance together
with his own son.

Therefore it is apparent, that it is the spirit which quickneth, begets,
fashioneth, and conformeth the children of God into the similitude and likeness
of God their father, wherein at the first they were created, and into which
they are renewed by the holy Ghost, by the Gospel of faith. This begetting and
quickening spirit is called immortal seed. 1. Pet. 1. 23. Being borne a new,
not of mortal seed, but of immortal, by the 1 Ioh. 3. 9.
word of God, etc. 1 Ioh. 3. 9. Whosoever is borne of God sins not, because
his seed remains in him, etc. This seed is not the essence of the holy
Ghost, but the power thereof, begetting faith of the Gospel in us, crucifying
the body of sin in us, and renewing us into the Romans 1. 13.
image of God. Romans 1. 13. 14. If ye mortify the deeds of the flesh by the
spirit, ye shall live; for as many as are led by the spirit of God, are the
sons of God. Tit. 3 4. We are saved by the washing of the new birth, and
renewing of the holy Ghost.

To conclude this point then: As the child does imitate the father by the union
and identity of the spirit communicated unto him from the father: even so the
child of God does imitate and follow Christ by the union of the spirit of God
and Christ, which the Apostle 2 Pet. 1. 4.
calls participation of the divine nature. 2 Pet. 1. 4. Whereby most great and
precious promises are given unto us, that by them ye should be partakers of the
godly nature, in that ye flee the corruption which is in the world through lust.

Quest Hereupon it may be demanded, how we are partakers of the godly nature,
and how we are said properly to be the children of God.

Answ. We are partakers of the godly nature two ways. First, in respect of the
effect, virtues, and gifts of the holy Ghost working in us, and by us; as,
first, enlightening our minds with the true knowledge of Christ: secondly,
begetting faith in us, and incorporating us into Christ: thirdly, purging out
the leaven of natural corruption in us: fourthly, fashioning us into new
obedience: fifthly, applying Christ with his gifts, and treasures unto us:
sixthly, leading us into all truth: seventhly, comforting us in afflictions:
eighthly, sealing the certainty of our inheritance in our hearts by his
testimony, as a Ephesians. 1. 14.
pledge or earnest of the promises of God. Ephesians. 1. 14. Hence it is that he is
called The spirit of wisdom, and understanding, the spirit of counsel, and
strength, the spirit of knowledge, and fear of the Lord, Esaias. 11. 2. Because
he Esaias 11. 2.
begets, works, and increases those virtues and graces in us. Likewise the
spirit of meekness, Galat. 6. 1. The spirit of faith. 2 Cor. 4. 13. The spirit
of love. 2 Timothy 1. 7. Moreover the Apostles were partakers of the divine nature
in respect of those extraordinary gifts wherewith they were endued for the
execution of their Apostolical office.

Secondly, we are partakers of the godly nature, in respect of the essence of
God: not that Gods essence is any part of us; but as he is God every where
filling heaven and earth with his essence, so is he in special manner with,
and in his children, and by his presence is effectual in them. Whereupon Paul
says, Romans 8. 11. The Romans 8. 11.
spirit of him which has raised up Jesus dwells in you. Ioh. 14. 23.
Ioh. 14. 23. If any one love me he will keep my word, and my Father will love
him, and we will come and dwell with him. God is present with the wicked also,
but it is in such sort as the Judge is present with the malefactors.

Thirdly, in this place the following of Christ is compared to the following of
light, or to a lantern that gives light to travelers to go the right way
without error, falling or stumbling. Such a comparison the Psalmist makes,
Psalm. 119. 105. Thy word is a lantern to my Psalm. 119. 105.
feet, that I might not stumble, nor err. The word then, both shows the
right way for a Christian to walk in, and guides him in the right way to
walk without offense. So that to follow the light is to have our conversation
in this world according to the word of God, which by his son he has sent and
revealed to us, and is effectual in them that are saved, bringing them out of
the darkness of this world into the glorious light and sunshine of his
kingdom and grace. Thus much of the exhortation. It follows now to speak of
the negative reason enforcing the same.

III. Shall not walk in darkness.
What it is to walk or live in darkness, the Apostle plainly declares,
Ephesians. 4. 17. 18. 19. the 17 verse is a dehortation, Walk not as other
Gentiles do in the vanity of their minds. Vanity of mind is a privation or
want of true wisdom and knowledge, whereupon the imaginations of the mind,
the affections of the heart, and actions of life, are not according to true
wisdom and knowledge, but vain, that is, foolish, fruitless, unprofitable,
Romans 6. 21.
to no end. Romans 6. 21. What fruit had you then in these things whereof you are
now ashamed? for the end of these things is death.

In the two verses following, he farther expresses this vain and foolish life
of the Gentiles, showing and declaring it by the causes thereof, which are two.
The first is in the 18. verse, namely the corruption of the mind. The second is
in the 19, verse, and that is remorcelesnesse of conscience.

The corruption of the mind stands in two things. First, in the presence of
evil (having their cogitation darkened.) Secondly, in the absence of good
(Being strangers from the life of God.)

Concerning the darkness of the mind, I thus express it. Man was created in
the image of God, that is, Col. 3. 10.
in the true knowledge of God. Col. 3. 10. And have put on the new man, which is
renewed in knowledge, after the image of him that has created him, and in true
righteousness and Ephesians. 5. 24.
holiness. Ephesians. 5. 24. Put on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness. This knowledge was as a pure and eleare
light in the mind of man; but after that by the fall man was separated from
God, this light was darkened, that is, this knowledge was corrupted with
ignorance as a punishment of the fall, so that there remained only some small
notions, glimmering, or remainders of light or knowledge in him. Then again,
this light or remainder of knowledge is farther corrupted by the frowardness
of the affections and will. Now this small remnant being taken away, there
succeeds mere darkness, and brutish ignorance. Mat. 6. 23. If the light
that is in thee be darkness, how Mat. 6. 23.
great is that darkness? As if he had said, if thy natural reason be darkened
through the malice of thy heart, there is nothing but mere darkness.

Secondly, the corruption of the mind stands in the absence of good
(strangers from the life of God.) Life is natural, or spiritual; the former
we have by generation from Adam, and it is the function of the soul in motion,
sense, and reason.

Spiritual life is that which we have by regeneration or new birth, which is
the action of the holy Ghost begetting faith in us, by the power whereof we
destroy the body of sin, and are renewed into the image of God, which is here
called the life of God. This life of God Paul does plainly declare, Gal. 2. 19.
20. That I Gal. 2. 19. 20.
might live to God I am crucified with Christ (as touching the old man) 20.
Thus I live, yet not I now, but Christ lives in me (his spirit works new
obedience in me.) In the words following he defines this dying to sin, and
newness of life by the cause (And in that I now live in the flesh, I live by
the faith of the son of God.) The Gentiles and profane persons are far from
this godly life.

Furthermore this their strangeness from the life of God is declared by the
cause thereof, that is, their ignorance: their ignorance is declared by the
cause also, to wit, the hardness of their heart, which is the perverseness of
the will and of the affections in the heart. And because froward and perverse
men do resist, and seek to quench the small light that is in them, therefore
God gives them up into a reprobate mind void Romans 1. 28.
of all judgment. Rom, 1. 28. This is the first cause of vain, foolish, and
fruitless living.

The second cause is remorcelesnesse of conscience, verse 19. Which being past
feeling, have given themselves to wantonness. Custom in sin hardneth the
heart, and the heart being hardened rebelleth against the mind, and puts out
the light of reason, which brings a curse upon the conscience, and takes
away all remorse of sin, which is a token of reprobation. The Apostle 1 Timothy
4. 2.
calls it a seared conscience that cannot bleed. 1* Tim. 4. 2. Thus have I
showed what it is to walk in darkness which is to live, not according to the
knowledge of God, and his waves, but according to the imaginations and corrupt
affections of our own hearts. And thus do all men naturally live, though
never so wise, learned, civil, and great in the world; their whole life is
foolish, fruitless, unprofitable, and their end is eternal death.

For the further clearing of this point, I will show in what particulars the
vain and foolish life of the ignorant is compared to darkness.

First, darkness is a privation and want of light: so spiritual darkness,
that is, the ignorance, and blindness of the heart is a privation, and want of
the light or knowledge of God.

Secondly, in darkness all things are invisible, one thing cannot be discerned
from another: Black, and white, good and evil, hurtful things and profitable
things are not discerned So in spiritual darkness, men call good evil, and
evil good; sin is delightful and sweet to them, yea they coun tit
abomination todepart 1 Pet* 4. 4.
from evil. 1 Pet. 4. 4. Wherein it seems strange unto them, that ye run not
with them to the same excess of riot, therefore speak they evil of you.

Thirdly, in darkness a man knows not the right way, though he be never so
quickesighted, and although he be set in it, yet will he soon go astray,
running into bypath and dangerous ways, like a blind man: so in So in
spiritual darkness, ignorance of God in his word, a man knows not the way of
life: this narrow way he can not find, and though he be never so subtle,
politic, wise, and learned, well may he grope for the straight gate, as the
men of Sodom did for Lots door, but he shall never be able to find it; and
though he daily look on it, yet shall he not discern it: All his ways are
the ways of death, and the good and right way seems to him to be the worst
way.

Fourthly, if this light of the sun were not, the earth should be a very
picture and resemblance of hell, a confused mass, or heap of beasts, fowls,
and men, one thing treading other under foot, nothing but hunger, thirst, cold,
nakedness, fear, terrors, sorrow, despair, mourning, and wailing,
continual dying, one thing devouring another: Even so in spiritual darkness,
where the knowledge of Gods word is not, there is a resemblance of hell, and
men are like devils: there is nothing but disorder and confusion, no duties
toward God, nor toward man put in practice. Where this glorious light of the
Gospel shines not in the hearts of men, they are like to beasts and Serpents,
yea, they degenerate into the natures of all noisome and venomous beasts.
First, they hatch cockatrice eggs, that is, whatsoever Esaias 59. 5. Psalm. 14. 5.
comes from them is deadly poison. Esaias 59. 5. The poison of Aspes is under
their lips. Psalm. 14. 5. Destruction and unhappiness is in their ways, verse
7. Secondly, they are vipers, children devouring parents, and parents their
children. Mat. 3. 7. Thirdly, They are as fed Ier. 5. 8.
horses, of unbridled and adulterous lusts, Ier. 5. 8. Fourthly, Rejoicing and
neighing in the victory and downfall of their neighbors, like to strong
horses. Ier. 50. 11. Fifthly, destroying Ier. 50. 11.
their Prophets, teachers, instructors, and the poor, like to Lions. Ier. 2.
30. Psalm. 10. 9. and 22. 13. Sixthly, subtle and wilely to deceive, like Foxes.
Luke 13. 32. Seventhly, Luk* 11. 32.
Girning and running about like dogs, if they be not satisfied in their
insatiable desires. Psalm. 59. 14. Esaias 56. 11. Eighthly, ravenous and greedy of
the prey, full of cruelty, and without all mercy, like to wolves, Mat. 7. 15.
Where the light of the Gospel shines not in the hearts and minds of men what
can there be but pride, vaineglory, drunkenness, excessive drinkings,
oppression, deceiving one another, and being deceived, every Superior treading
his Inferior under foot; politic and crafty circumuenting one another,
wily intrapping and insnaring one another; cousenage, fraudulent dealing,
dissembling and lying in bargaining, bloodsucking by cruel oppression hateful
and heathenish rent-racking, vain and prodigal spending, voluptuous living,
and licentious gaming, murders, envy, ill will, contention* and trouble,
whoredoms, adulteteries, and wantonness? These and such like, are the works
of darkness, even of them that are alive in body, and dead in soul. But
Christ is the light of the world: they that follow him shall not live in such
darkness, but shall have the light of life. Thus much of the negative reason:
the affirmative follows.

IIII. But shall have the light of life.
There be two lights of life, or lively lights. First the knowledge of God in
righteousness and holiness, participated by the son of God to Adam in the
creation, is called lively light: I say, the natural knowledge of God in Adam
before the fall, was the light of natural life, which life stood in absolute
holiness, which was his perfect obedience to the first Table, and absolute
righteousness, which was his obedience to the second. But this lively light by
the fall was extinguished, yet not wholly, but so buried in ignorance and
impurity, as it is of no force to bring forth in us any pure worship of God, or
holiness of life, but serves rather to bridle and restrain us from
outrageous sin, and to give us some light to discern our ignorance and
malice, to our own accusation and condemnation, so that it is a deadly and not
a lively light.

The second light is a new knowledge, that is, the knowledge of God in Christ.
Of God in Christ reconciling the world to himself: of God in Christ our
merciful and loving father: of God in Christ redeeming and purchasing us
again, when by sin we were utterly lost: of God in Christ restoring us to
sight, that were utterly blind, and ignorant: of God in Christ abolishing the
body of sin, and corruption in us: of God in Christ renewing us into his own
image and likeness, from which by Adams transgression we fell: of God in Christ,
turning the curse of the earth, with all afflictions and troubles, into
blessings and means to eternal bliss: of God in Christ, preparing a kingdom
and heavenly City for us, whose pauements, walls, and buildings are of Gold,
Pearl, Emeraldes, Chrysolites, Carbuncles, and all costly ornaments, a
thousand times excelling the Sanctum Sanctorum of Salomons Temple in glory.

He that follows Christ has this lively light in him* he that follows him
not, has no light in him, but is shut up in ignorance and darkness. He I say
that denying carnal wisdom, and fleshly lusts, does follow him, is
enlightened to see and behold the glory of God in saving the elect* by and
through Christ, which the Gospel sets forth: And by virtue of this light
and saving knowledge is he made partaker of the divine nature, that is quickened
to live the life of God, which stands in new obedience. He therefore that
follows Christ has the light of life.

What it is to have the light of life, or to walk in the light, is plainly
expressed. Ioh. 12. 35. 36. Yet a little Ioh. 12. 35. 36.
while the light is with you; walk while ye have light, least the darkness
come upon you, etc. Christ exhorts here to walk in the light, which
signifies two things.

First, to believe in him, as it is in the verse following, while ye have
light, believe in the light, etc. first, I say, to walk in the light
signifies to believe in Christ, our wisdom, righteousness, sanctification,
redemption.

Secondly, it signifies the performance of all duties worthy of a Christian,
which is to have our conversation according to our faith in him. For as the
light of the day is given to us to walk, and labor in our callings; even so
this spiritual light or day, shining in the Gospel, is given to us to walk,
to labor, and to live therein. And he that walks not in the light of the
Gospel, walks in darkness, even after the imagination of his own corrupt
heart, in the craftiness and deceiueablenesse of fleshly lusts. For the
further clearing of this point* I will show in what particulars this lively and
saving knowledge of God in Christ, revealed in the Gospel, and applied to the
elect by the spirit, is called Light.

First, the light is so glorious a creature, that no fleshly eye can behold it,
being in a subject of nature, like it self, as the Sun is: even so the light
of the Gospel is so glorious, that the eye of man's reason and understanding
cannot in the least measure apprehend it.

Secondly, the light is pleasant, delightful, cheerful, comfortable, joyful,
and hopeful; but in the absence of light there is heaviness, sadness,
sleepiness, pensiveness, sorrowfulness, dispairfulnesse, fearfulness: even
so, this saving knowledge places the soul in much more happiness, and
felicity, affording true and everlasting pleasures, true delights, true
cheerfulness, true comforts, true joys, true hope, which the miseries and
afflictions of this life cannot abolish or corrupt, seeing that they are the
rays and beams of the Sun of righteousness, shining in us. How invincible,
and unquenchable is this saving knowledge, the light of life?

Thirdly, the visible light is the life of the material world, maintaining
life, motion, sense, in all creatures in the firmament above, and elements
below, even so this saving knowledge is the life of the spiritual world, that
is, the company of Gods elect, kindling spiritual life in them, giving
spiritual wisdom, understanding, reason, sense, motion, unto them, whereby
they differ from other men, more then other men differ from beasts.

Fourthly, as by the shining light all things are visible to us, and every
thing is discerned and known: even so by this saving knowledge are all things
made manifest to the eyes of our minds. For by virtue hereof, we discern
between good and evil, between holiness and profaneness, between true
wisdom and worldly craftiness, between the true worship of God, and
idolatry, or false-worshippe, between sincerity and hypocrisy, between the
works of light and darkness, between Christ, and Antichrist; between God and
the Devil, who can transform himself into an Angel of light, to blind the
eyes of Infidels, that they that want this knowledge discern little or nothing
at all between the one and the other, yea they altogether take the one for the
other, like to the blind man that goes confidently the contrary way.

Fifthly, as the light does enlighten the bodily eyes, whereby we see to walk
in the right way, and that without stumbling or falling: even so this saving
knowledge shows the right way to eternal bliss, and guides us without
falling into the pitfalls of Satan, and this wicked world.

FINIS.

