THE CASTLE OF Memory: wherein is contained the restoring, augmenting, and
conseruing of the Memory and Remembrance,with the safest remedies, and best
precepts thereunto in any wise apperteyning: Made by Guliolmus Gratarolus
Bergomatis Doctor of Arts and Phisi\ke.

Englished by Willyam Fulwod.

The Contents whereof appear in the Page next following.

AFTER DARKNESS LIGHT.
POST TENEBRAS LVX



Printed at London by Rouland Hall dwelling in Gutter lane, at the sign of
the half Egle and the Keye. 1562.

THE CONTENTS.
The j. Chapter declares what Memory is where it florisheth, how profitable
and necessary it is, etc. The ij. contains the chief causes, where by the
Memory is hurt, with their signs and cures. The iij. shows the principal
endomages of the Memory in what sort soever they be. The iiij. tells
likewise the particular helps of the Memory. The v. co^prehendeth certain
best approved and chosen medicinable compounded remedies, and preservatives
greatly encreasyng the Memory. The vj. expresses Philosophical Judgments,
Rules, and Precepts of Remembrance. The vij. Chap. entreats in few words
of local or artificial Memory. Last of all is ^ut a ^^^fe Epilogue of the
foresaid things.
To the right honorable, the Lord Robert Dudley, Master of the Queens
Majesty's horse; and Knight of the most noble order of the Garter: Willyam
Fulwod heartily wishes long life, with increase of godly honor and eternal
felicity.
Since noble Maximilian, king of Boemia: Defended has this worthy work in
Latin tongue (I saic).

Since that also the godly prince
Edward, our late good king:
In French the same accepted has
as a right needful thing.
I thought therefore my duty was,
(most honorable Lord):
Sour worthy captain now to choose
who with benign accord.
In English would vouchsafe to save,
this Castle from decay:
Protecting it from envious toungs
that run at large always.
But whom might I rather elect,
my Patron now to be:
Then one who does most me^ excel,
in perfect clemency?
In fervent zeal to godlynes,
In favor of the just:
In forwardnes to all good works,
the truth this tell needs must.
A note of high Nobility,
a virtuous one in deed:
Whose good report has caused me,
thus boldly to proceed.
Right happy sure may be yt realm,
and praise to god extend:
Wherein such prudent peers do rule, Exodus 18. Deuteronomy. 1.

as Moses does commend.
Yea blessed it is of God the lord,
that has such worthy states:
Who righteousness rightly exaltes,
and wickedness abates.
These golden gifts of godly grace,
thus planted in your breast:
Have forced me to fly for aid,
where plenty is expressed.
Receue therefore (o worthy Lord),
an humble heart and true:
Protect also the Patronage,
which I submit to you.
And grant yt these my labors small,
may pass under your name:
Since that this work descended has,
from Princes of great fame.
For though that all Forgetfulness,
be banished from you quyte:
Yet hope I that this Treatise shall,
you honor much delight.
Considering well the worthiness,
of perfect Memory:
And what effect it furnishes,
in all affairs. for why?
Like as Oblivion is the loss,
of high renoumed acts:
And causes many worthy wightes,
forgo both fame and factes.
Like as it is an eating moth
and sore corrupting rust:
Abasyng things of noble state,
no better then to dust.
Like as it is a Chaos great,
confusedly compact:
Wherein al things both good and had,
have true proporcion lackt.
So Memory does still preserve,
each thing in his degree:
And renders unto every one,
his doughty dignity.
So does it pourge each man's estate,
and skoureth it full bright:
Whereby appears as in a glass
his lively shining light.
So does it give and attribute,
to good things good report:
To bad likewise as they deserve,
in just and equal sort.
How can yt Judge just judgment give,
except he call to mind: Judge.

The matters hanging diversely,
the truth thereby to find.
How shall the Preacher well recite
his matters orderly: Preacher.

If that he be forgetful of,
his places what they be?
How can yt Captayn well conduct,
his soldiers in array: Captayn.

Or else prevent his enemies,
if Memory be away?
How shall the Merchant safely keep, Merchant.

his recknings from decay:
If his Remembrance should him fail,
though writi^g bear great sway?
How can yt Lawyer plead his cause,
before the justice seat: Lawyer.

If he his clyents matters shall,
at any time forgeat?
How shall the Husbandana^ provide,
all seasons to observe: Husbandman.

If he do not remember well,
or any wise do swerue?
How needful then is Memory,
to rule a public weal:
In things deuyne and eke profane?
God grant it never fail.
Or how can it at any time,
be spared in the field?
That is so requysite at home,
and strong defending shield.
A good wit sone may learn things,
and understand the same:
But them still to retain and keep
in such order and frame,
That nothing be wanting thereof,
when just occasion shall
Procure rehearsal of such things,
as did to us befall
Is thoffice of the Memory,
the greatest gift that can
Here in this world by any means,
come unto mortal man.
For what helps it good books to read
or noble stories large:
Except a perfect Memory,
do take thereof the charge?
What profits is most worthy things
to see, or else to hear:
If that the same come in at the one,
and out at the other ear?
Why? then the matter is so plain,
that need (a perfect ground):
Does us compel to say no less,
when truth is truly found.
Therefore I briefly thus conclude,
take Memory away.
What is a man? what can be do?
or else what can he say?
Restore the same to him again
in full integrytie:
It will him sone reduce in deed,
to all felicytie.
Wherein god grant your honor may
long here with us endure:
And afterward in heavens hie,
among the Angels pure.
Amen.
Your honors most humble Willyam Fulwod.

The Translator to the Reader earnestlye desires grace, mercy, and peace.
Amongst other there be two several causes (good Reader) which instigated
me to enterprise and publishe the translation hereof. Partly, because of mine
own exercise and commodity. But chiefly and especially, for the common
utility and profit of my native country. The advancement and benefit
whereof every man is bound both by nature and conscience to study for all
means possible to the uttermost of his power: and for that purpose to
distribute according to the greatness or smalnes of the talent ministered and
lent unto Math. 35. Luck. 19.
him: to the end that the same (be it never so little) if it may in any wise
profit, do not remain in him as dead and frustrate: but rather that it be
bestowed forth to increase and fructify. Considering in deed that (as Plato
says) Non solum nobis sumus; ortusque Plato.
nostri partem patri^a vendicat, partem parents, partem amici.

Accept therefore in good part (gentle Reader) my labors such as they be:
wherein if thou shalt find any thing either not easy to be come by, or
obscure and dark to thine understanding (as perchance in artificial
Memory): thou must diligently and circumspectly often pervse the same, which
if at the length thou can not understand, do not therefore opprobriouslye
contemn it, but rather ask counsel at some other, for Non cuiuis homini
contingit adire Corynthum. or else repare to easyer and playner, whereof there
is in this treatise great abundaunce to the same effect what soever it be: for
I have not presumed to lessen mine Author, and therefore report me
fauourablye. In which doing thou shalt still encorage and provoke me to
further pains, I trust to thy furtheraunce, and the glory of almightye God
the Father, the Son, and the Ghost: to whom be laud and praise world
without end.

Amen.
This. xx. of November. 1562. Lege and perlege: Ne quid temere.
The Books verdicte.
A Castle strong I do present,
well furnished and sure:
Munited eke with armoure bent,
For ever to endure.
Vhich hitherto long time has been,
In (limbo patrum) hidd.
But now at last may here be seen,
from dangers men to ridd:
Procuringe them a perfect state, Sapi. 6. 8. and. 18.

And safe security,
Whereby they may find out the gate,
Of wisdoms lore. For why?
He that has lost his Memory,
By me may it renew:
And he that will it amplify.
Shall find instructions true,
And he that will still keep the same,
That it shall not decay:
By me must learn: the way to frame:
And my precepes obaye.
Lo here ye see my full effect:
And that I do entend:
The secrettes thereof to detect.
That thereby wits may mend.
Then Judge me, As I am worthy.
What Memory is, where it florisheth, how profitable and necessary it is.
The first Chapter.
Memory is by the A definition of memory.
which the mind repeateth things yt are past. Or it is a steadfast percesuyng
in the mind of the disposition of things and words. Or as (Aristotle
supposes) it is an imagination, that remains of such Aristotle.
things as the sense had conceived. Also by yt sentence of Plato, Memory is a
sense and a safety (or safe reteining Plato.
of things): for yt soul obtains by the office of the senses whatsoever
things chance under the sense, and therefore it is the beginning of an
opinion. But by the mind it self it considers intellectual things, and so
is it become intelligence. Yet yt Memory being lost, it is renewed again by
remembrance: for whereas forgetfulness or the loss of Memory is double, to
wit, perpetual and temporal (or for a time), in this verily remembrance
works, of the which it shall be spoken hereafter in his place. Neither is
invention or imagination of yt one part of the soul or brain, and Memory of
the other but they are in one same subject thing and the functions of the same
part of the soul, and either of them is of ye hole brain, in whose hole body
yt soul (being yt principal part of understanding) is dispersed: yet have
ancient Writers (not without a cause) said that diverse parts of the head
and brain be occupied of these functions of the soul: Memory The seat of
the Memory, is in the hinder part of the head.
therefore has his seat in the hinder part of the head in the third
Ventricle, which is also called Puppis. It would be long and altogether
superfluous here (where I study brevity) to describe the Anatomy of the
whole brain, the which is to be seen in the books of many, especially of
the learned yea and dilligent Andrea Vesalius. Yet will I briefly Andrea
vesalius.
speak somewhat making nerer unto our matter. There be three operations of the
soul in the brain, fantasy The sculo has. 3. operations.
(or imagination), reasonyng (or judgment), and Memory (or remembrance). The
two first have their operation in the two greater Ventricles of the brain, and
the third is erxercised in third and lesser Ventricle. In the concauities or
holownes of the brain is frequented The spirit is exercised in the
concauities of the brain
a liuelye, small, pure, and most clean spirit, and such a one is carried to
the Memory: the which surely has need of the clearenes and subtilitie of the
spirit. For if so be that that way be not opened by the which the spirit
passes to the hinder part (or Puppis) of the brain, the man remembers
nothing: and contrariwise they that have a swifte openinge of that way, are
wise, and answer spedely, as are diverse choleric persons: and they that have
that openinge slow, are dull and slack to learn and to answer, and such are
for the most part flematick or melancholicke, using gross and much meats
and drincks. Certeinlye there be few found that are indewed with a good wit
and an excellent Memory of Nature: for because that wit betokens a subtle
and soft substance of the brain, and Memory a permanent substance. Also
Galenus says in Galenus chap 12. Artis Medicio.
his.xii. Chapter, Artis medicinalis, that wit declares a subtle substance
of the brain: and the dulnes of understanding, a gross substance, etc. The
spirit serving for this office, does flee upward from the heart thorough the
synowes to the head, and is nourished with an outward compassing air, and
obtayneth a long continuance. And to be short, al Philosophers do accord,
that Memory is most of strength by the good temperature of the organe or
seat, in the which the soul does exercise this office. And it shall be a token
that they have a good Memory, whose hinder part of the head is great and
long: and they a weak Memory, whose hinder part of the head is as it were
plain and equal with the neck. It is also to be known that it causes
wisdom by the goodness of the spirits: and those are good spirits, which be
tempered with clearenes moving and subtilitie. Plato in Theaeteto says, that
Plato in Theaeteto.
the soul is not well at ease in a body that is thick or muddye, or that has
the flesh to soft, or hard.

And vntemperatnesse changes many ways: For sometime a body shall bring it
out of the mothers womb so strong and violent, that not only the Memory,
but also the reason shall be hurt, in such sort yt even folishnes shall happen
therewithal: the which amongst the other signs that it has, is the cause
Inte^peratnes is the cause that the ears be great. Aristotle. 1. De animaliu^
natura.
that the ears are very great and erected, as Aristotle recites in his
first De animalium natura: Who so chances to be borne when the Moon does
encounter the Sun, wandering through Aries and Scorpio shall have his brain
so afflicted, that being somewhat grown in years, a melancholicke passion
shall begin to spring. Also this vntemperatues of the brain comes many
times of ill nourishement, sometime of the unwholesome air that is about us:
For it is an old saying, there as the air is dryer, there also for the most
part the wits be sharper, and the soul wiser and prompter: even so a thick
and gross element causes the wits to be duller. Of the same diet is reason,
as also Galenus says in his book Galenus Quod animi mores, etc.
Quod animi mores, etc. The Memory also is weakened of chance, of being
stricken, of sickennes and diverse other like accidents, whereof there may be
had many examples as well in Thucidides in his second Thucidides. 2. book
belli Pelop.
book belli Pelop. as in others: a certain person being stricken with a
stone, forgot only his learning, being fallen from a hye house, lost the
remembrance of his mother, kinsfolks and neighbors: also Messala Messala
Coruinus.
Coruinus the Orator forgot his own name. Behold therefore how Memory is the
chief goodness of man. Seneca.
frail this most precious treasure of man is. Memory (as Seneca witnesses)
is the principal commodity and profit that man's nature can receive: for it is
an easy matter for studious persons to read many things, and it is not
difficile for a good and an exercised wit to understand the same: but to heap
them together, and to conscrue them in the coffre or secret of the Memory in
such sort that they slip not away, is the most necessary and principal
Plinius. 7. book. 24. Chap.
goodness of man's life. As Plinius reherseth in his.vii. book, the.xxiiii.
Chapter. Cyrus king of the Persians called all his soldiers name Cirus king
of the perfians,
by name. Mithridates also who was king of two and twenty nations, did
understand and answer so many Mithridates king of 22 nations.
languages without an Interpretor: there wants no examples of the
excellentnes of Memory, which men have had almost in all times. They
therefore which have not so excellent a Memory, must by labor get the same,
without the which a man shall scarce attain unto any perfection: for it
chau^ceth many times that so much the more that a man excels in Memory, he
also somuche the more florisheth in wisdom, except it be some sluggishe or idle
person. And yt Poets not without a cause have feyned wisdom to be yt daughter
of Wisdom is the daughter of Memory.
Memory: and of her it is rightly written.

By painful use begot I was,
a worthy wight and clear:
By Memory brought forth no less,
who is my mother dear.
Diverse aged persons using this practice, and applieng themselves to study have
in few months proceeded learned. Therefore we will declare in this work, by
what means it may be gotten, increased and kept. For it is manifest by
diverse learned men, as also by Cicero, that Memory has a certain cunning or
practice and that Cicero.
it proceeds not altogether of nature: so therefore we will first teach by
what kind of living and by what medecines it may be gotten and established,
expressing brief, excellent, and (by use) approved precepts. Afterward, we
will briefly entreat of artificial Memory, which of it self is natural, but
it is confirmed by certain precepts, and consists in observations, places,
and Images (or figures).

THE SECOND CHAPTER contains the chief causes whereby the Memory is hurt,
with their fignes and cures.
THere be two principal causes Coldenes and moistnes are co^traryes to the
Memory.
which hurt the Memory, to wit, coldness and moystnes: the which coldenes
is either alone, or else joined with moystnes, we will omit to speak of the
corruption which comes of over much heat and drynes. Yet coldenes hurtethe
more then moystenes: for coldenes does confound the nature, and works not in
it but as an under rulinge instrument. And moistnes is contrary to the
retentyue, the which is comforted with a proportioned drines: for superfluous
drynes is hurtful especially to the apprehension, whilst it The nature of
coldness is to repress, and the nature of heat is to move.
hinders that forms or likenesses can not be received and settled in the
same. It is the nature of coldenes to cease, and of heat to move: therefore
coldenes hinders the mouinge necessary to the Memory. And moistenes
hinders the retayning thereof. To be breife, seeing that forgetfulness
Forgetfulness is the doghter of coldenes. Paulus Aegineta.
is the daughter of coldenes, as Paulus Aegineta, and others do testify, it
is to be said and affirmed, that coldenes more hurts the Memory, then
moystenes. For the figure or kind of coldness which congeleth humors and
spirits, can not be conceived. The slepings also of such whose Memory or
understanding perishes, are to be observed, to wit whether they be vehement or
moderate slepers, or altogether not slepie, but have it according to the course
of nature. And so shall you find vntemperatenes the vanquisher: and shall
know also that moystnes and drines be the contraries: moistnes, because of
over much sleep: drynes, because of over much watchinge: and that of the mean
of these two, equality, and the good proportion of humors proceeds.
Moreover it is to be considered, whether any thing be voyded out of the
nostrells or mouth that commethe from the head, or whether those places be
altogether dry or but partly: the knowledge of which precedent causes and
shows will give to understand the disposition of the head, whereby may be
ministered a fit remedy according to the disposition of the person. They
that have great The fignes of moistenes.
Moystenes of the brain, are very desirous of much sleep, whose mouths are
full of spittle, and their Nostrells and eyes frequented with fleame: all their
Motions are dulle. Such kind of people do remember things present and
lately done: but being done long agone, they do either never, or with great
pain remember them. For such is the nature of moystenes of the brain that it
easelye receyuethe what imprintings or infixions it lists and with like
easenes loses them again.

Whereas drines rules or reigns, The fignes of drines.
which is contrary to moistenes, it is known by the contrary signs: the
head shall be given to watchinges and lightness: and seldom does the nose, the
roufe of the mouth, and the eyes expel such superfluities: the eyes are
holowe: they sone become balde: the ears abound with earwaxe. And as
concerning that it appertains to the Memory: present things are wc more
difficulty received or infixed then things past, and being received they do
longer abide: whereof it comes to pass, that we have a better Memory and
utterance, of old things, then of new. Ancient men may herin be an example
unto us, who will orderly recyte feats done from the beginning of their age:
but present things they either do not remember, or else do confound them in
vtterig. And this happens unto aged men: because that the state or disposinge
proceeds of frequented acts: whereby it comes to pass that extreme old men
do well remember ancient things: because they have often pondered either
them or yt like. But they do ill remember new things: because that the
imprinting of them in their Memory is not easy by reason of the hardness of
the instrument of understanding.

Where as Coldenes rules, there The fignes of coldness.
the face is white, the eyes are feeble, the veins can not easily be
perceived: they be given to much flepe, those parts that belong to the head
shall be but little warm, nor ruddye, the mind shall be astonyed, the head
troubled with gyddinesse, and shall bring things to remembrance with much a
do. This qualitye (as we have said before) is very hurtful, and does
diminishe the powers of the mind, and makes them dull: for as it is the
property of heat to move, so is it the nature of coldenes to hinder the
moving: and take this for a general rule, that the brain of a living body is
warmer with a summers air, then otherwise, as also Galenus says in his book
De vsu partium.

But when Heat flourishes in the The fignes of heat.
brain it is easelye known by these fignes: for such parts as are about the
head, are warmer and redder, then those that be far of: you shall perceive
the eyes to be more rolling, and the veins more apparante: As soon as they be
borne their hears grow fourth, and are black, hard, and curled: they are
contented with small and short sleeps, they have quyckenes of motyons and
remembrance. But if the heat do increase and become unnatural, they shall be
very vigilent. This over much heat does boil the lively spirits, and
consumes them into smokes and vapoures, and burns yt iuyces which be apt to
engender spirits whereby they be destytute of a good or salfe Memory.

But if the two qualities be Joined together, you shall know their signs by
as great a proportion, as these qualities be great, or little. And the
judgment of the foresaid things shall not be difficulte, as if that heat and
drynes were without temperature, there shall be a permixtion of yt sense, or a
frenzy according to the great or small degrees of the qualities. And
therefore it is manifest that the Memory may be kept, increased and erercised
by the science or practice Memory may be helped by physic.
of Physic, seeing that by sickness it may be diminished, hindered, and lost.

Therefore as concerning yt means to cure it, first of all the feedinge or The
means to cure the disseases.
kind of living must be altered according to the variety of the causes, as we
will herafter show. But first it is to be noted, that the forgetfulness which
comes of nature cannot easily be taken away, nor yt which comes of a hot
and dry cause, the rest of the body remaininge sound and perfect. This also
chauncethe some times, that the Memory may be diminished or lost by an
unaccustomed way: and then it is to be feared of a worse sickness, (except it
be spedelyremedyed) to wit of the Lethargy, falling sickness, Apoplexy,
Palsy, and other such kind of disseases the which are engendxed of fleame in
the brain, for the which recourse must be had to the Physicians. Also if the
Memory be perished by extrome age, it is not in vain to be labored to be
gotten again by remedies: but only must be contented with a convenient kind
of living or feeding, and must have ministered sucking moiste and restoratiue
meats and linctuaries, and such as maytake away the drynes.

If the hurting of the Memory come by vehement purgations and other unmeasurable
emptines, or of drynes it must only be remedied by good and nourishing meats:
for yt body being strengthened, and yt forces and powers got again, the
Memory is restored and fortified. Therefore meats being Observations belonging
to the Memory.
full of good juice do help much, which be easelye concocted and bigestid in the
ventricle: the wine must be red, ripe and alaied with water the exercise must
be moderate and without wearines: the head must be lightly rubbed: they must
sleep long; they must lie soft: they must use bathes of warm water: they
must avoid sweatinges: the head being shaven there must be powered on
Epithemata or Fome^tations of the decoction of flowers of Camomill, Melilote,
Linsede, hufked Barley, and Milk newly milked: it must be anointed in with oil
of Lilies, or of Almondes, oil of Dialtea, (in yt French Guimauues), and with
fresh Butter. Let them take co^serue of Borage, Bewglosse, Orange pills
preserved, and such like.

If the annoiance of yt Memory come Other observations.
of a cold vntemperature of yt brain alone without substance, let coldness beset
against heat, and likewise drynes against moistnes, but nevertheless moderatly
for in heat and natural drynes the proportion ought to be most equal to the
end, yt nothing be to much: because that a naturail heat is not a pure heat,
but co^pounded, in yt which there is a proportion of most equality. For all
kind of heat causes not a good Memory, nor al kind of drynes but yt which
is of a temperate proportion, and flows not into an immoderate vntemperatnes,
which has yt power to take away ye act of it own virtue. Therefore it is to
be taken hed^ lest the brain be made to hot, or to Note.
dry. And he that has a te^perate head let him take heed that he meddle not
with any medicines. They therefore that have the Memory corrupted by
unmeasurable heat and drines (yt which being joined together do often cause
frenesies and dotings) must have Oxirhodinum, powered upon their heads, and it
shall be easey to heal the rest with such things as do cool, and moisten. And
if the hurt come of over much heat joined with over much drynes, (the
which chances commonly tyther because of long sickenesses, or of excessyue
labors of the body, or of fyerce sorowefull and carnest affections of the
mind, by the which the forces and powers of nature are greatly opened or
weried and the lively spirits dissolved and wasted) moistning and meanly
warminge medicines having strength together, shall be very defencible and
necessary.

But when the qualities shall do Other observations for the Memory.
harm not alone by themselves, but yt there shall be also great abundance of
humors we must begin with euacuations and pourginges in providing before a
concoction or digestio^, if need be. The abundance of blood requires yt
cutting (or opening) of a vain which must be done with the council of a learned
Physician: and let the vein up on the shoulder be opened, the which is called
Cephalica, if the head only be burdened: if yt whole body be geued, the inward
or middle veins must be opened. If a yelowe or fleamy choler abound, by the advice of the phisitio^, it may be purged with medicines yt drive out choler,
as with Rubarde, Manna Casia, iuyes of Roses, electuarye of Roses, syrup of
Roses resoluatiue or laxatyue, Tamerindi, or with golden Pittes and such like.
If it be a black choler or melancolye, it must likewise be remedied by
convenient aides ministered by expert physicians as with the steeping or ^^^^or
of Seen of Epithimum, of Veratru^, in them that be stronger. Diasene, Pills
Indie, etc.

But if the cause be (the which in a More observations.
manner chaneeth always) cold and moiste, these means shall serve to cure it:
and first as touchi^g their living let the^ abide as much as is possible, in a
light and clear air not windy: for the winds do hurt much. And let them
avoid to eat any thing that increases fleame, as all cold things, and
likewise vapourous, as oynions, and above al things yt fulness and lothsomenes
of meats, or rawnes, and much drink, let the^ forbear much eating of
fruits, meats of hard digesting, washing of themselves with to hot or to
cold water and to much drinking of water or wine. Therefore meats yt Meats
permitted to the pacient.
have good nourishment, and engender warm and lively blood, are very helping
and necessary: as wethers mutto^, yt floshe of Goats, Eapons, Fesantes,
Partriges, whose eggs are of a singular power in this behalf, pigio^s turtle
doves, little sparrowes, larkes thrusshes or throstles, and O w^elles: being
dressed with Hisope, sauerie, thime, maioram, Rosemary, Cloves, maces Ginger,
Peper, Cinamom, Juniper beries, chiefly in winter. Let the^ eat Meats for
bidden the pacient.
no kind of living thing that is newly brought forth, because their flesh is
slimy and clammy: nor yt brains of any thing because they be fleamatike,
except the brains of a Hen, for they be peculiarly and chiefly praised.

Let the^ also forbear Marow (which is in bones) Cranes flesh, Fyshe,
especially if it be clammye and nourished in diches or holes, cold pot Herbs,
Milk, Cheese, especially much, or noughtie: fruits moiste and not ripe or
often, but sometimes they may eat sharper or tarter meats, chiefly in yt
winter, as Garlike, Peniroiall or Calamint, Capers being watered, mustard is
praised of Pithagoras: they must Pithagoras
eat little and especially at supper: they must drink no water except it be
sod with Honey, or Cinamom or some other pleasant spices. They must abstain
Moderate use of wine allowed.
from over much sleep, and not to sleep in the day time, nor upon the noddle of
the head, nor upon to much fullness of meat: let them also take beede of over
great watchinges, for it weakeneth the spirit, and resolves it and stuffeth
the head. Let their exercise be walking abroad, Certain exercise.
and that before meals, with the rubbyng of the parts of the head (but having
first been conveniently purged) with course clothes, and of the feet and
hands, but moderatly, and the whole body must be rubbed first, then
afterward the head, and let the rubbyng begin at the legs, in rubbing by
little and little the upper parts, that the substance may be drawn downewarde.
Let them not remain about pooles, fluddes, and moist sokye places, let them
avoid southe wyndes and rainy weather, let them dwell in lightsome and hie
house, let their head be anointed with helpinge and convenient oils (as it
shall be also deciared hereafter). Let them take heed of to much frequenting of
the act of generation, and al things that make feeble the brain, for the
principal being weakened, that which springs thereof must needs be hurt.
Let the body be kept clear without superfluities. If therefore the fleume be
cold and gross, it must be attenuated, concocted and Sundry me dicines,
remedies, and oyntmentes.
prepared to be voyded forth, with Ox^^ll compounde or squilliticke or made De
quinque radicibus, of Stichas, of Radishe roots, with Rose honnye, as need
shall require, and with convenient waters or decoctions. And to bring forth
the prepared substance or matter they must have ministered unto them Pills or
Cochies, or of the confection called Hiera Galeni, in puttyng to a little of the
oil of Castoreum, and of a Nutmygge. Let there be also added unto it a
prepared Colorynthis or Coloquintida (a kind of wild Gourdes) according to
the discretion of the Physician then present: or let there be given them Hiera
magna, with Nutmigs, or Hiera Rufi, of ye which Aetius in his third book
makes Aetius in his 3. book.
mention: also Yeralogadii, and other things which help the pain of the head
that comes of fleume: then after let there be made Gargarismes Fomentations,
Oyntmentes, little Bags, and such like: the Gargarisme may be made thus.

Take Calamus aromaticus, Penyroyal or Calamint, Hysope, Thyme of every one a
hand full, let them be sodde in water even to the half of the just quantity,
and to five ounces strained through a Colander, put an ounce and a half of
Scilliticke Oximell, and mingle half an ounce of Kose honny, and let it be
gargaled warm in a morning fasting. Also if there need a Glister, let it be
made according to the diseases that have respect to the head: nesynges or
sternutations may be provoked, as with Pepper, Struthion or Condisi, Elleborus
albus, Lyngwort or neesyng powder, Flourdeluce, and such like: or of these,
with Turpentine, and with a Gum called Ladanum, let there be made sneesyng
medecines. Moreover if the fleume proceed further, good odours or
Apophlegmatismi (medecines that purge fleume and spittle) do much belp: Cubebes
masticated or chewed, do sucour by all means: apply to their ears oil of
Castoreum, oil of Lauander, oil of Spike. If so be yt either there be not so
great abundance of such humors in the body, or that the pacient be not of so
great strengthes, we must first drive the fleume out of the whole body by an
easy purgation, and because it shall rather suffer yt powers and forces to
remain in the members and parts of the body then to take them away, therefore
let it be in this manner. Take Aloes washed with the juice of Thyme or Maioram
or with their waters one Dram, Trochisces of Agaricke two drammes, A dram
is the.(...). Part of an ounce.
Masticke, Cubebe, Nutmygs, of each of them six grains, with pleasant wine
let there be made twelve Pills, of the which seven must be taken in the
morning with the sirupe of Stichas: and the rest three days after, two hours
after supper: afterward they must be strengthened with comfortinge
electuaryes, such as follow o^ the like. But ouerpassi^g also yt pur^g locals
as above, if it be nedeful. Again for the purgatio^ these pills also do
properlye agree. Take of male Frankenscence, of fine Myrrh, of Ginger, every
of them a dram and a half, of the powder of a Houpe or Lapwinges head.ii.
drammes, of Galyngalle two scruples, of A Scruple is the third part of a
dram.
Hiera mayor one Dram and a half, of oil of Castoreum, of Colocynthys, of
either of them half a scruple, dreesse them with good Turpentine or with
Syrope of Stichas, and let there be made past (or dowe) and minister unto them
but a few Pills, and those great: upon a light supper going to bedwarde:
also such things as do dissolve may be taken away, that they may only
nourishe: these are most chief and singular in this cause, and do principallye
help the Memory. Afterward to strengthen the Pacient let there be made
such an electuaryc Strengtheninges for the pacie^t.
or in like manner.

Take of conserve of Rosemary flowers, of Baulme gentle, of each of them an
ounce, of Helycompane preserved, of green Ginger, either of them half an ounce,
of Orange pills preserved six drammes, of Diatrionpipereon, of Diambar either
of them half an ounce, with a little Aquavite distilled together with good wine
in glass vessels, or with Baulme water, or with the flowers of Lilium
conuallium: mingle them together: and let the Pacient take a dram or twain
in the morning two hours before his meat, and half a dram at bed time.
Nucha (called also spinalis medulla) is a substance procedyng from the brain,
alonge the back.


It is also to be noted that the Nucha is colder then the brain, and therefore
it endures and suffers cold things better then warm, and for that cause
it must be remembered, lest the causers of coldenes, which come from without
do not fall upon the hinder part of the head. And therefore such medecines as
cause warmenes as well without as wtin the body are to be ministered. Other
remedies and oyntmentes.
Thyme, Penyroyall, (or Calamunt) Organie (or wild Maioram) or such like of
this kind must be sodden in Vinegre and laid to the Nostrelles of the
Pacient: annoint the roufe of the mouth with very (...) or sharp medecines.
Also in the summer time annoint the out side of the head with warm Oil, as with
Oil of Rue, Oil of Dill, etc. And in the Winter time with the Oil of
Flowerdeluce, in the which there shall be sodden commen Sauory or bush Calamint,
Pepper, Bay berries, in puttyng to a little Vinegre for to make it perce. Also
Oil of Castoreum shall be very good to anoint the hinder part of the head
withal: or such an ointment as follows.

Take oil of Tyles, of Castoreu^ either of them half an ounce, of the roots
of Acorus or great Galingale, of Phu or Valerian, either of them a scruple, of
Pellitorie, of Rue or Herb grace, either of them half a scruple, with as much
wax as shall suffice. Let there be made an ointment, with the which the head
being shaven shall be anointed: and thereupon let there be laid a little bag
within the which there must be of the flowers of Rosemarye, of Baulme gentle,
of Lauander, each of them half a handful, of the flowers of an Elder tree a
handful, of Stichas iij. drammes, of Nutmygges, of Lignum Aloes, of Maces, each
of them a scruple, being beaten together let them be put into a silk bag.

Another ointment greatly helping the diminution of the Memory and
forgetfulness.

Take oil of Elder flowers an ounce, oil of Been.ii. ounces, oil of Euforbium,
oil of Castoreum, either of them half an ounce, Vinegre.iii. drammes, mingle
them together, and let the place be anointed therwithal. Also oil of
philosophers (so called of Mesue.
Mesue) being anointed upon the hinder part of the head, does wonderfully
repare the Memory.

Another ointment.

Take yt roots of Rue, Buglosse (...) Phu or Valerian with the roots each of
them.iiij. ounces, of oil of Castoreum of ij. or.iij. years old, of the seed
of Ash kayes which is like to a birds tongue, either of them two dragmes: let
them be made into powder and mingled together: then take of the juice of
Eufragia or Eybryght, of Clarie, of Veruen, each of the^.iiij. ounces, of the
pithe of Anacardum an Ounce, of the old Grease of a male. Bear as much as shall
need, let there be made a moiste ointment, and put it in a copper or tin
vessel, that it may remain moiste, for else it is nothing worth, and
therwithal anoint the hinder part of yt head. But if you will sonner help it,
or that the pacient have a colder head and that it be in a cold time, then let
the nostrells within be anointed with this odoriferous ointment. Take oil of
swets Spike an ounce, Cloves a scruple, Am bergrise half a scruple, Musk five
grains, white Wax as much as needs: also a drop of the same, before the
puttig in of ye wax, being powered warm into the ears is very good. Mesue.2.
descriptione Antid^ tarii.


A plaster also of Mustarde (of the which Mesue speaks in the second
description of the book of Medicines) is very expedient being laid to ye cold
afflicted hinder part of the head: or else oil of Mustard seed^.

Also ye aforsaid medecines, as well as those yt follow (without any former
purgatio^) are very good for them that are vexed with coldenes alone without
great ^^^^es. And besides these before rehearsed there be other yt help in
wardlye, as right Acorus preserved which I suppose to be Calamus aromaticus or
Galyngalle,) Sugre, flowers of Betonnye, Rosemarye, Lauander, Spikenarde,
Baulme Gentle, in putting to long Peper, Cloves, Cinamom, Nutmeges and such
like odoriferous things. Also Ginger preserned the quantity of a filberde nut
does help much especially in a cold and moist ventricle, as it is almost in all
or in yt greater part of them that are troubled with such cause and dissease,
for it does amend the Memory being taken in yt morning (not in warm seaso^s)
four hours before meat.

This also does not a little help.

Take Frakensence, Ciperus, long Peper, Saffron, Mirrhe, of each alike, mingle
them with Honey, and of yt same take every day a dram at the hours aforsaid,
and specially in yt mornig.

Another for yt same purpose chiefly working in aged persons.

Take of ye honey of Anacardum, of whit Fra^kensence, of Ciperus, of right
Acorus, each alike.ij. parts, of round and long Peper either alike.i. part, of
Mirobalanu^ cepulu^, ceruleum, either alike.ij. parts, of Cummin.i. part, of
Honey as much as shall serve, let there be ministered.ij. dragmes every morning:
Diambar also is very good.

Also a confection of Anacardu^ does profit much if it be well made, and used
vi. months after, for it sharpneth the wit and sense and purifieth the under
standing, it calls again yt mind, it heals the lethargy and gout, it
helps much yt dissease of the hentricle and the bealy coming by coldness, but
it is to be given to them yt be astonined, and yt have a very cold and reumy
head. And it is thus made: takeof Mirobalanu^ empeliticu^, belezicu^, of white
and long Peper, each of the^ xij. drammes, of Ginger, of yt honey of Anacardu^,
ei there of the^ an ounce, of oil of Castoreum, of Stirax or Storax, of Cloves
each of the^ v. drammes, of the flowers of Camomil, of Bay beries, of Ciperus,
each of the^ iij. drammes, of Honey as much as shall suffice, mingle them after
the manner of an electuary. Let a scruple of it be ministered at night, or the
biggenes of a small or filberde nutte, that is half a Dram, with warm wine
of the decoctyon of Anyse and Fenell seeds: it may also be taken in the
morning.

But let them that take it refrain from fleumatyke meats, from anger, from
lecherye and dronckenes.

And before that Anacards be put into any compounde Medecynes, they must be
dressed in this manner that follows.

Take Anacards and beat them very well in a Mortar and then put them in
most strong Vinaigre by the space of seven days, then sees them with a
soft fire in the same Vynaygre till there remain but the third part of the
Vinaygre: then strain the Grounds thereof which remain in the botome of the
vessel, after that the Vinaygre is first lyghtelye strayned or powered out,
and those grounds being put through the strainer or Colander, occupye them
in medecynes: for also the fruytes of Anacrds are not put in medecynes to be
taken at the mouth, except they be first dressed in this or like manner.

If so be you will make Honny of. Anacardum, you must put with the same
Anacardum so sodoen in Vynaygre, as much claryfyed Honnye, and let them
boil both together till they be thycke, and so shall you have Honnye of
Anacardum, the which has a wounderfull operatyon in the foresaid dysseases,
if you give thereof a Drammo or two in the morning,

In Sycylya whyleste the Anacardij be new they are put into puryfyed Honny,
and do remain long therein, and such is called Honny of Anacardum, and it is
used with out the fruits thereof, and is put in electuaries. If there be ij.
drammes given of yt Honey, it renews yt Memory of it own property.

Also Acorus (yt is Galingale) is an approved thing, being nourished and sodden
in Honey and reserved as yt nuts and roots are conserved: likewise long Peper
nourished and sodden in Honey and preserved, for they do keep and increase the
Memory: at every time receive a Dram.

Another proved ^forme of a powder.

Take Fra^kensence a dragme, Cyperus, Peper, Saffro^, Mirrhe, each of them ij.
drammes, let the^ be beaten fine, and driven through a searce, and so make it
into a powder, of the which the paciente shall receive every morning when he
rises a dram or at evening when he goethe to bed.

Another proved.

Take Cummyn, Pepper either of them two drammes, white Sugar three drammes: let
the^ be beaten and reduced into powder, take thereof a dram every day in the
morning.

Another likewise proved.

Take white Frankenfence a dram, long or white Pepper a scruple, make them
into powder, which must be drunk early in the morninge all at one draughte,
and that many days, with three ounces of Honny water, or of Cinnamon and Cloves
moderatly decocted.

Another as good and certain.

Take Cummyn five drammes, new Pepper one dram, right Acorus or Galingale,
Cyperus, black Myrobalanum, of each of them two drammes, Honny of Anacardu^,
(whereof we spoke before) one dram, common Honny three ounces and a half: let
such of them as may be punned, be punned together, and incorporated with
Honny, and preferued in a box: and rereyue thereof every morning two drammes.

The third Chapter shows the principal endomages of the Memory in what sort
soever they be.
IT behooves to avoid universally rawnes or vndigessions, as most dangerous
and hurtefull both to the reason, and also to the whole body.

It is very ill to drink much Wine especially to them that be strong: for
it does vehemently moysten Excessive use of wine in forbidden
the head, and there is almost nothing that so soon brings forgetfulness, as
does superfluous moystenes.

The excessive outward coldenes hurts the Memory, and chiefly in the night
when the head is uncovered. To go through Myer in cold times, and bare footed
does above the rest, hurt and cool the brain, and weakeneth the eyes.

Also to much heat does sometimes greatly trouble the reason and hurt the
Memory.

You must forbear the eatinge of fuminge meats and drynkes, as Garlyke,
Leekes, Oynions, also Cheese and Peason: Brothes, Potage, and all over moist
things are to be refrayned, especially at night: also all ill chewinge or
eating is naught.

To drink after meat (whiles the meats be digestynge, interruptynge the
same) namelye after supper, is very hurtful both to the Memory and the
brain.

Over much rest does weaken the heat: reteyneth and aggrauateth the
superfluities, and therefore hurts the Memory.

It is very noisome to sleep upon meat, to wit before that the meat be
descended into the bottom of the Ventricle: therefore take your sleep two
hours after: having your head lying hie and well covered, but not
superfluously, because that to much covering does either weaken the head in
resoluynge: or else does stuff it in drawing.

Frequented venerye does hurt either with a full stomarke or a hungry, or
after the which no sleep does follow, or nere unto the Eclipse of the Moon,
or with any other then their own spouse.

To sleep hosed and shoed especially with foul sockes, does hinder the
Memory, because of the reflection of ye vapors: feebleth the sight, and
causes the body to wax whote and burn.

Herbs eaten raw, do very much hurt the Memory: likewise Nuttes,
Filberds, and Chestnuttes.

Also to see or hear things that please not the mind: and such like
Simptomata or griefs of the mind.

Fear does oppress the Memory, or endurynge sadness: also a pensive care of
household business is hurtful.

Also immoderate sleep and violent vomiting.

Vinegre and all sharp things do the like: but if Vinegre be used of fatte^
and fleumaticke persons let it be made of strong Wine, and let it be warm,
and used seldom and that with Cynamon: and put Calamus aromaticus or Galingale
into the Vinegre vessel, Penyroyall or Calamint: There be some say that the
bones of Cocks being sucked, do breed the Lethargy.

The fourth Chap. tells likewise the particular helps of the Memory.
THe fruits that bind or restrain of Nature or art, in keepinge fumes or
vapors from rysyng, being moderately taken after meats, do greatly help
the Memory.

The moderate eating or refection of temperate meat and drink, as of Hens
and Patriges, and especially of the brains, does not only comfort the Memory,
but also the whole body: for like as Cacochimia (that is evil nourishing
meats) do hurt the workings of the soul: so Euchimia (that is good
nourishynge meats) do keep them safe, and chiefly in youth. And therefore a
high wit does seldom spring out of a mean or simple storke, except there
chance a liberal education.

Moderate and convenient exercise before meat, does not only profit the
Memory, but likewise the other functio^s of the body, also let the moving be
long, and the exercise laborious, according to the strength of the body, that
it may resolve the superfluities and let it be in fair and dry places: and
(if it be possible) let all the parts of the body be exercised.

A convenient and due expulsion of superfluities by the entrails, by the roufe
of the mouth, by the mouth, by the ears, by the urine, by the rubbyng of the
head with a comb, is very expedient to the memoratiue virtue, if the exercise
be done before sleep and after.

An often calling to mind of The Memory must be exercised.
things seen or hard, does strengthen and confirm the Memory: for there is
nothing that is so soon increased by diligence, or diminished by necgligence,
as Memory it self is: because except it be throughlye tylled and exercised
with a continual meditation, it is soon corrupted by fluggishenes.

A temperate gladness, and an he nest delectation, especially in the meditation
of sciences, does not only augment the Memory, but also the intellectiue
virtue, and all the other virtues of the body.

To wash ones feet often in warm water wherein has been boiled Baulme
gentle, Baye leaves, Camomile, and such like, is very good for the Memory,
ye head and the eyes.

To wash ones head every tenth day with Lee, in the which there has a
while sodden Camomile or Asarum, Baulme gentle, Sage, sweet Maioram, or Maioram
gentle, Baye leaves, or such like, and Roses in the Summer, does coroborat and
fortify the Memory, as it shall also be more plainlye spoken of in the
Chapter following.

To stand after meals, or to walk softly up and down, by means whereof the
meat may descend to the botome of the ventricle, is very expedient for the
good digestion of the meats.

To take Coriander after meat, being well dressed with Sugre, does let the
vapoures from ascending to yt head, and helps the Memory: also Diacotoneon
does the same.

To chewe Masticke with a little Ginger being fasting, does purge the head from
moiste fleumatike humors without any grief or pain, and the Memory being so
hindered is there with comforted, Galingale being put to the nostrells does
strengthen the cold brain.

Take the whitest Frankensence beat it into powder, put it in pure and simple
cold water, and drink it at the increase of the Moon, at the spring of the
day, at noone, and at the Sun settinge: and it will cause a good Memory, a
sharppe wit, and dry the brain and the ventricle.

Symeon Sethi affirms that the Simeon Sethi.
Galle of a Partrige being anointed once in a month, upon the veins of the
temples, so that it do perce through, is very profitable to confirm the
Memory.

Baulme gentle establishes the Memory, quickneth the wit, and in what
fashion soever it be eaten makes a man studious and dilligent the which
virtue also Cresses doc bring to pass in them that be cold and old, whereof
it is come into a common proverb, Ede nasturtium, Eat Cresses. Baulme gentle
also besides this brings quietness to the mind in causinge a pleasant sleep
to come to the head: It is also said that the flesh of A Turtle Dove does
increase the wit.

The brains of a Hen does help the wit and the Memory, in such sort
that it has brought some again to their wits, that began to dote.

The seed of Orminum or household Clarye does wonderfullye aid the
restoringe of the Memory, if it be taken in poulder with some meat or drink.
And the scrapinges of Yuorie does remedy forgetfulness, if a little thereof be
taken in the morning in a little wine.

Also a Grain of white Frankensence when you go to bed, does greatly
help the clammye or glewed substance: for it dries up the moystenes of the
head and the Ventricle, and so easethe the Memory. Use this after a purgaryon
twyse or thryse in a week, if there be much moistnes.

Two Drammes in wayghte of the confectyon of Ple^esar^hotycum taken when you
go to sleep, or Myrobalanum Cepulum preserved and well chewed being taken in
the morning four hours before meat once in a week, does wounderfullye
restore the Memory especially if it be hurt of a moiste cause. For Myrohalani
cepuli, preserved do strengthen the understanding and in a manner conserve you
the. So do passula.

It is good to take twice or thryse in a week preserved Ginger, the bygnes of
a small nut or little cheste nut, for it helps much an emptye stomach. The
confection of Diambar has the same effect

Remember that in a moist substance or cause there proceed first purginges.
For a moist substance is for the most part the cause of the weakness of the
Memory, as it is already declared.

The fifte chapter comprehends certain best approved and chosen medicinable
compounded remedies, and preservatives greatly increasing the Memory.
A Medecin wonderfully helping the Memory, and lethargy or forgetfulness: it
comfort the ventricle and all the members weakened by fleume and coldenes.
Take Ginger, Galingale Mastike Cu^min, Organny, each of the^ vi. drammes,
Nutmige, Calamus Aromaticus, Asarum or Fool foot, Carpesium, yt is Cubebe,
Lignu^ aloes, Mace, Percely seed, Ammios each of them.ij. drammes, white
Fra^kensence, Cloves, Cardamomum or grains, Zedoaria, Piretrum or Pellitorye,
Castoreum, long and black Peper, Costum or Cocus, Ciperus, each of them.iij.
dragmes dry Mintes half an ounce: let them all be punned and beaten to powder,
and with a sufficient quantytye of Penydes and of puryfyed Honnye, let there
be made a linctuarye: The which and the rest also you must use, chieflye in
cold wether or not over hot, and that a good space between.

Pills that are good for a languishing brain especially in aged and cold
folks.
Take sweet Amber or elect Ambargrise one Dram, Lignum Aloes half a scruple,
Cubebe two scruples: with the purest and swetest wine make.xv. Pills, and
minister a cople of them before supper.

Catapotia, or Pills very effectual to the Memory.
Take Cubebes, bushe Calamint, Nutmiges, Cloves, each of them a dragme and a
half, pure Frankensence, fine Mirrhe, oriental Ambargrise, each of them a
dram and a half Musk.v. grains: with Maiora^ water make Pills, and give
one at bed time, and two at Sun rising five hours before meat, in Somer by
a months space, in the spring and in harvest seldomer.

An odoriferous or sweet swellinge Apple for the Memory
Take the roots of Flower de luce, the seeds of Sesclis or Osiar, that is,
Syler montanum or wild Cummyn, Stichas, each of them two Drammes, Nuttmygge
half a Dram, Minte a Dram, Ambergrise, Frankensence, bushe Calaminte,
Storax, Lignum Aloes each of them half a Dram, Ladanum as much as shall
suffyce, make thereof an Apple by art: the which notwithstanding in winter
must be made of warmer things, and in summer of colder.

A most proved Experiment for the wit and Memory, which is said to be of
Aristotle,
Take Bears Greasse or fat Aristolle.
which he has in the right shoulder or sklyse, and put the same in the
said Bears bladder together with his urine or water and let them stand
together eight days: than pull it out and take the juice of Orminum or
household Clarie, Cybrighte, Veruene, Buglosse, Phu or Valerian, Aloes, of each
a like quantitye, and mingle them together with the said fat sturringe
them upon the fire with a wodden sklise, till it come to a thycke ointment of
ye which take when you will the quantytye of a little Bean, and anoint the
forehead, and the temples rubbyng them a little while, and you shall remember
the things that you have hard.

A comfortynge Water or Lees for the washyng of a cold and moist head, also it
helps the Memorse, and it must be of the Ashes of Twigges, or of an Oak, then
after let these things boil in it.
Take right Acorus, Stichas, Baye leaves, Rosemary, Iua or Chamapithys, Sage,
each of them a handful: with this wash the head: and after the washing bathe
the foreparte of the head with a little Aqua vite, and sprinckle it with the
powder following.

Take Penyroyall, bushe Calamint, Cloves, Sandarake, Mace, Stichas, dry Mynte,
Maioram, of each five drammes: mingle them and make thereof a fine powder, and
after the sprincklynge lay it upon hemp towe. Also at other times when you
go to bed put of the same powder upon the hinder part of the head, the head
also being unwashed, for it dries. etc.

Another Lee for to comfort the head and Memory.
Take wall Yuye, Rosemarye Baye leaves, Stichas, Marubium or Horehounde, or
Betony, and let them boil in the Lee, and therewith you shall wash your head.
Cipres nuttes have almost the same operation being often used. And that you
may have Soap with the same Lee.

Take Venice or French Soap two pound, Calamus aromaticus three drammes,
Maioram, Thyme, Stichas arabica, Nigella, Cloves, Cardamomum, each of them two
drammes, mingle thereto the roots of dry and sweet Flouredeluce an ounce, and
then mingle it with Soap fynely cut or scrapped in being well heated, and make
lumpes or pills in manner of a Walnutte, but if you can not myngle them
together by reason of the dryness of the things, then put thereto a little
Maioram water or some other convenient. Afterward let the head be well dried
in rubbing it with warm lynnen clothes: but hold not your head near to the
fire, lest Vapors be drawn to it and the head stuffed.

Another, which is very good for a moist head, and is to be used once or
twyse in a weke.
Take Senae, Roses, Camomill flowers, Acorus, Stichas, Bay leaves, Cypres
nuttes, Sage, Iua, Yuye berries, each of them an equal quantity, boil these
in the Winter in Lee to wash your head withal: but in Summer take away
Stichas, and put in Roses, and a few Myrtell berries, and use it not to whote.

Another most excellent remedy, but much more difficile to begotten.
Take the flowers of dry Cytrons, Buglosse, Rosemary, each of them two
drammes, Comomil, Violettes, Roses each of them a dram and a half, Seselis two
drammes, Semen viticis or Agnus castus or Tutson seed, field Rue, each of
them.iiii. Scruples, green Baye leaves, Maioram, Stichas, Sage, Elder flowers,
Artimisia or Mugeworte, each of them three drammes: let them be very well
beaten, and powered into three pound of the best Aquavite, and six ounces of
white Squilliticke Vinegre that is very strong, and let them rest together in
a glass vessel well covered for the space of two days, and then distill them
over ashes with a soft fire: afterward take good oil of Turpentyne
distilled eyghtene ounces, oil of Been distilled eight ounces, of the foresaid
water distilled xxiiii.ounces: in steed of oil of Been you may take oil of
Bears grease distilled, but it is better if you take of either of them half:
but if you can find neither of them, take Elder oil: put to these foresaid
things Men's hears well burned, for of their own property they cause
wakefulnes, and stir up them that have the Lethargy: let them be mingled and
distilled in a glassen vessel, even until all the water be drawn out, and
keep that same water a part: then take Euforbium.iiii. drammes, long Pepper
three drammes and a half, Cummyn three drammes, clear male Frankensence two
ounces and two drammes, Masticke, Myrre elect, either of them an ounce, Anacardum
well beaten an ounce and two drammes, Carpobalsamum, iiii. drammes, Pulpa
Castorei, half a dram, Myrob^lanu^ empeliticum, four drammes and a half,
Opopanax three ounces, raw Sylke and finely cut in pieces a dra^me and a half,
Costum, roots of femall Pionye, fine Cyperus, each of them four Scruples,
Ladanum three drammes, Dragons blood, (that is a Gum so named for the
lykenes of it) two drammes and a half, clear Bdellium six drammes: let them
that will be brought to powder be very well beaten to powder, and all powered
into all the foresaid Oil, and let them so rest in a temperate bathe the
space of five days together in a glass vessel closse stopped, but let them
be styrred or myngled with a dry reed or stycke every day: then let them be
strayned forth, and very well trushed or pressed with a course cloth which
has first been put into the water and well wrong out: and afterward let
the Oil (being in such sort strained) be distilled, or let it be so done
withal as is done in the distillynge of Oil of Ladanum: To wit, first
begin with a small Fire of Coals in an Oven or Chymney, till in so boylynge
softelye, it begin to distyll somewhat meanelye, then proceed on with a small
and easy flame, sum times renewynge it, until the moist and subtylle
substance of the Oils that were put thereunto be almost all distiled, the
which you may perceive by your eye syghte, but better by the weight of the
Oil that is distilled: then hold on with a mean fire of coals, in puttyng
away altogether the flame: and that which is distilled shall be kept in a
glass vessel well stopte. Last of all take Gallia muscata, Cloves, Maces,
Cubebe, Nutmygges, Cardamomu^ each of them four Scruples, Spyke, Calamus
aromaticus, the outward barks of an Orange, of each two Scruples, good Lignum
aloes, two drammes and a half, fine Ambergrise three drammes and a half, of
the best Musk a dram and a half: Let them be all beaten fynely to powder,
and mingled with all the foresaid distilled Oil, and let them so remain
together two or three days in a temperate heat, and then afterward let them
be distilled by their own kind, and be brought to a subtle or pure
substance, and let them be kept in a strong glass vessel well stopped with
wax, and it is exceeding good. The manner of vsi^g of it is such, that first if
it needs there be a purgation made of all or of the head, and than use it in
the beginning of the month of November continuallye by the space of fyftye
days, and afterward once in eighte days, and consequently also when you
will reduce things into your Memory, taking it late in the evening when you
purpose to rehearse, preach or entreat, of a thing in the morning.

Also in a cold affectyon this oil following shall be notable good.
Take Turpentine resine if it may be gotten, (for it is brought for the most
part out of Cyprus to Venice) or in place thereof take laricine the weight of
a pound, old brick or tile after the boiling or making not moistened, the
which being broken in pieces and set on fire and quenched have been in old
oil of Olyues, half a pound: Mastike an ounce, let the tiles be rubbed or
beaten in pieces, and being well mingled with Turpentine let them be set to the
fire of an over or furnays in a glass or earthen vessel well hardened or
nealed, and let the licoures that remain be gathered a sunder, for there will
run out three of a diverse color, good better, and best of al.

An Ointment for the same purpose.
Take the fat of a Bear, of a Capon, of a Hen, of a Cow, and Yuye Gum,
each of them an equal wayght, and destil them al in a Lembicke of glass with
a soft fire: with the which olye anointe your temples and the pulses of your
hands thrice in a week, and you shall perceive it to be an excellent good
thing.

An Ointment wherewith you may moderately anoynte your temples only in cold
weather.
Take the fat of a Moldwarpe of a Bear, of a Wesell, and of Castoreum, echof
them a like, the juice of Betonye, and of Rosemary, either of them a like: and
of all this make an ointment, the which (as it is said) Aristotle did use.
Aristotle.


To the end that you may retain things profoundly and perpetually in your
Memory, and that you may learn a thing spedely: this have many great men used.
Take the roots of Langdebefe, the rotes of Valerian either of them four
ounces, the Roots of Rewe two ounces: make thereof very fine Poulder then take
the Juice of Eybryghte, of Clarye or Orminum, and of Verueyne, each of them
four ounces: let the Juice be well strayned out thoroughe a lynnen clothe,
then myngle the Juice together, and the poulders by them selves, afterward
take the vithe of Anacardum the waighte of an once, and make a poulddr as
aforesaid Also take the seed of Asshe kayes which is like a Birds tongue,
and make a very fine Poulder, then myngle all the foresaid things together,
to wit, the Iuyces and the Poulders, and take an earthen Glassye fryenge
pan, and set it over the fire, and put therein Bears greasse, and pour
it or melte it by little and little, and cast into the same the said Poulders
always myngling it with the Iuyces, and put in still of the same grease till
it become a very pure oyntmente wherewith annoynte your temples and the part
of your Memory, and your foreheade, and the part of the Crown of your
head toward the noddle: and do this twice or thryse in a year, and you
must contynewe so in oyntynge, even more or less as it shall need: for
Sorcerye is superstious and vain.
this excedeth in virtue the superstytious art of Sorcerye.

To the same purpose.
Take eyghte cuppefulles of common water, leaves of Yuye, of Stichas, either of
them a pound and a half, put them together into the water to boil till
the water be almost consumed away, then take the^ out and press or wrynge them
well, and put therein a little Turpentine washed in Rose water, then wash your
head with good Lee, and when it is dried annoynte your temples and the hinder
part of your head with the foresaid lycoure.

An odoriferous or sweet smellyng Apple for the comfortynge of a cold brain,
Take Ladanum, Lignum aloes, Storar, each of them a dram, Cloves, Nutmygges,
Basil seed each of them half a dram, with Rose water, in the which there
has been dissolved or put a little Musk and Ambergrise, make there of an Apple.

To have a profounde and good Memory, or to recover it again if it be lost by
weakness or infirmity: it also helps the giddines
Take Rosemarye, that is Libanotis, Borage, Camomill, Violets, Roses, each of
them an ounce, Stichas Baye leaves, Maioram, Sage each of them two ounces: cut
or chop them all and put them in excellent good wine, and after a days space
distill them in a Lembick of glass or earth well nealde, and being distilled
keep them, and put therein sweet smelling Turpentyne a pound, white
Frankensence eyghte ounces, M^^cke, Myrrh, Bdellium, Anacardum, each of them
four ounces: bruyse all these, and let it so stand five days the distillation
being covered, then distill them so long with a good fire till you have Oil of
them, the which youmuste keep well closed in a glass bottell hard stopped
with Ware and parchment. The use thereof is such.

Receive thereof at your mouth as much as a Filberde shell would conteyne,
and annoynte also therewith the parts of your Memory, to wit the hinder
part of your head and the other parts heretofore rehcarsed: so shall you
prove it to be excellent good.

I might here gather together more yea and profitable remedies, but these shall
suffyce, and make a way for others to prepare according to the occasion: for I
have studied brevity, and have chosen out of good the best, nor I would not
(as also it becomes not a Christian) have them lie hidden in me. He shall
find more compounded and those not to be contemned whosoever reads Antonius
Fumanellus Veronensis chap 16. de compositione. mediciment.
in Antonius Fumanellus a physician of Verona, in his work of the composytyon
of medecynes the xvi. Chapter I have not written over those here, lest I
should do the thing already done, although some of his do in some part agree
with mine let every one chose out that which shall be convenient for him: and
he that can not, let him take counsel at a learned Physician, and let him
remember that there is nothing done or gotten without labor that is praise
worthy. For God has appointed Nothing without labor.
al things to labor: nether are the means to be despised of him that
desires to obtain the ends for because that (according to the natural
Philosophers) a man can Natural Philosophy.
not pass from one extremity to another without a convenient mean: And it is
the property of a sluggard not to addicte him self to immitate and follow
every good or best thing, for though we can not fullye atteyne thereunto, yet
at the least let us come as near it as we may, sithe that (as the Proverb
says) Mercurye is not made of every wood.

The sixte Chapter expresses Philosophical Judgments, rules, and precepts
of Remembrance.
ARistotle thought good, to assign Aristole.
two acts of Memoratio^: to wit, Memory and Remembrance: although
Remembrance perteyneth to those things which we have forgotten, and is the
office of the extymatyue or cogitatyue virtue, not principally of the
Memoratyue, as Auerrhous and Auerrhous Auerrhous. Albertus.
have declared in their little Treatyses: or you may name that faculty to be
the mind and understanding as Themistius ssythe: because there Themistius.
is no power or faculty perceived to wander about, but ye understanding. And
this without ye presence of ye obiecte is only in Man: for with the presence of
the object it is also found in brute Beasts, as Aristotle has assented,
Aristotle.
and as it euidentlye apearethe in a Greyhounde or Spayniel: and it is called
the fantastical sense.

But Memory is a retaynyng of the Images or symilitudes first perceived of the
soul, the which nevertheless is unprofitable except it both retain all, and
also restore them in the same order wherein it conceived them. And it
belongs not to present things nor things to come, Aristotle.
but only to things paste, as Aristotle says. Also Memory and Remembrance
although they do agree in one same subject kind, yet they Dyffer in
aptenes, because that they that have a good Remembrance, have commonly an ill
Memory.

Also as concerning time, Memory does always go before Remembrance: for a
man can not Remember except those things whereof he has the Memory. Also
this is granted to many living things, but that only to men: for sith
that to remember is as it were to argue perfitlye, that is to proceed from
known to unknown, therefore it appertains to man, whereof it comes to
pass that Rembraunce is a gift given to Man, as I have already expressed.

To the Memory there belongs four mouinges. Four things belong to memory.


The first is a mouyng of the spirits which transport the figures or
similitudes from the cogitatiue to the memoratiue.

The second is a picturynge and faynyng of fygures in the same Memory.

The third is a reportation or caryinge again of the spirits from the
memoratiue to the cogitatiue or ratiocinatiue.

The fourth is that action by the which the cogitatiue consydereth and
knows things perfectelye, the which is properlye called the Memory. We
say also that the art of Memory or Remembrance falls by it self upon
three things as it were three obiectes, to wit, upon a thing apprehended
or taken from else where, upon the act by the which the same thing was
from else where apprehended, and upon the determinate or indeterminate syme
in the which the same apprehension was made.

If any of these things fail or be lacking, the Memoration must needs
fail.

Therefore the Memory may also be very well thus defyned, that it is an
apprehension of Another definition of Memory.
similitudes remaining in the soul, with a dillygente searchynge or
inquisition: But of these things it is already spoken in the first Chapter.
And now purposynge to speak of Artificial Memory, we will first prescribe
certain things which he ought to perform of him self that will have a good
Memory. The which shall be at this time contained in Twenty precepts, but knyt
up in few words.

1. First judge (let this and the like be spoken to young Studientes) the
studies which you follow to be most excellent of all other: and your self to
be happy if you obtain wisdom and be sure to hear a learned teacher, whom
also you may be constrained to have in admiration: for certeynlye it much
helps the Memory, if you receive such things as you read and hear with
admiration and pleasure.

2. Judge the same science or knowledge to be hard and well known to very few,
because thereby your wit must needs arise and awaken: and that is profitable to
the Memory.

3. You must attentively and dilygently give ear to your teachers: likewise if
you read any thing your self, do it earnestly, gathering together all the
powers of your mind to the study thereof, neither let your mind waver, but
constrain it to be only upon your study, or with a little muttrynge call it
back again, for he is easy to be taught who is ready to hear
attentiuelye: for of a diligente attention proceeds a greater mouyng and a
more steadfast impryntyng. And therefore says Terrence. Terence.
When earnestly the mind is set,
Then does the Wit great virtue get.


4. At such time as you intend to collect or gather together many things,
reduce them as much as is possible to shortness and brevity, for he that will
increase his learning proceeds one way, and he that will augment his Memory
another way: for he that learneth does cut and divide the general into
parts even unto the vttermoste and last, but he that will have a good
Memory, does reduce and bring a multitude into one, or at the least into a
few.

Verses also do help much to the stedfastnes of the Memory by reason of ye
order of the compos^^^^ and good making, not rashly wandering or strayinge
abroad, but closed and shut up in certain limittes and measures, in such
sort that they suffer not the mind to wander and err.

5. Above all things let there be an order chosen out and observed in deuidyng
of the body into his members; for so shall you distribute Treatises in Chapters,
and Chapters into conclusions.

6. Every thing must be often repeated over, in such sort that when you have
learned one chapter, and the next following together, you must repeat or
rehearse again in your mind the first and the second: and when you have
learned the third, then you must begin again at the first, and so follow
successyuely.

7. When you entende to comprehend many things, you shall separate them
into members or parts: lesle that a dyffused multitude do confound the
Memory. Whereof that Poet says. A certain Poet.


If you will this thing well skan.
Into parts deuyde it than.
8. You must have an often and daily cogytatyon or thyncking of the same
thing, or a dysputation with other, or a declaration to another: for of
frequented acts is engendered a state or habit, which is yt Memory. Nor let
not the fear of erringe keep you back from disputinge: for you shall hold
faster that which you have lernid with shamefastnes and therefore says Seneca:
Memory loses no Senses.
thing, except that which it does not of ten regard or look unto.

9. Endeavor your self to understand perfectlye that which you entende to
remember: neither ought you to take so great care to read many things as
to understand many things: or else read few things often, especially of
them that fill not their papers or wryttinges with trifles.

10. Take heed lest the writing of things do not hurt your Memory, to
wit, lest you countynge those things to be sure and steadefaste, which you
have written in your Book of remembrances, do cease to thyncke any more of
them, and so trusting to that securytye, do suffer them to slip out of
your mind. Herein the example of Antischenes the Athenyan Antisthe, nes
Atheniensis.
serves very well, who aunswerynge a certain friend that made his moon that
he had lost his commentaries, said that he should rather have written them in
his mind then in his Papers: meaning the confydence of books to be the cause,
whereby we do / less exercise our Memory.

11. The dygestion of meat is to be procured, and such things as be
hurtefull to the Memory are to be avoided, and let such thynthinges as
help it be put in use, as it is already said in the third and fourth
Chapter.

12. Your mind must be made free from all strange cogitations, to wit
from such as do not belong to study: for being busied with many, etc.

13. Such things as you will remember, are not only to be hard, but also to
be seen: for they that do but once behold a thing do better remember it,
then they that hear the same very often and behold it not.

14. If any body ask you a question, do not answer hastelye or forthwith,
that is to say, without aduisement or meditation: for a sudden anuswere is
always and inconsulted.

15. You must measure the powers and strengthes of your wit and of your
Memory, lest you charge them with more then they be able to sustain and keep:
an example may be taken of the stomach, which if it be lode^ above it
strength, is made weaker for it does not digest: nether does a glutous body
ware fat: even so what soever is learned, except it be retained, does little
profit: therefore if you cannot retain as much as should be needful, you
must multiply the number, and still diminishe the continued quantity.

16. You must appeint certain hours or times for your study, and especially
those in the which your stomach or ventricle shall be emptye and not full of
meat: for then the wit is not filled or darckned with vapors: the conuenyent
hours shall be in the first part of the night when every thing is at rest,
and in the morning at Cocks crowing: and take good heed lest by any chance
or fortune, you mysse or let slyppe the howeres appointed for your study.

17. Repeat over every night that which you have gotten by your study or
lerning, after the imitation of Cato, who would call to Memory Cato.
in the eueninge, all that which he had done, read or heard, in the day time.

18. Memory is to be exercised even from youth, to the end it may be the
readyer and easyer both in children and men: and it forces much in what
kind of learning a man is brought up in from his young and tender years,
For, An earthen pot will savor still,
Of that thing which did first it fill.


Moreover all things be new un to children: and new or wonderful things do
make a steadfast infixion or impression in the Memory.

19. For the recreation of your mind and the restorynge of your strengthes,
you must not fly to filthy and dishonest things, but you shall bring it to
pass by changing of your study: for it is better somewhat to refreshe your
mind then altogether to lose it. Yea also the plays pastymes or Enterludes of
Christians ought to be sage and honest.

Therefore after earnest and grane studies you must repair to lighter and
easier, as to Histories or Musical exercises: for it restores the strength
and nourishes the convenient rest, and also virtue is of more power after
leisure and rest. There be some that had rather play, the which in deed is
granted and permitted, so that the play be a play and not an earnest or sad
thing, and let it be short, honest, without deceit hurt or covetousness. The
Chestes Cheaste play.
play (a Treatise whereof I latelye translated into English) does move and
stir up the wit, but in the same is often bestowed to much time and study,
the which ought to be better Tenyce play.
applied. The baule or Tenyce play, does also profit the hole body. (But
above all the noble exercise of Shooting (Shooting is most commendable)
in the long Bow is most commendable). Walking abroad is good cheiflye for
the head: but it is better to dispute together walkinge up and down and
moving the hands. This recreatio^ of the mind ought not to be daily nor often,
and especially it must not be used at ye hours or time of study. Your wit
being somewhat recreated or confirmed, you must immediately resort to yt study
of your lerning lest time do not peryshe, then the which nothing is more
precious or dear, and it must be brought to pass ye the time which is lost,
may he recovered again by earnest and dilligent study. For (as Philelphus
says). Philelphus*


Believe me, sure there is no play,
more excellent and pure,
Or that more labor does delay,
and liberty procure:
Then wholly to addicte the mind,
fair virtues to attain.
Fo^ve tue does the diffrence find
between good things and veins
And does also refreshe the spirit
with ioyfulnes and rest,
Causing the same so to delight
that thereby it is bleste.
20. Do not depart from your teachers before it besemeth or behooves you. For
many might become excellent men in science and knowledge if they were not
ashamed to be scholars, before they be able to have the judgment and
understanding of wisdom. Also it shall much profit to teach others, to
expound, to declare, to ask, and toanswere: to doubt of some thyngsis good,
so that it be not done without reason.

Finallye you shall reckon that amongst the unhappy days, in the which you
have not profited or learned some thing that might have been yours or done
you good. So that (after the common saying)
No day pass away without learning.


Precepts of remembrance.
The first precepte is, of the order and consequence of such things as are to
be remembered: for when we have learned any thing orderlye being joined
together with a certain connection and copulacion, though we forget the same,
yet the order being repeated over, we shall easelye remember it again: for
the antecedent being known, we shall easelye be brought into the consequent,
and shall find that which was lost. And therefore a certain Philosopher says
right well. That such things as be well set together in order, are easy to be
remembered: but they that be ill, are difficultlye called again into the
Memory. For we do easily express or declare things that have been done when
they be placed in the same order wherein they be done: for look what
effycacye things that are done have one toward another: even ye like have
they in mouinge and styrring up the mind.

The second is, that when by one like thing we be led into another like unto
the same, as if we do not remember Homere, let us call to Memory Homere.
Virgill yt prince of Latin Poets Virgill.
whereby we shall come to the remembrance of Homere the Prince of Greek
poets.

The third is, that we do sometimes think upon contraries: for he that will be
mindful of Hector, shall remember Hector.
also Achilles. Achilles.


The fourth is, the remembrance of of yt place and time wherein yt thing was
done: for the place and the time do ^^^ely bring the thing to Memory. There
be also three seats of arguments, from like, from contraries, and from nere or
between both.

The fifte is, to rehearse all things by their properties: as, if we would
remember a fat man, let us consider Dionyfius, Siracusanus. Justinius
or think of Dionisius Siracusanus: who (as Justinius is author) by fatnes
lost his eyes.

The seventh Chapter treats in few words of local or artificial Memory.
Artificial Memory is a disposyng or placing of sensible things in the mind
by imagination, A diffination of artificial Memory.
whereunto the natural Memory having respect, is by them admonished that it
may be hable to call to mind more easily and dissinctly such things as are
to be remembered: and (as Cicero says in his second to Herennius) it
consists or p^^ces as it were of wax or tables, and Clcero 2. to Herennius
of Images as of fygures and letters. For so it comes to pass that such
things as we have heard or learned, we rehearse again even as though we read
the^. Nor it skilleth not much whether we begin at the first or at the
last. The places them selves must be set in order, for if there be a confusion
in them, it follows of necessity that all the rest must be disordered. And it
behooves also that there be many places that many things may be placed by
the same exercise and practice. Cicero Cicero.
judged that there should be an hnndreth in number. Thomas Aquinas Thomas
Aquinas.
thought it good to have me. For these places many have searched by diverse and
sundry arts, Metrodorus Metrodorus.
found out three hundred and six places of the.xii. signs in the which the
Sun goes his course: because the Astrologers do divide the Zodiarke into so
many degrees. Cicero invented a certain familiar house, severed or parted
into many places, and he thought it good that we should devise after every
fyfte place either a golden hand or some other distinction, whereby the one
might be discemed from yt other, and also in the^ to observe a steadfast and
immovable order, yt we might always enter in and go out at the right side. An
other Author not vnsku^full, feigned places by certain living creatures and
derived their order out of the Latyne Alphabete, in such sort that every one
of their names should begin with some one of every letter: even as if these
were the names: an Ass, a Bear, a Cat, a Dog, an Elephante, a Fox, a
Goat, a Horse, a Iaye, a Kyte, a Lion, a Mule, a Nightingale, an Oule, a
Partrige, a Quail, a Rabbet, a Sheep, a Throstle, a Unicorn Xistus the
phisopher (who wrote of these) Hyena, Zacheus. He divided all these into five
places: into the head, into the forefeete, into the bealy, into the hinder
feet and the tail, for this order nature her self ministers; neither can
the wit be confounded in countinge or rekennyng them. Having thus gotten
then an hundredth and fyftene places he graued in them the Images of things
worthy of Memory, and also he commanded that many things should be written
by the mind or wit in the face of him that speaks, in the hears, in the
forehead, in the eyes, and so to descend downewarde to the feet. But me
thinks it a very easy thing to devise and imagine not only an hundredth but
also infinite places, saying no man is ignorant of the situation of the City
where he was borne, or in the which he has long dwelled.

Therefore when the mind enters in at the gate, whiles it considers the
diversity of ways, directinge and leadinge to diverse countries, and whiles
it remembers friends houses, public dwelling places, Palaces or common
places of Judgment, it shall find out a marvelous number of places. Hereto
also it may imagine great courts or places of larger room, wherein it may
devise as great a number of places as it lists, so that every thing may
be written therein that he will have.

And because the teaching by examples is brief and effectual: now will I put
forth some examples, to the end that thereby the matter may be the better
perceived. I will put forth an example of ten, and consequently by the
proportion thereof shall be devised the example of a thousand.

And therefore I take or choose a great and empty house, to the which you must
not go often but feldome, and apoynte or set the first place which is at the
door, three foot distant from the door. Let the second place be twelve or
fiftene foot destant from that, as for example, let there be one corner or
angle.

Let the third place be distant from the second even as many, or twelve foot
and there may be perchance another corner, or a midst between the first and
the second corner. The fourth, shall be a corner. The fyfte, shall be a corner
distante by as much. The sixte likewise: and the hall being finished, you shall
enter into one chamber, and immediatlye within the door you shall note or
appoynte the seventh, and afterward in the first corner of the chamber the
eight and in the second corner the nynthe, and in the third the tenthe with
his distaunce. And if you will have any more places, go out of the chamber,
and so mark or note ye other chambers proporcionally.

But yet remember that the dystaunce which is given is moderate and
conuenyent, but if there be not found so great a dystaunce, but a lesser
even unto eyghte, or to less even unto five foot, yei should it be
tolerable. As concerning the temple it ought to be such a one as must not
be much frequented, especially of your self: to the end that you be not
confounded or troubled with the multitude of the fygures or Images. These
places ought to be Memorable and remoueable with ones hand, for yt corners are
not places, but fyxed Images set and placed in the corners, upon the which
(even as upon paper) are painted other figures, which may be put out, even as
letters upon paper: As for example, the first place is marked The right way
to have artificial Memory, is the collocation and dilligent observation of
things.
or known by an vrinall, in setting an vrinall in his place. The second by a
salve bore, settinge there also a salve box. The iii. by a mortar putting it
there. The fourth by a pestill. The.v. by a payr of writi^g tables. The vi. by
a hares foot. The. 7. by a searcer. The 8. by a bag. The.ix. by a lofe of wax.
The x. by yt canes of caissa. And these names must be kept always in mind and
yt places from.v. to.v. yt the quinaries or fifte places may always be had in
Memory. Of yt distance there is enough spoken. Yet note yt you may pass
to.xxv. and not beyond, lest there should chance a negatio^ in the images.
And be it spoken eue^ likewise of ye quantity as thouching yt height, yt there
be not many of a heighte, but from v. eue^ unto.xii. foot. And let every fifth
place be marked, as it is said of yt order. The quality also must be noted yt
they be not to light nor to dark, nor to much freque^ted. Let us come to yt
images which are yt things yt must be placed: yt images which be known un to
us ought to be so set in these places with such mouinges, that by them we may
call things to remembrance. For example, I would remember twentye Names, I
will do thus: In the first place I will set the Image of Peter one whom I
well know, with an vrynall full of water in his hand the which he shall power
upon James one also well known unto me: and so by this notable act I shall
remember these two and so place in my remembrance these two names.

In the second place I will put Henrye who is unto me very well known (for
these fygures must be exactly known that they may quickly come into ones
Memory) who shall put his hand into a box and pull out the salve and
therewith all to besmyer Steven one also whom I do very well know.

In the third place I will set Thomas, one whom I know also, who shall take
out of the mortar a plaster and shall put it upon Frauncis face: or by
inuentynge some other mad iestes and toys, whereby the Memory may be
confirmed to bear away such like names. And so in like manner proceed with the
rest.

Likewise if I would remember any man and also his act, I will imagine him
and the doing of his act: as, if I would remember one eating of Figs, then
I will imagine that with a Fig he did some merry or strange thing.

If you will remember arguments, you shall take the substance of the
argument, and shall only place yt because the whole argument can not be placed,
and so of other things after their place.

We will yet again entreat of fygures by these five precepts.

The first is, that the figure do move either to laughter, compassion or
admiration: for one may soon find a figure that does stir up and move the
affection of the soul. An example hereof is this, if I should set or place
in the mouth of a mad Ass the head of Antonye to be almost bitten in
pieces, the blood to gushe out of him, and that he asks help, and holdinge
up his hands cries out: for it can not be, but that when I would, I should
see him with the eyes of my mind, and declare or expres Antony to him that
should ask or enquire for him.

Another is, that we should represent either the like by the like, or by yt
contrary, or else by the propriety thereof. An example of the first is, as if I
were about to place the name of Galene, I should write the name of some other
excellent Physician, whose authority (as nere as may be) is either equal,
or little inferior. An example of the second is, if I write the same by the
name of an unlearned Physician: if I descrybe Thersites Thersites. Achilles.
by Achilles, and the good for ye evil: or the foul by the fair. An example
of the third is, if I represent Ouidius Naso. Plato.
Ouidius Naso, by a great Nose: Plato by Large shoulders, Crispus by crysped
or curled hears Cicero: Gelasinus.
and Cicero by Gelasinus.

The thride is, that we accustom our selves to place things even from our
very youth, and that we increase with daily ercercyse: although that the
teachinge thereof may help and prefyte even them also that be elder. The
habit the perfectnes and dexterity (I mean to practice these things) is much
the more if they do so place al things which they shall either say or do and
also what soever they hear in communycation or talkinge. And they must like
wise painte and grave the manners, gestures, and times: For in so doing they
shall in a short space be notablye well exercised. It profits also to play
one with another, and to go about to excel him that shall recyte many
things, more clearelye, orderlye, and spedelye then other.

The fourth is, that (in every quinarie or fifte number of those things that
are to be marked) we repeat again from the beginning all such things as
are already noted: for the repetition of things comonlye brings great
utility and profit.

The fifte is, that we should represent things compound with the similitude of
simple things. As for example: he that will remember this sentence, Cicero
contendethe with Hortensius, Cicero Hortensius.
shall Imagine the pease called Cicer which complayneth of the barenes of the
garden: for so does Cicer resemble Cicero and the garden called Hortus does
represent Hortensius, and the complaint the contention. And thus also may the
chief points of the law be kept in mind, as if we would place this law to be
had in Memory, Publicati testamenti fides: the assurance of a testament
published: let us imagine a writing in form of a testament opened, upon the
which mire or dyrte has been cast by some man, and so the assurance therefore
is lost. Lo the assurance of the testament ones published can not be read
again. But these things shall be more easily done if there be learning adjoined
hereunto, and the knowledge of things worthy of Memory, and also perfect and
dailye exercise not wantinge, seying that exercise is hable to overcome all
things: so shall the philition also remember the rules of Physic, and likewise
ye Lawyer ye rules of the law with more facility.

The place therefore is like and is compared to ware or paper or tables (in the
which of old time many things were written): also the image or figure is
likned to letters or writing: and the recityng of the names is compared to the
readinge or recitinge of things being read. The place is the part serving instead of the Memory and receives things as the Memory does, and it is
multiplied by having respect forward and backward to ward the right side and
toward the left side, upward and downewarde, by adding somewhat or
dimishinge somewhat: and it is multiplied by mesuring the long, the ouertwart,
and the mean. The rule of the places briefly in order is this also, that first
there be an invention of the places (whereof it is already spoken) afterward
an ordering a meditation, a distaunce, a stedfastnes, a solitarines, a mean
light, a dissimilitude, a quantity, a marking of the fifte places by a golden
hand or of some other metal, and the variety thereof, lest the simitude
should cause a confusion. The images or figures are simitudes of things
conceived in the mind, or a proportion either wholly or partly like unto the
thing yt we would remember, yea they be taken for yt things themselves yt are
to be placed. And they be in two kinds: to wit, either known or unknown: of
the notes or marks some be quick, some dead: and as well of the quick as of yt
dead some simple, and some compound. Again you shall not forget that in placing
or setting of ye images or figures in their places the thing is always to be
placed with a merry, a merueilous or cruel act, or some other unaccustomed manner:
for merry ^uell, injurious, merueilous, excellently fair, or excedi^gly foul
things do change and move yt senses, and better stir up yt Memory, when ye
mind is much occupied about such things. also yt images ar varied by yt
tra^spositio^ and tra^sumptio^ of ye letters: as if I would remember nep, I shall
place a pen Nep (an herb so called.)
and for a tiran, a raueni^g wolf. It suffiseth therefore that we have
expressed a Method or compendious way, the which whosoever follows shall
easly (so that exercise be not lacking) get and attain the certain and sure
remembrance, of many and sundry things as due occasion shall require: but as
for the sluggishe and idle, let them slugge and sleep still, to whom all things
are displeasing.

The Epilogue.
Last of all, instead of an epilogue and as it wear a conclusion I will
Erasmus Roterodamus. 3, book Eccles.
add that which Erasmus Roterodamus writes in his. 3. book of Eccles. To
the power (says he) of the n^tyue Memory being good of nature, must be joined
intelligence, care, exercise, and order, Physicians also do promise some aid
to the confirming of the Memory and to this agrees, Marcilius Ficinus. But
besides Marcilius Ficinus.
those things that we have said, a perpetual sobriety of life does most of
all help: for gluttonye and dronckennes, like as they do dulle the wit, so
do they also utterly over throw and destroy the Memory: also the variety
of cares, and yt heap of busynesses is hurtefull, the tumultuous reading of
diverse volumes or books is also noyous. I suppose this to be the chief cause
why age should be forgetful: because the power or strength of the mind is
overthrown with the multitude of things. Also an imoderate bashfulnes, the
newnes or straungenes of Auditors, care and trouble of mind do annoye the
Memory: but bashefulnes and noultie are overcome or remedyed by use and
custom.

Also great or careful study is likewise hurtefull, in as much as it is not
without an earnest and gredye desire. In another place he says thus. The best
art of the Memory is, to understand things thoroughly, and being
understood to reduce them into order, and last of all to repeat often that
which you would remember. Hitherto Erasmus. If therefore you will have an
excellent Memory of good Erasmus.
things, you must take dilligent head, ye you understand ye perfect reason of
that you go about to learn by heart, for reason is an vndissoluable bond of the
verity and of the Memory. For this cause possibly Plato said, that thing
Plato.
which is once well understood, can never be altogether forgotten. Also those
things are to be committed to yt Memory which are not only profitable but also
pleasant. For such nourishments as bring yt swetest taste, do the easelier
pass and are converted into our nature: and with how much yt better appetite yt
any thing is taken, it remains so much yt longer. Add hereunto that which
Aristotle and Simonides thought good to be thoroughly observed Aristotle.
Simonides
(to wit) yt there should either be in deed a certain and sure order in
teaching, or else at yt least excogitated and supposed. Order consists in a
certain proporcion and connection. And if you take any one thing of those
that are set in an exquisite and perfect order, the rest will follow
forthewith by a certain necessary continuation either of Nature or of Art.
It is more over to be observed, that we do meditate many times those things
that we have learned: for so be the nourishementes of the mind digestid, and
as it ^ ear turned into the mind. It is very good also to renew and
rehearse very often such things as are committed to the Memory, with an
elegant oration or a sweet song, as it is heretofore declared. For pleasure is
the sauce of things, the food of love, the quickening of the wit, the
nourisher of the affection, and the strength of the Memory. The soul also
must be purged from evil things, that it may be filled with good things: And we
must humbly desire of God with a faithful prayer to grant us his spirit of
wisdom and knowledge for our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, to whom with the
father and the holy Ghost be all honor, laud and glory, for ever and ever.

Amen.
Memory says.
To him that would me gladly gain?
These three precepts shall not be vain.
The first is well to understand:
The thing that he does take in hand.
The second is, the same to place:
In order good, and formed race.
The third is, often to repeat:
The thing that he would not forgeate.
Adioynyng to, this Castle strong:
Great virtue commes er it be long.
FINIS.

