THE JUDGES SCRIPTVRE, OR, GODS CHARGE TO CHARGE-GIVERS. A Sermon Preached in
St. Nicholas Church of Newcastle upon Tyne, before the Judges, Justices, and
Gentlemen of the Town and Country, at the Assizes holden there the three and
twentieth day of July. 1635.

By Francis Gray, Master of Arts, and one of the Preachers in the same Town.

Ye shall do no unrighteousnes in judgment. Lev. 19. 15. He that walks
righteously, and speaks uprightly; he that despises the gain of
oppression, that shakes his hands from holding of Bribes, that stops his
ears from hearing of Blood, and shuts his eyes from seeing of evil, he
shall dwell on high, etc. Isai. 33. 15. 16. LONDON, Printed for Robert
Milbourne, and are to be sold at the sign of the Unicorn near to
Fleet-bridge. 1636.

TO THE RIGHT WORSIPFVLL, Sir Peter Riddel, Knight and Mayor; to Sir Thomas
Riddel, Knight and Recorder; to Sir Lionell Maddison, Knight and Alderman, and
to all the rest of his worthy Friends, the Worshipful Aldermen:
As likewise to the Worshipful, Mr. Leonard Carr, Sheriff, and the other late
Sheriffs of the Town and County of Newcastle upon Tyne. FRAN: GRAY wishes
what is most worthy of wishing* Grace here, and Glory hereafter.
RIght Worshipful, and ever much respected Friends, I find it commanded under
the Law, that he who had not a Lamb to offer Levit. 5. 7. 11.
in Sacrifice, was to offer two Turtle Doves, or two young Pigeons; and if his
sufficiency could not reach thereunto, then the tenth part of an Epha of
Flower was accepted: And it is written of Licurgus, that he enjoined the
people to offer little Sacrifices to their Gods; For (says he) they respect
more the inward Affection, than the outward Action. What my hearts desire is,
and ever has been, to express my thankfulness to your Worships for your many
favors, God who best knows my heart, is by his all-seeing eye insighted
therein; yet what to offer that might any way proportionate your Bounties no
way having, presuming upon your accustomed courtesy, that you will not
disdain a small tribute of gratitude where a greater is denied, I have here
made hold to commend to you my Patrons, the Patronage of this my poor and
small Labor, assuring my self that you will more tender the Authors inward
Devotion* than his outward Oblation: Which, I present to your Worships, not
after a Ceremonial Submission, but as a Serious and Real Testification of my
bounde^ Duty: The bashfulnesse of my Disposition, and just consciousnesse of
mine own unworthiness, were just Remoraes to stay me in this bold attempt to
come into public; Yet the due and daily experience that I have had, and now
do enjoy, of your kind acceptance, became a sufficient attractive to
countervaile all other retractive discouragements. I do hereby expect to come
under the lash of rash Censure, yet had I rather be unjustly taxed by the
Uncharitable, than continue ever guilty of that Capital crime of Ingratitude.
Affection, to you (as I do most sincerely profess) not any desire of Ambition
to my self was that, together with the motion of some friends which pricked
me forward to this rash enterprise: Let it have but what I heartily desire,
Gods favor, your Worships acceptance, the Reformation of such vices as therein
are justly taxed, and the Practice of such duties as are therein pressed,
together with the Readers favorable Construction, and then it has all that
either it can beg, or the Author can expect. And I justly hope, that what not
long since found your well-liking after your attentive and judicious hearings,
will not in so short a time meet with the poison of many malignant tongues:
However it fare with others, let it I beseech you, crave your Worships gracious
eye of Patronage. I need not to relate unto you in how many respects it is your
own, when in so many respects the Author confesses himself to be yours*
Receiving my Birth among you, my Education in part from you, and now for the
present, the chiefest means of my Sustentation, under God* by you. But whilst
I strive to express thankfulness, that I might not be judged basely to
flatter, as knowing that the sou^ding out of your Praises is no such pleasing
Music to your ears; Let this suffice that I Dedicate this my poor pains
unto you, and I shall never cease to breath out my hearty prayers to God, the
true Patron to us all, for your health and happiness, as also for the Peace,
Plenty, and Safety of that flourishing Corporation, wherein you are placed
Magistrates; which that you may the better Govern, and execute the trust
reposed in you, Give me leave to say to you in the Apostles words, wherewith I
will conclude: Let the Peace Coloss. 3. 15.
of God rule in your hearts, to the which ye are called in one body, and be ye
thankful, and my love be with you all in Christ Jesus. Amen.

From my Study in Newcastle upon Tyne, this 1 of December, 1635. Your Worships
in all due respects, to his power to be commanded, FRANCIS GRAY.

PErlegi hanc Concionem, cui Titulus (The Judges Scripture, etc.) in qua nihil
reperio sanae fidei, aut bonis moribus contrarium.

Tho: Weeks Episcopo Land: Cap: Domest.

GODS CHARGE TO CHARGE-GIVERS.
PSALM. 2. VER. 10. the latter part. Be instructed, ye Judges of the Earth.
THis Verse and Text, (Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, Worshipful, and
the rest Beloved) without Preface or Apology, are nothing else but Gods charge
by his Prophet, to them who were to give a charge to others; and his holy
direction to them, who under him were appointed to give both Correction and
Direction unto others.

In the words be pleased, I beseech you to observe with me these three General
Heads.

First, you are given to consider of the Persons directed: Set down by their
Title, They are called Judges.

Secondly, you are to take notice of their appellative Restriction, or
restrictive Appellation; which, you may be pleased to call their Circuit, or
place for the execution of their Authority. In that they are called, Iudices
terrae, Judges of the Earth.

Thirdly, there is to be considered, the Direction, or Charge it self which is
given; and that is, To be Instructed.

Be Instructed, ye Judges of the Earth. The Point then upon which we are first
to enter, and by Gods assistance and your gentle patience to handle, is
touching the persons directed, here in the Text, called Judges. The Prophet
David, having in some foregoing verses, spoken of the power and Majesty of the
Son of God, and declared how able he is to take vengeance on all those who
should dare to oppose him in his Soveraigntie; Now fearing that he should
chiefly meet with reluctance in Kings and Judges, as if because they being
Higher Powers, should chiefly presume to oppose the Highest of Powers: Or
otherwise, well knowing of what force the silent Rhetoric of the Paternes of
great Personages is, either in persuading to good, or in dissuading from evil,
he principally directs his speech to them, willing them to learn, and learning
to know, and knowing, to acknowledge the Supremacy of the Son of God, and To
serve the Lord in fear, as it follows in the beginning of the next verse,
whereupon in the Conclusion we must also touch.

I hope and presume, that I am not in the midst of a Masterlesse and lawless
Anabaptisticall Auditory; a Sect, that with might aad maine strives to strike
off the head of Government, and would frame the body of Men, like the body of
Polyphemus, without an eye, or make it like the confused Chaos of old, that it
be, Rudis indigestaque moles. So that I should need to stand much to prove the
lawfulnes of Kings and Judges, and how that there ought to be a Superiority
amongst the Sons of Men. If I should go no further than the words here of the
Prophet, we find God no way condemning them for being Kings and Judges, neither
does he wish and will them to leave these the places of their Dignity, but
only seeks to put them in mind of their Duty: Be wise now therefore O ye
Kings, etc. How Lawful and Laudable it is that there should be Kings and
Judges, Counselors and Magistrates; yea, and how necessarily it stands with
the good of the Commonwealth, Scripture confesses, and Experience confirms.

Whilst we see God in the very first Creation of the World, observing order,
and establishing a Superiority amongst his Creatures, willing The greater Light
to rule Genesis 1. 16.
the Day, and the lesser to govern the Night. And when he comes to the
Creation of Man, whom you may be pleased, as it were, to call the Masterpiece
of that his Divine Work-manship, Giving him command over the Genesis 1* 28.
Birds of the air, the Beasts of the field, and Fishes of the Sea. Whilst we
see Noah, a Commander in the Arc; Abraham, to be a chief President; Moses, to
be a Ruler; Joshua, to be his successor, both to persons and places; Samuel,
to be a Judge, to go from year to year in Circuit, to Bethel, Gilgal, and
Mizpeh, and to judge 1 Samuel 7. 16. 2 Chronicles. 19.
Israel; David, Solomon, Iosia, and Iehoshaphat, to be Kings; who also gave his
express command to his Judges. Whilst we behold our blessed Lord and Savior
JESUS CHRIST, no way overthrowing, but still seeking to establish Christian
government, paying Tribute, bidding to give Caesar his due, and content to be
brought before Pilate his Judge; Paul also answering submissively before his
Judges and giving it in express charge, that Every soul should be subject to
the Higher powers, to Romans 13 ^.
Kings, and all that are in authority, and that not only for fear, but for
conscience sake; for that the powers which were, were ordained of God, the
thrones* of heaven and earth being not contrary, but subordinate.

These, with many more instances which might be used, may serve to stop our
mouths, that we do not Verse. ^.
dare with those wicked ones, in St. Iudes time, To speak evil of Dignities,
but humbly to acknowledge them to be the breathing Images of the most high God.
If we compare the body Politic to the body Celestial, there we find an
Hyerarchy; the Apostle therefore speaks Coloss. 1. 16.
of Principalities and Powers, Dominions and Thrones; mention we find made of
Cherubins and Seraphins, Archangels and Angels: If to the body Astronomicall,
1 Cor. 15. 41.
the same Apostle shows us, that One Star differs from another in glory: If
to the body Ecclesiastical, you Ephesians. 4. 11.
have the same Apostle affirming, How that God has given to some to be
Prophets, some Apostles, some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers: If
to the body Natural, there we see all the members of the body to be guided by
the governance of the head: If to a body Occonomicall, the Apostle shows us,
and observation may teach us, that as there be vessels of gold, and vessels of
silver, so also, vessels of inferior metal: If to the body Military or
Martial, if there were not Generals, Captains, and the like Officers to
command, as well as the common Soldier to obey, there were but small hope of
victory: If to an hive of Bees, there this superiority is, Ipsius naturae
thesis, the very instinct of Nature has taught them to acknowledge a King, Et
Rege incolumi men's omnibus una.

If likewise we shall resemble the Common wealth to a Ship, the Orator could
tell us, that Alij sentinam hauriunt, alij plumbum inijciunt, and alius clavam
tenet, some are ready to pumpe, some to sound the depth by casting in of the
plummet, and some also to sit at the stern. If lastly, to an Instrument of
Music, there we see the sweetest harmony to arise from differing notes. Thus
in the Common wealth, God will have an higher and a lower; some to govern, and
some to be governed; some to command, and some to be commanded. Vbi est (...),
ibi est (...), want of Government causes confusion, and equality breeds but
contempt: where all will rule, there is no rule; where there is none to rule,
there is all misrule: to rule, and to rule well, and to be well ruled is the
very bond of humane society. God, we further know, has set such a majesty in
the face of lawful authority, that it works confusion, many times in the face
of wickedness, to dare to approach nigh it: and if the visible powers were not
often more praevalent with the Sons of men, than the invisible God, the world
would soon be overrunne with outrage: were not Authority ready to curb the
insolences of the stubbourne, what Incests, what bloodsheds, what lamentable
outcries, and superlative degrees of impiety would not abound? and each day
would appear to be that last time, whereof the Apostle speaks, Men 2 Timothy 3*
2, ^
to become heady, high-minded, truce breakers, disobedient, without natural
affection: and every way guilty of the like enormities.

Kings and Judges there then are, Kings and Judges there ought to be, the law
of God proves it, and the good of the Common wealth approves of it; Judges you
are, and Judges you are of God; you receive your warrant from God, as you
receive your Commission from the King. It well becomes you to be most faithful
to both: as you are of God, so in some sense, you are even called Gods. I am
sure that your judgment is called the Lords judgment, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. And you
are said, as Iehosaphat spoke to his Judges, to judge, not for man, but for the
Lord; and the Lord has promised to be with you in the judgment.

Behold then, and consider what a near relation God has to you; and you to
God; what shall I then in the first place say, but as Gods Judges, to put on
Gods courage, not to fear the face of men, to learn of God, not to have
respect of persons in judgment. The promise of Gods presence was that which
gave boldness to Moses, to Joshua, and to many other godly governors. Do as
they did, and you may in some measure expect to partake of that favor which
they found. Christian courage in the heart of a Judge or Magistrate, is that
which helps to put life into those Laws, which are ready to languish for want
of due and discreet execution. What are men in Authority more sure to meet
with, than distempered and refractory spirits, who hate to be reformed, and
think that they may sin without control; and if ever sin has gotten
head, and were countenanced both with might and multitude, surely now: and
therefore, when more than now, does it become Judges to be men of courage? It
was not without a mystery, that the steps to Salomons. Throne were supported
by Lions; what better might the Emblem or moral thereof be, but to intimate,
that a Lyon-like courage becomes such as sit in the Seat of Judicature and
Judgment? And let it ever be esteemed an especial part of a Rulers honor,
that he dare be just in punishing, whilst others will be unjust in sinning; and
that he dare to use his power, whilst they will dare to abuse theirs. Job
that holy man may very well serve Job* 29. 19.
as a pattern to all godly Magistrates, who was able to affirm this of
himself, that He did not stick to break the jaws of the wicked, and to pull
the prey out of their teeth. And why should not every Judge and Justice, having
Gods assurance of assistance, arm himself with an holy obstinacy, and learn
to prefer Justice before the favor and frowns of the stoutest evil doer,
becoming friends to all, as they become friends to Justice? yea, what more
procures credit to Government, than the unpartiall execution of Authority,
when great Offenders are forced to feel the smart of great offenses? As God
knows no honor, no royalty, no greatness in the matter of sin: no more
may his Deputies. Connivence at the rebellion of the Mighty, is that which
cutts the very sinews of a Commonwealth; neither does any thing help to make
Laws more contemptible, than the making difference of Offenders, that small
trespasses should be punished, when great ones are permitted to ride in
triumph: when that old Complaint comes again to be in practice, that the
Laws are made like unto Cobwebbs, wherein the lesser Flies are only taken,
and the greater do usually break through, who will not dare at length to
sweep them down.

The intention of the Law is an universal Reformation; now the Magistrate he
is termed (...), a living Law; and how shall he go through in the
indifferent administration of Justice, unless that whilst he puts on the
place of a Magistrate, he put off the person of a Friend, and go right on,
like the Sun in the Zodiac, with unresisted violence? Say not then when
God, a good Conscience, a good Cause, and the Law tells you, that here is
Justice to be executed against a great person offending, as Salomons sluggard
spoke, There is a Lion without: I shall incur the displeasure of some great
personage. Let not the contents of Agefilaus letters be too prevalent and
powerful, Si causa bona pro justitia, sin mala pro amicitia, utcunque parce;
neither with Saul, go about to spare the fattest of the spoil for your own
advantage, but so strive to proceed, that all both great and small may know,
that you bear not the Sword in vain.

Again in the second place, Judges ye are; Gods own mouth you see here
honors you with this Title; now what does more sympathize, or as I may so say,
synonamize with Judges, than Justice? So that the very Title of Judges ought to
be a continual remembrancer of that virtue which should be a perpetual
companion of your places. What can be more peculiar to a Judge, than Justice?
The Philosopher could ascribe this property to a Magistrate, that he be (...),
a preserver of that which is just; and Iethro, in that his Character of a good
Ruler makes this one particular requisite, that they be Veraces, or as Iunius
interprets the words, Ratione^ Exodus 18. 21.
tantu^ veritatis habentes, according to the usual reading, Men of Truth.
Justice is so requisite in a Commonwealth, that it is not only the Grace and
Glory of it, but the very Foundation, and as it were, the Cornerstone thereof.
Hence that old assertion, Toll justitiam and quid sunt regna nisi magna
latrocinea, The removal of Justice makes Kingdoms to become very Dens of
Thieves. Now what is Justice I beseech you, according to the old Description,
but a rendering to every man what is his due; So that it will well befit Judges
and Justices, ere that they can pass for current maintainers of Justice, so to
go on with an even and equal hand, that Causes be ever rather heard to speak,
than Persons: As you are not to exalt the proud Rich man, so neither to hate
the poor Just man; as you are not to benefit for Affection, so neither to
punish upon Passion; as you are not to do evil upon Malice, so neither to do
good upon Covetousness; as you are not to permit evil to escape Unpunished,
so neither to let goodness to go away Unrewarded.

To hang up a multitude of silly Snakes, who are more than half dead before
they come to dye, through hunger, and the noisome stench of a lamentable and
base Prison, which I dare boldly say, is more fit for Swine, than for Christian
Men; meaning thereby, the Country Jayle, a Grievance worthy of your Honors
best Consideration, and due Reformation, wherein Gentle and Simple, both Male
and Female, the Debtor and the Fellon are turned hand over head, in each
respect so woeful, that no Minister dare without great hazard either to his
life or health, go to offer in Charity, and to afford Comfort and Instruction
to the persons condemned: I say, to trusse up only such poor Pesants, Non
habet victoria laudem, there is small praise in such Justice: If in the mean
time notorious Fellons and Outlawes, the very bane and poison of the Country,
be not brought in; for Justices and Gentlemen of the Country, to be both
niggards of their pains and purses, on that behalf to do good, the King and
the country good service: If they shall be brought in, then for Witnesses and
Jurors, partly by fear, partly by favor, and partly by bribes to be laid off;
for composition of thefts, to be as common as the Thefts themselves; for
mischievous Murders, that so crying a sin; for every drop of innocent blood
is not only vocal, but importunate with God for vengeance. For these to be
buried, and through the greatness of friends to be smothered, for Incest, and
Oppressions to walk with outstretched necks, and all the more Grand crimes
of the place never so much as once to come into question, this will denote that
Justice lies a bleeding, this will prove an argument of gasping Justice.

Right Honorable you are called Judges, Right Worshipful you are called and
sworn to be Justices, give, I beseech you, not me leave, but God, in whose
place I stand here, as you your selves are shortly to sit elsewhere, to put you
in minds of what God tells me does become you: Has God conferred these places
of pre-eminence upon you? Non datur beneficium nisi propter officium, Dignity
calls for and commandes duty, and to whom much is given, of them much shall be
required. Know therefore that next to the prayers of the righteous there is no
more acceptable sacrifice to God then the upright administration of Justice,
the blood of Malefactors shed by lawful authority, is no doubt pleasing to
the most high God: Governors do even become guilty of those sins which they
seek not to reform by Justice: what better sight in any state then to see an
impudent Malefactor ledd* to the place of deserved execution. There Death may
perhapps seem harsh to some, but we must learn of God to know, that there is
as well a punishing mercy as a merciful punishing, and cursed be that mercy
that provokes to anger the God of mercy; It comes to far short God knows of
Justice, when Magistrates shall dare to humor the people in their Sins, this
is not with Moses to make up the gapp and breach between God and us, but to
make it greater by connivence. Sin we know is ready by every small
approbation to take heart, but if authority once seem to countenance it, and
will not punish it through foolish pity, it will soon learn to grow
impudent. As therefore you tender Gods glory, your fidelity to your Sovereign,
the Countries peace, and your own Comfort, suffer not, I beseech you, the
great and outrageous sins of these Northern parts to pass with a bare
giving of them in Charge, or to escape with a Slender reproof. Thus to do, is
only to shave that head, which deserves by Justice to be cut off; this is like
to a weak dosis that moves, but removes not the corrupt humors in the
stomach, it is a breach of Justice not to proportionate the punishment
according to the Sin.

Again give me leave yet once more to touch upon your title: Such as are
Judges have there name from there office, nomen ab officio convenienter habent:
Iudgges they are so called, for that it is there office to judge; now, who
knows not that Judging does imply a deliberate action? So that it will be
required that to right Judging there go along serious consideration, and
mature deliberation, that nothing be done rashly, nothing be effected*
unadvisedly. And as you are Gods Judges, it may well become you to learn this
manner and Method of proceeding even from God himself, who in the Sentencing
of sinners went no way precipitately to work: when our first Parents had
sinned, GOD first enters into parley with them, ere that he give them their
deserved Doom; so likewise he examines and questions Cain before he does
Genesis 18. 21.
sentence him, and when the Sins of Sodom cried loud for vengeance, I will
go down, says God, and see whether or no, they have done altogether
according to Deuteronomy. 1. 17.
their Cry: What God practices thus in himself, he gives in precepts to his
Deputies, You shall not respect persons in Judgment, butye shall hear both
small and Great: So when Iehosophat comes to give direction to his Judges, he
wills them again and again to take heed what they did: the Poet could say thus
much: Ovid de Trist.
Iudicis officium est vt res ita tempora rerum querere.


To consider aright of matters, to poncer times and well to weigh all
circumstances, well becomes a Judge: Mature and grave deliberation, has ever
been esteemed the Midwife to help to bring forth a good action; Temeritas
judicis est calamitas innocentis, The Judges temerity proves the guiltless
persons calamity, Et judicium temere darum, non tamest judicium, quam judicis
vitium. An over hasty sentence, deserves an hasty repentance. The Graecians
they placed Justice betwixt Leo and Libra, and many are accustomed to
protrature Justice with a balance in her hands, thereby intimating, that as
men in the places of Justice ought to be stout hearted, so they ought to
Balance all actions and causes; so that it cannot but much tend to a Judges
honor, wisely to weigh and judiciously to ponder, and not postingly to pass
by the poorest man's matter: watchful diligence then will prove a virtue most
suitable to Exodus 18 13.
men in places of authority, like Moses, of whom it is said, that he sat from
morning till evening to judge the people. He that is diligent in seeking after
these dignities, but having attained unto them, care not which way things go,
he is sick of Caligula's disease, who was bonus servus, sed Dominus nequum; or
as it was reported of Galba, that there was much rejoicing at his entrance, and
the people thought that they had done a good days work when they had made him
Emperor, but he was not long in, till they began to change there note; for
they found by woeful experience that they had met with a careless and cruel
governor. It is woeful when it is either with Magistrates or Ministers as
Pope Urban writ to a Prelate in his time very scoffingly, Monacho fervido,
Abbati calido, Episcopo vero tepido, and Archiepiscoposrigido, The higher in
means, the worse for manners. There is then good hope, when Judges, and all,
in all places of precedence, can say with Adrian, Non mihi sed populo; or as it
was affirmed of Caesar, Ipse se non habuit postquam mundus habere caepit
Prineipem, When he became a Governor, he ceased in a manner to be his own.
And happy sure that People, that Place, that Commonwealth, whose Rulers
thinks no time to long, no pains to great, nor no patience too much, whereby
they may glorify God, and seek the peoples good, in the appointed places of
their dignity: who are so desirous to study the Art of Government, that with
Caesar they can be content to divide the night, still reserving one part to
ponder of the peoples peace and safety.

(...). Homer Iliad.
It becomes not, (could the Greek Poet say) a good Counselor to be to great
a sleeper. It is said of Aegisilaus* that through his care of the public
good, he could scarce get time to be sick. Right Honorable then, and Right
Worshipful, Hoc agite, mind chiefly that, to which you are now chiefly
called, let your natures become answerable to your names, so shall we have
cause to bless you, and to bless God for you, to bless the care of our
gracious Sovereign through you, and justly to think our selves blessed in you.

And thus from the first general, we proceed in order unto the second; which
is, to consider of the Appellative restriction or Circuit, being here called,
Iudices terrae, Judges of the Earth.

Many may be the reasons of this denomination, which the time, and your
Honors weighty occasions will but permit to name. First, what is the subject
matter of your judgment, it is but the things of this Earth, Lands, Livings,
Liberties, Lives, and the like, all appertaining to the Earth, Quae supra vos
nihil ad vos, the souls of men come not within the compass of your judgment.
Secondly, the place of your residence and abode, the place also where you do
execute your office of Judicature, it is the very Element of this Earth.
Thirdly, those who are the proper object of your judgment, they are not Angels
and Spirits, but mortal men, they are such as are but dust and earth.
Fourthly, you your selves considered at the best, you are no more than a lump
of Earth, Earth by creation, and to be Earth by corruption; he who was ready to
call you Gods, was as ready in the next words to tell you, that you should dye
like men. It was the voice of God by his Prophet, commanded to be proclaimed,
Isai. 40. 6.
That All flesh is grass, and all the glory of man is as the flower of the
field. The supremest Monarke has no more power to detain his spirit in the
hour of death, then the meanest member; Sickness, and all other the
Harbingers of death, as not afraid of their Crowns and Scepters, of their
glorious roabes, and sumptuous array, dare without respect ceaze upon the very
best of the Sons of men. You do therefore bear those* Ensigns of honor
but in earthen vessels: Let not therefore, I entreat you, the eminency of your
places so transport you, as to blot out of your minds the remembrance of your
Mortality, but let the assurance of death and of judgment after death, be as
continual Watchbells* to will and to wish you to go on with care and
Conscience, with humility and meekness, that as it was said of Valentinian,
so it may be said of you, the people knew not whether they had Dominum, or
Patrem, a Lord or a Father, with such a sweet awfulnesse did he govern.
Humility in the places and persons of authority is a Virtue not more rare than
commendable, and yet Saint Bernards rule is, that Quanto quisque est sublimior,
tanto debet esse humilior, The higher in Majesty, the humbler in mind; like the
ear of Corn the fuller it is the more it stoupes. It was an excellent
Commendation that St. Cyprian gave Aurelius and Celarinus, In quantum gloria
sublimes in tantum verecundia humiles fecit, donec nihil in honor sublimius,
et nihil in humilitate submissius fuit. How much honor did exalte them, so
much did Modesty humble them, that Meekness and Majesty met together,
Greatness and Goodness kissed each other; in one word, you are but Judges of
earth, you are dust and ashes, dust and ashes therefore be not proud. Again in
the Fifth place, you are called Judges of the earth, and why so, but to confine
you to your proper places, to put a difference and distinction between you and
another Iudgd, whose jurisdiction is of a larger extent, in that he is, et cali
et terre iudex, Judge both of Heaven and Earth, Judge of quick and dead, and
as Abraham spoke, Iudex totius mundi: Shall not the Judge of all the world do
right. Gen* 18. 25. When man judges man, there is but earth judging earth, but
when God comes to Judge man, then there is Heaven judging earth, as he is
called 1 Timothy 6. 15.
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, so also may he be entitled Judge of Judges,
and shall without respect of persons render to every man according to his
works: Coll. 4. 1.
Wherefore as Saint Paul willed Masters to do unto their servants that which
was just and equal, remembering that they also had a Master in Heaven: So may
it be said to Judges to do only that which is just and equal to every man,
remembering that they themselves have even a Judge in heaven. Let not then gifts
taken either by your selves, or servants, blind the eye of Justice; if you do,
be sure that he who shall judge the Secrets of men by JESUS CHRIST, shall
disclose them to your Eccles. 12. 14.
shame, for He shall (says Solomon) bring every work to Judgment with every
secret thing, be it good or be it evel. Whilst the Psalmist calls you Gods, he
would have you to be Gods for disposition, upright and just* withal, this
title may imply that your Courts should be like Heaven, void of guile, and free
from all injustice; nay more, it also wills, that your Attendants should be
like unto Saints and Angels, innocent in respect of all corruption. I wish
therefore that both you and yours would say to corrupting Clients, as Simon
Peter said to Simon Magus, You and your money perish. Be of Samuels
integrity, and you may boldly speak with Samuels alacrity. If therefore the
poor, the fatherless and widow shall repair to your Gravities, as Noah's Dove
did to the Arc for refuge, or as the Sparrowe is said to fly into Zenocrates
his bosom, for shelter from the pursuing Hawke; oh do not pocket up their
Petitions without pity, but strive with holy Job, to be eyes to the blind,
and to be legs to the lame; cause, O cause the Widows heart to go away
dancing for joy.

And now in order it follows to proceed to the handling of the third and last
General, which concerns the Direction it self, in these words, Be
instructed; or as it is in the usual reading, Be learned: What more wholesome
precept could the Prophet here give in charge to Judges, than to be
instructed. Nescitis, said one very well, quanta bellua sit imperium,
Government is not such an easy task as many make it, and as the most account
of it. The right managing of Authority, and the swaying of the places of
Supremacy, is called by that ancient Father Greg. Nazian. orat. 1. (...), the
Art of Arts, and the very Science of Sciences. And why so? First, for men in
Authority to make their own lives an Exposition of that Law, whereof they are
made to be Magistrates, hic labor, hoc opus est; for by how much greater is
the authority, by so much the more spiteful is the malignitie of that our
mischievous enemy, who in the fall of one great one, seeks the foil of many.
Likewise, to bring to unity a many-headed multitude so divided by Action, by
Faction, and in Affection, how hard is it, unless that Governors be
instructed, and so Wisdom be made to sit at the stern of Government; that
doubtful matters may be decided, Controversies comprimized, Causes weighed,
abuses respectively punished, dangers prevented, Affairs managed, cunning
conveyances brought to light, the falsehood of the seeming simple discovered,
and that Justice be sincerely executed. How stands it most requisite, that
Kings be wise, and that they be learned who are Judges of the earth: It was
therefore not without very good ground, that God Deuteronomy 1. 13.
gave that in command to Moses to take Wisemen, men of understanding and men
known among their tribes, and to make such to be rulers over them. Learning
and instruction suits so well with persons in places of eminency, Prove. 8 15. 16
that we find Solomon, bringing in Wisdom thus speaking of herself, By me
Kings reign, and Princes do decree justice. Pythagoras his position runs much
in the same strain, Tum demum fore rempub: beatam, cum aut sapientes regere,
aut reges sapere caepissent, then is there hope of happiness to a common
wealth when wisemen govern, or governors do begin to become wise, wherefore
that which was Salomons prayer, may well suite with every superior, Cor
intelligens da domine servo; Lord give unto thy servant an understanding heart.

But what instruction, what learning is it, that David here would have Kings to
know, and Judges to obtain? that he shows immediately in the next verse,
which is to serve the Lord with fear. For according to the Wisemans assertion
it is timor domini, that is, initium sapientiae, Prove. 9. 10.
The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, Nay more, this serving of
God in fear it is the tie and knot, the very groundwork, of all true
faithfulness betwixt God and man, betwixt sovereign and subject, betwixt
pastor and people, betwixt the Judge judgeing, and such as are to be Judged by
him. Remove but this, and you overthrow the building of goodness it self.
Hence St, Bernard, Omne virtutum adificium illic^ vergit in pracipitium, si
timoris domini amiserit prosidium, banish Gods fear and give immediately
possession to all follyes: It was the ground of Abraham's fear, and that most
justly, to be slain coming into Abimelecks land, when he considered that
there was not Timor Domini in terra, The fear of God was not in that Land.
Genesis 20. 11*
And assuredly if Gods service and fear be cast behind our backs, farewell
care and conscience, both in Magistrate and Minister, farewell the true ground
of goodness, even in all.

And to what chiefer cause can we ascribe the generality of sins now among
us, and swarming in this Northern Climate, then the daily blaspheming of Gods
name, the continual profanation of his Sabbath, and other Holy Days,
disloyal to Magistrates, disrespect of Ministers, Murders, Depopulations,
Oppressions, Surfettings, Riots, Drunkenness, daily Thefts, and all the rabell
of rebellious sins; but to this one corrupt Fountain, Men have not learned,
and which is worse, they will not seek to learn to serve the Lord with fear.
It then becomes Judges, and all others, called to places or ^ignity, first, and
principally, to look to this lesson, that with godly Ioshuathey may be able to
say, I and my house Iosu. 24. 15.
will serve the Lord; that as they are above others, so they may strive to go
before others in this, which will really make them to be more glorious then
others: Prepositi vita est subditorum regula, and quod facit faciendo jubet:
Cyprian.
Your carriages being Superiors, carries a commanding power along with it;
whether it be in vice or in virtue: your faults, as likewise ours of the
Ministry, are like the Eclipses of the Sun, which helps to bring Detriment
to these sublunary bodies: you are as the principle Wheels in a Clock, or as
the Heart in the Body; and therefore, as He who has called ye to these
dignities is holy, so ought ye to be holy in all manner of conversation.

But though this instruction of serving God in fear, begin at home, yet it
must not end there; for it most nearly concerns such as are in high places,
that they endeavor, to make their power to serve for the furtherance of Gods
true Religion and virtue, that men be brought to serve the Lord with fear;
this well learned, will teach what it is that we owe to you, and you to us,
what we both owe to our King, and what indeed we all owe to God: Fear God,
and depart from evil (says Solomon;) Gods fear is to sin, as the banks
are to the raging waters of the Sea, to keep 1. Pet. 2. 17.
them within compass: Fear God (says the Apostle) and honor the King; the
one helps to bring on the other, for make Subjects truly religious, and make
them all in all: wherefore it concerns Judges, and all Christian Magistrates,
that Ab Ione fit principium, that in the first place they have an eye to the
honor and service of God, to be more tender, touching wrongs offered to God,
his worship, and service, then to their own particular persons: we dwell, and
long may we dwell under the guidance and government of a wise and religious
King, who labors by all means, that Gods worship and service may be
preserved, and his word may be purely preached. Your Honors are sent out as
eyes to espy out offenses, and to see to abuses: Be faithful then to God, to
your King, and be true to Gods fear. Let the service of God be as dear to
you, as the aple of your eye, and be not respectlesse of his honor, who has
been so respective of yours. And now, Right Honorable, good luck have you
with your Honors, ride on, and my hearts desire shall ever be, that he who is
one day, to come riding upon the wings of the wind, may ride on with you, to
assist, to direct, and to encourage you in the seat of Judicature and
Judgment; that you may so faithfully discharge the same, that the Country may
have cause to bless you, Posterity cause to praise you, the Wicked cause to
fear you, the Righteous cause to commend you, the Magistrates about you cause
to thank you; we of the Ministry cause to pray for you, all cause to love
you; your Prince at your return cause to approve of you, and the great Judge
of Heaven and Earth, in his due time, of his infinite mercy* cause to welcome
you with that Joyful, Euge: Well done thou good and faithful Servant, thou
have been faithful in a little, come and I will make thee Ruler over more,
enter into thy Masters Joy: Into the which joy, the Lord God in his appointed
season, bring us all for his Son Christ Jesus sake, to whom, together with
the blessed Trinity, be ascribed, as is most due, all Honor and Glory,
Praise, Power, Majesty, Might and Dominion, both now and for evermore,

Amen.
FINIS.

