PAVLS CROWN OF REJOICING. OR The manner how to hear the Word with profit.

By THOMAS GRANGER preacher of the word at Botterwike in Holland, near Boston
in Lincolnshire.

JAMES 1. 12. Blessed is the man that endures temptation, for when he is
tried, he shall receive the Crown of life, which the Lord has promised to
them that love him.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Thomas Pauier, and are to be sold at his shop in
Yuie lane. 1616.

TO THE WORSHIPFVL and virtuous Lady, the Lady, JOAN ALTHAM, temporal
happiness, and eternal blessedness.
GOOD MADAME:
MAY it please your Ladyship to accept this small treatise, of the right
hearing of the word. Small it is, not in respect of the subject; for to be a
good hearer is no less excellent a gift of grace, then to be a good speaker:
but in respect of the form, phrase, and manner of handling thereof, wherein I
have fashioned my self to the capacity of vulgar ignorant people, even such
like as by Gods providence I have heene called unto, who are fitter for milk
then strong meats. Yet whatsoever it is, such it shall be, as your Ladyship
shall accept it, and to speak ingeniously without flattery, which J ever
hated, your amiable disposition to Virtue, and Piety, in your young age, as I
well observed, when heretofore I lived at the house of the good Knight Sir John
Leuenthorp your father; and my often remembrance thereof upon occasions, and
now upon this occasion also, as also the singular duty that I owe to your
ancient, and truly honored family, and to you in special, have moved me, and
made me the bolder to offer this unworthy Present unto you, desiring you to
accept it only as a token of a thankful mind, and sincere affection; which
remain ever disposed to the performance of any service wherein your Ladyship
by me may be pleasured.

Your Ladyships in all duty to command THOMAS GRANGER.
From Botterwike in Holland, near Boston in Lincolnshire. 1616.
PAVLS CROWN OF Rejoicing.
1 THESE. 2. 13. For this cause also, thank we God without ceasing, that when
ye received of us the word of the preaching of God, ye received it not as the
word of men, but as it is indeed, the word of God, which also works in you
that believe.
IN the former Chapter, at the second verse, the Apostle begins a
congratulation, whereby he rejoices in the behalf of the Thessalonians for
their effectual faith, diligentloue, and patience in persecution, wherein they
excelled, as they became ensamples to all the faithful in Macedonia and
Achaia. Now in this second Chapter from the first verse to the 13. he makes a
digression; wherein he laboreth to confirm them in this effectual and
fruitful faith, and that by an argument drawn from his true Apostleship,
which by three principal reasons he proves, and approves unto them.

1. By his entrance in unto them, which was not in outward show and pomp, but
in travail, and in the fear of God. verse. 1. 2.

2. By his preaching, which was not by insincerity, that is, false and corrupt
doctrine, impure affections, and guile, but wherein he approves himself to
God. verse. 3. 4.

3. By his entire love and affection toward them, in that he used no
flattery, colored covetousness, or vainglory, but was gentle among them, as
a nurse cherishes her children, verse. 5. 6. 7.

Now this his sincere love and affection, he demonstrateth by the effects, and
tokens thereof, which do testify the sincerity, and simplicity of his heart.

1. Effect or token was his readiness, to deal not only the Gospel unto
them, but even his own soul, verse. 8.

2. Was his labor and travel, because he would not be chargeable unto them,
whereof they had experience, verse. 9.

3. Was his holy, godly, and righteous conversation among them, verse. 10.

4. His faithfulness in executing his office for their good; in exhorting
them, comforting them, and entreating them (as a father his children) to walk
according to their real calling, verse. 11. 12.

Now taking occasion at these duties of his ministry; namely his exhorting of
them, his comforting of them, and beseeching of them: he returns to his
former gratulation in the 13 and 14 verses: wherein he also rejoices in their
behalf, because they received the word, not as his word, but as the word of
God, that sent him; whereof this was a manifest token, even their conversion,
their faith, and obedience, and daily increase therein.

In this gratulation, two things are to be considered, the Manner and the
Matter. First, concerning the manner, or form thereof, it is expounded by way
of thanksgiving to God, the author of this harmony and concord between him
the Pastor teaching them from God, and them his stock receiving his doctrine
as from God.

In that he expounds his gratulation by way of thanksgiving, he teaches them
two things: first* that his preaching, labor, industry, and gifts, wrought
not this faith, and obedience in them, but God by his spirit inwardly, and by
his Ministry outwardly. 1 Cor. 3. 5. 6. Who is Paul, who Apollos, but
Ministers by whom 1 Cor. 3. 5. 6.
ye believed, as God has given to every man? Ego plantaui, Apollos rigauit,
etc. The Apostle therefore considering how apt we are of our selves to
attribute too much to the means, and to insist on the second cause, reuoketh
them to God the principal cause, that he alone may be praised; and glorified
for all thiugs, and in all things.

2. He teaches them hereby, that their faith is not of themselves, but of God,
and that thereof both he and they by his example ought to glorify God in
giving him thanks for this grace.

Again, whereas he gives thanks without ceasing, he first shows his
faithfulness, his love, earnest desire, that he had of their conversion, and
now his great rejoicing in their conversion: which two things are evident
tokens of a true Apostle: great thanks, and continual thanks, (you know) do
presuppose a great good turn; and such a benefit that one acknowledges
himself ever the better for: so the Apostle preferres here this benefit, even
the blessing of his Ministry in their faith and obedience, before the chiefest
earthly blessing, and in the 19. verse he says, they were his hope. Phil. 4.
1.
his joy, and crown of rejoicing, Likewise in Phil. 4. 1. he calls them his
beloved, his longed for, his joy, and his crown.

2. Whereas he gives thanks without ceasing, he does put them in mind,
exhort, and warn them, to be continually thankful for this endless love,
mercy, and grace of God: in calling them out of darkness into his marvelous
light. Such a benefit as this, whereby we do not only escape death, but
obtain eternal life, ought we always to remember, and by all means to
manifest our thankfulness for the same; both heart, mouth, and hand, ought to
be enlarged, ever to praise, and thank him by thought, word and deed,
otherwise if we be not for ever thankful for this endless benefit, we may
justly provoke the Lord to shorten his hand, and to take his graces from us.

Lastly, whereas he gives thanks without ceasing we observe what is the
greatest matter of joy, and rejoicing to a faithful shepherd, namely, the
faith and obedience of his flock to his doctrine, instructions, and
exhortations; not as from him, but as from God: as the husbandman rejoices in
a plentiful harvest, forgetting all his labors and travels in seed time;
even so the true shepherd rejoices in the fruits of his labors, and seeing a
plentiful harvest toward, is glad that God has made him an instrument to
gather his wheat, even the souls of men, into his Barn.

The Minister has cause of rejoicing, and thanksgiving in the faithful
discharge of his calling, when his conscience does assure him, that he has
kept himself innocent from the blood of all men, and has kept nothing back,
but to his utmost power and grace given him, has declared all the counsel of
God, by word, Act. 20. 26. 27.
and example of life, Act 20. 26. 27. he has I say cause of rejoicing herein,
though he see no fruits of his labors, as the Apostle says 2 Cor. 2. 15. We
are unto 2 Cor. 2. 15.
God the sweet savor of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that
perish.

But when his ministry is effectual in men to beget and increase faith in
them, to regeneration, and to eternal life, then is he the savor of life unto
life, and there is double matter of rejoicing, and thanksgiving. Paul little
rejoiced in his own grace, and conscionable discharge of his own duty,
neither esteemed much all his labors and sufferings, when he saw them not
effectual in the converting sinners unto God: but when he had done all that
he could, he complains that he had run in vain, Gal. 4. 11. I am in fear of
you, least I have bestowed Gal. 4. 11.
labor on you in vain. i. seeing no fruit of my labor in your conversion.

The matter of the gratulation, and thanksgiving, is their Faith, which is not
simply named, but propounded by way of circumlocution, and as it were described
by certain degrees.

The first degree in this description, or rather definition of their faith, is
their hearing of the word, [when ye received of us the word of the preaching
of God,] which words in the greek are thus, [because receiving the word of
hearing from us of God:] both have one meaning, but I rather follow the Greek
verbatim, because he speaks here especially of their act of believing, the
first degree whereof is hearing, and emplyeth his act of preaching in these
words (from, or of us.)

It is called the word of the hearing of God, because there is no light or
ground of the Gospel in man's reason; he has not the least sparkle of this
knowledge of God in Christ in him, therefore the Apostle says, Romans 10. 14.
Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the Preacher. Romans 10. 14.
Adam was created perfect man in all the faculties of his reasonable soul, yet
was he without this knowledge, which was hid in God, and revealed, and
preached to him by God himself after his fall, Genesis 3. 15. who foreseeing the
fall, foresaw the remedy also. This saving knowledge God likewise revealed to
Abraham, Genesis 18. 18. and afterward preached the same by typical ceremonies,
and by the Prophets, to his church: lastly, by his own Son, who has
revealed all the wisdom of God, concerning man's justification, and salvation,
and accomplished the same in himself; and the son having all power and
authority given of his Father in heaven and earth, has preached the same to
us Gentiles, by his Apostles, and Evangelists, Pastors, and Teachers: Again,
it is called the word of hearing after the imitation of the Hebrew, for the
word hear, or which you heard.

Now to hear this word of faith preached, is merely of grace, and is the
first degree of faith. The graceless, viz. natural men, will not patiently
hear this word of the preaching of God: it is to them foolishnes, and vain
talk, for they make this doctrine and profession groundless, and to no end.
Groundless, because they comprehend not the same by their carnal reason: To
no end, because they measure every thing by the worldly use, profit, or
pleasure thereof. 1 Cor. 1. 18. Praedicatio Euang. est ijs qui periunt
stultitia. In Act. 7. 57. 58. The Jews stopped their ears at Stephens
preaching etc. Act. 19 24. The multitude of the Ephesians when Alexander showed
them* of Paul and his doctrine, etc. Act. 23. Ananias the high Priest caused
Paul to be smitten on the mouth, in the very beginning of his Apology.

The Turks, Jews, and Papists are ready to stop their ears as soon as they
hear the truth. Yea, and many protestant Atheists, and Epicures, would at no
hand hear the word, if they were at their own liberty: they hate and deride
the very name of a Preacher, and cannot look on a black coat, (as these
black mouthed hell hounds term them) with a patient eye; which shows that
they hate our calling, and are the enemies of God, and their own salvation:
And that envious and murtherous heart which shows it self now in mocks, and
taunts, would show it self in open rage and cruelty, if it were not bound in
with chains and bonds of iron.

2. Degree of their Faith, is in these first words, [when ye received of us
etc.] This is the second degree of faith; after we have heard the word, to give
assent in general to the same, as true, and to approve of it as good. And this
is also merely of grace; for there are many which hear* but their hearing is
not mingled with faith, and therefore they profit nothing by hearing, Heb. 4.
2. The Gospel was preached to them, as also to us: but the word which they
heard profited not them, because it was not mixed with faith in those that
heard it. And Paul says, 1 Cor. 2. 14. The natural man perceives not the 1
Cor. 2. 14.
things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishinesse unto him; neither can
he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. In Acts 17. 18. When Paul
preached at Athens, certain Philosophers of the Epicures and Stoikes heard
him, but some counted him a babbler, and others, a setter forth of strange Gods.
This general consent unto the word preached in man, is of grace, but this is
not saving grace, for the Devils believe also and tremble, James 2. 19. I say
it is of grace in man, James 2. 16.
because he cannot do this by supernatural light; but the Devils by light of
nature, not by created light, but by observation.

3. Degree of their faith is expressed in the middle of the verse, in these
words [ye received it, etc.] This word, received, is twice used in the english,
but it is of differing significations, as the Greek, and Latin do show: The
former is in Greek (...), accipere, the latter is (...) excipere: the former
whereof signifies to receive or take willingly, or unwillingly, or after any
sort: the latter signifies to entertain or receive willingly, to welcome:
Therefore of this word comes (...), the right hand. That which we do
unwillingly, is done as it were with the left hand, sinisterly and untowardly;
but that which we do willingly, it is done as it were with the right hand,
dexterouslie, aptly, and handsomely: to receive the word, here, therefore
signifies to welcome, to embrace with willingness and liking, and to apply it to
themselves.

This is then the third degree of Faith, to welcome, entertain, embrace the
word with readiness, willingness, love, delight, and to apply the same
particularly to our own hearts and consciences. This is also of mere grace,
without which grace none can be saved. Many hear the word with the outward
ear, many do also understand it, and believe it to be true, but few receive
the same into the heart, to give it intertainment, Acts 8. 21.
and rooting there. In Acts 8. 21. Simon Magus believed the Gospel
historically, yet Peter says there, that his heart was not upright in the
sight of God. In Acts 5. 3.
Acts 5. 3. Ananias believed the Gospel, and seemed to bring forth fruits
thereof, as did the other Christians, but it was not rightly received into the
heart, for hypocrisy which is is the work of Satan, and saving faith, which
is the work of the spirit, cannot dwell together in one heart.

Judas understood, and believed the word, and was a Preacher thereof, but it
was never intertayned and rooted in his heart, but thorny covetousness was
rooted therein, which in the end choked the word. So 2 Timothy 4. 10.
2 Timothy 4. 10. Demas was a follower of Paul, but the love of the world was never
rooted out of his heart, therefore in time it choked the word, etc. Julian the
Apostata, give intertainment to the word, but pride was never rooted out of his
heart, therefore it choked the word in him, 1 Timothy 5. 11. Paul speaks of
young widows, that having entertained and professed the word, do afterward
wax wanton against Christ, and break their first faith, because concupiscence
and fleshly lust was never rooted out of their hearts, therefore it choked the
word in them.

When as the word is received into the heart, together with these and such like
lusts, which our Savior Christ calls thorns, Math. 13. 24. the thorns
being natural to the heart, and therefore having strong rooting, must needs in
time ouergrow and choke the word; even as weeds being natural to the earth,
do ouergrow and pine away the corn, that it cannot fructify. And this is the
condemnation of the multitude, I mean of the common hypocritical Protestants,
which give entertainment to the word, but expel not their beloved company, or
guest, their head personal sin, with the branches and fruits thereof: either
must Christ, and that sin dwell together; or else must Christ be expelled,
that it may rule.

But cast out the bondwoman with her children, for she and her sons cannot
be heir with the free, if Isaac be heir, then must Ishmael be cast out: and
if the birthright belong to Jacob, Esau cannot have it. Crucify the old man
with his children, the lusts of ignorance, and the works of darkness: for if
the son of God by his word and spirit has taken possession of your hearts,
and dwell therein, as owner and heir, then cannot the bond-womans son be
heir, whether it be pride, or covetousness, or envy, or fleshly lust, which
spring out of original corruption.

The word of God and natural lust cannot both dwell together, they cannot both
be heirs, they cannot both be masters, but being contrary one to the other,
the one of them will have the dominion and upper hand: sin and Satan lay
claim to all by right of ancient inheritance, from many descents, but the word
is the sword of the spirit, driving them out of the heart, and cutting them
down. As Ioshuahs sword slew all the ancient inhabitants of Canaan, and placed
the Israelites therein; even so must we cast out and subdue these Canaanitish
lusts and affections, the word must be as a sword, or sacrificing knife in us
to cut down these ancient inbred inhabitants, worldly lusts; yea, as the Land
of Canaan spued forth her Inhabitants, so must we clear our hearts of this
menstruous filth, that they may be Temples for the holy Ghost, even as Salomons
Temple, beautified and adorned with holiness, righteousness, faith, goodness,
meekness, love, truth, continence, temperance, and all virtue.

4. Degree of Faith, is their intertayning and embracing of the word in such
sort as is peculiar, and proper to the word which is propounded: first,
negatiuely, [not as the word of Men,] and then affirmatively (but as the word
of God.) Herein appears evidently the difference between hypocrites, and
true believers. Infidels hear the word of God altogether as the word of man:
Hypocrites receive the word of God as the word of man, that is, they allow it
to be the word of God, so far forth as it is agreeable to their liking, and
wherein it differs from them, they contemn, and put it off from them, as but
the word of man: this is therefore the mere and especial, and saving grace of
God, to receive the word as from God, and not from Man.

The Pharisees heard the pure word of the Gospel from the mouth of the Son
of God himself, but because he was in the shape and form of man, therefore
they received it but as the word of man, John 8. 13 John 8. 13. Mark 6. 2.
Thou bear record of thy self, etc. Mark 6. 2. Our Savior Christ's
Countrymen, friends, and kinsfolks, hearing his wisdom, and seeing his
works, were astonished, but believed not in him: What was the cause? Verse. 3. Is
not this the Carpenter, Maryes Son, brother of James and Ioses? etc. They
looked with fleshly eyes on his outward appearance only, and esteemed his word
but according to his outward appearance; therefore it became unprofitable to
them.

Such like Pharisees are the heads of the Romish Church, the teachers and
maintainers of hypocrisy, which avouch that the written word has no authority
with us* but by their approbation, and what is their approbation? First, they
wrest it to such a sense as may serve for the erecting and maintaining of their
own authority, and their Antichristian synagogue, and then having adulterated
it, and made it their own word, they give allowance to it. Hereupon every
Impe of that Church will not hear the word, as the word of God, but as of the
Church, that is, of the Pope, and his Cardinals; and in this they rest
satisfied, and resolved, thinking it heresy to receive the word merely as the
word of God.

Of this sort are all profane Esaues and Epicurish Politicians, which count
themselves Protestants, but are not: they acknowledge and receive the old and
new Testament, as the word of God, but as for Doctrines, Instructions, Uses,
and especially Applications thereof, they receive as but the word of men, and
chiefly, when the application thereof concerns their reformation in
particular. As the Papist counts the true interpretation of Scriptures heresy,
and under that name reiects it; so the carnal Gospeller counts the true uses
and applications of the word, precisenes, and under that name or term
contemnes it. So that as the one denies the truth and embraces error; so the
other confessing the truth in general, does wilfully refuse it in particular,
and lives after his own lust, without the word: and whether of these is the
better?

What is the cause that many do not hear and receive the word with that
reverence and obedience as they ought, as their whole life and conversation
does show? It is because they receive it as the word of man: for if they were
fully persuaded and seriously believed that it were the very word of God, they
would not so lightly regard it, and live so dissolutely: For who dare be bold
to fight against God? Who dare contemn him, and deride him to his face, as
many do? If men dare not do this to an earthly Prince, without fear, yea
cold fear troubling their thoughts, and loosing the joints of their loins;
how comes it to pass, that they dare so boldly challenge God the combat, and
with petulant derision provoke him?

The reason is, because they receive it as the word of man, and think they
have to deal with man, and not with God; this is the cause of their contempt
and disobedience: For if they were touched with any sense or feeling of the
presence of Gods majesty, and that they received the word as from his own
mouth; surely there is no man living, that durst so dally and trifle with the
word, much less withstand it, or have it in derision. It is a marvel
therefore to see and hear how many take liberty to themselves to dally with,
and to make a jest of the Word, to be touched with no reverence or fear of
the same.

But indeed, what marvel is it to see an infant thrust his hand into the fire
without fear, or doubting? or to see a blind man go willingly into the pit?
or a drunkard enraged with wine, to run desperately on the swords point? or a
mad man to kill himself? Did not the rebellious Israelites deride the word
of the Lord sent to them by all his Prophets? Did not Corah, Dathan, and Abiram
with their consorts, wittingly and wilfully rebel against the Lord in the
person of Moses, whose authority they saw even with their own eyes, that it
was given him of God? Did not the Israelites cast off the Lord, from being
their Governor in the person of Samuel? They have not cast thee away, but
they have cast me away, that I should not reign over them. 1 Samuel 8 7. 1 Samuel
8. 7.


Did not the Jews contemn and cast off the word of the Lord spoken by Jeremy,
saying that it was not the Lords word, but the malicious counsel of Baruch?
Ier. Ier. 43 2. 3.
43. 2. 3. Did not the counsel of the Jews with the high Priest, count the
Gospel sedition, and rebellion, which the Apostles taught, as Gods own spirit
gave them utterance? Acts 5. 28. Did not Tertullus the Orator count Acts 5. 28.
Paul a pestilent fellow, a moouer of sedition, and an heretic? Acts 24. 5.
Yea if we recount from the beginning Acts 24. 5.
of the world, we shall see that infidells, and hypocrites have always heard
and received the word of the Lord, as the word of man, and under that pretense
have ever with stood the same, and cast it off from them, especially if it were
not to their own liking, or that they could not politickely make some use of
it for their bodily turns.

No marvel then is it, if in these latter Atheistical and Epicurish days the
word of the Lord take no place among many, but be turned lightly off as the
word of man, yea, and had in derision, as but the unadvised, rash, and
indiscreet speeches of a fantastical, spleenfull, or precise fellow, as Eli
supposed the sober, and fervent prayers of Anna; and certain Jews termed the
gifts of the holy Ghost drunkenness.

But this were a marvel if that God should come from heaven in the shape of a
man, (for no mortal man can live in his glorious presence) and should converse
familiarly with us, preaching the glad tidings of the Gospel in all lenity and
mildness, having in his person, doctrine, and conversation matter to provoke
and allure all men, even the poorest, the meanest, the ignorantest, the
Publicane, the sinner, the weake-harted, the troubled conscience to follow him,
embrace him, love him, rejoice in him, being meek and lowly in heart,
merciful, and pitiful, mourning and sorrowing for the hardness of man's
heart, weeping for our miseries, calling all to repentance, refusing none that
in any sincerity came unto him; loving all, in whom any token of present, or
future grace appeared, reproving only the enemies of man's salvation, pride,
envy, hypocrisy, covetousness, and threatening judgments against hard-hearted
and obstinate rebels, who seek their own glory in the destruction of Gods
glory and kingdom, and are enemies to their own salvation, and all other
men's; nay, and besides this, should not only give no appearance of evil, but
show forth the glory of his God-like majesty in all his words and works,
public and private. It were a marvel I say, if any man received not his word,
as the word of God, being God himself, and in all humility, reverence, and
obedience, followed not him, and yielded not himself to do homage unto him.

Even thus was God conversant among his own people the Jews, in the true
shape of man; but his own received him not: they heard his word, but as the
word of man, and esteemed his life and holy conversation, but as of an ordinary
man: but this is more wonderful, that God preaching in the form of man should
be rejected as a deceiuer, as a chief sinner, as a worker with evil spirits,
as not worthy to live among men. Indeed if that Christ had preached some new
and strange thing never heard of before, they might have had some pretense of
rejecting his word; but seeing that he taught nothing, but that which Moses,
and the Prophets foretold, whose Disciples they professed themselves to be, and
whom they believed; and yet believed not him, but making him contrary to Moses,
Ioh 9. 28. who plainly set before their eyes, put John 9. 28.
into their ears, and even thrust into their hands all that they heard, and
read in Moses and the Prophets every day, that they might hear, and see even
with bodily eyes and ears, and handle the word of life: It is a wonderful
thing I say, that they should not receive his word as the word of Moses, and
the Prophets, and consequently of God. What sottish stupidity is this? What
should thus bewitch them, that being bereft of common sense, as it were, they
should deny that especially which they most professed, and rejected that by all
means as most detestable, which they most glory in, and boasted of?

Nay, if we consider the cause hereof, it is no wonderful or strange thing,
but natural and common, if we could but reflect our eyes upon our selves, to
see the things within us, as we do the things without us, but it is given to
very few to discern the times, and seasons by application of the true light to
the same, which makes every thing manifest as it is.

The cause hereof, was the bewitching hypocrisy of the heart; for howsoever
they pretended religion, devotion and zeal, and therein matched the Romish
Jesuits, yet was not the same truly rooted in their hearts, but pride,
ambition, vainglory, covetousness, and envy were deeply rooted, and firmly
settled therein, which sins being colored with fair pretenses of religion,
blinded not only the eyes of the world, but even their own eyes, that their
religious titles, prayers, fastings, alms, and other outward works were but
cloaked and colored pride, vaineglory, covetousness, oppression: and this true
body, namely, their outward profession, had not a true soul in it, but an
evil spirit or Devil, using this body deceitfully, and craftily for his own
advantage. For, this is the nature of the hypocritical heart, to transform
even the best, and holiest exercises of religion into the nature of it self,
that is, to serve it self of them.

These holy Devils of the Jewish Church, retayning the bare names, and
liuelesse titles of their Jewish privileges, as to be called the Israel of
God, the children of Abraham, etc. As also the outward ceremonies of the Law,
together with their own ambitious traditions, and gainful dispensations; but
being of worldly hearts and spirits, were so far from the true knowledge, and
spiritual meaning of the Law, of the types and ceremonies thereof, as also of
the Prophets, as that they could not abide to hear the same, sounding to their
ears as strange and new doctrine; for bare titles, and the outward bark
served their turns, having no farther savor of religion, nor love of the
truth in them. Therefore when Christ preached the Law and the Prophets
spiritually, which they professed, and wherein they boasted carnally. It was a
John 6.
hard preaching, who could hear it? John 6.

The Papist does marvel at the stupidity, and utterly condemn the obstinacy
of the Pharisees, and Jews for their contempt of the Gospel, and shameful
intreatment of the son of God, and for their hypocrisy, pride,
covetousness, envy, etc. And the Friars and Jesuits in their Sermons work
upon the passions of men, to provoke and inflame their hearts to an hatred of
them, for hating the Gospel, and putting our blessed Savior to death.

Surely it is a wonderful thing to consider the darkness of their hard hearts,
that they have no sight at all in themselves of these things, for which they
utterly condemn the Jews, being no less enemies of Christ then the Jews.

The Pharisees holding, and maintayning the true principles of the law, and
Prophets, did in their Interpretations, Expositions, and special Applications,
swerve so far from the true meaning thereof, through the darkness of their
earthly hearts, as they became utter enemies of the truth therein contained,
for Christ was the truth, the end and fulfilling thereof, whom they pointed at,
and whom the Pharisees heard and saw, speaking and fulfilling the same in their
eyes, and ears, yet will they not be his Disciples, but Moses Disciples, John
9. making Moses and Christ contrary, John 9.
whereas indeed they themselves were contrary to themselves, for if they had
known and professed Moses, and the Prophets spiritually, and truly, then had
they known Christ, and been his followers, but being carnal professors,
they are utter enemies of the truth which they professed. Let common
Protestants note this well.

Even so, in the very same manner, the Romish Synagogue, with the whole
Antichristian rout, houlding the true principles of the Gospel, the old and
new Testament, and the abridgements of the same, to wit, the Creed, the
Commandments, and Lords prayer, do in their Interpretations, Expositions,
Glosses, and particular Applications of the word, so far and wide run astray
from the true meaning thereof, as they are utter enemies of the truth
persecuting the true professors of the same, under the names of heretics, as
the Jews persecuted Christ under the name of a seducer and deceiuer.

The Pharisees built their false sect, doctrines and devotions upon the true
ground, or principles of the Law and Prophets, so do the Romanists build their
Antichristian Synagogue, their false doctrines, works and devotions upon
Christ, the Prophets, Evangelists and Apostles. But here is the cunning of the
Devil, who as he sees God in his great wisdom to bring good good out of
evil, yea, to turn all his Satanicall policies and devises upon his own
head, and to work himself glory out of his plot of dishonor and subversion:
even so on the contrary he brings evil out of good, turning the truth of God
into a lie, yea, upon Gods truth and ordinance builds he his own kingdom,
but this bay and stubble built upon the true foundation shall be burnt by the
fire of Gods spirit, 1 Cor. 3. 15. and the plant which he has not planted
shall wither away, and be rooted out, Math. 15. 13.

Now seeing that they have built a false Church upon a true foundation,
soothing up themselves in their outward privileges, and liuelesse titles,
making their own laws, doctrines, traditions, and innumerable deal of
beggarly baggagement the rule of conscience and holy life, put the case, that
Jesus Christ the only truth were to come, or that it should please his
glorious Majesty, to come from heaven into the Church of Rome (which professes
it self to be the only and holy flock of Christ) in such manner as he came
among the Jews, instructing and teaching the people every where, in truth,
sincerity, and without partiality, proving his doctrine by the written word,
(which themselves acknowledge and profess) as he did the Gospel among the
Jews by Moses and the Prophets, and confirming the Doctrine with miracles; as
also conuincing and reproving them for their Idolatry, superstition, false
doctrine, vain ceremonies, traditions, godly lies, wicked dispensations,
ambition, pride, tyranny, cruelty, excessive covetousness, extortion, bribery*
and all the heathenish abominations of that holy den of thieves: If I say
that Christ were at Rome amongst them at this instant, in such appearance life,
conversation, and doctrine, as he was among the Jews, I demand what manner of
intertainment should be given him? And whether his word and doctrine should be
received as the word of God, or as the word of man? whether it should be
received as the truth of God, or rejected as heresy?

Even as the King of Niniueth, with the Princes, Rulers, Nobles and Commons
believed the word of God spoken by Jonah, laid his robe from him, covered him
with sackcloath, and sat in ashes; and proclaimed that neither man, beast,
bullock, nor sheep should feed* or drink water; that man and beast should
put on sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God, and turn from his evil way, and
the wickedness that was in his hands. Jonah 3.

So it may be that the Pope with his Cardinals, Friars, Monks, Priests, etc.
together with the whole City of Rome would believe his word, and receive it as
the word of Christ. It may be, they would acknowledge him, reverence him, and
honor him, humbly submitting to his doctrine, confessing their errors and
sins, and suffer themselves to be rightly informed, and reformed by him,
their guide, governor, and chief shepherd of their souls.

But I rather think, that he should have far worse intertainment among them,
then amongst the Pharisees and Jews, and Heathen, that they would persecute
both his doctrine and person with all indignities, that might be devised, and
because of his true miracles confounding their lying wonders, would judge him
to be Antichrist, (of whom they have already made Luther the forerunner) even
as the Pharisees counted him the greatest Sorcerer, and to deal with the
Prince of the Devils, by whose power he exceeded all other: I suppose that
they which so devoutly worship and adore the Image of Christ, and of the
Apostles, beautifying the same with such sumptuous ornaments, and ouerlaying of
gold, would by all means dishonor the true Christ. And his Apostles, not
only contemning their persons, and condemning their doctrines, but also
putting them to ignominious deaths. I suppose that Seruus seruorum Dei, would
hardly re-deliuer the chair, give the right hand, or wall to Peter. For as the
Pharisees did to Christ the head, so do they to his Apostles and members
likewise. And as Antichrist does now to the true Ministers and members, so
would he do to the head: For the afflictions of Christ are accomplished in his
members by Antichrist, who should also suffer the same in his own person, if
he were in the state of humiliation upon the earth, as he was.

Surely may some say, it were a marvelous thing, if it should be so, I would
think rather that Christ, and his Apostles, teaching the same doctrines, and
working the same, or such like miracles, should be heard and received of the
Pope, his Cardinals, etc. as he was of the faithful in the Jewish Church.

I answer, if he should come indeed, as Ignatius Loyala that profane and
bloody soldier, a Spaniard, Vide Triumphu^ Papalem, Hasenmulleri. 1539.
the Father of the Jesuits, * came to Pope Paulus the third, deuoting himself
and his Disciples to him, promising absolute obedience to him, in all things,
without any exception, and binding himself with an inviolable oath, that he
would, to his uttermost power maintain and uphold the Romish Church and See by
all means possible, if (I say) both his doctrine and miracles might serve for
the glorifying of that carnal Idoll-gull, and upholding of his worldly
Synagogue and See; then without doubt he shall have great intertainement, and
in such sort also might he have been entertained of the Pharisees, yea of
Herod, or any worldling.

But now to come nearer to our selves, what if Christ were in state of
humiliation, and in the very same outward appearance among us, as he was among
the Jews; or Paul, Peter, or any of the Apostles, preaching the same Gospel
that is now preached (for none other Gospel could Christ himself preach, than
this which is already preached) and expounding the several texts thereof, as
he did of the Prophets in the Temple, and in the Synagogues, handling the same
in special, and in particular, applying the same fitly according to all
circumstances, yea, speaking as his and their manner was, to the heart,
conscience, and spirit? how should his words be heard? whether as the words of
God, or as of man?

It may be he should be received of all men, as he was of Lazarus, of Martha
and Mary, who poured a pound of very costly ointment on his head, who washed
his feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hayres of her head. It may
be that all men would weep abundantly, fall on his neck, and kiss him, as
the Christians did at Paul's departure from them; Acts 20. 37. It may be that by
all means possible, they would Acts 20. 37.
show their love to him, by prostrate obeisance, and humble obedience, by
contemning all worldly things in comparison of his presence, yea, and by
preferring one word of his mouth before all humane learning and knowledge. It
may be that all men from the highest to the lowest, from the richest to the
poorest, from the mightiest to the weakest would wholly submit, and subject
themselves to the obedience of his word and doctrine, taking more pleasure
therein, than in all worldly pleasure and profit, and deuote all their worldly
goods, might, wisdom, and learning to the advancement thereof, and there is
no question, but some of all degrees and estates would sincerely and devoutly,
according to the gift of grace and measure thereof do these things, yea, many
doubtless would love him, embrace him, reverence him, for the Gospels sake,
and admiring him would say, doubtless the spirit of God is plentiful, and
very strong in this man, so gracious are his words, so holy is his conversation
amongst us, as we may see true Christianity perfectly acted, even as the word
teaches and commands.

But on the other side, what entertainment should he find in the world, I
mean among the brutish sinners, the ciuilly honest, and the pharisaically
religious, for these are they that are called the World? In what manner would
carnal Gospellers hear and receive his pure, spiritual, and heavenly
Sermons? What manner of taste and relish would his words have in their ears?
What repentance would there be wrought? What confession? Contrition?
Satisfaction of wrongs done, with Zacheus? What conversion? What obedience to
his doctrine? What reformation either of themselves, or of those, and those
things, that are in their power to alter, and order according to his doctrine?
How would sinners and wicked livers hear him! I mean all such as propound
their own glory and profits, or pleasures, the end of all their actions, and
endeavors, inwardly and outwardly; for they that make these and such like
things their principal ends, can neither do good deed, speak good word, nor
think good thought all their life long.

How would the greedy churl hear him, that loves to think and meditate of
nothing but gain? to speak nor do any thing that tends not one way or other
to his bodily profit? How would the lustful person hear him, that makes his
whore and wanton woman his Idol? How would many ravening Lawyers, and such as
make authority a cloak of destruction and unhappiness, (too many now a days)
hear him, that stand continually waiting and gaping for the bride, whereby the
poor is oppressed, the hands of reuengeful persons, and of cruel churles are
strengthened against their neighbors; and whereby the mouths of superstitious
and profane livers are opened, and hands strengthened against God himself, in
his Word and Ministers? How would (I say) worldlings of all sorts hear him?
How would they entertain him? What would they say of him?

Even as the Jews did say, do, and Judge of the Prophets and servants of God
then, and as we do esteem the faithful Ministers and religious professors
now; so would too many (if authority brideled them not) speak, do, and Judge
of Christ himself, or the Apostles being conversant among us, as then they
were among them. Some said, he is a good man; other said, nay, but he seduceth
the People, John 7. 12. John 7. 12.
Some would say he is too strict, too precise, fantastical; such kind of
Christianity can no where be acted; of too spiced a conscience, malecontent, he
cannot tell what he would have, nothing can please him, there can be neither
love nor good fellowship; but contention and mislike one of another where such
preaching is: he meddles too far in matters that concern him not: he thinks
there is none so wise and godly as himself; his parents and friends are of
small reputation among their neighbors, he is of very mean education, few of
the richer or wiser sort make any great reckoning of him. If he were of
ability, power, friends and learning, as he is but mean and bare, he would
happily prove a dangerous fellow; for he is very bold, he uses very broad
speeches, and takes too much liberty to himself, to speak of such things, as
better men then himself will not talk of: he must have an oar in every man's
boat, he makes every man his text; a melancholy fellow, not of a sound brain,
very malicious, and spleenefull; unless I and many more be deceived, some
think that he has been beside himself: I have seen him chollericke enough
for all his mildness, and heard him rail on his betters; he will be taken up
ere it be long at one hand or other.

These and such like things would worldlings speak of him, and (I fear) far
worse: for they that stick in the outward letter and bare titles of religion
and Christianity, have been, are, and always will be, utter enemies of the
life and spirit thereof, to the true Preachers and sincere professors thereof,
being like to the earthly and bloody Edomites, which under the title of
circumcision, and the children of Abraham, claimed to themselves the chief
religion, and hated the true worshippers of God.

For the further clearing of this point, I will bring in two interlocutors, or
speakers, Eulalus and Mataeologus, in which two persons you may easily behold
the estate and conditions of these times, and see the common carnal Protestant
set forth in his colors.

Mataeologus. Au, I pray you judge charitably of your brethren, you run out now
too far.


Eulalus. A man may be charitable though he be not foolish. He may be
charitable, though he justify not Esaus, that prefer their bellies, profits,
and pleasures before Gods kingdom, and mocking Ismaels, that being heirs of
worldly things, have the children of God in derision, because they have not, or
because they will not worship the golden Image Mammon, nor reverence them, nor
count them the happier for their Image sake.


Mataeol. These and such unhallowed speeches are too common in the mouths of
many precise fellows, there is nothing with them but Scripture, but others that
have not the Scriptures in their mouths, so much [and therefore neither in
their hearts,] are as good as they, for ought I [blind Bayard] see. What, do
you think, because we regard not them so much, that therefore we would not
regard our blessed Savior, or the holy Apostles, if they were in man's
appearance among us? there is none but they would spend goods, body, and life
for him: there is none unless very few (such as thou art) but they would leave
all, and follow him, yea we would resign all that we have, and all that we
are into his hands, to dispose at his gracious will and pleasure, or else we
were as ill as the Jews, as Pilate and the Pharisees, and worthy to go to
hell with them: (I doubt you will prove your self to be little better in the
end.)


Eulalus. I would be loath to provoke you to anger, my purpose is in friendly
manner to reason with you, not to offend you. Let us speak of an other matter.
This question was put forth to me by a friend of mine a while ago, etc. What
if a Lion were changed into a Lamb, whether would the old sheep be afraid and
run away from him?


Mataeolog. Why, common reason answers that question, at the first hearing,
if the Lion were turned into a Lamb, he should be counted and used as a
Lamb, and he might well be afraid of other things, that before were afraid of
him.


Eulalus. You say well, and as the thing is. What is a man went to the wars in
a far country, and had been forth twenty years, many men supposing that he
may be alive, some doubting that he is dead, some auouching that he is alive,
and will come shortly. Now if this man came in the form of a poor man, or a
servant, to his own house, as Ulysses did, what would his own family say and
do to him?


Mataeolog. I think he should have Ulysses intertainment, they would mock and
deride him, and thrust him out by the head and shoulders if he troubled them
too much, and send for the Constable to carry him away to the stocks if he
would not be ruled, and be gone.


Eulalus. What if a King should disroabe himself of his glory, and come among
his subjects, in the outward show of a poor man, or a servant? put the case
that he should come to dwell in your town, behauing himself harmelesly and
innocently among you, obeying all his own laws to the full, and good orders
of your parish, what would men say, and judge of him?


Mataeolog. I think e there is none, but they would count him an honest poor
man, though there be some that is apt to speak badly enough, whem small
occasion is offered, and if he were never so good, he should never please all
parties, for our town is as the rest of the world is.


Eulalus. But what if he should begin to meddle in your towns matters, and to
find fault with your rich men for their unjust, hard, and unlawful dealings,
likely enough, all in your parish observe not law, nor good order, especially
if it be not for their profit: some are wronged and oppressed among you, the
small offenses of some are made heinous crimes, some do manifest wrong, and
live in bad and dishonest sort, and yet no man dare speak of it: I say not
that there are such in your town, but put the case there were such.


Mataeolog. To tell you the truth (for I have known their dealings, and their
qualities a long time) there were no abiding for him among them, if he speak
but a word against some of them, though it were manifest troth, he were far
better run his country than live there; for the rich would be against him,
and the poor to please the rich would do nothing but abuse him, some few
might happily pity his case, but they durst say naught.


Eulalus. But what if his kingly majesty appeared to them in his behavior,
words, gesture, counsels, wisdom, advise, learning, etc. they might easily
see him to differ from ordinary and common men and to go beyond themselves in
all things, would they not reverence him then think you, for all his mean
estate?


Mataeolog. They would even do as the Scripture says in one place; when a
rich man speaks, every one must hold his tongue, and praise him, though he be
a fool; but if a poor man speak, they say, what fellow is this? and if they
get but any advantage against him, they will even hang him, if they could, such
a saying there is; and even so would they say to him. I may say it well enough,
and do them no wrong, for they have never yet been better; therefore King me
here, King me there, if the King were in such manner among them as you talk
of, they would make him a subject, I Will uphold you for all his wisdom,
counsel, etc. for they scorn that any mean man should teach or control them.


Eulalus. But what if the King of Kings, Jesus Christ, should come down from
heaven in such appearance among them, as he was on earth in the state of his
humiliation, and should deal plainly with them as he did with his own
countrymen, Luke. 4. and with the Luke 4.
Pharisees, Mat. 23. would they not be filled with wrath Math. 23.
and indignation? would they not be ready to cling like Bees together, to make
him weary of the town? would they not seek to entangle him in his own
speeches?


Mataeol. It is like enough that if he once cross them, they would deal
badly enough, and have little regard to his Sermons, they are so full of pride
of heart and covetousness, as they would turn off every thing with mocking
and jesting, if otherwise they could not revenge themselves of him. And I
think there be too many such like every where.


Eulalus. How happens it that your Minister instructs them no better, he
might reform many abuses and disorders among you, if he were diligent in
preaching and applying the Word as he ought to do?


Mataeolog. Our Minister is more diligent then he need to be: he might take
less pains, and have the more thanks. There has been more disquietnesse
since his coming, then ever there was before, but he gayneth naught by that;
for I believe he feels the smart of it in his Tithes payment. His predecessor
made a pretty living of it, because men's hearts were more toward him: Again,
he was a good husband, and neither mak't nor meddled with any man, or his
doings, as this man does. And to tell you the truth, I my self (though he
never harmed me) cannot fancy him, nor like of his doings.


Eulalus. Why, what are his pains; you spoke even now as though he were no
husband.


Mataeolog. His pains is a deal of lip-labor, all against himself; there is
nothing but catechizing and preaching with him, if he hold on as he has begun,
he will catechize all the good servants out of the town, he makes us even all
weary of him. Youth must not play on the Saboth day, between Morning and
Evening Prayer: old people must not meet together at the Alehouse to make
merry, as they had wont to do. A man must not do any small Iobb, nor walk to
other towns upon businesses, nor make bargains on the Saboth day, and I
cannot tell what a hundredth such like prattles (it would make a horse break
his halter to hear all) but if all men were of my mind, we would give him the
hearing (seeing we cannot tell how to remedy it) but we will do as our
fore-elders have done before us, as for him, we know not whence he came, nor
what he would have: when he has made an end, let him do it, etc.


Eulalus. You said even now that he bred much disquietnes among you, tell me
wherein he so naughtily behaueth himself, and I will talk with him: it may be
I shall prevail with him for a friends sake of mine that has been a
Benefactor of his.


Mataeolog. Faith, I cannot say that he is of a naughty behavior; for he never
sues nor troubles any man. For indeed the poor pay him all his due, because
they dare not withstand him; neither does he look for more then his due, nor
all that, as the report goes: And as for the rich, he will not stand much with
them (they are so froward) unless they too grossly wrong him; and wrong him
they will, do what he can, and I think in my conscience, that some counts it
the best and cleerest gotten goods.

But here is the mischief, he is too bold, and too indiscreet in his
Catechizings and Sermons, he never keeps his teske, but is always roauing
into Townesmatters, and men's manners, that he has naught to do with: We are
not so ignorant (as it pleases him to term us sometimes) but we can see when
he leaves his teske. What is it for him to stand telling us of such things as
are not in the Scripture? We have some in our town that can read indifferently
well marry, and are good sensible men, that can find no such matter in the
Bible: Wherefore we think that he is too precise and curious. It comes surely
of pride, that he would have all men ruled by him (and that our towns men
know well enough) and that both his apparel and meddling in high matters does
testify; or it comes of malice, for he has no good neighborhood in him: or
of envy, even as other poor men grudge at, and envy rich men: or of choler,
for he will be angry often times we know not for what, even when no man has
wronged him. Well; he thinks there is no man so good as himself, but I think
there is none so bad as he, and such like Putricans; but if he cannot be
content to read the Word of God to us, and to trouble us with no such bibble
babble, some of our rich men will ouerpowre him and remove him; he had best to
look well to himself; (being among Scorpions,) you should be greatly his
friend if you would adueruse him of these things, but in no case tell him, that
I speak such things unto you.


Eulalus. I am sorry to hear you say that he behaues himself so indiscreetly
among you, especially in the work of the ministry, do you think that he
speaks all of pride, envy, malice, and choler?


Mataeolog. He does, he does without doubt, every man sees, and says that; for
if he would let them alone, they would let him alone, that is a clear case:
for I have heard many say so, and I fully believe it, I know it partly by my
self. Here is a fine man not far off (you cannot but hear of him) a very
good scholar, he is as perfect in his Greek and Latin as in his English, it
will do one good to hear him, he will go from the Alehouse to the Church,
and make as good a Sermon, and a better then our Minister can do with all his
weeks study: he goes not an harebreadth from his teske, to meddle of any
by-matters, as our minister does. The common saying is true, the best Scholars
are the least medlers: he deals with nothing but with Gods word, and he has
therefore the good will of all the parish, and wants nothing that they can do
for him.


Eulalus. If they love so to hear him, then they are a people of good
knowledge; they surely know how to order their lives after the rule of Gods
word; because he holds himself so to the word of God, and meddles with
nothing else.


Mataeolog. Nay, I think they have as little to say, as we have: We have
some talkatiue (but needy) fellows in our parish that are able to put them all
down in reasoning, and I doubt the Minister to: but neither we nor they care
for them, they might guide their tongues, and keep their friends if they were
wise. Such poor men should mind their business, and please their Masters, and
not run to Sermons, and busy their heads, they know not about what. We care
for no such pratlers that will be making themselves better then other men. But
I know what I know, they that carry books in their pockets, carry the Devil
in their hearts. And to tell you the truth, we care for none that follows or
favors our Minister: for there is no good neighborhood, nor good fellowship
in any of them. I think more than I will speak of, but what this world will
come to, the Lord knows.


Eulalus. It should seem by the drift of your speech, that you are in your
parish, as they are in many more; one man is against another, and all against
the Minister for his Preaching and Catechizing, as though Gods word were your
common adversary, even as Herod was against Pilate, and Pilate against Herod,
and all against Christ; or as Simeon and Leui brethren in iniquity.


Mataeolog. What do you compare us to Herod, that killed S. John Baptist* to
Pilate that condemned our blessed Savior? And is our Minister to be compared
to Christ, to S. John Baptist, or to any of the Apostles? He! What Is he? No
body, almost none of our substantial men care for him, nor any that is wise,
only a few ignorant base fellows favor him. It is more for a dinner, or a
pot of beer, then for any good devotion they have, more then others.


Eulalus. Be not angry I pray you, I speak not of you, but of them that are
such like. I take you to be my friend, and I hope never to give you any just
cause to think hardly of me. I suppose that if John Baptist, Paul, Peter, etc.
or any of the holy men in times past, were among you, in the appearance of an
ordinary Minister (say, it were of your Minister) that you would reverence him,
suffer your selves to be instructed, and catechized with all readiness and
willingness, acknowledge and confess your sins, that you would be so far
from oppressing one another, as you would even sell your possessions, and cast
the money at his feet, as the Christians did at the Apostles feet, Act. 4 37.
and that you would suffer your selves to be ruled and ordered in all things by
his Sermons.


Mataeologus. I truly, I think that I should even do so.


Eulalus. Yea, and all your neighbors that your Minister so troubles and
disquiets, with his indiscreet preaching.


Mataeolog. I think they would I promise you, else we were all even as ill as
Pilate, Herod and the Pharisees, as you said even now.


Eulalus. I think indeed you would be all alike minded toward John the
Baptist, Paul, Peter etc. For they would be quiet, not meddling with your
corruptions in your towns matters, nor of your evil manners that you
complain of; they would preach learnedly, in Latin, Greek and Hebrew, and
schollerlike, as that fine man does which you told me of, that men might have a
comfort and delight to hear them, as you said of him; they would not rail
against honest men, reproving them for their covetousness, oppression, usury*
bribery, envy, lying, swearing, drunkenness, adulteries etc. but they would
preach the Gospel, letting all such matters pass, doing their own duties,
and letting other men alone by them, as your fine man does: they would keep
company, and go from the Alehouse to the Pulpit: they would respect your rich
men, and not do as your Minister does, which makes no difference between the
poor and the rich: nor between chiefe-charge-bearers, and beggarly persons,
and thinks well of none, but such as favor his Preaching and Catechizing.


Mataeolog. I perceive now, that all this while you have mocked me: you seem
to be a favorer of those hypocrite Putricans, I Will stand no longer talking with
you.


Eulalus. My purpose was not to mock you, but to let you see how many men do
sooth and flatter themselves in the bare title of a Christian, or of a
Protestant (as the common Papist thinks it enough to have the bare name of a
Catholic) being in the mean time so far from the knowlede of God and true
Christianity, as they are indeed the utter enemies of Christ and his members,
and yet know not so much. This is the deepest hypocrisy of all, whereby a man
blinds not others so much, as he deceiues his own heart. As for your self, I
perceive that you are full of the darkness of this world; but if it shall
please God to have mercy on you, and to open the eyes of your mind, you will be
ashamed of this folly that you have uttered to me; though now you think that
you have well spoken, and the rather because you have too many abettors in such
ignorant Imaginations.

As concerning your Minister, that you so contemptuously speak of; I have
known him long, and am well acquainted with him. I am sure, unless you seek
occasion, and devise matter against him, you cannot justly tax him for any
enormity; whether it be for not observing the Canons, or any temporal, or
Ecclesiastical Law, or in regard of the faithful, and conscionable discharge
of his calling, as the Laws of God and man enjoin him; or in regard of his
life and conversation.

Whereas you say that he is more diligent then needs, that is because you
desire not the knowledge of God nor his ways. Your affections are set on the
earth and earthly things: Therefore for fear of the Law you come to the
Church, but for want of the Love of God and his Word, you would soon be gone
again, to your drinking, gaming, iobs-doing, etc. as the dog returns to his
vomit, and the Sow to her wallowing in the mire.

Whereas you say, he feels the smart of it in his Tithes paying; this
proceeds from your hatred of God, and of Jesus Christ, whose children you
boast your selves to be, as the Pharisees boasted of God their Father, and of
Abraham their Father. For by your own confession it is merely for his
preaching, and catechizing sake, and also your good liking to your former idle
Pastor, manifests the same. You have Jewish and murtherous hearts by your
own confession, for you diminish his living by your cunning and crafty
shifting; you would feign bring him into shame and obloquie, and make him a
common byword by your daily mistaking all his sayings, and doings. His Sermons
you turn off with raging at every thing that you think is spoken against you;
or else with bitter mockings. Yea, you proceed so far in your Jewish
rebellion, as you can and dare, and as the bribe can give you liberty. If the
Lord had not bound your hands and feet with the chains of good laws and
government, it is like enough your civil substantial men would throw him over
the Pulpit, and stone him out at the towns end, as the Nazarens would have
thrown our Savior Christ down headlong Luke 4.
from a rock, Luke 4.

Whereas you so much commend your former minister for his husbandry, and
nothing else; that's your blindness, for the Scripture teaches you otherwise.
Our Savior says, He that lays his hand to the plough, and looks back, is
unapt for the kingdom of God. You are his husbandry, he is to work upon
you, to plow up the fallowes of your hearts, to destroy and kill the
unprofitable weeds of sin and wickedness in you, and to make your hearts a
pure and clean soul for the Gospel, that you might bring forth the fruit of
holiness, and righteousness; that you glorifying God upon earth, he might
glorify you in heaven eternally; and that he also performing this duty which
Christ (whose Steward he is) has laid upon him, might shine as the stars
in the firmament for ever and ever, by turning you from the ways of death and
damnation, to righteousness and life.

Whereas you call his pains a deal of lip-labor, and say he will catechize
all the good servants out of the town, and say that it would make a horse
break his halter to hear all his prittle-prattle: The Lord open your heart,
that you many know what you say, and see in what miserable and fearful estate
you are. There is none of these things but you hear them proved and confirmed
plainly by the Scriptures, and many of them are the very words of the Text. How
has Satan blinded and bewitched you, that he causes you to mock God to his
face, even as he would have brought Job to have blasphemed him to his face?
Job. 1. 11. The Job. 1. 11.
Lord convert you, and baptize you with the fire of his spirit, that you may be
transformed into a member of Jesus Christ: for truly you show your self as
yet to be but a limb of the Devil. What you are in Gods election, the Lord
himself knows, but if you never repent, you can never be saved.

Whereas you say, you will give him the hearing, because you cannot remedy it,
but you will do as you list; It would make any Christians heart bleed to hear
you. For first you show your cruel and reuengefull hearts (as the Jews did to
Stephen) in that you would have a remedy, if Law would give liberty, and like
enough, so far as it would permit: For the hatred of worldlings against Gods
Ministers and children, is as a burning fire kindled by Satan, and is like the
unquenchable fire of hell.

Again, whereas you would give him the hearing, and make no more ado, you
show your resolution in your obstinacy: your meaning is, that you would not
contend too much with him; that you will come to the Church as late as you can,
and when you are come, to while away the time in sleeping, or thinking on some
earthly thing; and so let both him and the Sabbath go; for you think he
cannot present you, and so long you care not.

Again, you say he breeds much disquietnes among you, through his bold and
indiscreet Sermons: In that you think him too bold, that is the pride of your
own hearts, which think that he should be afraid of your faces, Ierem. 1. 18.
contrary to Gods commandment, Ier. 1. 18. Is not the Lord able with the breath
of his mouth to blow you all in a moment into the river of fire and brimstone,
as he caused the west-winde to blow the grasshoppers of Egypt into the red Sea?
Alas seely worms that creep on the earth, and savor of nothing but the earth.

Whereas you tax him of indiscreetnes, that is your ignorance and
indiscretion, that know not white from black. You say he keeps not his text:
What, would you have him to do nothing but read over his text an hour
together? You might justly then make him a common byword. No, but he roaues
into towns matters, and men's manners, that he has naught to do with. Though
he has naught to do with them, yet God has to do with them, that, I hope
you will grant. But when your Preacher applies the Word to your town in
particular, and to the hearts and consciences of you and other men in
particular, for your own instruction and reformation, then you say, he goes
from his text. He meddles of such things as concern him not. You can find no
such thing in the Bible: what is this but ignorance, and hardness of heart?
you think because you find not the name of your town and townes-matters
expressed word by word in the text, and because the houses and names and
particular actions of such and such men are not according to every circumstance
at large expressed (as your grounds are butted and bounded in your leases) that
therefore the text concerns not you, and consequently none, and so would you
have God to have naught to do with you, no more than you would have to do
with him. You think enough for you to know what you would have; but what he
would have you cannot abide to know. Yea, your spirits (though not your
tongues) do say, depart away from us, we will none of thy ways.

And though you think, that you do but speak and do against your Minister:
yet the truth is, that you fight like Giants against God and Christ, whom you
call your Father and Redeemer; and not only you, but Satan by you, who rides
you at his pleasure. But you like the dumb horse, or mule, that have none
understanding, know not whether you go. And those Church-robbers that think
their ministers tithes the best gotten goods, are the men that cast lots for
Christ's coat: for Christ is crucified, and his garment has Lots cast for it
till the worlds end. (I doubt this is a mystery to you.)

Whereas you talk of precisenes, curiousnes, strictnes, and Putricans (as it
pleases your ignorance to term them) these and such like terms are but the
froath of an evil and mocking heart, and the scumme of a corrupt judgment,
that knows not what the Minister, or what Christian life means.

You your self think, that this precisenes, and too much busying of himself
comes of pride, because he would have all men ruled by him; whereas the truth
is, (and as his behavior among you shows it, unless you be wilfully, and
stark blind) that he wholly and altogether set^eth forth God unto you, in
his word, that you might be ruled by him, and that you, (as all men are) being
by nature rebels against God, might be brought into subjection under him. And
for this cause your minister does abase himself, that making himself no body,
God may be all, among you all, and in you all. And that his rule over you, your
hearts, consciences, and lives might the more clearly appear unto you, and in
you; that he might present you a chaste and pure Virgin to Christ: arrogating
nothing to himself, as Reualls and Antichrists do, thereby obscuring Gods
glory, but sending and delivering you as it were into the hands of God, and
Christ, that gathers and clocketh you to himself, as the hen does her
chickins, by your minister. Wherefore even as the Churl says, Corn is too
cheap, because he cannot get so much for it as he would have, but the poor
find it to be too dear: even so your own hearts are prone, stubborn, and
rebellious, not his, and therefore disdain you to humble your selves to walk
with your God, and intruding your selves into the room of God,
Antichristianlike, you as Sycophants do in spirit say, that God is proud,
which with the tongue, you as it were father upon your Minister: being like the
Libard, which for the hatred he bears to man, teareth his image in pieces if
he find it in paper, parchment, etc.

Did not Corah, Dathan, and Abiram rebel against God in the person of Moses?
Did not the Israelites cast away God from ruling over them in the person 1 Samuel
8. 7.
of Samuel? 1 Samuel 8. 7. See, if ever any of the children of God spoke this of
the Prophets, that spoke to them in the name of the Lord, whether Kings,
Nobles, or Commons? But the rebels always, not only Kings and Nobles, but
even the basest miscreants, took occasion at the person of the Prophet to
despise and cast away the Word of the Lord, and to entreat his messengers
despitefully, and as it seems you do, the Prophet which God has sent amongst
you, and to you.

You smile at this particular application, that I call your Minister a Prophet
of God, but let me tell you this by the way, that profane persons can hear
the word of God in general, I mean, so long as they understand it not, and
know not what use to make of it; but when it comes to be applied in particular,
they fall either to raging, or mocking, as Luke 4. The Nazarens Luke 4*
willingly heard our Savior Christ read his Text out of Esaias, and after he had
begun to expound the same, they commended him, and wondered at his gracious
words, but when he began to reprove their unbelief, and hardness of heart,
(which you call meddling of towns matters, and men's manners) they were filled
with wrath, and went about to break his neck: (They looked for a temporal
kingdom without them, and not a spiritual kingdom within them.) For these
Nazarens boasted of Christ, and thought it a great honor to their country and
city, that a Prophet should arise from among them, that could preach such high
doctrine, and work such and so many great miracles; yea they imagined also
that Christ should glory in their carnal gracing and honoring of him, as if
for that end he should preach and work wonders: which thing his own kinsman
also imagined, John 7. 3. 4. For flesh and John* 7. 3. 4.
blood can go no further. But when Christ comes to discover their hypocritical
and carnal hearts, to reprove their infidelity, and that he will not carnally
glorify John 5. 44.
them, as they would carnally glorify him. John. 5. 44. then are they all in a
rage, they will to their ability be revenged of him, as it seems you would be
of your minister.

Again, if they fall not to raging, then they fall to mocking, as the covetous
Pharisees mock Christ Luke 16. 14.
Luke 16. 14. when they perceived that he spoke against them: and this is your
device, by your own confession, you would not strive much with your Minister
(for want of power to do evil) but you will show your hatred in your mocks,
wrye looks, privy taunts, nips and girds, encouraging others against him, and
bringing him and the Gospel into contempt, by all the sly means you could,
so shall rude persons and abiects be actors of your wickedness: but carry your
self as politickely as you can, and cover your shame with heathenish ciuility,
as well as you may (as now a days many of you are become as cunning as
stageplayers,) yet you shall but dance in a net.

You say he preaches of pride, why? because his apparel shows him to be
proud. There may be, I hope, a proud heart in a leather doublet, like that of
yours, and there may be a meek spirit, and humble heart in a stuff gown like
that of his; you look on the outward appearance, but God looks on both your
hearts. His apparel is such as his calling requires; and I know that for your
cause also he wears such to take away offense, and contempt, you are so apt
to stumble at every straw; for such as you, judge only according to the
outward appearance, and would take occasion at his mean apparel, to dispose
the Gospel, as the Nazarens did. Mark. 6. 3. 4. and for this purpose the
Church has always enjoined decency in apparel to Ministers.

You say, he preaches of malice, because he has no good neighborhood in
him, because he goes not to the Alehouse with you, and your hang-byes,
haile-fellowes well met, to drink and to game, and to preach over the pot (you
would then hear him, with great devotion, and not say he preached
prittle-prattle) therefore he has no good neighborhood in him. If you knew
what good neighborhood were, you should see none in any of you, so much as in
him.


Mataeo. Why, what call you good neighborhood.


Eulalus. Ephesians. 5. 12.
The Apostle tells you in Ephesians. 5. 12. submit your selves one to another in
the fear of God. If your fellowship and friendship be knit in God, it is good
fellowship: If your feasting and meetings be as they were in the Primitive
Church among Christians, using your selves as in the presence of God, there is
good fellowship and neighborhood. If you be affectioned to love one another
with brotherly love, and in giving honor one going before another, that is
good neighborhood, Romans 12. 10. If your rich men Romans 12. 10.
prey not on the poor, by rent-racking, by small measures and great prizes, but
relieve them before they fall, and help them up when they are fallen, Luke 10.
Luke. 10. 33. 34. 35.
33. 34 35. then are you good neighbors.

But if your good neighborhood be acted no where but at the Alehouse, in
drinking and drunkenness, ribaldry and swearing, in foolish iangling, rotten
and unsavory speeches. In dissembling, lying, cousonage in bargayning,
insnarings (called alehouse bargains) wasting your good, like Esaus: then is
it such like as S. Peter speaks of, 1 Pet. 4. 3. 4. It Is like 1 Pet. 4. 3. 4.
the meeting of swine at their trough; and it seems strange to such heathenish
people, that good Christians run not with them to the same excess of riot, and
therefore speak they evil of them.

You say also that he preaches out of choler, and that he will be angry when
no man hurts him. You think belike, no man should be angry for Gods cause; you
will take your brothers part, your kinsmans part, and your friends part, when
you see him abused: yea, in his absence, you will answer for him, it may be you
will not deal only words, but blows for him, if you love him well, and
should God have no friends to take his part, not to speak a word for him, nay,
not so much as to look with an angry countenance against his enemies. Has not
God been, and is not God our friend that we should show no love at all to
him? can a child with patience see his Father wronged? and should the children
of God not be displeased when they hear the name of God blasphemed? Surely if
we love our Fathers that begat us, we cannot but love God much more which has
made both them and us, and all the world, and maintains us all, and all for
us, of his own goodness and bounty. If we love our earthly Mothers, that endured
some bodily pains in our birth, we cannot but love Jesus Christ, that endured
the cursed death of the Cross. For our new birth; Our Mothers bring us forth
Children of wrath; firebrands of hell, but Christ has brought us forth
children of God, and heirs of his glorious kingdom. Surely this love of God
toward us, which is infinite, and endless, should move us to love him; at the
least, to be displeased with his enemies, and the contemners of him.

Was not Moses angry with the Israelites in Gods Exodus 32. 19.
cause? Exodus 32. 19. Did not the Levites out of their zeal of Gods glory slay
every man his brother, companion, and neighbor? Was not Lots righteous soul
grieved from day to day, because of the wickedness of the Sodomites? but you
say, a man is angry for naught, if it be in Gods cause, you show, what
knowledge, what faith, what love of God there is in you. This is far from
loving him with all the heart, soul, mind, and strength. There is none so
ready to answer for themselves as you are, yea, you will be very fervent and
zealous in your own causes: but you will hate or mock them, that speak in
Gods behalf. Whether do you love God, or your self better? whereas you say,
that some of your rich men will over power him, and remove him, unless he
look well to himself; he knows that to be the nature of the rich, which
serve the golden Devil Mammon, to hate all them that seek to set forth Gods
glory. He knows that Mammon is now strong in the world, and so full of
sophistry, that he can make the Law a nose of wax, yea, and the Gospel also,
to turn them which way he list. Notwithstanding he fears not the soldiers
and servants of Mammon, though they come like Goliahs, strong men, sensible
men, sound cards, well purst, cunning underminers against him; for God has
put a stone in his sling, even his word in his mouth, and given him strength to
slay a Bear, and a Lion. God has bidden him not to fear you: wherefore
should he fear? Ezech. 2. 6. Son of man fear Ezech 2. 6.
them not, nor be afraid of their words, although Rebels and thorns be with
thee, and thou remainest with scorpions: fear not their words, nor be afraid
at their looks, for they are a rebellious house.

Wherefore I would counsel you to look well to your self, that Satan and
your own sins ouer-power not you, and remove you clean out of Gods favor,
protection, and kingdom.

Afterward, you come to tell me of a fine man, of a great Scholar, that uses
more Greek and Latin then English in his Sermons, and that it will do one
good to hear him. What edifying do you think that any of his unlearned
hearers get by such using of his Greek and Latin? You your self say that
they profit nothing in knowledge, and I think they profit as little in good
life. What good is that you speak of? It is even nothing but this, that you
use him, as an instrument to disgrace your Minister withal, by your odious
comparisons-making. And because hereby you comfort, relieve, and refresh an
accusing conscience, whiles that you dispose the plain-dealing of your own
Minister, and accounts him the right Preacher, that lets you live securely in
your sins.

Moreover, do you think it a decent thing for a Minister to go from the pot
to the pulpit? Should he not rather come from God, I mean from prayer, and
Meditation, that he might pray and preach in fear, humility, reverence, and
zeal, as having the word put in his mouth from God, and speaking as from God,
being in the glorious presence of God and his Angels?

You say that you have talkatiue fellows in your parish, that can put them all
down in reasoning, and their minister too. It likes you well, and such as you,
to call gracious words talkatiuenesse, and prattle. Mark what the Apostle
says, Colossians 3. 16. Let the word of God dwell plenteously in you, in all
wisdom, etc. In another place, Let your speech be seasoned with salt; but you
think that vain, foolish, rotten, and unsavory speeches, should rather be
plentiful in men mouths; for with these I never hear you find any fault,
oaths, lies, foolish ieasting, ribaldry has free passage without check, or
rebuke. And if such persons do but humor and please you, then is all well,
taken how bad soever it be, and with such like persons you love to keep
company; but you have no delight to tarry where there is sober talk, and
Christian communication; as I have seen diverse begin to hem, and to hum, and
to hang down the head, to yawne, raspe, and stretch (as being weary with long
sitting) saying that they have business, and therefore must away, and so
sliuing out of the doors, presently stumble into an other place, where they
will be as merry as cup and cann can make them.

But hear what the holy man of God, the Prophet David says, Psalm. 26. 4. 5. I
have not dwelt with vain persons, Psalm. 26. 4. 5.
neither will I have fellowship with the deceitful. I have hated the
congregation of the wicked* and will not sit among the ungodly, And Psalm. 119.
115. Away from me ye wicked, Psalm. 119. 115.
for I will keep the commandment of my God. And Pro. 14. 7. Depart from the
foolish man, when thou perceiuest Prou. 14. 7.
not in him the lips of knowledge. And Ecclus. 9. 17. Ecclus. 9. 17.
Let thy talk be with the wise, and all thy communication in the Law of the
most high. This is expressly commanded, Deuteronomy. 11. 19. We must speak of the
Commandments Deuteronomy. 11. 19.
continually, when we sit at home, when we walk by the way, when we rise up,
and when we lie down: but they that do thus, by your confession, shall lose
their friends; if they lose their friendship of sinners, to obtain the
friendship of God, and his Angels, it is a gainefull loss, for there be more
with them then against them.

Whereas you say (a wonted Proverb among profane people) A book in the
Pocket, a Devil in the heart; There be some that carry no books in their
pockets, nor yet good words in their mouths, which notwithstanding have the
Devil in their hearts. All are not bad that carry good books with them, nor
all good, that have no books. It is a Proverb among you, he that does as the
Preacher would have him do, shall die a beggar: but there be some which dye
beggars, because they will not do as the Preacher would have them. And I my
self have heard some say, bring not up your son in learning, for it will
make him a bad husband; but there be some bad husbands that were never brought
up in learning.

You call your honest men needy, in way of contempt. It is as easy for the
rich man to scorn the poor for his poverty, as it is for the fat Ox that is
ready for the shambles to tread the feeble under feet. The holy man David was
pestered, and pushed at Phil. 22. 12.
with such fat Bulls of Basan, Psalm. 22. 12. and bark't at with such dogs, verse
16. so was Christ also, whereof he was a figure; and so are, and shall all
Christians, especially the poor, that can least help themselves Mark well,
what our Savior Christ says, It is as hard for a rich man to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, as for a gable rope to pass through the eye of a needle:
The temptations of Mammon prevail so much with them, as that they cannot
subject their hearts to the Gospel; they will not have Jesus Christ to be King
and ruler over them, like the murtherous Husbandmen in the Gospel, they cannot
abide to do homage to Christ; such manner of service is too base, with the
proud and licentious worldlings. It will not afford such meat, drink, and
cloth, as a man should have, and there is no liberty but continual
paines-taking. Lewd servants that take no pleasure in their Masters profit, nor
delight in a well ordered family, love to serve dissolute and prodigal
masters, where they may have great wages to maintain pride, wantonness, and
gaming, and where they may have full scope and liberty to say and do what they
list: Even so, most rich men, and all worldlings, have no pleasure at all in
the profiting of Christ by their faithful service, neither have any delight in
his government and family, there is so much strictness* curiousness and base
work; but they must serve golden Mammon, that will give them wage enough, they
shall want nothing that will do them good, for there is neither pinching nor
sparing, neither shall they be restrained of their liberty.

Now seeing that these worldlings are such bad and froward servants, Christ
which is a straight and hard man, and therefore looks to have his business
well followed, and to receive his own with advantage, will have those that
have not dwelt in wanton and prodigal houses, where there is nothing but
eating and drinking, mirth and pastime; but he has chosen the poor and needy
to confound the rich; the foolish and simple, to confound the wise and the
learned; the weak, and helpless, to bring to naught the mighty and the
strong, 1 Cor. 1. 26. 27. 28. This Scripture is 1 Cor. 1. 26. 27. 28.
fulfilled in your own eyes, in your own town, and yet you cannot see it,
because he looks on the heart, and has mercy on whom he will, and you
contrarily look on the outward appearance, and judge thereafter. In Mark 6.
Christ preaches in his own country, Mark 6.
and works miracles there also, but how do they hear him and receive him?
Whence has he this doctrine? What wisdom is this that is given him? How does
he work such great wonders? Is he not a carpenter? are not his Mother,
Brethren* and Sisters with us? But here was all, and therefore Christ
marvelled at their unbelief. In the weak and mean outward appearance of
Christ, they might the more clearly have seen the power, wisdom, and glory
of God, had they not beheld him with fleshly and carnal eyes.

So may you see the mercy, grace, and goodness of God in opening the eyes of
your poor men, tradesmen, laboring men, unlearned men, men of no education,
of no means, such as the Disciples were; not so sensible and so wise as some
of your rich men are, not booke-learned as they are, not at leisure as they
are, but always in some labor and travel, and yet can they put down all
your sensible men in reasoning, and your fine Latin Preacher with them. Is not
this the power of God inlightning their minds, mollifying their hearts with
the oil of grace, and sanctifying the word unto them which they hear?
Hereupon comes this difference between them, and the rich, and between other
poor men and them. They hunger and thirst after the word of God, therefore God
satisfies their souls with God, and they are fat and well-liking, the rich
have not this spiritual hungar, and thirst, and therefore they are sent empty
Luke 1. 53.
away. Luke 1. 53.

These poor men among you (whom God has received to mercy) you call prattling
fellows, beggarly persons, Putricans, with other mocking, ungodly, and envious
terms. Our Savior Christ's countrymen admired his doctrine, wisdom,
miracles, but ever in the end they came in with their (But:) He is but a
Carpenter, but of mean parentage, but of mean education, etc. Even so do you
come in always with your But: but he is no Scholar, but he is no linguist,
but our rich men and great men regard him not; he is but this, he is but that:
so you make this But, a stumbling block, or rather a brazen wall to separate
you from Gods Kingdom. The Lord turn your hearts.

Again, you say such poor men should mind their business, and not run to
Sermons: this running to Sermons indeed is a great beam in your eyes: you
commonly judge them unthrifts, that spend an hour in the week day at a
Sermon: but you never speak of them that spend many hours in the week in
idle talk, or at the Alehouse* Nay I have heard your own tongue commend a
tradesman, for his orderly course of life; and among other things, that he
would go twice or thrice in the week to the Alehouse; if he liked the
company; but he duly kept his stint, he would not pass his hour unless by
great chance. Neither do I simply disallow this thing in him; but if he
bestowed one of these hours in the hearing of a Sermon, I should think the
better of him, and so would you to. For I am persuaded that you your self
think the Church better than the Alehouse, and the word of God to be as
needful for the soul, as Ale for the body. And if they offer not the
sacrifice of fools, but give diligent ear, and laying up that in memory which
they hear, shall afterward upon occasion speak of the same, I hope that you
for your part will not term them pratlers, nor hate them for it, but rather
commend them, and love them, preferring them before others that have that care
to know God, nor desire to hear his word.

Alas, I am sorry to hear you say, that you care for none that follows, and
favors your Minister. You should all favor him, and follow his doctrine: yea,
and him also, wherein he follows Christ. You should be his fellow-helpers,
and gather with him, and not scatter abroad, nor hinder the work of the Lord
in his hands. You rich men should countenance him all that you can, that
thereby all sorts, and even the worst people might be moved to reverence him,
which in the contempt of him, contemn the word of God, and God himself, whose
messenger he is. They should cover his faults, and infirmities, that by such
things the word of God be not evil spoken of among them that seek such
occasions. They should help and relieve his wants (as all true Christians ever
have done,) that poverty hinder not the work of the Ministry and so your
souls be starued, and famished to death through the pining of his body.

You will meat your oxen, and keep your horses well, that they may be strong
to labor, else your business will lie undone: ought you not then much more to
maintain your minister, that your souls may be filled, and satisfied with
good? Will you withdraw meat from your beasts, that they might not work, and
yet would have your work done? surely you would think him hardly well in his
wits, that would do so: even so, will you sacrilegiously withdraw your
Ministers maintenance, that he might not preach, and yet would be saved, this
is spiritual madness, and dead drunkenness.

Alas for you, I pity your case, I perceive how the gods of this world, Satan
and Mammon, have blinded the eyes of some of your rich men, and has prevailed
so much with them, as he has brought them to be rank Pharisees, as ill and
worse then they, that persecuted Christ.

Some few of them, it should seem, being fat at the heart, and full in the
purse, are pricked with pride and vaineglory, whereby they seek to ouer*power
all the meaner sort, to prey upon them at their command, both to say and do,
not what truth and right is, but what they would have. If any submit themselves
and yield to them in all things, magnifying and praising them, him they will
countenance and favor and chiefly give him fair words; but all accounts in
the end being cast, he shall find himself nothing helped, or bettered by
them, unless it be of other men's cost; but if any dislike their doings and
cross them sometimes, yea, when he can do no other, unless he will burden
his conscience, him they will be revenged of, disgracing him, and watching
opportunity to thwart him; and as I may say, to worrie him if they could. And
by those means have they brought, and seek to bring all men into their
subjection, whereout they suck no small advantage.

Now these men cannot abide your minister for his plain dealing with them, yea
like envious Riualls they cannot abide that any respect or reverence should be
had, or given to him, for they think it great disgrace to them, that any man
should be preferred before them in any thing in your parish; yea they make
account of your minister, but as of a bodily servant for outward Church*duties,
according to Law, and that therefore they pay his tithes as his wages. They
would not have him to meddle or make with townes-matters, which are swayd after
their own lusts, nor of their wickedness, because they would not have their
ugliness and shame uncovered before the eyes of the world, nor the gnawing
worm of their galled conscience stirred and set on work before the time, (the
Lord convert them if it be his gracious pleasure.) Hence it is that they seek
to single out all men from him, that being left alone, and no man daring to
speak in his behalse, no not the manifest truth, they might upon every light
occasion use him at their pleasure: but though all men leave him, yet God will
assist him, in his own cause; and in the end all men shall see his power in
the conversion, or in the confusion of these wicked Caitiues.


Mataeolog. It is even as true, that you say, as God is in heaven. They are so
fed as they are like a fool with a full belly, and a babble in his hand. No man
can be in quiet for them: they are even the most venomous people that ever man
came amongst; it is not possible to escape their hands, but they will one way
or other mischief him: I have had but too much experience of -- etc.


Eulalus. How bad soever they be, let not us be moved to impatience, but use
good words; If we see their wickedness, let us hate it, but let us love their
persons, God can make them vessels of holiness and righteousness at his
pleasure. A soft answer pacifieth wrath, and good words quench the coals of
strife: we must not cease to be good because they are evil.

But to make an end of my former speech unto you; If you remember, you were
angry with me (when upon your own speeches) I said you were like to Pilate and
Herod, one against another, and all against your Minister; do you not even now
say the same upon another occasion) terming them venomous, and full fools with
bables? Whereby it appears that you are now with them, now against them; feign
would you have their favor, but your own will withal; but your love to Gods
word, and your minister is like theirs. Well, I perceive that sin reigns in
a company of you, and that Satan rules you at his pleasure. When you and they
are at some variance, and the Minister, as his text does lead him, does reprove
some sin that you know them guilty of, that sin you remember well, and will
be rehearsing of it, and curri-fauouring with the Minister, to shroud your
self under him: this you do out of a reuengefull heart to disgrace and defame
your neighbors, and that in making others bad, your self might seem good.
Again, when time serves, you will side to them against your minister, and call
his reproving of sin railing against honest men, and say that he has no
neighborhood, nor love of his people in him; that he speaks all out of
pride, malice, envy, choler: Whereby a man may easily see, that some among you
are religious, some profane and immovable in their wickedness, some crafty
shifters, serving themselves of both parties, hating the one, and not loving
the other.

What say you now, being in this tune that you are in? Put the case that John
the Baptist, or Paul, or Peter, etc. or any of the holy men of*former times,
should come to Preach among you: put the case that Jesus Christ himself should
come, (I mean not working miracles, nor discovering themselves) but preaching,
and teaching in such manner as they did to the Jews, and to other peoples,
when they lived on earth? You say you would hear them, follow them, reverence,
and honor them, confess your sins, you would spend goods, body, and life
for them, you would cast all that you had at their feet, and suffer your
selves to

But the manifest truth is, that Christ himself should find no better
entertainment, than your Minister now does, nay far worse; for Christ used to
speak to the spirits of men, seeing he knew the thoughts of their hearts, and
their secret sins; and therefore would you persecute him with more deadly
hatred. He would not preach comfort I warrant you to obstinate and hard
hearted Pharisees, nor frame his speeches to the liking of their corrupt
judgments, and earthly imaginations, as you would have your Minister to do.

But you will say he would be innocent, harmless, sinnelesse, giving none
occasion, no appearance of evil, yea, he would stop the mouths of the
worst, that they could not speak one evil word of him.

But by your leave, that is well spoken which is well taken, and that is well
done, that is well construed. If you be of froward dispositions, and evil
hearts, how would you take that at his hands, which were contrary to you? how
would you being of ignorant and corrupt judgments interpret his words, and
censure his doings? It mattereth not only who is the speaker, and what is
spoken; but also who is the hearer, and how it is heard. The serpent can find
poison there where the Be can find no poison but honey. And I have often
heard them say that the cunning Alchymist can draw gall out of honey, and honey
out of gall: you must therefore consider what heart and ears you have: I tell
you plainly, that unless Christ should put new hearts into your bodies, you
would hear him no otherwise then you do your own Minister, that cannot give
you new hearts. And though he be most holy, yet would you esteem him a
sinner. What I pray you said the proud and covetous Pharisees of him? He is a
glutton, a drinker, a common Mat. 11. 19. Mat. 27. 63. Mat. 9. 34.
companion. Matthew 11 19. A deceiuer, Matthew 27. 63. A Sorcerer, or worker
with evil Spirits, Matthew 9. 34. He has a Devil, and is mad, why John
10. 20.
do you hear him? John 10 20. He is a Samaritane, John 8. 48. John 9. ^4.
and is frantike, John 8. 48. They know that he is a sinner, John 9. 24. yea,
his own kinsmen laid Mark 3. 21.
hands on him, supposing that he was mad. Mark. 3. 21.

How then I pray you would the proud, covetous Pharisees in these days receive
him? How would profane mockers hear him? Even worse then they do your
Minister, or any other faithful Pastor elsewhere. For the more purely that the
word of God is preached, the more does it dissent from the corrupt heart, and
more nearly searches it, and makes sinners more sinful, working more
forcibly in the conscience. Hereupon the rebellious sinner presently seeks
for false releefes, ease, and comforts, and that is by returning all upon the
Minister, he is a Puritan, he is fantastical, precise, indiscreete,
uncharitable; now he speaks to himself, for we are no such men; he speaks
out of pride, malice, envy, choler, false information, there is none worse then
himself, such Christianity cannot be acted etc. How I pray you, did they
censure John the Baptist? He has a Devil, the Devil is in him, a grimme
dog, a melancholy fellow, (...), etc. How then would you speak of him, and
of Christ? If new wine be poured into old vessels, whosoever poures it in,
and howsoever it be poured in, the vessels will burst. And if a new piece be
sewed to an old garment, how good soever the piece be, and how cunning soever
the tailor be, it will rent away part of the old: for the old vessel cannot
contain the new wine, nor the old rotten garment retain the new cloth. If
the pure word of God from Christ's own mouth were applied to your old,
fleshly, and rotten hearts, what containing or retaining would there be of it?
Again, so long as you are carnal, how can you judge of those things which are
spiritual?

The natural man cannot perceive the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolishness to him, nothing sounds well to his ear, but that which savors of
flesh and blood. And therefore many dainty eared men can away with none but
with schollerlike Sermons. The Word must savor of humane wisdom and learning,
else there is no more taste in it, than in water, he cannot abide to drink
it; but if it has sugar in it* or be mixed with wine, then for the sugar and
wines sake, he drinks it off, and commends it not simply, but secundum quid.
But the pure word of God has neither good taste, nor good farewell, it goes
down either like water in the sottish, or like wormwood and gall in the
hard-hearted and malicious.

Judge now I pray you, how your froward rich men would hear, receive,
entertain, and welcome Jesus Christ, in whom they say they believe, whom they
love above all, and by whom they hope to be saved. I fear that they which so
greatly commend your fine man, that preaches more Greek, Latin, and Hebrew,
then English, and which are so delighted and comforted with his languages, if
Jesus Christ were preaching to them, in such manner as he did on the earth,
would hardly give him friendly intertainement, they would hardly all agree to
make him a stipend, or contribution, I doubt some would give him never a penny,
even of them that are the most able.


Mataeolog. I am no Scripture man: I cannot answer you to every thing: but it
will not sink into my head, but that we should all hear and obey Christ.
Though we be bad enough (as there is none good but God) yet we are not so
bad, I trust, whatsoever you say, I hope you are no Prophet, it is hard for you
to judge what we are, much less can you tell what you would be.


Eulalus. I perceive well that you are no Scripture man; for it appears by
you, that that gift is not yet given to you, neither do you as yet desire it.
For it may be that you are afraid to be termed a Puritan, or to be mocked of
your friends and companions, and you love not to be mocked. Whereas you say
that I am no Prophet: It is enough for me that you are a Prophet in these
things. For I have said nothing but that which you have said, and I build upon
your reason, and common reason.

You said even now that if a Lion were turned into a Lamb, he would be but
regarded and used like a Lamb. Even so, when God took our nature, even man's
true shape unto him, was he not regarded and used as a man in the world? Yea,
and was he not more despitefully and shamefully entreated in the world, then
ever any man was before him? What if he were in the same appearance now in the
world, as then he was, should he have any better entertainment in the world
then his brethren have now, and 1 Cor. 1. 15.
have had? They that know not* his members. (1 Corinthians 1. 15. which discern
all things, and are judged of none:) How should they know the head, if he were
among them? Surely he that knows the head, knows the members also, and he
that knows not the members knows not the head, for they are all Heb. 2. 11.
one. Heb. 2. 11.

You said also, that if a man were forth twenty years in a strange country,
and should return home again in the form of a servant or poor man, that his
own family would not know him: Even so Saint John 2. 10.
John speaks of Christ, John 1. 10. He came among his own, and his own
received him not. If they had known him in Moses and the Prophets, they would
surely have received him, as some believers did. So if you know him not now in
his Word preached, you could not possibly know him if he were among you: for
you can no way know him but by his voice.

You said moreover that if a King should come into your town in the form of a
servant, or poor man, that he would not be heard nor regarded at all, though
he showed forth himself in his countenance, gesture, behavior, wisdom,
counsel, advise, learning, etc. Even so though Christ was the brightness of
the glory of God, and the lively Image and pattern of his person in the world,
the majesty, power, greatness, wisdom, and goodness of his God head shining
in his person, face, countenance, words, works; yet his own knew him not. And
if he were in such sort among you, neither would you know him nor hear him
otherwise then now you know him, and hear him by his voice; if he begin once
to meddle with you, and to reform you, then you would not let him alone. Why?
because he will not let you alone, as you said of your Minister. Alas for you
I pity you, because you cannot see your own hypocrisy that you might repent.

There was a certain Bishop, that at a visitation preached a very godly
Sermon, and godlily, even to the capacity of the meanest hearers. I heard him
very greatly commended for his grave gesture, for his distinct and sober
delivery, for his Fatherly instructions, speaking plainly and familiarly as a
Father to his Children, not so earnest and vehement, and hot, as young
nouices are, etc. And he was worthy to be a Bishop. As for their Minister, he
was but a youngling, and as good as no body in comparison of him. If they had
such a Preacher, they would give I know not what (for these gave little, or
nothing toward the maintenance of their own)

This great and general commendation was signified to the Bishop in private,
etc. Now at the next yearly visitation after, the same Bishop came in the
attire and fashion of an ordinary and poor minister, having his beard shaven,
etc. offering himself to be their Preacher, for there was a speech in the
town that their own Preacher would go away to another place. The Bishop of
set purpose did choose another text differing from his former in words, but not
in matter, so that in a manner he preached the very same Sermon. Now the same
persons that did so much commend him before, did as muh discommend him now, and
that in mine own hearing. They said that he had no good gesture, but a heavy
kind of moving of his body, that he bended too much forward, and stood not
upright, that he was nothing ripe, nor ready in his delivery, that he could
be no scholar, because he was so plain spoken, that almost any man might
make as good a Sermon, that it differed little from ordinary talk, that he
enforst, nor followed his exhortations with no vehemency, nor earnestness,
and that his words had no life in them, to stir up attention, or to move the
affections of the hearers, that none of them would give a penny toward his
maintenance, and that they would have an other kind of Preacher than he, or
they would have none. Even so if Jesus Christ should come to preach among you
in man's appearance, you conceit your self that you would hear him as Christ,
but withal; you have a secret confused imagination of some kind of worldly
flourish, as the Jews conceived of him: but the plain truth is, that you
would say and judge no otherwise of him, then of any other faithful pastor:
for you commend you know not what, and you dispraise you know not what.

But now to trouble you no longer, let me counsel and exhort you, as a
friend, and Christian brother, cast away all these vain and worldly
Imaginations, pray unto God to enlighten the eyes of your mind, that the
glorious light of the Gospel might shine unto you, which as yet is hidden from
you, pray unto him to take the stony heart out of your body, and to give you an
heart of flesh, a penitent, humble, and sober heart, leave that foolish
ieasting, and that vain Ale house company keeping, betake your self to
private prayer, and reading, and then GOD will hear you, and come unto you,
for he will not turn away his face from them that desire to be acquainted
with him, give diligent ear to your Ministers Sermons and Catechizings, and
meditate seriously after of that which you have heard and offer your self to
your Pastor and Shepherd of your soul, be not strange unto him, as though
you cared not for him, but let him see your amendment and conversion, and be
better acquainted with him, but yet in singlenes and sincerity, and if you once
be entered into a good way, be constant in it to the end without fear, or
wavering, let nothing terrify or affright you; whatsoever men judge, say, or
do, care not you for that, nor be troubled, be ruled by the advice of your
minister, before any other, and let your foot wear his threashold, for you
shall find more comfort, pleasure, and delight in his company than ever you
had in any thing all the days of your vanity, yea, you shall more and more
perceive in what a most miserable estate you were in, and those rebels your
rich gluttons are in, unless they repent: You shall by Gods grace in time come
to a more clear, and perfect discerning of all things. You know the old
Proverb commonly used, they that are in Hell think there is no other Heaven,
and the Ox thinks he is going to the stall, when he goes to the shambles.
Be not deceived: The men of this world, which you do call wise sensible men,
are led by their sense, and worldly craft to the Devils Larder-house. And as
the Apostle says, when they think themselves to be wise, they become very
fools.

I have spoken thus boldly unto you, because I take you to be my friend; for I
am sure that I am yours: if you any way doubt of it, try me in any thing
wherein I can pleasure you; only let me entreat you to consider well of this
point that you and I have thus reasoned of. I have a good hope that howsoever
you have been misledde a long time, all the Angels in Heaven shall rejoice in
your conversion. And I do like you a great deal the better, because you have
not left me, and gone away from me in a chase, especially being that I have
dealt so plainly with you as I have done.


Mataeolog. I can tell you, if you had spoken so to some of our town, they
would sit on your skirts while they lived.


Eulalus. Like enough: for it is the property of flesh and blood to be
reuengefull, but the Apostle teaches us another lesson: Avenge not your
selves, I will repay says the Lord: My skirts are as well able to bear a
Feather, as it is to sit on them; I trust that so long as I give them no other
occasion then I have done, they shall have no fast sitting, for the Lord will
not leave them that fear him, in their enemies hands.

The Lord grant that I may see some fruits of this conference in you at our
next meeting.

By this short Dialogue it appears how the word of GOD is most commonly and
generally heard and received,, yea, even of all, that are not sanctified: For
they do either altogether hear it as the word of man, or at least when it is
particularly applied, for their conversion, and reformation, then begin they
ever to seek out arguments (for the Sophister the Father of lies is at hand)
for their hard hearts, for their lustful living, for the saluing of an evil
and corrupt conscience, drawn from the person of the Minister; yea, and to
seek out another shepherd, (some that Satan has picked in at the window) whom
they may object against him: who if he be a good Scholar, politic and
crafty for his own advantage, and of Gentleman-like fashion, then is he, and
such like to be preferred before their own Minister, and such like, without
all compare. And indeed, to say the truth, there is no more comparison
between them, then between Paul, and the learned preachers, that so flourisht
at Corinth. A fool will seek out excuses for his foolishnes.

Wherefore seeing that this is the fourth and highest degree of Faith, whereby
a man even steps up into heaven, the Apostle, and all faithful Shepherds,
have great cause of rejoicing (as the Angels in Heaven also have) and of
thanksgiving without ceasing, when any man hears the word, not as theirs, but
as Gods, seeing that they alone, and none but they do hear, know, and follow
Christ their chief shepherd.

This then is the condemnation of the world, that they hear indeed, but with
unbelieving hearts, doubting, and wavering minds, and in a dreaming and
slumbering manner, being like to Salomons sluggard, Prou. 6. 10.
Proverbs 6. 10. Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little foulding of
the hands to sleep; the weather is cold, there is a Bear, or a Lion in the
way; It is yet early enough, there is no time yet ouerpast: many labor and
travel, having no rest night nor day, yet do they live and die in poverty;
many lie and sleep, yet wealth comes on them unlooked for: That which will
be, will be: It is but even happen good, have good, one good fortune or other
will befall me. I shall do as well as I can, and as others have done before
me. And thus does slothfulness get the upper hand, and hold possession still,
till at the length poverty come suddenly, and necessity like an armed man.

This is the common practice of dead hearted, and worldly minded men, they are
continually called upon, iogged, and rouzed, yet they hear, and hear not;
like dreamers, and are possessed with the spirit of slumber. Their hearts are
fixed, and affections set on the earth and earthly things, even as the tree is
fixed, and rooted in the earth. They love to lie and live securely in sin,
being drunken with the profits, pleasures, delights, pomp and pride of this
world, having no affection nor fancy to God and godly things, being adulterers,
adulteresses, and fornicators of this world, altogether unlike and contrary to
the spouse of Christ in the Canticles.

Hence it is, that they imagine and reason in themselves like the sluggard; yet
a little more pleasure in sin, a little more solace and delight in fleshly
lusts, a little longer space of living after the pleasant conceits and
imaginations of mine own heart, there is yet no time ouer-past, I shall repent
and amend in my latter days, God is merciful, and will not so strictly deal
with us as these precise Preachers do bear us in hand, that would have us to
be ruled and ordered by their fantastical imaginations: they would have they
know not what, and for ought we see; they are as ill as others. This precise
kind of preaching is come up but of late years, and I think there were as
good Christians before, as ever there have been since.

These and a thousand such like follies do they imagine and utter, tending all
to the blinding and hardening of themselves in their sinful and rebellious
courses. That which a man has a special love, liking, and inclination to of
himself, he may soon be persuaded unto by another, for any reason, though
never so weak and seely feeds him, and confirms him; whereas the strongest
disswasions that may be shall prevail little or nothing, or but for the time
present: Again, on the contrary, if a man out of his own heart and judgment
have no liking nor inclination, though he be never so earnestly set upon, and
by most sound and strong reasons be dissuaded by another; yet can he be little
moved or stirred, but ever returns back again to his former dislikes, like
the heavy stone, that being rouled by great strength upward, does of it self
retire back again, so soon as we hold off our hands.

Thus it is with obstinate sinners, whose hearts are heavy, and stony, the
strongest reasons that may be though never so plain and evident, yea the very
bare word of the text, being the immediate word of God, can prevail little or
nothing with them, they are so strongly possessed with contrary imaginations,
lusts and desires: but on the contrary, any weak, silly and foolish reason,
any ignorant speech and groundless opinion feeds them, and confirms them
in their sinful courses. Any thing will persuade the sluggard to be idle; so
any thing will move the sinner to spiritual idleness: And thus will those
drunken and sleepy sinners do, till death summon them to judgment, and till
the house be fired over their heads, and round about them, I mean till the
elements melt, and the heavens pass away with a noise, as our Savior Mat. 24.
38. 39.
Christ says, Matthew 24. 38. 39. As in the days before the flood, they did
eat and drink, marry, and give in marriage, unto the day that Noah entered
into the Arc, and knew nothing (for they little regarded, and less believed
Noah's preaching) till the flood came, and took them all away; so shall the
coming of the Son of Man be.

Therefore it is no marvel if men commonly cast away the word of God
preached, as but the word of man; but it is a marvel rather that men should
hear it as the word of God, taking no offense at the person of the Preacher:
for this proceeds of supernatural grace, but the other comes of natural
blindness and corruption. Great cause therefore have we to rejoice and give
thanks to God for them, that receive the Word from us, not as our word, but as
the Word of GOD; which is an evident token of true conversion.

In this manner of receiving the word he confirms them, by auouching that
the word preached is indeed the word of Gods own mouth: By which brief
asseueration, he preuenteth and cutteth off all objections.

Furthermore he amplifieth this their manner of receiving the word, by the
efficacy of the word in them [which works in you:] The word of man works on
the natural affections, and moves them but to that, to which they have an
inclination in themselves: but the word of God works in man by regenerating
and sanctifying him, that denying himself he might be transplanted into
Christ, and bring forth fruit in him, to the honor of God, not to the profit of
himself, which no natural man can do. Philosophy and moral education
instructs and orders the life and manners, by restraining the brutishness
of sin, but it changes not a man from being a bruit. Herein then is the
evident difference between Gods word, and humane doctrines, and instructions.

This working of the word he restrains to the believers [in you,] without
faith we are dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. And our Savior Christ
says, Ephesians. 2. 1.
The time shall come, and now is, when the dead (sinners) shall hear the voice
of the Son of God, and they that hear it (with humble, penitent, and obedient
hearts) shall live. Also the Apostle says, Ephesians. 5. 14. Awake thou Ephesians. 5.
14.
that sleep (in worldly and fleshly affections, and lusts) and stand up from
the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. Now the dead receive no
nourishment* therefore neither they that want faith, as the Apostle says, Heb.
4. Heb. 4. 2.
2. The word which they heard, profited them not, because it was not mingled
with faith in them that heard it.

In the 14 verse following, he proves that the word of God wrought in them
by the outward work or effect, [For ye are become followers of the Churches of
Iudaea in Christ: For you have suffered the same things of your own
countrymen, as they have of the Jews. This, is a sure and evident argument of
true hearing and believing, to immitate the godly, and to have fellowship and
communion with them. Further, this fellowship and imitation is proved and tried
by the fire, namely by their suffering with them, this suffering is further
tried by the persons persecuting [their own countrymen, friends, kinsfolks,
etc.] for that is the greatest persecution of all, and which can least be
endured, wherefore it tries a Christian man even to the heart.


FINIS.

