NEVVES from Graues-end: Sent to Nobody.

Nec Quidquam nec Cuiquam.

LONDON Printed by T.C. for Thomas Archer, and are to be sold at the long Shop
under S. Mildreds Church in the Poultry. 1604

TEE EPISTLE Dedicatory.
To Him, that (in the despite and neuer-dying-dishonour of all empty sisted
Mecaen-Asses) is the Gracious, munificent, and golden. Rewarder of Rimes:
singular paymaister of Songs and Sonnets: Vnsquint-eyde Surueyor of Heroical
Poems: Chief Rent-gatherer of Poets and Musicians: And the most valiant
Confounder of their desperate debts. And to the comfort of all honest
Christians) The now-onely-onely-Supper-maker to Enghles and Plaiers-Boyes, Sir
Nicolas Nemo, alias Nobody.
SHall I creep (like a drownde Ratte) into thy warm bosom, (my Benefique
Patron!) with a piece of some old mustie Sentence in my mouth, stolen out of
Lycosthenes Apothegmes, and so accost thee? Out vpont! the fashion of such
Dedications is more stale than kissing. No, no, suffer me (good Nobody) to diue
(like a White-Friars Puncke) into thy familiar and solid acquaintance at the
first dash: And in stead of Worshipful Sir, come upon thee with honest Jew,
how do? Wonder not that out of the whole barrel of pickeld Pat^ons, I have
only made choice of thee, for I love none really, but thee and my self, for
us two do I only care, and therefore I conjure thee, let the payment of thine
affection be reciprocal.

They are Rimes that I have boyld in my leaden Inckpot, for thine own eating:
And now (rarest Nobody) taste the reason why they are served up to thee (in the
tail of the Plague) like Caveare, or a dish of Anchoues after supper. Know
then ( Monnsier verse-gilder) that I have failed (during this storm of the
Pestilence) round about the vast Island of the whole world, which when I found
to be made like a foote-ball, the best thing in it, being but a bladder of man's
life, (lost with a little prick) I took up my foot and spurnd at it, because
I have heard that none but fools make account of the world. But mistake me
not, (thou Spur-royall of the Muses!) for it was neither in Sir Francis Drakes
nor in Candishes voyage, that I swom through so much saltwater: But only with
two honest Card-makers Peter Plamius and Gerard Mercator) who in their
universal Maps, (as in a Barbers Looking-glass, where a number of most
villainous ungodly faces are seen, in a year, and especially now at Christmas)
did (like Country-fellowes, that is to say very plainly) and in a shorter time,
than a Sculler can row from Queene-hyue to Wapping, make a brave discovery
unto me, as well of all the old raine-beaten, as of the spicke and span
newfound worlds, with every particular Kingdom, Dukedom, and Popedom in
their lively colors, so that I knew Constantinople as perfectly, as Iobbin,
the Mault-mans horse of Enfield knows the way to London: and could have gone
to the great Turks Serraglio (where he keeps all his wenches) as tollerably
and far more welcome, than if I had been one of his Eunuchs. Prester John,
and the Sophy, were never out of mine eye, (yet my sight was not a pin the
worse). The Sultan of Egypt I had with a wet finger: from whence, I travailed
as boldly to the Courts of all the Kings in Christendom, as if I had bin an
Ambassador) his pomp only excepted.)

Strange fashions did I pick (like worms) out of the fingers of every Nation,
a number of fantastic Popin-Iayes and Apes (with faces like men) itching till
they had got them. And (besides fashions) many wonder^ wo^^hy to be hung up
(like Shields with senseles, bald, impraesaes) in the white paper-gallery of a
large Chronicle. But this made me fret out worse than gumd Taffaty, that
neither in any one of those Kingdoms, (no nor yet within the walls and
waterworks of mine own country) could I either find or hear, (for I gave a
Crier a King-Harry-groate to make an oyes) no nor read of any man, woman or
child, left so well by their friends, or that carried such an honest mind to the
Commonwealth of the Castalians, as to keep open-house for the seven poor
Liberal Sciences: nor once (which even the rich cubs and fox-furd curmudgens
do) make the^ good cheer so much as at Christmas, when every cobbler has
license (under the broad Seal of Hospitality) to sit cheek by iowle at the
table of a very Aldermans deputy.

What woodcocks then are these seven wise masters to answer to that
worme-eaten name of Liberal, seeing it has undone them? It Is a name of the old
fashion: It came up with the old Religion, and went down with the new.
Liberality has bin a Gentleman of a good house, and an ancient house, but now
that old house (like the Players old Hall at Dowgate) is fallen to decay, and to
repair it, requires too much cost. My seven lattin-sellers, have bin liberal
so long to others, that now they have not a rag (or almost nothing but rags)
left for themselves: Yea and into such pitiful predicaments are they fallen,
that most of our Gentry (besides the Punyes of Innes of Court and Chancery)
takes them for the Seven Deadly Sins, and hate him worse than they hate
whores. How much happier had it bin for them, to have changed their copies, and
tro^ Sciences bin bound to good Occupations, considering that one
London-occupier (dealing uprightly with all men) puts up more in a week, than
seven Bachilers of Art (that every day go barely a wooing to them) do in a
year.

Has not the Plague (incomparable Nobody: and therefore incomparable, because
with an Aeneas-like glory, thou have redeemed the golden-tree of Poesy, even
out of the hellish scorn, that this world (out of her Luciferan pride) hopes
to dam it with) has it not I say done all men knights service in working the
downfall of our greatest and greediest beggars? Dieite Io Paean, You young
Sophistical Fry of the Universities! break Priscians pate (if he cross you)
for joy: for had not the Plague stuck to you in this case, fix of your seven
Academicall sweet-hearts (if I said all seven I should not lie upon them) had
long ere this (but that some Doctors withstood it) been begd, (not for Wards,
yet some of them have lodged I can tell you in the knights Ward) but for mere
Stones, and Chesters, Fools, Fools, and Iesters, because whereas some of
their Chymicall and Alchymicall raw disciples have learnt (at their hands) to
distill gold and silver out of very Tauerne-bushes, old greazy knaves of
Diamonds, the dust of bowling Allies, yea and like Aesops Gallus Gallinaceus,
to scrape precious stones even out of dung-hils, yet they themselves (poor
harletries) had never the grace, nor the face, to carry one penny in their own
purses.

But to speak truth (my noble curer of the poetical madness for nothing)
where should they have it? Let them be sent into the courts of Princes, there
they are so lordly, that (unless they were bigger and taller of their hands,
than so many of the Guard) every one looks over the^, of it they give him any
thing, it is nothing but good looks. As for the City, that's so full of
Crafts-men, there is no dealing with their mysteries: the nine Muses stand in a
brown study, when they come within their liberties, like so many mad wenches
taken in a watch and brought before a bench of Brown bills. O Ciues, Ciues!
quaerenda pecunia primum! Virtus post Nummos: First open your purses, and then
be virtuous, part not with a penny: the rich mizers hold their own by this
Canon law. And for those (whom in English we call poor snakes) Alas! they are
barde (by the Statute against Beggars) from giving a dandiprat or a Bawbee. In
the Camp there is nothing to be had but blows and Prouant: for soldiers had
never worse doings: My sweet Captain, bestows his pipe of rich Trynidado
(taking the Muses for Irish Chimny-sweepers) and that's his Talent.

Being in this melancholy contemplation, and having wept a whole ynck-horne
full of Verses in bewailing the miseries of the time, on the sudden I started
up: with my teeth bit my writings, because I would eat my words: condemnd my
penknife to the cutting of powder-beefe and brewes: my paper to the drying and
inflaming of Tobacco: and my Retirements to a more Gentleman-like recreation,
viz. Duke Humphres walk in Powles: swearing five or six poetical furious
oaths, that the Goose-quill should never more gull me, to make me shoot
paper-bullets into any Stationers shop, or to serve under the weather-beaten
colors of Apollo, seeing his pay was no better. Yet remembering what a notable
good fellow thou were: the only Atlas that supports the Olympian honor of
learning: and (out of thy horn of Abundance) a continual Benefactor to all
Scholars ( Thou matchless Nobody!) I set up my rest, and vowde to consecrate
all my blotting-papers only to thee: And not content to dignifie thee with
that love and honor of my self: I sommond all the Rymesters, Play-patchers,
Iig-makers, Ballad-mongers, and Pamphlet-stitchers (being the yeomanry of the
Company) together with all those whom Theocrytus calls the Muses Byrds (being
the Masters and head-Wardens) and before them all made an ^ncomiasticall
Oration in praise of Nobody, ( scilicet your proper self) pronouncing them
Asses, and threatening to have them pressed to serve at sea in the ship of Fools,
if ever hereafter, they taught their lines (like water-Spaniels) to fetch any
thing that were thrown out for the^, or to diue into the unworthy
commendations of Lucius Apuleius, or any Golden-Asle of them all, being for
their pains clapped only on the shoulder, and sent away dropping, when as thy
leatherne bags stand more open than Seacoale sackes more bounteously to
reward them.

I had no sooner cut out thy virtues in these large cantles, but all the
Synagogue of Scribes gave a Pla^dite, crying out Viua voce, with one loud
throat, that All their verses should henceforth have more feet, and take
longer strides than if they went upon stilttes, only to carry thy glorious
praises over the earth: And that none (but Nobody) should lick the fat of
their Inventions: that Dukes, Earls, Lords and Ladies, should have their
Il-liberal names torn out of those books whose Authors they sent away with a
Flea in their ear, And the style of Nobody in Capital Roman Letters, bravely
Printed in their places.

Hereupon crowding their heads together, and amongst themselves canuasing more
and more thy inexplicable worth, All of them (as inspirde) burst suddenly
forth, and sung extemporall Odes in thine honor, and Palynodes in recanta io^
of all former good opinions held of niggardly patrons: One of them magnifying
thee, for that in this pestiferous shipwreck of Londoners, when the Pilot,
Boteswaines, Master and Maisters-mates, with all the chief Mariners that had
charge in this goodly Argozy of government, leapt from the stern, struck all
the sails from the maine yard to the mizzen; never looked to the Compass,
never fownded in places of danger, nor so much as put out their Close-fights,
when they saw a most cruel man of war pursue them, but suffered all to sink
or swim, crying out only, Put your trust in God my Bullies, and not in us,
whilst they either hid them selves under hatches, or else scrambled to shore
in Cockboats: yet thou (undaunted Nobody) then, even then, did stand stoutly
to thy tackling, step coragiously to the helm, and manfully run up and
down, encouraging those (with comfortable words) whose hearts lay coldly in
their bellies. Another lifted thee up above the third Heaven, for playing the
Constable part so rarely: And (not as your common Constables, charging poor
sick wretches, that had neither meat nor money, in the kings name to keep
their houses, that's to say, to famish and die: But discharging whole baskets
full of victuals (like vollies of shot) in at their windows: thou, only thou
(most charitable Nobody, made them as fat as butter, and preseruedst their
lives. A third extold thy martial discipline, in appointing Ambushes of
Surgeons and Apothecaries, to lie close in every ward, of purpose to cut of any
co^uoy that brought the plague succor. A fourth swore at the next Impressio^ of
the Chronicles, to have thy name, with the year of our Lord and certain
Hexameter verses under-neath) all in great golden letters, wherein thy Fame
should be consecrated to eternal memory, for carefully purchasing convenient
plots of ground, only for Burialls (and those out of the City too, as they
did in Jerusalem) to the intent, that threescore (contrary to an Act of common
Council against In-mates might not be pestred together, in one little hole,
where they lie and rot: but that a poor man might for his money have
elbow-roome, and not have his guts thrust out to be eaten up with paltry worms:
least when in hot and dry Summers (that are yet not dreamed on) those mustie
bodies putrefying, the inavoydable stench of their strong breath be smelt out
by the Sun, and then there is new work for Clerks and Sextons.

Thus had every one a flirt at thy praises: if thou had been begde to have
played an Anatomy in Barber-surgions Hall, thy good parts could not have been
more curiosly ripped up: they diu'de into the very bowels of thy hearty
commendations. So that I, that (like a Match) scarce gave fire before, to the
dankish powder of their apprehensions, was now burnt up my self, in the flames
of a more ardent affection toward thee, kindled by them. For presently the
court brake up, and (without a quarter-dinner) all parted: their heads being
great with child, and aching very pitifully, till they were delivered of
Hymns, Hexasticons, Paeans, and such other Panegyricall stuff, which every
one thought 7. year till he had brought forth, to testify the love that he
bore to Nobody: In advancement of whose honor (and this was sworn upon a pen
and ynck-horne in stead of a sword, yet they al write Tam marti quam mercurio,
but how lawfully let the Heralds have an eye toot) they vowed and swore very
terribly, to sacrifice the very lives of their invention; And when they wanted
ynck (as many of them do wanting money) or had no more (like a Chancery-man) but
one pen in all the world, parcel of their oath was, to write with their blood
and a broome-stick before they would sit idle.

Accept therefore (for hansell-sake) these curtall Rymes of ours (thou
Capon-feaster of scholars:) I call the^ News from Graues-end: Be it known
unto thy Non-residence, that I come not near that Graues-end (which takes his
beginning in Kent) by twenty miles at least; but the end of those Graves do I
shoot at, which were cast up here in London, to stand as landmarks for every
parish, to teach them how far they were to go: laying down (so well as I can)
the manner how death and his army of pestilent Archers, entered the field, and
how every arrow that they drew, did almost cleave a heart in sunder. Read over
but one leaf (dear Nobody) and thou purst upon me an armor of proof against
the rankling teeth of those mad dogs (called Booke-biters) that run barking up
and down Powles Churchyard, and bite the Muses by the shinnes Commend thou my
labors, and I will labor only to commend thee: for thy humor being pleased,
all the mewing Critists in the world shall not fright me. I know the Stationers
will wish me and my papers burnt (like heretics) at the Cross, if thou do
(now) but enter into their Shops by my means: It would fret their hearts to
see thee at their Stalls reading my News. Yet therein they deal doubly, and
like notable dissemblers, for all the time of this Plaguey Allarum, they marched
only under thy colors: desirde none but thy company* none but thy selle were
welcome to them: none but Nobody (as they all cride out the thine immortal
commendatious) bought books of them: Nobody was their best, and most bounteous
customer. Fie on this hollow-hearted world! Do they shake thee off now? Be
wise, and come not near them by twelue-score at least, so shall thou not need
to care what disgraces they shoot at thee. But leaving them to their old tune,
of What new Books do you lack? prick up thine ears like a March-Hare (at the
sudden cry of a kennell of hounds) and listen what news the Post that's come
from Winchester - Term winds out of his horn.

O that thou had taken a lease there (happy Nobody) but for one month, the
place had (for thy sake) bin well spoken of for ever. Many did heartily pray
(especially Watermen, and Players, besides the Drawers, Tapsters, Butchers, and
Inholders, with all the rest of the hungry Cominaltie of Westminster) for thy
going thither. Ten thousand in London swore to feast their neighbors with
nothing but plum-porredge, and mince-pyes all Christmas, (that now for anger
will not bestow a crust on a beggar) upon condition that all the Judges,
Sergeants, Barristers, and Atturnies, had not set a foot out of doors, but that
thou only (in pomp) (saving them that labor) had rode the journey, so
greedily did they thirst after thy preferment. For had thou bin there, those
black-buckrom tragedies had never bin seen, that there have bin acted. Alas!
its a beastly thing to report. But (truth must out) poor dumb Horses were made
mere Iades, being used to villanouslie, that they durst neither weihy nor wag
tail. And though the riders of them had grown never so chollerick, and chaft
till they foamd again, an Hostler to walk them was not to be had for love or
money. Neither could the Geldings (even of Gentlemen) get leave (for all they
swet til they dropped again) to stand as they had wont at Rack and Manger. (no,
no, it was enough for their masters to have that honor) but now (aagainst all
equity) were they called (when they little thought of any such matter) to a
dear reckoning for all their old wilde-oates.

A co^spiracy there was amongst all the Inkeepers, that Jack Straw (an ancient
rebel) should choke all the horses: and the better to bring this to pass, a
bottle of hay was sold deerer then a bottle of wine at London. A trusse cost
more, then master Majors trusse of Forduch, with the sleeves and belly-piece
all of bare Satin to boot: Which knavery being smelt out, the horsemen grew
pollitick, and never sat down to dinner, but their Nags were still at their
elbowes: so that it grew to be as ordinary a question, to ask, What shall I
pay for a Chamber for my self and my Gelding all night, (because they would
not be Iaded any more) as in other country towns, For my wife and my self,
for a beast and a man were entertained both alike, and that in such wonderful
sort, that they will speak of it, In aeternam rei memoriam. For most of their
rooms were fairly built (out of the ground, but not out of the dirt) like
Irish Houels, hung round about with cobweb-lawne very richly, and furnished, no
Aldermans Parlor in London like them: for here is your bed, there a stable, and
that a hogsty, yet so artificially contrived, that they stand all under one
roof, to the amazement of all that behold them.

But what a childishnes is it, to get up thus upon their Hobby-horses, let them
bite a the bridle, whilst we have about with the men. As for the women, they
may laugh and lie down, its a merry world with them, but somebody pays for
it. O Winchester! much mutton have thou to answer for, which thou have made
away (being sluttishly fried out in steakes, or in burnt Carbonadoes) thy
maid-seruants best know how, if they were called to an account. It was happy for
some, that 4. of the Returns were cut off, for if they had held together, many
a one had never returned from thence his own man. Oh beware! your
Winchester-Goose is ten times more dangerous to surfeit upon, than your S.
Nicholas Shambles-Capon.

You talk of a Plague in London, and red Crosses set upon doors, but ten
plagues cannot melt so many crosses of silver out of Lawyers purses, as the
Winchesterians (with a hey-pas, re-pas) iugled out of theirs to put into their
own. Patient they were I must needs confess, for they would pocket up any
thing, came it never so wrongfully, insomuch that very good substantial
householders have oftentimes gone away with cracked crowns, and never co^plaind
of the^ that gave the^. If ever money were current ( a curre^do, of running
away) now was the time, it ran from the poor clients to the Atturneys and
Clarks of bands in small troops (here 10 and there 20) but when the Leaguers
of Winchester cried Charge, Charge, the Lawyers paid fort, they went to the pot
full dearly, and the townsmen still carried away all the noble and royal
victories. So that being puffed up with an opinion, that the Silver Age was crept
into the world again, they denied (in a manner) the Kings Coin, for a penny
was no money with them. Whenever there shall come forth a Pressed for
Soldiers, thither let it be sent, for by all the opinion of the best Captains
(that had a charge there, and have tried them) the men of Winchester are the
only serviceable men this day in England: the reason is, they care no more to
venture among small shots, than to be at the discharging of so many Cannes of
beer: Tush, us their desire, to see those that enter upon them, to come off
soundly, that when they are gone, all the world may bear witness they came to
their cost.

And being thus (night and day) imploid, and continually entering into Action,
it makes them have mighty stomachs, so that they are able to soake and devour
all that come in their way: A Rapier and a Cloak have bin eaten up at a Supper
as clean (and carried away well too) as if they had bin but two Rabbet-suckers.
A Nag served but one Seruing-man to a breakefast, whilst the Saddle and Bridle
were brewd into a quart of strong Beer.

This intolerable destroying of victuals being looked into, the Inhabitants
laid their heads together, and agreed among themselves (for the general good of
the whole Town) to make it a town of Garrison. And seeing the desperate
Termers, that strove in law together, in such a pitiful pickle, and every
day so durty, that when they met their Council, they looked like the black
Guard, fighting with the Innes of Court, that therefore all the Householders
should turn Turk, and be victuallers to the Camp. By this means having the
law in their own hands, they ruled the roast how they listed: insomuch, that
a common judge of double Beer skornd to kiss the lips of a Knight under a
groate. Six hours sleep could not be bought under five shillings. Yea in
some places a nights lodging was dearer than the hire of a Curtizan in Venice
twice so long. And (having learnd the tricks of London-Sextons) there they laid
four or five in a bed, as here, those other knaves of Spades thrust nine and
ten into one grave. Beds keeping such a iustling of one another in every
room, that in the day time the lodgings looked like so many Vpholsters Shops,
and in the night time like the Sauoy, or S. Thomas Hospital. At which, if any
guest did but once bite his lip, or grumble, he was cashierd the company for a
mutinous fellow, the place was not for him, let him trudge. A number stood with
Petitions ready to give money for the reuersion of it: for Winchester now
durst, (or at least hopt to) stand upon proud terms with London. And this
(thou beloved of all men) is the very pith and marrow of the best and latest
News (except the unmasking of certain Treasons) that came with the Post from
Winchester, where if thou had hirde a Chamber (as would to heaven thou had)
thou would never have gone to any Barbers in London whilst thou had liude,
but have bin trimd only there, for they are the true shauers, they have the
right Neapolitan polling.

To whose commendations, let me glue this piece more, that it is the most
excellent place for dispatching of old suites in the world, for a number of
riding suites (that had lain long in lauander) were worn out there, only with
serving amongst the hot shots, that marched there up and down: let Westminster
therefore, Temple Bar, and Fleetestreete, drink off this draught of Rosa
solis, to fetch life into them again, after their so often swounding, that
those few Jurors that went thither (if any did go thither) have taken an oath
never to sit at Winchester-Ordinary again, if they can choose, but rather to
break their fasts in the old Abbey behind Westminster, with Pudding-Pyes, and
Furmenty.

Deliver Copies of these News (good Nobody) to none of thy acquaintance (as
thou tenderst me) and thou shall command any service at my hands: for I have
an intent to hire three or four Ballad-makers, who I know will be glad for
six pence and a dinner, to turn all this limping Prose into more
perfectly-halting Verse, that it shall do any true-borne Citizens heart good,
to hear such doings sung to some filthy tune, and so farewell. Turn over a
new leaf, and try if I handle the Plague in his right kind.

Devoted to none but thy self, Somebody.

News from Graues-ende.
TO Sickness, and to Queazie Times,
We drink a health in wholesome Rymes,
Physic we inuoke thy aid,
Thou (that borne in heaven) art made
A lackey to the meanest creature,
Mother of health; thou nurse of nature,
Equal friend to rich and poor,
At whose hands, Kings can get no more,
Than empty Beggars; O thou wise
In nothing but in Mysteries!
Thou that have of earth the rule,
Where (like an Academe, or School)
Thou readst deep Lectures to thy sons,
(Men's Demigods) Physicians;
Who thereby learn the abstruse powers
Of Herbs, of Roots, of Plants, of Flowers,
And suck from poisonous stinking weed
Preservatives, man's life to feed.
Thou nearest to a God, (for none
Can work it, but a God alone,)
O grave Enchauntresse, deigne to breath
Thy Spells into us, and bequeath
Thy sacred fires, that they may shine
In quick and vertuall medicine,
Arm us to convince this Foe,
This King of dead men, conquering so;
This hungry Plague, Cater to death,
Who eats up all, yet famisheth:
Teach us how we may repair
These Ruins of the rotten Air,
Or, if the Aires pollution can
So mortal strike through beast and man,
Or, if in blood corrupt, Death lie,
Or if one dead, cause others die,
How ere, thy sovereign cures disperse,
And with that glory crown our verse:
That we may yet save many a soul
(Perchance now merry at his Bowl)
That ere our Tragic Song be don,
Must drink this thick Contagion:
But (o grief) why do we atcite
The charms of Physic? whose numbd sprite
Now quakes, and nothing dare, or can,
Checked by a more dread Magitian?
Sick is Phisicks self to see
Her Aphorisms prou'de a mockery:
For whilst she is turning over her books,
And on her drugs and simples looks,
She Is run through own armed heart,
(The Infection flying above Art:)
Come therefore thou the best of Nine,
(Because the Saddest) every line
That drops from Sorrows pen is due
Only to thee, to Thee we sue:
Thou Tragic Maid, whose Fury's spent
In dismal, and most black O^tent.
In Vprores, and in Fall of Kings,
Thou of Empires change that sings,
Of Dearths, of Wars, of Plagues, and laughes
At Funerals, and Epitaphes:
Carowse thou to our thirsty soul
A full draught from the Thespian bowl,
That we may power it out again,
And drink, in nombers Juice to men,
Striking such horrors through their ears
Their hair may upright stand with fears,
Till rich Heirs meeting our strong verse
May not shrinck back, before it pierce
Their marble eye balls, and there shead
One drop (at least) for him that's dead:
To work which wonder, we will write
With Penns pulled from that bird of night
(The shriking Owl) our Inck we will mix
With tears of widows, (black as Stix)
The paper where our lines shall meet,
Shall be a folded winding sheet,
And that the Scene may show more full,
The Standish is a dead man's scull.
Inspire us therefore how to tell
The Horror of a Plague, the Hell.
The cause of the Plague.
NOr drops this venom, from that fair
And crystal bosom of the Air,
Whose ceaseles motion clarifies
All vaporous stench, that upward flies
And with her universal wings,
Thick poisonous fumes abroad she flings,
Till (like to Thunder) rudely tossed,
Their malice is (by spreading) lost.
Yet must we grant that from the veins
Of Rottennes and Filth, that reigns,
Over heaps of bodies, slain in war,
From Carrion (that indangers far)
From standing Pooles, or from the wombes
Of Vaults, of Muckhills, Graves, and Tombs,
From Boggs; from rank and dampish Fenns,
From Moorish breaths, and nasty Denns,
The Sun draws up contagious Fumes,
Which falling down burst into Rhewmes,
And thousand malladies beside,
By which our blood grows putrified.
Or, being by winds not swept from thence,
They houer there in clouds condense,
Which sucked in by our spirits, there flies
Swift poison through our Arteries,
And (not resisted) strait it choakes
The heart, with those pestiferous smoakes.
Thus Physic and Philosophy
Do preach, and (with this) Salues apply:
Which search, and use with speed: but now
This monster breeds not thus: For how
(If this be prou'de) can any doubt
But that the Air does (round about)
In flakes of poison drop on all,
The Sore being spread so general?
Nor dare we so conclude: for then
Fruits, Fishes, Foul, nor Beasts, nor Men
Should escape vnteinted, Grazing flocks
Would feed upon their graves: the Ox
Drop at the plough: the traveling Horse
Would for a Rider bear a Coar^e:
The Ambitious Lark, (the Bird of state)
Whose wings do sweep heavens pearled gate,
As she descended ( Then) would bring,
Pestilent News under each wing:
Then Riu^rs would drink poisoned air:
Trees shed their green and curled hair:
Fish swim to shore full of disease,
(For Pestilence would Fin the seas:)
And we should think their scaly barks,
Having small speckles, had the marks.
No soul could move: but sure there lies
Some vengeance more then in the skies:
Nor (as a Taper, at whose beams
Ten thousands lights fetch golden streams,
And yet it self is burnt to death,)
Can we believe that one man's breath
Infected, and being blown from him,
His poison should to others swim:
For then who breathed upon the first?
Where did th'imbulked venom burst?
Or how scapte those that did divide
The selfsame bits with those that did?
Drunk of the selfsame cups, and lay
In Vlcerous beds, as close as they?
Or, those, who every hour, (like Crows)
Prey on dead carkasies: their nose
Still smelling to a grave: their feet
Still wrapped within a dead man's sheet!
Yet (the sad execution don)
Careless among their Canns they run,
And there (in scorn of Death or Fate)
Of the deceast they widely prate,
Yet snore untouched, and next day rise
To act in more new Tragedies:
Or (like so many bullets flying)
A thousand here and there being dying,
Death's Text-bill clapped on every door,
Crosses on sides, behind, before,
Yet the (in the midst) stands fast: from whence
Comes this? you will say from Providence.
It Is so, and that is the common Spell,
That leads our Ignorance, (blind as hell)
And serves but as excuse, to keep
The soul from search of things more deep;
No, no, this black and burning star
(Whose sulphurd drops, do scald so far,)
Does neither houer over our heads,
Nor lies it in our bloods, nor beds:
Nor is it stitcht to our attires,
Nor like wild balls of running fires
Or thunderbolts, which where they light
Do either bruise, or kill outright;
Yet by the violence of that Bound
Leap off, and gives a second wound:
But this fierce dragon (huge and foul)
Sucks virid poison from our soul,
Which being spit forth again, there raigns
Showers of Blisters, and of Blaines,
For every man within him feeds
A worm which this contagion breeds;
Our heavenly parts are plaguey sick,
And there such leaprous spotts do stick,
That God in anger fills his hand
With Vengeance, throwing it on the land;
Sure it is some Capital offense,
Some high, high Treason does incense
The Eternal King, that thus we are
Arraigned at Death most dreadful bar;
Th'Inditement writ on Englands breast,
When other Countries (better blessed)
Feel not the Judges heavy doom
Whose breath (like Lightning does consume
And (with a whip of Planets) scourges
The Veins of mortals, In whom Surges
Of sinful blood, Billows of Lust
Stir up the powers to acts unjust.
Whether they be Princes Errors,
Or faults of Peers, pull down these Terrors,
Or (because we may not err,)
Lets sift it in particular,
The Courtiers pride, lust, and excess,
The Church man's painted holiness;
The Lawyers grinding of the poor,
The Soldiers staruing at the door,
Ragd, lean, and pale through want of blood,
Sold cheap by him for Countries good.
The Scholars envy; Farmers curse,
When heavens rich Threasurer does disburse
In bounteous heaps (to thankles men)
His universal Blessings: then
This deluing Moale, for madness eats
Even his own lungs, and strange oaths sweates,
Because he cannot sell for pence,
Dear years, in spite of Providence.
Add unto these, the City sin
(Brought by seven deadly monsters in)
Which does all bowndes, and blushing scorn,
Because it is in the Freedom borne,
What Trains of Vice, (which even Hell hates)
But have bold passage through her gates?
Pride in Diet, Pride in Clothing,
Pride in Building, pure in nothing,
And that she may not want disease
She sails for it beyond the Seas,
With Antwerp will she drink up Rhene:
With Paris act the bloodiest Scene:
Or in pyed fashions pass her folly,
Mocking at heaven yet look most holy:
Of Usury she will rob the Jews,
Of Luxury, Venetian Stews,
With Spaniards, she is an Indianist,
With barbarous Turks a Sodomist.
So low her Antique walls do stand,
These sins leap over even with one hand:
And He, that all in modest black,
Whose Eye-ball strings shall sooner crack,
Then seem to note a tempting face,
Measuring streets with a Doue-like pace,
Under that oily vizard wears,
The poor man's sweat, and Orphans tears:
Now whether these particular Fates,
Or general Moles (disfiguring States)
Whether one sin alone, or whether
This Maine Battalion joined together,
Do dare these plagues; we cannot tell,
But down they beat all humane Spell:
Or, it may be, Jehovah looks
But now upon those Audit-Bookes
Of 45. years hushed account,
For hours misspent, (whose sums surmount
The price of ransomd Kings) and there
Finding our grievous debts, does clear
And cross them under his own hand,
Being paid with Lives, through all the land.
For since his Maiden. Seruant's gone,
And his new Vizeroy fills the Throne,
Heaven means to give him (as his bride)
A Nation new, and purified.
Take breath a while our panting Muse,
And to the world tell gladder news,
Than these of Burialls, strive a while,
To make thy sullen nombers smile:
Forget the names of Graves, and Ghosts,
The sound of bells: the unknown coasts
Of Deaths vast Kingdom: and sail over
With fresher wind to happier Shore.
For now the maiden I Will has got,
A Royal Husband, (heavenly Lot)
Fair Scotland does fair England wed,
And gives her for her maidenhead,
A crown of gold, wrought in a Ring,
With which She Is married to a King:
Thou Beldame (whisperer of false Rumors)
Fame; cast aside those Antique humors,
Lift up thy golden Tromp, and sound
Even from Tweedes utmost christ all bownd,
And from the banks of Silver Thames
To the green Ocean, that King James
Had made an Island, (that did stand
Half sinking) now the firmest land:
Carry thou this to Neptunes ear,
That his shrill Tritons it may bear,
So far, until the Danish sound
With repercussiue voice rebound,
That Eccho's (doubling more and more)
May reach the parched Indian shore,
For it is heavens care so great a wonder,
Should fly upon the wings of Thunder.
The Horror of the Plague.
O Thou my Country, here mine eyes
Are almost sunck in waves, that rise
From the rough wind of Sighs, to see
A spring that lately courted thee
In pompous bravery, All thy Bowers
Gilt by the Sun, perfumde with flowers,
Now like a loathsome Leaperlying,
Her arbors withring, green Trees dying,
Her Reuells, and May-meriments,
Turned all to Tragic dreeryments:
And thou (the mother of my breath)
Whose soft breast thousands nourishes, A pos(...) ad Ciui(...) tem.

Alrar of Jove, thou throne of Kings:
Thou Fownt, where milk and honey springs,
Europs Jewel; Englands Iem:
Sister to great Jerusalem:
Neptunes minion, (bout whose wast
The Thames is like a girdle cast,)
Thou that (but health can nothing want,
Empress of Cities, Troynouant.
When I thy lofty Towers behold,
(Whose Pinnacles were tipped with gold
Both when the Sun did set and rise
So lovely were thou in his eyes)
Now like old Monuments forsaken,
Or (like tall Pynes) by winter thaken;
Or, seeing thee gorgeous as a bride
Even in the height of all thy pride
Disrobd'e, disgracte; And when all Nations
Made love to thee in amorous passions,
Now scornd of all the world alone,
None seek thee, nor must thou seek none,
But like a prisoner must be kept
In thine own walls, till thou have wept
Thine eyes out, to behold thy sweet
Dead children heapt about thy feet:
O Derrest! say how can we choose
But have a sad and drooping Muse,
When Coarses do so choke thy way
That now thou lookst like Golgatha;
But thus, The altring of a State
Alteis our Bodies, and our Fate,
For Princes death's do even bespeake
Millions of lives; when Kingdoms break,
People dissolve, and (as with Thunder)
Cities proud glories rent asunder.
Witness thy walls, whose stony arms
But yesterday receiu'de whole swarms
Of frighted English: Lord and Lowne,
Lawyer, and Client, Courtier, Clown,
All sorts did to thy buildings fly,
As to the safest Sanctuary.
And he that through thy gates might pass,
His fears were locked in Towers of brass,
Happy that man: now happier they
That from thy reach get first away:
As from a shipwreck, to some shore:
As from a lost field, drowned in gore:
As from high Turrets, whose Ioints fail:
Or rather from, some loathsome Iaile:
But note heavens Justice, they by flying
That would cozen Death, and save a dying,
How like to chafe abroad they are blown,
And (but for scorn) might walk unknown;
Like to plumde Estridges they ride,
Or like Sea-pageants, all in pride
Of Tacklings, Flags, and swelling Sails,
Borne on the loftiest waves, that veiles
His purple bonnet, and in dread
Bows down his snowie curled head,
So from the infected city fly
These Swallows in their Gallantry,
Looking that wheresoever they light,
Gay Summer, (like a Parasite)
Should wait on them, and build'em bowers
And crown their nests with wreathed flowers,
And Swaynes to welcome them should sing
And dance, as for their Whisson King:
Feather of Pride, how art thou tossed?
How soon are all thy beauties lost?
How casely golden hopes vn-winde?
The russet boore, and leatherne hind,
That two days since did sinck his knee,
And (all uncovered) worshipped thee,
Or being but poor, and meanly clothed,
Was either laughed to scorn or loathed,
Now thee he loathes, and laughes to scorn,
And tho upon thy back be worn,
More Satin than a kingdoms worth,
He bars his door, and thrusts thee forth:
And they whose pallat Land nor Seas,
Whom fashions of no shape could please,
Whom Princes have (in ages past)
For rich attires, and sumptuous wast,
Never come near: now sit they rownd
And feed (like beggars) on the grownd,
A field their bed, whose dankish Sheets
Is the green grass: And he that meets
The flatrings^? Fortune, does but lie
In some rude barn, or loathsome stie:
Forsook of all, floured, forlorn:
Own brother does own brother scorn,
The trembling Father is undone,
Being once but breathed on by his son;
Or, if in this sad pilgrimage
The hand of vengeance fall in rage,
So heavy upon any'es head
Striking the sinful body dead.
O shame to ages yet to come!
Dishonor to all Christendom!
In hallowed ground no heaped gold
Can buy a grave; nor linen sold
To make (so far is pity fled)
The last apparel for the dead:
But as the fashion is for those
Whose desperare hands the knot unloose
Of their own lives, In some hye-way
Or barren field, their bones they lay,
Even such his burial is; And there
Without the balm of any tear,
Or pomp of Soldiers, But (o grief!)
Dragd like a Traitor or some thief
At horses tails, he is rudely thrown,
The coarse being stuck with flowers by none,
No bells (the dead man's Confort) playing,
Nor any holy Churchman saying
A Funeral Dirge: But swift they are gone,
As from some noisome cation
O desolate City! now thy wings
(Whose shadow has been loved by Kings)
Should feel sick feathers on each side,
Seeing thus thy sons (got in there pride)
And heat of plenty, In peace borne,
To their own Nation left a scorn:
Each cowheards fears a Ghost him haunts,
Seeing one of thine inhabitants,
And does a Jew, or Turk prefer,
Before that name of Londoner;
Would this were all: But this black Curse
Doing ill abroad, at home does worse,
For in thy (now dispeopled) streets,
The dead with dead, so thickly meets,
As if some Prophets voice should say
None shall be Citizens, but they.
Whole households; and whole streets are stricken,
The sick do die, the sound do sicken,
And Lord have mercy upon us, crying
Ere Mercy can come forth, they are dying.
No music now is heard but bells,
And all their tunes are sick men's knells;
And every stroke the bell does toll,
Up to heaven it winds a soul:
Oh, if for every coarse that is laid
In his cold bed of earth, were made
A chyme of belles, if peales should ring
For every one whom death does sting,
Men should be deaffe, as those that dwell
By Nylus fall; But now one Knell,
Gives with his Iron voice this doom,
That twenty shall but have one room;
There friend, and foe, the young and old,
The freezing coward, and the bold:
Servant, and master: Foul and fair:
One Livery wear, and fellows are
Sailing along in this black fleet,
And at the New Graues-end do meet,
Where Churchyards banquet with cold cheer,
Holding a feast once in ten year,
To which comes many a Pilgrym worm,
Hungry and faint, beat with the storm
Of galping Famine, which before
Only picked bones, and had no more,
But now their messes come so fast,
They know not where, or which to taste;
For before (Dust to Dust) be spoken,
And thrown on One, more Graves be broken.
Thou Jealous man I pity thee,
Thou that live in hell to see
A wantons eye cheapening the sleeke
Soft Jewels, of thy fair wives cheek,
My verse must run through thy cold heart,
Thy wife has played the woman's part
And lain with Death: but (spite on spite)
Thou must endure this very night
Close by her side the poorest Groom,
In selfsame bed, and selfsame room:
But ease thy vexed soul, thus behold
There Is one, who in the morn with gold
Could have built Castells: now he is made
A pillow to a wretch, that prayde
For halfe-penny Alms, (with broken lim)
The Beggar now is above him;
So he that yesterday was clad
In purple robes, and hourly had
Even at his fingers beck, the fees
Of bared heads, and bending knees,
Rich men's fawnings, poor men's prayers
(Tho they were but hollow aires)
Troops of servants at his calling,
Children (like to subjects) falling
At his proud feet: lo, (now he is taken
By death,) he lies of all forsaken.
These are the Tragedies, whose sight
With tears blot all the lines we write,
The Stage whereon the Scenes are plaide
Is a whole Kingdom: who was made
By some (most provident and wise)
To hide from sad Spectators eyes
Acts full of Ruth, a private Room
To drown the horror of deaths doom,
That building now no higher rear
The Pesthouse stands every where,
For those that on their Beeres are borne, Pest-ho(...)

Are nombred more, than those that mourn.
But you grave Patriots, whom Fate
Makes Rulers of this walled State,
We must not loose you in our verse,
Whose Acts we one day may rehearse
In marble nombers, that shall stand
Above Times all-destroying hand:
Only (methinkes) you do err
In flying from your charge so far.
So coward Captains shrink away,
So Shepherds do their flocks betray:
So Soldiers, and so Lambs do perish,
So you kill those, you are bound to cherish:
Be therefore valiant, as you are wife,
Come back again: The man that dies
Within your walls, is even as near
To heaven, as dying any where;
But if (o pardon our bold thought)
You fear your breath is sooner caught
Here then aloof; and therefore keep
Out of Deaths reach, whilst thousands weep
And wring their hands for thousands dying,
No comfort near the sick man lying:
It Is to be feared (you petty-kings,)
When back you spread your golden wings,
A deadlyer siege (which heaven auert)
Will your replenisht walls ingirt.
It Is now the Beggars plague, for none
Are in this Battle overthrown
But Babes and poor: The lesser Fly
Now in this Spiders web does lie.
But if that great, and goodly swarm
(That has broke through, and felt no harm,)
In his inuenom'd snares should fall,
O pity! twere most tragical:
For then the Usurer must behold
His pestilent flesh, whislt all his gold
Turns into Tokens, and the chest
(They lie in,) his infections breast:
How well heel play the Misers part
When all his coin sticks at his heart?
He Is worth so many farthings then,
That was a golden God among men.
And it is the aptest death (so please
Him that breath heaven, earth, and Seas)
For every covetous rooting Mowle
That heaues his dross above his soul,
And does in coin all hopes repose
To die with corpse, stamped full of those.
Then the rich Glutton, whose swollen eyne
Look fiery red (being boild in wine)
And in his meals, adores the cup,
(For when he falls down that stands up
Therefore a goblet is his Saint,
To whom he kneeles with small constrain:,
When his own goblet Scull flows over
He worships Bacchus on all four,
For none's his God but Bacchus then,
Who rules and guides all drunken men,)
When He shall wake from wine, and view
More then Tauern-tokens, new
Stamped upon his breast and arms,
In horrid throngs, and purple swarms,
Then will he loath his former shapes,
When he shall see blew marks mock grapes,
And hang on clusters on each vein,
Like to wine-bubbles, or the grain
Of staggering sin, which now appears
In the December of his years,
His last of hours; when heel scarce have
Time to go sober to his Grave.
And then to die! (dreadful to think!)
When all his blood is turned to drink:
And who knows not this Sentence given,
Among all sins, none can reele to Heaven?
But woe to him that sinkes in wine,
And dies so (without heau'd up eyne)
And buried so! O loathsome trench!
His grave is like a Tavern bench.
It Is fearful, and most hard to say,
How he shall stand at latter day.
The adulterous and luxurious spirit
Pawnd to hell, and sins hot merit,
That bathes in lust his leaprous soul,
Acting a deed without control
Or thought of Deity: through whose blood,
Runs part of the Infernal flood:
How will he freeze with horror? lying
In dreadful trance before his dying:
The heat of all his dambd desires
Coold with the thought of gnashing fires:
His Ryots ravished, all his pleasures
His marrow wasted with his treasures,
His painted harlots (whose embraces
Cost him many silver faces,
Whose only care and thought was then
To keep them sure from other men)
Now they dance in Russians hands,
Lazy Leiftenents (without bands,)
With muffled halfe-fac'de Pandars, laughing,
Whilst he lies gasping, they sit qua^fing,
Smile at this plague, and black mischance,
Knowing their deaths come over from France:
It Is not their season now to die,
Two gnawing poisons cannot lie,
In one corrupted flesh together,
Nor can this poison then fly thither:
There Is not a Strompet among them all
That lives and rises by the fall,
Dreads this contagion, or her threats,
Being guarded with French Amulets.
Yet all this while thy self lie panting,
Thy Luxurious hours recanting,
Whilst before thy face appears,
Th'adulterous fruit of all thy years
In their true form and horrid shapes,
So many Incests, violent Rapes,
Chambered adulteries, unclean passions,
Wanton habits, riotous fashions,
And all these Anticks dressed in hell,
To dance about the passing bell;
And clip thee round about the bed,
Whilst thousand Horrors graspe thy head.
The Cure of the Plagne.
ANd therefore this infectious season
That now arrests the Flesh for Treason
Against heavens everlasting King,
Anointed with the eternal spring
(Of life and power) this stroke of Force,
That turns the world into a Coarse,
Feeding the Dust with what it craves,
Emptying whole houses to fill graves,
These speckled Plagues (which our sins leuy)
Are as needful as they are heavy;
Whose cures to cite, our Muse for bears,
Tho he the Daphnean wreath that wears
(Being both Poesis Sovereign King,
And God of medicine) bids us sing
As boldly of those policies,
Those Onfets, and those Batteries,
By Physic cunningly applied,
To beat down Plagues (so fortified)
And of those Arms defensitiue,
To keep th'assaulted Heart alive,
And of those wards, and of those sleights,
Used in these mortal single fights,
As of the causes that commence
This civil war of Pestilence,
For Poets souls should be confinde
Within no bownds, their towering minds
Must (like the Sun) a progress make
Through Arts immensiue Zodiake:
And suck (like Bees) the virtuous power,
That flows in learnings seuen-sold flower,
Distilling forth the same again
In sweet and wholesome Juice to men:
But for we see the Army great
Of those whose charge it is to beat
This proud Inuader, and have skill
In all those weapons, that do kill
Such pestilent foes, we yield to them
The glory of that stratagem:
To whose Oraculous voice repair,
For they those Delphick Prophets are,
That teach dead bodies to respire
By sacred Aesculapian fire:
We mean not those pied Lunatickes,
Those bold fantastic Empirickes,
Quack-saluers, mishrump Mountebancks,
That in one night grow up in rancks
And live by pecking Phisickes crummes,
O hate these venomous broodes, there comes
Worse sores from them, and more strange births
Then from ten plagues, or twenty deaths:
Only this Antidote apply,
Cease vexing heaven, and cease to die. The (...)

Seek therefore (after you have found
Salve natural for the natural wound
Of this Contagion,) Cure from thence
Where first the evil did commence,
And that is the Soul: each one purge one,
And Englands free, the Plague is gone.
The necessity of a Plague.
YEt to mix comfortable words
Tho this be horrid, it affords
Sober gladness, and wise joys,
Since desperate mixtures it destroies;
For if our thoughts sit truly trying,
The just necessity of dying
How needful (tho how dreadful) are
Purple Plagues, or Crimson war,
We would conclude (still urging pity)
A Plague's the Purge to cleanse a City:
Who amongst millions can deny
(In rought prose, or smooth Poesy)
Of Evils, it is the lighter brood,
A dearth of people, then of food!
And who knows not, our Land ran over
With people; and was only poor
In having too too many, living,
And wanting living! rather giving
Themselves to wast, deface and spoil,
Than to increase (by virtuous toil)
The banckrout bosom of our Realm
Which naked birthes did ouerwhelme:
This begers famine, and bleake dearth:
When fruits of wombes pass fruits of earth,
Then Famines only Physic: and
The medcine for a ryotous Land
Is such a plague: So it may please
Mercies Distributer to appease,
His speckled anger, and now hide
The Old rod of Plagues: no more to chide
And lash our shoulders and sick veins
With Carbuncles, and shooting Blaines:
Make us the happiest amongst men,
Immortal by our prophecing pen,
That this last line may truly reign,
The Plague's ceast, heaven is friends again.
FINIS.

