A DISPVTATION, Between a He Conny-catcher, and a She Conny-catcher, whether
a Thief or a Whore, is most hurtful in Cousonage, to the Commonwealth.
DISCOVERING THE SECRET Villainies of alluring Strumpets. With the Conversion of
an English Courtizen, reformed this present year, 1592. Read, laugh, and
learn. Nascimur prop^^ia. R. G.



Imprinted at London, by A. I. for T. G. and are to be sold at the West end
of Paul's. 1592.

To all Gentlemen, Merchants, Apprentises, and Country Farmers health.
GEntlemen, Country men, and kind friends, for so I value all that are honest
and enemies of bad actions, although in my books of Conny-catching I have
discovered diverse forms of colonings, and painted out both the sacking and
crosbyting laws, which strumpets use, to the destruction of the simple, yet
willing to search all the substance, as I have glanncst at the shadow, and to
enter into the nature of villainy, as I have broacht up the secrets of vice, I
have thought good to publish this Dialogue or disputation, between a he
Conny-catcher, and a she Conny-catcher, whether of them are most preiuditiall
to the Commonwealth, discoursing the base quallities of them both, and
discovering the inconvenience that grows to men, through the lightness of
inconstant wantons, who being wholly given to the spoil, seek the ruin of
such as light into their company. In this Dialogue, loving Countrymen, shall
you find what prejudice ensues by haunting of whore-houses, what dangers grows
by daliying with common hat lottes, what inconvenience follows then (...)
pleasures of unchaste Libertines, (not only by their consuming of their wealth,
and impouerishment of their goods and lands, but to the great indangering of
their health. For in conuersing with them, they aim not simply at the loss of
goods, and blemish of their good names, but they fish for diseases, sickness,
sores incurable, ulcers brusting of the joints, and sault rhumes, which by the
humor of that villainy, lepte from Naples into France, and from France into
the bowels of England, which makes many cry out in their bones, whilst
goodman Surgion laughs in his purse: a thing to be feared as deadly while men
live, as hell is to be dreaded after death, for it not only infecteth the
body, consumes the soul, and waste wealth and worship, but ingraues a
perpetual shame in the forehead of the party so abused. Whereof Master
Huggins hathwell written in his Myrror of Magistrates, in the person of
Memprycaius, exclaiming against harlots, the verses be these: Eschew vile Venus
toys she cuts off age,
And learn this lesson often, and tell thy friend,
By Pockes, death sudden, begging, Harlots end.


Besides, I have here lay de open the wily wisdom of ouerwise Curtizens, that
with their cunning, can draw on, not only poor nouices, but such as hold
themselves masters of their occupation. What flatteries they use to bewitch,
what sweet words to inueagle, what simple holiness to entrap, what amorous
glaunces, what smirking Ocyliades, what cringing courtesies, what stretching
Adios, following a man like a blood-hound, with their eyes white, laying out of
hair, what frouncing of tresses, what paintings, what Ruffes, Cuffes, and
braueries, and all to betraie the eyes of the innocent nouice, whom when they
have drawn on to the bent of their bow, they strip like the prodigal child,
and turn out of doors like an outcast of the world. The Crocodile hathnot
more tears, Proleus, more shape, Ianus more faces, the Hieria, more sundry
tunes to entrap the passengers, then our English Curtizens, to be plain, our
English whores: to set on fire the hearts of lascivious and gazing strangers.
These common, or rather consuming strumpets, whose throathes are softer then
oil, and yet whose steps lead unto death. They have their Ruffians to
rifle, when they cannot fetch over with other cunning, their crosbiters
attending upon them, their foysts, their bufts, their nippes, and such like.
Being waited on by these villains, as by ordinary servants, so that who
thinks himself wise enough to escape their flatteries, him they crosbyte, who
holds himself to rule, to be bitten, with a counterfeyt Apparater, him they
rifle, if he be not so to be verst upon, they have a foyst or a nyppe upon
him, and so sting him to the quick. Thus he that medles with pitch, cannot but
be defiled, and he that acquainteth himself or conuerseth with any of these
Connycatching strumpets, cannot but by some way or other be brought to
confusion: for either he must hazard his soul, blemish his good name, loose
his goods, light upon diseases, or at the least have been tied to the humor of
an harlot, whose quiver is open to every arrow, who likes all that have fat
purses, and loves none that are destitue of pence. I remember a Monk in Diebus
illis, writ his opinion of the end of an Adulterer, thus: Quatuor his casibus
sine dubio cadet adulter,
Aut hic pauper eit, aut hicsubito morietur,
Aut cadet in causum qua debet indice vinci,
Aut aliquod membrum casu vell crimine perdet,
Which I Englished thus: He that to Harlots lures do yield him thrall,
Through sour misfortune too bad end shall fall:
Or sudden death, or beggerie shall him chance,
Or guilt before a Judge his shame inhance:
Or else by fault or fortune he shall leese,
Some member sure escape from one of these.


Seeing then such inconvenience grows from the caterpillars of the
Commonwealth, and that a multitude of the monsters here about London
particularly and generally abroad in England, to the great overthrow of many
simple men that are inueagled by their flatteries, I thought good not only to
discover their villainies in a Dialogue, but also to manifest by an example,
how preiuditiall their life is, to the state of the land, that such as are
warned by an instance, may learn and look before they leap, to that end kind
Countrymen, I have set down at the end of the disputation, the wonderful
life of a Curtezin, not a fiction, but a truth of one that yet lives not now in
an other form repentant. In the discourse of whose life, you shall see how
dangerous such truls be to all estates that be so simple as to trust their
fained subtilties: here shall parents learn, how hurtful it is to cocker up
their youth in their follies, and have a deep insight how to bridle their
daughters, if they see them any ways grow wantons, wishing therefore my labors
may be a caveat to my contry-men, to avoid the company of such cousoning
Courtezins.

R. G.

Farewell.
A disputation between Laurence a Foist and fair Nan a Traffic, whether a
Whore or a Thief is most preiuditiall.
Laurence. Fair Nan well met, what news about your Uine Court that you look
so blythe, your cherry ch^ekes discouers your good fare, and your brave
apparel bewraies a fat purse, is Fortune now alate grown so favorable to
Foystes, that your husband has lighted on some large purchase, or has your
smooth looks linckt in some young Nouice to sweat for a favor all the byte in
his Bounge, and to leave himself as many Crowns as thou have good conditions,
and then he shall be one of Pierce penilesse fraternity: how is it sweet
wench, goes the world on wheels, that you tread so daintily on your typtoes?


Nan. Why Laurence are you pleasant or peevish, that you qui^ with such brief
girdes, think you a quarterne wind cannot make a quick sail, that eas^e^
lystes cannot make heavy burdens, that women have not wiles to compass
crowns as well as men, yes and more, for though they be not so strong in the
fists, they be more ripe in their wits, and it is by wit that I live and will
live, in dispight of that peevish scholar, that thought with his
conny-catching books to have crosbyt our trade. Do thou marvel to see me
thus brisk, fair wenches cannot want favors, while the world is so full of
amorous fools, where can such girls as my self be blemished with a
threedbare coat, as long as country Farmers have full purses, and wanton
Citizens pockets full of pence.


Laur. Truth^ if fortune so favor thy husband, that he be neither smoakt nor
cloyed, for I am sure all thy bravery comes by his Nipping, Foysting, and
lifting:


Nan. In faith sir no, did I get no more by mine own wit, then I reap by his
purchase, I might both go bare and penilesse the wholeyere, but mine cyes are
stauls, and my hands lime twigs (elswere I not worthy the name of a she
Connycatcher) Cyrces had never more charms, Calipso more enchantments the
Sirens more subtle tunes, the^ I have crafty slightes to inueagle a Conny, and
fetch in a country Farmer. Laurence believe me, you men are but fools, your
gettings is uncertain, and yet you still fish for the gallows, though by some
great chance you light upon a good boung^ yet you fast a great while after,
whereas, as we mad wenches have our tennants (for so I call every simple
letcher and amorous Fox) as well out of Term as in Term to bring us our
rentes, alas, were not my wits and my wanton pranks more profitable then my
husbands foysting, we might often go to bed supperlesse for want of surfeiting,
and yet I dare swear, my husband gets a hundredth pounds a year by boungs.


Laur. Why Nan, are you grown so sliffe, to think that your fair looks can
get as much as our nimble fingers, or that your facking can gai^e as much as
our foysring, no, no, Nan, you are two bows down the wind, our foyst will get
more then twenty the prou^est wenches in all London.


Nan. Lie a little further and give me some room, what Laurence your tongue is
too lavish, all stands upon proof, and since I have leisure and you no great
business, as being now when Powles is shut up, and all purchasies and Connies in
their burrowes, let us to the Tavern and take a room to our selves, and there
for the price of our suppers, I will prove that women, I mean of our faculty,
a trafficque, or as hase knaves term us strumpets, are more subtle, more
dangerous, in the commonwealth, and more full of a yles to get crowns, then
the cunningest Foyst, Nip, Lift, Pragges, or whatsoever that lives at this day.


Laur. Content, but who shall be moderater in our controversies, since in
disputing pro and contra, betwixt our selves, it is but your yea and my nay,
and so neither of us will yield to others victories.


Nan. Trust me Laurence, I am so assured of the conquest, offering so in the
strength of mine own arguments, that when I have reasoned, I will referse it
to your judgment and censure.


Laur. And trust me as I am an honest man, I will be indifferent.


Nan. Oh swear not so deeply, but let me first hear what you can say for
your self.


Laur. What? why more Nan, then can be painted out in a great volume, but
briefly this, I need not discribe the laws of villainy, because R. G. has so
amply pend them down in the first part of Con^y-catching, that though I be one
of the faculty, yet I cannot discover more then he has laid open. Therefore
first to the Gentlemen Foyst, I pray you what finer quality? what Art is more
excellent either to try the ripenes of the wit, or the agillitie of the hand,
then that for him that will be master of his Trade, must pass the proudest
Iugler alive, the points of Legerdemain, he must have an eye to spy the
boung or pursse, and then a heart to dare to attempt it, for this by the way,
^e that fears the Gallows shall never be good thief while he lives, he must
as the Cat watch for a Mouse, and walk Powles, Westminster, the Exchange, and
such common haunted places, and there have a curious eye to the person, whether
he be Gentleman, Citizen or Farmer, and note, either, where his boung lies,
whether in his hoase or pockets, and then dog the party into a press where
his staule with heauing and shouing shall so molest him, that he shall not
feel when we strip him of his boung, although it he never so fast or
cunningly coucht about him, what poor Farmer almost can come to plead his case
at the bar, to attend upon his Lawyers at the bench, but look be never so
narrowly to it we have his pursse, wherein sometime there is fat purchase,
twenty or thirty pounds, and I pray you how long would one of your
Traffiques be earning so much with your Chamber work. Besides in faires and
markets, and in the circuites after Judges, what infinite money is gotten from
honest meaning men, that either busy about their necessary affairs, or
carelessly looking to their Crowns, light amongst us that be foysts, tush we
dissemble in show, we go so neat in apparel, so orderly in outward
appearance, some like Lawyers Clerks, others like Seruingmen, that attended
there about their masters business, that we are hardly smoakt, versing upon
all men with kind courtesies and fair words, and yet besng so warily
watchful, that a good purse cannot be put up in a fair, but we sigh if we
share it not amongst us, and though the books of Conny-catching has somewhat
hindered us, and brought many brave foystes to the haulter, yet some of our
Country farmers, nay of our Gentlemen and Citizens, are so careless in a
throng of people, that they show us the pray, and so draw on a thief, and
bequeath us their purses, whether we will or no, for who loves wine so ill,
that he will not eat grapes if they fall into his mouth, and who is so base,
that if be see a pocket fair before him, will not foyst in if he may, or if
foysting will not serve, use his knife and nip, for although there be some
foysts that will not use their knives, yet I hold him not a perfect workman or
master of his Mystery, that will not cut a purse as well as Foyst a pocket,
and hazard any limme for so sweet a gain as gold, how answer you me this
brief objection Nan, can you compare with either our cunning to get our gains
in purchase.


Nan. And have you no stronger arguments goodman Laurence, to argue your
excellency in villainy but this, then in faith put up your pipes, and give me
leave to speak, your choplodgicke has no great subtlety for simple, you
reason of foysting, and appropriate that to your selves, to you men I mean, as
though there were not women Foysts and Nippes, as ne at in that Trade as you,
of as good an eye, as fine and nimble a hand, and of as resolute a heart, yes
Laurence, and your good mistresses in that mystery, for we without like
suspicion can pass in your walks under the color of simplicity to
Westminster, with a paper in our hand, as if we were distressed women, that had
some supplication to put up to the Judges, or some bill of information to
deliver to our Lawyers, when God wot, we shuffle in for a boung as well as the
best of you all, yea as your self Laurence, though you be called king of
Cutpurses, for though they smoke you, they will hardly mistrust us, and
suppose our stomach stand against it to foyst, yet who can better play the
staule or the shadow then we, for in a thrust or throng if we shoue hard, who
is he that will not favor a woman, and in giving place to us, give you free
passage for his purse. Again, in the market, when every wife has almost her
hand on her boung, and that they cry beware the Cutpurse and Conny-catchers,
then I as fast as the best with my hand basket as mannerly as if I were to buy
great store of butter and eggs for provision of my house, do exclaim against
them with my hand on my purse, (...)
and say the world is badde when a woman cannot walk safely to market for
fear of these villainous Cutpurses, when as the first boung I come to, I either
nip or foyst, or else staule an other while he has stricken, dispatched and
gone, now I pray you gentle sir, wherein are we inferior to you in foysting,
and yet this is nothing to the purpose. For it is one of our most simplest
shifts, but yet I pray you what think you when a farmer, gentleman, or
Citizen, come to the Term, perhaps he is wary of his purse, and watch him
never so warily, yet he will never be brought to the blow, is it not possible
for us to pinch him ere he pass, he that is most charie of his crowns
abroad, and will cry ware the Conny-catchers, will not be afraid to drink a
pint of wine with a pretty wench, and perhaps go to a trugging house to ferry
out one for his purpose, then with what cunning we can feed the simple fop,
with what fair words, sweet kisses, (...) sighs, as if at that instant we
fell in love with him that we never saw before, if we meet him in an evening in
the street, if the farmer or other whatsoever, be not so forward as to motion
some courtesy to us, we straight insinuate into his company, and claim
acquaintance of him by some means or other, and if his mind be set for lust,
and the devil drive him on to match himself with some dishonest wanton, then
let him look to his purse, for if he do but kiss me in the street I Will have
his purse, for a farewell, although he never comm^t any other act at all. I
speak not this only by my self Lawrence, for there he a hundredth in London
more cunning then my self in this kind of cunny-catching. But if he come
into a house the^ let our trade alone to verse upon him, for first we feign our
selves hungry^ for the benefit of the house, although our bellies were never so
full, and no doubt the good Pander or Bawd she comes forth like a sober
Matron, and sets store of Cates on the Table, and then I fall aboor^ on them,
and though I can eat little, yet I make havoc of all, and let him be sure
every dish is well sa^cs^, for he shall pay for a pipping Pie that cost in
the Market four pence, at one of the Trugging h^nses xviii. pence, tush what
is dainty if it be not dear bought, and yet he must come off for crowns
besides, and when I see him draw to his purse, I note the putting up of it
well, and cre we part, that world goes hard if I foyst him not of all that
he has, and then suppose the woorst, that he miss it, am I so simply
acquainted or badly provided, that I have not a friend, which with a few
terrible oaths and countenance set, as if he were the proudest So^lda^^ that
ever bare arms against Don John of Austria, will face him quite out of his
money, and make him walk like a woodcocke homeward by weeping cross, and so
buy repentance with all the crounes in his purse. How say you to this Lawrence,
whether are women Foystes inferior to you inordinarie cousonage or no.


Laur. Excellently well reasoned Nan, thou have told me wonders, but wench
though you be wily and strike often, your blows are not so big as ours.


Nan. Oh but note the subject of our disputation, and that is this^ which are
more subtle and dangerous in the Commonwealth, (...) to that I argue.


Laur. I and beshrow me, but you reason quaintly, yet will I prove your wits
are not so ripe as ours, nor so ready to reach into the subtilties of kind
cousonage, and though you appropriate to your self the excellency of
Conny-catching, and that you do it with more Art then we men do, because of
your painted flatteries and sugared words, that you flourish rethorically like
nets to catch fools, yet will I manifest with a merry instance, a feate done
by a Foyst, that exceeded any that ever was done by any mad wench in England. A
pleasant Tale of a Country Farmer, that took it in scorn to have his purse cut
or drawn from him, and how a Foyst served him.
IT was told me for a truth that not long since here in London, there lay a
country Farmar, with diverse of his neighbors about Law matters, amongst whom,
one of them going to Westminster Hall, was by a Foyst stripped of all the pence
in his purse, and coming home, made great complaint of his misfortune, some
lamented his loss, and others exclaimed against the Cutpurses, but this Farmer
he laughed loudly at the matter, and said such fools as could not keep their
purses no surer, were well served, and for my part quoth he, I so much scorn
the Cutpurses, that I would thank him heartily that would take pains to foyst
mine, well says his neighbor, then you may thank me, since my harms learnes
you to beware, but if it be true, that many things fall out between the cup and
the lip, you know not what hands Fortune may light in your own lap, tush quoth
the Farmar, heeres forty pounds in this purse in gold, the proudest Cutpurse
in England win it and wear it, as thus he boasted, there stood a subtle Foyst
by and heard all, smiling to himself at the folly of the proud Farmar, and
vowed to have his purse or venture his neck for it, and so went home and
bewrayed it to a crew of his companions, who taking it in dudgion, that they
should be put down by a Pesant, met either at Laurence Pickerings, or at
Lambeth: let the Blackamore take heed I name him not, least an honorable
neighbor of his frown at it, but wheresoever they met they held a convocation,
and both consulted and concluded all by a general consent, to bend all their
wits to be possessers of this Farmers Boung, and for the execution of this
their vow, they haunted about the Inn where he lay, and dogd him into diverse
places, both to Westminster Hall and other places, and yet could never light
upon it, he was so watchful and smoakt them so narrowly, that all their
travel was in vain, at last one of them fled to a more cunning policy,
and went and learnde the man's name and where he dwelt, and then hyed him to
the Counter and entered an Action against him of trespass, damages two
hundredth pounds, when he had thus done, he seed two Sargiants, and carried
them down with him to the man's lodging, wishing them not to arrest him till he
commanded them, well agreed they were, and down to the Farmers lodging they
came, where were a crew of Foystes, whom he had made privy to the end of his
practice, stood waiting, but he took no knowledge at all of them, but walked up
and down, the Farmer came out and went to Powles, the Cutpurse bad stay, and
would not yet suffer the Officers to meddle with him, til he came into the West
end of Paul's Churchyard, and there he willed them to do their Office, and they
stepping to the Farmer arrested him, the Farmer amazed, being amongst his
neighbors, asked the Sargiant at whose suite he was troubled, at whose suite
soever it be, said one of the Cutpurses that stood by, you are wronged honest
man, for he has arested you here in a place of privilege, where the Sherifes
nor the Officers have nothing to do with you, and therefore you are unwise if
you obey him, tush says an other Cutpurse, though the man were so simple of
himself, yet shall he not offer the Church so much wrong, as by yielding to
the Mace, to imbollish Paul's liberty, and therefore I will take his part, and
with that he drew his sword, an other took the man and haled him away, the
Officer he stooke hard to him, and said he was his true prisoner, and cride
Clubbes, the Prentises arose, and there was a great hurly ^urly, for they took
the Officers part, so that the poor Farmer was mightily turmoyld amongst them,
and almost haled in pieces, whilst thus the strife was, one of the Foystes had
taken his purse away, and was gone, and the Officer carried the man away to a
Tavern, for he swore he knew no such man, nor any man that he was indebted
too, as then they satte drinking of a quart of wine, the Foyst that had caused
him to be arrested, sent a note by a Porter to the Officer that he should
release the Farmer, for he had mistaken the man, which note the Officer showed
him, and bad him pay his sees and go his ways, the poor Countryman was
content with that, and put his hand in his pocket to feel for his purse, and
God wot there was none, which made his heart far more cold then the arrest did,
and with that fetching a great sigh he said, alas masters I am undone, my
purse in this fraie is taken out of my pocket and ten pounds in in gold in it
besides white money. Indeed said the Sargiant, commonly in such brawles the
cutpurses be busy, and I pray God the quarrel was not made upon purpose by the
pickpockets, well says his neighbor, who shall smile at you now, the other day
when I lost my purse yon laughed at me, the Farmer brook all, and sat
malecon^ent, and borrowed money of his neighbors to pay the Sargiant, and had a
learning I believe ever after to brave the cutpurse.

How say you to this mistress Nan, was it not well done, what choice witted
wench of your faculty, or she Foyst, has ever done the like, tush Nan, if we
begin once to apply our wits, all your inventions are follies toward ours.




Nan. You say good goodman Laurence, as though your s^btilties were sudden as
women's are, come but to the old Proverb, and I put you down, It Is as hard to
find a Hare without a Muse, as a woman without a scuse, and that wit that can
devise a cunnyng lie, can plot the intent of deep villainies. I grant this fetch
of the foyst was pretty, but nothing in respect of that we wantons can
compass, and therefore to quit your tale with an other, hear what a mad wench
of my profession did alate to one of your faculty. A passing pleasant Tale,
how a whore Conny-catchta Foyst.
THere came out of the country a Foyst, to try his experience, here in
Westminster Hall, and struck a hand or two, but the devil a snap he would
give to our citizen Foystes, but wrought warily, and could not be ^etcht off
by no means, and yet it was known he had some twenty pounds about him, but
he had planted it so cunningly in his doublet, that it was sure enough for
finding. Although the citcie Foyst laid all the plottes they could, as well by
discoueryng him to the Gaylors as otherwise, yet he was so pollitique, that
they couls not verse upon him by any means, which grieved them so, that one
day at a dinner, they held a counsel amongst themselves how to cousen him,
but in vain, til at last a good wench that sat by, undertook it, so they would
swear to let her have all that he had, they confirmed it sollemply, and she
put it in practice thus, she subtly insinuaed her self into this Foysts
company, who seeing her a pretty wench, began after twice meeting to wax
familiar with her, and to question about a nights lodging, after a little nyce
loving and bidding she was content for her supper and what else he would of
courtesy bestow upon her, for she held it scorn she said, to set a salarie
price on her body, the Foyst was glad of this, and yet he would not trust
her, so that he put no more but ten shillings in his pocket, but he had
above twenty pounds twilted in his doublet, well to be short, suppertime
came, and thither comes my gentle Foyst, who making good cheer, was so eagar
of his game, that he would straight to bed by the leave of dame Bawd, who
had her fee too, and there he lay till about midnight, where three or four
old Hacksters whom she had provided upon purpose came to the door and rapt
lustely, who is there says the Bawd looking out of the window, marry say
they, such a Justice, and named one about the City that is a mortal enemy to
Cutpurses, who is come to search your house for a Jesuit and other suspected
persons, alas sir says she I have none here, well quoth they, oape the
door, I will says she, and with that she came into the Foystes Chamber, who
heard all this, and was afraid it was some search for him, so that he desired
the Bawd to help him that he might not be seen, why then quoth she, step
into this Closet, he whipped in hastily and never remembered his clothes, she
locked him in safe, and then let in the crew of Rakehels, who making as though
they searcher every chamber, came at last into that where his Lemman lay, and
asked her what she was, she as if she had been afraid, desired their
worshippes to be good to her, she was a poor Counney maid come up to the
Term, and who is that quoth they, that was in bed with you, none forsooth
says she, no says one, that is a lie, here is the print of two, and besides,
wheresoever the Fox is, here is his Skin, for this is his doublet and hoase,
then down she falls upon her knees, and says indeed it was her husband,
your husband quoth they, nay that cannot be so Mi^ion, for why then would you
have denied him at the first, with that one of them turnde to the Ba^d, and did
question with her what he was and where he was, truly sir says she, they came
to my house and said they were man and wife, and for my part I know them for no
other, and he being afraid, is indeed to confess the troth, shut up in the
Closset. No doubt if it please your worships says one rakehell, I warrant you
he is some no^able Cutpurse or pickpocket, that is afraid to show his face,
come and open the Closet, and let us look on him, nay sir says she not for to
night I beseech your worship carry no man out of my house, I will give my word
he shall be forth coming to morrow morning, your word dame Bawd says one,
it is not worth a straw, you huswife that says ye are his wife, ye shall go with
us, and for him that we may be sure he may not start, I Will take his doublet,
hoase and cloak, and to morrow I Will send them to him by one of my men, were
there a thousand pounds in them, there shall not be a penny diminisht, the
whore kneeled down on her knees and feigned to cry pitifully, and desired the
Justice which was one of her companions, not to carry her to prison, yes
huswife quoth he, your mate and you shall not tarry together in one house, that
you may make your tales all one, and therefore bring her away, and after ye
dame Bawd see you lend him no other clothes, for I will send his in the morning
betimes, and come you with him to answer for lodging him. I will sir says she,
and so away goes the wench and her companions laughing, and left the Bawd and
the Foyst, as soon as the Bawd thought good, she unlocked the Closet and cursed
the time that ever they came in her house, now quoth she, here will be a fair
adoo, how will you answer for your self, I fear me I shall be in danger of
the Cart, well quoth he, to be short, I would not for forty pounds come before
the Justice, marry no more would I quoth she, let me shift if you were conveyed
hence, but I have not a rag of man's apparel in the house, why quoth he, seeing
it is early morning, lend me a blanket to put about me, and I will escape to a
friends house of mine, then leave me a pawn quoth the Bawd, alas I have none
says he but this ring on my finger^ why that quoth she, or tarry while the
Justice comes, so he gave it her, took the blanket and went his ways, whether
I know not, but to some friends house of his. Thus was this wily Foyst by the
wit of a subtle wench, cunningly stripped of all that he had and turnde to
grass to get more fat.




Nan. How say you to this device Lawrence, was it not excellent? What think
you of a woman's wit if it can work such woonders.


Laur. Marry I think my mother was wiser then all the honest women of the
parish be^^^es.


Nan. Why then belike she was of our faculty, (...) a Matrone of my
profession, nimble of her hands, quick of too^^^ and light of her tail, I
should have put in sir reverence, but a foul word is good enough for a filthy
knave.


Laur. I am glad you are so pleasant Nan, you were not so merry when you went
to Dunstable, but indeed I must needs confess that women Foyses if they be
careful in their trades are (though not so common) yet more dangerous then
men Foystes, women have quick wits, as they have short heels, and they can
get with pleasure, what we fish for with danger, but now giving you the
bucklers at this weapon, let me have a blow at you which another.


Nan. But before you induce any more arguments, by your leave in a little by
talk, you know Laurence that though you can foyst, nyp, prig, list courbe, and
use the black Art, yet you cannot crosbite without the help of a woman, which
crosbiting now adays is grown to a marvelous profitable exercise, for some
cowardly knaves that for fear of the gallows, leave nipping and foysting,
become Crosbites, knowing there is no danger therein but a little punishment, at
the most the Pillorie, and that is saved with a little Vnguantum Aureum, as for
example, Jack Rhoades is now a reformed man, whatsoever he has been in his
youth, now in his latter days he is grown a correcter of vice, for whom
soever he takes suspicions with his wife, I warrant you he sets a sure fine on
head, though he has nothing for his money but a bare kiss, and in this Art we
poor wenches are your surest props and stay. If you will not believe me,
ask poor A. B. in Turnmill street, what a saucy Signor there is, whose
purblind eyes can scarcely discern a Lowse from a Flea, and yet he has such
insight into the mystical Trade of Crosbiting, that he can furnish his board,
with a hundredth pounds worth of Plate, I doubt the sandeyde Ass, will kick
like a Western Pugge: if I rub him on the gaul, but it is no matter if he
find himself touched and stir, although he boastes of the chief of the
Clargies favor, yet I Will so set his name out, that the boys at Smithfield
bars shall chalk him on the back for a Crosbite, tush you men are foppes in
fetching nouices over the coals, hearken to me Lawrence, I Will tell thee a
wonder, Not far off from Hogsdon, perhaps it was there, and if you think
Ilye, ask master Richard Chot, and master Richard Strong, two honest
gentlemen that can witness as well as I, this proof of a woman's wit. There
dweltt here sometimes a good ancient Matron that had a fair whenc to her
daughter, as young and tender as morrow mass priests Lemman, her she set out
to sale in her youth, and drew on sundry to be suitors to her daughter, some
wooers, and some speeders, yet none married her, but of her beauty they made a
profit, and inue agled all, till they had spent upon her what they had, and
then forsooth, she and her young Pigion turn them out of doors like prodigal
children, she was acquainted with Dutch and French, Italian and Spaniard as well
as English, and at last, as so often the Pitcher goes to the brook that it
comes broken home, my fair daughter was hit on the master vain and gotten
with child, now the mother to color this matter to save her daughters
marriage, begins to wear a Cushion under her own kirtle, and to feign her
self with child, but let her daughter pass as though she ailde nothing, when
the forty weeks were come, and that my young mistres must needs cry out
forsooth, this old B. had gotten huswifes answerable to her self, and so
brought her daughter to bed, and let her go up and down the house, and the old
Croane lay in child bed as though she had been delivered, and said the child
was hers, and so saved her daughters escape, was not this a witty wonder
master Lawrence, wrought by an old Witch, to have a child in her age, and
make a young whore seem an honest virgin, cush this is little to the purpose,
if I should recite all, how many she had cousoned under the pretense of
ma^riage, well poor plain Signor, See, you were not stiff enough for her,
although it cost you many crowns and the loss of your service. I Will say no
more, perhaps she will amend her manners. Ah Lawrence how like you of this
gear, in Crosbyting we put you down, for God wot it is little l^^kt ^os in
and about London, and yet I may say to thee, many a good Citizen is Crosbyt in
the year by odd Walkers abroad, I heard some named the other ^ay as I was
drinking at the Swanne in Lambeth Marshe, but let them aloane, it is a foul byrd
that defiles the own neast, and it were a shame form to speak against any
good wenches or boon Companions, that by their wits can wrest money from a
Churl, I fear me R. G. will name them too soon in his black book, a
pestilence ou him, they say, he has there set down my husbands pettigree
and yours too Lawrence, if he do it. I fear me your brother in law Bull, is
like to be troubled with you both.


Laur. I know not what to say to him Nan, has plagned m^e already, I hope he
has done with me, and yet I heard say, he would have about at my Nine hoales,
but leaving him as an enemy of our trade, again to our disputation. I cannot
de^y Nan, but you have set down strange Presidents of women's preiuditial wits,
but yet though you be Crosbites, Foysts, and Nips, yet you are not good Lifts,
which is a great help to our faculty, to filche a boult of Satin or Ueluet.


Nan. Stay thee a word, I thought thou had spoken of R. B. of Long Lane and
his wife, take heed they be parlous folks and greatly acquainted with keepers
and Gaylers, therefore meddle not you with them, for I hear say, R. G. has
sworn in despite of the brasill staff, to tell such a foul Tale of him in
his black Book, that it will cost him a daung erous Joint.


Laur. Nan, Nan, let R. G. beware, for had not an ill fortune fallen to one of
R. B. his friends, he could take little harm.


Nan. Who is that Lawrence?


Laur. Nay I will not name him.


Nan. Why then I prythie what misfortune befell him?


Laur. Marry Nan, he was strangely washed alate by a French Barbar, and had all
the hair of his face miraculously shaven off by the Sithe of Gods vengeance,
in so much that some said he had that he had not, but as hap was, how soever
his hair fell off, it stood him in some stead when the brawle was alate, for
if he^ had not cast off his beard and so being unknown, it had cost him some
knockes, but it fell out to the best.


Nan. The more hard fortune that he had such ill hap, but hasty iournies
breed dangerous sweates, and the Phisi^ians call it the Ale Peria, yet omitting
all this, again to where you left.


Laur. You have almost brought me out of my matter, but I was talking about the
Lift, commending what a good quallitie it was, and how hurtful it was, seeing
we practice it in Mercers shops, with Haberdashers of small wares, Haberdashers
of Hattes and Cappes, amongst Merchant Tailors for Hoase and Doublets, and in
such places getting much gains by Lifting, when there is no good purchase
abroad by Foysting.


Nan. Suppose you are good at the lift, who be more cunning the^ we women, in
that we are more trusted, for they little suspect us, and we have as close
conueyance as you men, though you have Cloakes, we have skirts of gowns,
handbaskets, the crowns of our hattes, our plackardes, and for a need, false
bags under our smockes, wherein we can convey more closely then you.


Laur. I know not where to touch you, you are so witty in your answers, and
have so many starting hoales, but let me be pleasant with you a little, what
say you to priggin or horse stealing, I hope you never had experience in that
faculty.


Nan. Alas simple sot, yes and more shift to shun the gallows then you.


Laur. Why it is impossible.


Nan. In faith sir no, and for proof, I will put you down with a story of a
mad, merry, little, dapper, fine wench, who at Spilsby Fair had three horse
of her own or an other man's to sell, as she her husband and an other good
fellow, walked them up and down the fair, the owner came and apprehended them
all, and clapped them in prison, the Iaylor not keeping them close prisoners, but
letting them lie all in a Chamber, by her wit she so instructed them in a
formal tale, that she saved all their lives thus. Being brought the next
morrow after their apprehension, before the Justices, they examined the men how
they came by those horses, and they confessed they met her with them, but where
she had them they knew not, then was my pretty peate brought in, who being a
handsome Trul, blushed as if she had been full of grace, and being demanded
where she had the horses, made this answer, may it please your worships, this
man being my husband, playing the unthrift as many more have done, was absent
from me for a quarter of a year, which grieved me not a little, insomuch that
desirous to see him, and having intelligence he would be at Spilsby fair, I
went thither even for pure love of him on foot, and being within some ten
miles of the Town, I waxed passing weary and rested me often and grew very
faint, at last there came ryding by me a Seruingman in a blew coat, with three
horses tied one at another tail, which he led as I gest to sell at the fair,
the Seruingman seeing me so tired, took pity on me, and asked me if I would
ride on one of his (...) horses, for his own would not bear double, I thankt
him heartily, and at the next hill got up, and road till we came to a Town
within three miles of Spilsby, where the Seruingman alighted at a house, and
bad me ride on before and he would presently overtake me, well forward I road
half a mile, and looking behind me cauld see no body, so being alone, my
heart began to rise, and I to think on my husband, as I had rid a little
farther, looking down a lane, I saw two men coming lustily up as if they were
weary, and marking them earnestly, I saw one of them was my husband, which made
my heart as light as before it was sad, so staying for them, after a little
unkind greeting betwixt us, for I chid him for his unthriftiness, he asked me
where I had the horse, and I told him how courteously the Seruingman had used
me, why then says he, stay for him, nay quoth I, lets ride on, and get you
two up on the empty horses, for he will overtake us ere we come at the Town,
he rydes on a stout lusty young gelding, so forward we went, and looked often
behind us, but our Seruingman came not, at last we coming to Spilsby
alighted, and broake our fast, and tied our horses at the door, that if he
past by, seeing them, he might call in, after we had broake our fast,
thinking he had gone some other way, we went into the horse fair, and there
walked our horses up and down to meet with the Seruingman, not for the intent
to sell them. Now may it please your worship, whether he had stolen the horses
from this honest man or no, I know not, but alas, simply I brought them to the
horse fair, to let him that delivered me them have them again, for I hope
your worships does imagine, if I had stolen them as it is suspected, I would
never have brought them into so public a place to sell, yet if the law be
any way dangerous for the foolish deed because I know not the Seruingman, it
is, I must bide the punishment, and as guiltless as any here, and so making a
low courtsie she ended. The Justice holding up his hand and wondering at the
woman's wit that had cleared her husband and his friend, and saved her self
without compass of law. How like you of this Lawrence, cannot we wenches
prigge well.


Laur. By God Nan, I think I shall be feign to give you the bucklars.


Nan. Alas good Lawrence, thou art no Logitian, thou can not reason for thy
self, nor have no witty arguments to draw me to an exigent, and therefore
give me leave at large to reason for this supper, remember the subject of our
disputation, is this positive question, whether whores or thieves are most
preiuditiall to the Commonwealth, alas, you poor thieves do only steal and
pur loine from men, and the harm you do is to imbollish men's goods, and bring
them to poverty, this is the only end of men's theeuery, and the greatest
preiudidice that grows from robbing or filching, so much do we by our theft,
and more by our lechery, for what is the end of whoredom but consuming of
goods and beggary, and besides perpetual infamy, we bring young youths to
ruin and utter destruction, I pray you Lawrence whether had a Merchants son
having wealthy parents, better light upon a whore then a Cutpurse, the one
only taking his money, the other bringing him to utter confusion, for it the
Foyst light upon him or the Conny-catcher, he loses at the most some hundredth
pounds, but if he fall into the company of a whore, she flatters him, she
inucagles him, she bewitcheth him, that he spares neither goods nor lands
to content her, that is only in love with his coin, if he be married, he
forsakes his wife, leaves his children, despises his friends, only to
satisfy his lust with the love of a base whore, who when he has spent all
upon her and he brought to beggerie, beats him out like the Prodigal
child, and for a final reward, brings him if to the fairest end to beg, if
to the second, to the gallows, or at the last and worst, to the Pockes, or as
preiuditiall diseases. I pray you Lawrence when any of you come to your
confession at Tyborne, what is your last sermon that you make, that you were
brought to that wicked and shameful end by following of harlots, for to that
end do you steal to maintain whoores, and to concent their bad humars. Oh
Lawrence enter into your own thoughts, and think what the fair words of a
wanton willdo, what the smiles of a strumpet will ^riue a man to act, into what
ieopardie a man will thrust himself for her that he loves, although for his
sweet villainy, he be brought to loathsome leprosy, tush Lawrence they say
the Pox came from Naples, some from Spain, some from France, but whersoeuer
it first grew, it is so surely now rooted in England, that by S. ( Sith) it may
better be called A Morbus Anglicus then Gallicus, and I hope you will grant,
all these French favors grew from whoores, besides in my high loving or
rather creeping, I me an where meu and women do rob together, there always
the woman is most bloody, for she always urges unto death, and though the
men would only satisfy themselves with the parties coin, yet she ends her
theft in blood, murdering parties so deeply as she is malicious. I hope gentle
Lawrence you cannot contradict these reasons they ^ee so openly manifestly
probable. For mine own part, I hope you do not imagine but I have had some
friends besides poor George my husband, alas, he knows it, and is content
like an honest simple suffragan, to be corrinall with a member of other good
companions, and I have made many a good man, I mean a man that has a
household, for the love of me to go home and beat his poor wife, when God
wotte I mock him for the money he spent, and he had nothing for his pence,
but the waste beleauings of others beastly labors. Lawrence, Lawrence, if
Concubines could inueagle Solomon, if Dalilah could betraie Sampson, then
wonder not if we m^r^nice in our wickedness then a thousand such Dalilahs, can
seduce poor young Nouices to their utter destructions. Search the Gayles,
there you shall hear complaints of whoores, look into the Spit^les and
Hospitalles, there you shall see men diseased of the French Marbles, giving
instruction to others that are said to beware of whoores, be an Auditor or
ear witness at the death of any thief, and hi^^^^^ Testament is, Take heed
of a whore, I dare scarce speak of Bride well because my shoulders tremble at
the name of it, I have so often deserved it, yet look but in there, and you
shall hear poor men with their hands in their Piggen hoales cry, Oh fie
upon whoores, when Fouler gives them the terrible lash, examine beggars that
lie lame by the high way, and they say they came to that misery by whoores,
some threedbare citizens that from Merchants and other good trades, grow to
be base Infourmers and Knights of the Post, cry out when they dine with
Duke Humfrey. Oh what wickedness comes from whoores, Prentises that runs from
their masters, cries ou^ (...) whoores. Tush Lawrence, what enormities
proceeds more in the Commonwealth then from whooredome. But since it is almost
suppertime, and mirth is the friend to digestion, I mean a little to be
pleasant, I pray you how many badde profittes again grows from whoores,
Bridewell would have very few Tenants, the Hospital would want Patientes,
and the Surgians much work, the Apothecaries would have surphaling water and
Patato roots lie dead on their hands, the Paynters could not dispatche and
make away their Uermiglion, if tallowe faced whoores used it not for their
cheeks, how should sir John's Broades men do if we were not ^ why Lawrence
the Gally would be moord and the blewe ^oore so lean, that he would not be
man's meat, if we of the Trade were not to supply his wants, do you think in
conscience the Peacocke could burnish his fair tail, were it not the whore of
Babylon and such like, makes him lusty with crowns, no no, though the Talbot
has bitten some at the game, yet new fresh huntsmen shake the she crew out of
the cupples. What should I say more Lawrence, the Suberbes should have a great
miss of us, and Shordish would complain to dame Anne a Clear, if we of the
sisterhood should not uphold heriollitie, who is that Lawrence comes in to
hear our talk, Oh it is the boy Nan that tells us supper is ready, why then
Lawrence what say you to me^^ have I not proved that in foysting and nipping
we excel you, that there is none so great inconvenience in the Common wealth,
as grows from whores, first for the corrupting of youth, infecting of age, for
breeding of brawles, whereof ensues murder, insomuch that the rume of many men
comes from us, and the fall of ^^^ny youths of good hope, if they were not
seduced by us, do proclaim at Tyborne, that we be the means of their
misery, you men thieves touch the body and wealth, but we ruin the soul,
and endanger that which is more precious then the worlds treasure, you make
work only for the gallows, we both for the gallows and the devil, I and for
the Surgian too, that some lives like loathsome laizers, and die with the
French Marbles. Whereupon I conclude, that I have won the supper.


Laur. I confess it Nan, for thou have told me such wondrous villainies, as
I though never could have been in women, I mean of your profession, why you
are Crocodiles when you weep, Basilisks when you smile, Serpents when you
devise, and the devils cheifest broakers to bring the world to destruction. And
so Nanlets sit down to our meat and be merry.


THus Country men, you have heard the disputation between these two cousoning
companions, wherein I have shakte out the notable villainy of whores, although
mistress Nan this good Oratresse, has sworn to we are a long Hamborough
knife to stabbe me, and all the crew have protested my death, and to prove
they meant good earnest, they belegard me about in the Saint John's head within
Ludgate being at supper, there were some fourteen or fifteen of them met,
and thought to have made that the fatal night of my overthrow, but that the
courteous Citizens and Apprentises took my part, and so two or three of them
were carried to the Counter, although a Gentleman in my company was sore hurt.
I cannot deny but they begin to waste away about London, and Tyborne (since
the setting out of my book) has eaten up many of them, and I will plague them
to the extreamitie, let them do what they dare with their bilbowe blades, I
fear them not: and to give them their last adue, look shortly Countrymen for
a Phamphlet against them, called The black Book, containing four new Laws
never spoken of yet, The creeping Law of petty thieves, that rob about the
Suburbs. The lymitting Law, discoursing the orders of such as follow Judges,
in their circuites, and go about from Fair to Fair. The Iugging Law, wherein
I will set out the disorders at Nyneholes and Ryfling, how they are only for
the benefit of the Cutpurses. The stripping Law, wherein I will lay open the
lewd abuses of sundry Iaylors in England. Beside, you shall see there what
houses there be about the Suburbs and towns end, that are receyuers of Cut
purses stolen goods, Lifts, and such like. And lastly, look for a Bed-roll or
Catologue, of all the names of the Foystes, Nyps, Lifts, and Priggars, in and
about London: and although some say, I dare not do it, yet I will shortly set
it abroach, and whosoever I name or touch, if he think himself grieved, I
will answer him before the Honorable privy Counsel.

The conversion of an English Courtizan.
Since to discover my parentage, would double the grief of my living Parents,
and revive in them, the memory of my great amiss, and that my untoward fall,
would be a dishonor to the house from whence I came. Since to manifest ye place
of my birth, would be a blemish (through my beastly life so badly misledde) to
the Shyre where I was borne: since to discourse my name, might be holden a blot
in my kindreds browe, to have a sinew in their stock of so little grace. I
will conceal my parents, kin, and Country, and shroude my name with silence,
least envy might taunt others for my wantonness. Know therefore, I was borne
about threescore miles from London, of honest and welthy parents, who had many
children, but I their only daughter, and therefore the Jewel wherein they
most delighted, and more, the youngest of all, and therefore the more favored:
for being gotten in the wayning of my parents age, they doted on me above the
rest, and so set their hearts the more on fire. I was the fairest of all, and
yet not more beautiful then I was witty, in so much that being a pretty
Parrat, I had such quaint conceits, and witty words in my mouth, that the
neighbors said, I was too soon wise, to be long old. Would to God, either
the Proverb had been authentical, or their sayings prophecies, then had I by
death in my nonage, buried many blemishes that my riper years brought me to.
For the extreme love of my parents, was the very efficient cause of my follies,
resembling heerin the nature of the Ape, that ever kills that young one which
he loves most, with embracing it to ferue^tly. So my father and mother, but
she most of all, although he to much, so cockered me up in my wantonness, that
my wit grew to the worst, and I waxed upward with the ill weeds: what soever I
did, were it never so bad, might not be found fault withal, my Father would
smyle at it, and say, it was but the trick of a child, and my Mother allowed of
my unhappy parts, alluding to this profane and old proverb, an untoward
gyrle makes a good Woman.

But now I find, in sparing the rod, they hated the child, that over kind
fathers, make unruly daughters. Had they bent the wand while it had been
green, it would have been plyant, but I, ill grown in my years, am almost
remediles. The Hawke that is most perfect for the flight and will, seldom
proves hagarde, and children that are virtuously nurtured in youth, will be
honestly natured in age: ^le upon such as say, young Saints, old devils, it is
no doubt a deuillish and damnable saying, for what is not bent in the Cradle,
will hardly be bowed in the Sadle. My self am an instance, who after I grew to
be six years old, was set to School, where I profited so much, that I
writ and read excellently well, played upon the virginals, Lute and Cytron, and
could sing prick-song at the first sight: in so much, as by that time I was
twelve years old, I was holden for the most fair, and best qualitied young
girl in all that Country, but with this, bewailed of my wel-wishers, in that
my parents suffered me to be so wanton.

But they so tenderly affected me, and were so blinded with my excellent
quallities, that they had no insight into my ensuing follies. For I growing to
be thirteen year old, feeling the rain of liberty loose on mine own neck,
began with the wanton Heyfer, to aim at mine own will, and to measure content,
by the sweetness of mine own thoughts, in so much, that pride creeping on, I
began to prancke my self with the proudest, and to hold it in disdain,
that any in the Parish, should exceed me in bravery. As my apparel was
costly, so I grew to be licencious, and to delight to be looked on, so that I
haunted and frequented all feasts and weddings, and other places of merry
meetings, where, as I was gazed on of many, so I spared no glaunces to suruiew
all with a curious eye-fauour: I observed Ouids rule right: Spectatum veniunt,
veniunt spectentur vt ipse.

I went to see and be seen, and decked my self in the highest degree of
brau^rie, holding it a glory when I was waited on with many eyes, to make
censure of my birth. Beside, I was an ordinary dauncer, and grew in that
quality so famous, that I was noted as the chiefest thereat in all the Country,
yea, and to soothe me up in these follies, my Parents took a pride in my
dancing, which afterward proved my overthrow, and their heart breaking.

Thus as an unbridled Colte, I carelessly led forth my youth, and wantonly
spent the flower of my years, holding such Maidens as were modest, fools, and
such as were not as wilfully wanton as my self, puppies, ill brought up and
without manners, growing on in years, as tide nor time tarrieth no man, I
began to wax passion-proud, and to think her not worthy to live, y^ was not a
little in love, that as diverse young men began to favor me for my beauty, so
I began to censure of some of them partially, and to delight in the multitude
of many wooers, being ready to fall from the Tree, before I was come to the
perfection of a blossom, which an Uncle of mine seeing, who was my Mothers
brother, as careful of my welfare as nie to me in kin, finding fit
opportunity to talk with me, gave me this wholesome exhortation.

A watchword to wanton Maidens.
COzen, I see the fairest Hawke has oftentimes the sickkest feathers, that ye
hotest day has the most sharpest thunders, the brightest sun, ^he most
sudden shower, and the youngest Uirgins, the most dangerous fortunes, I
speak as a kinsman, and wish as a friend, the blossom of a Maidens youth,
(such as your self) has attending upon it many frosts to nyp it, and many
cares to consume it, so that if it be not carefully looked unto, it will perrish
before it come to any perfection.

A Uirgins honor, consists not only in the gyfts of Nature, as to be fair
and beautiful, though they be favors that grace Maidens much, for as they be
glistering, so they be momentary, ready to be worn with every winters blast,
and parched with every Summers sun, there is no face so fair, but the least
Moale, the slenderest skarre, the smallest brunt of sickness, will quickly
blemishe.

Beauty Cozen, as it florisheth in youth, so it fades in age, it is but a
folly that feeds man's eye, a painting that Nature lendes for a time, and men
allow on for a while, in so much, that such as only aim at your fair
looks, tie but their loves to an apprentishippe of beauty, which broken either
with cares, misfortune, or years, their destnies are at liberty, and they
begin to loathe you, and like of others.

Forma bonum fragile est quantumque accedit ad Annos,
Fit minor et spacio Carpitur ipsa suo.
Then Cousin, stand not too much on such a slippery glory, that is as brittle
as glass, be not proud of beauties painting, that hatched by time,
perrisheth in short time, neither are Women the more admirable of wise men for
their gay apparel, though fools are fed with gards, for a woman's ornaments,
is the excellency of her virtues: and her inward good qualities, are of far
more worth then her outward braueries, imbroydred hair, bracelets, silks:
rich attire, and such trash, do rather bring the name of a young Maid in
question, then add to her same any title of honor.

The Vestall Uirgins were not reverenced of the Senators for their curious
clothing, but for their chastity. Cornelia was not famozed for ornaments of
gold, but for excellent virtues. Superfluity in apparel, shows rather
lightness of mind, then it imports any other inward good quality: and men
judge of Maidens rareness, by the modesty of their raiment, holding it rather
garish then glorious, to be trickt up in superstuous and exceeding braueries.
Neither Cozen is it seemly for Maids, to iet abroad, or to frequent too much
company.

For she that is looked on by many, cannot choose but be hardly spoken of by
some, for report has a blister on her tongue, and Maidens actions are narrowly
measured. Therefore would not the ancient Romans, suffer their Daughters,
to go any further then their Mothers looks guided them. And therefore Diana
is painted with a Tortuse under her feet, meaning, that a Maid should not be
a stragler, but like the Snayle, carry her house on her head; and keep at
home at her work, so to keep her name without blemish, and her virtues from
the slander of envy.

A maid that hazards herself in much company, may venture the freedom of her
heart by the folly of her eye, for so long the pot goes to the water, that it
comes broken home, and such as look much must needs like at last: the Fly
dallyes with a flame, but at length she burns, flax and fire put together
will kindle, a maid in company of young men shall be constrained to listen to
the wanton allurements of many cunning speeches: if she has not either with
Ulysses tasted of Moly, or stopped her ears warily, she may either be entised
with the Sirens, or enchanted by Cyrces, youth is apt to yield to sweet
persuasions, and therefore cozen think nothing more dangerous than to gad
abr^ade, neither cozen do I allow this wanton dancing in young virgins, it is
more comendation for them to moderate their manners, than to measure their
feet, and better to hear nothing than to listen unto vnreuerent Music:
Silence is a precious Jewel, and nothing so much worth as a couetenaunce full
of chastity, light behavior is a sign of lewd thoughts, and men will say,
there goes a wanton that will not want one, if a place and person were
agreeable to her desires: if a maidens honor be blemished, or her honesty called
in question, she is half deflowred, and therefore had maidens need to be
chary, least envy report them for unchaste. Cozen I speak this generally, which
if you apply particularly to your self, you shall find in time my words were
well said.

I gave him slender thanks, but with such a frump that he perceived how light
I made of his counsel: which he perceiving, shakt his head, and with tears
in his eyes departed. But I whom wanton desires had drawn in delight, still
presumde in my former follies, and gave my self either to gad abroad, or else
at home to read dissolute Pamphlets, which bred in me many ill affected
wishes, so that I gave leave to love and lust to enter into the center of my
heart, where they harbored till they wrought my final and fatal prejudice.

Thus leading my life loosely, and being soothed up with the applause of my too
kind and loving parents, I had many of every degree that made love unto me, as
well for my beauty, as for the hope of wealth that my father would bestow upon
me: sundry suitors I had, and I allowed of all, though I particularly granted
love to none, yielding them friendly favors, as being proud I had more wooers
then any maid in the parish beside: amongst the rest there was a welthy Farmer
that wished me well, a man of some forty years of age, one too worthy for one
of so little worth as my self, and him my father, mother, and other friends,
would have had me match my self withal: but I that had had the raynes of
liberty too long in mine own hands, refused him and would not be ruled by
their persuasions, and though my mother with tears entreated me to consider
of mine own estate, and how well I sped if I wedded with him, yet carelessly I
despised her counsel, and flatly made answer that I would none of him:
which though it pinched my Parents at the quick, yet rather than they would
displease me, they left me^ in mine own liberty to love. Many there were beside
him, men's sons of no mean worth, that were wooers unto me, but in vain,
either my fortune or destenie dro^e me to a worser end, for I re^used them
all, and with the Beetle, refusing to light on the sweetest flowers all day,
nestled at night in a Cowsheard.

It fortuned that as many sought to win me, so amongst the rest there was an od
companion that dwelt with a Gentleman hard by, a fellow of small reputation,
and of no living, neither had he any excellent quallities but thrumming on the
gittron: but of pleasant disposition he was, and could gawll out many quaint
and ribadrous Iigges and songs, and so was favored of the ^oolish sect for his
foppery. This shifting companion, suitable to my self in vanity, would oft^
times be jesting with me, and I so long dallying with him, that I began
deeply (oh let me blush at this confession) to fall in love with him, and so
construed of all his actions, that I consented to mine own overthrow: for as
smoke will hardly be concealed, so love will not be long smothred, but will
bewray her own secrets, which was manifest in me, who in my sporting with
him, so bewrayed my affection, that he spying I favored him, began to strike
when the iron was hot, and to take opportunity by the forehead, and one day
finding me in a merry vain, began to question with me of love, which although
at the first I slenderly denied him, yet at last I granted, so that not only
I agreed to plight him my faith, but that night meeting to have farther talk,
I lasciuiously consented that he cropped the flower of my virginity. When thus I
was spoiled by such a base companion, I gave my self to content his humor, and
to satisfy the sweet of mine own wanton desires. Oh hear let me breath and
with tears vewaile the beginning of my miseries, and to exclayme against the
folly of my Parents, who by too much favoring me in my vanity in my tender
youth, laid the first plot of my ensuing repentance: Had they with due
correction chastised my wantonness, and suppressed my foolish will with their
grave advise, they had made me more virtuous and themselves less sorrowful.
A fathers frown is a bridle to the child, and a mothers check is a stay to
the stubhorne daughter. Oh had my parents in ouerlouing me not hated me, I had
not at this time cause to complain. Oh had my father regarded the saying of
the wise man, I had not been thus woe begone.

If thy daughter be not shamefast hold her straightly, least she abuse her
self through overmuch liberty.

Take heed of her that has an unshamefast eye, and marvel not if she
trespass against thee.

The daughter makes the father to watch secretly, and the carfulness he has
for her, takes away his sleep.

In her virginity, least she should be deflowred in her fathers house.

If therefore thy daughter be unshamefast in her youth, keep her straightly,
least she cause thine enemies to laugh thee to scorn, and make thee a common
talk in the City, and defame thee among the people, and bring thee to
public shame.

Had my parents with care considered of this holy counsel, and leuelied my
life by the lodestone of virtue: had they looked narrowly into the faults of
my youth, and bent the tree while it was a wand, and taught the hound while he
was a puppie, this blemish had never befortuned me^ nor so great dishonor had
not befallen them. Then by my example, let all Parents take head, least in
^ouing their children too tenderly, they (...) them utterly, least in manuring
the ground too much with the unskillful husbandman, it were too fat, and bring
forth more wee^s then flowers, least cookering their children under their
wings without correction, they make them careless, and bring them to
destruction, as their ^^rture is in youth, so will their nature grow in age. If
the Palm tree be suppressed while it is a sien, it will contrary to nature be
crooked when it is a Tree.

Quo se^^el est imbutarecens seruabit odoren test a di^. If then virtue be to
be ingrafted in youth. least they prove obstiuate in age, reform your
children betimes both with correction and counsel, so shall you that are
parents glory in the honor of their good endeavors, but leaving this
digression, again to the looseness of mine own life, who now having lost the
glory of my youth, and suffered such a base slave to possess it, which many
men of worth had desired to enjoy, I waxed hold in sin and grew shameless, in
so much he could not desire so much as I did grant, whereupon, seeing he durst
not reveal it to my father to demand me in marriage, he resolved to carry me
away secretly, and therefore wished me to provide for my self, and to furnish
me every way both with money and apparel, hoping as he said, that after we
were departed, and my father saw we were married, and that no means was to
amend it, he would give his free consent, and use us as kindly, and deal with
us as liberally as if we had matched with his good will. I that was apt to
anyil, agreed to this, and so wrought the matter, that he carried me away
into a strange place, and then using me a while as his wife, when our money
began to wax low, he resolved secretly to go into the Country where my father
dwelt, to hear not only how my father took my departure, but what hope we had
of his ensuing favor, although I was loath to be left alone in a strange
place, yet I was willing to hear from my friends, who no doubt conceived much
heart sorrow for my unhappy fortunes, so that I parted with a few tears, and
enjoined him, to make all the have he might to return, he being gone, as the
Eagles always resort where the carrion is, so the brute being spread abroad of
my beauty, and that at such an Inn lay such a fatre young Gentlewoman, there
resorted thither many brave youthful Gentlemen and cutting companions, that
tickled with lust, aimed at the possession of my favor, and by sundry means
sought to have a sight of me, which I easily granted to all, as a woman that
counted it a glory to be wondered at by many men's eyes, insomuch that coming
amongst them, I set their hearts more and more on fire, that there rose diverse
brawles who should be most in my company, being thus haunted by such a troop
of lusty Ruffiers, I began to find mine own folly, that had placst my
first affection so losely, and therefore began as deeply to loath him that
was departed, as erst I likte him, when he was present, vowing in my self
though he had the spoil of my virginity, yet never after should he triumph
in the possession of my favor, and therefore began I to affection these new
come guests, and one above the rest, who was a brave young Gentleman, and no
less addicted unto me, then I devoted unto him, for daily he courted me
with amorous Sonnets and curious proud letters, and sent me Jewels, and all
that I might grace him with the name of my servant, I returned him as loving
^nes at last, and so contented his lusting desire, that secretly and unknown
to all the rest, I made him sundry nights my bedfellow, where I so bewitched him
with sweet words, that the men began deeply to doat upon me, insomuch that
selling some portion of land that he had, he put it into ready money, and
providing Horse and all things convenient, carried me secretly away, almost as
far as the Bathe. This was my second choice and my second shame, thus I went
forward in wickedness and delighted in change, having left mine old love to
look after some other mate more fit for her purpose, how he took my
departure when he returned I little cared, for now I had my content, a
Gentleman, young, lusty, and indned with good quallities, and one that loved
me more tenderly then himself, thus lived this new entertained friend and I
together unmarried, yet as man and wife for a while, so lovingly as was to his
content and my credit, but as the Tygre though for a while she hide her
clawee, yet at last she will reveal her cruelty, and as the Agnus Castus
leaf when it looks most dry, is then most full of moisture, so women's
wantonness is not quallified by their wariness, nor do their chariness for
a month, warrant their chastity for ever, which I proved true, for my
supposed husband being every way a man of worth could not so covertly hide
himself in the country, though a stranger, but that he fell in acquaintance
with many brave Gentlemen whom he brought home to his lodging, not only to
honor them with his liberal courtesy, but also to see me being proud of
any man of worth, applawded my beauty. Alas poor Gentleman, too much
bewitched by the wiliness of a woman, had he deemed my heart to be a harbor
for every new desire, or mine eye a suter to every new face, he would not
have been so fond as to have brought his companions into my company, but
rather would have mewed me up as a He^ne, to have kept that several to
himself by force, which he could not retain by kindness, but the houest
minded Nouice little suspected my change, although I God wot placed my
delight, in nothing more then the desire of new choice, which fell out thus.
Amongst the rest of the Gentlemen that kept him company, there was one that was
his most familiar, and he reposed more trust and confidence in him then in all
the rest, this Gentleman began to be deeply inamoured of me, and showed it
by many signs which I easily perceived, and I whose ear was pliant to every
sweet word, and who so allowed of all that were bewtifull, affected him no
less, so that love prevailing above friendship, he broake the matter with
me, and made not many suites in vain before he obtained his purpose, for he
had what he wished, and I had what contented me, I will not confess that any
of the rest had some sildome favors, but this Gentleman was my second self;
and I loved him more for the time at the heel, then the other at the heart, so
that though the other youth bear the charges and was sir pay for all, yet this
new friend was he that was master of my affections, which kindness betwixt
us, was so unwisely cloaked, that in short time it was manifest to all our
familiars which made my supposed husband to sigh and others to smile, but he
that was hit with the horn was pincht at the heart, yet so extreme was the
affection he bare to me, that he had rather conceal his grief, then any way
make me discontent, so that he smoothered his sorrow with patience, and brookt
the miurie with silence, till our loves grew so broad before, that it was a
wonder to the world, whereupon one day at dinner, I being very pleasant with
his chosen friend and my choice lover, I know not how, but either by fortune,
or it may be some set match, there was by a gentleman, there present a question
popt in about women's passions, and their mutabilitie in affection, so that the
controversy was defended, pro and contra, which arguments, whether a woman
might have a second friend or no, at last it was concluded, that love and
Lordshippe brooks no fellowship, and therefore none so base minded to bear
ariuall. Hereupon arose a question about friends that were put in trust, how
it was a high point of treason, for one to betray an other, especially in love,
in so much that one gentleman at the board, protested by a solemn oath, that
if any friend of his made privy and favored witly the sight of his mistress
whom he loved, whether it were his wife or no, should secretly seek to
incroach into his room and offer him that dishonor to partake his love, he
would not use any other revenge, but at the next greeting stabbe him with his
Poynado, though he were coudemned to death for the action. All this fitted for
the humor of my supposed husband, and struck both me and my friend into a
quandarie, but I scornfully iested at it, when as my husband taking the ball
before it fell to the ground, began to make a long discourse what faithless
friends they were that would fail in love, especially where a resolved trust
of the party beloved was committed unto them, and hereupon to make the matter
more credulous, and to quip my folly, and to taunt the baseness of his friends
mind, that so he might with courtesy both warn us of our wantonness, and
^eclaime us from ill, he promised to tell a pleasant story performed as he
said not long since in England, and it was to this effect.

A pleasant discourse, how a wise wanton by her husbands gentle warning, became
to be a modest Matron.
THere was a Gentleman (to give him his due) an Esquire here in England, that
was married to a young Gentlewoman, fair and of a modest behavior, virtuous
in her looks, how soever she was in her thoughts, and one that every veay with
her dutiful endeavor and outward appearance of honesty, did breed her husbands
content, insomuch that the Gentleman so deeply affected her, as he counted al
those hours ill spent which he past not away in her company, besotting so
himself in the beauty of his wife, that his only care was to have her every
way delighted, living thus pleasantly together, he had one spetiall friend
amongst the rest, whom he so dearly affected, as ever Damon did his Pythias,
Pliades his Orestes, or Tytus his Gisippus, he unfolded all his secrets in his
bosom, and what passion he had in his mind that either ioyed him or
perplexed him, he revealed unto his friend, and directed his actious according
to the sequel of his counsels so that they were two bodies and oue soul.
This Gentleman for all the iuward favor shown him by his faithful friend,
could not so withstand the force ^f fancy, but he grew enamoured of his
friends wife, whom he courted with many sweet words and ^aire pr^nises, chorms
that are able to inchant almost the chastest ears, and so subtly couched his
arguments, discovered such love in his eyes, and such sorrow in his looks,
that despair seemed to sit in his face, and swo^e, that if she granted not
him Le don du merci, the end of a lovers (...) would present his heart as a
Tragic sacrifice to the sight of his (...) mistress, the Gentlewoman waxing
pitiful, as women are (...) ^^^ted and are loath Gentlemen should die for love,
after a few excuses (...) him dub her husband knight of the forked order, and
so to satisfy his humor, made for feyt of her own honor. Thus these two
lovers continued by a great space in such plesures as unchaste wantons count
their felicity, having continually fit opportunity to exercise their wi^^^
purpose, since the gentleman himself did give them free liberty to lo^^ neither
suspecting his wife, or suspecting his friend, at last, as such traytrous
abuses will burst forth, it fell so out, that a ^^yd who had been an old
servant in the house, began to grow suspicious, that there was too much
familiarity between her mistress and her masters friend, and upon this
watched them diverse times so narrowly, that at last she sound them more priuiate
then either agreed with her masters honor, or her own honesty, and thereupon
revealed it one day unto her master, he little credulous of the light
behavior of his wife, blamed the maid and bad her take heed, least she sought
to blemish her virtues with slander, whom he loved more tenderly then his
own life, the maid replied, that she spoke not of envy to him, but of mere
love she hear unto him, and the rather that he might shadow such a fault in
time, and by some means prevent it, least if others should note it as well as
she, his wives good name and his friends should be called in question, at these
wise words spoken by so base a drug as his maid, the Gentleman waxed astonished
and listened to her discourse, wishing her to discover how she knew or was so
privy to the folly of her mistress, or by what means he might have assured
proof of it, she told him that to her, her own eyes were witnesses, for
she saw them unlawfully together, and please it you sir quoth she, to feign
your self to go from home, and then in the backhouse to keep you secret, I
will let you see as much as I have manifested unto you, upon this the master
agreed, and warnd his maid not so much as to make it known to any of her
fellows. Within a day or two after, the Gentleman said, he would go a
huntiug and fo rise very early, and causing his men to couple up his Honndes,
left his wife in bed and went abroad, as soon as he was gone a mile from the
house, he commanded his men to ride before and to start the Hare and follow the
chase, and we will come fair and softly after, they obeying their masters
charge, went their ways, and he returned by a backway to his house, and went
secretly to the place where his maid and he had appointed. In the mean time,
the mistress thinking her husband safe with his Hounds, sent for he^ friend
to her bed chamber, by a trusty servant of hers, in whom she assured that was
a secret Pander in such affairs, and the Gent^eman was not stacke to come, but
making all the haste he could, came and went into the chamber, asking for the
Master of the house very familiarly, the old maid noting all this, as soon as
she knew them together, went and called her master and carried him up by a
secret pair of stairs to her mistress chamber door, where peeping in at a
place that the maid before had made for the purpose, he saw more then he looked
for, and so much as pincht him at the very heart, causing him to accuse his
wife for a strumpet and his friend for a traitor, yet for all this, valuing his
own honor more then their dishonestie, thinking if he should make an uproar,
he should but aim at his own discredit, and cause himself to be a laughing
game to his enemies, he concealed his sorrow with silence, and taking the maid
apart, charged her to keep all secret, whatsoever she had seen, even as she
esteemed of her own life, for if she did bewray it to any, he himself would
with his Sword make an end of her days, and with that putting his hand in
his sleeue, gave the poor maid six Angels to buy her a new gown, the wench
glad of this gift, swore solemnly to tread it under foot, and since it pleased
him to conseale it, never to reveal it as long as she lived, upon this they
parted, she to her drudgery, and he to the field to his men, where after he
had killed the Hare, he returned home, and finding his friend in the Garden,
that in his absence had been grafting horns in the Chunnies, and entertained
him with his woonted familiarity, and showed no bad countenance to his wife,
but dissembled al his thoughts to the full. As Soon as dinner was done, and
that he was gotten solitary by himself, he began to determine of revenge,
but not as every man would have done, how to have brought his wife to shame,
and her love to confusion, but he busied his brains how he might reserve his
honor inuiolate, reclaim his wife, and keep his friend, meditating a long
time how he might bring all this to pass, at last a humor fell into his head,
how cunningly to compass all three and therefore he went and got him a
certain slips, which are counterfeyt pieces of money being brass, and covered
over with silver, which the common people call slips, having furnished himself
with these, he put them in his purse, and at night went to bed as he was wont
to do, yet not using the kind familiarity that he accustomed, notwithstanding
he abstained not from the use of her body, but knew his wife as before times,
and every time he committed the act with her, he laid the next morning in the
window a slip, where he was sure she might find it, and so many times as it
pleased him to be carnally pleasant with his wife, so many slips he still laid
down upon her cushnet. This he used for the space of a fortnight, till at last,
his wife finding every day a slip, or sometime more or less, wondered how they
came there, and examining her waiting maids, none of them could tell her any
thing touching them, whereupon she thought to question with her husband about
it, but being out of her remembrance, the next morning as he and she lay
dallying in bed, it came into her mind, and she asked her husband if he laid
those slippes on her cushnet, that she of late found there, having never seen
any before. I marry did I quoth he, and I have laid them there upon special
reason, and it is this. Ever since I have been married to thee, I have deemed
thee honest, and therefore used and honored thee as my wife, parting coequall
favors betwixt us as true loves, but alate finding the contrary, and with
these eyes seeing thee play the whore with my friend in whom I did repose all
my trust, I sought not as many would have done, to have revenged in blood, but
for the safety of mine own honor, which otherwise would have been blemished by
thy dishonestie, I have bin silent, and have neither wronged my quandom friend,
nor abused thee, but still do hold bed with thee, that the world shall not
suspect any thing, and to quench the desire of lust I do use thy body, but not
so lovingly as I would a wife, but carelessly as I would a strumpet, and
therefore even as to a whore, so I give thee hyer, which is for every time a
slip, a counterfect coin, which is good enough for such a slipperie wanton,
that will wrong her husband that loved her so tenderly, and thus will I use thee
for the safety of mine own honor, til I have assured proof that thou
beco^^est honest, and thus with tears in his eyes and his heart ready to
burst with sighs, he was silent, when his wife stricken with remorse of
conscience, leapi^^ out of her bed in her smock, humbly confessing all,
craved pardon promising if he should pardon this offense which was new begun in
(...), she would become anew reformed woman, and never after so much as in
thought, give him any occasion of suspicion or jealousy, the patient husband
not willing to urge his wife, took her at her word, and told her that when he
found her so reclaimed, he would as before he had done, use her lovingly and as
his wife, but till he was so persuaded of her honesty, he would pay her still
^lips for his pleasure, charging her not to reveal any thing to his friend, or
to make it known to him that he was privy to their loves. Thus the debate
ended, I guess in some kind greeting, and the Gentleman went abroad to see his
pastures, leaving his wife in bed full of sorrow and almost renting her heart
asunder with sighs, as soon as he was walked abroad, the Gentleman his friend
came to the house and asked for the goodman, the pander that was privy to all
their practices, said, that his master was gone abroad to see his pastures,
but his mistress was in bed, why then says he, I will go and raise her up, so
coming into the chamber and kissing her, meaning as he was wont to have used
other accustomed dalliance, she desired him to abstain with broken sighs and
her eyes full of tears, he wondering what should make her thus discontent,
asked her what was the cause of her sorrow, protesting with a solemn oath, that
if any had done her injury, he would revenge it, were it with hazard of his
life, she then told him scarce being able to speak for weeping, that she had
a suit to move him in, which if he granted unto her, she would hold him in
love and affection without change next her husband forever, he promised to do
whatsoever it were, then says she, swear upon a Bible you will do it without
exception, with that he took a Bible that lay in the window and swore, that
whatsoever she requested him to do, were it to the loss of his life, he would
without exception perform it. Then she holding down her head and blushing,
began thus. I need not quoth she make manifest how grossly and grievously you
and I have both offended God, and wronged the honest Gentleman my husband and
your friend, he putting a special trust in us both, and assuring such earnest
affiance in your unfeigned friendship, that he even commits me his wife, his
love, his second life, into your bosom, this love have (...) constancy, in
playing the harlot, that says that he (...) you returned with treachery and
falsehood, in abusing mine honesty and his honor, now a remorse of conscience
touches me for my sins, that I heartily repent, and vow ever hereafter to
live only to my husband, and therefore my suit is to you, that from
henceforth you shall never so much as motion any dishonest question unto me,
nor seek any unlawful pleasure or conuersing at my hands this is my suit,
and hereunto I have sworn you, which oath if you observe as a faithful
gentleman, I will conceal from my husband what is past, and rest in honest
sort your faithful friend for ever, at this she burst a fresh into tears,
and uttered such sighs, that he thought for very grief her heart would have
claue asunder. The gentleman astonished at this strange Metamorphesis of his
mistress, sat a good while in a maze, and at last taking her by the hand, made
this reply, so God help me fair sweeting, I am glad of this motion, and
wondrous joyful that God has put such honest thoughts into your mind, and
has made you the means to reclaim me from my folly, I feel no less remorse
then you do, in wronging so honest a friend as your husband, but this is the
frailnesse of man, and therefore to make amends, I protest a new, never
hereafter so much as in thought, as to motion you of dishonestie, only I crave
you be silent, she promised that and so they ended. And so for that time they
parted, at noone the gentleman came home and cheerfully saluted his wife and
asked if dinner were ready, and sent for his friend, using him wonderfully
familiarly, giving him no occasion of mistrust, and so pleasantly they past
away the day together, at night when his wife and he went to bed, she told him
all, what had past between her and his friend, and how she had bound him with
an oath, and that he voluntarily of himself swore, as much being heartily sorry
that he had so deeply offended so kind a friend, the gentleman commended her
wit, and found her afterward a reclaimed woman, she living so honestly that
she never gave him any occasion of mistrust. Thus the wise gentleman reclaimed
with silence a wanton wife, and retained an assured friend.

At this pleasant Tale all the board was at a mutiny, and they said the
gentleman did passing wisely that wrought so cunningly for the safety of his
own honor, but highly exclaiming against such a friend as would to his friend
offer such villainy, all condemning her that would be false to so loving a
husband. Thus they did diversely descant and past away dinner, but this Tale
wrought little effect in me, for as one past grace, I delighted in change, but
the gentleman that was his familiar and my Paramour, was so touched, that never
after he would touch me dishonestly, but reclaimed himself, abstained from me
and became true to his friend, I wondering that according to his woonted
custom, he did not seek my company, he and I being one day in the chamber
alone, and he in his dumpes, I began to dally with him, and to ask him why he
was so strange, and used not his accustomed favors to me. He solemnly made
answer, that though he had played the fool in setting his fancy upon an other
man's wife, and in wronging his friend, yet his conscience was now touched with
remorse, and ever since he heard the Tale before rehearsed, he had vowed in
himself never to do my husband the like wrong again: my husband quoth I, he
is none of mine, he has brought me from my friends and keeps me here
unmarried, and therefore am I as free for you as for him, and thus began to
grow clamorous, because I was debard of my lust, the gentleman seeing me
shameless, wished me to be silent, and said, although you be but his friend,
yet he hold you as dear as his wife, and therefore I will not abuse him,
neither would I wish you to be familiar with any other, seeing you have a
friend that loves you so tenderly, much good counsel he gave me, but all in
vain, for I scorned it, and began to hate him, and resolved both to be rid
of him and my supposed husband, for falling in an other familiar of my
husbands, I so inueagled him with sweet words, that I caused him to make a
piece of money to steal me away, and so carry me to London, where I had not
lived long with him, ere he seeing my light behavior, left me to the world,
and to shift for my self. Here by my example may you note the inconstant life
of Courtezens and common harlots, who after they have lost their honesty, care
not who grow into their favor, nor what villainy they commit, they fancy all as
long as crowns last, and only aim at pleasure and ease, they cleave like
Caterpillars to the tree, and consume the fruit where they fall, they be
Vultures that pray on men alive, and like the Serpent sting the bosom wherein
they are nourished. I may best discourse their nature, because I was one of
their profession, but now being metamorphosed, I hold it meritorious for me
to warn women from being such wantons, and to give a caveat to men, least they
addict themselves to such straggling strumpettes, as love none, though they like
all, but affectionate only for profit, and when he has spent all, they beat
him out of doors with the prodigal child, but stopping here, till occasion
serve me fitter to discover the manner of Courtizins, to my self, who now
being brought to London, and left here at randon, was not such a housedoue
while any friend stated with me, but that I had visit some houses in London,
that could harbor as honest a woman as my self, when as therefore I was left
to my self, I removed my lodging, and gat me into one of those houses of good
hospitality whereunto persons resort, commonly called a Trugging house, or to
be plain, a whorse house, where I gave my self to entertain al companions,
sitting or standing at the door like a staule, to allure or draw in wanton
passengers, refusing none that would with his pursepurchase me to be his, to
satisfy the disordinate desire of his filthy lust, now I began not to respect
parsonage, good qualities, to the gracious favor of the man, when eye had no
respect of person, for the oldest lecher was as welcome as the yangest lover, so
he brought meat in his mouth, otherwise I pronounce against him.

Si nihil attuleris ibis homere for as. I waxed thus in this hell of
voluptuousnes, daily worse and worse, yet having as they term it, a respect to
the maine chance as near as I could to avoid diseases, and to keep my self
brave in apparel, although I pay^ a kind of tribute to the Bawd, according as
the number and benefit of my companions did exceed, but never could I be
brought to be a pickpocket or theeuish, by any of their persuasions, although I
wanted daily no instructions to allure me to that villainy, for I think nature
had wrought in me a contrary humor, otherwise my bad nourture and conuersing
with such bad company, had brought me to it, mary in all their vices I carried
a brazen face and was shameless, for what Ruffian was there in London, that
would utter mor edesperate oaths then I in mine anger, what to spet, quaffe, or
carouse more diuellishly or rather damnable then my self, and for beastly
communication, Messalyna of Rome might have bin waiting maid, besides, I grew
so grafted in sin, that Consueto peccandit ollebat sensum peccati, Custom of
sin, took away the feeling of the sin, for I so accustomably use my self to
all kind of vice, that I accounted swearing no sin, whordome, why I smile at
that, and could profanely say, that it was a sin which God laughed at,
gluttony I held good fellowship, and wrath honor and resolution, I despised
God, nay in my conscience I might easily have been persuaded there was no God,
I contemned the preachers, and when any wished me to reform my life, I ^ad
away with the Puritan, and if any young woman refused to be as vicious every
way as my self, I would then say, gip fine soul, a young Saint will prove an
old devil; I never would go to the Church and Sermons, I utterly refused,
holding them as needles Tales told in a Pulpit, I would not ^end mine ears to
the hearing of any good discourse. but still delighted in iangling Ditties of
ryhaudrie, thus to the grief of my friends, hazard of my soul, and consuming
of my body, I spent a year or two in this base and bad kind of life, subject
to the whistle of every desperate Ruffian, till on a time, there resorted to
our house a Cloathier, a propper young man, who by fortune, coming first to
drink, espying me, asked me if I would drink with him, there needed no
great entreaty, for as then I wanted company, and so clapped me down by him,
and began very pleasantly then to welcome him, the man being of himself
modest and honest, noted my personage, and iuditially reasoned of my
strumpetlike behavior, and inwardly as after he reported unto me, grieved
that so foul properties were hidden in so good a proportion, and that such
rare wit and excellent beauty, was blemished with whoredoms base deformity, in
so much that he began to think well of me, and to wish that I were as honest
as I was bewtifull. Again, see how God wrought for my conversion, since I gave
my self to my loose kind of life, I never liked any so well as him, inso much
that I began to judge of every part, and me thought he was the properest man
that ever I saw, thus we sat both amorous of other, I lasciuiously, and he
honestly, at last he questioned with me what country woman I was, and why being
so proper a woman, I would beseem to dwell or lie in a base Alehouse, especially
in one that had a bad name, I warrant you he wanted no kna^ish reply to ^it
him, for I told him the house was as honest as his mothers, marry if there
were in it a good wench or two, that would pleasure their friends at a need, A
guess by his n^ase what porredge he loved, and that he hated none such, well,
seeing me in that voice he said little, but shaked his head, paid for the
beer and went his way, only taking his leave of me with a kiss, which me
thought was the sweetest that ever was given me, as soon as he was gone, I
began to think what a handsome man he was, and wished that he would come and
take a nights lodging with me, sitting in a dump to think of the quaint^es of
his personage, til other compan^^^s came in, that shakte me out of that
melancholy, but as soon again as I was secret to my self, he came into my
remembrance, passing over thus a day or two, this Cloathier came again to our
house, whose sight cheared me up, for that spying him out at a Casement, I
came down the stairs and met him at the door, and heartily welcomed him, and
asked him if he would drink, I come for that purpose says he, but I will
drink no more below but in a Chamber, marry sir quoth I you shall and so
brought him into the fairest room, in their sitting there together drinking,
at last the Cl^athier fell to kissing and other dalliance, wherein he found me
not coy, at last told me that he would willingly have his pleasure of me, but
the room was too lightsome, for of all things in the world, he cou^^ not in
such actions away with a light Chamber, I consented unto him, and brought him
into a room more dark, but still he said it was too light, then I carried
him into a farther Chamber, where drawing a buckeram cuttain before the window,
and closing the curtains of the bed, I asked him smiling, if that were close
enough, no sweet love says he, the curtain is thin and not broad enough for
the window, peradu^^^^^^ some watch(...) eye may epsy us, my hartmisdoubts,
and my credit is my life, good love if thou have a more close room then this,
bring me to (...), why then quoth I follow me, and with that I brought him into
a back loft, where stood a little bed only appointed to lodge suspicious
persons, so dark that at noone days it was impossible for any man to see his
own hands, how now sir quoth I, is not this dark enough, he sitting him down
on the bed side, fetched a deep sigh, and said indifferent, so, so, but there is
a glimpse of light in at the tyles, some body may by fortune see us, in faith
(...) quoth I, none but God, God says he, why can God see us here, good sir
quoth I, why I hope you are not so simple, but Gods eyes are so clear, and
penetrating, that they can pierce through walls of brass, and that were we
enclosed never so secretly, yet we are manifestly seen to him, and alas quoth
he sweet love, if God see us shall we not be more ashamed to do^ such a filthy
act before him then before men, I am sure thou art not so shameless but thou
woldst blush and be afraid to have the meanest commoner in London see thee in
the actio^ of thy filthy lust, and do thou not shame more to have God, the
maker of all things see thee, who reuengeth sin with death, he whose eyes are
clearer then the Sun, who is the searcher of the heart, and holds vengeance
in his hands to punish sinners. Consider sweet love, that if man and wife
would be ashamed to have any of their friends see them in the act of
generation, or performing the rightes of marriage which is lawful, and allowed
before God, yet for modesty do it in the most covert they may, then how
impudent or graceless should we be, to fulfill our filthy lust before the
eyes of the Almighty, who is greater then all kings or princes on the earth. Oh
let us tremble that we but once durst have such wanton communication in the
hearing of his divine Majesty, who pronounces damnation for such as give
themselves over to adultery. It is not possible says the Lord, for any
whoremaister or lascivious wanton, to enter into the kingdom of God, for such
sins whole Cities have suncke, kingdoms have been destroyed, and though God
suffers such wicked livers to escape for a while, yet at length he pays
home, in this world with beggarie, shame, diseases, or infamy, and in the other
life, with perpetual dampuation, weigh but the inconvenience that grows
through thy loose life, thou art ^^ted of all that are good, despised of the
vertuons, and only well thought of, of reprobats, raskals, ruffians, and such
as the world hates, subject to their lust, and gaining thy living at the hands
of every diseased leacher. Oh what a miserable trade of life is thine that
live of the vomit of sin, in hunting after maladies, but suppose, while thou
art young, thou art favored of thy companions, when thou waxest old, and that
thy beauty is vaded, then thou shall be loathed and despised, even of them
that professed most love unto thee, then good sister call to mind the baseness
of thy life, the heinous outrage of thy sin, that God does punish it with the
rigor of his justice, oh thou art made bewtifull, fair, and well fourmed, and
will thou then by thy filthy lust make thy body, which if thou be honest, is
the Temple of God, the habitation of the devil. Consider this, and call to God
for mercy, and amend thy life, leave this house, and I will become thy
faithful friend in all honesty, and use thee as mine own sister, at this,
such a remorse of conscience, such a fearful terror of my sin struck into my
mind, that I kneeled down at his feet, and with tears besought him he would
help me out of that misery, for his exhortation had caused in me a loathing of
my wicked life, and I would not only become a reformed woman, but hold him as
dear as my father that gave me life, where upon he kissed me with tears, and so
we went down together, where we had further communication, and presently he
provided me an other lodging, where I not only used my self so honestly, but
also was so penitent every day in tears for my former folly, that he took me
to his wife, and how I have lived since and loathed filthy lust, I refer my
self to the Majesty of God, who knows the secrets of all hearts.

Thus Country men I have published the conversion of an English Courtizen, which
if any way it be profitable either to forewarne youth, or withdraw bad persons
to goodness, I have the whole end of my desire, only craving every father
would bring up his children with careful nourture, and every young woman
respect the honor of her virginity.

But amongst all these blythe and merry ^estes, a little by your leave, if it
be no farther then Fetterlane, oh take heed, that's too nigh the Temple, what
then, I will draw as near the sign of the white Har^ as I can, and breathing
my self by the bottle Alehouse, I Will tell you a merry Jest, how a
Conny-catcher was used.

A merry Tale taken not far from Fetter Lane end, of a new found Conny-catcher,
that was Conny-catcht himself.
SO it fell out, that a Gentleman was sick and purblinde, and went to a good
honest man's house to soiourne, and taking up his Chamber grew so sick, that the
goodman of the house hired a woman to keep and attend day and night upon the
Gentleman, this poor woman having a good conscience, was careful of his
welfare and lookte to his diet, which was so slender, that the man although
sick, was almost famisht, so that the woman would no longer stay, but bad his
Host provide him of some other to watch with him, since it grieved her to see a
man lie and starve for want of food, especially being set on the score for
meat and drink in the space of a fortnight, four ponndes. The goodman of the
house at last, hearing how that poor woman did find fault with his scoring,
the Gentleman not only put her out of doors without wages, but would have
arrested her, for taking away his good name, and defaming and slaundring him,
and with that calling one of his neighbors to him, said neighbor, whereas
such a had to^ngued woman has reported to my discredit, that the Gentleman
that lies sick in my house wants meat, and yet ruunes very much on the score,
I pray you judge by his diet, whether he be famisht or no, first in the
morning, he has a Cawdell next his heart, half an hour after that, a quart
of Sugar sops, half an hour after that a neck of mutton in broth, half an
hour after thaat Chickens in sorrel sops, and an hour after that, a Joint of
rostmeat for his dinner, now neighbor, having this provision, you may judge
whether he be spoyld for lack of meat or no, and to what great charges his
diet will arise, whereas in truth, the poor Gentleman would have been glad of
the l^all of these, for he could get none at all, but the cousoning knave,
thought to verse upon him, and one day seeing money came not briefly to the
Gentleman, took some of his apparel, his cloak I guess, and pawnde it for
forty shillings, whereas God wot, all he eat in that time was not wo^^th a
Crown, well, the Gentleman seeing how the knave went about to Conny-catch him,
and that he had taken his cloak, smoothered all for revenge, and watched
opportunity to do it, and on a time, seeing the goodman out, borrowed a cloak
far better then his own, of the boy, saying that he would go to a friend of
his to fetch money for his master and discharge the house, the ^oy ^ending it
him, away walks the Gentleman though weak after this great diet, and never
came at the Taylors-house to answer him cloak or money. And thus was he
Conny-catcht himself, that thought to have verst upon another.

FINIS.

