A FAMILIAR EXPOSITION or Commentary on Ecclesiastes. Wherein the worlds
vanity, and the true felicity are plainly deciphered. BY THOMAS GRANGER,
Preacher of the Word at Butterwike in Eastholland, Lincoln.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for Thomas Paulet, dwelling in Iuie-Lane. 1621.

TO THE RIGHT Reverend Father in God, and my very Honorable good Lord, GEORGE,
by Gods providence L. Bishop of Lincoln, and high ALMONER to the Kings Most
Excellent MAJESTY, continual increase of all true HAPPINESS.
Most Reverend, and my Honorable good Lord.
IT is not more triuiall then true, Nimia familiaritas parit contemptum, Too
much familiarity breeds contempt. Plenty breeds loathing of what we most
desired, and wearisomnesse in what we most delighted, custom causes
facility, and that again produces carelessness, and neglect. Necessity
searches and finds out necessaries, Art beautifieth, but out of Art
springs idle curiosity that marreth all. What integrity is there in any
thing? When the world was clean purged by waters, and the wicked swept all
away, yet there remained a secret Cham lurking in the righteous family, and in
Lots house one that looked back to the rich plain of Sodom. The purest
quintessenee extracted from the purest body by the p^ecisest subtlety, has in
it semen corruptionis, an insensible beginning of corruption. The Church being
cleansed of her leprosy, and restored to her antiquity comely* and
beautiful, grows so curious on the one side, and so Atheistically
sacrilegious on the other side, that who is a good man, who a wise man, sub
iudice lis^est. We are falling from comely sobriety, to proud ouer-weening
curiosity, and fantastical leuitie, like those that think a thing never to
be well, till it be spoiled with too much fingering, whitling, and hammering.
Too much playing with the fantasy, (the disease of these times) marreth a
good understanding. For as a learned man says, it is matter erroris, the mother
of error leading us from natural portraitures to anticks, the like whereof
(for illustration sake) is to be seen in our apparel, and putting on
thereof, and should be seen in our bodies, if they were of aerious substance,
and changeable at our will. Much preaching we have, and much hearing, (a
peculiar blessing on this nation) we are ripe of conceit, and glib of tongue,
every thing is easy, nothing difficult, and how many think themselves able to
teach their teachers, and govern their governors? Surely, if the Pulpit, and
place of authority, were granted them, we should have so many new coined
Churches, and polities, that the divine, true, and natural portraiture of both
should be lost, and all of us left in a maze, and as creatures translated out
of their proper element into another. Much have we in times past desired the
sober, and plain preaching of the word, for knowledge of the truth, and right
practice of duties toward God, and one toward another, but the fickleness of
many is weary of both. They cannot tell whom they would hear, what they would
hear, what form they would have, and as the sickly man, and want on child
would have they know not what. Many are so ravished with their own anticks,
and conceit of their own knowledge, and all sufficiency, that it is enough for
them to hear for variety, and comparison sake, new instruments, new voices,
to look the Preacher in the face, but in the mean while, like Cut-purses, to
have their sacrilegious hands in his pocket, and to salve the smarting sore
with a dinner or a supper, sawced with oily words, with deceitful hollow
courtesies, which fill the eye and the fantasy (bewitchingly) but dry up the
blood in the veins; for we are fools, but they are wise. Their heart goes
after their pride, after their covetousness, Ezech. 33. 31. Plenty of the word
has bred loathing thereof, and plenty of Preachers contempt of them. Many have
heard, and seen Christ enough, yet find neither profit ^or pleasure in him,
he has neither form nor beauty; therefore unclean spirit return home
again, fox to thy kind, dog to thy old vomit, sow to thy wallowing in the
mire. Heathenish devotion is mere madness; Popish devotion is superstitious,
and foolish sober hearing and well doing is wearisome: What remains but
Epicurisme? And what is that but to make an Idol of the corruptible body, the
most rotten Idol of all? Surely, neither Pagans, nor Popish Churches and
houses were ever so filled with Idols, as they are now. For the belly, body, or
person, is the Epicures Idol, as the Apostle says, Phil. 3. 19. And how this
Bell, and Iezabel, the corruptible carke is should be more adored, and deifyed,
than now it is, I conceive not, neither can any Cook, or Tailor imagine, for
in devising new follies they fall into the old unawares. Now what will be the
ripeness of this swinish wallowing in the lees of concupiscence, but
backsliding into Paganism, or rather a progress into Atheism, when all good
wisdom and understanding is depraved through lust? So that in the end, we
shall be worse Ignorants, or rather worse miscreants, then ever we were,
according to that principle in Philosophy, Bonum optimum corruptum fit
pessimum.

Considering the season (beloved Father in God) I was in doubt whether it were
better to have exercised my self in the Prophet Jeremy, whose prophesies are
well befitting this last end of the world, drawing near to the universal
judgment, as the particular nation of the Jews did toward theirs, for their
wilfulness, hard-heartednesse, contempt of their Prophets, carnality of their
Priests, confidence in their own strength, covetousness, oppression, etc. But
because I feared both means and health would fail me in so long a work, I
undertook this, which is of like nature; and intent, namely to withdraw men
from the transitory world, and the perishing lusts thereof, even from this
loathsome Belly-Idolatry, spiritual Mastupration, Selfe-harlotry, to the fear
of God, and obedience to his commandments, considering the proud presumption*
want on security, the civil filthiness, modest leuity, courteous
Chuch-robberies, and the fruitless i^ngling professions of many, whose
prattling, and hearing is endless, but good works in humility, and love, to
which God has elected and redeemed us, are far from them, Ephesians 1. 4.
Titus 2. 14. which caused wise, aged, experienced Solomon to say, Eccles. 12.
12. Be admonished by these my Son, for of making books there is no end, and
much reading is a weariness to the flesh. But he that is not a forgetful
hearer, but a doer of the work, this man shall be blessed in his deed, Iam.
1. 25. For this is totum hominis, the whole duty of man, Ecces. 12. 13. Surely,
if blessedness be to be found in the deed, then in much writing, reading,
speaking, hearing, there must needs be weariness, if not to the body, yet to
the conscience, which in these outward exercises only, can never find true
comfort, or assurance of Gods love.

Now I have made choice of your Lordship, to whom I might Dedicate this work;
and that for sundry causes: First, that I might exhibit it to you as a New
years gift, the best that I have, in token of my sincere love and duty, and
earnest desire of your prosperous and happy welfare, who as you were studious
your self, when once you were Fellow of Queens College in Cambridge; so were
you a special favorer, and furtherer of the Studious, whereby you purchased
special love, both in your own College and abroad also, and the same through
your perseverance, and prudent government is still continued amongst us that
live under your Jurisdiction. Another cause is, that it might find the better
passage under your patronage, and kinder entertainment under your name, that
though it be defective in selfe-desert, yet for your sake the indifferent,
beneuolous, and generous eye, respecting the strong, might ingenuously pass by
the we^ke. Moreover, being desirous to show forth some testimony of my
thankful mind for your Lordships great favor toward me; I thought good to
offer that, which only I am able to give, and which I know you are most ready
and willing to receive, even the fruits of my Ministerial labors to you, a
special favorer of faithful Ministers. Lastly, as tokens of small weight,
but of great value, are more acceptable then great Sums, I trust that this
small gain of my one Talent, which I present to your Lordship, as a token of
my sincere affection, obedience, and service, shall counteruaile a ponderous
volume. And what I am less able this way to perform, I shall recompense with
my continual and hearty prayers for your temporal and eternal happiness.

London, 1. Ian. 1621. Your Lordships in all humble observance* TH. GR.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful and worthy-minded Gentlemen, Sir James Fowlerton,
Sir David Murray, Sir Peter Osburne, Knights: Mr. John Murray, Mr. William
Car^e, Mr. Henry Gibbe, of his Majesty's Bedchamber, Mr. Emmanuel Giffard, one
of the Gentlemen of his Majesty's Priuy-chamber, Esquire. Mr. James Douglasse, Mr.
Richard Jones, Mr. Endymion Porter, Mr. John Heron, and Mr. John Parker,
Esquires: Grace and Peace be multiplied.
RIGHT WORSIPFVLL, and worthy minded Gentlemen: Having in the first place
elected the divine, learned, judicious, enriched with wisdom, and piety, for
the patronage of this work, I have also further bestowed the same on you, (nil
minuit de lumine lumen) to the end that being shielded with reverend, and pious
gravity* in the Van, and guarded by generous and vnblemishable virtue in the
Rere, I may be safely protected from the snarling detraction of envy on the
one side, and receive a favorable construction of what may be amiss on the
other. The universality, and excellency of the subject, has enlarged my
dedication; It is Solomon's Ethiks, his tractate de summo bono, of the chief,
and complete felicity, and the worlds vanity, and therefore the very root,
seed, or kernel of all happy knowledge, both of good, and evil in all
things, natural, political, ecclesiastical. Contraria iuxta se posita magis
illucescunt, say the Philosophers; and says a Father. Qui malum non nouit,
perfect bonum non intelligit, He that has not known evil, does not
perfectly understand good. As the earth, so the Arts have their weeds, from
which they are purged by their Physicion. Truth is like Gold in the Mine:
Uprightness is sur*rounded and clouded with calumnies: Wisdom is darkened
with sophistry* Impurus spiritus se immiscit in omnibus: The unclean spirit
intrudes himself into every thing. Solomon therefore does not only (...), id
est astruere, positiuely avouch and lay down the grounds of true felicity,
but also (...), id est, destruere, destroy the false and counterfeit felicities
of man's dark heart, and that by evident arguments, drawn from such grounds as
the wisemen of the world could not find, groping like the Sodomites for Lots
door, but could not find it; not so quicke-sighted as he that saw men
walking like trees. For as they say, Nullum elementum ponderat suo loco, No
element is ponderous in his place; so they being in corruption, felt no weight
of corruption, no more then the Fishes in the Sea and worms of the Earth feel
the weight of either. Worldly wisdom is weariness, both to the body and
mind* and a vexation of spirit. For being it self crooked, it cannot rectify
things crooked. Mirth is madness. Royal magnificence is transitory and
m^table. The sagest aduisements depend on uncertain issues. Prosperity and
adversity are set one against another, as hill against dale. The restless
Pole is immoueably fixed in his place; as the grinding millstone, so is the
earth in her center a mass of mutabilities. Of the heavens there is a constant
revolution, up and down, to and fro, they never have the same face, never hold
the same countenance, at least from the first motion till the end of times.
Here is the difficulty of prognostication. Omnia versantur in perpetuo ascensu
and descensu; There is a perpetual ascending and descending of life, and
state. Every man, every state, every thing is a Planet, whose sphericall
reuolutions are some of longer, some of shorter continuance. Vulgar judgments
are variable; their counsels groundless. Scinditur incertum studia in
contraria vulgus; but the prudent designs of sage States are firm; even so
are the imaginations of the wisest worldlings in all their ways, and
enterprises; but the foundation of God remains sure. Their wise sayings are
applauded, when they do but dream waking, and rave like men in sickness,
thinking themselves to be in Dothan, when they are in the midst of Samaria; 2
Kings 6. When they are on the surest ground, they walk on pinnacles; again,
when they are naked in the midst of their enemies Camp^, they are armed in
the strongest fort. For the hand of God does all, that men might fear before
him, and not lean to their own wisdom. Yet vain man would be wise, seeing
he is but a wild Asses Colt, says Job. He would be happy, being but a mass of
mortalities. For being the most compound and universal nature, as concerning
his plasme, and so the most excellent by creation, he is the most miserable by
degeneration. Nam bonum optimum corruptum fit pessimum. And how much greater
then is the corruption of his spirit? That is to be seen by the corruption of
the most excellent spirit. Both have their restraints, and limitations; yet
has not God left man in desperation, but in his eternal wisdom provided
means of restoration, which here is begun, and there finished, whence the
Author of corruption fell. This restoration is first the renouation, or
change of the center, the root of man, I mean his heart or spirit of his
mind; then of his spirits vessel, I mean the brutall nature, or inferior
part, which I take to be the sperme, or quintessence of the universe, and then
are all things renewed with him; 2 Cor. 5. 17. Felicity therefore is here to be
had, and by the holy endeauours of renewed wisdom to be obtained. But this
good in this vale of misery is imperfect, yet in continual motion, and
progress to perfection, though the whole engine with all the furniture
thereof, man, and every condition and state of life, ethike, politic,
ecclesiastike, groan under the burden of vanity. Here then is wisdom and
work for the curious Alchymist, who surpasses common capacities. Here is the
skill that extracteth gall out of honey, and honey out of gall. Here is the
Philosophers stone, that turns iron that base metal, into gold the purest
metal, even the sovereign good that overcomes evil, yea, that turns
things in their natures cursed, into blessings, the beginnings of endless
torments into eternal glory, the light that expels darkness, the life that
swalloweth up death, the spirit that wears out the leprosy, canker, and
rottenness of the spirit, of the vessel, of the person, of the outward state.
To omit the many learned dotages of the worldly wise, and madnesses of
selfe-willed Idiots; some man thinks himself happy, if he knows the evils
of this life, and with all has knowledge to avoid them, and in procuring of
good unto himself for his bodily ease, comfort, and pleasure, thinks that by
this wisdom he has obtained the chief good, and so kisseth his hand, and
sacrifices to his net, his subtle, sound pate, as he judges. Here is his
uttermost extent, in this sphere is he rolled as the Sow in the mire. Secondly,
some man again esteems such a one but brutishly subtle, because he does not
good to others as well as to himself, as the principle of humanity requires;
Quod tibi vis fieri, fac alijs, Do as thou would be done to. Therefore
because he is cautelous, and provident for himself, and communicates to
others also, he judges himself to be that happy man. He excels indeed the
former brute, as he again does that vegetable one; Eccles. 4. 8. even as the
air excels the water, and that the earth. But the wisdoms of these three
conjoined by union into one individual, are but as an excellent vessel, or
receptacle for this last. Lastly, another who is truly wise indeed, excludes
this man from happiness yet, because he is but as a beautiful body without a
quickening spirit, which is piety, the soul or supernatural spirit, enlining
the rest. So that neither the wise vegetable, nor the wise brutall or sensible,
nor the wise reasonable or humane, but the wise spiritual organized with the
rest (as I may say) is only capable of this sovereign good of Solomon. This
only knows what is good in evil things and states, what evil in good
things and States, what is good for himself in both, in this vain life,
according to that line and measure that God deals to man. This wisdom
orders and enliueth the other wisdoms, being a supernatural gift, the
divine influence of the sanctifying Spirit: For they being severed from this,
are but an eye without the optike spirit, which indeed is no eye, but a dead
member. The like we see in the structure of man's vessel, id est, in the
vegetable and brutall spirits, but the reasonable soul enliueth, moves, and
orders them both, or rather her self in and by them, by virtue of her union
with them, whereby they become rational.

The degrees of this good to be gathered out of Solomon's (...), or positive
doctrine, are briefly these:

1. To be in a calling, according to Gods general decree; Genesis 3. 19.
Otherwise a man is a belial, a sluggard, a dissolute, dispersed, incompact
member, out of favor with God and man, and his own conscience, and lies open
to many miseries, as he is the fittest subject to be sentina malorum, the sink
of evils.

2. To labor in that lawful calling, to exercise his talent, that his Lord
may receive his own with advantage.

3. To labor with diligence, Chapter 9. 10. of this book. Hereby many bodily
miseries, and occasions of spiritual temptations also are avoided. For a man
to be negligent in his business, is to be brother to a waster, as Solomon
says else where.

4. To comfort and solace the body with the fruits of our labors, all the
creatures from the highest heaven to the center of the earth, serving to no
other purpose then the reparation and conservation of the souls frail,
corruptible vessel: For the soul her self is enliued, fed and conserved by
another World, the Word of God effectual by the spirit that speaks therein.
The body is ex limo terrae, of the slime or seed of the universe; but the
soul is ex alia propagine, progeny.

5. As we have received good* so to be faithful dispensers thereof, viz. to
communicate to others, wherein the essence of charity consists. Communicating
of mutual duties, is the bond of civil or sociable life, whereby a man in any
condition of life, in harmefull occurrences, and unfortunate accidents, is
preserved, helped, relieved, and the beneuolous aspect of neighbors
congratulating his prosperous state, is a lightsome, pleasant, and comfortable
thing. Moreover, danti dabitur, and qua mensura metimini, vobis metietur. But
this communicating is of all gifts and duties, toward equals, superiors, and
inferiors, even of every one in their place and calling toward others, in
oeconomike, ethike, politic state. Thus far the Heathen man goes, but here
he makes a stand, he cannot transcend his Orb. All things are made for man,
says Cicero, and man is borne for man, to be serviceable and comfortable one
to another in sociable life. Therefore all these degrees do but as it were
constitute the vessel of the quickening spirit.

6. The sixth and last degree therefore of felicity, is piety toward God,
sincerity in divine worship, briefly shut up in this word, Fear God, and keep
his Commandments. It is totum hominis, or totus homo, the whole man, without
which he is but praestantissimum brutum. What this fear, and obedience is, is
set down in the Law of Moses at large, which is more largely and plainly
expounded by the Prophets, and they again by the life and doctrine of our
Savior Christ, and that again by the Apostles, and they by Pastors and
Teachers to the Worlds end. This is that complete sovereign good, of soul,
body, and state, positiuely taught in this Treatise. Which in a word is this,
the wise demeanor of a man toward himself, toward others, toward God, in
things concerning his own body, and person, concerning communicating, or
sympathising others, concerning divine worship according to the direction of
Gods Word. These degrees must not be sundered, but kept entire of him that
would be completely happy, so far forth as happiness can be obtained in this
confused, enormous World. Men being ignorant of this sixe-fold union, fall into
many errors, run out into many extremities, and plunge themselves into a gulf
of miseries, yea, and digladiate among themselves, praising, dispraysing,
blaming, excusing they know not what, even tossed in a labyrinth. But he that
builds on this ground, and walks in this light, riddeth himself and others
out of many, even infinite errors, and miseries of this vain life. One man
will be very devout and zealous, but what inconveniences runs he into, when
he neglests his particular calling? and of the practice of how many duties and
goods that by him might be done, is he deprived? Cert^ in quo peccaueris, in
eodem punieris. Wherein a man sins, therein shall he be punished; poverty,
debt, imprisonment, etc. shall fall upon him, and the obiecting of his
profession to scandal, is no small matter. Sed peccat in tutiorem partem; But
I say, what inforceth that offense at all? He that says, Deum time, fear God;
says also, Mandata eius serua, Keep his commandments; whereof diligent
labor in a calling is one. For want whereof a man omitteth much good, and
offers himself to many temptations, and snares. Another labors diligently,
and worshippeth God, but neglects the duties of charity, whereof in these days
there are not a few. Saint James complayneth of such. Another insisting on
duties of charity, neglects the duties of piety. But to reckon up the
extremities, and errors of men in the breach of this union, which yet would
all be wise, and seem happy to themselves, is an endless work. A sound and
prudent spirit within a man, is better then a World of Books. Therefore Saint
John says, that those few leaves of the Gospel by him penned, among a World
of Books that might have been made of Christ's sayings and doings, are
sufficient, what needs more? Neither the whole Scriptures, nor the Volumes of
the Fathers, nor what can be uttered by voice, can prevail, where an heart is
wanting. And who can give man an understanding heart, but God only? yet are
men presumptuous, therefore they come not to the fountain of wisdom, and so
live and die in vanity. Thus have I briefly declared the very life, and
substance of this Treatise of the wise and aged King, whose sentences, though
they seem to be difficult and independent, collected by some that have taken
them from his mouth, upon occasions uttered; yet are they doubtless a
continued speech, purposely penned, every thing orderly cohearing, and
methodically colliming at the same object. The more wise and aged, most
commonly the less discoursiue; and much talking is tedious, their sentences
are brief, fundamental, and pithy, and their words seem often times very
independent. Besides this, Solomon, without regard to artificial structure,
utters his experiments, and that from the heart to the heart, not from the
brain to the ear, (as common use among many is in these heartlesse days) and
also as the sanctifying Spirit of God moved him. Therefore are his words pure
without tincture, altogether of spiritual relish, and without any taste of
the caske. For his maine drift is to cast man wholly out of himself, that he
might be found in Christ alone, or else be utterly lost. Cap. 12. 13. Phil. 3.
8. 9. 10.

Now my earnest desire, reverend, religious, and learned Gentlemen, lovers of
learning, special favorers, and friends of the learned and virtuous, is, that
you would judge these labors of mine amongst others, worthy your acceptance,
rather valuing the same in your generous spirits, according to the mind of him
that honors, and loves your virtues, then respecting the dignity of the
work it self, which notwithstanding shall be such like as it shall please you
to accept, and the Lord to work by it in the hearts of the Readers without
whose quickening Spirit, the whole Scripture is but a dead letter, but into
whose nostrils the Lord shall breathe again the breath of eternal life, it is
to them no nose of wax, as the Papists say, but a plain even way, a lantern
to the feet, a light to the paths. Howsoever, we are unto God the sweet savor
of Christ in them that are saved, and in them that perish; 2 Cor. 2. 15. And
unto you this public testimony of my observance, and love for your love to our
gifts and calling, I trust shall be acceptable; which I shall recompense again
with my continual and hearty prayers to Almighty God, the Father of lights,
and fountain of all good, that the true felicity and chief good revealed to,
and penned by Solomon, and here explained, may be plentifully conferred upon
you, to your greatest comfort here in your spirits, souls, bodies, states, and
perfect glory of all in the Kingdom of glory.

London, 1. Ian. 1621. Your Worships in the Lord to be commanded, TH. GR.

AN EXPOSITION OR COMMENTARY ON ECCLESIASTES.
CHAPTER I.
Verse 1. The words of the PREACHER, the Son of DAVID, King in Jerusalem.
The Inscription.
IN this Treatise of Solomon, two things are to be considered. First, the Title
or Inscription, laid down in this Verse. Secondly, the Substance, Subject or
Matter thereof, from Verse 2. to the end of the Book.

The Words of the Preacher. The Author is not simply named, but described, I.
By the person that he takes upon him at this time, the Preacher, not the
Politician* not handling matter of man's outward state, but of his spiritual
state* teaching Mortification, or the abnegation of himself, and the carnal
consideration and usage of all things on the one side, and the subjection of
himself, and all things with him to God only in fear, and obedience on the
other side. This word Coheleth, translated the Preacher, is of the feminine
gender, signifying properly an Assembly or Congregation; figuratively, a
Function or Office in the Church: And it is translated of the Greeks.
ECCLESIASTES, a Preacher, or one speaking in the Church: Or it may signify (as
here it does) a person reunited or reconciled to the Church; and so^t is a note
of a penitentiarie teaching others out of his own experience of standing,
falling, rising.

This reconciled Penitent, Church man, or Preacher, is notified by four names
in the Scripture, viz Solomon, that is, Peaceable, 1 Chronicles. 22. 9. Iedidiah,
that is, Beloved of the Lord* 2 Samuel 12. 25 Lemuel, that is Him that
appertains to God, Prou. 31. 1. Coheleth, in this place.

II. He is described by his relative, or parentage, Son of David. An argument
to move attention, and more serious consideration of that which is spoken, and
to procure benevolence. David of Dod, ami^us, dilectus.
For David his father feared God, and was beloved of God and the people, whereof
he took his name.

III. By his dignity, or office, King. An argument to move docility, and awful
regard, drawn from the dignity and authority of the person, and duty of the
hearers. His office is explicated by the object thereof, understood in the next
word, viz. the people of God in Jerusalem.

IIII. By the place of his habitation, in Jerusalem. Jerusalem, the Sacrarie,
Chapel, or Treasure-house of wisdom, the Fountain of wisdom, the only
place of Gods worship and special presence: And therefore a King excelling all
other Kings of the earth, which are but mere worldly politicians, not
sanctified, not guided by divine wisdom, but ignorant of the glory of God,
which is the end that Kings should only aim at.

Verse 2. Vanity of Vanities, says the Preacher, Vanity of Vanities, all is
vanity.
The Proposite.
THe maine purpose of Solomon in this book, is, to show wherein the blessed
estate, and happy condition of man in this vale of misery consists. Which
seeing that it is not to be found in the world* I mean, out of the Church, the
wisemen of the world are of so different, yea contrary opinions among
themselves, and all aberre from the truth, because being in darkness, they
neither know God nor themselves, neither what is good, nor what is ill for man
in this vain life. Again, they lay down this for a ground or principle, that
there is a Summum bonum, or felicity, by the wisdom, and endeavor of man to
be found in the things of the world: But this ground being false, all their
buildings must needs fall down to the ground. But Solomon here by the
special instruction and direction of the spirit of God, lays down such a
felicity as the world by their wisdom, could not comprehend. The brief sum
whereof is this; Fear God, and keep his Commandments, or in a word,
faithful The Theme or Question.
obedience is the chief good. This is the Theme, or question, as appears by
the conclusion of all, Chapter 12. 13. Now the argument of confirmation is thus
framed: Principal Syllogism.


Prop.Either is the fear of God and obedience to his laws the chief good, or
else it is to be found in, and by the things of this world, which we call the
goods of the body, the goods of the mind, the goods of fortune, or outward
goods. Assum.But it is not to be found in and by these things. Concl.Therefore
is the fear of God, and obedience to his laws, the chief good.
The Proposition is evident, the Assumption is to be proved. Prossyllogisme, i.
A reason confirming the Principal.


Prop. If all be vanity most vain, then there is no felicity, or chief good
to be found in the things of the world. Assum. But all things are vanity most
vain: Concl. Therefore, etc.
And so he proceeds forward in the handling of this argument to the end of
the book, which he concludes, Chap. 12. 8. So that this verse is a
Prossyllogisme, or reason added to the principal; in the handling whereof the
whole body of this book consists. Hebraismus.
Vanity of vanities. An hebrew phrase of speech. They express the comparatiue
often by a preposition, and the superlatiue by doubling of the same word, which
notes excellency or perfection. As if he should say, all things are most
vain, or vanity it self. It is first amplified by a repetition, wherein the
adiunct is put for the subject, to signify the certainty of this fundamental
truth, which is Epiz^uxis*
figured as an ingemination, or redoubling of the same sound, more vehemently to
move the affections. Secondly confirmed by testimony, the dignity whereof
depends on the office of the speaker. The Preacher faith it, therefore
believe it. Aged men are to be heard with reverence, Job 32. 6. 7. I am young,
and ye are very old, wherefore I was afraid, and durst not show you mine
opinion. I said, days should speak, and the multitude of years should show
wisdom. Conuerts are to be greatly regarded, Acts 22. 19. 20. So Paul
argues. Surely they will receive my testimony, for they know that I
imprisoned, and beat in every Synagogue them that believed on thee: And
Preachers especially, Mal. 2. 7. The Priests lips should preserve knowledge,
and they should seek the Law at his mouth. So Osee. 4. 4. Therefore is Solomon
to be believed, being wise, aged, experienced. By vain, is meant imperfect,
uncertain, transitory, void of contentation, full of grief, fruitless, to no
end, nothing. Briefly, both man and all things with man are naught, and come
to naught, 1 Cor. 2. 6. We speak wisdom among them that are perfect, yet not
the wisdom of this world, nor the Princes of this world, that come to naught.
What has man than to glory in but in the Cross of Christ, whereby he is dead
to the world, and the world to him? as Paul says. Man therefore, and
whatsoever is within him, without him, about him, proceeds from him, is most
vain, even nothing, Phil 3. 8. till he be a new creature, and all things
renewed with him, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Henceforth we know no man after the flesh, yea
though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no
more. Therefore if any man be in Christ, be is a new creature: old things are
passed away, behold, all things are become new.

Verse 3. What profit has a man of all his labor which he takes under the
Sun?
Epilogisme, A Reason confirming the reason of a Reason.
THe Epilogisme confirming the Prossyllogisme. All things are most vain,
because man can reap no profit, no contentation of mind, no quietness of
heart of all the endeauours, cares, labors of body and mind, wherewith in
vain he wearieth himself all the days of his life. The argument is figured
by a communication or question, to intimate the certain and infallible truth
thereof: For both the ignorant and the wise, even every man that comes into
the World, is wholly carried with an opinion of an earthly felicity; to the
obtaining whereof, there is, as he judges, an aptitude in man, and a
possibility in the things of the World. The most learned and wisest placed it,
some in divine contemplation without the word of God, some in moral virtue
only, some in virtue and worldly prosperity together, some in riches, some in
honor, some in one thing, some in another. And every man feeling manifold
miseries, troubles, and wants, wherewith he is compassed and filled, does
imagine to himself a possibility of delivery and freedom on the one side, and
an happy enjoying of the contrary good on the other side. Ah that I were freed
once from this, or that; if I had but this, or that; I could do this, or that;
I would even desire no more; I should think my self happy, etc. does every
man imagine. Hereupon he begins to buckle himself to his work, to gather
his wits together, to bestirre his stumps, and either rusheth violently
forward, as the Horse rusheth into the battle; or else he proceeds warily,
wisely, fundamentally, as they that spend all in searching out the Philosophers
stone, but never find it. Of those Zophar, one of Jobs kinsmen says; Job 11.
12. Vain man would be wise, though man be borne like a wild Asses Colt. The
reasons of this vain project, are

First, because man cannot look beyond the world; he is confined within the
limits of the Spheres, he is in bondage under the curse; his phronema, men's,
or purest wisdom, is nothing else but lust, or brutality. 1 Ioh. 2. 16. All
that is in this world, as the lust of the flesh* the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life* is not of the Father, but of the world* But man knows not this
his misery, and how than shall he know the right way to be rid out of it? So
than every natural man is a fool. Romans 1. 22. A beast; Ier. 10. 14. A wild
Asses colt; Job 11. 12.

Secondly, being but a fool, a beast, a wild Ass, he looks on the glory,
the riches, and the beauty of the world, and judges according to the outward
appearance thereof, neither considering the vanity that is in himself, nor
that which is in the creatures: For Satan takes away his heart, and
bewitcheth him with the pleasant shows of that which is not. So he set the
World before the eyes of Christ, in a glorious show or vision, to ravish him
with the love thereof: So he set before the eyes of our first Parents a better
and happier state, than that wherein God had placed them. Thus he does with
every man; 2 Cor. 4. 4. He is the God of this world, blinding the eyes of men
with the show of a worldly glory and felicity, that the true glory and felicity
of the Gospel might not appear to them, but rather seem ignominious, base,
and contemptible: That he ex^olleth, and prefers, this he debaseth, and
suppresseth by all means, as we see how he works in and by his instruments,
worldly minded men. The like to this we see in the flickering painted Harlot,
who by her subtle shows, looks, gestures, glaunces, rauisheth the young man
he knows not with what vehement fancies. Amor tollit de cardine mentem. He
looks at her, he longs after her, he dreameth on her, she is as an Angel
in his fancy; the full possession of her is his felicity: But when he finds
by experience that this felicity is nothing but the stocks, pox, and gallows,
she is now a loathsome carrion, and as a scab'd vlcerous jade, and a limme of
the Devil to company with.

Whence comes this delusion? First, it arises out of man's own vain heart,
and is cherished by Satan's fotures. The sick and weakly, thinks the strong
and healthful happy. The deformed, admireth the beautiful. The poor blesses
the rich. The ignorant and base, admire the honorable, and men of authority
and power. The pleasant seat, sumptuous buildings, gorgeous apparel,
delicious fare, proud attendance, variable delights and pleasures of the rich,
ravish the mind of him that lacks these. He looks on these, and pineth,
judging according to the outward appearance. Sed latet anguis in herba. He
considers not the vanity, and sorrow of this splendide misery, this
beautiful Harlot. It is like a beautiful picture drawn with white and red
colors in sackcloth, which afar off is very lovely, but near by it is like
the filthy matter of a sore or wound, purulent rottenness, or the back of a
galled Horse. No man ever yet found any constant contentation in any state: yet
may his outward appearance deceive others, and another him.

Secondly, therefore this delusion arises from the vaineglorie and pomp of
the world, deceiving, and being deceived. It is the common corruption of man to
pride, to boast, to set forth himself, to bless himself, as Job says; to
color and cover his vanity from others, to draw them into admiration of him,
and to be admired of others is his joy and delight: For their false testimony
of his happiness mitigateth, rather blinds the sight of his vanity, or
miseries from himself, (for of those does every carnal man desire to be
insensible, that he may more freely rejoice, and solace himself in the flesh.)
Who is the happy man? says Craesus to Solon. Every one flattered him, and if
this Philosopher had done the like, he would even have run mad, and rusht,
as Alexander did, out of mankind into the rank of the gods. To what purpose
did Ezechiah show all the treasures of his Kingdom to the Ambassadors of the
King of Babel? Esaias 39. 2. And what one man almost in the world having friends
come to his house, does not the like? See an example hereof in Haman, Hest. 5.
10. 11, 12. We would all seem to have this imagined worldly happiness, feign
would we bless our selves, and be admired of others: But we are but proud
bankerupts, gentlemen to day, festival and gorgeous, and to morrow beggars,
and cast into prison. All is but the crackling of thorns under a pot, a great
flame, a loud noise, light ashes, folly, vanity, nothing. To conclude, every
natural man imagines that profit, yea, jithron, durable profit, is to be
found and wrought out by wit and labor in the world. There is a felicity to be
had, and all men's study is to find out the right way to attain it: He thinks
his game to be good, if he can but rightly play his cards. If but one poor
tradesman has gotten goods together, and through the increase of a small
stock, has at length made a great purchase, and left it to his heir, who
still increases it, and puts his son to the Innes of Court, etc. whereby
he becomes a gentleman, and so forward, than are all beggars in hope. This
one example serves to cut off all despair, and impossibility; yea, provoke
a thought of the like project, that lies dead in the bottom of the brain.
But if the world begin to run a little on the beggars side, his hope is
presently kindled, thought arises after thought, and calls up this dead
project, his blood rises, his pulses begin to beat, as he that has found a
purse full of gold, he stirs about, his heart pants, his mind is in the
top of the world, why may he not be a Tamerlane? But of Gods Kingdom and
glory there is no thought at all in him. Does any man doubt of this that I
say? Why do men so study, and break their brains night and day for
preferment? Why do they so weary themselves with heaping up riches? Why do
they so climb to honors? And why do they even sell their souls and bodies to
the Devil, to obtain worldly prerogatives, if there were no profit, no
contentation, no felicity in them? Surely they do not think that they are
filling a bottomless tub, but forecast great profit, pleasure, and
contentment of mind to arise of their labors hereafter; which thing the rich
man, Luke 12. vainly boasted of. Psalm. 49. 11. Their inward thought is, (the
vain imagination of every carnal heart) that their houses shall continue for
ever, and their dwelling places to all generations; they call their lands after
their own names. Every man knows that he shall die, yet he labors and
strives, and puts off from day to day, as though he should live for ever.
The Devil so bewitcheth him, yea, steals away his heart, that he knows,
and never thinks what he knows; he believes, and doubts: Therefore says
David, Lord teach me to number my days, that I may apply my heart to
wisdom. The manifold glaunces, ejaculations, and fancies that lust
suggesteth, and Satan ingesteth into the mind of man, are strange and
wonderful: But it is more strange, that contrary to the truth, which he
hears, sees, knows, they should carry him away, at least make him a
mindlesse, dreaming, unprofitable wanderer, like a feather in the wind,
without all resolution. The case is common: A fool has always a knave
attending on him; he hears his friend truly counselling, and carefully
admonishing, he knows him to be without deceit; yet the knave whom he
suspecteth and fears, carries him away. A fool is bound to his lust, the
devil and the knave work upon the lust, which he calls humouring, and so
catch the fool.

Verse 4. One generation passes away, and another generation comes: but the
earth abides for ever.
THe unprofitableness of all the studies, endeauours and labors of man,
whereby he enquireth and searches, deuiseth and plotteth continually to find
out a felicity or happy rest, is argued by the instable, transitory, variable,
uncertain condition, and circular course, both of mankind and of the world,
with all the creatures, their effects and events. The World with all his
creatures is Gods engine, for his own use, created in perfection of beauty,
wherein God showed forth his incomprehensible wisdom and goodness to the
view of Angels and men: But through the disobedience of man, for whose service,
under God, all things were made, the curse was laid upon him, as a just
judgment, and upon all creatures with him. For in that it is said, Thou shall
surely dye, Genesis 2. 17. There is the curse or corruption of the Soul: And
where it is said, Cursed be the earth for thy sake, Genes. 3. 17. Here is the
corruption of the whole engine, with all the creatures. Now this curse or
corruption* is want of created vigor and strength, ataxie, and anomie,
disorder, iniquity, confusion, and in one word, Vanity: So that all this
universe is a mass of vanity, mortality. And who can bring a clean thing
out of filthiness? says Job. Who can work felicity out of misery?
blessedness out of cursednesse? profit out of loss? constancy out of
instabilitie? strength out of weakness? joy out of sorrow? soundness out of
corruption and rottenness? life out of death? This thing all men strive to
do, because they neither know the vanity that is in themselves, nor that
which is in the creatures. But they do nothing else but heap vanity upon
vanity, as he that struggleth in the mire, and medleth with pitch.

One generation passes away, etc. The words are a Prosepilogisme, or reason
confirming the former, dr^wne from the fleeting and corruptible state of man,
and all worldly things, according to Solomon's common observation of all things
in the world. The reason may be framed thus:

Propos. If both man and all things with man be inconstant, transitory,
uncertain, mutable, corruptible, then are all men's studies and labors
unprofitable and fruitless, yielding no sound contentation, or quiet. Assump.
But both man, and all things with man are of this condition. Conclus. Therefore
there remaynes nothing, no contentation, no sound or durable good wherein to
rest, to man of all his labors.
The Proposition is manifest. The Assumption is confirmed by an Induction
grounded on observation, which is a reason by many particulars proouing and
concluding an universal, against which there cannot any one particular be
objected. This induction is of all superior and inferior parts of the world,
to wit, of Man, the center of the world, Verse 4. and of the circumference, to
wit, of the Sun, Moon, Stars, Heavens, verse 5. of the winds, verse 6. of
rivers, verse 7. Nec in caeteris contrarium est videre, and of all things,
verse 8. both simples and compounds, universal causes, and their effects.

One generation passes, etc. The first particular. Not only particular men
do vanish away through some extraordinary diseases, or outward casualties, and
their states also, but even whole generations successively, yea the most
healthful, strong, and sound are dissolved again into their dust, and so is
the most firmly settled state dispersed and brought to nothing by an
unchangeable decree. All things were created of the earth, and to the earth
they return again.

But the earth abides for ever. The vanity of mankind is illustrated by a
comparison of the unlike. Man vanishes away suddenly as, a flower in the
spring, but the earth, more vile than man, lasts ever. The earth is as it
were a Stage, whereon every man in his generation acts his part, and
afterward departs with all his pomp and crackle never to be seen again,
nor remembered any more. Abides ever, that is to say, in comparison of the
perishing generations of all things, which rise and fall, ebb and flow
continually. Otherwise it self also shall melt with fervent heat, and be
purged with fire. By ever, is meant till the end of all things: Earth is put
for all the elements by the figure Synecdoche, and for the heavens also. The
whole engine shall be changed, Psalm. 102. 25. 26. 2 Pet. 3. 10. Therefore man
has no profit of all his labor, the fruit of all his contentious endeauours
is a mere nothing. For by reason of this inconstancy, and fluxibility of
himself, and all things, he does but lay his foundation on the floods. He
vanishes away in his studies, and perishes in his labors, as a Snayle. His
life is but a continual dying or passage to death, and his works are like
himself. When we look upon the earth, let us remember our birth and burial.
Our bodies, names and works shall be all alike, even as the dust blown into
the sea with the wind, and as the smoke vanished in the air. Finally, we are
more vile than the earth, for it is permanent, but we are most frail, and
never abide in one stay, but hasten like a Post-man to our end.

Verse 5. The Sun also arises, and the Sun goes down, and hastes to the
place where he arose.
THe second particular. As the generations of man* for whom all other things
were made, are not durable, neither are the things of man, his counsels, and
acts durable, but new generations differing from the former succeed: so
likewise the Heavens, the Sun and other Stars are restless in their
motions, and changeable in their courses; so that when we look upon the Sun,
or but open our eyes to behold the light, we may clearly see the Sun acting
before our eyes, as it were on the stage of the firmament, the unsteadfast
condition and perishing state of man, having his circular motion, after the
similitude of the heavens, yea, and also caused by the heavens, which are
second causes or universal instruments of God for the foture of all things,
both elements and elementarie bodies, and in that respect may well be called
the basis or firmament of the world. But contrarily by accident, that is, by
reason of corruptibilitie, weakness, want of vigor in the creature, and in
man above the rest, which is the effect of the curse denounced, Genesis 3. they
are the consumers, and destroyers of all things. For as the Sun is the
general instrument, or most remote cause of generation and preservation, (Sol
et homo generat hominem, says Aristotle,) so by accident it corrupts, and
destroys all things, and that both by his diurnall and annual revolution, to
wit, from East to West, from South to North, causing Day and Night, Summer and
Winter, with other seasons of the day and year.

To conclude: The life of man as concerning his bodily state, is a continual
passage from the womb whence it issues, to the grave into which it falls,
as the Sun seems to rise out of the earth, and to descend into the earth;
and man in his issue or progeny may be said to return circularly again, with
the Sun, out of the earth, out of the womb into the horizon, into the world.
Again, concerning his outward state, he has his ascending, and descending,
birth, and burial with the Sun. For there is no constancy of any state, or
kindred, though one continue longer than another, as the Oak out-liueth the
Ash, and the Ash the Willow, yet all dye, and vanish in their time: For the
Lord raises up the poor out of the dust, and the needy out of the dunghill,
that he may set him with Princes, Psalm. 113. Again. Psalm. 107. 40. He pours
contempt upon Princes, and causes them to wander in the wilderness, where
there is no way, 1 Samuel 2. 7. He makes poor, and makes rich, he brings
low, and lifts up. So that with the Sun there is a double motion of
mankind; one of life, which is diurnall, and another of state, which is
annual, I mean, the house, or kingdom of longest continuance. Lastly, in
this certain and steadfast motion there is nothing but uncertainty, and
unsteadfastness, therefore no felicity but vanity.

Verse 6. The wind goes toward the South, and turns about unto the North;
it whirleth about continually, and the wind returns again according to his
circuits.
THe third particular. As the Sun is wheeled about with restless motion, so
are the winds also whirled about according to their manifold circuits. The
former we see, this we hear, and feel, which teach us to see, hear, and
feel our vanity, unless we be senseless. The wind is a nearer instructor,
beating on our faces, and sounding in our ears, yea, piercing into our ears
and heads, to awake our dull spirits, to cause us remember what we are, what
our works are, and what our end, and their end is. So that unless we be in a
dead sleep, drunk with senseless carnality, we cannot but remember the
brittlenesse of our bodies, the incertainty of our lives, the instability of
our states, and all things with us running in their circuits; as the windy
exhalations ascending out of the earth to the region of the clouds, are from
thence flung back by contrary and discordant qualities, and so run circularly
in the air from South to North, or from what places soever they arise, toward
the same places again. Vain therefore are earthly wise men, that think their
houses shall continue for ever, and call their lands by their own names, as
David says. But why do they so labor in the wind? Because a brutish man
knows not, neither does a fool understand that God has subdued all things
to mutability, and vanity, that in him only we might seek for durable
riches, and the true and everlasting felicity.

Verse 7. All the Rivers run into the Sea, yet the Sea is not full: unto the
place from whence the Rivers come, thither they return again.
THe fourth particular. Not only the winds arise, make a noise for a little
season, and then die, after which others arise again in like sort; but the
waters also are circularly carried, by perpetual ingresse and regresse, into
the seat, and from the seat of waters, the Sea. As the Sea is the receptacle
of fresh waters, so do her salt waters re*passe through the veins, and
conduit pipes of the earth, strained and qualified by diverse Mines, and tempers
of mould of magneticall nature, which appears in this, that the Sea is not
filled. For the earth thirsts for moisture, and attracteth from the Sea, as
the hand, fingers, toes, and all members do blood from the liver, by many
net-like veins ramified all over, which break through the breasts of porose
and rocky hills, through clefts of quarries, and so run down into the Sea,
from whence they came: Whereof arose that speech, He that knows not the way
to the Sea, let him seek for a River to be his guide. As it is no marvel that
the blood should ascend out of the liver to the higher parts of the body; no
more wonder is it, that the waters should spring out of the high mountains, as
milk does out of women's breasts, seeing that the earth, nay, whole nature is
magneticall, or alchymisticall. We marvel not that blood and milk should be
sweet, though we eat salt meats, and as little cause have we to marvel at
the other. The Fishes of the Sea are fresh, not salt; for the Sea is their
element, as the earth is to her creatures: And when a creature begins to
resemble his element, it is a token of dissolution, as when blew* green,
yellow colors, etc. begin to appear in the flesh, which we call earthly,
and dead colors. So springs and torrents are the fruits of the Sea, or rather
the Sea is the aliment of the earths body, which conuerteth her salt waters
into milk, for the nourishing of all that spring out of her womb. Or, whether
it be, as Aristotle thinks, that the waters are converted into liquid, or
rorid air, which is sucked in of the earth, by her magneticall thirst, and
congealed into many dispersed small drops, as moisture attracted through the
porose and supple bladder becomes a torrent of urine: which vapors gathering
together in the veins of the earth, for that purpose ordained of God, break
forth of the hills. But according to the former doctrine, these drops are
rather euaporated and sweat out from those veins, to sustain and moisten the
roots of vegetables in the upper parts of the earth. As for the attraction of
liquid air, dewes, and raines, the earth has her Systolen, and Diastolen, her
dilatation and constriction, which we call the breath in living creatures,
she continually draws in, and sends out. Living creatures also are not
only fed by the root of the stomach, but by the air drawn in, and sent
forth by the breath, which is temperature of the hearts heat, nutritive of the
animal and vital spirits. and purgative of unnatural vapors. As the humors
have their purgative passages, so have the spirits. The ear is a purgative
vessel, as well as the instrument of hearing; and so of the other senses. To
conclude, which way soever this passage of Rivers is, they return from whence
they came; and such a circular motion is there of man, and all humane things:
Therefore in this world there is no firm ground for man to build upon; But the
securest man, and the surest state shall be dissolved, dispersed, and brought
to naught: Wherefore let every wise man build upon the Rock Jesus Christ, and
his work shall remain for ever.

Verse 8. All things are full of labor, man cannot utter it: the eye is not
satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing.
A General conclusion of all the particulars. As the generations of men, the
heavens, the winds, the waters, are restless; so are all things in their
kinds inconstant, transitory, fleeting. They travail in pain with man, they
groan under the burden of corruption with him; and their disorder, enmity,
infirmity, misery, corruption, vanity, shows forth to man that he is even
such like; yea, his condition is worse then theirs: For whatsoever is within
man, is without him; and whatsoever is without him, is within him. So that
wheresoever he turns his eyes, he may behold his vanity. The plasme, or
vessel of man's soul, is his brutall nature, which we call the body, which is
the center of the world, or union of the whole, or an universal nature,
wherein all particulars are united. For do we not see how every creature is
the Chaos to his seed, as the matter whence it first arises and issues, and
the seed again is the Chaos of the creature that arises, and issues
thereout, whose members, as David says, are fashioned day by day, when as yet
there was none of them? Psalm. 139. 16. Therefore of man there is a twofold
Anatomy, one of his body into members, another of his bodily nature into
cosmicall parts or natures, whereof he is termed the little world. As man has
a similitude, and proportion of members with all living creatures, so has he
also of their natures, and is an union or mixture of their natures. So that man
is the text, and every word in this text has his Gloss, or Commonplace, to
wit, some creature to explicate and manifest it. He that would know the work
of the Spirit in the simples, the heavens and elements, might know it in the
compounds, and how one compound is of like, or unlike conditure* affected, and
disaffected to another, kind unto kind, and kinds among themselves. All
things in their creation were placed in subordinate order, both in themselves,
and in respect of others; but by the curse was that dissolved, and contrary
ataxie, or disorder, and confusion brought upon them. To proceed, the
creatures of one element have the proportion, and similitude of the creatures
of another element, and is the same as near as the matter, and condition of
the element will afford. And every element has his degrees of creatures,
whereof one comes nearer to man's nature, than another; and one is more
particular and universal than another: but all are full of enmity, impotency,
misery, vanity. Therefore in the creatures a man may behold his condition, his
qualities, his shame, his brutishness, his misery, his vanity. For being the
most compound, and universal nature, he is subject to most corruptions,
infirmities, diseases, pains, aches, yea, to all the vanities, and miseries of
all the creatures, but yet according to the manner of his union or mixture,
whereby he is indiuiduated, and differenced from all. Hence it is that natural
men in the Scriptures are compared to beasts. For this brutality is man's
nakedness; Genesis 3. 7. showing forth it self most in those parts. When a man
keeps himself in his spirit, his nakedness is covered; when he breaks
forth into passions, yielding to his brutall plasme, id est, vessel or body,
his shame is discovered: but when his spirit seeks to satisfy it in the
lusts thereof, as Epicures do, he is a very beast, and worse than a beast. For
a beast is but his plasme, his vessel is himself, but man has a spirit to
govern his vessel, to cover his shame, of which he is termed a man. But man's
natural spirit is false, a dissembler, an ignorant, impotent, vain. It
covers shame indeed, but with a net, nay, with a menstrous cloth. For as he
cannot abide to be likened to a beast, so he strives to make himself
glorious, and by dignifying his person, and beautifying his body, and by
disguising and masking his bestiality, to beget and maintain in the minds of
men a reverend and divine estimation of him. This is indeed necessary for all
men to do, as the light of nature teaches, and for Princes and Governors
especially; yet cannot the Blackmoore change his skin, nor the Leopard his
spots. Yea, in seeking to cover shame, he most of all lays it open, (not
knowing so much) as our apparel now adays, and the putting on thereof does
testify; and in seeking to avoid brutality, and to be as a God in the eyes
and minds of men, he most of a l runs into brutalitie, and becomes a
Leuiathan, Behemoth, the most beastly of all men. It is the spirit of God that
renueth, not covering, but taking away shame, not disguising, masking, and
coloring, but transforming. Christ was not naked, nor ashamed: In him are we
built up new again, our leprosy cleansed, and the works of the Devil are
dissolved; He that is in him, need not be ashamed of any thing, though the
world count it shame to be in him, Romans 1. 16. Shameless carnals know not
their shame, namely, that their glory and boasting is bruitishnesse, and
deuillishnesse.

All things are full of labor. By things, he means, 1. All Creatures. 2.
All Actions and human affairs, whereby he strives for this imaginary
happiness, like a fool, a mad man, a wild Asses colt. By Labor, he
means the sphericall motion, the instability of things rising, decaying
fading, fainting, falling, frail, and impotent; uncertain, and corruptible,
inordinate, and full of envy, one against another, and all against man; and
those that are in some sort obedient and serviceable to man, are full of
crossenes, auknes, and uncertainty, and so are men among themselves, in all
their courses and actions. As there is no bond of love, so there can be no
coordination or co-working of things together for man's good, nor of men among
themselves for their own good. All is rents, rags, and distractions: Every
thing is for it self, and every man is for himself, as a ragge or piece rent
out of a garment, or limb cut off, imagining a felicity to himself, but by
this means running into Gods curse, and man's hatred. Every man strives to
make a concurrence, or to bring in a confluence of all things, qu^ potest, to
the extent of his power, yea, to turn the world about to his private intended
project of happy contentation, with removing all obstacles out of his way: But
it is too heavy a mass for the wild Ass, too difficult a matter for the
ouer-reaching fool, that by violence, and subtlety strives to rush or steal
into Paradise again. But against every hill there is a dale, God has set
adversity ouer-against prosperity, every thing is cross, and perverse, and
runs out into extremities, quite out of created harmony, and concord. There
can no happy contentation be at all obtained indeed, but by their
reconciliation, soliditie and constancy. But that can never be in state of
corruption, all things are so unconstant, cross, and frail, yea, so rotten,
like an old house, or corrupt body, that one part being repaired, another
falls down, and one soar being cured, two break out in another place. He
therefore that labors to make this apt concurrence of things to obtain his
imagined happiness, does but go about to gather together wild beasts of all
sorts, that run out on every side, and being with infinite labor gotten
together, will devour one another, or else all set upon him; and to bring many
men together to effect a work, that are at variance among themselves, and all
opposite to him.

Concerning human affairs, they are full of alterations and changes.
Commonwealths, private states, public businesses, domestical works, and
actions, are full of inconstancy, uncertainty, crossenesse, trouble and
grief. Such crossenesse is there in every thing, so manifold events contrary
to man's intendments, that the best gamester has commonly the worst luck: And
even those things, whereof man's wisdom and providence seem to have most
power and command, do fluctuate upon uncertain issues, in so much that he is
altogether uncertain, whether his intents shall succeed at all, and how, and
whether they shall turn to his benefit, or hinderance, to the raising up of
himself, or overthrow of himself, and that which to day he has resolutely
determined, is to morrow through unknown occurences changed and quite
disanulled. To conclude: Of all these vanities, there is a constant revolution.

Man cannot utter it. An illustration by a comparison of the Less. The
revolution, instabilitie, uncertainty, and vanity of man in himself, in his
estate, in all his ways, and imaginations, and also of the creatures with him,
is more than man by word or writing is able to express. How uncertain, and
unknown are the ordinances of Heaven? And who has set the dominion thereof in
the earth? Job 38. 33. Who can foretell the seasons of the year by the
variable configurations of the stars? Yet has God set them for times, and
seasons. And one unseasonable Summer, or Winter, Seed time or harvest, turns
all men's states vpside down, enriching one, and impouerishing another. Now the
seed rotteth with too much moisture; than both grass and grain is scorched
with heat, and how slipperie is money, and cattle uncertain? Man and his
estate therefore standing upon such foundations is altogether instable, and
uncertain. And how sure a foundation is that of the winds and the waters? Yet
the Mariner must apply and commit himself to them, he must obey them. Whether
he shall return home again he knows not, nor when, nor which way, whether
poor or rich. And whether the Sea, or Land be the safer habitation he cannot
determine. As the water swalloweth up, so the fire deuoureth, danger is every
where. The continent is inconstant, as the waters. For the earth is full of
darkness, and cruel habitations. All the foundations of the earth are out of
course. Highways, bye-wayes, and hedges are full of robbers, wild beasts,
and serpents. A man is safe no where: One lies in wait for his tongue,
another for his purse, another for his body. Again, things profitable, and
good in their kind sometimes afford no profit to the owner, and sometimes
hurt. Contrarily, things of least account, and that are as it were made for
evil, do a man the most good. What is good, what ill for a man, by all his
wisdom he cannot certainly know, no not for a moment, and blind hope is
doubtful and fearful. Whence then is joy and full contentation? How long
could it last if a man had it? The heathen showed forth this instabilitie and
uncertainty of man's estate, in their card-play, and dice-play. For these
plays are nothing but a sportfull imitation of Gods providence, under the
names of chance and fortune, with a wise disposing of those chances for the
most good, and least loss, that fortune deals. The best play, so the best
course, has often times the worst event, and contrarily. So chancefull,
changeable, and uncertain are all worldly things.

The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing. The
former comparise figured by a gradation. Man can neither utter by voice, nor by
his own observation perceive, nor by relation of others attain to the depth
of Gods wisdom in his works, nor yet of the corruption that is in them.
Although the wisest, and most exercised in the contemplation of the creatures,
and humane affairs strive never so much to satisfy his curiosity in
searching out the unknown paths of God in all things, yet can he never find
it out, nor comprehend in mind the firm foundation of God in such infinite
contingencies, casualties, inconstancies, appearances, disparences, courses,
and recourses of all things: Yea, the counsels of God are so deep, and his
ways past finding out, that man imagines that there is no knowledge, nor
government at all, or that he swayeth great matters only, which makes him so
trust to his own wisdom and providence, and thereby to work out this
happiness conceived in his vain mind. Moreover, the frailety of all
creatures in themselves, and mischievous dispositions one against another, and
all against man, are infinite. Every thing is but a Lion in the grate, their
obedience is outward compulsion, not inward affection, as in their creation.
But the frailty of man's body, instabilitie of his estate, the malice of his
heart, the wickedness of his actions against God and man, are wonderful, his
inventions are innumerable. The wicked subtilties of a woman in insnaring the
foolish, and the madness of fools is endless, Solomon says that he could
not comprehend it, Chapter 7. God only is able to deliver a man. The miseries,
troubles, disquietnesse, vexations of man, in the best commonwealth, are
manifold and great. Every one is suspicious, and afraid of other, the hearts of
men are so deceitful, their simulations, and dissimulations so many, and their
dispositions so variable. All things are carried by extremity, neither does
reason rule, nor good affection move. And this is a common deceit in every one,
in every matter to make an alledgement, and show of reason, and good will, when
it is nothing but the awe of the Magistrate, or some other compulsion, or that
one may make use of another for the time. In which case every one loves
himself, but never one another. Mischief, envy, and destruction is in the
heart of every one naturally. And a politic regiment is a grate for wild
beasts, every one having an habitation by himself, and Laws are iron chains
for mad men: If the chains were broken, and the grate broken up, we should
be as wild beasts in a forest. How many headie beasts are there, crafty
Foxes, subtle Serpents, that by money, favor, and all devices seek to wrest,
and crack these chains? How many violent and moody beasts, rushing against
the sides of the grate, making the house to shake in the parts, and sometimes
in the whole, ever waiting, watching, wishing, trying now and then to break
all open? This is the quality of every wild thing in hold. Surely if a man
look into the spirits of men, in their dealings and dissemblings, he shall
not only see a forest of beasts and serpents, but an hell of wickedness and
miseries. All is selfeloue and hatred: hence comes such fear and snatching;
For otherwise men would not so much care in whose possession the goods of the
world were, seeing the reasonable, wise, liberal, loving, and right
dispensation thereof according to the law of nature, and of Christ. Thus it was
for a little while, Acts 4. 34. 35. but that festival day lasted not long, nay
rather it lasts still among the faithful, to the worlds end. But that is
another argument. Here we speak of the condition of the dark and evil
world, and the imaginary deceitful good thereof without Christ.

To conclude: He that looks on the frailty of man, and all the creatures
with him, the interchangeable course of all things and states, and considers
the depth of causes, and reason of things, shall be forced to seek for
felicity, durable rest, or happy contentment, somewhere else than in the
confused, disordered, transitory World: For all is vanity, nothing, to none
end, like the actions of a fool, and talk of a man in his dream. This secret
God reuealeth to his secret ones: As for the men of the world, they will be
wise, great, glorious, and do great matters; they hear, they see, they
listen, they study, and strive, imagining that by a further and deeper reach
they shall find good: For they are wild asses colts. As the Spartanes
indigitating or deifying Alexander, at his command, contrary to their own
liking, wrote; Because Alexander will be a god, let him be a god: So I write;
Because these will be wise, will be great, will be glorious, will be what they
will be; then let them be so. But Alexander dyed like a man, in the flower of
his age: even so there is more hope of a fool, than of one of these wise (mad)
ones. To conclude: As the soul of man working especially by the organs of eye
and ear, cannot find perfect contentation in things and times absent; neither
ever shall it do in time to come, for all things past, and to come are the
same in their kinds, as the seasons of the year are the same for ever: So
that there is no possibility that the soul should be satisfied and filled with
good in worldly things, through the ministry of the chiefest senses, but
rather with irkesomnesse, weariness and loathsomeness.

Verse 9. The thing that has been, it is that which shall be, and that which
is done, is that which shall be done; and there is no new thing under the
Sun.
AN amplification of the Argument, or former Induction, figured by a Prolepsis,
or prevention of an Objection secretly framed in the foolish heart, which is a
wild, roauing, groundless imagination, or evil suggestion of a possibility
to obtain a durable felicity, or happy rest, in a full, firm and solid
state. It is man's ignorance and presumption to strive for that, which never any
yet had, and to do that which never was done before: He is all for novelties
and wonders. To be the only one is every man's desire, and to this point do
all his soaring thoughts aspire: Every man will needs try his wit and strength
in finding out the means to this worldly bliss, that none ever yet felt
himself entirely to enjoy: Such courses he deuiseth to take, so far to
travail, such curious inventions to find out, as never yet any did. Every man
in his kind and ways strives, as it were, to find out the stone that shall
turn iron into gold, till all his wit and silver be spent, and at the last he
brings forth wind: It was but the crackling of thorns under a pot.
Parturiunt montes, exit ridiculus Mus. With these mountanous imaginations and
windy thoughts Solomon here meets.

The thing that has been, is that which shall be, etc. Both the things that
have been, and the deeds that have been done, are even the same that now
are, and are done, and so shall be hereafter. And there is no new thing under
the Sun. An amplification by the contrary denied, to take away doubting, and
to inculcate the certain truth thereof. Under the Sun. That is, worldly or
human things, or deeds. There is a circular revolution of all things,
counsels, deeds, events, as well as of the spheres of heaven, winds and
rivers. There is a rising, falling, ascending, descending, appearance,
disparence of all things. Let the profoundest speculatist, or curious
practitioner, turn the edge of his wit which way he will to find out some new
thing, the like whereof was never yet known, nor heard, yet sure it is, the
same things have been, and the same deeds were done of old, and they are
nothing but the circular reuolutions of the former. The heart of man is the
same that it has been of old, and produces such effects good or evil; it
cannot alter it own kind, but is wheeled about in it own sphere. Some have
sought for a felicity in the studies of Wisdom; some in riches and sensual
pleasures; some in Honor, pomp and magnificence: but no man ever yet found
contentment in his present estate, without mixture of grief, grief
accompanying it, or sorrow following him hard at heels. Many have thought, and
think others happy, but none ever yet found himself happy. Suos quisque
patimur manes. If none ever yet reaped profit of his endeauours and labors,
neither then shall ever any do it now, or hereafter. Every man complayneth of
the present state of the world, and says, it was never so bad, but it is not
worse, nor yet better then it has been, neither shall it be otherwise. The
same complaints and discontent has been, and shall be, in all generations. If
a man live never so long, he shall neither see nor hear other things then
heretofore have been, neither is it in his power to alter or mend any thing;
for the world is nothing but an alteration of alterations in it self. A man
has no more command of it, than the Sea men has of the winds. Some violent
and hautie spirits have striuen forcibly for the full fruition of an earthly
happiness, but having obtained their desires, that seemed so beautiful a
far off* they found themselves no whit the better, but rather worse, yea,
nearest to misery, whereof they thought to rid themselves for ever. Therefore
it is better to sit still, than to rise and fall; to live in obscurity, than
to be a public spectacle of folly, as the most subtle and violent workers
of old have been, and so shall they be still. Every man has great hopes, as
of old, neither can he be dissuaded from this vanity, till old age bring him to
see, by long experience, this revolution of all things, and then begins he to
despair and to be weary. He is full of teastinesse, anger, and impatience when
he sees nothing but vanity, folly and madness in men.

It may be objected. If there be such a constant revolution of all things, then
there is a certain knowledge of all things to be had, and a foreknowledge of
things to come, which a man may attain to, and so obtain contentation of
mind in the speculation of divine wisdom, in the frame and government of
the world, and in this sort to be united unto God by communication of his
secret counsel, is a felicity. I answer, the particular or individual
things, and actions, with their proper circumstances, are now, and never were
before, nor shall be again, but the things and actions in their kind, and
nature, and intent, are the same that were of old. They are the same in
substance, but differenced by circumstances, or individual properties, and so
is generation from generation, Father from Son, Man from Man, Summer from
Summer, Winter from Winter, Year from Year, Day from Day: For that figure,
face, or rather countenance of the heavens which is to day, shall never be
again, or, the essence of all things in their kinds is the same, but their
existences, whereby a thing of the same kind is this, and not that, are
without number: And in this respect may a man say that there are infinite
worlds. Man cannot utter it, nor conceive it in mind, as was said before.

Verse 10. Is there any thing, whereof it may be said, See, this is new? It
has been already of old time, which was before us.
A Confirmation of the answer. There was never yet any man that could say,
this thing, or action in the substance, nature, kind, or intent thereof is
new. Such a thing was never thought, said, nor done, plotted nor effected. This
proposition is figured by a communication, to signify the certain truth
thereof. The argument is drawn from all the Specialls denied to deny the
General. The argument may be framed thus.

Prop. If there neither be nor shall be any one thing new, which has not been
of old, then all things that now are, and shall be, have been of old. Assum.
But the antecedent, or former part is true: Concl. Therefore the Consequent or
latter part is true also.
For if we shall recount from the creation till this present day, and consider
all the Saints, and Sinners, with their words and works, the manner of their
living, and behavior in all things, both toward God and man, mentioned in the
Scriptures, we shall see none other things then we now see, and shall see
with our eyes, and hear with our ears. Though there be not the same degrees,
measures, or extents, yet there is the same spirit, will, desire, endeavor,
conceit of mind, and actual performance, Qua data porta ru^nt, as power is
given, and way lies open, etc. To exemplify this that I have said. The old
Saints and Martyrs are all departed this life, and their personal works done
on earth are ceased with them, and so it is to be said of the wicked also: but
the natures and kinds of both, with all their words and works, are yet
living, and liuelily acted now in the world, and shall be, as they were then.
Christ is enuyed, persecuted, tempted, mocked, crucified to the worlds end, not
in his own person, but in his Ministers and other members. For, says Christ,
If they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, much more them of his
household? Again; All these things will they do unto you for my names sake:
yet shall they not know so much. Moreover, the same judgments of God do now
fall on the wicked, but they acknowledge them not, nor apply them; Ier. 5. 3.
because they are brutish and foolish; Psalm. 92. 6. and also the same blessings
and deliverances on the godly, that did in old time, and the godly that are
exercised and depend on the Word know it; Zach. 11. 11.

All blessings and curses were but casualties, chances, lucks, natural
effects, and events, to them that believed not, nor applied the Sermons of the
Prophets; which caused Jeremy to complain, Thou have stricken them, but they
have not grieved; thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive
correction. They hardened their faces, and refused to return. And why? because
they will not acknowledge such things to come of the Lord for sin; but they,
and we stick in the second causes, we cannot go beyond the clouds, winds,
stars, etc. therefore neither are we thankful to him for his benefits. And
if we Ministers were gifted with special revelations as the Prophets were, who
would believe us more now than they did then the Prophets? And though our
prophecies were fulfilled in their eyes, yet would they not so apply them. The
same things come to pass now that did then, though they be not now foretold
in such sort; and should have done so than, though they had not been foretold,
(for both the nonage and rudeness of the Jews required such special
revelations) and the people with all their sayings and doings are now that were
then. Thankful obedience procures the same blessings; contempt and rebellion
bring the same punishments and corrections, though they be not prophesied: For
we need no new prophesies nor miracles, seeing that the old are sufficient,
(unless God should send a new Gospel.) We are the same people, and such are
our words, works, and behauiours; and so is God the same God, not partial,
not unequal: Wherefore if the old prevail not, neither will the new. If we
want wisdom and grace to apply the old, we would acknowledge the new, no
otherwise than the Jews the old people did; Ier. 5. 3. Well, prophesies by
special revelation and miracles are ceased, but all things prophesied or
taught by the Prophets, and the efficacy of miracles* are still the same. The
Scriptures set forth the state of the World for the substance, nature, and
condition thereof, to the Worlds end, and endures throughout all generations,
which are the same, and so is it the same, and to be preached to all
generations. There is no man, good, or bad, no thought, word, or work, but
there may he see himself, his works, and thoughts of his heart plainly
depeinted forth. It is accomplished, and fulfilled in every generation; but the
eyes of the wicked are holden. Therefore if there were new prophesies, new
miracles, yea, a new Bible, it should be but the same, that which now is, in
the nature, kind, substance, and scope thereof, differing only in respect of
circumstances. To conclude. All things whatsoever a man can particularize, are
the same, that have been; the same I say, Specie, in kind or nature, not
numero, the very selfsame without individual or circumstantiall difference.

Here then is wisdom to discern the times and seasons, and to apply
after-things rightly to the former, or rather to behold things past in those
that are present; but that is hidden from most men's eyes, and it is given to
few to behold that which they hear, and read of, though it be never so
plainly acted before their eyes; yea, and he is even now acting it himself.
There i^ nothing in the written Word, but it extends in some sort to every
man, though man be a fool, and a beast, and will have nothing to concern him,
but what he lusts. So are we blinded with Satan, and bewitched with our
brutish lusts, that in hearing we understand not, and in seeing perceive not. A
just judgment of God on the wicked, which hate the truth, and embrace lies.
How many professing the name of Christ, believing in God, children of Abraham,
(as they say, and imagine) are indeed the very Princes, Priests, Pharisees, and
commons of the Jews, that heard, saw, touched, talked much of Christ, and with
Christ, but yet heard him not, saw him not? etc. They look^ for Elias to come,
but he was already come, and they did unto him whatsoever they would. He was
already come, not in his own person, but in spirit, and power. The Jews that
were garnishing the Sepulchers of the Prophets, whom their Fathers murdered,
would have murdered the same Prophets if they had been than living, and
preached as in the days of their Fathers; and they did indeed murder them
all in the great Prophet, the Son of God; Math. 23. Therefore says Solomon,
The wise man's eyes are in his head, but the fool perceives nothing of all
that is before him. Therefore they that are now living, with their words, and
works, are the same that were of old. Happy, yea, thrice happy, are the eyes
that can see this, and the heart that can understand it: but that is not given
to all. The obstinate being convicted of a deed condemned of old, may say, it
is a wrong indeed, it is unjust, I must confess, etc. but it must be so, it
cannot be remedied, etc. Again, they that do such and such things, have good
reasons for it, etc. I answer, it must be so indeed, and such reasons must go
current, and prevail: sor offenses must be as they have been of old; but woe
be to him by whom the offense comes, as it was said of old. And they had
also as good reasons in former times for their musts, as we have now for our
musts, and even the same. Woe be to them that say, we must do thus, and this,
or else, etc. I must do this, or that; or else I cannot live, etc. So the
Princes, Priests, Pharisees, Commons, must crucify Christ, for their own
security, and preservation of the Temple, City, and worship of God, (here are
good reasons.) So Judas must betray his Master, because he must have money.
Pilate must be partial, and do injustice for favor, or fear of the Jews,
though he knew the innocent and just to be persecuted of envy, and should have
given judgment rather against his false accusers, and aided, and protected him
with his power, and garrison of Soldiers, countenanced him and his doctrine,
and all that favored him; and contrarily disgraced, and weakened every
adversary: he should have obeyed the submonitions of his own conscience; but
that the wicked must not do, because they have reasons to the contrary. The
Israelites must follow the ways of Jeroboam, contrary to the voices of all the
Prophets, and so must an infinite number now adays be cross, and hateful to
all their teachers, contrary to the submonition of their consciences, because
they have reasons which many are ashamed to utter. The Jews must be
Church-robbers, purloyning, and alienating tithes, because they had good
reasons for it, such as we have for our Church-robberies: But he that must
steal, must be hanged, notwithstanding his good reasons; so the wicked must
do wickedly, because he cannot live else, or not live so, or so well as he
desires, because he must be damned. Hell fire must burn, therefore it must
have fuel.

Verse 11. There is no remembrance of former things, neither shall there be any
remembrance of things that are to come, with those that shall come after.
AN explication of the confirmation, figured also by a Prolepsis. Ob. But there
are now many things, the like whereof we never heard before: And we read of
many things, that have been said, and done, that now are not, neither are
likely to be hereafter. Ans. That is but our ignorance. For time consumes all
things: Every particular thing perishes, and every deed vanishes, but yet in
such sort as I said before. Therefore when an old thing is renewed, or clothed
with other circumstances, we observe it not, we perceive it not, no not when we
are even doing and saying that which we know to have been done and said of
old, no more then Judas knew himself to be Achitophel, and David utterly
condemned himself in another; 2 Samuel 12. 5. The Pope knows not himself to
be Caiphas, nor the Jesuits that they are Pharisees. The Pharisees knew not
themselves to be the very same with their Fathers, to speak and do even the
same things; neither knew they Christ to be Zachary, or Elias, having the
same, yea, a greater spirit, and power; Matthew 23. 29. 30. See their madness.
They condemned their Fathers, and justified themselves, because they built the
Tombs of the Prophets, and garnished the Sepulchers of the righteous, and say,
if they had been in the days of their Fathers, they would not have been
partakers with them in the blood of the Prophets. True iwis, if Moses had been
there, they would have showed themselves tenderhearted Wolves. For John 9. 28.
They were Moses Disciples, not Christ's; and yet is Moses fulfilled in him, and
Moses commanded them to hear him. Abraham rejoiced in spirit to see his day*
John 8. 56. and they boast themselves to be his children, Verse 39. But if
Abraham should have been raised from the dead, (as was Lazarius, or as Dives
would have had one risen from the dead to warn his brethren) to have
accompanied Christ in preaching and teaching these his children; they would
have done the same to their Father Abraham, and to Moses, that they did to him.
They would have crucified both Abraham, Moses, and Elias with him, as the Pope
would do Peter now. They boast that God is their Father, verse 41. but God was
now among them, not in majesty and terror, as he appeared in Mount Sinai to
their Fathers at the giving of the Law, but incarnate, appearing in their own
nature, humble and meek, teaching them all things in mildest manner, with
sufficient testimony of his Godhead: yea, evidently showing forth the majesty
and power of his Godhead, whereof themselves were convicted. What blinded them
thus? what deceived them? what bewitched them? Even their lusts. They were full
of pride, covetousness, envy; in a word, carnally minded, having a show of
religion and devotion, in doing the outward letter of the Law, and strictly
observing their own ceremonies and traditions, thereby deluding the people,
and themselves also; but what the spiritual intendment of the Scriptures was,
they were altogether ignorant. Faith in Christ their Redeemer, and the denial
of themselves, the world, the flesh, and the devil, was far from them. They
could not go before an earthly felicity, a fleshly happiness, therefore they
looked for a worldly redeemer of their states from under the power of the
Romans, etc. Their devotion was but a mask of worldly craftiness, policy,
and deuillishnesse, to blind the people with, and themselves also. The people
groaned under their burden, and in hope of liberty thronged in such multitudes
after Christ; but when such fleshly hopes failed, Judas betrayed him, and they
cried, Crucify him, away with him, (he is not for our profit) to please their
devout tyrants again, whom they had displeased in following him. Behold the
condition of these brutish hypocrites. They follow and flatter the Preacher of
the Gospel. Ioh. 6. 25* 26. 27. Not believing and humbling themselves, as Mary
did, but like rebellious belly-gods, Papists, to set up a Pope against their
King. For when they found him to be a spiritual King, Shepherd, Redeemer,
they persecuted him with deadly hatred, and had rather be under any tyrant,
than under his spiritual regiment. The Gospel is the most grievous burden
that can be borne, and the Preacher thereof the greatest tormenter. Ah, that
Papists, common-Protestants, Libertines could lay these things to heart! How
many stand up at Creed, but fight against the Gospel! How many receive the
sign of the Cross in their foreheads, but fight under the devils banner! How
many make a vow to God in Baptism, but cast the payment thereof upon their
sureties, like brutish ding* thrifts, running out like Cham, and Cain, and
devils, forth of Christ's presence, which in spirit cry out against their
teacher, What have we to do with thee, art thou come to torment us before the
time?

To conclude. All that is, and shall be done, has been done of old, but we
know not so much. Shortness of life is a great cause thereof: For few men live
so long to see the revolution or circular course of many things. And some
things and states are of longer continuance than others. Moreover, this kind
of observation, most profitable to man is neglected of most* but the wise
obseruer can foretell many things to come, or nearly aim at them.
Furthermore, the remembrance of things past dies with the present generation,
and a wonder lasts but nine days, and but a few memorable things are derived
to the next, which also vanish more and more out of their minds, and at length
remain with very few, vanishing as a sound or loud noise by little and little,
and as a bird of the air vanishes out of sight. In like sort, all things, now
said, and done in this present generation of the world, shall in future ages be
forgotten, and the like also may be said of all things in ages to come, in
respect of ages following them. To conclude: Seeing that man, and all things
with him are so unstable, and changeable, there can no good remain to man of
all his labors, no contentation of mind, no quietness of conscience. He must
seek that elsewhere: For his foundation here, shall be but laid on the sands,
and his buildings shall be but the Tower of Babel, and fall down like the
Tower of Siloam, on the head of the builder. Therefore all is vanity.

If any man think that this following is the more natural analysis of this
former part of the Chapter, I easily yield to it. The first verse contains
the inscription of the book. The second verse contains the Theme or general
proposition. The third verse contains the principal argument, which is
confirmed by two reasons in this chapter. The first is drawn from the
instabilitie of man dying, verse 4. illustrated first by a comparison of the
earth standing and remaining, verse 4. end. Secondly, by a comparison of the
Sun, Winds, Rivers, rising, falling, and returning back again, which man
does not, verse 5. 6. 7. To which purpose Catullus.
the Poet says.

Soles occidere, and redire possunt:
Nobis cum semel occidit breuis lux,
Nox est perpetua vna dormienda.
The heavenly Lamps do As it seems to them that stand on the w^st^rne, and
eastern shore.
fall into the gulf,
And issue forth again out of the deep:
When our swiftstarre of life is vanished,
It nere returns, in death we ever sleep.
And to the same purpose Job says, There is hope of a tree, if it be cut
down, that it will sprout again, and that the tender branch thereof will not
cease, though the root thereof wax old in the earth, and the stock thereof
dye in the ground, yet through the sent of waters it will budde, etc. But man
dies and wastes away, yea, man gives up the ghost, and where is he? Job 14.
7. 8. 9. 10. The winds also are rolled in their circuits, and the rivers keep
their constant revolution, they return back again.

The second reason is drawn from the instability of all creatures, states, and
human affairs, illustrated by a comparise of the less, which is figured by
a gradation, verse 8. amplified by a prolepsis, verse 9. confirmed, verse 10.

Verse 12. I the Preacher, was King over Israel, in Jerusalem.
Here begins the latter part of the Chapter, wherein Solomon shows that
he found not only by observation, but also by experience in the studies of
wisdom, that all things are but vanity and vexation of spirit, both the
things themselves, and man's wisdom and knowledge of the things also. All
things are instable, frail, and full of corruption, no sure thing can be built
upon them, no felicity can proceed out of vanity, no perfection out of
imperfection. For the curse is on man* and on all things with man, therefore
there must needs such like effects proceed from them. For a clean thing
cannot come out of filthiness, Job 14. 4.

His purpose is to show that he made search in the best things, wherein there
was appearance of any good, which man most desired and admired. And first he
began with wisdom, which of all other things being merely transitory, is
the flower. For as for other things they are not so preeminent, because fools,
and beasts may be partakers thereof as well as the wise, to wit, riches,
honors, friends, pleasures, beauty, strength; but wisdom is proper to the
wise only, by which a man is a man, and comes nearest to the divine nature:
Therefore true happiness was likelyest to be found in wisdom.

The argument whereby he confirms the unprofitableness of human wisdom,
and things seeming good, is drawn from the testimony of his experimental
knowledge of things subject to knowledge and science, in the rest of this
chapter, and of things subject to man's bodily use, chap. 2. The things subject
to knowledge are either natural with their causes, properties, effects, or
else moral, both good and evil, both wisdom, madness, and folly. The
testimony of experimental knowledge he declares and proves to be firm and
good by two arguments. The first is drawn from the person searching out the
knowledge of things by observation and experience, verse 12. Secondly, from his
diligent travail therein. Of this travail, First, he propounds his
counsel, verse 13. Secondly, he declares the effect thereof. Thirdly, he
expounds both his reuiew; and determination or judgment thereof, verse 14
His determination he confirms by a reason, verse 15. All is figured by a
prolepsis, verse 16. 17. and concluded, verse 17. which is confirmed, verse 18.

The first argument confirming the certainty of his experimental knowledge,
is drawn from the condition of his person, (King) and therefore of farthest
extent, and reach, of de^pest apprehension, and largest comprehension, as he
that on an high hill sees farthest, and comprehends most. Men of private
state are but of private, straight, and and particular wits, experienced, and
exercised in few and inferior things, and also disturbed many ways. But a
King is as the Sun, comprehending all things, superior, and inferior within
the compass of his sight, and is elevated* as I may say, above the troubled
regions of the Air, (all things being placed under him) and free from all
obstacles in a firmly established and peaceable commonwealth, as this of
Israel now was: In a word, he is Gods vicegerent, the nearest attendant to
him, of his privy counsel, ever in presence and sight, on whose hand, as I
may say, the great King leans. David was a man of war, but God gave Solomon
peace with all nations, and all nations were serviceable to him: Wherefore? The
more freely to live in ease, and fleshly pleasure? To do as brethren do often
times falling at variance among themselves for want of an outward adversary,
against whom they may join in unity of contention? Or that the members of the
body should devour and consume one another for want of matter to work upon
from the stomach? No such thing: For that is brutish and ethnicall: But he
gave him peace that he might build him an house, a glorious house. He gave
him wisdom with peace, to govern his people prudently, and to teach them the
fear of the Lord, to stablish the whole worship of God in perfection,
according to the Law. To glorify the Lord in erecting his house, and
stablishing his worship, that the beauty of both might be an astonishment to
the nations, that the God of Israel might be glorified in all the earth.

To conclude, his Kingly office is amplied by the subject, or object (Israel)
the people of God, and therefore the most excellent, and glorious King. Lastly,
by the place, (in Jerusalem) Jerusalem the city of God, the beauty of
holiness, the paradise of the world renewed, the joy of the whole earth. Now
being a King, he wanted no means to attain to knowledge, neither authority
to enquire and demand the opinions, and judgments of others, nor ability to
get and use all means requisite for exquisite knowledge.

Verse 13. And I gave my heart to seek and search out by wisdom, concerning
all things that are done under heaven: this sore travail has God given to the
sons of men, to be exercised therewith.
THe second Argument, confirming the certainty of his experience drawn from
his diligent travail and accurate endeavor. As he wanted not power and
ability to procure and use all means; so neither wanted he desire and
diligence: For he gave himself wholly, not only to seek by wisdom to know
things, but to search out by observation and trial, according to wisdom, the
causes, properties, and effects, and the reason of all things that are, and are
done under heaven. But this he did not in pride and curiosity, but in
modesty, accordingly as he found himself gifted of God, 1 King. 4. 33. For God
is the father of lights, the gifts of his spirit are lights shining in
darkness. Wisdom is with God, and proceeds out from the throne of God,
which whosoever wan^eth can never attain to the true knowledge of him, because
his worldly heart is full of darkness. For God has subdued all things under
vanity, which the blind world knows not, or but dreamingly notes, (which
makes flesh and blood so proud) from which no man can rid himself, strive he
never so much, but rather does still, as the proud curious heritickes did,
increase vanity, error, and folly, as the hydropical body by thirsting and
striving to quench thirst by drinking, does increase the discase, and in the
end destroy it self. The heathen kept neither mean nor measure in the curious
and ambitious search of the wisdom of God in the world, and his secret
counsel in the use of his creatures: But for as much as the end of their
endless labors was not the glory of God, even subjection to him in fear and
thankful obedience, but their own vainglory, praise, pleasure,
foolishness, impiety, they found not that which they sought for: For a fool,
says Solomon seeks wisdom and finds it not, but wearieth himself in a
Labyrinth; and so became vain in their worldly imaginations. Wherefore because
they sought to know God out of his Church, and to assume the glory thereof to
themselves by returning their own eyes, and the eyes of men after them, to
exalt and magnify them; as he that seeks praise by the curious description
of a cunning work, but forgets, yea despises the workman himself, and
because they thought and sought to comprehend the infinite majesty and
wisdom of God, in the creation and government, by humane capacity, and
travail, without the Spirit and Word of God, therefore were they blinded, like
the Sodomites seeking Lots door, groping all their life after that which they
could never find, attaining only to so much as served to quicken the worm of
their dead consciences to make them inexcusable.

Furthermore, as God has by a general decree in the beginning laid sore
travel on man to humble his pride thereby, in so much that nothing can be
gotten without great labor since the fall; so neither can he attain to the
knowledge of wisdom without diligence: For the gift is indeed freely given of
God, but we must receive it by the appointed means. Therefore although he
granted the request of Solomon, in giving a wise and understanding heart above
all that were before him, or after him, yet he applied himself to the study
and contemplation of all things, and to find out the secrets of Gods wisdom
by careful observation, and experience. So that in the studies of knowledge,
there is great affliction both of body and mind: First, because some never
attain to true wisdom, but fall into vain imaginations, and manifold
errors, and so when they think to be wise, they become fools. The just
judgment of God on their proud presumption, Romans 1. 22. Of those kinds of
studies these words of Solomon may be understood, This sore travail has God
given, etc. Secondly, they that are moved, and directed by the spirit of God
to the right end, and so attain to wisdom, are greatly humbled with infinite
toil as well as the husbandman; and in the end see nothing but vanity, even
matter of grief, both in the things that are known, and in the knowledge it
self. For they are still as far from contentation and peace of conscience,
as ever they were. For no worldly thing can make a man happy. So that although
a man had all knowledge, without Christ it is nothing; Paul esteemed it but
loss and dung, Phil. 3. Of this wisdom, I rather think the words to be
understood.

Verse 14. I have seen all the works that are done under the Sun, and
behold, all is vanity, and vexation of spirit.
IN the former verse he propounded his counsel, in the applying of himself to
get knowledge and experience, not of some things, but of all things. Here he
declares the success or effect thereof. I have seen all the works, etc. I
have indeed by the gift of God obtained that understanding which I sought for:
For I have seen it with mine eyes, I have read it in the Book of Nature, the
holy Spirit of wisdom instructing, and directing me. God has given me a
right and true discerning of all that I have seen, and discoursed on, by
sanctified reason. Every man hears and sees as well as Solomon, but no man
rightly discerns ought, but by the revelation of the Spirit. For a man is a
beast by his own knowledge, a fool, darkely led, deceived by Satan, and such
like are his observations. If a man look on the fairest letters, and cannot
read, what is he the better? Solomon attained not to this height of wisdom
by reading of the natural and moral Treatises of the Egyptians, Chaldeans,
Assyrians, Gimnosophists, discoursing by imagination upon other men's works,
and culling sentences out of them, to make a show of that which was not in him;
wherein indeed many excellent things are buried, as in dark and confused
Mines, (yet but wild fruit, proceeding from the wild Olive) out of which
notwithstanding a divine and sanctified spirit can extract good matter, and
convert it into the right nature and use thereof, as it may be Solomon did,
some may think; but the Kings of Israel were to be exercised in the Book of
the Law only, not in Ethnicall vanities, which commonly we call learning. What
their wisdom was, the Proverbs, the Canticles, the Son of Sirach, the
Book of Wisdom, make manifest, which differ much from ethnicall moral
Treatises, which are the wild fruits of wild trees, and wild ones are most
addicted to them; such lips, such lettuce. But Solomon saw with his eyes, and
rightly conceived in mind what he saw, by the special illumination of the
Spirit of God, which gave such a plentiful blessing to his holy endeauours,
that he became famous for his wisdom among all the wise men, and Kings of the
earth; who were desirous to hear of the wisdom which God put in his heart; 1
King. 10. 24. So that even his servants were counted happy, that attended on
him, and heard his wisdom.

Here we note that there is twofold learning or knowledge in a man; the one is
obtained by reading of men's books, the other by reading in the Books of God.
The former kind of wisdom is imitation, which we commonly call learning: It
is gotten by imagination and strength of memory: It is a talkatiue learning,
which a man relates from the mouth of another, not from an understanding
heart. A parable is harsh in a fools mouth, and so is learning. He has not,
as our Savior says, Radicem vel semen in s^ipso, Root, or seed in himself,
hewants the seed or principles of that whereof he talks in himself. It is
therefore but speculatiue and childish, and as it were an artificial or
painted complexion, whereof a man boasts, vainly pust up in his ignorant
mind. Hi volunt se primos omnium rerum esse, nec sunt: but the other is modest
and humble. For it is gotten by reading in the Books of God. Yet a^ the Book
of the Word being sealed up, or clasped, affoordeth no knowledge; Esaias 29. 11.
no more do the creatures, when our eyes are held. The creatures sound out the
majesty, power, wisdom, justice, goodness, mercy, glory of God; as also the
corruption, folly, shame, vanity, and misery of man. For in them he may see his
nakedness, his curse. But the fool perceives nothing of all that is before
him: He neither beholds the glory of God in them with praise and fear, nor
his own nakedness, and brutishness with shame. If God open our eyes and
ears, yea, give life unto ou^ dead senses, unfolding this book unto us; then
shall we be able to read in this book, the Spirit shall bring all things to
our remembrance, (we hear and see confusedly in a slumber, and imperfectly, as
children) and shall gine us ripe understanding in all things, both to behold
the reverend and glorious wisdom of God in his workmanship, as David says; I
am fearfully and wonderfully made, and his secret counsel, with his goodness
in the use of those his vessels, and the effect, and use of that vanity that is
in them.

In one generation may a man observe, and know even by sight, all things
whatsoever have been taught by word or writing, divine or humane, since the
beginning of the world, forasmuch as all things are the same in their circular
courses. But if a man be not guided by the Spirit, his observations are but
superstitious, and false rules, his readings erroneous, yea, though he has
read all Books, and has not root or seed in himself, he is but in a maze
tossed too and fro, hearing and seeing as in a dream: In a word, he wants
wisdom, he has no learning. Wherefore men must not presume above their gift,
nor run before they be called; but work according to their talent.

And behold, all is vanity, and vexation of spirit. After that he had traveled
for knowledge, and obtained knowledge; now thirdly he takes a reuiew, or
reflection in his mind thereof, to consider what benefit or fruit redounded,
or might redound to him thereby, and with all presently determines the case
most plain and evident. And] when I had sought, and searched, and known what
I could; Behold] mark, consider, and remember what I say, All is vanity] both
knowledge, and things known, every thing was empty of good, full of evil, I
had nothing but labor for travel. After that Solomon had known all things,
not by their shadows and pictures, namely, by reading books, and relation of
voice; but seen with his own eyes, and things seen most affect and please:
yet he found no profit of this his labor, no contentation, no happy rest. Why?
Because all was but vanity and vexation of spirit, or the feeding of the soul
with wind. The Hebrew word signifies either in differently; He got nothing
but labor for his travail, and grief for his care. Contrarily, he that
drinks the waters of life, his thirst shall be quenched; John 4. and he that
eats the bread of life, his hunger shall be satisfied; John 6. There is the
true and everlasting food of the soul, which only gives contentation, that
foolish man so greedily elsewhere seeks for, but never finds.

Verse 15. That which is crooked, cannot be made straight: and that which is
wanting, cannot be numbered.
A Reason why he found no contentation, no profit by the diligent search of
wisdom, drawn from the subject or object thereof, the things themselves,
which were not in man's power, and providence, nor reformable by his wisdom,
but in the hand of God; Chap. 3. 11. and Chap. 7. 13. For in all the parts of
the World, in all living creatures, chiefly in man, and civil states, there is
nothing but corruption, enmity, vanity, misery. The creatures, and man
himself, the success and event of things and businesses, are crooked,
perverse, confused. If a man labor to build up some sure work upon the
creatures, it is a vain travail, and brings forth vexation. For they are
frail, weak, imperfect; they decay, alter, perish, and are subject to
innumerable infirmities and casualties, which crookedness no man can remedy.
To speak more fundamentally, every thing in nature is perverse, and
disordered, one thing is distracted from another, the unity of the whole engine
is dissolved, the uniform subordination disioynted by sedition, all things
transuerse and perverse, every thing enuiously eying, and destroying another,
through the poison of enmity that is in them, as if the parts of the body
should fall at odds, every thing following a corrupt inclination and
inordinate affection of it own; neither can they be brought into the right
frame of subordinate unity, of m^tuall duty, and love one to another, and all
to man, or man to man, and man to God, by any power or wisdom of man. The
creatures in their kinds are all self-love, pride, cruelty, pernicious, and
dangerfull one to another, and all to man, and man to man. They are miserable
in themselves, and add misery one to another through enmity and mischief.
Some reconciliation I grant, is made among some of the creatures one with
another, and with man, by the wisdom and labor of man, taming and teaching
them, and so also is there some reconciliation of men among themselves in a
politic government* but the best unity, and uniformity, is imperfect, weak,
crooked, full of corruption, vanity, and misery. No felicity can be built
thereon, no contentation can be found therein.

To proceed, as all things are thus crooked in their kinds, so is man more
crooked then the rest. His mind is depraved, full of blindness; his passions
or affections are inordinate; his body is subject to innumerable diseases. It
is the corrupt vessel or instrument of a more corrupt soul: Yea, man's
crookedness is an union or mixture of the crookednesses of all the creatures.
This crookedness can he never make straight by all his wisdom, which is
crooked it self. All humane science cannot give one spark of true light, nor
rid the soul from one drop of poison, wherewith it is infected* The blood of
Christ only must purge it. The wisest Philosophers, Naturalists, and
Moralists, when they had done all they could, yet their crookedness remained
in them. The ciuilest and best thief is but a thief: What was Alexander but a
thief? And the ciuilest and fairest conditioned whore is but a whore: The
whore Flora, deifyed by the Romans, and honored with festival days, was but
a beastly sade. What else can the truth make of these two persons? Such like
indeed differ much from the rude, unmannerly, and savage people, yet are they
beasts as well as they. The flesh of Iezabell was but dogs meat, and the
blood, the royal blood of Ahab, dogs drink. No better was the corpse of
Iehoiakim, Ie^. 22. 19. then the carkeise of an Ass.

Moreover, from this crookedness of the creatures, and of man, proceed many
crosses, unluckiness, innumerable dangers, many misfortunes and casualties in
every best course that the wisest can take, and so is all his labor lost,
there remains no fruit to him, but grief and vexation. Therefore in the best
composed state of things there is naught but deformity, imperfection,
weakness, want of vigor and strength, diseases, infirmities, sicknesses,
strange casualties, sudden misfortunes, untimely deaths, which all creatures,
with man, are subject unto. Again, the best ordered state, or commonwealth is
full of wants, full of superfluities and running into extremities on both
hands, full of cruelties, of oppressions, and partial dealings, and that of
favor, envy, revenge* Unworthy persons are preferred and honored, the
best-deseruing are dejected, vice is graced and inri^hed, virtue is
discountenanced and suppressed. In principal matters there is negligence,
carelessenesse, remissness: In trifles there is much curiosity and
contentions; Judgment is deferred, laws are distorted, and such like things,
without number, which it is as hard for any Prince by wisdom and power to
reform, as to regenerate or restore whole nature again unto her first
integrity. If we consider the state and condition of the creatures themselves,
and one toward another, the defectiuenesse, crookedness, crossenesse of all
things, with their events and casualties, we shall find it to be impossible
to lay any groundwork thereon, whereupon to erect an happy estate.

To conclude: Seeeing that a wise man in the abundance of knowledge sees
nothing but perverseness and weakness, the one whereof cannot be reformed,
the other not helped, neither of them remedyed, he reapeth no joy, no comfort
by such sights, but anger, disquietnesse, grief, and has satisfied his
desire, and expectation of happy rest no more then he that eats and drinks
wind to satisfy the bodies appetite, when the one is fatted, the other shall
be contented.

Verse 16. I communed with mine own heart, saying, Lo, I am come to a great
estate, and have gotten more wisdom then all they that have been before me
in Jerusalem: yea, my heart had great experience of wisdom and knowledge.
AN amplification of the confirmation handled, Verse 12. 13. 14. 15. by a
comparison of all Kings that reigned before him in Jerusalem, figured by a
Prolepsis, thus: Thou may happily be deceived in this matter, through partial
conceit of extraordinary wisdom, and therefore having but an ouerly
consideration of things, and being blinded with the veil of the common
imperfections of things, and follies of vulgar people, and distempered Princes,
have not rightly beheld to what happy state, and contentation a man may
attain in this life by the right and perfect understanding of things and by
the provident and prudent carriage of himself in all things, etc. Ans. Neither
the dullness of apprehension, nor the weakness of judgment, nor want of
diligence have been any let to me in this search. For I have not attempted
this of pride, nor spoken it of arrogance, as puffed up with a vain imagination
of wisdom, but I have impartially communed with mine own heart, and have
found that as God has given me riches and power; so also has he given me
wisdom and knowledge of all secrets, above all the Kings that reigned before
me in this treasury of wisdom, Jerusalem, the City of the great King:
Neither do I deceive my self with the ouerly discourse of manifold
imaginations, and groundless conclusions, but my heart has seen great
wisdom and knowledge, I have fundamentally observed and had the ocular
experience of things, their natures, causes, properties, effects, uses, etc.

Verse 17. And I gave my heart to know wisdom, and to know madness, and
folly: I perceived that this also is vexation of Spirit.
A Continuation of the same answer. As I perceived in my heart that I had
received of God a greater measure of discerning, and sensible insight above
others, so according to my uttermost ability, I diligently exercised my self
in searching out, yea following the even tract and way of wisdom in her
works, so far forth as man is able to apprehend, and comprehend her.
Consequently by the rule of wisdom I examined the wisdoms, doctrines, and
instructions of men, even the manifold, ^arring, and repugnant opinions of men,
and the proud errors of contentious men, who greedily affecting the admiration
of their wits do by intruding themselves into things above their re^ch bewray
great ignorance, foolishness and madness both in natural things, and matter
of estate: I perceived that this also is vexation of spirit. A conclusion of
his former reu^iw, determination or judgment, Verse. 14. To conclude, as I by
wisdom sought out the knowledge of natural things, and found that all was
nothing but vanity and vexation of spirit: so have I more then that sought out,
examined, and tried the understanding of moral things, good, and evil, and I
find as before, that this is also full of vexation; Wisdom on the one side
being incomprehensible, and the consideration of such men, their opinions, and
doings being wearisome and grievous to the spirit on the otherside, yea, their
madness is endless.

Verse 18. For in much wisdom is much grief: and he that increases
knowledge, increases sorrow.
A Reason why that seeking after knowledge, both of wisdom and folly, there
is no contentation of mind, but vexation of spirit. For the further that a man
searches into the bottom of things, to give fuller satisfaction to his heart,
the more grief he finds, and sorrow is increased with knowledge: For,

First, the accurate search, and discussing by examination and judgment of
that which is fought, is a great affliction to body and mind.

Secondly, when a man has done what he can, he has only attained to the
sight of that great darkness of ignorance that is in him, Chap. 7. 23. 24.
which he thinking by study to expel, does more increase it, that is, he more
and more sees into what a deep dungeon, he and all men are fallen by the
sin of Adam.

Thirdly, it is difficult, troublous, full of intricate questions, and
distracting doubts, endless, and withal transitory. It is neither perfectiue
of him that has it, nor perfectiue of other men, or their matters.

Fourthly, the more that a wise man knows, he still more, more and more
beholds greater corruption, vanity, folly, madness, and misery, wherewith
his spirit is discomforted, and grieved, his heart is heavy, his mind
dispairefull. So that he is farther off from happiness then the ignorant, that
knows nothing. For he works and eats, and drinks and sleeps soundly,
he is without care, he is heartily merry, and so is strong and healthful.

Fifthly, when a man has transcended common capacities, his dark parables,
instructions, and counsels, of many shall be had in contempt, of others he
shall be enuyed, and his wisdom shall be but the white of a But to be shot at,
of some he shall be suspected, and suppressed, for Princes are suspicious of
the godly-wise-learned, I think because their rudeness and nakedness lies
open to their judicious eyes; which made Nero kill his master Seneca; or else
desire ignorance that the thousand-headed beast might be better held under the
yoke of government: For if they be wise and godly, the rude Princes think that
their nakedness lies open, whereof contempt follows. This is ethnicall
policy. Contrarily, the wise and godly Prince shall by his wisdom, and
godliness bind the consciences of his people, and cause them to reverence and
dread him, as Job said of himself. This is the only security of a Prince, as
of Job, David, Solomon, Josiah. Moreover, if the wise would have the benefit of
his wisdom to redound to many, he must descend to their meannesse, and
rudeness, and of a plentiful seed-sowing most commonly reap little, and
sometimes nothing.

Sixthly, he shall see the fool oft-times graced, countenanced, preferred for
money, and other sinister respects, when he for all his wisdom shall not be
regarded, but be buried in obscurity, and oblivion.

Seauenthly, If a man understand all mysteries, and all knowledge, and that no
secret be hid from him, all cannot free him from death, but it shall rot in the
grave with him: Wherefore if a man know not himself to be in the number of
Gods Elect, if in the curious search of all things, he cannot find that in
himself, what contentation, rest, joy, quietness of conscience, what
happiness can knowledge bring him? nay rather it will increase his sorrow.
Wherefore all human knowledge is vain, even nothing, and worse then nothing.
For when a man has attained to all knowledge that can be comprehended in man's
brain, the Devil has still more then he: For he has been in the kingdom
of glory, and seen God face to face. And if a man had as he has, how much
still should he be the better? Surely, if a man know not only the depth of
Gods wisdom in the world, but the secrets of the kingdom of glory, and of
the damnation of hell, and also could by words utter them, he should
notwithstanding live in miserable perplexity all his life, till he had this
saving knowledge, which should be his only joy and comfort both in life and
death.

This only should sweeten all the miseries of this life, whereas the other
does exacerbate, and turn all the prerogatives, delights, and pleasures of
this life into gall, and wormwood. There is no felicity on earth but this;
fear God, and keep his commandments: For he that has obtained all worldly
wisdom, cannot by the same work out a felicity to himself in this crooked
state, and vain condition of all things.

CHAPTER II.
Verse 1. I said in my heart, go to now, I will prove thee with mirth,
therefore enjoy pleasure: and behold, this also is vanity.
SOlomon having found no profit, no happy contentation in knowledge, nor in
things subject to knowledge, purposes now to try what contentation may redound
to him by the use of the creatures, all care cast away, whereof above other men
he had the full possession and fruition. This verse contains 1. a
declaration of his counsel about the finding out of the chief good, by the
trial of another way. 2. his determination or censure, which is amplified by a
note of attention, or asseueration, I said in my heart, etc. As if he should
say, I have already tried what profit the studies of wisdom can afford; but
neither in contemplation, nor in experimental knowledge found I any thing,
save only much affliction of the flesh, and vexation of mind; for
contentation cannot be attained, nor grieuances avoided thereby. Well, then I
purposed in my heart to prove what profit the use of worldly things might bring
unto me: And first of all, it is before I subdued my body to the spirit of my
mind, supposing that the chief good wherein the soul rests contented, was
to be traced out by that path whereby a man comes nearest unto God, but found
no contentment at all, yea contrarily sorrow; so now on the contrary, I fell
into a consideration of the uses of the manifold creatures of God, for man's
necessity, comfort, and delight. Therefore now I began to apply and exercise
my wisdom in the cheering, and pampering of the flesh, in bathing my self in
the pleasures and delights of the sons of men: I withheld nothing from the
desires of my heart, but yielding my self to all my bodily appetites, as far
forth as lawfully I might, to try what more profit and better contentment I, or
any other that is most delighted in this way, might find in this course of
life. But when I reflected my spirit upon the consideration of this way also, I
saw that here was nothing but vanity. For there is no steadfastness in the
things that consume away even with the moderate using, and the body together
with them also, and the immoderate use thereof would be a greater burden to the
flesh, than the immoderate studyes of Learning. Because immoderation in this
kind would bring a sure and sudden destruction both to body and soul.
Wherefore neither in the moderate nor immoderate use thereof was there any
felicity, but vanity.

Verse 2. I said of laughter, it is mad: and of mirth what does it?
A Confirmation of the censure: Mirth and pleasure are vanity. For when I had
sought out and tried what contentment epicurish and sensual living could
afford to him that is most addicted to it; I saw that laughter was mad, and
mirth reasonlesse, both vain. For indeed the matter of laughter is man's
shame, or nakedness; it is folly, or brutalitie to be lamented, not laughed
at. For let a man laugh at what he will, and but smile at any thing, when he
returns to sobriety of heart, and to the prudent consideration of himself,
and the thing that he laughed at, he shall find it to be folly, vanity,
misery, I mean a slip, or defect of that wisdom, prudence, providence,
and reason in some saying, deed, or event which is not in the perfect image of
God, nor in man as he is man, to wit, grave, wise, reverend, honorable,
perfect in this imperfect state that no light conceit of him, his words,
actions, events in the minds of men should move laughter. For what matter of
laughter is there in the persons, speeches, deeds, events of reverend Sages,
Kings, Judges, of Christ, and of God? Our Savior Christ often sorrowed, but we
cannot learn that ever he laughed, neither yet conceive at what he should
laugh. It is recorded in stories that the Philosopher Heraclitus always wept
and sorrowed, because he saw nothing but vanities and misery, yea,
bruitishnesse in all the dealings of men, whether in their sobriety or
laughter. Contrarily, Democritus always laughed. What was the matter or object
of his laughter? Even the folly, madness, vanity, brutalitie of men, which
by laughter he neither rejoiced at nor approved. Finally, whenever a man
laugheth at things great or small, let him by gathering onething of another but
diue to the ground of his laughter, and he shall find some matter of grief
and repentance, both in the person, or thing laughed at, and in himself, or at
least in the one. For if Adam had never fallen, there should never have been
laughter, nor weeping, but an heart possessed with heavenly joy, even joyful
sobriety.

The epicurish and sensual laughter therefore that Solomon here speaks of,
is madness, even the corruption and intemperance of reason, the froath of
vain imaginations, the superfluity of the spleen, corrupted by the fall, and
bewrays often times much sin in the soul, which brings grief and
repentance. And as laughter was madness, so was mirth unreasonableness, or
foolishness. For it neither causaily brings out of it self, nor yet
accidentally occasioneth any profit.

It is short, and vanishing, dying with the action, like the stroke of an
instrument, and the taste of honey: The one whereof in the continual use
grows wearisome, and is in the end the greatest toil; the other grows
bitter, and is in the end very loathsome: Neither afford solid contentment.
For he that makes the time of this life but a play, is as he that makes it
but a market: Both shall receive the same judgment; the one for his Iouil^y,
as the lewd Iauils of these days term it, the other for his drudgery. Both
are their own Idols, opposite one to another, and both to God. Therefore are
both, the carfulness of the one, and carfulness of the other, a burden to
the conscience. So that in laughter and mirth, wine and women, dissoluteness
and luxury, there is no felicity, but vanity, no contentation, but desperation.
Yet notwithstanding all this we must put a difference between the common
frailty of man's nature, which God passes by, and the sinful laughter of the
wicked.

Verse 3. I sought in mine heart to give my self unto wine (yet acquainting
mine heart with wisdom) and to lay hold on folly, till I might see what was
that good for the sons of men, which they should do under heaven all the
days of their life.
AN exposition or declaration of Solomon's counsel concerning the finding out
of the chief good, by the trial of another way, which is the exercise of his
wisdom in pomp, and magnificence, to the end of the tenth verse. First he
found no content in the studies of learning, or speculations of the mind:
Secondly, he found less comfort in the contrary course, bodily pleasures: Now
thirdly he will try the ^^xt or middle course, in the right use of all worldly
delights, and bodily pleasures, according to the direction of wisdom, which
is the glory of a King, even that thing which all men count happiness. And for
the attainment of his intended purpose, he fared still deliciously, and by
wisdom beheld the follies and vanities thereof: Namely, how Princes wanting
wisdom, abused themselves in the dissolute and immoderate use of these
delights, and all prerogatives, yea often times transformed themselves into the
natures of beasts, that so he might behold the true and right use thereof, and
consequently find out, yea work out a perfect contentation to himself in such
an happy state during the time of life, as many men have dreamed of, and aimed
at, but none for lack of wisdom to enter into, and keep the right path,
have attained. As the Al^hymists hold a possibility of making their
Philosophers stone, to turn iron into gold; so do men imagine a possibility
of a worldly felicity to change sinful wretches into gods. But as the most
learned could never find the one, so neither shall the most wise and wealthy
ever find the other. For this cause does God lay sore travail, and crosses on
men, to humble their pride thereby. For we children of Adam would feign be as
Gods; Genesis 3. 5 6. We strive violently to run back into Paradise again, but
that is done away, and another is set before us, into which earthly dregs
have no desire to enter: For the Eele loves the mudde, not the crystal
Springs, and the Toade loves scumme and ditches, not the Palace.

Verse 4. I made me great works, I builded houses, I planted me Vineyards.
AN hypotyposis or lively description of the acting and effecting of his
counsel, to wit, his worldly pomp, and magnificence, by an enumeration of
diverse particulars. First, he propounds the same generally; I made me great
works. All the works that I did were curious, and costly, as man's wit could
devise the manner, and the world could afford the matter. So that the seat of
my Palace in all the works thereof, was as it were a resemblance of the
World, and the glory thereof, that mine eyes, and senses being filled with what
pleasures and delights my heart could imagine, I might enjoy full contentment.
To which purpose I built me houses most large and spacious, whose timber works
were of Cedars, and pillars of Almug trees; I made me Chambers and Galleries
for all uses, for necessary uses, for delights, and pleasures, for
solitariness, and private meditation, for Summer and Winter, etc. For Cedars
and silver were as plentiful with me, as stones in the streets, and Sycomore
trees in the dales. Of gold I had abundance. For there came yearly six
hundred sixty six talents of gold, besides that which I had of Merchant men,
and spice Merchants, of the Kings of Arabia, and Governors of the Country. I
made me a great throne of Iuory, and ouer-laide it with the best gold, the like
whereof was not in any Kingdom. All my drinking vessels were of gold, and all
my vessels of the Forest of Lebanon were of pure gold. I had also abundance of
precious stones, Jewels, spices, ointments, odours, and what precious things
the earth could afford, were sent to me for presents. I had 1 King. 4. 7. 22,
etc.
twelve Officers over all Israel, to provide victuals for me, and my household. I
had for one days provision thirty measures of fine flower, and sixty measures
of meal, ten fat Oxen, and an hundred Sheep, besides Hearts, and Roe-bucks, and
Fallow Dear, and fatted Foul. So that the meat of my Table, the sitting of
my Servants, the attendance of my Ministers, and their apparel, my Butlers,
etc. were an astonishment to Princes. Moreover, I had four thousand stables 2 Chronicles. 9. 25. 1 Kings 4. 26. Chap. 10. 26.
of Horses for my Chariots, ten Horses in every Stable, forty thousand in all. I
had fourteen hundred Chariots, and twelve hundred Horsemen. I made me two
hundred Targets of beaten gold, six hundred sheckles went to one Target. I
made me also three hundred shields of beaten gold, three pound of gold went to
one shield. Also I was at peace with all Kings, which did reverence to me, and
sent me presents, who were desirous to hear of my wisdom, and of my works.
My Princes and Officers also were loyal and faithful to me. So that I enjoyed
the fullness of prosperity, and security. And because no pleasant thing might
be wanting to me, I planted me vineyards, and furnished them with the choysest
Vines of all sorts.

Verse 5. I made me Gardens, and Hortyards, and I planted trees in them of all
kind of fruits.
SEcondly, I made me also Gardens, contrived by the art of the best workmen,
and filled them with all manner of pleasant plants, and herbs. I made me
hortyards, and planted therein trees of all kinds of fruits, pleasant to my
sight, and delightful to my taste, resembling even the Garden of GOD.

Verse 6. I made me pooles of water, to water therewith the wood that brings
forth trees.
THirdly, I made me also Cisternes to convey waters from the Springs, and
Fountains, to water my Gardens and Hortyards, and other trees therewith in the
times of drought, to preserve them fresh and green for the pleasure of mine
eyes, and to make their flowers and fruits more beautiful, and delicious.

Verse 7. I got me servants and maidens, and had servants borne in my house;
also I had great possessions of great and small Cattle, above all that were in
Jerusalem before me.
FOurthly, I got me also men-seruants and maid-seruants, such as had been well
trained up, and were fit for the service of Princes, both in regard of their
persons and qualities. I had also others borne in my house, the children of
Captives, even the choysest, and best qualified of those that had been taken
captives in the wars. Also I had great possessions of Cattle, both of Oxen
and Sheep, of Horses, Camels, and Mules, partly for the provision of my House,
partly for other uses, above all that were before me in Jerusalem.

Verse 8. I gathered me also silver and gold, and the peculiar treasure of
Kings, and of the Provinces: I got me men-singers, and women-singers, and the
delights of the sons of men, as musical instruments, and that of all sorts.
Fifthly, also of silver and gold, I had abundance, which yearly came unto me,
besides that which came once every three years from Tarshish, for vessels and
vtensils, for the beautifying of my house, for shields and targets, and other
uses; and other precious treasures, which for their rareness and beauty,
Princes value at highest rate, and are therefore peculiar to them. I got me
also men-singers, and women-singers, that both had perfect skill and pleasant
voices, that not only the shrilnesse of the quauering treble, and the gravity
of the deep base, and the delightful mediocrity of the mixed tenor mitigating
the sharpness of the one, and eleuating the flatnesse of the other, might
refresh my spirits with their pleasant air; but also that the song it self
might affect my mind with the lightsome air of pleasant thoughts, insinuated
by the pleasing deceits of harmonicall allurements, to remove the impression of
pensive melancholy, and to pacify the surges of choleric fancies, that such
objects being stolen away from my mind unawares, as cares are by sleep, I
might be retracted from the disturbance of intemperate passions. I had also the
delights of the sons of men, even all kinds of musical Instruments. The
Hebrew words are Schaddah, Schiddoth, id est, deuastation, and deuastations; or
spoil, and spoils, and signifies the fairest women taken captives in the
sacking of a City, as Xantis Pagnine translateth it, which thing was the common
custom of old times. The words afore-going, delights of the sons of men,
import as much, being, as I think, more properly related to Solomon's three
hundred Concubines, which were the fairest women of captiuities. For as Wife
and Children are termed the pleasures of the eyes, and Idols the delight of the
eyes; so also may these be termed the delights of the sons of men, in those
warlike times; Iud. 5. 30. Have they not sped? have they divided the prey, to
every man a damozell or two? which was a special reward. But Tremellius
translateth it, Symphonie, and Symphonies, that is, all kinds of musical
Instruments, as it is in our English Translation. For melody is a mixture of
like, and unlike voices, or of like, and unlike sounds, in the mixture and
temperature whereof, one is so refracted and retused by another, that of them
all, Symphonie, id est, a discordant concord arises after the imitation of the
elements refracted in an harmonicall mixture in compound bodies. Now music is
delightful to young men, and may well be thus termed.

Verse 9. So I was great, and increased more then all that were before me in
Jerusalem: also my wisdom remained with me.
A Conclusion containing an amplification of his pompous magnificence, by a
comparison of all his predecessors. I became great both in power and wealth,
eminent and glorious above all. Neither in this royal splendor was I
intemperate, giving the reins to inordinate affections and lusts, but I
behaved my self both in the getting and usage of these things, according to
the direction of wisdom, that I might both freely without check of
conscience rejoice in them, and also be admired and honored in the minds and
hearts of mine own subjects, and foreign Princes.

Verse 10. And whatsoever mine eyes desired. I kept not from them, I withheld
not mine heart from any joy; for my heart rejoiced in all my labor, and this
was my portion of all my labor.
Sixthly, moreover besides these particular prerogatives, whereof I have made
mention by name, I withheld no delights from my senses, which either by the
wisdom of my mind, or by the submonishing inclinations of my senses I
perceived to afford access of joyful contentment. Neither did I suppress
the fancies of my heart with check, or delay, but it rejoiced in the easy,
speedy, and full attainement thereof. Therefore my heart rejoiced in all my
labor which I took for the joy of my heart. And this was the portion of all
my labor, even to rejoice my self in the use of these things. Thus far of
the trial of the third way to felicity.

Verse 11. Then I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought, and on
the labor that I had labored to do: and behold all was vanity, and vexation
of spirit; and there was no profit under the Sun.
AN exposition of Solomon's counsel, in the reuiew of his pompeous
magnificence, and of the event thereof. After that by wisdom I had effected
all that was in mine heart to do, and gotten what comfort, contentment and joy
could be affoorded to my heart in the possession, sight, and use thereof, the
testimony of other Kings and Princes in their admiration of my royal
splendor, also furthering and confirming in me the conceited hope of
happiness: then upon impartial reueiw of all my glory, according to true
wisdom, without deceitful flattery of my self, I saw no profit, no solidity,
no perpetuity, but changeableness, and chancefulnesse both in the parts and in
the whole. For both the things themselves are subject to casualties, and
alterations, and howsoever in time to vanish quite away, and also age it self
makes the most delightful things wearisome. So that what felicity so ever
men, through the error of their minds, may imagine to themselves, or the
things of the world may occasion them to hope for, by their deceitful show
promising what they cannot perform; yet there is no such profit, no sound
tranquillity, no constant rest in them, all things being uncertain, fleeting,
subject to dissolution by a thousand ways, some apparent, some suspected, most
unknown, holding the unstable mind, and doubtful heart always in unquiet
suspense. Therefore by reason of this vanity, they are a vexation to the
spirit, giving no more contentment thereto, then light wind does to the hungry
appetite and empty stomach. Neither indeed can the armies of heaven and earth
afford it, because God has subdued all things under vanity.

Verse 12. And I turned my self to behold wisdom, and madness, and folly:
for what can the man do, that comes after the King? even that which has
been already done.
AN exposition of his counsel in the reuiew of the two former ways to
felicity, to wit, of wisdom, and beas^iall sensuality, and also
foolishness, with a confirmation thereof. Wisdom and madness are quite
contrary. Madness is inconsideratenes, rashness, epicurishnesse, mirth, and
iollity, without all care. Folly seems here to be a mixture of both. But
wisdom in the wicked cannot be termed wisdom, but worldly craftiness,
brutish, or diabol^call subtilty. The Hebrew is Sikkeluth, of the verb, Sakal,
i. pravus, distortus, perver^us suit, that is, wicked, froward perverse,
turning aside out o^ the right way. Such wise men, as the world counts
wisdom, are in the Scriptures termed brutish, and foolish, Ier. 10. 8. And
beasts every where, because their wisdom is only exercised in fulfilling
their brutish appetites, and fleshly lusts, which is a thing common to man with
beasts, neither can the unregenerate do otherwise. 1 Ioh. 2. 16 A fool is
either natural or spiritual. The natural fool is either reasonable, or
reasonlesse. The reasonable is he that wisely and prudently orders himself
according to reason, which reason notwithstanding is corrupt and limited to
lust. Rom 1. 22. 1 Ioh. 2. 16. So that in him there is nothing but folly and
wickedness. Such a fool is every man unregenerate, Psalm. 14 1. 2. The
reasonlesse fool, is either he that has not sound reason, whose principles of
reason are cra^kt, broken and confused, but yet to his power does wickedly; or
else that has reason, but uses none, being captive to his lusts, of whom
there is less hope than of the other. To this fool, shame and reproach
belongs. He is full of mischief, proud, wilful, wrathful, reuengefull,
rash, and is inwrapped in many dangers, and troubles. For as he gloryeth in his
craft, and is mischievous, so mischief falls on him, it is his portion. The
spiritual fool is every carnal Professor of the Gospel in outward show
without the power thereof, who has a general illumination, confused, and
broken principles, but his manners and all his courses are heathenish, and
brutish, being captiuated to his lusts. Yea, and he is a fool also, that has
understanding, knowledge and learning, but yet serves not God but his own
lusts thereof, deceiving his own heart. There are abundance of such fools now
a days. Of all these fools Solomon here speaks, but more specially, I
think, of the reasonlesse fools. To discover the vanity, and folly of
spiritual fools more at large. This foolishness is that common mediocrity or
mean, which worldly wisemen, politicians, and moralists, and all fools do
falsely imagine to be virtue, or the best profession, which consists in the
middle of their extremes. But in case of religion, their dark hearts never
rightly conceived what either extremes or middles were. For this common mean,
is a mixture of light with darkness, good with evil, sweet with sour,
wisdom with sensuality, precious with vile, religion with carnality. But such
indifferences are hateful and loathsome before God, and upright men. This the
Scriptures term folly, and such wise ones, fools and hypocrites, Matthew. 23.

Understand therefore the deceitfulness of the heart, and the delusion of
Satan, even that deep sophistry, by which whole multitudes do perish, yea
even all, except the very Elect. For what is that common wisdom, reason,
indifference, honesty of men, but a certain mediocrity or mean mixed of linen
and woollen, of sour with sweet, of religion with fleshly morality; as though
that all things, religion and all should only tend, and aim at a happy
worldly state, or glorifying of the flesh or outward man, or to approach as
near to this mark as may be. This was the sin of Saul. He did not aim at
the sole glory of God, but mingled the holy commandment and his own lust,
even his vainglory, together. He would not loose his own glory in that
triumph: Therefore Samuel told him that hoe was become a fool. 1 Samuel 13. 13.
Such fools were the Israelites. 1 Kings 18. 21. and Exodus 31. 1. Such fools
were the Pharisees, Princes, people of the Jews. The disciples being yet but
rude, and weak were tainted with this folly, Ioh. 12. 22. Yet in them it was
but infirmity, because they were in Gods election, and actually believed, and
followed him in sincerity. Every professor of the Gospel, not inwardly renewed
by the spirit of sanctification is a fool, but we must take heed of judging,
and censuring: For the work of the spirit in the regenerate is not to make a
mixture of heavenly and carnal things, but by mortification to sub due all
things to himself, even to convert the whole man inward and outward into
spirit, to bring every thought and imagination, every word and work into
captivity under Christ, which is true wisdom and liberty. So that whereas it
is said, that in state of grace we are partly flesh, partly spirit, in all our
actions and affections, it is not meant of mixture, for where there is mixture,
there is no sound, no saving conversion, but the Fox will to his kind; but
that we are as the rusty Iron in the fire, the menstruous or filthy rag in the
fullers soap, nay rather Lazarus dead in the grave, into whom the soul being
re-entred, causes motion of the spirits, first in the heart, than of the
pulses, and blood, then of a leg, or arm, etc. till at length he be risen
wholly out of the grave, and at last brought to his former state of life, and
so is death overcome of life. But what this means, our common, honest,
reasonable, wise, indifferent minded men, neither will nor can conceive. For
they know not through the hardness of their hearts, that the ground of their
Christian profession, is the utter denial of themselves, or the utter
destruction of the flesh, and the best things thereof, as enmity to the grace
of Christ, Romans 8. 7. Phil. 3. 7. that they might be wholly in him, and for
him, 1 Cor. 6. 19. 20. which is the maine scope of this present treatise of
Solomon. To redress this beautiful, but fundamental evil, let us remember,
and lay to heart these two Texts of Scriptures. The first is David's charge to
Solomon his son, 2 Chronicles. 28. 9. And thou my son Solomon, know thou the God
of they father, and serve him with a perfect heart, and willing mind: for the
Lord searches all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the
thoughts. The second, is the ground and life of every word and work, which
makes it acceptable in the sight of God. Romans 14. 23. Whatsoever is not of
faith, is sin. He that wants true faith shall perish everlastingly,
whatsoever, how great soever his works be.

Lastly, Solomon here confirms his experiments, with the considerate and
judicious view thereof, by the conscience of his sufficiency in wisdom, and
experience, which is figured by a Prelepsis, or prevention of an objection,
thus. It may be that thou have not perfectly known the difference of wisdom
and madness, and folly, and so have not judged and determined rightly of
things, and the use thereof. Ans. I have sufficiently known, and tried the
truth of that which I have spoken concerning these things, and the vanity
thereof. This assertion is amplyfied by an argument of the Greater denied. No
man can know or try more than I have done? The words are figured by a
communication, What can the man do? Haadam, ^* the greatest, learnedest, and
most experienced, for the demonstratiue article notes eminence, or excellence.
That comes after the King? This testimony of himself is confirmed by the
dignity and excellency of his person, (King,) amplified by a comparison
included in the demonstratiue article, noting eminence, hammelek, the King, the
most excellent King. As if he should say, If Kings that have power to get the
knowledge, and experience of things, are to be believed, then much more the
most eminent King is sufficient to know, try, and determine the truth of all
this that has been said, therefore to be believed.

Verse 13. Then I saw that wisdom excels folly, as far as light
excels darkness.
A Determination or censure upon his judicious reuiew of the two former ways,
in the commendation of wisdom, and dispraise of folly, figured by a prolepsis
thus; Thou seem to put no difference between wisdom, and madness, and
folly, in that thou canft find no profit, no content in any of them, but only
vanity and vexation. Ans. Although that true felicity is not to be found in
wisdom, neither in the wisdom of this World, nor in the literal knowledge
of the Gospel, yet it altogether excels folly, yea, is contrary to folly.
The proposition he illustrateth by a comparison of things contrary. Even as
light excels darkness, not in degrees, but in nature; so does wisdom
excel folly, not in degrees, but in nature, having no fellowship or communion
with it, but mortifieth it, as light excels darkness, and water
extinguisheth fire. By folly, he means the crooked actions and conversation
of wicked idiots, and crafty colts, unadvised fools, and cunning fools, whose
wisdom is worldly, sensual, and devilish; James 3. 15. separated from all
fear of God, and grounds of natural goodness, and exercised in evil, as
Tamar said to Amnon, intising her to incest; Thou shall be a fool in Israel.
Such a fool as he here means, was Nabal.

Verse 14. The wise man's eyes are in his head, but the fool walks in
darkness: and I my self perceived also that one event happens to them all.
A Confirmation of his determination in the commendation of wisdom, and
dispraise of folly, and also a reuiew of the event of wisdom, and the wise.
The wise man's eyes are in his head. The head is as a Tower, the eyes are as
watchmen looking round about, and afar off, and as the Sun which is the eye
of the World. Watchmen in the top of a Tower, are watchful, diligent, and
circumspect, foreseeing evil a far off, and preventing it before it
surprise them. So in the eyes of a wise man there is understanding, discerning,
judgment, sobriety, heedfull diligence, foresight. Wisdom orders all the
ways of a wise man, he escheweth dangers, mischiefs, inconveniences, and
every hurtful thing; he procures commodities on all sides, he has delight
and pleasure in the works of his hands. Whereas contrarily, the fool is
blind, he knows not what he says, nor what he does; he observes not persons,
times, and place, but rusheth headily forward, committing every word, and deed
to fortune. He falls into the ditch on every side, he dasheth his head
against every post, he wrappes himself among bushes and briars, as they that
walk in darkness, and unknown places, and is rent and torn, and if he
struggle out, he is never the nearer, but is by and by in new dangers, because
he wants the lantern of Gods Word and Spirit, to direct him into the right
paths, and to guide him therein, that only is it that makes the simple wise,
and teaches man knowledge.

The World is Gods Book, every thing that a man hears or sees, is a leaf,
or a line, wherein he may read something to his own instruction, and further
edification. The wise man beholds the wisdom, providence, goodness, and
justice of God in all things. Again, he beholds the deprauation and
corruption of all things, brought in by the envy of the Devil. He discerns
the uprightness of godliness, and the tortuosity of wickedness, the plain
paths of wisdom, and the perverse ways of folly in all things, and in every
thing. The one he chooses, ordering himself in all his ways according to
wisdom, the other he refuses, and corrects, and retracteth himself by
wisdom. So that the understanding, sober, heedfull, watchful eyes of the
wise, look not on the things themselves, or outward appearances, but on Gods
wisdom, goodness, justice in the things; yea, he beholds Satan's malice,
and man's misery, and discerns the times, and the seasons, the works of God
therein, and the counter-workes of the Devil. But the fool walks in
darkness. The fool has as it were no eyes, or eyes wherein the sight is
perished. He looks on things, as does the wise, but he sees into nothing.
Therefore Solomon says, Prou. 17. 24. The eyes of a fool are in the ends of
the earth; that is, light, heedlesse, wandering eyes, showing the confusion of
many vain imaginations in the head, but no discreet apprehension, no sobriety
of wisdom, no prudent observation. He looks on outward appearances, and
observes childishly. But he cannot see one whit how the Scriptures, teaching
the whole knowledge of God, and of our selves, his wisdom, man's folly, his
grace, man's malice, are continually fulfilled before his eyes. He that is in
darkness, discerns not colors, no more does the fool things that differ.
The fool gathers up follies, and glories in some imitatiue wicked
subtilties, and a parable or wise sentence is harsh, and odious in his mouth.
The fool has the eyes of a beast, judging, choosing, refusing, according to
his carnal affections and lusts, etc. And I my self perceived also that one
event happens to them all. Here is his reuiew of the event of wisdom, and
the wise. This worldly wisdom which men so much magnify, makes not a man
happy. For I my self not forgetful of my self in my royalty, not enamoured
of my beauty, not kissing my hand, perceived also as well as others, that one
event or end happens to the wise and foolish, and both of them are alike
subject to the manifold afflictions, calamities, sorrows, and miseries of this
mortal life. Therefore speak what you can in the commendation of worldly
wisdom, and act what you can thereby, it shall in the end be co-incident with
folly.

Verse 15. Then said I in my heart, as it happens to the fool, so it
happens even to me; and why was I then more wise? Then I said in my heart,
that this also is vanity.
HIs determination, or conclusion upon the reuiew. When I saw that the wise and
fool had one event, and chance; I reasoned thus within my heart. If good
things befall the fool as well as me, and evil things befall me as well as
the fool, then have I to no purpose wearied my body and mind, in searching
out wisdom: But I see that it does so; therefore to defraud a man's soul of
pleasure, in striving for wisdom; is to no purpose, and consequently it is
also vanity.

Verse 16. For there is no remembrance of the wise more then of the fool for
ever, seeing that which is now, in the days to come shall be forgotten; and
how dies the wise man? as the fool.
A Confirmation of his reason concluded in the verse aforegoing, by two
arguments, the one in the beginning, the other in the end of the verse.
Concerning the former. If the wise man with all his words and works be not had
in everlasting remembrance, no more then the fool, then is the labor and
wisdom of the wise to no purpose: but the antecedent or former part is true,
because that both the persons, and their doings that now are, shall be
forgotten in succeeding generations; therefore is the consequent or latter part
true also. Time is a depth which swalloweth up all things. And the decourse of
time is a passage, leaving all things behind it. The further that time passes
away, the more confusedly still we see things past, which in the end quite
vanish out of mind, as the bird or arrow that flies into the profundity of
the air, or stone that falls into the height of the deep. Now the fish, and
the stone, the bird and the arrow, are all one, even without difference, to him
that sees neither, yea, plain nothing; and so are all things vanished out of
mind. And how dies the wise man? as the fool. Here is the latter argument,
whereby he confirms the vanity of wisdom, by the same condition thereof
with folly, figured by a communication, or rather an exclamation, intimating,
that the wise is greatly to be commiserated, because he receives no more fruit
of his worthy labors, then the mad and foolish, that live in sensuality and
bodily pleasures, after the manner of beasts. It cannot be discerned by their
end, in outward appearance, whether is the happier, or whether is the more
miserable.

Verse 17. Therefore I hated life, because the work that is wrought under the
Sun, is grievous unto me: for all is vanity and vexation of spirit.
A Conclusion. Therefore am I so far from hope of obtaining any contentment,
profit, or happiness in this World, that I rather hated life it self, having
no matter of love, or desire in it. My reason is, because that all things which
men do in this life, are grievous. Every work is full of grief in it self,
and occasioneth grief to others. The works of the brutish Epicure are
grievous; the works of the foolish that thinks himself wise, are grievous;
and so are the works of the wise, seeing that he dies, and his wisdom is
forgotten, as they and theirs are. Moreover, he confirms this reason again
by a Prossyllogisme, or addition of another reason. For all, as well the best,
as the worst things, is vanity and vexation of spirit.

Thus far of his counsel in the reuiew of the two former ways to happy
contentment, verse 12. Of his determination, or censure of them, verse 13. of
the confirmation of his determination, and the reuiew of the event of wisdom,
and the wise; verse 14. of his determination or conclusion upon the reuiew;
verse 15. of the confirmation of his determination, verse 16. and conclusion;
verse 17.

Verse 18. Yea, I hated all my labor which I had taken under the Sun:
because I should leave it unto the men that shall be after me.
THis verse has relation to the reuiew, and event of his pompous magnificence,
verse 11. He looked on all his works, and labors, but all was vanity and
vexation; Why? because there was no profit under the Sun. Here is further set
down the consequent of that event, namely, that he obtained not only no
contentment by his great works, but also hated them. The reason of his hatred
is, because he should leave them to the possession and use of another man, who
should be heir to all his labors, yet never took any pains for them.

Verse 19. And who knows whether he shall be a wise man or a fool? yet
shall he have rule over all my labor, wherein I have labored, and wherein I
have showed my self wise under the Sun.
A Confirmation of the reason, figured by the prevention of an objection, thus:
That a man shall leave his labors to another, is no cause of grief: For
seeing that he must not always live here; for one generation passes, and
another comes, it is a man's joy, and comfort rather, yea, the prosperous
success of them in their continuance to future generations, gives great
contentment to the heart.

Ans. That cannot be, because it is impossible for me, or any man to know
whether he shall be a wise man or a fool. It is figured by a communication, to
intimate the impossibility thereof. And what manner of man soever he shall be,
yet shall he have the rule, command, and use of all my labors at his pleasure,
wherein I have so diligently exercised my wisdom. If he prove a fool, what
is the fruit of my labor, and my wisdom? even to be the purueyour of another
man's sensuality, and to subminister matter for the execution, and maintenance
of his folly: So all my labor is lost. If he prove a wise man, yet will he
alter, change, and use all my labors according to his own mind, and so shall
they be transformed, as a vesture, into a new fashion. Therefore in that a man
must leave his labors to another man's possession and disposition, that is also
vanity.

Verse 20. Therefore I went about to cause my heart to despair of all the
labor which I took under the Sun.
A Conclusion of the reason confirmed in the verse before. Seeing that my
wisdom in my labor, shall be either turned into folly, or else translated
into another fashion, I judged it better to despair of getting contentment by
my works, rather then to place any hope in such uncertainties, that I might
elsewhere seek for the true happiness, that cannot be lost nor changed.
Therefore seeing that in the best things done here by wisdom, we have more
matter of despair than hope, and howsoever, are held in continual suspense,
they are mere vanity and vexation.

Verse 21. For there is a man whose labor is in wisdom, and in knowledge,
and in equity: yet to a man that has not labored therein shall he leave it
for his portion. This also is vanity, and a great evil.
AN amplification of the conclusion contained in the verse before; Namely, of
the despair and grief of his labor, by an observation of the common
condition of men. There is many a man that labors to attain to an happy
estate here, and that by wisdom, knowledge and equity, to which God also
gives a blessing, that so his heart might rejoice without check of conscience
in the fruition thereof, which is seldom incident to the rich; yet shall he
leave his estate behind him, to be a portion for another that never took any
pains for it. And so be the provident and true drudge of he knows not whom;
and how it shall be used and employed, and blessed in the hands of him he
altogether knows not. Yea, sometimes it falls out that the heir curses
his patrimony, because that if he had not had such a means and provocation, he
should not have committed so many evils. Faelix necessitas, quae ad meliora
tra^it. For our Savior says, How hard is it for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of heaven? This then is a vanity, and not only a pr^uation of good,
or a nothing, but also a great evil, namely, that a man should not only be
deprived of his goods by death, but also that his goods should be depraved.

Verse 22. For what has man of all his labor, and of the vexation of his
heart wherein he has labored under the Sun?
THis verse has reference to the 18. verse before, containing a reason of the
hatred of his dispairefull labors, figured by a communication, to give more
weight unto it. If a man see no profit of the labors of his body and mind,
then they have nothing but matter of despair and hatred in them: but what
profit, or joyful contentment can any man find in the laborious getting, and
careful keeping of his gettings? Therefore as I said at first, so after many
proofs, I conclude; What profit has a man of all his labor that he takes
under the Sun.

Verse 23. For all his days are sorrow, and his travail grief; yea, his
heart takes not rest in the night. This is also vanity.
A Prossyllogisme, or confirmation of the former reason. He has no profit of
his labors, no calm contentation. Why? For because all his days are full of
pains, and sorrows, trouble, and anger. His travail is full of care and
anguish, fears, and doubts, perplexity, and anxiety. His heart is deprived of
the natural reft of night. For then he falls to reuiew the labors of the
time past, and to dispose of the travail of the time following, to bring all
things aptly together, without the interruption of manifold occurrences, or
chances, for the accomplishment of his project. Again, although he would take
his rest, yet the manifold businesses, and exagitations of his thoughts on the
day, cause many broken dreams, and fearful fantasies, which often disquiet
the spirit, and makes the heart pensive afterward: So that a man has no
profit of his pains, but his labor for his travail, and this also is vanity.

Verse 24. There is nothing better for a man, then that he should eat and
drink, and that he should make his soul enjoy the good of his labor. This
also I saw, and that it was from the hand of God.
IN this verse Solomon sets down the right use, and only good that is to
be found in the things of this life, for a remedy, or mitigation of the
vanities or miseries, and declares the same by the efficient cause. His
proposition is illustrated by a comparison of the Greater denied; And it is an
answer to a secret objection, which is this. If nothing but sorrow and grief
redound to man of all his labors, to what purpose then should a man apply his
mind to wisdom, and his body to travail? And if so be that a man must
either deprive himself of life, or else prolong his days in perpetual
sorrow, then the world seems to be made for none other end, then to be an
engine of torture unto men. Ans. Not so neither. For though I have already
proved that a man can obtain no true profit, or happy contentation by the
things of the world, nor by any thing that can be known or done by man's
wisdom: yet it follows not therefore that there is no good in all things
made for man's use, by which he may be enabled and helped both to live, and to
order his life according to wisdom, and virtue. But there is a good in them
for which cause God has created them, and imparted the same to every one
according to his own pleasure. And this good, is not to depend or rest on
them, nor to trust in them; for therefore has God made them uncertain, and
vain, nor yet by treasuring them up to deprive a man's self, or others of
their use, nor to lavish them out, as though they would never have end: but to
feed, cheer, and comfort the body therewith, with tranquillity of mind
resting on Gods mercy, and so to pass the time of this life with joyful
contentation in honest labor, not in idleness, sensuality, or drudgery. He
that looks for more then this in them, is utterly deceived, seeing that in
the best use of them, they are transitory and vanishing. Lastly, this good use
of them he declares by the principal efficient cause. Not only the
possession of these things, but also their virtue to feed, and refresh the
body, and mind, is the gift of God. Otherwise, all wisdom is full of vanity,
and grief. They come neither by man's providence, and endeavor originally, nor
by chance, Deuteronomy. 8. 17. Therefore let us return all praise and thanks to him,
in the usage of our selves, and use of all his gifts.

Verse 25. For who can eat? or who else can hasten hereunto more then I?
A Confirmation of his proposition, amplified by a comparison of the Greater
denied, and figured by a communication. Who could receive more profit, joy and
contentment of these transitory, and fading things more then I? and who can
more speedily, and easily obtain, and more securely possess and use them more
then I? what good thing soever could be had, and what use could be made of them
for the pleasure of my body, and delight of mind, I had it in the perfection
thereof, yet this is all that I by experience found, or could conceive in heart
to be found in them.

Verse 26. For God gives to a man that is good in his fight, wisdom, and
knowledge, and joy: but to the sinner he gives travel to gather, and to heap
up, that he may give to him that is good before God: This also is vanity, and
vexation of spirit.
AN amplification of this right use of worldly things by the efficient cause
thereof, both in himself and other men. These men are described by their
condition and quality (good;) Goodness is illustrated by a distinction thereof
[in his sight,] that is, truly good, Psalm 3^ 1 2. not in appearance before
men, or his own deceitful ^ea^t Ier. 17. 9. which is hypocrisy. God who has
made the world, and all things therein for man's use, has given wisdom and
knowledge to those that are accepted of him, and fear him, to get them
rightly, and to use them comfortably. This work of Gods mercy is illustrated
by the Antithesis, or contrary work of judgment in the sinner. Contrarily,
God withholdeth this wisdom, knowledge and joy from the sinner, which fears
him not, but turns his ear from the Law, and makes no conscience of his
doings, and leaves him in the power and bondage of his lusts, to torment
himself both night and day with carking, caring, and drudgery to gather
riches, and yet to deprive himself of all comfort, meat, drink, clothing,
recreation, etc. This work of Gods judgment in the sinner is declared by the
end; Namely, that after this faithless drudge has treasured them up, God
might give them to them that fear him, and are accepted of him, Job 27. 17.
Again, God does take them away from good men, when he corrects their faults,
and gives them to the wicked, that are both theirs and his enemies, as the
example of Ezechias does manifest. To conclude; This also is vanity and
vexation of spirit.

CHAPTER III.
Verse 1. To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose under
heaven.
SOlomon has hitherto discoursed, and concluded the vanity of man's purposes
and designs of happy contentment. First, by the common observation of things
subject to man's knowledge. Secondly, by his own experimental knowledge both
of wisdom, and of the use of worldly things, in the two former Chapters* Now
he continues still his observation, showing by the conversion of times, and
particular examples pertaining to knowledge and use, that all things, deeds,
counsels, events, good, and evil, are known to God only, and in regard of us
do fluctuate upon uncertain issues, yea, altogether uncertain in their
beginnings, proceedings and endings, which depend and attend upon unstable
times, whatsoever our aduisements and devices be either in attaining good, or
avoiding evil. This is another maine argument* or Prosepilogisme, confirming
the Epilogisme, Cap. 1. 3. Whereby he proves that a man has no profit of all
his labors. First, he propounds it generally in this verse, and after
confirms it by an induction of sundry particulars as he did before. And here
is a lively exposition of that which he spoke, Chap. 1. verse 8. of the
mutability, and corruptibility of all things, All things are full of labor,
man cannot utter it, etc.

To every thing there is a season. No marvel is it if all man's wisdom, and
the use of worldly things, whether sensual or magnificall be subiugated to
vanity, when as all things, all counsels, all deeds, all events, so variable,
and repugnant in this unquiet world are subjected to this instable course and
recourse of times, which God has put in his own hand; and in his secret
providence has prefixed a time unknown, and unalterable by man. To every
thing that is subjected to the Law, inclination, and instinct of nature, there
is a time; and a time to every purpose under the Sun, that is, to every thing
done by the election, counsel, and will of man. To every thing that necessity
urges us to do there is a time, both of their beginnings and endings,
ordained of God: So that we cannot do what we would, nor when we would, nor
how we would, nor how long we would, nor surcease when we would, nor change
when we would. For the hidden foundation of God remains sure, and shows it
self in his time contrary and diverse to our manifold vain imaginations,
desires, and purposes. We therefore and all things with us, within us, and
without us, in our bodies, and in our minds are subject to the instabilities
of times and seasons, even to opportunities, and occasions, in our beginnings,
proceedings and endings.

Verse 2. A time to be borne, and a time to dye: a time to plant, and a time to
pluck up that which is planted.
FIrst, it is not in the power of man to come into the world, nor in his will
to depart out of the world. But the season or opportunity of both, whether by
the course of nature, or otherwise, is prefined by the counsel of God, and is
the work of his hand. And as there is a time of the birth and death of man, so
also of the planting and rooting up of trees, there is a time ordained of God.
There is a time of their growth, age, standing, and falling, according to the
necessity and use of man: For every man, and every generation has his
necessity, according to the exigence whereof he applies himself by the
information of reason, partly to obtain good, partly to avoid evil. So there
is a time to sow, and to reap, which things though men voluntarily do, yet
the ground thereof is necessity, and for the doing of them, we tarry the
appointed times, and wait for the convenient seasons, which are not in our
own power.

Verse 3. A time to kill, and a time to heal: a time to break down, and a
time to build up.
SEcondly, the times of natural life and death, are not only appointed of God,
but also untimely deaths, by diseases, casualties, violence, Justice, which we
think by skill to prevent, and by providence to avoid, have their appointed
times. And contrarily, desperate life; namely, mortal evils, both of dangers
and diseases, in our reason unavoidable, is in the hands of God, who delivers
and recou^reth, kills and saves alive at his pleasure, to whom nothing is
impossible. Hereof the Scriptures afford innumerable examples. Dangers, and
diseases, troubles and sickness, deliverances and recoueries from both, are in
the power of God. Moreover, as there is a time of living, dying, planting, and
rooting up: so also of building and pulling down, according to the exigence of
man's necessity; yea, a time there is of building houses where trees, grass,
and corn have grown, and beasts have been fed; and a time to feed beasts,
to plant trees, and sow corn, where paued courts, and situations of fair
buildings have been. And all these works depend upon the opportunities of
times, without the power of man, to which man applies himself voluntarily by
judgment of reason, according to the exigence of a secret necessity.

Verse 4. A time to weep, and a time to laugh: a time to mourn; and a time to
dance.
THirdly, every man by all his wit labors, or at least by desire wishes to
be free from cares, and that is the end of his cares, and to avoid the causes
of weeping, yet can he not escape that evil. For either the want of foresight
and diligence in himself, or outward crosses and chancefull occurrences shall
cause, or else occasion weeping, whether he will or no. Again, there is a time
to mourn, which men desire to avoid as the greatest evil; yea, when they cry
peace, then is sorrow at hand, which neither can be avoided, nor mitigated, nor
ended by the counsel of our own will: For even that is not in our power.
Contrarily, heaviness may endure for a night, but unexpected joy comes in
the morning; Psalm. 30. 5. 11. As the one comes unsent for, so the other
comes unlooked for.

Verse 5. A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together: a
time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing.
FOurthly, if a man purpose to pull down an house, yet that he cannot do
even when he would, but he must tarry for a convenient season. And if he
would gather stones together to build an house, he must crave leave of
opportunity, which depends on manifold circumstances. So that whatsoever he
prepares in his heart to do, the issue must be of God, yea, opportunity
calls us out to do many things that we never intended. Also there is a time
of marriage, both with whom, and when; and a time for children appointed of
God, to which a man must yield, or else procure great and manifold evils to
himself. So there is a time to refrain from marriage, and a time to abstain
from embracing, unless a man shall bring upon him the anger of God for his
intemperancy,

Verse 6. A time to get, and a time to lose; a time to keep, and a time to
cast away.
Fifthly, if a man use any traffic by Sea or Land, or by what trade or exercise
soever he gets his living, he must heedefully observe the opportunity of
time: For time and tide tarry no man. Time is to be taken and used whiles it
serves and offers it self, otherwise, it is in vain to follow the bird
that is escaped. This is a thing, whereof all men repent them, that they took
not time while time served. Hence Solomon says, Prou. 27. 1. Boast not of
tomorrow, for thou know not what a day may bring forth. We in this Land,
that do not wisely use that opportunity of peace which God offers us to
enrich our selves by honest and lawful parsimony, but break out into pride,
and prodigality, venery, and all kind of vanity, shall once repent the
misvsage thereof. We have had a large and fit opportunity a long time to serve
God, and to do good works; but with the unprofitable servant we hide our
talent in the ground, nay, spend all on our lusts, which are as a fire kindled
by the fire of hell, to devour up holy things also. It is said that in old
time they spared from back and belly, and superfluous buildings, to build
Churches, and maintain Friars; but the proud, venereous, politic, gluttonous
Iou^ls of these times, have enlarged their throats and bellies, as hell, to
devour and swallow up Churches, and tithes, and Ministers and all. Contrarily,
there is a time also to lose, which by all our providence and best endeavor we
cannot abide. Yea, sometimes the Merchants, how greedy of gain soever they be,
are glad to cast their wares into the Seas, and suffer their ship sometimes
to seek a new master, and th^^^^ the escape of their lives a precious
merchandise, as the Mariners did in Paul's voyage.

Verse 7. A time to rent, and a time to sow; a time to keep silence, and a
time to speak.
Sixthly, there is an opportunity to rent old garments, when they are worn, to
be put to other uses. If they be rent before they be worn, that is
unprofitable; if they be worn too long, that is in-decent, and occasioneth
contempt, and I know not what evil conceit of a man in the minds of men, as
the son of Sirach says; The apparel, countenance, and gesture, declare what
a man is. Contrarily, there is a time to sow garments, both for necessity, and
comeliness. But the superfluity of sowing brings poverty, and discovers
shame. For God blesses his own ordinances, and prospers his own
opportunities. But there is no time ordained of God in his will and ordinance
for the inuenting, and bringing in of strange fashions; That is an opportunity
taken by the permission of God from the Devil. Furthermore, though there is
necessary and continual use of speech, yet it is limited and confined to fit
opportunity, else is it foolish babbling, displeasing and harsh to the ears of
God and man. Therefore says Solomon, Prou. 25. 11. A word fitly spoken, is
like apples of gold in pictures of silver, id est, most acceptable, profitable,
comfortable, amiable, beautiful. Also Chap. 15. 23. Joy comes to a man by
the answer of his mouth, and how good is a word in due season? He that
observes not opportunity of speech, does often times deprive himself of many
good things, and inwrappeth himself in many miseries also. Further, Solomon
says; Prou. 16. 1. The preparations of the heart in man, and the answer of the
tongue, is from the Lord: Contrarily, there is a time to keep silence. To be
silent in season, is as great a virtue, as to speak in due time; For he that
is defective in the one, is so in the other. We most commonly offend in
speaking, namely, in our own causes; but in speaking on Gods behalf, and our
neighbors, we are commonly mute enough, yea, possessed with a dumb spirit. But
of good speech and silence, God gives opportunity, and season. Our tongues are
the keys of God, to open and shut the doors of our lips, and our hearts
are, or should be Gods treasury. Therefore our Savior Christ says; A good man
out of the treasure of his heart, brings out good things. And out of the
abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks. David says, Psalm 116. 10. I
believed, therefore I spoke. Paul says; We speak wisdom among them that are
perfect, 1 Cor. 2. David said; Awake my glory, meaning his tongue. Christ was
the word of the Father, so must the believer be the word of Christ.

Verse 8, A time to love, and a time to hate: a time of war, and a time of
peace.
SEauenthly, there is a time to love, as there is a time to speak, and this
opportunity of love is as commonly offered of God. Love or true friendship is
the bond of human society. By the bond of love, all the members of the body
are knit together into one head: It is the sinews of the Church, and
commonwealth. Where love fails, all tends to dissolution. God is all love,
the Devil has knowledge and faith, but he has no love at all* Therefore the
virtue and power of opportunities, in getting, making, keeping, and using
friends, is excellent, and necessary. Contrarily, there is a time to hate, to
know our enemies, to confront, and contend with them, to beware, and avoid
them, to encounter and fly away, yea, also to make good use to our selves of
the wrongs that are offered us. For howsoever a man orders his life, and
behaueth himself in all things, love and hatred, concord and discord, good
will and envy shall sift and toss all affairs. For the unclean spirit
mingleth himself in all things to make confusion, and to bring destruction.
Therefore says Solomon, Prou. 28. 4. They that forsake the Law, praise the
wicked: but they that keep the Law, contend with them. The wicked are whelps
of the same littour, therefore are they affectioned one toward another, and
praise one another. Romans 1. 31. Nam. 16. 41. They grace sin in others, to
cover their own blemishes, and to prevent reproach, and controulement of their
evil dealings and behavior: but the man of conscience, that fears God, will
discountenance, discourage, and dispraise them, resist, and oppose them, and
strive for the truth unto death. Hence it is that David says; I hate them that
hate thee, and earnestly contend with them that rise up against thee.

Ob. Christ says, Math. 5. 39. Resist not evil: but whosoever shall smite
thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other also.

Ans. Resistance is either a lawful and harmless avoiding of evil, or else
a retaliation, or rendering of like for like, wrong for wrong, revenge for
revenge, and that is forbidden, Leuit. 19. 17. 18. Yea, we ought so to be
possessed with the spirit of patience, bounty, and goodness, as to suffer a new
wrong, rather then to revenge an old, through hatred and ill will. To this
purpose Paul says, Romans 12. 17. Recompense to no man evil for evil, which is
to be overcome of evil, verse 21. but overcome evil with goodness,
darkness with light, corruption with grace; if it be possible, have peace
with all men. How is that? Avenge not, verse 19. but if thine enemy hunger,
give him meat, and if he thirst, give him drink* so shall thou heap coals
of fire upon his head: to wit, either win him with thy benefits, or his own
conscience shall witness against him, that the fire of Gods wrath hangs over
his head, who will not suffer wickedness to go unpunished* Which terror of
his conscience thou must not desire, nor rejoice at in way of revenge, or for
ease of thine own stomach, least God turn his wrath from him unto thee, but
rather pity him, yet so as God might have the glory. Therefore by turning of
the cheek, is not meant that a man should make himself a prey to contentious
men* malapert, and violent persons, and a voluntary object of their cruel
contempt: but to be of such moderation and equity, as to pacify and win them
with sufferance, goodness, kindness, or what good means sanctified reason
can devise, not to be incensed with hatred, to oppose and wrack them, and so
be overcome of Satan by these his instruments, both to bring the Gospel into
slander and hatred, and to fall into the same condemnation with them. Wherefore
we are to pray for the conversion of them, and Gods protection of us, not to
contend with them in their kind, that by the virtues of the spirit appearing
forth in us, the corruption of nature, and malice of Satan in them may be by
their own consciences condemned. But all this infringeth not the law of
nature, which is to kill rather then to be killed, without the lawful course
of civil justice, nor yet disanulleth the politic law, which God has
ordained to protect the just, to bridle the violent, and to reform the vicious
and injurious. Let us take heed how we cavil, and sophisticate the simplicity
of the Scriptures.

All this is explained, verse 44. Love your enemies: Your enemies; not Gods
enemies, which we are to hate, yet to take heed of rash judgment: For though
the cause or fact be hateful, yet that argues not simply hatred of the
person. Wherefore love them, that is, desire their conversion, not their
confusion; for we know not whether they be in Gods election, but charity hops
the best. Whom God has cast off, and who have cast off God, we must cast off,
lest we be partakers with Gods enemies; therefore we must not bid an obstinate
heretic God-speed. Neither would the disciples have eaten bread with Judas, if
they had known his plot of treachery, but Christ revealed him not: And Paul
says, have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness. If a man can
have no fellowship with their works, neither with their persons, specially
such persons, as on the one side make a mock of all good edification, and on
the other side, are strong corrupters. For what could Satan incarnate and in
subjection to the civil power do more? To conclude; We must do good to our
enemies willingly, resist their evils peaceably, make the cause Gods, not our
own, contend with them lawfully, live among them warily, commit the vengeance
to God, cast no stumbling blocks before them, but rather offer means, and
further their conversion, that they may glorify God in the day of visitation,
that is, when it shall please God to open their eyes to see, and discern the
truth. To conclude. Love and hatred in private persons, wars and peace in
public states, have always been, and must be to the end. For throughout all
nature there is an opposition of one thing to another, as well discord as
concord, tares as wheat, because God will be glorified as well by judgment as
by mercy. For in both he delights, Ier. 9. 24. All these things and times are
out of our power, and fall out by the determinate counsel of God. As we
receive all temporal benefits from the hand of God, not what, not how much,
not by what means we list, so likewise we take opportunities for all things
from his hand also. For he is all hand, holding and giving all things, what, to
whom, how, when he will, Iam. 4. 13. 14. 15. We purpose, but know not what
shall be, wherefore we must say, if the Lord will, Prou. 27. 1. And Jeremy
says, O Lord, the way of man is not in himself.

Verse 9. What has he that works, in that wherein he labors?
A Conclusion of the principal argument, that a man has no profit of all his
labors, Chap. 1. 3. The Proposition or Mayor is, Chap. 3. 1. The Reason is
framed thus:

If there be a time to every thing* and to every purpose under the Sun, then
a man has no profit of all his labors, seeing that all things depend on the
instability of times.

But the Antecedent, or former part of the reason is true, as I have already
proved by many examples, of things natural, necessary, voluntary.

Therefore the consequent or latter part is true also, namely he that studyeth,
endeavors; works, has no profit in all his labors.

For the beginning, proceeding, finishing, event, depend all on uncertainties.
And even in that he knows not what shall become of his labors, who shall
have the benefit, whether a wiseman or a fool, his friend, or his foe, does
as much afflict the mind, as to be crossed in the beginning and proceeding of
his works by unfortunate casualties; what greater vanity and grief is there
then for a man upon the reueiw of his labors to say, Opera, and impensa
perijt. All is lost?

Verse 10. I have seen the travel which God has ginen to the sons of men,
to be exercised in it.
A Commoration, amplifying this conclusion to verse 16. In this verse he
sets down the cause of this vanity of man's labor, and that is the
judgment of God upon his pride. For thus has God always avenged the
ambition, and curiosity of man's heart, that he should entangle himself in
infinite businesses, perplexe his mind with endless cares, spend all his
days in troubles, grief, anger, sorrow, sickness and till the day of death
to be forgetful of death, and unmindful of the event of his toil. But that
hoped contentation of mind, which he dreameth of, shall he never obtain, and
if he do obtain it, it shall have matter still of greater misery in it. The
Israelites murmuring for flesh in the Wilderness had their desires to the
full, but the fullness of their desire, was their destruction, Number. 11. 32. 33.
And our Savior says, Matthew. 6. Verily, they have their reward. So that this
supposed contentation, of also earnestly labored for, is in the possession
thereof, but the earnest-penny of everlasting misery. What profit then has he
that works, in that wherein he labors? How much better were it to submit
himself to the providence of God, and suffer himself to be governed by his
laws? This verse is an exposition of the 13. verse of the first Chapter.

Verse 11. He has made every thing beautiful in his time: also he has set
the world in their heart, so that none can find^ out the work that God makes
from the beginning to the end.
THe unprofitable vanity of man's labor is illustrated by an Antithesis, or
contrariety of the most wise work of Gods providence. God by the work of his
power and wisdom, has made and set all things in comely order, and by the
word of his providence he governs and administreth all things, having
prefined aforehand a convenient and beautiful opportunity for every thing. But
whereas the imaginations of man's heart, are only evil, his pride is such,
that he would be a god, and equal with God, Genesis 3. 5. 6. and that by working
out an heaven, a felicity, and a glory in the world to himself; therefore
has God laid a judgment upon his impatience, ambition, curiosity; namely, a
presumptuous and foolish dotage, to imagine that he is able to comprehend the
whole course of times past, and to come, and thereafter to plot his endeavors
to attain a possibility of his own proiects, to avoid all opposite accidents,
and to remove all cross occurrences; yet is he so far from the knowledge of
that most wise, just, convenient, and secret administration or aeconomie of
God, that he cannot rightly conceive of one work of Gods providence, how it is
begun, how it proceeds, how it is finished, by what means, turnings, and
returnings it is effected. Yea, the ways of God are past finding out. Yet this
is the madness of those, whom we call understanding, wise, prudent, and
politic men, to frame a world in, and according to their own hearts, as if
they were gods, or rather Gods Apes, that is, first, to purpose with themselves
what they will have, and what they will be, and then by their wisdom, and
strength, to turn all the world, and every thing about to this point, to wind
and wring in every man, and every matter by craft or violence, by fear, by
flattery, by simulation, dissimulation, to make in the end a general
concurrence or confluence of all streams into this Ocean. This impossibility
is that, wherabout he beats his brains, vexes his mind, disquieteth his
heart, toyleth his body, depriueth himself of all joy, and comfortable rest
all the days of his life. But what is the profit of his wisdom and labor in
the last end? Even to make himself a fool, aby-word, a spectacle of folly.
Parturiunt montes, exit ridiculus mus. The maine end of all, is but a babble
like the tower of a Babel, a new nothing. It is like that great senseless
lump of earth that Nabuchadnezzar set up, yea, it is like that huge
braineworke, the Synagogue of the Romish beast.

It may be objected, How can evil things be said to be beautiful? and what
times has God ordained for wickedness? I answer, evil things in the kinds
and natures thereof, as they proceed from the devil, and the venomous
fountain of man's heart, are loathsome and ugly: but evil things in their
times as God uses them, are beautiful, necessary, and comely, namely, as they
are sent as just and due punishments from God, as executions of wrath and
vengeance for the wickedness of the world, and trial of the faith, and
patience of his servants. In time of peace there is unthankfulness, pride,
contempt of God, abusing of his creatures to riot and excess; then the sword,
famine, wars, pestilence and manifold miseries, are in that respect
beautiful in their time. Many men get their goods by covetousness, racking,
oppression, unjust dealing, extortion, bribery, deceit, usury, unmercifulness
to the poor, purloyning, and withholding of the Levites wages. Now it is a
just revenge, and beautiful that a Ruffian and dingthrift rise up, and
riotously waste all. David committed adultery with Bathsheba, and slew her
husband; This displeased the Lord, 2 Samuel 12. Therefore shall the sword never
depart from his house, he will raise evil against him out of his own house,
and take his wives before his eyes, and give them unto his neighbor, etc. So
Amnon defiled his sister Thamar, and Absolon in revenge slew him. Absolon
rebelled against his father, and by the counsel of Achitophell committed
incest with his wives, etc. Afterward Achitophell hanged himself, and Absolon
was slain by Ioab, (and he was executed by Solomon.) These adulteries,
murders, incests, rebellions, treasons are in their kinds abominable, but as
they are judgments of God, beautiful. He turns all evil things to the good
of his Elect, and his own glory as well in executing Justice, as showing mercy.

Verse 12.
I know that there is no good in them, but for a man to rejoice, and to do
good in his life.

Verse 13. And also that every man should eat, and drink, and enjoy the good
of all his labor, it is the gift of God.
Remedies of vanities
IN these verses he gathers and concludes from the former observations and
considerations, the right use of all worldly things, for a remedy or mitigation
of the vanities, as he did, Chap. 2. 24. which he confirms, first, by the
testimony of his own knowledge; secondly, by the efficient cause. Seeing that
it is the property of fools to weary themselves about vain contriuing, and
disposing of things according to their inordinate desires, let the wise man be
better advised, and learn by the example of Gods dealing with them, how to
apply himself both to get and spend; namely, with a contented mind, and quiet
heart. Let him learn to rejoice, and cheer his body in the comfortable and
sober use thereof, and to give part to the poor. Ephesians. 4 28. and to the
Church, 1 Cor. 9. 14. To this tranquillity of mind David exhorts, Psalm. 37.
3. Hope in the Lord, and be doing good, dwell in the land, and verily thou
shall be fed. Rely on Gods providence, and lean not to thine own wisdom,
as Solomon says: This is all the good, that all our wisdom and travel can
produce out of these earthly things, and the only true profit that can be made
of them. But this consideration can no man fetch out of his own brain: If he
do apprehend it, yet his memory cannot long hold it. And if he do remember
it, yet his foolish heart cannot practice it, because wits (not seasoned with
grace) must be working. It is therefore the gift of God.

Verse 14. I know that whatsoever God does, it shall be for ever: nothing can
be put to it, nor any thing taken from it: and God does it that men should
fear before him.
A Confirmation of contentation, and tranquillity in the right and good use of
things, drawn from the steadfastness of Gods works, which are unalterable. It
is mere madness, either to think that the causes of things, and their
proceedings are in our power, or that the events of our counsels shall be
according to our designements, or yet to vex our selves at all, if the
success be not answerable according to our expectation. For let a mortal man
devise, advise, and plot what he will, and as he will, yet can he never
disanull, or any whit alter the decree of God, for the preparations are of the
heart, says Solomon, but the answer of the tongue is of the Lord, and so is
the work of the hands. Yea, it is a great impiety for a man to think that he
can by his power or free will, either add, or detract from the decree of God,
or turn aside any part of his counsel: For even that which a man has done by
his free will, was originally from the unchangeable decree of Gods will, Act.
4. 28. From whence proceeded evil but from the negation of election and giff
of perseverance? The ordering and disposing whereof, God has decreed according
to the pleasure of his will, which is a depth unsearchable, incomprehensible.
But we know this, that he does all out of the love of himself, and to the
glory of himself: And so is he all in all. All this he confirms by the
testimony of his own knowledge.

Moreover, the unchangeableness of Gods providence, is amplified by the end
thereof. That men might fear before him. That men seeing their own ignorance,
weakness, foolishness, in the divine additions, detractions, changings and
disa^ulling of their purposes and designs on the one side; and all things
swayed by an over ruling power on the other side; might be brought even whether
they will or no, into his presence; namely to acknowledge, reverence, and to
depend on him only, and humble themselves to his ordinance, being revoked from
their own ambition and pride, by the unhappy success of their wisest, and
surest courses. This is that which Moses so labors in the repetition of the
law to imprint in the minds of the Israelites. Deuteronomy. 8. 2. 3.

Verse 15. That which has been, is now, and that which is to be, ^ has
already been, and God requires that which is past.
A Confirmation of the stability of Gods purposes or works of his providence,
as before, Chap. 1. 9. As the heavens, winds, rivers, have their constant
courses, and recourses by perpetual motion; even so God has provided in his
most wise administration of man's affairs also, that one thing should succeed
another, according to the instability of times, and return again by their
courses, even in their circuits, in kind and nature, according to the
restless revolution of time. So that whatsoever has been in old time, is now
at this present: and whatsoever is gone and past, shall God cause to return
again. Therefore, as times, so are all things in time in the hands of God, and
as all things come from his hand in their convenient seasons, so again they
return into his hand, as the seed is cast out of the hand of the sower, and
returns again into the hand of the sower, circularly for ever.

Verse 16. And moreover, I saw under the Sun the place of judgment, that
wickedness was there; and the place of righteousness, that iniquity was
there.
He passes here from the vanities of the body natural, to the vanities of the
body politic.

A third prosepilogisme, to prove the Epilogisme. Chap. 1. 3.


SOlomon has heretofore declared in general the vanity of man's wisdom and
providence, by peculiar observation and experience: now he comes
particularly to declare the vanities, and vexations, uncertainty, and
instability of all worldly things, by his diligent observation of outward
examples in civil state, or common life. All which tend still to the same end,
to wit, that a man can find no perpetual course of prosperity in any worldly
state, nor any thing in any state wherein to content his mind, and rest his
heart, but that all things are full of vanity and vexation, and so consequently
he must rest on God only. Of these vanities and evils, some proceed from the
malice of others, or do outwardly come to a man, as those examples following
do manifest.

1. Example of vanities observed in outward things.
The first example is of oppressors, wherein he shows how vanity and
vexation is increased by oppression. Every man and estate is subject to
troubles, and contentions, caused partly through want of wisdom and
providence to prevent evils, partly by the violence of cruel and merciless
men, partly through the unquietness of humorous, and distempered persons,
partly through many unavoidable chances. Howsoever, wheat and tares, Gods
flock and evil beasts, must live together in civil state during the time of
this life. Now whereas in this mixture, innumerable controversies and wrongs
arise, good laws are established for the deciding of the one, and reforming of
the other, that men might live happily, by the preservation of peace, and
justice. And for the making, and execution of the same laws, are Magistrates
ordained. But I saw that wrong reigned in the place of judgment, as well as
any where else, and that public authority was made but a cloak, yea, a
defense of public injustice, whereof the Scriptures afford us many examples.
Here is vanity, for no certain remedy can be found here, but rather greatest
evils often times proceed from hence.

Verse 17. I said in mine heart, God shall judge the righteous, and the wicked:
for there is a time there, for every purpose, and for every work.
A Confirmation of vanity, increased by the place of judgment, (wherein
notwithstanding to the faithful that wait on God, there is matter of
comfort.) Because no remedy is here to be had, and that judgment proceeds
not forth, but is turned into gall and wormwood, (for these persons being
armed with public authority, think to use the Laws at their pleasure,
without punishment) therefore the oppressed must appeal to the just Judge, and
impartial auenger of every wrong. But God does not always smite sinners in
the act of sin, but commonly when they have forgotten, and are in greatest
security; as Amnon had the stab, when his heart was merry with wine; Antiochus
when he was in the height of his pride; Alexander and Herod, when they took
upon them to be gods; Julius Caesar when he was in the Senate; Jerusalem about
forty years after Christ's resurrection, when all was forgotten. Therefore a
man must stay Gods leisure: For the Lord will come, and not tarry, he will be a
swift witness, and auenger of wrongs. All must be conuented before his
judgment seat, 2 Cor. 5. 10. and render an account of every idle word, much
more of evil deeds. All is vanity.

For there is a time there for every purpose, and for every work. This word,
[there] as I think, has relation to Gods judgment seat, as if he should
say, unjust Magistrates have a time by the patience, and long-suffering of God,
to fulfill their bloodthirsty, and gold-thirsty lusts: but another time shall
succeed that, when the wronger and wronged, the just and unjust* shall give up
an account, and be doomed according to their works, to live or die for ever:
And even then when they sit upon the judgment seat, is God present to take
notice of their corrupt and partial dealings, to censure them, and to give
sentence upon their sentence; yea, and to begin the execution of his sentence
upon them by untimely death, disgrace, banishment, remorse of conscience, etc.
Therefore they that have authority and power to do what they will, and to have
what they will, and those that are strengthened by authority in their lusts,
shall obtain no profit* nor quietness of heart thereby. This also is vanity,
and vexation to them, as well as suffering wrong to the other.

Verse 18. I said in my heart concerning the estate of the sons of men, that
God might manifest them, and that they might see that they themselves are
beasts.
A Confirmation of the former. I said in my heart concerning the state, or
condition of the sons of men, that God by judgment might manifest them, or
lay them open, (for where no law is, there is no difference, and where no
judgment is, there is as little) and that they might see their own shame,
namely, themselves to be beasts, and that by their beastly lusts and
affections, chiefly by their cruelty one toward another, in devouring and
preying one upon another; as fishes, birds, and beasts do, which want
understanding and reason, and so know not God, nor themselves. And though they
glorify themselves, and are as gods in their own eyes, and cause others to
fall down, and humble themselves unto them, whereout they suck no small
advantage, yet shall they die like men, and come to the same end that beasts
do, yea; they are more miserable then beasts, which are not subject to sin,
nor culpable of judgment.

Or, these words may be thus interpreted. I said in my heart, concerning the
order of the sons of men, that God had given them dignity, and to see to they
are as beasts to themselves. For this word Dibrah, signifies order, Psalm. 110.
4. and Barar signifies to choose, to purge, to declare, whereof comes
Berurim, choice men set up in dignity, namely, Princes, Rulers, Governors,
Officers ordained of God, for peaceable, honest, and happy life, which abusing
themselves and their places, are to man's reason as but stronger, and more
subtle beasts, preying upon the weaker and more simple and harmless.

Again, they may be translated thus, that they might clear, or justify God,
and see that they themselves are beasts; and therefore vanity it self, even
out of measure vain. Lastly, thus, that God had purged them, id est, created
them pure, holy, and righteous, in his own image, in the beginning, yet to see
to, in this state of degeneration or corruption, they are in themselves as
beasts, accordingly as he says, Chap. 7. 31. God has made man righteous, but
they have sought out many inventions: and Psalm. 49. 20. Man that is in honor,
and understands not, is like the beasts that perish. Which of these
interpretations is the most genuine and natural, I leave to every man's
judgment.

Verse 19. For that which befalls the sons of men, befalls beasts; even
one thing befalls them all: as the one dies, so dies the other; yea, they
have all one breath, so that a man has no pre-eminence above a beast: for all
is vanity.
THe apt coherence of these three verses following with the former, intimate,
that the last interpretation is the most proper. For they are a reason proving
the corruption, vanity, vileness, and misery of proud man, by comparing him to
beasts, whose frailety, corruption, or vanity, is Gods judgment upon man. In
them may he behold his sin, and his corporal punishments for sin before
his eyes, if otherwise he be insensible, which are the forerunners, and
beginning of eternal torments; and sencelesnesse is a judgment of God upon the
reprobate. This like condition of man and beast, to carnal judgment, is set
down in these three verses; which similitude or likeness made the Epicures to
think that the estate and condition of them both, was all one; and
consequently, that to eat, drink, and play, was the chief good, or only
felicity of man. For we see by daily experience, that man and beast are
subject to the like casualties and misfortunes, how men vex, devour, lie in
wait, ensnare, kill, etc. one another, as beasts do, how they die, as beasts
do, having the same causes of corruption in them with beasts. They have the
same breath whereby they live, the same spirit whereby they move, the same
senses, the same inward and outward members, and in bodily shape many beasts
come near unto him, and he is subject to deformities, and all infirmities in
his kind, as much, and more then they. So that in outward state he has no
pre-eminence above the beast. For he cannot longer use the things of this
World, nor carry any thing away with him more then the beast does. The reason
is, because all is vanity. Therefore there is no difference.

Verse 20. All go unto one place, all are of the dust, and all turn to dust
again.
A Commoration. All go to one place, that is, both men and beast are dissolved
again into their elements. For God created all things of the dust, and all
turn to dust again. There is the same matter of man, and beast. Some think
that beast was made of the earth, and man of the dust of the earth, to wit,
either of mire, or else of the dust, that lies on the sur-face of the earth.
But that is an idle contention. For mire, and dust, and earth, are all one, and
the same in essence or substance. When the rain falls on the earth, it is
mire, when the Sun extracteth the moisture out of it, it is dust. So that the
whole earth is nothing but dust, or mire, whether you will. Therefore man was
not made of baser matter then beast, as some say, but rather of better: For
Adam signifies red earth, or red dust, or red mire. All is one without any
difference. And Solomon says here, all are of the dust, or earth, which by the
figure Synecdoche signifies all the elements, whereof earth in earthly things
is predominant, and water in the creatures thereof. No element is simple, or
pure, but it has a mixture of other elements also to be the Chaos or nurse of
their sundry creatures, which in their purity they could not be. So that
earthly things are most earth, especially, the more particular or simpler
creatures, as metals, stones, trees, etc. Yet water, air, and fire also, with
which the element of earth is mixed: By virtue of which mixture, man and beast
are made of the other elements as well as of the earth.

Verse 21. Who knows the spirit of man that goes upward, and the spirit of a
beast that goes downe-ward to the earth?
A Continuance of the commoration, figured by the prevention of an objection,
thus. There is great difference between man, and beast: For man's brutall
nature and spirit is but the plasme or vessel of his soul, which is not
compound, or mixed with it, but only united to it. Therefore when this frail
vessel is broken or dissolved, the immortal spirit or soul ascends to God
that gave it, and the vessel again is absumed into the elements whereof it
was formed. But the spirit of a beast is nothing but the quintessence, the
purest and prime of his body, or his life, which consists in the harmony or
union of the elements, and so not being another essence separable from the
body, it dies with the body. Ans. This is indeed the holy and divine truth,
but now speaking of the worldly, outward, and miserable state of man, as it
appears to human senses and reason, who can by any sign or token, or skill
of Anatomy find out any differing ways of these spirits? What man can show me
the ascending of man's spirit into heaven, or the descending of the beasts
spirit into the earth; namely, the dispersing thereof into the elements? If a
man say, that the spirit of man ascends upwards into the firmament, how can he
let me see that? but if it do, then does the beasts so also. For the firmament
is but the quintessence or prime of the elements, as the spirit is of the body,
according to Plato. And be it that by human reason, a man may easily
demonstrate the immortality of the soul, as the learned heathen have all done,
yet what is that to the outward worldly state of man living? Man whiles he is
man, (and of man we only speak, not of spirits) is no better then beast. So
that to conclude; Seeing that it is with man, as with beast, there is no
profit, no contentment, no rest, no durable prosperity, no happiness at all in
this cursed, confused, brutall world, but all is vanity.

Verse 22. Wherefore I perceive that there is nothing better, then that a man
should rejoice in his own works: for that is his portion; for who shall bring
him to see what shall be after him?
A Conclusion of the right consideration, regard, and use of worldly things
inferred as before, ver. 12. And Chap. 2. 24. Seeing that there is nothing but
vanity and misery, I perceived that it was but vanity and folly to seek for
any happiness in any worldly state. And that it was the point of true and
solid wisdom for a man to rejoice his heart in the honest getting,
comfortable using, and prudent disposing of things put into his hand by the
providence of God, while it is his, even in his hands. For this is a man's
portion, yea, all the good that can be found in them, and by them. For who can
bring a man to see what shall be after him? Chap. 2. 18. 19. The knowledge of
aftertimes belongs to God only, and when we are gone, then is all out of
our hands, and none of ours, but left to Gods disposing, which how God uses
and bestows, or what good is done therewith, is no thanks, no reward to us.
Therefore it is but folly for a man to deprive himself of the benefit of his
works, and to disquiet his heart and mind in vain, with providing and
plotting for aftertimes; namely, for his posterity, whereof he has no
certainty. What greater folly is there, then for a man to torment his body,
vex his spirit, torture his conscience, lose his soul, for those that come
after him, which either shall be wrested from their goods, or die presently
after him, or wastfully spend them, working out their damnation in the
prodigal spending, as he did in the covetous getting. But if they do enjoy
them, and do good with them, yet is that nothing to him that is now in
torment. For it is not by virtue of the goods gotten, and left by him, but of
Gods grace, and that does good as well without those goods, as with them. For
it is not how much we do, but how well, not what, but what God accepts. For
all is his own, we can do nothing for him, nor give any thing to him.

CHAPTER IIII.
Verse 1. So I returned, and considered all the oppressions that are done under
the Sun; and behold the tears of such as were* oppressed, and they had no
Comforter: and on the side of their oppressors there was power, but they had
no Comforter. II. Example of vanities in outward things.

A Second example of corruption in civil state, is of the oppressed. This is
the second example of vanities, observed in outward things, such things as
outwardly come to a man. These words have dependence on verse 16. chap. 3.
There he showed how vanity was increased by corruption in place of Judgment
and Justice; here he shows how vanity is increased by manifold oppressions
every where; whereby almost every man of wit and wealth oppresses, treads
on, insnareth and vexes the inferior and weaker, after the manner of beasts.
And behold, A graphicall or lively description of oppressions in all ages, and
among all sorts of men, continual and common. They are described

First, by the greatness thereof. They are such as caused not only grief and
complaining, but also tears.

Secondly, they are amplyfied by their want of remedy, the incompassionatenesse
of people, which is the sin of Sodom. They had no Comforter. There was none
to deliver Esaias 59. 16.
them, none to take their parts, none to counsel them, but every one rather
treading on him that falls, after the manner of brute beasts.

Thirdly, by the persons oppressing, which were men of authority and power,
that had the law in their own hands.

Fourthly, by the incompassionatenes of other great men, which were merciless,
cruel, and hard-hearted, above the common sort of rude people, as Ierem. 5.
26. 27. 28. complains. Which persons though they were able to remedy wrongs,
yet they rather approved the same, as Herod did Pilates, and Pilate in some
sort did the Priests and Pharisees: So far were they from affording any
comfort to the distressed. The whole verse labors of a gradation.

Verse 2.
Wherefore I praised the dead, which are already dead, more then the living,
which are yet alive.

Verse 3. Yea, better is be then both they, which has not yet been, who has
not seen the evil work that is done under the Sun.
AN amplification. He amplifieth these grievous evils both of the oppressors,
and the oppressed, by a comparison from the Less to the Greater. They that are
dead, having left their wives and children, lands and goods behind them, which
is a great cause of mourning, and tears as contrarily life is joy; are
notwithstanding more happy then these that are living, and enjoy the
privileges of life. This comparison is figured by a R^u^cation, whereby he
recalleth back the former comparison as not sufficient to illustrate the
vanities and miseries of life, and brings in another more fit to express the
greatness thereof. Yea, rather the condition of him that is not yet borne, is
better then they both, because he has not felt nor seen the calamities of the
world. Better it is not to be at all, then to be in misery. What profit then
has a man of all the labor that he takes under the Sun? Mundus est
inuolucrum, ^iue Chaos miseriarum.

Verse 4. Again, I considered all travel, and every right work, that for
this a man is enuyed of his neighbor: this is also vanity and vexation of
spirit.
III. Example of vanity in outward things
A Third example of vanities, outwardly incident to man, is envy, not active
but passive. By envy also is vanity greatly increased. I considered all the
honest and moderate labor of him that rightly earned his living, without
covetousness and wrong* who deprived not his soul of comfort by hoarding them
up, but rejoiced in the work of his hands, and extended the fruits of his
labors to others also. But even this man was enuyed of his neighbor, because
he was good, and did good. Yea, even they that were pertakers of the benefit of
his labors with him, rejoiced at his fall. Wherefore did Cain hate his
brother? even because his brothers deeds were good, and his own evil.
Wherefore should Labans house envy Jacob, through whose faithfulness all things
prospered well with them? yet so it was and is. Wherefore does the righteous man
make himself a prey? Isa. 59. 15. Because he speaks the truth, and departs
from evil. Why did the sons of Jacob, envy their brother Joseph? because
their father loved him. What occasioned Ismael to mock Isaac? Genesis 21. 9. Even
because God had blessed him. And Amos says, Chap. 5. 10. He that rebukes in
the gate is hated, and he is abhorred that speaks uprightly. Why was our
Savior Christ hated, persecuted, crucified? because he was true, holy,
righteous, the holy one, and the just. Because he was good, and his goodness
extended wholly to others. For in the world he had no prerogatives of the
world, all was theirs, and their childrens, he took nothing, but gave himself
for them; he was (...), full of love and favor to man, whatsoever he was it
was for man's good. Yet in this he could not be pardoned, but must be put to
shame and contempt with the greatest malefactors. All this argues the great
vanity of this life.

Verse 5.
The fool foldeth his hands together, and eats his own flesh.

Verse 6. Better is an handful with quietness, then both the hands full with
travel, and vexation of spirit.
I. Example of inward evils, is sloathfulnesse.
THese vanities or evils hereafter following, proceed from a man's self, from
within him, whereof there be three examples following in this Chapter, to wit,
of the sloathsull, the niggard, and the will-full, which heap miseries upon
themselves by their own folly.

The first example is of sloathfulnesse, whereby much vanity is increased,
whereof much wickedness and misery proceeds. The sluggard is graphically
depeinted forth by an hypotiposis, or lively description, by his general, and
effects. in this verse. The fool. The idle person is first described by his
general, he is a fool, or wicked person, one of that rank that wants
wisdom and understanding. For he despises the decree and ordinance of God.
Genesis 3. 19. In the sweat of thy face shall thou get thy living. Again, he
brings himself, into contempt, base account, and hatred, by wilful poverty.
Moreover, he brings himself into bondage and slavery, when he is inforst to
run into debt, and to submit himself to the vices, and evil dispositions,
whatsoever they ^e* of other men, to please them, for relief, and so to be the
servant of other men's corruptions, a son of Belial. Finally, he sets open
the gap to infinite evils very hardly to be avoided, as lying, dissembling,
flattering, humouring, grudging, envying, stealing, robbing, murdering,
imprisonment, etc.

The fool foldeth his hands together. Secondly, he is described by his deeds,
or gestures, which are priuatiues or prauatiues rather, signifying not any
labor, or preparation to labor, but a preparation to more rest and ease,
which is a privation of labor. He foldeth his hands. He sits or lies now
stretching, now enwrapping his arms one within another, now yawning to ease
himself a little, when through want of motion, the blood drawing more inwardly
thickneth, leaving the outward limbs more riged and stiff, and setleth about
the heart. Now he hangs the chin into the bosom, because his laziness will
not rouse up his dull spirits, and disperse his cold and clottered blood. Now
he looks upward, gaping with open mouth, because he will not stretch a
little the sinews of his throat and chapps, as a man does that looks
upwards with his lips shut; therefore this idle fool draws his breath in
at his mouth most commonly, for the rheum ascending into his head, for want of
moderate exercise, and discending into his nose, hinders the easy passage of
his breath, that he cannot so fully enjoy his pleasant sleep. And for
recreation sake, when he is weary with sleeping on the one side, he turns on
the other, as the gate does on the hooks, Prou. 26. 14.

Again, He foldeth his hands together. As others unfold their hands, arms,
knees, to labor; so he infoldeth or crudleth his limbs together to sleep, as
every kind of creature does. Working and walking, do most exercise the body,
standing less, leaning less then that, sitting less, and lying less then
that, but the enfolding of the members give greatest rest, and security. For
then the blood is kept more temperate, he coucheth in a less room, and is
sooner up, if any evil outwardly assail him. In heat the sluggard displayeth
abroad his limbs, in cold he gathers them on an heap. These drowsy fools
live by instinct of corrupt nature, like beasts. As for prodigal, stirring,
lively, and witty fools, they more resemble the Devil. They are not snailes,
but waspes, and hornets. They are idle also, for either they live in no
profession or calling, or else take no pains in their profession. And of them
is this text also understood.

And eats up his own flesh. What other evils soever he may avoid, yet this
is a sure punishment laid on sluggishnesse, that it pineth, and consumes the
body, as it wastes the outward state. For by labor must a man live, therefore
by idleness shall he destroy himself. For idleness is a cause of many
diseases, when the dregs of the humors are not moved, nor superfluities
evaporated by agitation, and sweat* Drowsinesse breeds drossinesse, and vain
pleasures, which is another kind of idleness, brings poverty and pain.
Again, he eats up his own flesh with grief, envy, covetousness. Grief
flayeth him, Prou. 21. 25. Envy and covetousness consume the flesh, and dry
the bones. Many sluggards are covetous and greedy, yet proud, and idle, envying
the plenty of those that labor, and speak evil of them. There are abundance
of such like now a days.

Verse 6.
Better is an handful with quietness, etc. Thirdly, the sluggard is here
described by his inward effects, or vain imaginations of his foolish heart,
destitute of judgment, uttered by the tongue, whereby he excuses,
maintains, and confirms himself in his idleness. For a fool wants not
his reasons, yea, the sluggard is wiser in his own conceit, then seven men
that can render a reason; Prou. 26. 16. But his reasons are grounded on his
lust, and according to his lust, for that is his law. Better it is to have an
handful with quietness, then both hands full with travel and vexation of
spirit. As if he should say, it is better for a man to content himself with a
little with rest, then to toil himself as the drudge does, carking and caring
night and day he cannot tell for whom. What should a man do, but eat and
drink, and play, and be merry, and take his natural rest? A man cannot tell
how long he shall live, wherefore then should he make a beast of himself? He
were as good spend his goods himself, as let another spend them. A man may
labor all his life to gather goods for his children, and they may hap to be
rather the worse, then better for them. For as he has freed them from care to
get them, so will they but care how to waste them. Again, he that strives to
be rich, shall be entangled in manifold businesses, troubles, suits, and be
disquieted with a multitude of servants and laborers, which will spend it as
fast as they get it. Moreover, he that has much, is but a prey to thieves,
robbers, and catch-poles, so that unless he look well and warily to
himself, he shall be ensnared one way or other, and be hated and enuyed. Now
for a man to live, and lie continually thus at defense, is a great vexation,
and better were it that his goods were far enough, then to live in continual
fear, and drudgery. Therefore I hold it a wiser course for a man to take his
ease and pleasure, to be content with a little, let the World run which way
it will. The sluggard seems to have many good speeches often times, but they
proceed from an evil heart, and tend to an evil end. Therefore they are but
foolishness and wickedness.

Verse 7. Then I returned, and saw vanity under the Sun.
II. Example of inward evils is, vnsociablenesse.
A Second example of the contrary, to wit, of covetousness, and drudgery,
whereby vanity is increased. Then I returned, and saw vanity, etc. When I
beheld the foolishness of the careless sluggard, and withal looking about
for the hearted man that h d wisdom to order himself rightly in the affairs
of this li^e, another extremity offered it self to my sight, which was a
vanity above all vanities, yea, darkening all other, as the Sun does the
stars. So that me thought I began but now to see vanity under the Sun.
These words therefore are as it were a magnificall preface to the description
of some great thing.

Verse 8. There is one alone, and there is not a second, yea, he has neither
child nor brother; yet is there no end of all his labor, neither is his eye
satisfied with riches, neither says he, for whom do I labor, and bereave my
soul of good? this is also vanity, yea, it is a sore travel.
A Description of the impure drudge. First, by his solitariness, or
insatiableness: There is one, and not a second. That is to say, a soliuagant,
or solitary vagrant, a Deastricolous person, whose heart is fixed in the ground
like the root of a tree, neither a rational, nor yet a brutall creature, but
a plain vegitable, or locomotiue plant. For diverse of this kind there be,
that are without conjugal affection, or abstain from marriage for fear of
charge of children and expense. For he has not a second, (all living
creatures are sociable but he) that is, he has no companion or fellow, all
companies are vain and evil, and offensive to this sober one, (for so is he
conceited of himself) and the best man with him is but a talker, a familiar
friend is but a disturber of his thoughts, and hinders him from his
business. So fearful and careful, distrustful and despairefull is a man,
when God leaves him to himself.

Secondly, he is described by his unreasonableness, argued by the negation of
the impulsive causes of his careful drudgery. He has neither child nor
brother, kinsman, nor allianee* at least that stands in need to be helped
with his goods.

Thirdly, he is described by his excess. There is none end of all his labor.
He is insatiable, his heart is a bottomless gulf that cannot be filled, his
desires are enlarged as hell. All that he looks upon with his eyes, he
desires to have. And if he had it, yet could not that quench his thirst, nor
stay his hungry appetite. He is a Leuiathan, a Sea-dragon, or Whale, that
wants room in the maine Ocean.

Fourthly, he is described by his senselessness. forgetfulness, want of
discourse, and use of reason, being in utter bondage to his lust, and so wholly
degenerated into the nature of a beast. He never says, for whom do I labor,
and bereave my soul of good? He is carried even forward like the plant by his
inclination, or like the beast by his appetite, like every irrational by his
instinct, never reflecting his reason upon himself, or his travel, to
consider the end thereof, and use of worldly things, nor upon his own end,
though he see death in others, both elder, younger, and equals every day
before his eyes, and even feel the causes, forerunners, or warnings of death
in his own flesh and bones summoning him to judgment. This person most wise,
most good in his own conceit, comes far short of the rich man, Luke 12.
who in the fullness of wealth was able to say; Now soul take thy rest, thou
have goods enough, eat* drink, and be merry. He comes far short of
Nabal, that ate, and drank, and was drunk, and slept soundly upon it. Nay, he
never bethinketh himself how all the things of this World serve for nothing
else but meat, drink, apparel. For he depriueth himself of these as near
as may be, and lays them up for the worms, mothes, and canker. This service
is the event of his labor, as much as in him lies, (for death, not he,
puts others in possession and use thereof) what other end soever he
confusedly dreameth of, but never obtains.

The whole verse labors of a Gradation, thus: He carefully labors for no
cause; and not only so, but there is none end of his labor; and not only
that, but he is never satisfied, neither that only, but he affords no comfort
to his body therewith. He planteth a vineyard, and eats not of the fruit; he
feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk, he is an ox treading out the
corn, and muzzleth his own mouth, yea, when his bread is before him, he
lays his knife to his throat, as Solomon says, scarcity is upon his table.
This is a vanity, and a sore travel. It is one alone indeed, for there is
nothing in nature to compare him to. For every creature desires the perfection
of it self, but this seeks his own destruction. He is like a Water-mill.

Verse 9. Two are better then one; because they have a good reward for their
labor.
AN illustration of the vanities of Without natural affection toward men.
Romans 1.
Misanthropicall covetousness, by a comparison of contrary Which is a remedy
against the contrary* vanity.
society or community of life; Two are better then one. This contrariety is
confirmed by the opposition of the benefits of sociable life, and evils of
solitary life, by diverse examples, in these four next verses, to wit, of two
working together, of two lying together, of two contending, with the
Opposition, or contrariety.
Antithesis of their reasons, or contrary consequence of contraries.

The first example, is of two working together. Two or more laboring, or
traveling, or doing any thing are helped, furthered and comforted one by
another. And that work, or exercise whereabout they are busied, has better
success by much, then when one is alone. Man by nature is the most sociable
creature, as his reason and speech does manifest. As for other living creatures
they are sociable also, but yet by natural sympathy, and so are plants also.
They are gathered or severed by their manifold differing kinds, and by
sympathies and antipathies in their kinds: But reason and speech unites men
into one civil body, and several men are several members of that body. And
whereas no member can serve it self, maintain or comfort it self without the
other, nor if it be sick, lame, etc. can relieve it self without the other:
so neither can any one man live without the coworking, nor comfort himself
without the aid and compassion of another. But if he strive to do it, or can
do it in somethings yet it is altogether imperfectly, unprofitably,
uncomfortably done, and of no continuance. For the whole state of one member is
so by divine providence entangled and united with another, that in the perfect
welfare of one there must be a concurrence or communion of all, as we see it
to be in the members of the body, which though they have several offices, yet
cannot one execute his office to the perfect good of it self, without the
communion of the offices of the other members. What can the man do, whom all
men forsake and leave wholly to himself? what can the eye do when all the
other members leave it? what profit has it by seeing? Therefore the more that
a man is separated from society, and community of life, he is the more
imperfect, comfortless, miserable. But now this Misanthropicall drudge has no
society with God, and little with men, therefore he is a member destitute,
imperfect, yea worse then a beast. He is imperfect and destitute* quia flagrat
inuidia populi, the hearts of all are against him. All the members withold
their lucky communicati^g influence, as I may say, and are maleuolently
aspected: Now he that is dishearted of all, is as fruit in an ill season, too
cold, too hot, intemperate. Contrarily, he that has the hearts or good will of
men, flourishes under their beneuolous aspect. Therefore the pliant sociable
man is much better then the tough, stiff, soliuagant drudge in all seasons and
affairs.

Verse 10. For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow: but woe to him
that is alone when he falls; for he has not auother to help him up.
THe contrary reasons, showing the benefits of sociable life, and the evils of
solitary covetousness. If they fall, etc. If one or any of them miscarry, in a
iourny, or any action, then his fellow will help him up, commiserate his case,
and communicate his help, even his strength with the others weakness. So it
is in the society, and community of civil life. If a man have companions,
friends, and well-willers, which are gotten and kept by mutual duties, and
tokens of love and friendship, he shall have helpers and furtherers of him in
his need, reioycers with him in his prosperity, comforters of him in his
sickness, incouragers of him in his troubles, and commisserators of his
ill-fare, of what kind soever it be. Contrarily, woe is to him that is alone;
when he falls, he has not another to help him up. Woe, that is, loss,
trouble, uncomfortable living, etc. is to him that is alone: For as he cares
for no man, so no man cares for him. Even as he that is alone in a journey,
and falling by the way hurts himself, or falls lame, or falls sick, or
wants money, etc. is in greater trouble and distress, if he want a fellow,
or companions to communicate, and impart their help unto him: so if a man be a
solitary drudge, and an unprofitable incompact member, that he cares for none
but for himself, nor yet in effect and truth for himself, as Domitius Nero,
who complained that he could find none to kill him, when a more ignominious
death waited for him; he I say, shall in his prosperity be enuyed, and grudged
at of all, in his strict dealings be cursed, in his need be helples, in his
troubles remediless, in his heaviness comfortless, in his falling trodden
under foot, and after his death cast into the pit as an unprofitable drone.
Briefly, he shall want all the profitable and comfortable fruits that redound
to men by virtue of mutual duties, and love in sociable, and civil life. What
profit has this man of all his labors that he takes under the Sun?

Verse 11. Again, if two lie together, then they have heat; but how can one
be warm alone?
THe second example is of two or more fellows lying together in bed, or
boards, or on the ground. Two lying together, are better then one, because they
have heat. Contrarily, how can one be warm alone? If two or three men lie
together in the cold, they shall be helped one by another, and all kept warm:
even so, if there be an intercourse of mutual duties among men, accordingly as
every man has received the gift of God, then shall they be helped, comforted,
sustained one by another, and it shall be well with every one of them. But
contrarily, if one lie alone, the cold surpriseth him on every side, and by his
contrary quality, driving and enforcing the blood and heat inwardly, benummeth
the outward parts, oppresses the heart, and mortifieth it; whereas two or
three lying together, the heat is produced and kept in the outward parts the
pores of the body kept open, the blood dispersed, the flesh kept supple by the
heat, and so preserved from the rigidity of the cold: even so in civil
society, if a man be without fellow, friend, companions, lovers, welwillers, he
is helpelesse, comfortless, and impotent, subject to many evils, and
inconveniences that might be avoided, he has none to rejoice with him in his
good success, nor to commiserate his evils, none to maintain him in his
standing, nor to sustain him in his falling.

Verse 12. And if one prevail against him, two shall withstand him; and a
threefold cord is not quickly broken.
THe third example is of two or more fellows in matter of contention. If one
prevail against him, two shall withstand him. As if he should say, If a man be
not alone, but has fellows or pertakers, then though that one be stronger
then he, to give him the foil, yet shall he with the help of his fellow
withstand that one. This is amplified by a comparison of the less to the
greater, figured by a prouerbiall or alligoricall speech. (A three-sold cord is
not quickly broken.) If with the help of one he shall be able to withstand
him, much more then with the help of two or more. Or, when many shall lay
their strengths together, they shall be much more able. So likewise if a man be
not a solitary, malecontented, selfe-conceited, rigorous muckrell, but
communicate with others, and be consociate with them by the intercourse of
mutual duties, benevolence, courtesies, kindness, compassionatenesse, etc.
the like he shall find again. Therefore the unjust steward dealt wisely, Luke
16. He made friends aforehand, lest he should be alone, and destitute, and end
his days in desperation.

To conclude all this point, our Savior Christ says, With what measure ye
mete, it shall be measured to you again, Mat. 7. 2. Thus much of the second
example of inward evils.

Verse 13 Better is a poor and a wise child, then an old and foolish King, who
will no more be admonished.
III. Example of inward evils is wilfulnes.
A Third example is of folly in kings, men of authority, and rule, men of
wealth, and of what pre-eminence soever, whereby vanity is also increased.
Idleness brings the sluggard to misery; covetousness brings the niggard
to misery; and wilfulness brings every man of power and great estate, who
has an outward show of happiness, to misery. Yea, so far from happiness is
a wilful and selfe-conceited man, although he be a King or Monarch, that a
poor and a wise child is better then he: The child is better then the old
man, the poor is better then the rich. Docility, teachablenes, tractablenes is
the property of wisdom, and he that is wise is nearest unto happiness,
whatsoever his age and estate be. Contrarily, stubbornness, perverseness,
wilfulness is the property of foolishness, and he that is foolish is farthest
from happiness, though he be a Monarch; Yea, he is nearest to greatest
misery, as Ieho^akim, Saul, Zedekiah, etc. Samuel was better then Heli, and
David then Saul. And through the like folly, were ten tribes rent from
Rehoboam. The highest estate, or dignity that a man can attain to, and which
men commonly count the happiest, is the state of a king. For a king having all
other in subjection and under command, is in that worldly respect the nearest
unto God, whose immediate vicegerent he is. And therefore in respect of
supremacy in the execution of Justice and judgment, Kings are termed,
comparatively, Gods.

But notwithstanding that high place and supreme power, if he want discretion
and wisdom to sway the scepter in Justice, and judgment, according to the
law of the highest, he is worse than a poor subject or inferior, that has
wisdom to order his private and particular state aright. Yea, though he be
old, and rich, yet is he worse then one that is young and even a child, and
poor because this has wisdom, that is, is capable, teachable, tractable,
and so is in possibility and hope. But contrarily, the other being old, and by
reason of age, and long experience should be of a wise and understanding heart
to discern truth and equity, but yet is foolish, and carried with the sway of
wandering and fruitless lusts, as children commonly are; neither yet through
wilfulness will be admonished, that is, will not hear, nor yield to the
advice and counsel of sage, and prudent counselors, but like Rehoboam,
Zedekiah, Ahab, Nebuchadnezzer setleth himself upon his lees; the other, I
say, is better then he. All this comparison is figured by a Synecdoche of the
Special. For by king is meant all men of any external power, place, wealth,
kindred, beauty, strength, age, or any prerogative. Contrarily, by the poor
child, is meant any one that wants these prerogatives, and is the most
inferior.

Verse 14. For out of prison he comes to reign, whereas also he that is
borne in his kingdom becomes poor.
A Confirmation of the Antithesis, or contrariety, by the contrary effects of
wisdom and folly in them both. For out of prison he comes to reign: That
is, though he be a captive, and kept in hold under chains, as Joseph was, yet
by wisdom he comes not only to obtain liberty, but also rises by degrees
to the scepter: So that he which was a bondsman, is now become a King;
contrarily, he that is borne in the kingdom becomes poor, as if he should
say the other was a made bondsman, but borne a king, this made a king, but borne
poor, because that the other was in his birth and bondage of a kingly heart
and disposition, as was David, though of mean parentage; but this in his
kingly birth and royal pre-eminence, is of a declining and degenerating heart
and disposition, as was Iehoiakim, and Comah; Ier. 22. Whereby it comes to
pass, that he loses the reverend and awefull regard of his subjects, as did
Sardanapalus, etc. By folly and wilfulness, are great houses and kingdoms
overthrown, and translated to others, whereof the Scriptures afford diverse
examples. By prisonhouse is meant any of mean estate, or low degree, as David
was, and as Joseph was, according to the Psalm 113. 7. 8. and specially Psalm
106. 17. 18. 19. 20. By borne King, is meant any of higher estate, degree, or
pre-eminence in outward things, by the figure Synecdoche. Such like were
Zedekiah, Iehoiakim, Coniah.

Verse 15. I considered all the living, which walk under the Sun, with the
second child that shall stand up in his stead.
THis third example of vanity, and vexation belonging to royal state, is
figured by the prevention of an objection thus: What though sometimes it fall
out that Kings are led aside, either through their own folly, or deceits of
wicked Counselors, as the flattering Princes corrupted Ioash? 2 Chronicles. 24.
17. that argues not that wise Princes behauing themselves prudently in all
their ways, should be subject to vanity; that is, deprived of happy
contentation, as other inferior degrees are. I answer, that vanity and
vexation in royal state, is not only increased by their own folly, or
produced by an inward cause; but also it proceeds from an outward cause, to
wit, occasioned (if he were guarded from all other evils and discontentments)
by the inconstancy, and the instability of the passionate people his subjects.
For they are fickle and restless, carried to and ^ro, as every blast of
coffeehouse and idle fancies toss their humors, and are often times like the
Sea, that makes a noise when no wind is stirring, when they have no cause,
but only disquieted with an itch, affectation of novelties and changes, though
it be for the worse, as the Israelites being weary of Judge* ordained of God,
would be governed by Kings, as other Nations were, 1 Samuel 8. 6. 7. As they that
being wea^y of rest, must be exercised with labor, verse 11. to 18. that they
may be brought to know their happy estate, which through fickle and wanton
discontent they are ignorant of, like to children that having too much of their
own will, cry for the roode, for nothing else will quiet them. Deliciousness,
and fullness in every thing, grows loathsome. Howsoever, men know not, or are
forgetful of their own good. This then is a grief, and vexation to a King,
that the people rest not contented in him, and if they do, yet when he is old,
they begin for the most part to turn their hearts toward the second, even the
child, or heir, that shall reign after him. And this is not one of the least
griefs of old age, the contempt or neglect of the younger, when as they see
themselves growing out of request, their names, account, and memorial,
decaying by little and little, with their bodies, and with death vanishing
quite away. As this is to others, so to Kings also a vexation to see already
the common aspect of their people, bent upon another object before the time.
Old age is jealous, and suspicious of the contempt of youth.

Verse 16. There is no end of all the people, even of all that have b^^ne
before them: they also that come after, shall not rejoice in him: surely this
also is vanity, and vexation of spirit.
A Reason, why people are with the second child, that shall stand up in the
Kings stead, namely, their inconstancy. There is no end of all the people that
have been before them* End, has not relation to time, or perpetual
succession of generations, but signifies a fixed resolution, and resistfull
contentation, or joyful complacence, which is not to be found in the people,
which are wavering as the Sea, and variable as the Moon. For former people
little regarded the present Kings Grandfather, being old, and in their desires
turned after his Father being young, whom again now being old, the present
people are weary of, and are all for his son, and that for sinister respects,
even their own preferment, gain, etc. or itching after novelties, and
changes. They also that come after, shall not rejoice in him. And when he is
old also, the people then shall no more rejoice in him, then the former did in
his aged Father. For the common people are like to children, that rest not
contented with any Schoolmasters, and like to servants, that love to change
every year their Masters, even as again Parents and Masters are affected to
new Ministers. People are desirous to hear new Preachers, as Feasters to hear
new songs, and new instruments; Ezech. 33. 32.

CHAPTER V.
Verse 1. Keep thy foot when thou go to the house of God, and be more ready
to hear, then to give the sacrifice of fools: for they consider not that they
do evil.
He shows here the vanities of the body ecclesiastic.
IN this Chapter Solomon prosecuteth still the same argument of vanities. But
from the first verse to the ninth, he makes a digression from vanities in
temporal things, and shows the vanities that are rife in the Word in the
service of God. As before he declared the vanities of all humane things, both
inward and outward, and withal showed the good that was to be found in them,
even the comfort of the body; so here he sets down the true felicity and
happiness of man, and where it is to be found, to wit, not in worldly
wisdom, worldly wealth, worldly pomp, but in the reverend fear, and true
service of God. It was not to be found in the Schools of human learning, but
in the house of God. And withal he shows the vanities and hypocrisies of
men, corrupting themselves in this his service, to the verse 8. and the
occasions of their hypocrisies and fainting in his service, verse 8. as
doubtings of Gods providence and administration through oppressions; which
still increases vanity. And this he does by way of exhortations, dehortations,
or admonitions. That so by showing on the one side the vanities of human
things, with the good of them for the body; and on the other side, the good of
spiritual things for the soul, with the vanities therein, he might plainly
set before our eyes the most absolute and perfect felicity of both body and
soul, even of the whole man here in this World, yea, that in seeing the good
of all things, and the vanities of all things, we might be mortified to this,
and quickened or renewed to that. Keep thy foot when thou go to the house
of God. Come not to the house of God, as to an ordinary house, but consider
whether thou go, into whose presence, to what end. In Prou. 4. 23. he says;
Keep thy heart with all diligence. Here he bids, Keep thy foot. By heart,
he means the soul; by foot, the affections. The soul is carried upon the
affections, as the body is upon the feet. Therefore the meaning is, take heed
to thy soul, to thy self, to thy spirit, to thy affections. Consider well how
thou art in spirit affected, in affections disposed, when thou go to the
Temple of God, to perform the works of divine service.

And be more ready to hear. When thou come to the Temple of God, put thy
shoes off thy feet, thy carnal affections, Exodus 3. 5. For the place where
thou stand, is holy, that thou may resign thy self wholly to the Lord;
Ruth. 4. 7. Come in reverence, humility, sincerity, to hear the Law and the
Prophets, to understand, to believe, to yield thy self to the Lord in absolute
obedience to his Word. Know wherefore thou come, into whose presence, what
thou intendest by thy offerings, so shall thou come in reverence and dread, in
faith, in thankfulness.

Then to offer the sacrifice of fools. That is, fools come clothed with the
rags of vanity, ignorance, pride, presumption, and other lusts, they come
without a wedding garment. They come with a multitude of sacrifices, and to
burden the Altar of God, as though God regarded their outward works, and
needed their gifts, that he should be pleased with them, reconciled to them,
and reward them for their works and gifts sake, as great men use to do, when
costly presents are sent unto them. But these fools know not that the true
intent of sacrifices is not to give to God, but rather receiving of God, as
forgiveness of sins, deliverance from everlasting death, salvation, and
life, the right of this World, and the glory to come by the death and merits of
the Son of God, whom those sacrifices, and offerings did shadow forth,
represent, and signify unto them. They know not that they should come to
learn, understand, see, believe, and receive the endl^^se mercy and grace of
God toward them in these sacrific^s, and withal to testify their thankful
obedience to him; even the denial of themselves, and all fleshly lusts, to
resign themselves wholly to him, who in the appointment of God, had even
already given himself for them. This true faith and obedience is far from
those ignorant fools, who think to appease the anger of God, and to please
him with their outward works, and gifts, lip-prayers, and fastings; Math. 6.
Yea, to merit at his hands hereby, as evidently appears, Mal. 3. 14. It is in
vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his Commandments,
and that we have walked humbly before the Lord of Hosts? Here they look to be
rewarded of the Lord for their works, and fastings, according to their lusts,
as they that honor and flatter Princes for their own benefit and preferment.
They did all for their own profit, as the multitude that followed Christ so
earnestly, John 6. 26. Suauis odor lucri ex re qualibet, Gain is sweet out of
every thing. In Zach. 7. 4. 5. They fasted the fifth and seventh month, (a
Law of their own making, else it should not have been kept so long, seauenty
years together, verse 5.) to obtain temporal benefits for their bodies of
him, but they stopped their ears at the voices of the Prophets, verse 7. they
refused to hear, they pulled away the shoulder, and made their hearts as an
adamant, verse 11. 12. God a giver was theirs, but not God a receiver.

For they consider not that they do evil. They understand not that these
works, prayers, sacrifices, vows, fastings, are an abomination to the Lord,
where faith, reverence, humble confession, love, obedience, are wanting; Esai
1. Psalm. 50. 8. to the end. 1 Samuel 15. 22. Has the Lord as great delight in
burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold* to
obey is better then sacrifice; and to hearken, then the fat of Rams; Prou.
15. 8. The sacrifice of the wicked, is abomination to the Lord; but the prayer
of the upright is his delight. These outward exercises of Religion, performed
by fools, are evil; and therefore an abomination, procuring wrath and
destruction from the Lord. First, when they are done in ignorance, and
disobedience, as appears by the Texts aforesaid, the Jews did, and most
people now adays do, and always have done. Secondly, when under color of
religion, as hearing, reading, religious talking, etc. they intend to effect
some mischief, at least to cover their profaneness, covetousness, revenge,
etc. So Absolon under color of a vow conspired against his Father. The
Pharisees under pretense of long prayers, devoured widows houses, they
crucified Christ also under many pretenses. So the Jews fasted, Isai 58. 4.
Such a fast was Iezebels, to murder Naboth. Such like were the Preachers of
Corinth, and they that preached of envy to increase Paul's afflictions; Phil.
1. 15. 16. And it is to be feared, that such like abominable ones are
plentiful in these days. For as all things are pure to the pure, so
hypocrites defile the purest, and holiest things.

Verse 2. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty to utter
any thing before God: for God is in heaven, and thou upon earth: therefore let
thy words be few.
AN amplification of the former instruction by the specials or particulars, to
wit, of prayer and vows, to verse 8. but negatiuely, or dehortatorily, to
declare also the vanities incident to these religious exercises, as I said
before. Here he teaches how we ought to pray, or to keep our foot or heart
in prayer. Be not rash with thy mouth. That is, when thou art about to ask any
thing of God, or to give him thanks by prayer, let not thy tongue run before
thy wit, let not thy mind be carried away with rolling imaginations of many
broken matters, and confused apprehensions, nor yet thy affections unpurged
from the scent of sensuality, pride, presumption, boasting, like the Pharisees,
babble not forth ignorant and heartlesse formal speeches in the ears of God,
as hypocrites do, which think to be heard for the loudness of their noise,
and multitude of their words, Mat. 6. 5. And let not thine heart be hasty to
utter a thing before God.

Be not unadvised in thy thoughts, and intent thereof in Gods presence, to ask
or promise what thou think good according to thine own lust or liking, Iam.
4. 2. 3. 4. to give and take as pleases thy self, as if thou thy self be
pleased God should be pleased also, to doubt of Gods goodness, and promise of
giving, and to limit his power. Let not thy counsels or thoughts proceed from
an unpurged, and ill disposed heart, nor thy words from vncomposed, unconstant,
wandering, wavering thoughts. For God is in heaven, and thou upon earth. These
words are an argument or motive enforcing the former dehortation by a
comparison of things unlike, to wit, Gods glorious Majesty, and man's
weakness, baseness unworthiness, argued by the difference, and distance of
the places where God most shows forth his glory, (in heaven) and man has his
habitation (on earth.)

As the highest heaven, which is the throne of God, is more glorious and
greater then the earth, which is but his footstool, and how far the one is
distant from the other, so is God much more excellent and powerful than man,
as the Lord says, My thoughts are not as your thoughts, nor my ways as your
ways.

Therefore let thy words be few, that is to say, dread that glorious and
fearful Name, The Lord thy God, Deuteronomy. 28. 28. Come before him in humility,
fear and reverence, utter no foolish speeches, make no vain repetitions; but
ask with an earnest desire in knowledge, according to his will, and for his
glory. For he knows before what thou ne^dest, he understands thy secret
thoughts, and can give thee what, and when it pleases him, without thy prayer.
But this means has God ordained that he might be glorified by thee, by thy
reverend sear, submission, thankfulness, that acknowledging of whom thou
art, and from whom all that thou have comes, thou may return thy self,
and all that thou have received to him, even to the praise of his glorious name.

Few words are here opposed to ethnicall, pharisaicall, heartlesse crying, and
babbling. 1 King. 18. 28. not to the often praying, nor long prayers, nor
fervent repetitions of the sanctified heart. Luc. 2. 37. Matthew. 26. 44. Ioh.
17. 14. 16. Our Savior Christ spent whole nights in prayer, and the Apostle
says, Pray continually: And Christ by the parable of the unjust Judge and the
poor widow, exhorts us to frequent and vehement praying. Every particular
blessing requires a particular prayer and thanksgiving. The Lords prayer
contains the substance of all prayers, as the twelve articles do the
Gospel, and the ten Commandments the whole Law. The disciples made a
general request of prayer in general; Lord teach us to pray, Luke 11. 1. not
particularizing any subject or matter, but as John taught his disciples. The
prayer of John was doubtless (as Caluin^ says) some certain form gathered
from diverse Scriptures, agreeable to the time of the coming of Christ, and his
spiritual kingdom. And the prayer of Christ contains the whole substance of
his kingdom, which is Gods wisdom and glory in man's salvation; the three
former petitions respecting Gods glory, and the three latter those things that
are profitable to man's salvation. So also the commandments are divided into
two tables, the former containing duties of piety toward God, the other duties
of charity toward men. So the twelve articles teach us what to believe
concerning God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and what concerning the Church.
The disciples being yet but children and of confused knowledge used this prayer
only (I think) in solemn praying* as children and ignorant people are first
taught the articles of faith, the commandments, and this prayer. But they that
hold it enough to say the Lords prayer only; namely, this form of words, may
as well lay it is enough to faith and obedience, only to believe the Creed,
and do the commandments, refusing the particulars of the Law and the
Prophets, the Proverbs of Solomon, etc. the writings of the Evangelists, and
Apostles, and all expositions and applications, as indeed they do. But when
the Apostles were endued with full measure of the spirit they could frame
prayers according to all circumstances, and exigence of times, and occasions,
as Act. 4. 24. etc. Act. 20. 36. Which Paul's also in all his Epistles testify
after the example of Christ. Ioh. 17. and Chapter 11. 22. 42. etc. and many
other places. Therefore I conclude, as a man's knowledge of the truth is, so let
him pray generally or particularly; yea both, according to the direction of the
Lords prayer, and that is according to the doctrine of the whole Scripture of
Christ's kingdom. Every right prayer is a branch of the Lords prayer, so every
doctrine a branch of the Creed, and every work of the ten Commandments. Ask,
believe, do. If these seeds be within us, they must branch forth all over, as
veins do from the liver, and sinews from the brain; yea, if their branches
fill the world, it is but the perfection and plerophorie, or fulness of prayer,
faith, obedience. As a man abounds in knowledge, so may he abound in all prayer
and thanksgiving. But he that will insist only upon the brief collections or
forms of the Creed, Lords Prayer, and ten Commandments, is very likely to
deny all in particular, that in general he confusedly confesses, saying as
it were, that fruit, that br nch never came out of that kernel which I had in
my mouth seven years ago. This is but a foolish babbler, that stands up at
the Creed, and fights against the Gospel. That bableth over the
Commandments, and maintains swearing, and hates every godly and righteous
man, and is to every good work reprobate, one that is like the corn upon the
house tops, that makes a show a while, but never comes to good.

Verse 3. For a dream comes through the multitude of business, and a fools
voice is known by multitude of words.
AN argument of dehortation, drawn from the effect, or rather adiunct, of many
words, [batologie, or polylogie,] they are signs of a fool, they bewray an
ignorant and heartlesse hypocrite that prays without knowledge, and without
sanctified affections. This is illustrated by a similitude. As the multitude of
business causes a dream, so do many words declare a fool, who by rash and
inconsiderate speeches, utters many follies and vain things, that make him
known to be a fool that has a fools heart: For a fool is counted wise till
he speak. He that has no root of understanding and wisdom in his heart,
but either says other men's written prayers, or rabbles together many words and
sentences without understanding and affection, is a fool. Otherwise, he that
is weak in knowledge, or otherwise defective, may use other men's prayers, and
parcels of many prayers, into which his understanding and affection being
employed, they become his own. For he does join with holy men in their
prayers, as the people join with the preacher in his prayers, if he use
discretion in the use of their prayers. For one set prayer cannot agree to all
times and circumstances, unless it be more general, as the Lords prayer is
most general, and may therefore be said at all times.

Verse 4. When thou vowest a vow unto God defer not to pay it: for he has
no pleasure in fools: pay that which thou have vowed.
THe second particular is a vow. When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not
to pay it. That is, when according to the Law thou have undertaken to exhibit
an evident testimony of honor to the Lord by a vow, thereby exciting and
stirring up thy self to give unto the Lord that which is his own and due unto
him, even thy self, the resignation, and consectation of thy self, or any
thing into his hands, to be to his honor in thankful obedience after a more
special manner; defer not to pay it, do not mock God, trifle not with him,
make no dissembling show of special service, and thankfulness to him, when
thou art loath to perform it, as though thou were willing to bind thy self to
God, but yet loath to abridge thy self of liberty: This is like the hypocrisy
of Ananias and Saphira, Act. 5. For he has no pleasure in fools. An argument
enforcing the admonition. They that do so are not accepted of God, because
they are fools, that is, they are sinful and wicked, their rashness shows
their irreuerence, their slacknesse in paying, shows their dead heart and
coldness of affection, and their not paying, manifests their deep
hypocrisy and contempt of him. The man of honor, and the aged are offended,
if a man in such sort trifle with them, much more is God displeased, when he is
so lightly regarded, and mocked. Therefore the Lord commanded in the Law, Deuteronomy.
23. 21. When thou shall vow a vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shall not slack
to pay it: for the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee; and it would be
sin in thee. Pay that thou have vowed. A conclusion of the reason. If thou
slackest to pay thy vow, it shall be sin in thee: Therefore pay it.

Verse 5. Better it is that thou should not vow, then that thou should
vow and not pay.
AN amplification of the conclusion, by a comparison. It is better not to vow,
because that it is indifferent and free, for God has not commanded it, but
promised to accept that incitation of thy self to special service and duties.
Therefore if thou forbear to vow, it shall be no sin in thee; Deuteronomy. 23. 22.
it is better I say, then that thou should vow and not pay, because that is
sin. For God is mocke^, seeing that whom with thy lips thou have honored,
thou have by deed dishonored, showing thereby thy want of fear, reverence,
and love to him, as follows in the next verse.

Verse 6. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, neither say thou
before the Angel, that it was an error: wherefore should God be angry at thy
voice, and destroy the work of thine hands?
A Reason of the comparison, why it is better not to vow, then to vow and not
to pay: because it is sin. For though thy vow be in thy free choice, yet when
it is once made, God has commanded the performance. Deuteronomy. 23. 23. That which
is gone out of thy lips, thou shall keep, and perform; even a free will
offering, according as thou have vowed to the Lord thy God, which thou have
promised with thy mouth. Therefore David says, Psalm. 66. 13. 14. I will pay
thee my vows, which my lips have uttered, and my mouth has spoken, when I
was in trouble. This he propounds by way of dehortation. Suffer not thy mouth
to cause thy flesh to sin. That is, neither conceive in mind, nor promise
with thy mouth, that which thou can nor, nor ought to perform, for that
is but to bind thy self to sin, which easily thou might have avoided*
yea, to call and seek for occasions of sin, in that thou take up that for
an occasion, which God has left free, and easy for thee to forbear. Neither
say thou before the Angel that it was an error. A prevention of an objection,
thus. Although I have rashly vowed that which now I cannot perform, and
through ignorance have vowed that, which afterward I find to be unlawful, yet
my intent was good: Therefore if I confess mine error before the Lords
messenger, Mal. 2. 7. and seek to be absolved from my vow according to the
Law; Leuit. 5. 4, 5. etc. I trust God will be reconciled to me. Answer. When we
are about to do for our selves, I mean, to please God according to our own
ignorance and lust, then we term it a good intent; but when the deed is
naught through want of knowledge of Gods will, and hearty submission to his
will, the intent is as bad. A fool will not want excuses for his folly, and
this good meaning, or well meaning, is one of the common deceits of a carnal
heart, being like him that wishes well to his friend, but never does him good,
but rather evil always in the end, when he is thoroughly tried. He that
inconsiderately and unlawfully voweth, under color of good, and good intents,
provoke God to anger, and shall not go unpunished, notwithstanding his
outward absolution. For unless we dread his Majesty, and seek to know his
will, that we sin not against him, he will not accept our offerings. Leuit.
5. 6. 10. Our prayers shall be turned into sin. For this is nothing indeed;
but to make the Ordinance of God, an occasion to sin against God. If we sin
unwillingly, and of infirmity, we have Jesus Christ the righteous, a
propitiation for our sins; but if for that cause we be careless, and
presumptuous, we mock God, and deceive our selves, and there is no truth in
us. For Christ came to redeem us from sin, to bind us unto God, and not to
give liberty to sin, to make less conscience thereof, but rather more,
according to the abundance of mercy. Wherefore should he be angry at thy
voice, and destroy the work of thine hands? Wherefore should thou provoke
God to anger by words, and such words as are in thine own power? For God has
not commanded thee to promise this or that to him: So that in not promising,
thou have not sinned. Why then should thou bring sin upon thy soul, by
promising that which thou oughttest not, or can not perform? Surely, when
thus for want of fear of God, thou dishonourest him, he will honor himself
in thy lust judgment, that others may dread his name.

Verse 7. For in the multitude of dreams, and many words, there are also
diverse vanities: but fear thou God.
A Reason of the dehortation, or admonition. For in many words, that is to say,
in rash and inconsiderate promises, and excuses accordingly, there are diverse
follies. For God is offended, the Messenger of the Lord is grieved at thy
follies, men are scandalized, and thou art punished. This he illustrateth by a
comparison of dreams, which neither are true, but the confused and disordered
fancies of one that slumbereth, nor arising from the principles of rest, by
judicious discourse, but caused by distempered humors, neither to any end, but
to disquiet him that would take his rest. Such like are foolish prayers and
foolish vows. But fear thou God. An exhortatory conclusion of all, setting
down the true ground of prayer and vows, which makes them acceptable to God.
But fear God. The fear of God is the beginning of wisdom, Psalm. 19. 9. The
fear of God is clean, a good understanding have they that do thereafter. If
thou fear God, thou will wisely promise, and diligently perform. Fear
being grounded on wisdom, is here opposed to rash promising, and flack
performance, the effects of folly, which testify the want of fear and
prophanes, whereof this word (but) is a sign.

Verse 8. If thou see oppression of the poor, and violent perverting of
justice and judgment in a Province, marvel not at the matter: for he that is
higher then the highest regards; and there be higher then they.
THese words are a confirmation of his former documents, or divine lessons of
sacrificing, prayer, vows, figured by a prolepsis, gathered from his former
discourse of vanities, increased by oppressions, Chap. 3. 16. 17. Cap. 41. 2.
3. Object. It is in vain for a man to bind himself too strictly to religion,
and religious exercises, otherwise then for politic respects seeing that
there is no providence of God, nor divine administration os the World, as
evidently appears by the oppressions of the poor, and the violent perverting
of judgment and justice. For it is a marvel indeed, and a thing even contrary
to reason, that there should be not only a general, but also a special
providence and government in judgment, and justice, and mercy, Ier. 9. 24. and
yet to see such oppressions and wrongs go unpunished and unreformed, and the
poor and godly without deliverer, without comforter.

Ans. This argument seems good indeed to carnal reason, which judges
according to outward appearance, not according to the secret and good wisdom
of God, who intends the glory of himself in all things. For so the foolish
say, Mal. 3. 14. it is in vain to serve God, what profit have we by obedience
and humiliation of our selves in mourning and fasting? And the wicked say,
Psalm. 10. 11. God has forgotten, he hides away his face, he will never see
it. So Psalm. 73. 11. How does God know? Is there knowledge in the most high?
David was also tempted to this folly, Verse 2. My feet were almost gone, my
steps had wel-nigh slipped. For when I saw the wicked in prosperity, Verse 4. 5.
6. I said, I have cleansed my heart in vain, and to no purpose washed my hands
in innocence, Verse 13. Seeing that I am contrarily plagued, and chastened
continually, Verse 14. But Solomon here resolves this doubt. If thou see
such disorder in a Province, marvel not that it should be so, for God that is
most high in power and dignity, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, and Judge of
Judges, knows and regards, yea, orders all these disordered things
according to his wisdom for his glory, the punishment of the wicked, and good
of his servants. And as these earthly Princes and Governors, are set in high
place, and are therefore called gods, because they are Gods Vicegerents; so
has God other Ministers, an innumerable company of Angels, higher and greater
then they, by whom he executes judgment on tyrants, and cruel oppressors in
his time, as Chap. 3 17. They shall be punished, and the godly and poor,
oppressed, shall be delivered, Psalm. 12 5. For the oppression of the poor, for
the sighing of the needy, now will I arise, says the Lord, I will set him in
safety from him that would ensnare him.

Verse 9. Moreover, the profit of the earth is for all: the King himself is
served by the field.
IIII. Example of vanities observed in outward things.
A Regression to his former discourse of vanities in worldly things. This is
the fourth example of vanities, observed in outward things, to wit, of earthly
possessions, pertaining to the manifold uses of this present life in civil
state, which men get without oppression and wrong, by lawful courses, whereby
notwithstanding vanity is increased. And he makes his repassage to the
demonstration of these vanities, by a comparison of worldly goods among
themselves. Moreover, that is to say, now (after this digression to vanities in
spiritual things) to return again to these earthly things, wherein men
bestow so much study and travel, amongst all their manifold studies and
practices to satisfy their hearts desires, there is nothing more needful and
profitable then tillage. For the earth is for Bonum quo c^^unius, eo melius.
all.

The earth is the womb whereof all are formed, and the breasts or dugges
whereof all are fed and preserved. The fullness of the earth are the creatures
thereof, and the fullness of the creatures, the fruits and virtues that are in
them, to sustain and maintain this mortal life. The revenues of the earth
therefore are most necessary and excellent, amplified by an argument of the
Greater.

If any could live without the profit of the earth, then might the king; but
whatsoever his other prerogatives and excellencies are, yet can he not live
without the benefit of the field, Melek l^sadeh negnebad, i. the king is
servant to the field, to have care of tillage and earthly fruits, that
himself may be served therewith.

Verse 10. He that loves silver, shall not be satisfied with silver; nor he
that loves abundance, with increase: this is also vanity.
AN argument to confirm the vanities of this study, exercise, and course of
life also, illustrated by a comparison of the like. Even as he that loves
silver cannot be satisfied therewith, but this thirst increases with his
store, as the Poet says, Crescit amor nummi, quantum ipsa pecunia crescit,
that is, as the heap is greater, so the appetite is sharper, All the benefit
that he receives by his money, is the sight of it, and the sight breeds
longing, and that breeds discontent with that which is present; as this man I
say, is not satisfied, so neither can he that loves abundance be satisfied
with increase. He that loves full fraughtage of grounds, corn, cattle. etc.
receives no contentation by those which he has, but he still desires more,
neither do the fruits redound to him in such measure, as he still desires.
And if there be no difference between the greedy Farmer or Purchaser, and the
biting Usurer, the one receiving no more contentation by his grounds and
stock, then the other does by his silver, then is the state of them both
miserable, and vain and full of vexation. Note, he says not, He that has
money, or he that has abundance is not satisfied, but he that loves them. For
a man may have these, and yet love God only, which the other do not. But
Solomon speaks here of worldly things, which are the desire, love, delight of
worldly men, whereby and wherein they seek for an earthly felicity in the
pleasant paradise of their possessions, but find naught.

Verse 11. When goods increase, they are increased that eat them: and what
good is there to the owners thereof, saving the beholding of them with their
eyes?
A Confirmation of this insatietie, and consequently unprofitableness by a
cause thereof. When goods increase, they are increased that eat them. As a man
desires to have abundance of corn, cattle, wine, oil, etc. So must he have
also a multitude of servants and hirelings, his family must be enlarged with
his revenues, who work the same out of the earth for him. And what good is
there, etc. That is to say, no good at all, figured by a communication. They
work for him indeed, but the benefit redoundeth to them, for as they get it,
so theyeate it, and wear it, sharing him out a part thereof amongst them,
sometimes the best, sometimes the worst, sometimes the greatest, sometimes the
least, and that for ouerseeing them; and yet his oversight is such sometimes,
as that his alowance is made him accordingly. This is the good that he reapeth
by the profits of the field, even to behold the sharing of them out into parts,
to look upon his own part, and to eat as the rest do, for he can make no
more of it, but meat, drink and apparel, and so much do they make of theirs,
with as full contentment and more. For they lay all the burden of cares, and
all other troubles upon his fairer portion, to reduce it to an equal^tie with
theirs.

Verse 12. The sleep of a laboring man is sweet, whether he eat little or
much: but the abundance of the rich will not suffer him to sleep.
AN amplification of the unprofitableness of plenty of earthly fruits by a
comparison. A man in the ample possession of these is in worse case then the
poor man that wants this abundance: Because that the sleep of a laboring
man is sweet, whether he eat little or much. The laboring man is tied to a
competency or mean, therefore on the one side he is free from the evil
superfluities of intemperance and riot, to which filth is subject, yea, to
which out lustful nature does captiuate us in the possession thereof, but the
other is restrained, for his fire wants fuel to flame forth with the other,
and is kept in a temper. Again on the other side, he is free from consuming
cares, which weary the brain, and disquiet the heart of the other; So that his
bodily pains are recompensed with pleasant sleep, whether he eat much or
little, whereas the restless spirit of the other rides his body day and
night: For his abundance will not suffer him to sleep. His abundance is a
great heavy lump, like the stone of Sisiphus, which is rolled up and down
continually with a doubtful, fearful, careful heart; or else the contrary
temptations thereof do so ouer-power him, that he has no more command of
himself then the fed horse. So that his condition is miserable, and causes
the poor man to bless himself in his mediocritie, yea, to prefer his
poverty before the others wealth. This is a great evil, but there is yet a
sorer then this.

Verse 13. There is a sore evil which I have seen under the Sun; namely,
riches kept for the owners thereof, to their hurt.
AN amplification of the unprofitableness of wordly goods by their event. It
is first propounded generally, There is an evil. Secondly, confirmed by the
testimony of his special observation: Which I have seen under the Sun.
Thirdly, explicated more specially. Riches kept for the owners, to their hurt.

In these three last verses before, the unprofitableness of riches, is figured
by a gradation, thus. A man has not only no good by them* save to look on
them, verse 11. but also they deprive him of his necessary and natural rest by
night, verse 12. Neither do they only so, but (positiuely) they bring him to
ruin oft-times, verse 13. The former words include a comparison of evils among
themselves, to illustrate this evil of riches; as if he should say: There be
many infirmities and evils incident to man, and to his outward state, to
increase vanity, anger, sorrow, grief, etc. Yet is this a sore evil, cholah,
or evil disease, even a sickness to death, that a man should spend all his
days in travel, depriving his body and mind of recreations, and such
comforts as the use of riches bring, that in his latter days his joy may be
full, and perfect, without any mixture of care, or fear of want, either for
himself or for his children; but then it should fall out quite contrary to his
expectation; namely, that those things which were gathered, kept and preserved
for his good, should be to his destruction in their event. This was the event
of Hamans aspiring to promotion and honor, wealth, friends etc. He little
thought that all his plots for honor and wealth should have been a rope and a
gallows to hang him on, whereas many others had been hanged with less cost
and labor. But the more cost the greater infamy, the higher rise the greater
fall.

The builders of the tower of Babel intended to make themselves famous in the
earth, but the event was their labor for their travel, and the judgment of
God upon their pride. It became a babble good for naught, but to proclaim their
folly to all ages of the world. The devil and the Pharisees thought that all
was firm and sure to them and theirs, when they had crucified Christ, and in
his ignominious death had exposed his name, doctrine, and all that believed in
him, to shame and perpetual contempt. But the event was the downe-fall of
Satan's kingdom, and the shame and confusion of them and their children, as it
is in the parable of the vineyard. They that believe in him shall never be
confounded, nor ashamed. Much a do a long time also, has there been about the
building and establishing of the Romish Synagogue, and deifying the great Gull,
but confusion and shame shall be the event. The rich man. Luke 12. provided and
laid up great store of wealth, for his case and joy in his old age, but when he
begins to say, Now soul cast off all care, take thine ease, eat, drink, and
be merry, the event was quite contrary, for his goods pressed down his soul
to hell.

Finally, to how many and most lamentable miseries may a man and his family be
exposed by reason of his abundance, wherein soever it consists, all ages
afford innumerable examples. Neither do these evils befall the wicked only,
the event of whose vnlawfull-gotten-goods, Solomon here alonely aims not at,
but even the good also, as the example of Naboth, and of innumerable in our
experience may testify. Sin is the cause or ground of all evils. Pride was
the cause of Hamans fall, and sin was the ground of Jobs misery, and Naboths
death.

To conclude, this is a vanity and a grievous evil belonging to worldly goods,
whosoever gets them, or keeps them; namely, oft-times to occasion his
ruin. This generality does Solomon principally intend.

Verse 14. But these riches perish by evil travel, and he begets a son,
and there is nothing in his hand.
AN amplification of their unprofitableness, by their instability and
uncertainty. They are a slippery possession, like an Eele in a man's hand, or a
bird that has ill will to tarry there, for as soon as the hand ^lacketh, she
is flowne; so riches take them the wings of an Eagle, and fly up suddenly into
heaven, they writhle out of the hand, and lush into the deep, and that when a
man sees and looks on. But these riches perish by an evil travel. This
word (But) seems to imply a prolepsis, thus: Wealth indeed sometimes does
occasion a man's ruin, as Abraham traveling into Egypt, feared that the beauty
of his wife should be an occasion of his destruction, Genesis 20. 11. So Jacob
feared that his posterity should occasion evil to him from Laban, and his
sons, but that is seldom.

Ans. Be it so that a man perish not by those riches, yet these even these
riches hagnasher ha^ica, that a man has so laboriously gotten, and carefully
kept, and still diligently increases, shall perish in his hands, (as though
they must either kill, or be killed) and that either by casualties, to which
they lie open, as well as himself does; or else by his own folly, and
improuidence. For there is a way, which a man in wisdom takes, whereby all
things succeed according to his mind.

Again, there is a way which a man takes for the best, and likeliest, but it
is filled with cross and loss, every one falling in the neck of other, both
causally, and occasionally, which thing often times brings a sudden dissolution
of the greatest, and most settled estate. For in this case a man is in a maze,
and knows not which way to turn him. For if he take this way, a Lion shall
tear him; if he leap over the hedge, a Serpent shall bite him; if he turn
another way, he shall fall among thieves. Whether he travail or traffic by
Sea or Land, it is an evil travail. What can a man do when the Army of God
encountereth him, or withdraw, as I may say, their fortunate aspect from him?
when nothing thriueth with him, but is like the panting Bird, or writhling Eele
in his hand? And he begets a son, and there is nothing found in his hand.
An amplification of his calamity, by the extent, which is the poverty of his
posterity also. It is not only a grief to him, to be deprived of his goods
for himself, but that his children also, for whom he so carefully traveled,
and are as dear unto him, as unto himself, should be left destitute, and
helpelesse. And withal, the grief of their Fathers fall extends to them, to
add affliction to the sorrowful, besides the hopes of their possibility,
which are now become frustrate: To be deprived of that which a man was borne
to, as we say, is a perpetual sorrow, and causes many a deep sigh.

Verse 15. As he came forth of his mothers womb, naked shall he return, to
go as he came, and shall take nothing of his labor, which he may carry away
in his hand.
AN amplification of the unprofitableness of riches, by their common adiunct.
They are bodily, temporary, momentany. Man is everlasting in his better part,
whereof he is denominated a man. But riches serve only for the time of this
our life. There is no strength in them to free a man from death, but they leave
him in the jaws of death. They serve only for his expense by the way, till he
come to the place of his account, and his judgment upon his account. Riches
are like an Harlot, which having entangled a man with the love of her, makes a
show as though she would not depatt from him; but when he is arrested by the
Sergeant for debt, she utterly forsakes him, and follows other customers,
whom she mocketh in like sort. The rich man can carry away nothing in his hand
of all his labor, to afford any help, or comfort to him after death. Dives,
Luke 16. does witness this, who of all his earthly abundance, could not enjoy
so much as a drop of water to cool his tongue. The rich man's departure out
of the World, is illustrated by a comparison of his coming into the World. As
he came naked, so shall he return. It will be said; That is the common
condition of every man, and no more grief to the rich then to the poor. Ans.
It is indeed the common condition of all men, but yet a misery peculiar to the
rich: For he has only labored for riches, he has put his confidence in his
riches, his joy, delight, comfort, was all in his riches; he knew none other
God, but his Idol. Now as it is the torment of hell, to be quite separated
from the presence and protection of God, from the company of his Angels and
Saints: so is it the greatest misery of the rich man, to be separated from the
presence and protection of Mammon: When he and his Idol are parted, then he
falls into desperation. This we see verified by the practice of those, who
being yet alive, and likely to live long, make away themselves, yea, often times
for a small loss, but their fear is great: for they have now none other God
to trust on, or to fl^e unto for succor. Therefore how much soever a man is
addicted to any other sin, how great soever his desire, his love, delight be
in any vice, yet for this only is he termed an Idolater. And this is the
cause, why the Scriptures impute this common condition of man with all
creatures, to the rich, for a special misery, Psalm. 49. 17. And as a man's
desire, joy, love, and confidence in his goods is the greater, so much greater
is his misery: Otherwise, he that trusts in the living God, who has life in
himself, and by himself, and gives life to all, is poor in his abundance,
Math. 5. 3. and rich in his poverty. For in using of this World, he uses it
not, for his heart is in heaven, because his treasure is there. But he that
has his treasure here, lives in fear, and dies in despair. O death how
bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that lives at rest in his
possessions, unto the man that has nothing (in outward appearance at least) to
vex him, and that has prosperity in all things, (for a little while, as
Craesus had) yea, unto him that is yet able to eat meat, that is young,
lusty, and strong? etc. Ecclus 41. 1.

Verse 16. And this also is a sore evil, that in all points as he came, so
shall he go: and what profit has he that has labored for the wind?
AN amplification of the unprofitableness of riches lost, by a comparison of
the common condition of man leaving his riches. For a man by death to leave all
behind him, is a misery. But it is a greater misery for riches to leave a man
before death. Commonly riches accompany the rich to the grave, and there give
him his farewell, which indeed is a misery to go as he came: but this man
having gotten them with excessive toil, is deprived of them before his death,
so that in all points he goes as he came. This is a double misery. Dives his
misery was great in that he must part from his wealth, yet he was honored
with a pompous funeral; but Jobs was greater, that being bestripped of all,
he should die before his death, and be buried before his grave was open, as
yet he knew nothing to the contrary. For first his whole state was dissolved,
all his ornaments, all his necessaries utterly dispersed, dead in his estate,
dead in his children, the World was a dead thing to him, and he a dead thing
to the World, as the Proverb is, Who is so woe begoue, as first a man since
none. Again, he was buried in the grave of sorrow, and covered with the moulde
of oblivion, and contempt. Therefore said David in his deiection also, I am a
worm, and no man, I am as a dead man out of mind; and Elias, 1 Kings 19. 4. I
am not better then my Fathers were. This then is also a sore evil. These words
are an illustration of this misery, by a comparison with the former verse 13.
from the Equals, in this word (also). As it is a grievous evil for a man to
perish by occasion of his riches; so is it also as grievous an evil, that his
riches should perish from him. For his life stands in his riches. And as
David in his mourning for Absolon, wished that he had died for him, 2 Samuel 18.
33. So the rich man in his mourning for the loss of his goods, wishes
himself dead, or that he had been dead, when by such or such a folly he
incurred such an incurable damage. How many a man hazardeth, yea, loses his
life to save his goods? This devoted seruitor will also die for the honor of
his god Mammon. He is a Martyr also. What profit has he that has labored
for the wind? A conclusion amplified by a comparison, to illustrate the
unprofitableness and vanity of uncertain and perishing riches. Even as he
that labors for the wind, wearyeth himself, but gets naught* so this
man gathering goods, enjoys naught. The wind-gatherer feels the wind, but
graspeth naught; so this man imbraceth sweetly his goods, but holds naught.

Verse 17. All his days also he eats in darkness, and he has much sorrow,
and wrath in his sickness.
AN hypotyposis, or lively description of his misery, that is despoyled of his
possessions, which I called before the death and burial of a man, in respect
of his worldly estate. All his days he eats [a synecdoche of the special)
in darkness (a metaphor). As prosperity is compared to the shining of the
Sun, and brightness of the Moon, Job 31. 26. so is adversity to obscurity
and darkness; Esai 58. 10. The earth into the which the evil spirits were
cast down, is a death, and an hell to them in comparison of the glory of
heaven; and this earth is proportionably an heaven to the damned. So in some
proportion poverty and want is a grave, a death, an hell to the wicked rich, in
comparison of the splendor and glory of his wealthy state, from which he is
fallen. When Dives would have been glad of one drop of water, how glorious and
beautiful was the reuiew of his earthly state? yea, the thought that for a man
to behold the light of the Sun, to have his abiding among the creatures of God,
to live among men, and to be in the Church of God, though otherwise he licked
the dust with the Serpent, and drunk water, and were filled with all the
temporal afflictions of this life, was an heaven. Now as this vale of misery
was to Dives in torments an heaven without misery: so are vain riches a
paradise of pleasure to the godless rich, being now in poverty. He counts
the rich happy, and himself when he was rich; but now he is in despair, and
hates himself, he has no comfort in himself. For then he loved himself
for his goods sake, but they being lost, he is perished. He wandereth in
solitariness, like to an ignis fatuus, undone, deboshed, he auoydeth man's
company, he delights in nothing, all things are turned into bitterness, he
is a Pelican in the Wilderness, an Owl in the Desert. He has much sorrow
sickliness, and anger. An amplification of the former general speech, by the
specials. Sorrow, in Hebrew Cagnas, signifies indignation, wrathfulnesse,
fretting, grudging, repining, making every thing a provocation of grief, as
Prou. 21. 19. It is better to dwell in the wilderness, then with a woman of
contentions, and indignation, vacagnas, sickliness, and anger. In the Hebrew,
and sickliness, or languor, and fury. Indignation, mourning, fretting, causes
sickliness, consuming, and languishing, it dries, and makes bitter the
humors, which again causes furiousness. The Hebrew word Ketzeph, properly
signifies such anger as causes foaming, and froathing, as the tumultuous
waters tossed with the wind. As if he should say, He is full of madness, or
beastly fury. For such men commonly are angry against God, to which Satan
would have tempted Job. They curse the Devil and all ill luck, they storm
against the creatures themselves, and envy other men. Neither does he speak
of those men only that are thus impatient in losses, but of all men, which
bewray such infirmities in like case, though not in such measure and
desperation, as the wicked do, which once having riches, trusted not in God,
but in riches.

Verse 18. Behold that which I have seen: it is good and comely, for one to
eat and to drink, and to enjoy the good of all his labor that he takes
under the Sun, all the days of his life which God gives him: for it is his
portion.
A Proposition of Solomon's judgment (upon consideration of these vanities) of
the true and right use of all worldly things, confirmed by the testimony of his
own observation, and experience* Behold, that which I have seen. Behold, a
preface to stir up attention, consideration, and remembrance of his
instruction. That which I have seen; The testimony. It is agood, which is
comely, for one to eat* to drink etc. the proposition. This is the only good
that is to be found in them, bodily sustenance, and personal maintenance. This
Good is amplified by the adiunct, comeliness. This joyful, and comfortable
use of honest labor is agreeable to the nature of man, who differs from a
beast: And carnal reason teaches, that all things are made for man, that man
might rejoice with man in the comfortable use thereof.

Again, it is agreeable to the person of man, who is the image of God, endued
with a reasonable soul, which is not made for his body, as the Epicure
dreameth, nor the body for goods as the niggard slumbereth, but contrarily,
Matthew. 6. 31. Take no thought for meat, drink, clothing: For the body is not
for raiment, nor the life for meat, but contrarily, Verse 25. Clothing is for
the body, meat is for the life, and the life is for the kingdom of God, verse
33. Seeing that these things are for the reparation, sustenance, and
maintenance of man's body, which is the house and vessel of the soul, it is a
comely thing that this vessel or house be accordingly maintained. For* that is
the only end and use thereof. As man is the most excellent creature and image
of God, so let him not make himself a beast, and servant to the creatures; but
maintain the dignity of his person. But yet let him not turn his person into
an Idol, as it is now common.

For that is his portion. A confirmation by a reason drawn from the end, and
use of earthly things. They are given him of God, for that purpose, even to
convert them to that use only, for no other good is in them, no further matter
can be wrought, or attained to by them. Therefore herein let him rest himself
contented, and to this end limit his desires, and endeavors.

Verse 19. Every man also, to whom God has given riches, and wealth, and has
given him power to eat thereof, and to take his portion, and to rejoice in his
labor; this is the gift of God.
AN amplification of the proposition, by the efficient cause, in the last
words: This is the gift of God. For a man to labor moderately for riches, and
by Gods blessing of his labor to attain to riches and wealth; and also to
have power to use the same for the comfort of his body, in eating, drinking,
apparel, building; for the comfort also and education of his children and
family, accordingly as God has bestowed on him, and to rejoice herein also,
without greedy desire of more, or faithless fear of losing that which is
present; All this is the gift of God. For unless God that gives power to get
wealth, give also grace to use wealth aright, he shall live beside his wealth,
yea live in poverty, and die in misery.

Verse 20. For he shall not much remember the days ^f his life: because God
answers him in the joy of his heart.
AN amplification of the proposition by the effect, namely, of the right use of
riches. He shall He shall not be altogether free, and happy, but in some good
measure.
not much remember etc. that is, neither shall the time past be grievous unto
him through the conscience of his covetous getting, and omission of every good
duty; or through the feeling of pains, aches, diseases gotten in times past,
with lifts, burdens, fasting, watching* etc. Neither shall the time present,
nor the time to come be grievous through fear of want or loss, or through
doubting of Gods providence for him and his posterity, or through fear of
death it self, sommoning him to his reckoning. And why? Because God answers
him in the joy of his heart. A confirmation by the cause. As God has given him
power to gather riches and wealth, so he is answerable to his honest and
conscionable labors and travail, with another power, gift, or grace; namely,
joy of heart* comfort, and hearty joy in the use thereof, to his own good, his
neighbors good, and Gods glory.

CHAPTER VI.
Verse 1. There is an evil which I have seen under the Sun, and it is
common among men.
AN illustration of the comfortable use of riches, which is the gift of God, by
the contrary unprofitableness, vanity, or abuse thereof, in those that want
this grace; or rather by the abusing of themselves, their souls and bodies, in
withholding the use thereof from both. Which thing is a plague and curse of God
upon sinners, that seek not his kingdom, and the righteousness thereof, but
trusting in themselves and their goods, aim at a full and firm estate, void
of care and fear, or else of plain and excessive pride hoard up their riches
for the advancement of their posterity: Of which purpose also God defeateth
them, by translating their goods to strangers. And this is a great calamity and
woeful misery. This he touches to the end of verse 6.

This first verse contains the general proposition of this
unprofitableness, and vanity of riches, which increases the misery of man
that seeks for a felicity in them, not in God. There is an evil which I
have seen under the Sun, and it is common among men. This unprofitable
vanity i^ declared in this verse. 1. By the General, an evil. 2. Confirmed by
testimony, Which I have seen under the Sun. 3. Amplified by the adiunct, and
it is common among men. This known evil, whereof there is great complaint
every where, is common among men, and peculiar or proper to men: For beasts are
not subject to this evil disease, but men only, who in this respect among
other, are worse and more miserable then beasts. And it is indeed our peculiar
plague of God upon the distrustful, faithless, uncharitable niggard; who as
he neither loves God, nor his neighbor, so neither does he love himself, by
the just judgment of God.

Verse 2. A man to whom God has given riches, wealth, and honor, so that he
wants nothing for his soul of all that he desires, yet God gives him not
power to eat thereof, but a stranger eats it: This is vanity, and it is an
evil disease.
A Particular explication of the proposition in these two next verses, wherein
this vanity or evil plague, is set forth to the view of the eyes, by an
hypotiposis or lively description. There is a man, that as he has thirsted
after worldly goods, as the Israelites hungered for flesh, so God has given him
his hearts desire: He has riches, he has wealth, and the abundance of all
things serviceable for the welfare of man's life; he has honor, or the place,
and title of dignity to which he has aspired, neither does he want any thing
that his soul lusted after, but has inioyed all the full measure and
perfection thereof. Here is the outward appearance of happiness: But God
withholdeth his grace from him, that he cannot use it to his comfort. He is
like an ass loaded with gold, and victuals, but eats thistles, and in the
end a stranger that never sweat for it, one unknown to him, yea, it may be one
that was his enemy shall have the use thereof. So that it plainly appears at
the last to all men, that this happy man was the drudge, the Purueyor, the
Porter, the ass of other men's burdens. Here is the unprofitableness and
vanity of his labor. And this is an evil disease, or grievous sickness.
This evil disease than consists, 1. In the accomplishment of his desires, He
has riches, wealth, honor, amplified by a commoration, he wants nothing. 2.
In the privation or want of grace to use them: Yet God gives him not power to
eat thereof: Eating, is put for all comfortable uses, by a Synecdoche of the
special, 3. In the event of all his possessions, the translation thereof to
strangers; But a stranger eats it.

Verse 3. If a man beget an hundred children, and live many years, so that the
days of his years be many; and his soul be not filled with good, and also
that he have no burial, I say, that an untimely birth is better then he.
A Continuation of the description of the vanity of riches without use, figured
by a Gradation. If, or although* a man has not only riches, wealth and
honor, but has even an hundred children also, even children (esteemed the
greatest blessing, as orbity and barrenness was a reproach) according to his
desire, which he may send out like flocks, Job 21. 11. and not only so, but
withal live many years, and yet his desires be not satisfied with riches, so
that he cannot enjoy the comfortable use of these things that are present; but
even his children are an occasion of greedy desire, care, sorrow, sparing, and
pinching, etc. and not only satisfied and comfortless in life, but also at
his death has no burial, even neither then has any use of his goods,
children, kinsfolks: for the honorable execution of his funeral, Ier. 22.
18. but is rather executed for some capital crime committed, as many Emperors
and Popes were, or murdered, Ier. 22. 19. or drowned, or makes away himself,
as Nero, and Achitophel, Saul and Judas did, or dies far from home, and
suddenly, or that had been hated, as Jason, 2 Maccab^us 5. 8. 10. of all men,
and even his children be weary of him, and ashamed of him, yea discredited by
him in his latter days, when his understanding and memory failing, he has no
government of his inordinate passions, but is wickedly humorous, wearisome, and
odious, and therefore even his friends glad of his death; this is a vanity, a
miserable calamity. This vanity or evil disease, particularized in this
verse, consists. 1. In having children at a man's desire. 2. In living long.
3. In being deprived of all joy through faithless and greedy desire. 4. In an
infamous, and dishonorable death. Lastly, he illustrateth this vain condition
of the rich, by a comparison of an abortiue child, to wit, one that is borne
before his time, and dies in his birth: The untimely birth is better then he.

Verse 4. For he comes in with vanity, and departs in darkness, and his
name shall be covered with darkness.
A Confirmation of the comparison or pre-eminence of the vntimely-borne child
above him. Ki bahebel ba, for he comes in vanity, i. as nothing, being
senseless of good and evil. So that his coming is as no coming at all. And
as he comes before his time and growth to ripeness of birth, and so is no
man; so again he departs in darkness, he is privately buried, either few or
none knowing thereof, and his name is covered with darkness. For there is no
speech, nor remembrance of him any more.

Verse 5. Moreover, he has not seen the Sun, nor known any thing. This
has more rest then the other.
A Second privilege or pre-eminence of the abortiue above the vain rich. He
has not seen the Sun, etc. His birth was to him an end of all miseries to
which the life of man is subject. He neither felt in himself, nor saw the
manifold corruptions and evils in the world, nor the cares and travels of this
painful life. He is freed from bodily diseases and pains, from oppressions
and envy, from fears, and dangers, from grief, anger and fury, with which the
other was pressed and oppressed: Therefore he has more rest then the other,
who lived and dyed in vanity.

The corn that is cropped up as soon as it appears, or is bruised in pieces
when it lies in sprout, is better then the old weed that is hated while it
stands, and in the end is cut down for the fire.

Verse 6. Yea, though he live a thousand years twice told, yet has he seen
no good. Do not all go to one place?
AN amplification of the former argument by a prolepsis. Notwithstanding, the
eo^mon afflictions of mortal life, yet it is a pleasant thing to behold the
Sun, to enjoy the blessings of God bestowed on a man, and long life is a
blessing desired of all. Therefore in that he lived here many years, his
condition is much better then the abortiues, which was deprived of all. Ans.
Although he lived long, yea, a thousand years, and a thousand to the end of
that, yet is that no prerogative, but a multiplication of miseries, and
vanities: For he has seen no good. He has spent his days in careful
travel, in sorrow, grief, anger, in much disquietnesse, fear, and trouble,
he has deprived himself of sociall recreations of the day, and the natural
rest of the night* to accomplish his vain hopes, he has lived besides all his
goods, he has iaded his body, broken his brains, burdened his conscience, he
is hated of God, loathed of men, the earth groneth under his burden, the World
is weary of him, he is quite stripped of all goodness, and banished out of
every place in the hearts of men, as Jason, 2 Macc. 5. 8. He dies in ignominy,
he is burled in forgetfulness, his name is rotten before his body, he has
neither done good, nor enjoyed good, and how long soever he lived; Do not all
go to one place? After that he has had the experience of two thousand years
vanities, he must descend into the grave of the abortiue, and return again
into dust with him. Now when they are both dust, whether dust is the better?
the former or later? The dust of him that had the experience of common, and
personal vanities, without number, many years, and ended his days in shame
and dishonor, or of him that never knew any thing?

Verse 7. All the labor of man is for his mouth, and yet the appetite is not
filled.
THe second part of the Chapter: which is, a conclusion of the weakness, and
insufficiency of riches to satisfy the desire of man, to the end of the
Chapter. Man consists of an immortal soul and corruptible body; that is
spiritual, this is earthly: yea, that is a spirit, and the body is but a
vessel, or instrument united to it, without composition or mixture. This
vessel is the sperme of the World, the dust of the earth, that is to say, an
elementary matter or substance, consisting of a mixture of the elements, and
therefore it is sustained and maintained by elementary food; So that the
appetite, to wit, hunger, and thirst, is earthly also. Now what is the end of
all the labor of man? wherein does he labor? what is the object or subject
whereon he works? Is it not all to satisfy the bodily appetite? Whence
proceeds, and whether tends this appetite? Nature it self declares the
matter. The appetite of the Tree is the more simple moisture, or rather juice
of the earth, and it cannot, neither wills to go beyond his kind: For the
appetite is limited to the kind, which only desires the perfection, and
propagation thereof. And so of all creatures living and sensible, according to
their kinds. But man's vessel being the most compound, not that it has more
elements then other creatures, but the most universal nature, has an
universal appetite: And the whole World, with all the creatures therein, serve
only for meat, drink, and clothing. The whole Armies of heaven and earth
are only for these three services of man's body, either immediately, or
mediately; that is to say, either food, or else preparatory vessels,
Ministers, Officers, or Trades*men, subordinate one to another for man, who is
the center of them all* Sheep and Oxen eat the juice of the earth, not
immediately, but by the preparatory vessel, the green herb, by which it is
transformed into food agreeable to the nature of ^ea^ts and fowls. So man
ea^eth grass and fodder, prepared by the bodies of cattle, also flies and
worms, and vilest things, are by subordinate vessels from one to another,
prepared to his mouth, and for his mouth. The most universal instrument by
whose foture the life of the World, and of all his furniture is maintained, is
the light in the Sun, which God therefore created before any other creature.
Then the Stars, nextly the matter of the firmament, whereof the stars were
formed: These are subordinate. So that the heavens are an universal cause or
vessel, by whose foture the elements are sustained. Again, the elements are
an universal cause of sustenance of their creatures produced out of their
wombes, and formed of them. Lastly, the mixed creatures are preparatory vessels
one for another, till at length all come to the belly and back of man, even
his body, the center of them all: For all is meat, and meat includes
medicine also. Now every man has in him the nature of all men, so that all men
are but as one man, this one man is the sperme or seed of the whole World,
superior and inferior nature, as the kernel contains the tree with all his
branches, leaves, colors, vermiculations, fruits, etc. and as the sperme of
the living creature contains the members, faculties, qualities, operations,
etc. of the creature from whose body it is propagated, and is by the universal
fotures of the light, stars, firmament, elements, etc. produced into growth
and perfection, which are but the universal preparatory instruments, which
this sperme uses and applies for the building up of it self with the next
food or matter, which is apt to be adapted, and incorporated into the nature
of it self: This matter or food it only desires. And so does man also in
his kind. Of the animal and spiritual food and appetite it is impertinent
here to speak. Therefore all the labor of man is for his mouth. The heavens,
the elements, the creatures, work, and prepare for him, by their influences,
inclinations, appetites, for to satisfy and fill his appetite. Their mouths
are made for his mouth, their skins for his clothing, and building also is
but a clothing or covering. All things are for the necessities and delights of
the body. In this respect also is he the Image of God, in that all things are
for him, and he is for himself, as concerning the creatures. For all are
servants to him, but he is servant to none: If he be, that is his degenerating,
his curse, his fall, his brutishness: for he that serves any thing, body, or
bodily things, is a beast in that respect. But who almost now a days makes
not an Idol of his body? therefore when we would be as gods, then are we evil
beasts, filthy beasts. But bodily things are for the service of the body; the
body for the spirit, and that for the Lord. Otherwise, as Jeremy says; Every
man is a beast by his own knowledge.

And yet the appetite is not filled. Or as the Hebrew signifies; The soul is
not filled. What the extent of man's appetite is, both personal, and bodily,
may well appear, by that which is already spoken, and also by the two examples
following. The first is sufficiently testified by the example of Alexander the
Great, who was not contented with the possession of the continent or Land, nor
yet of the Sea, when he had heard Anaxagoras disputing of the plurality of
Worlds; and when he had conquered all, he must needs be a god, pretending a
title to heaven also. The appetite of man is not limited to the material
World, till he be transformed, or degenerated into the nature of a beast, which
is when his light is fallen down into the confused Chaos again, the lees of
his concupiscence, which is utter darkness. The second is testified by the
example of Heliogabalus, the monstrous glutton, who was served at one supper
with seven thousand fishes, and five thousand fowls, and had six hundred
bawdes and harlots following him in chariots, and gave great rewards to him
that could invent any new pleasure. Who is not an Alexander, and an
Heliogabalus, if God suffer him to range? God has always permitted some to
run out into extremities of vice, as the Sodomites, that all men may see what
horrible filth lies in the heart of every man, which God restrains for the
preservation of mankind for his Elect sake, otherwise the Devil is come
down, and rides upon man's appetite. The appetite multiplyeth it self
infinitely. For of all the millions of the living, among whom the World is
divided, every one has an appetite of all, which shows it self in the
vehemence, and extremity of men's striuings, and aspirings higher and higher,
one roaring wave or billow beating forward another to ouerflow the banks, and
to convert all into sea, if God had not limited their line, within which every
man is bounded, when he has inhiated, striuen, and done what he can. His
might shall never be to his mood. For God has set hill against dale, and
contrarily. But what the appetite of him that has but one acre of ground to
live on, and but one wife, is in the nature and kind thereof without outward
restraint, or inward grace, and indeed both, plainly appears by these two
examples, which may serve for all. Therefore all the labor of man is for his
body and bodily state, but the appetite is not filled.

Moreover, if the bodily appetite should be satisfied with meat, drink,
apparel, with the delights of the sons of men, and pleasures of the eyes;
and that the personal appetite were also satisfied with honor and Sovereignty,
which happened neither to Alexander, nor to Heliogabalus, nor to any natural
man; yet cannot the soul be satisfied with infinite worlds. For the food of
the soul is not the world, but God in the world.

The excellent beauty of Gods wisdom shining forth in all things, enamoureth
the soul with the love thereof. And the more that a man knows, the more he
thirsts and longs for knowledge. But this appetite is not filled, for it
works on an infinite object, which cannot be comprehended nor contained in
the soul, at least, while it works by earthly organes. So that neither
Alexander nor yet his Master Aristotle, nor Plato, Aristotle's Master could be
satissied herewith. Their appetites could not be stanched. He that goes about
it, makes God an Idol, because he limiteth the infinite. But if he be
comprehended of any creature in heaven or earth, then is he limited. I
conclude, though the appetite of the body should be filled, yet the appetite of
man could never be filled. Then full contentment or felicity is not to be found
in this world, nor by this world, and the appetite that will not be filled with
a little, shall never be filled, howsoever men commonly deceive themselves,
thinking that if they had but this, or that, they would set up their rest. Yea,
even as Dives would have set up his rest, if he had gotten but one drop of
water to quench his fervent thirst. The truth is, the more fuel the fire has,
the more hot it burns. But the spirit of Christ is the water that cooles this
heat, and quenches this thirst, his body and blood satisfies this hunger.
When the appetite, the attractiue, retentiue, digestive powers work on this
food, the other becomes an excretion or expulsion.

But again, though we enjoy Christ and the kingdom of glory by faith, yet so
long as we are here in the flesh, we have not the full possession thereof, 1.
Ioh. 3. 1. and therefore desire to be with him, 2 Cor. 5. 1. 2.

To conclude; Neither the appetite of the brutish man, nor of the animal or
carnal man, nor of the spiritual man is here filled. And what shall fill the
vegetable man, or locomotiue tree, which desires not meat, drink* clothing,
women, children, buildings, etc. Eccle. 4. 8. And yet is there none end of his
labor? Men now a days grow as thin as Oaks begin to grow, and all is
filled with brutes and unprofitable vegetables.

Verse 8. For what has the wise more then the fool? What has the poor, that
knows to walk before the living?
A Confirmation of his former proposition concerning the insufficiency, and
weakness of earthly things, to satisfy the appetite in their use, figured by
a prolepsis, and that by a Communication. What can the wise man do more with
these worldly things then the fool? And what can the rich man in all his
abundance do more with it, then the poor does without it? The Hebrew is thus.
What more excellent or better thing by them is to the wise man, then to the
fool? and what other thing is to the poor, then to him that knows to walk
before the living? Then to him that can put forth himself, put himself in
prease, make a show, or crackling noise, carry a good account for doing good
unto himself, Psalm. 49. 18. This I think the Hebrew directly intends.
Neither the wise man by, his wisdom, nor the rich man by his power, strength
and skill to order them for the best, can do more with them then bring their
bodies to the ground in the full period of their times. But this the fool and
the poor do as well as they, andwhen they are all in the grave, what
difference is there of their bones? And if there were any, what is of their
dust? If the rich and the wise can do no more with them, then the poor and the
foolish, then is there no strength in riches to full contentation, or felicity.

Verse 9. Better is the sight of the eyes, then the wandering of the desire:
This is also vanity and vexation of spirit.
AN amplification of the former reason, further figured by another prolepsis,
thus: Seeing that God has given the earth and worldly goods to men for the
sustenance and pleasures of the body, they are a blessing, and tokens of his
love, and the beholding of them with the eye, affords some contentment, and
satisfies the desire of the soul.

And although perfect happiness consists not therein, yet it is much better
then a wandering desire, which longs after many things, and wants
necessaries, which the body naturally calls for, and provoke a man to seek
for, though he would never so much enforce himself to restfull contentation.
He that has a good competency and sufficiency, to cheer his body with
comfortable things, and to live in good account and credit among the better
sort, is of a more stayed desire, and has loy in himself above him that has
less, and is always wishing, complaining, craving, etc.

Ans. Be it so, yet in these things that he possesses, there is vanity and
vexation of spirit. There is no soundness but rottenness. Misery may be
mitigated, but it can never be cured.

Verse 10. That which has been, is named already, and it is known that it is
man. neither may he contend with him that is mightier than he.
A Confirmation of his judgment, or censure delivered in his former brief
answer, This is also vanity, etc. by two arguments. The former whereof is
drawn from the notation of man's name. That which has been (whatsoever it is
for outward respects) is already named, and it is known that it is man.
Nod^agn asher huae adam. The reason is thus framed.

Prop. He that has his name of the earth, is earthly, mortal, in bondage to
corruption, miserable, vain. Assump. But man has his name of the earth, the
matter whereof he was formed; for Adam signifies red earth, dust, or mire:
Therefore Man is earthly, mortal, miserable, etc.
Whether a man be wise, or foolish, rich, or poor, honorable or base, it
mattereth not much. For it is enough to argue his vanity, that he is Man, or
Adam, of the earth, earthly, mire, dust, the most miserable of all creatures,
subject to infinite miseries, as has been already showed. For the best good
being corrupted becomes the worst evil, from Lucifer to metals and stones.
Neither may he contend with him that is mightier then he. Another argument
drawn from the decree of God, who has subdued him, and all things with him
unto vanity, whereof he can by no means rid or free himself. For a man to
contend with God, who is more mighty that is, but to increase vanity, even to
add madness to folly.

There are indeed that have striuen. 2 Mac. 9. 8. to exalt themselves and to be
happy men in their own eyes, and opinions of all the people (for the
contrary opinion of one man breaks this enforced deceitful complacence) as
Valor. (...) lib. 7. cap. 3.
Craesus thinking not only himself happy, but that all men also should count
him blessed, asked Solon who was the happy man, to try what he would say; but
when Solon preferred Tellus the Athenian, a private man, and Cl^obis and Bitus
also, he was offended. But Solon answered him that he might he called rich and
mighty, but not blessed till he had made an happy end. This curbed the vain
conceit of his fained, enforced felicity. For such like will needs draw the
judgments of all men after their own, to deifie them, either by reward or
revenge, by favor or displeasure, by countenancing or disgracing, etc. So
Mordecaies dis-reuerence was the breaking of Hamans felicity, and Micahs
prophecy of Ahabs. The Scriptures afford diverse examples hereof. But the
greatest shame, contempt, and confusion abides on them that have thus
contended with God, 2 Mac. 9. 12. Act. 12. 23. and they are left for memorable
examples of vanity till the worlds end. And so shall the great whore, that
pompous scarlet whore of Babylon be trodden under foot, as unsavory salt, and
swept away as doung in the end. This is a principle uttered by him that cannot
lie, He that exalts himself, shall be brought low. But man in honor
understands not, he is like the beasts that perish. All is, and must be vain.

Well, whatsoever vanity and vile abomination of evil is in one man, is in
the nature of all, and that which breaks out of the skin of one, lies in
the bones of another, though it never find passage forth in such measure, nor
come to that height, as it has sometimes done in others, to be an evident and
visible document to all, of their unknown and unfelt corruption. For God has
his hook in their nostrils, and they are kept as wild beasts in the grate,
which being set at liberty soon show whence they are bred. For all is but
man. Nay, who almost forgets not himself to be but man? and who is not a
beautiful Idol in his own sight? Who would not feign seem to be a glorious
man in the eyes of all, at least in the eyes of all of his owneranke, equals,
and inferiors, and so on forward infinitely, as passage lies open, and
obstacles are more and more removed? Even a beggar is proud of a better ragge,
and a child is proud of a toye, thinking himself happy in comparison of
other children, and would have other children to praise, admire, bless, and
exalt him for his toye sake, and to deiect, and vilify themselves in
comparison of him, yea, he takes occasion by his toye to show forth not only
pride, but contempt, and cruelty. People in these days are huft-bubbles,
tumorous excrescences. They strive much to make Idols of their bodies, they
stretch out themselves beyond their measure, and rack others to make their
bodies pompous spectacles, they cover, and color till their whole substance be
turned into rottenness within the shel, and all is to make a goodly show, to
be glorified of others, as they glorify themselves, and for that purpose
glorify others again. But thou art still but man, when thou have made of thy
self what thou can. And why art thou proud O earth and ashes! Thou do but
contend with him that is mightier than thou. He will still be exalted, and thou
shall be a beast. Every one now strives to be a proud Iezabel, to be an Herod,
a Nabuchadnezzar, to make a deceitful show, to affect the subtilties of
Antichrist, to bewitch others with their shows, as Iezabel would have
bewitched Iehu. They are like the devil to cast phantasmes before the eyes and
minds of men, (hear this ye fine beastly women) yea, they convert holy
things to the service of their Idol, and all too little. And why? because man
will needs enforce an happy state, at least in show and account, upon
himself. But this is vanity, and shall end in misery. Bell, greedy Bell shall
be stamped to powder, and Iezabel shall be dogs meat. And I pray God that our
sins turn not our yealow starch into red.

Verse 11. Seeing there be many things that increases vanity, what is man the
better?
A Reason why man must not contend with God, but yield himself to the
acknowledgement, and confession of vanity; to depend on the commandment and
mercy of God. Seeing there be many things that increase vanity, what is man
the better? The hebrew is, seeing that, when as because much is belonging to
things, or is of things increasing, or, that do increase vanity, what is
there more to man? That is to say, seeing that the more things that a man has
and deals withal, the more that he intangles himself in, beats his
brains, and br^^keth his body about, the more vanities, and vexations he
enwrappeth himself in, what is he better than he that sits still? Nay, does
he not most often by his wit work out his woe? and by his strength procure his
own ruin? Therefore let not a man in pride and presumption seek to break
out from under the yoke of God. Romans 8. 20. forgetting himself to be but man;
but rather humble himself to the right way, and means of freedom which God
continually sounds in his ears. If by mortification he has entered in at the
strait gate, let him keep still in the narrow way, which few do, least his
Christian profession prove but a veil to cover and color paganism, yea
atheism. To conclude, as worldly things are multiplied, so is vanity with
them. It is but an addition and more universal mixture of vanities, to bring
forth greater and more miseries. For the deeper that a man wadeth, the more
shall he be wet.

Verse 12. For who knows what is good for man in this life, all the days of
his vain life, which he spends as a shadow? for who can tell a man what
shall be after him under the Sun?
THis verse contains a confirmation of the former reason, why that a man
meddling with great and many matters, is nothing the better, figured by a
communication to inculcate the certainty thereof. No man knows what is good
for a man in this life, all the days of his vain life. Life is amplified,
first by an emmeration of the least particles of time concluded in the general
[all the dayes] Secondly, by the adiunct, vain, Vanity* is illustrated by a
comparison, it passes away as a shadow. The time of life is but a day, which
is divided into morning, noone and evening. The shadow is longest in the
morning, and it does nothing but vanish till noone, where it seems to make a
stand, but does not, but by increasing it vanishes quite away. If the shadow
grow shorter, time spends, if it grow longer time also spends: so is the time
of life a continual spending, as the Snaile that continually wastes her
self. Now in this fleeting time, who can tell what is good for a man, seeing
that man, and all things with him vanish away like a shadow? Again, as there
is no constancy of days, in regard of their natural quality and
disposition, but are variable and contrary, so neither is there of the state
of man in the decourse of his life: Every day brings new travels, new cares,
new troubles, alterations, and changes, and every one is doubtful and
fearful of after times. And this is a vanity.

Again, every man sees his imprudence, and manifold errors, committed in the
days that are past; he sees his inconsiderate courses, his ouer-sights, the
weakness of his understanding and judgment, in contriuing things to the
best, for which he vexes himself with grief and anger all his life after,
and so recompenceth vanity with vanity. Again, when he seeks to redress
that which has been amiss by a new and better course, he falls rather into
greater errors, as he that is in a maze, or vast desert. Therefore neither
can a man himself, who is best known to himself, tell what is good for him,
neither can any other man. For who can tell a man what shall be after him? A
confirmation of the former. No man can tell what is good for a man throughout
the whole course of his life, seeing that life is vain, and every day of life
is vain. But why cannot a man tell what is good for a man? Because that he
that cannot tell what shall be after a man, either in after times of life, or
when he is dead, cannot tell what is good for a man to do for the present; but
the former can no man do, neither can he do the latter. If a man could tell
what would be cheap, what dear, he would be rich in a year. But God has
left that in his own power, that all man's courses might be vain and foolish,
1 Macc. 6. 8. So that when he has striuen all his days with vehemence of
body and mind, the simple man that sat still, has gotten the prize. Therefore
seeing that no man can tell what shall be, he cannot tell what is good for him,
whether to do this, or that, whether to take this course, or that, whether the
obtaining of his present desires shall turn to his good, or greater evil; 1
Macc. 6. 11. Luke 12. 20. He knows not the issue, or event of any thing: For
all is in the hands of God, who does all that men may fear before him, and
denying themselves, cast themselves wholly upon him.

CHAPTER VII.
Verse 1. A good name is better then precious ointment; and the day of death,
then the day of ones birth.
SOlomon has hitherto declared the vanity of all worldly things in the last
Chapter, of riches that occasion the destruction of the owner, of riches lost
by casualties, and leaving their owner destitute and miserable of riches
without grace to use them, of the multitude of children, of long life, of the
insufficiency of riches to satisfy man's desire, of their weakness to benefit
one more then another, of their uncertain event; Chap. 5. Now in this Chapter
he shows the vanities of this life by degrees, by comparing them with other
things that are better for men then the best or most pleasing things, though to
the carnal man it may seem otherwise, and in their own kind are so indeed.

And his maine scope herein, is to set down those better things for certain
remedies, whereby to avoid those vanities of life, or to extenuate and
mittigate them, and to gather what good may redound to man by the right
ordering of himself in the things of this life. This he principally intends,
and the demonstration of vanities less principally or by consequence in this
Chapter. Moreover, the avoiding, or extenuating of these vanities, is not all
that he aims at, but also the right meaning of that joyful and comfortable
use of riches, whereof he spoke before, Chap. 5. 18. and 2. 24. For this gift
of using riches, is not terminated in the welfare and complacence of the flesh,
as the Heathen imagine, but for a further grace here intimated, in that those
things that are contrary to the pleasure of the flesh, are preferred above all.
This I take to be the counsel and direct intendment of Solomon here.

A good name is better then precious ointment. Concerning the coherence of
these words with the former; They are an answer to an objection upon occasion
of his last words especially, to wit, that the increase of worldly goods was
nothing but a multiplication of vanities, and that no man could know what is
good for him in this vain life. The objection may be thus framed. If there be
nothing good for a man here, but all is vanity, and the more that he seeks
to rid himself of infelicity by wisdom and travel, and to obtain wealth
and honor, by so much the more vanity is increased, yea, and that there is no
good to be had, nor known in this life; then is there nothing but matter of
despair in this life, and better it is for a man to deprive himself of life,
then to prolong it in misery, especially when hope of better fails. Answ.
Although that God has subdued all things to vanity, and all the wisdom and
studies of men to folly, yet that is not driftly to torture man with despair,
and to destroy his creature, but to bring him to faith and obedience, to know,
to fear, and obey his Creator. For if man of pride, and presumption, will
needs exalt himself, and coin a felicity or glorious state here in the
World, to make a petty god of himself, he shall in the issue and vpshot find
all to be but vanity, and himself a fool, and a beast. And all men naturally
do thus. Genesis 3. 5. 6. There is the spawne, or beginning, that has
ouer-spread all generations of the World. Therefore God has subjected all
things to vanity, out of which a man can by no means extricate himself, but
rather by striving run further in. But yet seeing that there is an happy
state of man here begun, which a man is to desire and seek for, in God, (not
in worldy things) and even that in this vain life, which in that respect is
not vain, there are certain salues for these sores, and remedies for these
vanities: Solomon therefore, that he might take away from men coffeehouse,
and despair of their estate, does here deliver rules of direction and comfort,
that they may have wherewith to arm themselves against the troubles and
miseries of this vain life, and in some good measure be able to alay and
mitigate the same, which God laid upon Adam, and all his sons, for a just
punishment of his fall.

The first rule or remedy is in this first verse: A good man. A good reputation
or report, being the testimony of good men, of the virtuous life and honest
conversation of a man, is a speciallblessing of God, arming the heart with
great joy and comfort against many, yea, all outward losses, and want of bodily
things. The excellency of a good name is illustrated by a comparison of the
best and most delicious things, signified by ointment, by a Synecdoche of the
Special. The comparison is both of the quality and quantity. First,
concerning the quality: even as the precious ointment has a fragrant scent
refreshing and delighting the spirits of the senses, whereby the body and mind
is cheered; so a good name and deserved estimation is of all outward things the
most pleasant possession, comporting the heart in every state of life: For it
originally proceeds from a good conscience, and is the perfume of a godly and
faithful heart, yea, he that having a great measure of the anointing of God,
which is the graces of his spirit, to be a pattern to the rude, a light to the
blind, a guide to them that know not the way, does also refresh, encourage,
and cheer the spirits and hearts of all that love God, and his truth among the
filthy sents of corrupt examples, fleshly fashions, and ethnicall behauiours,
that are noisome and grievous to the eyes, ears, and minds of men of gracious
disposition, and as a fresh gale of sweet air to him that labors in the
earth, that lives among earthly men.

Concerning the quantity, the argument is from the less to the greater.

A precious ointment is of great value, a chief treasure, and esteemed with
the most precious things, but a good name is of more worth then it, or any
earthly substance. For costly ointments, and other treasures are of times more
plentiful among the wicked: For the sensual are all for their senses, but
this is peculiar to good men alone. They may be bought for money, but this is
the gift of God, not to be purchased with base metal. They are corruptible,
this is everlasting. They leave a man in death, and betake them to a new
master, but the praise of the just man remains still, and still, his own. It
both tarrieth behind him on earth, and goes with him to heaven, and will
crown him with glory at the last day. For although it be darkened for a time
amongst the goats, as Naboth was, as Paul's and David's, yet shall it break
forth as the rays of the Sun from under a cloud. It may be covered, but it
cannot be polluted with unclean tongues, yet it becomes more bright as
metal rubbed with dust or mire. Whereas contrarily, the false and forced
praise of sinners that are prone and ambitious, turns to their greater shame,
as that of Herod, Senacherib, and the Pharisees did. And so shall Antichrists
do, as did that of Antiochus.

And the day of death, then the day of ones birth. These words are a second
rule, to arm the man that fears God against temporal miseries. Concerning
their dependence upon the former, they are an answer to an objection framed
thus: A good report in this life affords little comfort, seeing that death
comes after it, which is the miserable end of all men.

Ans. The day of death is better then the day that one is borne. It is better
then the time of life, and the transitory things of life. Yea, it is better
then a good report it self, because it is a comfort to extenuate the
afflictions of life, but this utterly abolisheth all vanities. The birthday is
an entrance into all woe and misery, but the day of death is a passage into
life. The body is but a prison and a rack to the soul, but by death it is set
at liberty: For by death are all miseries ended, all dangers, pains, aches,
diseases, sorrows, tears, and that grievous war and conflict of
concupiscence, or fleshly lusts, 1 Pet. 2. 11. doubtings, unbelief, fears,
pride, ignorance, covetousness, ambition, envy, hatred, lust, which fight
against the soul, are dead, from which Paul so earnestly desired to be freed,
Romans 7. 24. 2 Cor. 12. 8.

Again, by death a man is freed from evils to come, Esaias 57. 1. He is
delivered from the wearisome company of petulcus goats* Psalm. 120. 5. 1 King.
19. 4. and from the assaults of Satan, yea from all fightings within and
without, to rest, and reign in glory with Christ, and the blessed company of
heaven: This of the rule or remedy principally aimed at. Now for the sequel or
collection concerning vanity, the argument from hence is thus. If the day of
death, which to carnal reason is miserable, be better then the day of birth,
surely this life is a thing most vain. But so it is.

Verse 2. It is better to go to the house of mourning, then to go to the
house of feasting: for that is the end of all men, and the living will lay it
to heart.
A Second rule or remedy whereby a man is armed against the vanities of life,
is mortification, which is the suppressing of sin, and curbing of the motions
of sin in the heart simply, because it displeases God, and is the only
thing whereby he is dishonored. Other mortifications are but either
philosophical, or civil, or subtle; the first whereof is of natural
conscience, the second of vain glorious disposition, the third of a devilish
heart. But this is wrought only by the Spirit of God, who is a purifying fire,
and purging soape; Mal. 3. 2. 3. not only restraining and bridling, but
consuming sin. This consumption begins at the heart, Ier. 4. 4. Break up
your fallow grounds, circumcise the fore-skinne of your heart. If mortification
begin not here, it is guilefull; Psalm. 32. 2. He is blessed whose spirit is
not guilefull, though he be subject to many infirmities. Now that this rule may
be operative, and of force, Solomon sets down the means and courses that
are to be taken, whereby to produce and nourish it, for the comfort of the
soul, in this vale of misery. The gift is of God, from whom every good seed
of grace proceeds; the other are but artificial, imitatiue, and coined: yet
this seed of God grows not but by planting and watering, as all other seeds
do, and that is the use of the means. The means therefore of the growth and
increase of this grace, Solomon here sets down, illustrating the same by a
comparison of the contrary vanities, and they are four, in the four next
verses.

The first means of mortification, are the outward prouocations thereunto, to
wit, such places, and companies whereby that good seed of grace that lies in
the heart may be preserved and increased. For every seed must have his proper
place, and outward foture of warmth and moisture to concoct it to perfection,
which Saint Paul calls, Rigation. 1 Cor. 3. 6. It is better to go to the
house of mourning, to visit the sorrowful, and sad in heart, to go to the
grave of the dead, to frequent the companies of mourners, to weep with them;
then to go to the house of feasting, where there is singing, dancing,
merriment, vanity, and prouocations to vanity most commonly. For that is the
end of all men. A confirmation of this rule, or reason of the comparison, by
the antithesis, or contrariety of the adjuncts. The adjuncts of the banqueting
house, are not expressed, but understood by anantapod^sts; The former are death
and mourning: for there is the end of all men.

Let a man feed, pride, and beautify his body as he will, yea, as most do now
a days make an Idol of it, yet shall it be a dead carkeis buried in the
earth, as other dead carrion is, and more vile then other. Bonum optimum
corruptum fit pessimum. The more composition the more corruption, as in riches
increased there is more vanity. So that if it must needs be an idol, yet shall
it be but a carrion idol, and such are all they that adore it in feasts and
pompous meetings, as did the Pharisees.

Again, let a man put away all remembrance of death out of his heart, to
source himself in the flesh, to boil in pleasure, seeking out companions, and
prouocations of lust, (which are planters and waterers also in their weedy
kind) yet shall it be turned in the end to lamentation and mourning, unless
that curse be laid on a man's death, that none shall mourn for him, but rather
eat him up, as the dogs did Iezabel, one worrying another for his goods and
lands, and the wicked poor roaring like greedy Lions for his flesh, that care
not who dye, nor how many, so that their bellies be filled.

And the lining will lay it to heart. A reason or proof of the consecution of
the former argument, which was this:

If in the house of mourning there be the end of all men, then it is better to
go thither, then to the house of feasting.

But the antecedent is true.

Therefore the consequent also.

The reason of the consequence is, the living shall lay it to heart. These
words show the effect of death and mourning, (which are termed, the end of all
men) namely, a serious meditation of the state, and condition of man. All men
are apt to forget themselves to be but men, specially in their feastings, and
iolity, iouil^y, and ribaldry; but this end of all men, and them being exposed
to the senses, eyes, and ears, does occasion them to remember whence they
came, what they are, whether they are to go. So then this serious meditation
or remembrance, is the effect of the impulsive cause. For by the dead corpse
and mourning, a man is occasioned to remember himself. The inward impulsive or
precedent, is the gracious disposition of the heart, to take such good
occasions, or suffer himself to be moved therewith: for the wicked heart is
stony, brawny, without remorse, full of infidelity; therefore he makes this
contrarily an occasion of more epicurish and sensual living, yea, at this time
serving his belly and his lusts, as he that cutteth purses even before the
bench. And the eye of the fool is mindlesse, wandering in the corners of the
earth. The outward impulsive, I say, is the occasion, to wit, the dead corpse
and mourning, the house of mourning, and the grave of the dead. What is a man
by this occasion moved to lay to his heart?

I. His own death, for even so must he die, and be mourned for of his wife,
children, kinsfolks, etc. cast into the grave, and be putrified in the earth.

II. The vanity of all worldly things, whereof a man is now quite bestript, as
lands, goods, buildings, clothing, treasures, skin, body, and all are clean
sliuen off from the soul, as bark from a tree, and as a shell from the fish,
and the soul is gone naked, as the body came in naked, either to be glorified
in heaven for the good deeds that it did in the flesh with worldly things, or
to be confounded and tormented in hell for the evil.

III. Of the account or reckoning, that it must make before the just Judge of
the talent, that God gave it to employ with diligence to his best advantage.

IIII. Of repentance and continual preparation to death, by avoiding evil,
whereby his Lord is indammaged, and by doing good, setting every thing in order
every day, and disposing all things to the best for the profit of his Lord,
that when he comes, he may receive his own with advantage.

These and such things does he lay to his heart, that has an heart, when he
goes to the house of mourning, and comes to the grave of the dead. The
sequel, or argument of vanity gathered by the comparison, is this:

Prop, If it be better to go to the house of mourning, then to the house of
feasting, then are all merry meetings, iuncatings, plays, games, sports,
pastimes, etc. vain and unprofitable and no quietness of heart to be found in
them. Assump.But the antecedent is thus; therefore the consequent.
Verse 3. Sorrow is better then laughter; for by the sadness of the
countenance, the heart is made better.
A Second means of mortification, is sorrow or anger, which is a godly
indignation or grief, for our sins committed, and duties omitted. This
sorrow goes before repentance, and works repentance. It is that which Saint
Paul commends in the Corinthians, occasioned by his reprehensory letter 2
Cor. 7. 10. 11. where it is set down by seven effects in them.

1 Carefullnesse or diligence in reforming their errors, and in conforming
themselves again to that purity, which was wrought in them, when at first he
preached the Gospel to them in the evidence of the spirit, from which they
were declined through the Philosophical ianglings of the false Apostles.

2 Clearing of themselves, or defense [(...)] which was a deprecatory excuse of
their errors, which kind of defense intimates an ingenuous confession
together with some alleadgement for themselves, to insinuate that they had done
amiss, rather of infirmity then wittingly and willingly, and so were ready to
be reformed, which thing must needs pacify Paul's mind, and move him to commend
them rather, seeing that to err is humane frailty, but to acknowledge and
reform an error is grace. So that this defense is an excusation including
confession, deprecation, reformation.

3 Indignation, when a man grieueth at his folly, impudence, and
carelessenesse, that he should be so or so overtaken and misled, whereby to
displease God, to offend his brother, to burden his own conscience, and to
give advantage to the adversary.

4 Fear, which is a sense of Gods displeasure, for some sin committed. This
remorse brings repentance. It is contrary to the servile fear of an evil
conscience with hardness of heart, and to worldly fears.

5 Vehement desire, namely to seek for, and to obtain the favor of God, that
they might rejoice in his grace again, as they did at their first conversion,
for by sinning we grieve the spirit of God, and cause him to frown on us,
whose presence and countenance we earnestly desire to be turned, toward us
again, as he that through unkind dealing, having almost lost his best friend,
seeks earnestly to recover the fullness of his former love, which thing is
plainly exemplified in David, Psalm. 51.

6 Zeal, which is a fervent endeavor to repentance. It is mixed of love, and
anger, or rather here, of desire and indignation or sorrow, which is all one.

7 Revenge, which is a chastening and curbing of our selves upon consideration
of Gods displeasure, that we may prevent his judgments, and win his favor
again, 1 Cor. 11. 30. 31. The whole verse labors on a gradation. By the
exposition of this verse it fully appears what the sorrow or indignation is
that Solomon here speaks of. The meaning of the words are, better is a sad
and thoughtfull heart, caused by remorse and grudge of conscience, tending to
repentance, and amendment of life, then a light heart and variable mind having
no serious consideration of sin, nor of Gods judgments in this life, nor
after this life impressed in it, but seeks rather to extinguish both, the
more freely to laugh and be fat.

For by the sadness of the countenance, etc. A confirmation by the effect.
This sorrow of the heart appearing in the firm and sad countenance makes the
heart more joyful, and pleasant. For as heat expels heat, so does godly and
penitent sorrow expel fear, trouble and despaireful doubtings which oppress
the heart as an heavy weight. The reprobate cannot expel this servile sorrow
with penitent or gracious sorrow, but by other false remedies seeks to
mitigate and alay the rigor, as Dives would have cooled his heat with a drop
of water, but one drop of grace in life, would have done more then an Ocean of
waters in hell. The wicked would be eased of torment, but they will give no
glory to God, like the nine lepers, whether they be living or dead, they are
all for themselves. If Dives would as earnestly have craved but for one drop of
grace when he was living to have killed the worm in her breeding, his thirst
should have been quenched. But being given to the belly, and bodily
pleasures, he loved not sorrow, nor repentance, but applied false remedies to
the worm, laughter and fatness. He loved not the rebukes of the wise, but
such as were skillful to feed his humors. These words may also be expounded
thus. By the sad countenance and sober behavior the hearts of one another are
made better, vain fancies and lustful thoughts are checked and curbed,
sinful words and evil deeds following them are prevented. The sequel or
argument of vanity gathered by the comparison, is as before, and so throughout
the Chapter.

Verse 4. The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning: but the heart of
fools is in the house of mirth.
A Third means of mortification is sober conversation. The heart of the wise,
etc. As there is sorrow and remorse in the heart and conscience of the wise, so
there is sadness in the countenance, and also sober behavior, sober
apparel, and sober compaine. The heart of the wise man is affected to such
places and companies as he may have benefit by to his edification in knowledge,
and godliness. Such things he loves to hear, to speak, and to relate as may
make both himself and others the better, Prou. 15. 30. Good hearing makes his
bones fat, (and so of the seeing also.) The heart of him that has
understanding seeks knowledge, that is, moves his lips, eyes and ears to
seek for increase of that holy wisdom, wherewith he is in some good measure
already endued. For to him that has shall be given. Therefore he is ready also
to frequent the houses of mourning (a synecdoche of the special) and the
society of mourners, such as are well acquainted with the cross, exercised in
temptations, and men of sober carriage, whereby he receives more comfort and
ease of heart, than by all festival and merry meetings, where there is
commonly vanity enough, and matter of grief to him that seriously thinks on
his latter end, and the account of every idle word. As the nature and kind of
the seed and root is, such like is the sap and shape of the tree, such or
such places it desires to grow in, and among such or such other trees. If it
has place and company according to his liking, than it prospers,
flourishes and rejoices, if not, yet it lives, brancheth and fructifieth
though poorly, as the willow in the forest, the hys^p on the wall, wheat in
light sand, and rapes in stiff clay. Every thing desires his proper place and
company, with other fotures according to his kind, to attain the perfection,
and flourishing state of his kind, which thing if it cannot do, yet is it
prudent and shiftie, and will reap the most commodity to it self that may
be, without any loss through improuidence and negligence: But if it be in a
so^le contrary to his kind, it is much discouraged, his fruits are unkindly
and imperfect, his sap is corrupted and much ai^ered by the quality of his
food or humor, etc. yet will it retain the kind, or else dye. The seed or
root of man is his heart, as the heart or spirit of man is, such is the man.
Men's c^^usque, is est quisque. And though of all creatures he be most variable,
and can personate himself infinite ways, yet does his spirit incline him one
way. The Adamant in the dial is fickle, and it is uncertain, what coast it
most affects, or rather what his natural position is, being violently
agitated; but when disturbance cease, it rests on the north pole. So, fox
to the kind. A wise man's heart is his ^oote, and such like are his thoughts,
countenance, words, works, carriage. And as the man in his kind, nature, and
disposition is, such soil he re^^yceth to grow in, such things he loves to
hear by voice or writings, such companies he frequenteth, this he extracteth,
that he rejects, as his spirit is. For the body of a common*wealth is as it
were a mixture of all kinds, or a Choas, from whence every spirit may gather
matter of edification and corruption: As the frame of his heart is, so may he
adapt matter of perfection or destruction. But the wise heart uses all things,
and turns all things to the best.

But the heart of fools is in the house of mirth. An illustration of the
former by the contrary. This heart is of a contrary sap, of contrary
affection, and disposition, and as inwardly, so outwardly contrary. Such
soyles it loves, and such fotures as are agreeable to his kind, so does every
beast, every weed, every plant. Such lips, such lettuce: And wild things
accord not well with the tame. And though they be tamed, yet are they
troublesome. The spirit of policy curbeth and drives the snaile into her
shell, but the spirit of God renueth. The fool seeks for nourishments of his
folly, such counsels such books, such hearing, examples and companies, and
ripeneth his folly. The fool is but a body, and his soul is but as sa^t to
keep it alive. His sap is bitter, his fruits are no better. If he be among
the wise, and hear the words of the wise, the best things he rejects (light
is not comprehended of darkness) other things he misconstrueth, and conuerts
into folly. If he hear or see infirmity, or vani^ie, that he browzeth on,
and catches up as a sweet bit. Pro. 15. 24. The mouth of the foolish, is fed
with foolishness, and so is his ear. The dainty tooth desires delicates, so
does the fool all things that may feed his beastly lusts. Therefore let the
wise be wary for giving offense, and abstain from appearances of evil, else
will the fool by occasion of his folly run mad. Therefore says Solomon,
answer a fool according to his foolishness, and answer not a fool
according to his foolishness. Let thine answer curb, not cherish his folly.

Verse 5. It is better to hear the rebuke of the wise, than for a man to hear
the song of fools.
THe fourth means of mortification, which is the way to true felicity, is the
rebuke of the wise, that is to say, it is better for a man to submit himself
to the admonitions, and wholesome reproves of the wise, then to be praised and
flattered of fools. Wisdom says to the simple, Pro. 1. 23. Turn you at my
correction, you that have erred from the way of truth, and prodigally wasted
your selves: But the foolish despise her counsels, her admonitions, her
corrections, the stubborn fool will abide no touch, verse 25. The wise man
will love him that reproves him, but the fool is provoked to wrath. The wise
child is better than the old King that will not be admonished. David desired
rather to be smitten of the righteous, than to eat such things as please the
wicked, because the rebukes of the wise are as precious balmes. Better it is to
be rebuked of the wise for a man's errors, than to be praised of the wicked for
pleasing their humors. Than for a man to hear the song of fools. An
illustration of the former by the contrary. The ieasting, merry conceits, and
fleshpleasing talk of the ungodly, corrupts the minds of the hearers, and
steals sober thoughts out of their hearts, to settle them on their dregs,
at least for the present, and is a means to quicken and revive those
head-supprest relics of concupiscence that are mortified in them, as the fire
reuiueth the snake that is almost dead with cold. The fool footheth and
flattereth a man in evil, and to evil. He extenuateth and vilifieth every
grace of God, he excuses madness, and imbraceth folly, which is civil
wickedness. Yet he has many good words, and shows wit, but all is to clothe
virtue with the contemptible rags of vice, and to clothe vice with the robes of
virtue. His good words are but as the scripture in the Devils mouth, Mat. 4. 6.
he defiles them, but they purify not him. Therefore, whether a fool be
merry or sober, angry or pleased, he is grievous to the wise, but the wise
shows wisdom in both. His words are seasoned with salt. He is gracious and
lovely.

Verse 6. For as the crackling of thorns under a pet, so is the laughter of
the fool: this also is vanity.
A Reason of the comparison, why that the rebuke of the wise is better than the
song of fools. It is illustrated by a similitude of thorns crackling under a
pot. Even as thorns under a pot make a loud noise, and flash forth into a
great flame, but the noise suddenly cease, and the flame is presently
quenched: so vainglorious fools, and epicurish fools, enemies to sober
wisdom and grace, make a pompous show for the time, drawing all mouths and
ears, and eyes after them, as though they were the only happy ones; but it
is but a noise and flash of vanity, Moreover as the crackling of thorns is a
vain sound, offensive, and harsh to the ear, and of no regard, so is the
laughter of a fool, laughing at his own wicked fantasies, grieuing the wise
with his turbulent noise.

The sequel or collection concerning vanity is this, if rebukes and checks be
better than mirth and pleasant companions, and delicious, and voluptuous life,
then is that pleasurable kind of life but vain, etc*

Verse 7. Surely oppression makes a wise man mad: and a gift destroys the
heart.
A Third rule or remedy, whereby a man is armed against the miseries or
vanities of this life is patience. Patience is a voluntary and continual
sustaining and bearing of evils and evil men, the more freely to show and
bring forth the fruits of the spirit, for the comfort of our own hearts, and
the increase of our assurance, and for the conversion of the wicked our
enemies. For in contending with the wicked in their kind (otherwise the
righteous contendeth with them) and revenging of our wrongs, we shall obscure
the graces of God, and fall into the same mischief, and condemnation with
them, which thing the enemies of grace desire. This remedy is set down in the
four next verses. The Analysis whereof I take to be this. Patience is first
illustrated by a comparison of the contrary, to wit, impatience, expressed by
the fountain or cause thereof (pride of heart) verse 8. Impatience is
described, first by the effects, verse 7. Secondly, by the event, verse 8.
Moreover, patience is amplified by a dehortation, verse 9. and figured by a
prol^psis, verse 10.

This verse then is a description of impatience, or the proud spirit, by the
effects thereof, oppression, and perverting of the Law. Oppression stands in
racking, wronging, revenging. Surely oppression makes a wise man mad. As a mad
man is without the use of reason, being violently carried with a corrupt
humor, saying, and doing nothing from any ground of good understanding, but
according to the multitude of broken and confused phantasmes, caused by the
distemper of blood: even so the wise being carried with inordinate affections
and lusts, to wrong, oppress, revenge, and catch from every man to grind the
face of every man, in lending and betting, to wrest the Law for advantage,
bewrays not only foolishness, but madness, harming himself, and
mischieuing others, as other mad men do. The difference between them stands
only in this, that the one is but a bodily madness, caused most often through
the superfluity of an humor, the other is spiritual, inspired and incensed of
the Devil. That is in the blood, this is in the heart: that is brutall, this
is devilish; that is common to all, this peculiar to the children of the
Devil: that has not reason, this uses not reason, or rather that cannot use
reason, this will not use reason.

Finally, there is a spiritual frenzinesse in fleshly sobriety. These are
Satan's wildings, whom he has blinded, and so rides them at his pleasure.
They are taken of him at his will* as the Apostle says. The proposition is
amplified by a vehement asseu^ration, (Surely). And a gift destroys the
heart. This is another effect of impatience, perverting of the Law for bribes:
In Deuteronomy. 16. 19. A gift blinds the eyes of the wise, and peruerteth the words
of the righteous; that is, either the words of him that else would judge
righteously, or the matters of the innocent, for the Hebrew word Dabar,
signifies indifferently both, and both are one. Here it is said, a gift
destroys the heart, corrupts the heart, takes away the heart, all are one.
Who is so blind as he that will not see? And so foolish as he that will not
understand? What heart is more corrupt then that which condemns it self in
that which it allows, or rather condemns it own thief, in giving sentence
upon another? yea, which presses it self to death, in giving sentence of
death, or absoluing another from death? And what words more perverse then those
of Judas, Quid mihi dabitis? What will ye give me, and I will betray the
innocent into the hands of his cruel adversaries? When the Magistrates eyes
are blinded, then is he led by the string of the briber, and the briber by the
string of the Devil, and they both fall into the ditch. As the sight of the
Apple desfroyed the heart of Eve; so the sight, or feeling of a bribe,
destroys the heart of the wise, that knows the Law, and discerns
judgment. Our first Parents for an apple lost Paradise, and won hell; so
every child of Adam, like Esau, for a sweet bit will sell his soul to the
Devil, and his brother to a lying bribing thief, yea, partake with the
thief, as Judas did with the Pharisees, and all for a bit. We, wiser children,
think that it was a great folly in our first Parents, that having so much, and
so much choice of other fruits, would notwithstanding taste of the forbidden
sruit, without any need at all. It is even as great folly, for a man in his
abundance to destroy himself, and his brethren for a bribe, a trifle of no
value. The briber is the Devils messenger: Now when he presents his Masters
bait to the bribe-taker, then is the Devil at hand to inflame the lust of
covetousness in him, whereby the bribe seems pleasant to the eyes, as the
apple did to Eve. The gift dazzeleth the eyes, it has a bewitching power in
it, it takes away the* heart, it peruerteth words, it makes a wise man mad.

Verse 8. Better is the end of a thing then the beginning thereof: and the
patient in spirit, is better then the proud in spirit.
A Description of impatience by the event. Better is the end of a thing, etc.
These proud persons that will not rely on the providence of God, nor submit
themselves unto his will, but they will needs be what they will be, and have
what they will have, and so through impatience fall to wronging snatching,
racking, revenging, deceiving, wresting, etc. do at their beginning aim at
great matters, work much mischief, make themselves terrible to inferior men,
to suck advantage at their pleasure out of them, and to make them come in with
offerings on every side, as to some great Idol. But this proud, presumptuous,
tyrannical beginning, shall have a bitter end: For God is just to defeat them,
to reward their pride with shame and confusion* He is good and merciful, and
will deliver the oppressed out of the hands of the oppressor in the end, even
in his good time. God most wise, most just, will turn those evil attempts to
his own glory, and good of his children. The end tries every matter, and
every man; for in the end comes judgment: And the just Judge will take up
all matters into his own hands, and pronounce righteous judgment. And the
patient in spirit, is better then the proud in spirit. These words contain the
rule it solfe, inferred by way of consequence, or a conclusion of the
premises. Therefore the condition of the patient man that suffers wrongs and
contumeliet, is better then he that of pride ^asteth away, yea, derideth
patience, as but baseness, timorousness, pusillanimity. The argument may be
gathered thus.

Prop.If a wise man, of a proud and impatient spirit, falling to oppression and
bribery, shall in the end bring the just judgment of God upon his madness,
then is the pationt in spirit, that rather suffers wrong, better then he.
Assump.But the Antecedent is true: Therefore the Consequent.
Concerning the sequel, or argument of vanity, it may be thus framed.

Prop.If he that is oppressed, unmercifully racked, despitefully entreated,
deprived of his own right, overthrown in his righteous cause, yea, trodden
under foot by the proud and violent; If he, I say, be better then a man of
power, that may do even what he lusts, that can avenge himself of every
man, that multiplyeth wealth, that by wisdom is crept into the place of
honor, and is able to benefit whom he will, and undo any that contendeth with
him, whereupon the people fall down unto him, and he sucke^h out of them what
advantage pleases him; then is all but vanity, and misery. For the former is
counted miserable, and if the later, who blesses himself, and is counted
happy of others, be vain in his beginnings, and miserable in his ending; then
is all misery and vanity, both to oppress, and to be oppressed. Ass.But the
Antecedent is true: therefore the Consequent.
Verse 9. Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry: for anger rests in the
bosom of fools.
AN amplification of patience, by a dehortation. Be not hasty in thy spirit to
be angry. Let no pride distemper thy passions, and move thee to w^athfull
contention and revenge, whereby thou shall be provoked to devise and plot
mischief against thy neighbor, yea, and against the Lord also, when thou have
once given place to the Devil, and suffered thy lust to get dominion over
th^e. For anger rests in the bosom of fools. Anger is an enemy to wisdom
and counsel, therefore he that is swayed with this inordinate affection, shall
be carried headlong into all folly. For wrath is an evil counselor, it
cannot keep secrets, nor cover infirmities, It is like Rehoboams young
counselors, and Hushai counselling Absolon, and inwrappeth a man in manifold
troubles, dangers, and mischiefs. If he prevail in his reuengefull and moody
courses, then is he hated of all men; if he be prevailed against, then is his
impacience either turned to fury and madness, and he becomes an odious
miscreant, or else shall be derided of his adversaries* and bewray his folly to
all men; and this shall be his inheritance. Anger therefore rests in the breast
of a proud, malicious man, but the wiseman will consider the work of God,
both of his ordinance and providence, and so according to the understanding,
and mature discerning of the matter, proceed or surcease, etc. For the
providence of God shall surely be accomplished, but clamor, wrath, violent,
wilful and preposterous courses shall redound upon the head of passionate
fools, of what degree, place or condition soever they be, whether their
contention be against their superiors, equals, or inferiors. An example of
foolish anger and wisdom, See Act. 5. 33. 34. etc. Act. 19. 28. to the end.
Act. 23. 2. and verse 5. 6.

Verse 10. Say not thou, what is the cause that the former days were better
then these? for thou do not inquire wisely concerning this.
THese words contain the complaint of impatient people, and are a common
objection of wrathful fools, whereby to excuse, yea, approve, and cherrish
their moody and reuengefull passions, which wanting particular causes of just
anger, open their mouths wide against the world, but indeed against God
himself, in whose hands the government of the world is. This complaint is
continually in the mouths of the wicked moody, and the wicked needy. The moody
Papist would murder all the godly that have Scripture in their mouths, yea,
and lives also: For they be Canaanites and Hagarens. And the needy profane
would murder the rich, for they are lions in the grate. What these would do
appears by their complaints, groaning like mute thieves and murderers under
the press: For the weight of the Law lies heavy upon them by occasion of
their own malice. For to the just and godly every law is a law of liberty. Say
not thou, why were the former days better then these? These next words are an
answer. Thou do not wisely inquire concerning this. Thou do not consider
of times according to wisdom, but art a fool to expostulate with God, who
according to his own infinite wisdom orders the times and seasons in
judgment, justice and mercy. Solomon gives no other reasons, because this
common complaint is a common folly, and the murmuring of stubborn and
reasonlesse persons, that are not capable of any reason, or else will not be
persuaded by reason, but are rather worse when they are reasoned withal: They
are most commonly but moody, needy, greedy and malecontented fools that make
this complaint, and it is vain to argue according to wisdom with incapable
ignorants, and indocible stubborn ones. For they will despise the wisdom of
the wise, and tread under foot their precious pearls, and glory in their mad
contempt. Yet to try whether the fool will leave his folly I will give two or
three answers to this idle objection not worth the answering.

First, let him recount from the days that God placed man upon the earth, till
the present time, and show me when this good world was, (antiquae meliora: The
more ancient, the purer, says the proverb in another respect.) How good were
the days that Cain and Abel lived in? How good were the days of the old
world, till the Flood? The days of Sem and Cham? The days of Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob in Canaan? Of the Israelites in Egypt? How good were the days of the
Judges? The days of the Kings of Judah, and Israel? How good were the days of
Solomon, those peaceable and wealthy days? Did not the people complain of the
grievous burden of those days, and were ready to rebel, as afterward they
did? How good was the world in the days of Christ, and of the Apostles? If it
were not then good* when should it be good? How good in the times of the
Primitive Church, boiling in the heat of persecutions and heresies? How good
were and are the times of Antichrist? Of all times we find grievous complaints.
And of the times of Popery (hinc illae Lachrymae) we find great complaint in
the Fathers. These times were full of wars, bloodshed, massacres, treasons,
rebellions, robberies, etc. caused by that man of sin. Friar Mantuan
discovers the goodness of the world then: And Euerard Archbishop of
Canterbury, wrote a volumne (called Obiurgatorium temporis) the Rebuke of the
time. Wicked and monstrous were those days, yea, exceeding the heathen about
two hundredth years ago, the goodness whereof our wicked ignorants so much
admire. But Elmerius, a Monk of Malmesbury, counted them the days of greatest
woe and misery, and thereupon gathered the certainty of Antichrists present
reign? Fullwell do these proud murmurers show their tyrannical, and
rebellious hearts: When they had a Pope to absolve them from their alleagiance,
and to quench their thirst with the blood one of another, the world was good:
When the Pope partly with subtilty, partly with violence wrested Nobles, yea,
Kings out of their possessions, yea, whom he lusted, after one manner or
another, then was there cheapnesse and plenty: The Friars made Robin-hoods
penny-worthes, and this is all that these greedy blood hounds commend the old
world for. The Friars bound the commons to them by making good penny-worths of
other men's livings, both of the Clergy, and Laity, wrung from them by all
deceitful means, for which the Commons were but their slaves, and fools
praised their bounty for giving them a cake of their own meal. It is an easy
matter to be liberal on other men's purses. Neither yet considering the times
then, were there any such penny-worths. Your Forefathers groaned under the
burden of those penny-worths surely, when they put up a bill in a Parliament,
in the days of King Henry the fourth, the contents whereof was to take away
Temporal Lands, inordinately spent by the Clergy: Which Lands were
sufficient to maintain fifteen Earls, fifteen hundred Knights, six
thousand and two hundred Esquires, one hundred Almes-houses, fifteen hundred
Priests, and to allow twenty thousand pound yearly to the King; allowing to
every Earl, three thousand marks by year: to every Knight one hundred
marks, and four plow-land; to every Esquire forty marks and two plow-land; to
every Almes-house, for to maintain such surplusage of poor, as Cities, and
Towns were not able to maintain, one hundred marks; and to every Priest
seven marks. Fabian. chron. in Hen. 4. ann. 1410. Say not therefore, Why were
the old times (in those respects) better then these?

A second answer is, that sin and death has ouerspread all places and
times, all the sons of Adam are sinful, and the curse lies on them, and the
devil is their Prince, who is the Lord of the flesh: but God has gathered a
Church to himself, which is pestered with Hypocrites also, and the children of
God themselves, partly by means of these corrupting hypocrites, partly through
the temptations of the relics of lust within them, are drawn aside out of
the way often times. The just God therefore punishes the one, and chasteneth the
other. His messengers or instruments are, the Plague, comprehending all
infirmities, diseases, and maladies; the Sword signifying all miseries and
troubles that way; and Famine. Say not therefore, Why were the old times (in
that respect also) better then these?

A third answer is given by Solomon himself, Chap. 1. 9. 10. The thing that
has been, is that which shall be, and that which is done, is that which shall
be done, and there is no new thing under the Sun. Is there any thing whereof
it may be said, see this is new? The fool perceives nothing of all that is
before him, why? Because he discerns not the substance of things when they
are clothed with other circumstances. Therefore what is new, what old, he
knows not, neither can observe how the variable imaginations of all
generations, all their deeds, and manners are fixed in their center, to the
nature whereof all things are converted.

A fourth answer therefore shall be this. Leave off murmuring, complaining,
and disputing against God, mortify wrath, revenge, and covetousness, betake
thy self to the word of God, with a wise and understanding heart in humility,
exer^ise thy faith in obedience thereto, and then shall the world be well with
thee, the righteous shall resort to thy company, they shall rejoice with thee,
and commiserate with thee, and the peace of conscience shall overcome all
things. If the world be an hell of evils, yet shall thou be in heaven;
contrarily if the world were a paradise of pleasures, yet should thou be in
hell. Some are full of fear and despair, and most greedy in time of plenty;
some are joyful, hopeful, and content in time of scarcity. He that has
abundance, and no children is a care full drudge, and he that has but little
substance, and many children lives in comfort. Therefore avoid wrath, let go
displeasure let the world run his circuits, hear thou for thy time what the
Lord says to thee, and do his will while thou live, and then shall it be as
good a world to thee as ever it was.

To conclude; If all these old worldlings would mortify those rebellious
affections and lusts which reign in them, and hear what he says, who
speaks to all generations, the world should be as good as they can imagine it
ever yet was. But when the Lord calls to them, then are they ever ready to
call up their forefathers, to set them in opposition against the Lords, as the
Pharisees did, Ioh. 9. 28. We are none of this man's disciples, we are Moses
disciples. The truth is, they were the devils disciples, and so are these
Savages. If these answers satisfy not, the rod of the Magistrate is for the
fools back, and the yoke for the beasts neck.

Verse 11. Wisdom is good with an inheritance: and by it there is profit to
them that see the Sun^e.
A Fourth rule or remedy, whereby a man is armed against the miseries and
vanities of this life, whereof impatience, discontent, oppressions, murmuring,
complaining, revenging, etc. are principal vanities, is Wisdom. Concerning
wisdom two things are handled. First, the profitablenesse thereof, to verse
23. Secondly, the difficulty thereof, from thence to the end. The profit is
first generally propounded, verse 11. 12. The proposition is infolded in a
comparison with that which is of greatest account, yea, commonly counted the
chiefest good among men, to wit, an inheritance. Wisdom is good with an
inheritance, or as an inheritance, gnim nachalah: and by it there is profit, It
is more excellent or better, Veiother, i. and praestantius, magis) to them that
see the Sun. The comparison is from the Less to the Greater, figured by a
Correction, thus: A fair inheritance is a thing desired of all men, and a man
of great possessions is commonly counted happier then other men. Yet is not
that the only good, nor the best good, but there is another gift of God, as
good, and as profitable for man as an inheritance, without which his
inheritance, be it never so great, shall be unprofitable to him. Nay, if we
must make comparison between wisdom and wealth, wisdom is the more
excellent in it self, and better to man: For a wise and a poor child is
better then an old King that wants wisdom.

Verse 12. For wisdom is a defense, and money is a defense: but the
excellency of knowledge is, that wisdom gives life to them that have it.
A Reason of Wisdoms excellency above wealth, because it is a defense to a
man in every state of life, and in every matter. The Hebrew is, betzel
hachoch^ah. i. In the shadow of wisdom. The fruit or profit of wisdom is
illustrated by a comparison of an arbor, or thick leaued tree in the heat of
Summer, which is very great in those countries, and therefore they use to sit
and eat meat under such trees, yea, and to sacrifice to their idols in such
places. As the thick arbor by refraction of the Sunne-beames defends a man
from the broiling heat of Summer, and refreshes him with the cool air, and
also protecteth him from the violence of tempestuous blasts, mitigating the
extremity of the one, and the rig^ur of the other, reducing both to the temper
of man's body: so does wisdom in prosperity, and adversity defend a man, that
neither the excess of the one, nor extremity of the other shall ouerpower
him, but he so moderateth both, as that he keeps himself clear and free in
some good measure from the temptations and predominance of them both. Sapiens
dominabitur actus: The wise man ouerpowreth the stars, and is armed against
the weather. The heauiest things by engines may be removed, and done, which
otherwise to plain strength are impossible, and by device of instruments the
strongest castles are battered down, and thickest walls pierced through: so
many things to common judgment impossible, are done and avoided by wisdom.
And money is a defense, or shadow. These words seem to be an answer to an
objection, thus: Wisdom indeed is good, and a defense to a man, but money
also is needful, and a present remedy. For by money may a man readily obtain
his desires, and speedily avoid an evil. For what favor can a man obtain by
wisdom, that cannot as well be obtained by money. Et genus* and formam, etc.
It makes the base honorable, and the deformed beautiful, yea, in another
acception of the words, it desineth all things. Ans. It is true, money is a
defense also, and may prevail much often times, and most in a corrupt state:
Money makes friends, and adds strength, whereas otherwise a man is left
naked, and exposed to many dangers and evils: But as I said before, it cannot
hold out in comparison with wisdom. For it is more excellent, in that it
gives life to the owners thereof. Money is but as drugges and lenitiue
ointments to mitigate the swellings and diseases of the body, whose root,
remains still within, and pullulateth again after the same, or some other
manner: but wisdom is a spirit incorporated into the radical humor, giving
health, strength, and life to the body to extirpate the roots of all diseases.

The life of a man stands not in his riches, but wisdom gives life. By
wisdom is not meant worldly craftiness* and the deep counsels of sinners,
which is nothing but execrable malice and folly, Eccl^s. 19. 22. but that
which is joined with the fear of God. It is the knowledge of the law, and
works of God, and the practice of his wisdom is prudence, by which a man is
directed always in the best, safest, and nearest way to happiness* Money is
ordered by wisdom: For without wisdom, it is but a knife in a childs hand.
For the prosperity of fools shall destroy them, Prou. 1. 23. The rich man
trusted to riches, Luke 12. 19. Dives trusted to riches, Luke 16. The king of
Tyrs trusted to riches, Ezech. 28. Haman trusted to his wealth, so did Craesus
King of Lydia, Nabuchadnezzar trusted to the strength of Babylon, and Xerxes to
the multitude of his sould^ers, as did Senacherib also. But these defenses were
nothing: For riches avails not in the day of wrath, but righteousness
delivers from death. The wicked in hell confess too late, Wisd. 5. 8. What
has pride profited us, or the pomp of riches brought us? If a man has
tools, and want wisdom to use them, what is he the better? Nabal was a rich
fool, and his riches for want of wisdom destroyed him. But thou will say,
what can a wise man do without riches? But wisdom is good with an
inheritance. Yea, and without an inheritance. For if a wise man desire riches,
he can by wisdom obtain riches, and honor* for out of the prisonhouse
comes he to reign, as Solomon said before. If he desire not temporal goods,
he is rich already: For no man wants that which he desires not, nor yet
desires that which he needs not. The wise man is rich in God, he has
therefore whatsoever is for his good, and more is but a superfluity. If poverty
be the way to life, and riches the way to death, whether is the better way?
Whether is the better defense, or shadow? Whether is the better that is brought
low to rise higher, as Job was, or that rises high to fall, as Haman did?
Wisdom is a strong Tower to the wise, but a rich man is a ship tossed on
the waves. But a wise man with riches is better then a wise man without money.
I but tiches infatuate the heart of the wise, and are often a snare to him. For
he that has riches, commonly wants himself, they are strong tempters, and
therefore wicked Mammon. Howsoever a man is more troubled to keep a good
conscience with riches, then he that wants them. Neither indeed can a wise
man want* seeing that there is as much use of wisdom, and the wise, as of
wealth and the rich: For the world is governed by wisdom, not by riches.
Therefore wisdom shall always have the pre-eminence, and riches attending on
it.

Verse 13. Consider the work of God: for who can make that straight, which he
has made crooked?
AS before he propounded, in general, the profit and excellency of wisdom,
to arm a man against impatience and all other vanities; so here he begins
to express the benefit and use thereof more particularly, showing what the
practice of wisdom is, and how it is a defense, comfort, and life to a man in
this vale of misery.

First, the practice of wisdom stands in a right consideration of the works
of God, verse 13. The right consideration of the works of God is not to search
into the depth of his unsearchable wisdom, but to rest contented in the work
of his ordinance. He does all things after the counsel of his own will. No
man is his counselor, his own counsel must stand. Therefore consider the
work of God. All things are ordered by the wisdom of God, and it is thy
wisdom, not to coin worlds, and policies, at thy pleasure and will, by
violence and turnings of devices; but thou must rest, and rely on God, and let
him work his own work, otherwise impatience shall carry thee headlong into
sin against God, and against thy self. The reason of this practice is in the
next words figured by a communication. For who can make that straight, which he
has made crooked? If thou see oppression, and wrong* and perverting of
justice, which may move thee to impatience, anger, revenge, insurrection, etc.
oppose not sin against sin, but fear God, and know that God is even now in
doing a work of justice on some by these, and afterward will do a work of
justice on these. If Josiah the best King that ever reigned, will needs go
out to fight against Pharaoh, whom the Lord had sent out for an executioner of
justice, he shall be slain. The Lord makes use of crooked things, for his
glory, which thou can never make straight. Walk thou uprightly, and speak
thou uprightly, that they may know their crookedness, if so be that God will
reveal it to them, and return to thy uprightness, if God give them power to
lay it to heart, but let their crookedness be their own, and fall upon their
own heads. Rest thou on God, tarry his leisure, all times and works are in
his hands. They cannot be hastened, nor slackned by the wit or strength of man.

Verse 14. In the day of prosperity be joyful, but in the day of adversity
consider: God also has set the one over against the other, to the end that man
should find nothing after him.
SEcondly, the practice of wisdom stands in the right use of the times and
seasons, which are in Gods own hands. These seasons are either of prosperity
or adversity, of wealth or want, of peace or troubles. In the day of prosperity
be joyful, when God gives thee thy hearts desire for the necessity and
comfort of thy body, receive it thankefully, use it joyfully, cheer thine
heart therewith, and let others be partakers of thy joy. For to what other
purpose has God sent it? Make not a curse of his blessing, nor his goodness
an occasion of sin, either by depriving thy self, or others of the use
thereof, or by abusing the same to the hurt of thy body, or mischieuing of
others. Glorify God in peace and plenty, comfort thy self, glad the heart of
thy neighbor, let him praise God in the feeling of his blessings with thee,
and not envy thy wicked prosperity. But in the day of adversity consider. Fall
not to unprofitable murmuring, grudging, complaining, cursing, etc. It is the
work of God whatsoever the means be. For nothing is without him. He uses
crooked things to the accomplishment of his will, as well as straight. But the
wisdom of God in applying them to unknown ends, and good ends, excuses not
man's malice, and evil intents. Weigh the reason of adversity by wisdom, and
then rest on God, as Job did, and as David did in Saul's persecutions, in
Absolons rebellions, and Shimeis cursed raylings. Job said, The Lord gives,
and the Lord takes away, and we must receive evil (punishment and
chastisements) because we are evil, as well as good of the Lord. The former
are our deserts, the later Gods mercy. David said of Shimei, Let him alone,
peradu^nture the Lord has bidden him curse. So consider that this is the work
of God. Therefore fear, blaspheme not, neither fret, nor strive. Thou can
not alter the course of the heavens, nor change the weather, but thou in
wisdom applye^t all thy worldly businesses to the times, and as the times
will give thee leave. Anger, and contention is but vain.

This patient consideration and contentation is enforced by a reason of the
intent and end of Gods wisdom herein; God has also set the one against the
other, etc. So has God tempered the life of man with the intercourse of
crosses, and succession of things contrary, exercising judgment, justice, and
mercy in his secret counsel, that man might find nothing what to say, or do,
to imagine or devise in any state, of himself. For Gods work is most wise,
secret, and firm, unalterable by man, not to be prevented, nor amended by his
erroneous counsels. But the must let the arrogant search of causes pass, and
glorify God in adversity as well as in prosperity, as Job did: yea, God
sends prosperity, and adversity, and other contrary accidents to try us,
namely, that we may see and know the manifold hidden hypocrisies of our hearts,
that by these occasions show forth themselves in imaginations, affections,
words, and works, Deuteronomy. 8. To conclude, God does this, that we may know and
confess him to be all in all, and our selves to be but fools, and beasts of
ourselves.

Verse 15. All things have I seen in the days of my vanity: There is a just
man that perishes in his righteousness, and there is a wicked man that
prolongeth his life in his wickedness.
A Confirmation of the former reason by the effects of Gods secret and
wonderful providence, seeming quite contrary to reason, and to be intolerable
indignities, which he further confirms by the testimony of his own
experimental knowledge. All things have I seen. There is nothing that can be
conceived, and known by the understanding and reason of man, but I have had
the observation and experience thereof. For from the prudent observation, and
experience of the works of God, have I gathered rules of wisdom, for the
instruction and direction of others. He adds, In the days of my vanity; to
signify the fullness of his experience of good and evil* of wisdom and
folly. He has seen both in himself, and observed in others the works of
God. This briefly of the testimony. The matter or subject of the testimony, are
two particular effects of Gods providence. The first is, There is a just man
that perishes in his justice; namely, for truth and righteousness sake. So
Abel was slain by his brother Cain, because his deeds were righteous, and his
own wicked; 1 John 3. 12. Esaias says, Chap. 59. 15. He that departs from
evil, makes himself a prey. Naboth was slain for keeping a good conscience.
The Prophets, our Savior Christ, the Apostles and Martyrs, suffered death for
the truth. Many are murdered, spoiled, vexed, rayled on by the wicked for
righteousness sake, and even the last end of the righteous often times seems
to be without honor, as the wicked in hell confess they erroneously judged in
time of their iouill life; Wisd. 5. And this is a thing contrary to carnal
reason, and hard to be understood; Psalm. 73. 16. 17. And therefore are many
offended thereat, and take occasion to depart from the way of truth. For they
fully know not this point of wisdom, namely, to rely on the providence of
God, contrary to humane reason, and that he is most honored when we trust him
on his bare word.

The second effect is contrary to this. And there is a wicked man, that
prolongeth his days in his wickedness. Contrarily again, some there be that
neither fear God, nor reverence man, without conscience, without truth in
words and deeds, swearers, blasphemers, oppressors, despisers of the good,
mockers of grace, covetous, injurious, and yet flourish in prosperity, have the
World at will, have children at their desire, build houses, plant vineyards,
purchase Lordships, yea, they are honored of men, and praised for their
wisdom; they live in health, and die without sickness; Job 21. 13. Lazarus
perished in hunger, Dives lived in pleasure. Christ was soon cut down; but
Herod lived long, even till he was foure-score years old. If a man judge
according to outward appearance, these things argue that there is no providence
at all. But it argues infidelity, and pride enough, when a man will believe
nothing without so many reasons and proofs, nor do any thing at Gods command,
till he see his wages; Mal. 3. 14 Righteous men die, and merciful men are
taken away; Esaias 57. 1. that they might not see nor feel the evils to come on
the World, as Lot was taken from among the Sodomites: And wicked men live to
their further vengeance and sorrow, as did Herod. The righteous are chastened
with death, and the wicked live to increase their damnation; 1 Cor. 11. 32.
They are taken away, lest wickedness should alter their understanding, and
deceit beguile their mind; Wisd. 4. 10. The wicked live to defile their souls
and bodies with all kind of sin, to have all their worldly desires
accomplished to ripeness, as did the Canaanites. Let us therefore turns our
selves to the providence of God, and there rest contented. For they that trust
in him, shall never be ashamed, nor confounded.

Verse 16. Be not righteous overmuch, neither make thy self ever wise: why
should thou destroy thy self?
THirdly, the practice of wisdom consists, first in avoiding extremities,
verse 16. 17. Secondly, in keeping the mean, verse 18. The extremities are
excess, or defect. The excess is an error on the right hand, when a man by
pride abuses his wisdom, in stretching it beyond the limits and bounds of
humane capacity, either in defining thereby what is just, what unjust, or what
is truth, what error. Be not righteous ouer*much. A man cannot be too
righteous in respect of obedience to the Commandments* yet if he be so much
addicted to one or some, as that he despises the rest, he bewrays
hypocrisy and folly, and may well be said to be too just. For a man is not to
cull out what he thinks good, thereby to justify himself, and to condemn
others; but as David says, to have respect to all the commandments, else
shall hell limit his obedience, and serve God, or rather seem to serve him
according to his own liking; but reseruations and exceptions God abhors.
But a man may make himself too just, when he presumptuously takes upon him
beyond his apprehension, to define what is right, what not, in this confused
disorder of the World, and state of frailety, wherein all things are full of
difficulty. For no man must presume above his gift, or stretch himself beyond
the line either of all men's capacity, or his own. This is but to intrude a
man's self into the room of God, and to make himself a Lawgiver, rather then
an understander and doer of that which is already given, and so in the end
become rather zealous of his own Laws, and fancies, then of Gods; as the
Pharisees were, and Papists are, and other heretics have been. Neither make
thy self ouer-wise. As thou must not set up* a justice, or zeal of thine
own, so neither a wisdom, or doctrine of thine own. And this a man does,
when he will search further into the wisdom of God, then he has revealed in
his Word. But since the most perfect has hardly attained to the fullness of
revealed wisdom, how shall a man pierce into that which is not revealed?

Surely, he that will needs behold the Sun with open eyes in his glory, shall
loose his eyesight, and so shall he loose his wits that will pry too deeply
into the secrets of God. If a man will search further then God has revealed to
man, or beyond the measure of his gift, he cannot but fall into heresies, and
foolish fancies, which even to common judgment, shall be ridiculous or wicked.
Therefore says Solomon, why should thou be desolate, or destroy thy self?
Why should thou provoke God to anger, by proudly prying into him, and not
rather honor him by humble obedience, admiring rather his wonderful wisdom
in his works, then seeking to comprehend his infiniteness to pride thy self
withal, or yet to limit him to thy reason, and seeking for satisfaction in
things that cannot be had, rather then to do good works, as many proud barren
talkers do now a days. The fool seeks wisdom, and finds it not. The
Jews will be righteous without Christ, they will have a Church of their own
making, and a Christ of their own forming: (So will the Brownists and
Anabaptists, etc. The Greeks will be wiser then Christ, both lew and Gentile
will be wiser and better then God. For whose doctrine was madness, and life
sinful, and end shameful, if not Christ's? whose laws and traditions are
preferred, enforced, and urged more then Gods? But the one is wicked, the other
foolish, both are both, and so are they desolate. For God has destroyed the
Justice of the one, or them for their Justice and Goodness, and the wisdom
of the other. And so shall the Popish celestial, terrestrial Hierarchies,
their Justice, and devotions, prove wicked madness. If a man interpret these
words of righteousness in civil causes, as it is said* summum ius summa
in^uria, and as Cicero says, Viuimus in faece Romuli, non in repub: Platonis,
and of calumniations of the law, that is but a branch, for the words are to be
taken in the general sense of all divine and humane things.

Verse 17. Be not overmuch wicked, neither be thou foolish: why should thou
die before thy time?
THe contrary defect is set down in this verse, which is an error on the left
hand. As some will be too just, and too wise, so some again will be too wicked
and too foolish. Be not wicked overmuch* etc. As thou must not arrogate to thy
self to define what is just and right at thy pleasure, as though thou had
all knowledge, and all descerning, and the perfection or highest degrees of
all, so neither must thou run out into the other extremities of
dissoluteness and wickedness. For, because thou can not satisfy thy
irreligious curiosity on the one side, must thou therefore deny the providence
of God on the other side, and despise his ordinance? Because thou can not
comprehend his unrevealed wisdom, will thou therefore cast off all knowledge
and discerning? Because thou can not sound the bottom of Gods wisdom, and
find out the unknown trackt of his paths, neither can comprehend the reason
of this or that, or why thou should do, or not do this or that; will thou
therefore cast off the royal commandment, and walk in crooked turnings and
by-ways? Will thou not understand those duties aright, whereby thou art to
testify thy humility, fear, and obedience, because thou can not go beyond
that which is written, or beyond thy line? Will thou not read the Scriptures
at all, because they are hard to be understood? What must thou needs have the
exact understanding of all, or else will thou understand none? This is indeed
the common folly of Popish Idiots; They dare meddle with any thing, save the
Bible: For they believe as the Church believes, but what it believes they know
not, so they believe they know not what, and live they know not how. They are
too wicked, too foolish.

If the Scriptures be hard, then must thou pray more earnestly, and labor more
diligently. But the Gospel is hid to them that perish, not to others. Because
there is, and all ways has been so much contention about the points of
religion, and the chief articles of the faith; must thou therefore make thy
self an Epicure? Must thou cast off all care, and seed thy belly? Because the
Primitive Church was pestered with heresies, must the Pope therefore take away
all knowledge of God, clasping up the Bible in an unknown tongue? And because
Saint Jerome complains of the abuse of the common knowledge of the Scripture
in the mouths of some prophance vulgars, must all men, even the whole Church
therefore, be cast out into utter darkness, must there be neither preaching,
catechizing, nor praying* Must the Book of God be turned into pictures and
idols, teachers of lies? Must Pastors and Teachers be turned into idle Monks
and Friars, and faith and true obedience the only means to salvation into
their regularities? As before the profane made a common prattle of Scripture
without reverence, so now must they therefore be devout in lies contrary to
Scripture? A fair mends. Because Monks and Friars, the Popes orders, had too
much living, not only Tithes, the Churches due by divine right, but the best
Temporal livings, lands and houses; must the Ministers of Christ now be stripped
of all, and be plain beggars* Yea, destitute of common meat, drink, and
lodging? Because they had too much for nothing doing, must we have nothing for
sore travel? Because they had more clothes and gowns then needed, must we
therefore by extreme need be driven to wear but half gowns? And because
they were wolves, devouring the flock, must therefore the flock now be greedy
dogs worrying their she pheards? Because nothing was enough for those Drones,
shall therefore any thing be enough and good enough for diligent and faithful
Laborers? Stulti dum viuant vitia in ventraria currunt. The world is a fool,
and a fool runs ever out into extremities. Too just or too wicked; too
wise, or too foolish; too lavish, or too covetous, superstitious, or not
religious at all, if not a Papist, then an Atheist. If not bringing
gifts-superfluously to the Tabernacle, then taking away all maintenance, as
these greedy swine, the civil pompous Epicures do in these present days,
wherein every one is skillful to rob the Church without remorse, to maintain
greedy Bell, and proud Iezabel, to keep the Minister under, that the devil
may be aloft and reign, who ^ideth on their backs sumptuously sadled, and
lodges in their bellies filled with the Church goods, Satan's sweetest bits.

Why should thou dye before thy time? Why should thou bring Gods heavy
judgments upon thee for thy dissoluteness and contempt? The works of the
Lord are wonderful, and to be sought out of all that fear him, that he may
be glorified in them. For neither the dumb creatures, nor the dead praise him
here in earth. But he destroys them that despise the knowledge of him and his
laws. For wherefore has the Lord given his word, but that we should know it
and do it? As David exercised himself in the law day and night, and as the
Bareans searched the Scriptures to try Paul's doctrine, for which they were
commended of the holy Ghost; so must we also without curiosity search out
diligently the secrets of the Lord therein contained. For things written belong
to us, and to our children. And the diligent shall attain to the subtilty of
knowledge, and to understand the dark sayings of the wise, Prou. 1. 4. 6. But
the ungodly that casts his words behind him shall be reproved. And those mad
fools that gave all to the Friar, but snatch all from the Ministers of Christ,
and delight in their wants and miseries, shall receive a just reward of their
extremities. For what outward token of sound grace, is to be found almost in
any of them? and who are they that desire most to creep into these possessions,
but Zijms, ^ims, and goats in sheep clothing, or plain ravening wolves? Who
desire that all livings might be impropriate, that we might not have where to
put our heads, as our Savior complains.

The devil is put out at the fore-dore for a foul these, and comes in at the
back door like a brave gallant: we were once wild olives, and are hastening
to our old ^ildenesse again: for our faith whereby we stand, is fruitless,
and lies a dying, but the brutall part, the flesh, is even deified, as Satan
deified himself in the sight of God and the Angels.

Verse 18. It is good that thou should take hold of this, yea also from this
withdraw not thine hand: for he that fears God shall come forth of them all.
THis verse sets down the practice of wisdom in keeping a mean between
vain curiosity, and profane dissoluteness, or contempt. It is good that
thou should, etc* Hold the mean between these two extremes, turning
neither to the right hand nor to the left, as the Lord has commanded in the
Law, but keep an even course, or godly mediocrity. It is good to search into
the depth of the word, and works of God without curiosity. For the Lord
gives wisdom to those that seek her as gold and silver, to know Justice and
judgment, and equity, to understand a Proverb, and the interpretation the
words of the wise, and their dark sayings, and a wise man will hear, and
increase counsel, and a man of understanding shall attain to wise counsels.
Pro. 1. Yea also from this withdraw not thine hand. His meaning is, not that we
should make a mixture of righteousness and wickedness, of wisdom and folly,
which are things contrary, and have no communion at all one with another. For
what fellowship has light with darkness, and Christ with Belial? There be
many Atheistical belly-gods in these days that will be compounding, and
deuizing mediums, according to their own fantasies, and deuizing such
religions as may stand with their own lusts, they will gather the dew of
sweetest flowers with the Be, and suck Pitch and Tar; and Horse-dung with
the Waspe and Hornet* and dunghill-Flye, and make a loathsome potion of Gall
and Honey. They will neither be too pure, not too popish, neither too good, nor
too r^guish, but they will savor of both, like Laban and Esau, because God may
abhor^e the religious Atheist, and spue the honest Epicure out of his mouth.
For such dregs are not for his service.

Blessed are the pure in spirit, notwithstanding their imperfections and
infirmities, but cursed are they that halt between two religions, serving
their lusts of both. But the meaning of the holy Ghost is, that we should
acknowledge our own imperfections and weakness, both in regard of exact
righteousness, and discerning of perfect Justice in the intricate and
difficult matters of the world, and of the depth of Gods secrets, and to teach
us modesty. We cannot be too just, nor too wise, so long as we contain our
selves within the compass of the written word, and withal go not beyond our
line, that is, presume not above the gift that God has given us; Neither yet
too wicked, nor too foolish, so long as we do but see and acknowledge our
weakness in knowledge, and defectiuenesse in discerning of Justice and
Judgment, and disability to attain to the fullness of every gift, and
therefore rest our selves contented with that which we can attain to, trusting
in Gods mercy for the rest (not envying our betters, and of pride, striving to
make all alike) as the Lord says to Paul, My grace is sufficient for thee. 2.
Cor. 12 9. It was wickedness and folly therefore in him that had but one
talent, to go bury it in the ground, and to sit idle: But as it is an ordinary
thing for a rich man to be covetous, and to seek to be too rich, so it is for
the mean or poor to be careless, and prodigally to waste that little which
he has.

For he that seareth God, etc. A reason of the former speech, because he that
has the fear of God planted in his heart, shall avoid both curiosity and
dissolute ignorance: He that dreadeth the Majesty of God will not arrogantly
and presumptuously pry too far into his secrets, nor limit his providence by
his short and shallow capacity, nor yet contrarily depart away from the
knowledge of him in his word, and works, but exercise himself in both, as
David did, and all the godly have done.

Verse 19. Wisdom strengthens the wise, more then ten mighty men which are
in the City.
AN hortatorie conclusion of the premises. Therefore follow wisdom, depart
not from her directions and counsels. This exhortation is included in the
reason or confirmation thereof: For wisdom has more strength, then ten men
of power and might in a City, for the defense thereof. Prudence excels
puissance, and counsel valor. A weak man that has light, is better then a
giant that is blind, and a man ouer-commeth the Lion, and the Elephant, and
takes the whale. For there is a time when the strong is weak, and the weak
strong, and wisdom finds it out. Great buildings are raised by skill, or
wisdom of that kind, not by plain strength. The ship also is guided by
wisdom, and by wisdom of that kind are the winds and floods, made
serviceable. Hester by wisdom delivered the Church of God from their
oppressors, and brought Haman to the gallows that he had prepared for
Mordecai. By the wisdom of Iudeth was Bethulia delivered, and the devouring
host of Olofernes dispersed, and cropped up with the sword. And by wisdom,
Leonidas king of the Spartanes with six hundred men dispersed five hundredth
thousand of Xerxes host. So that the strength of his ten hundred thousands
were broken by six hundred men, and Greece delivered. Iusti^. lib. 2.

Verse 20. For there is not a just man upon earth, that does good, and sins
not.
FOurthly, the practice of wisdom stands in a right consideration of the
condition of man since the fall. For there is not, etc. The true and full
understanding of this principle gives great direction to the wise, both for
the bridling of impatience, anger, revenge, etc. and also for even and moderate
carriage of himself among all sorts of men, and in every matter. First, this
is to be laid down as an infallible ground, that no man is perfectly good, nor
yet can attain to perfect goodness in this vain life. Therefore is every man
full of imperfection and wants, whereupon comes such disorder, crossenesse,
and difficulty of every matter. Every man then being frail and sinful, does
often more or less depart from this duty, partly of ignorance, partly of
temptation, and who is he that offends not in his tongue? There be many
obstacles to let evil deeds, and remorse of conscience setleth the heart
before they be acted, besides manifold occurrences: but the tongue is near to
the heart, and as it were the sound of the heart, which is conveyed by the air
of the breath, and qualified by the imagination of the mind, which follows
either the suggestions of Satan, or the cursed humors in evil. I say cursed,
because the body is a mass of sin and death, by the curse; Genesis 3. 17. Well,
seeing that regeneration is but here begun, and not perfected, and that all
men, partly of temptation, partly of infirmities are subject to many falls in
deeds, and words especially, there shall, and must be occasions of anger,
discontent, revenge, etc.

Verse 21. Also take no heed unto all words that are spoken; lest thou hear
thy servant curse thee.
A Consequent or conclusion of wisdom, deducted necessarily from the former
ground. If all men be subject to offend often by deed and word, then must thou
not give thine heart and memory to all the words that are spoken. Let not all
cross speeches, angry, and idle words, settle in thine heart, and memory: But
let them pass away as other vain sounds do. For he that will examine every
word that men speak, sometimes of heat, sometimes unadvisedly, etc. shall
never be charitable, but always contentious, never quiet, but always grieved,
and such seeds being received into the heart, will bring forth no good fruit,
but corrupt the good seeds of grace, and make the ground barren. Evil words
are the seeds of many evil works: Let the seeds die, and much evil shall
be avoided. When angry words are past, let evil thoughts pass away with them,
and make them an occasion of firmer friendship, reconciliation and charity,
which was a cause of emnity. But let not the evil spirit bring in these
thoughts again, at least give them no entertainment, lest the last error be
worse then the first. Lest thou hear thy servant curse thee, Asher Lo
tishmagn; id est, when as, because thou shall not, or ought not to hear thy
servant speaking evil, or reproving thee. But in charity forbear to examine
his words and deeds too strictly: And then is this conclusion or precept
enforced by an argument of the Greater denied, to deny the Less, n these
words. If thou ought not always to hear with grief thy servant reproving
thee, or his angry complaints, then much less ought thou to regard the
angry speeches or contumelies of others, etc. If in wisdom thou must turn
away thine ear, and wink at many both words and deeds of thy servant, who is
maintained of thy Table and purse, and owes duty and reverence to thee, then
may thou much more passe-by the reproaches and petty, abuses of others, that
live aequali iure with thee, that are free, as we, say, under God and the
King. To conclude, if a man in charity must bear with the infirmities of his
servant, and those that are obliged to him by any bond or duty, then must he
much more be of charitable behavior toward all men, by suppressing anger,
impatience, revenge, etc.

Verse 22. For oftentimes also thine own heart knows, that thou thy self
likewise have cursed others.
A Confirmation of the former instruction concerning the bridling of anger,
revenge, etc. by the testimony of a man's own conscience, conuincing him by the
Law of nature, which teaches every man to do to other men as he would be done
to. As thou would have them to bear with thine infirmities, so bear thou
with theirs, and make another man's case and state thine own. For oftentimes
also thine own heart knows, etc. Examine thine own conscience, call thy
self to account, and thou shall find that thou have often despised, and
reproached others. Therefore hear, and bear with patience that other whiles,
which thou have imposed on others, and having a feeling of this frailty, and
many more in thy self, be readier to pardon then to revenge wrongs in words or
deeds, And compare not thy common infirmities with other men's personal
sins, nor yet contrarily, that thou may be an indifferent Judge between
thy self and others. By personal sin, is meant that special sin, which
every particular person for his part is most addicted unto. And by special, is
meant a greater degree of this or that sin, in this or that particular man;
otherwise all sin is in all men, but it is of a several, of a differing
conditure in several men. If thou be naturally more patient, and another
choleric, justify not thy self, nor yet condemn him by this comparison. For
thou shall find some virtue in him to match thy patience, and some vice in
thee to match his choler. But if his anger be sanctified, or but his
infirmity, and thy patience natural or civil, he is a man, and thou art yet
but a beast, yet in the flesh, and among the fleshly, thou have thy
commendation, and that is thy portion, thy reward; Matthew 6. Weigh these things
by wisdom, and thy heart shall be armed against manifold vanities, to live in
rest, quiet, and comfort, in some good measure, in this miserable life, as
these rules have prescribed.

Verse 23. All this have I proved by wisdom: I said, I will be wise, but it
was far from me.
FRom this verse to the end he declares the difficulty of wisdom, to show
that curiosity is vain on the one side, and that diligence to attain to some
good measure of wisdom, is requisite on the other side, and by consequence
the error of man appears in the one, and imperfection in the other, and
vanity in both. Now the object of wisdom is either good or evil, things
reasonable or agreeable to good reason, or things wicked, which are either with
reason and subtlety, or mere madness.

The difficulty of the former he declares by his own experience in this
verse. All these things have I tried by wisdom, that is to say, that which I
have said concerning the extremities and mediocrity for the establishing of the
heart in patience and comfort, I have seen and tried by the direction of
wisdom. Neither yet is a man moderate and wise enough, because he is able to
bridle impatience, but he must diligently bethink himself as well of that
which is to come, as of that which is passed or present, whereupon the happy
issue or event of things present do depend. For the experience of things past,
and conjecture of that which is to come, or may happen, is the ground or
direction of that which is to be done for the present, that the same may be to
right and good purpose. For it is not enough that a thing be good in his kind,
but rightly applied, and used to good purpose. And herein has wisdom her
chiefest stroke. Therefore I having obtained knowledge, and the practice of
knowledge, even wisdom, thought to attain to the depth thereof, and said
within my self. I will be wise, but it was far from me. But how much I thought
my self more merely to have attained to wisdom, by so much the more was I
further off. For where is wisdom to be found? Where is the place of
understanding? Job 28. 12. Wisdom is a protection against all evils to come,
wisdom directs in judgment and equity, wisdom guides in the right way,
and guardeth from the incursions of Satan and the wicked, the wicked subtle,
and the wicked mad or sensual, both foolish, both beastly, and enemies to
godly wisdom.

Verse 24. That which is far off and exceeding deep, who can find it out.
A Reason of the difficulty of good wisdom, or of wisdom exercised in that
which is good. That which is far off, or removed far away and out of sight
(an allegorical speech) worn out or dispersed away by succession of times,
which do alter and eat up all things, who can find out? For of innumerable
things past, there is no knowledge at all, and of a few memorable things there
is some general conceit; but the condition, or conditure, or circumstantiall
existence of the times, and things past, is vanished, and that which was most
common, is now become most difficult. And the learned is perplexed in searching
out that which was once most triuiall. It is a difficult thing to calculate the
whole figure or countenance of the heavens, in any one day of the month, six
hundred years ago, etc. But it is more difficult to know the whole condition
or state of that generation then living, though we may gather much by those
that wrote in those days. The Papists for want of this wisdom are become
sophistical sots in the interpretation of the Fathers, and Scripture. If this
calculation were granted to us, as it was to Moses, and very much to Solomon,
all the Scriptures and all Laws should be most plain and most easy to be
understood of him, whom the god of this World has not blinded. And exceeding
deep, who can find it? If things past be difficult, as the arrow or bird in
the air vanishing out of sight more and more, insomuch that a man can only
say; Yonder is a Bird, but what kind, what color, and many more individual
differences, he cannot tell, but guess by conjecture as well as he can; then
are things to come much more difficult, being buried as it were in a dark
dungeon, or pit, into which the eye can diue but very little. But all the
deliberation of the wise proceeds from the comparing of things past and to
come, without which, a thing in it self good, shall not have like effect, yea,
it shall have a contrary effect, and event. The word of Gods providence is
firm and sure, and it is before us, but it is seen of them to whom God
reuealeth it more or less. Man is not able to conceive what is good for him,
or right, it is the gift of God. But in his last end upon reuiew of all things
past, he shall see his manifold errors, vanities, madnesses on the one side,
and of Gods wisdom, goodness, justice, and mercy on the other side, if that
judicious, and gracious reuiew be given him. For many live in darkness, and
die in darkness, without observation of Gods works, like beasts. This of the
difficulty of wisdom, in respect of the object of good, which is of God.

Verse 25. I applied mine heart to know and to search, and to seek out
wisdom, and the reason of things, and to know the wickedness of folly, even
of foolishness and madness.
HEre he begins to declare the difficulty of wisdom in finding out, and
comprehending the deprauation, malice, and corruption of man's nature, which is
infinite, for as he gave his heart to know, to trace out, or see into, and to
find out wisdom, and the reason of things by the discourse of wisdom: so
also he labored as diligently to know the wickedness of folly, or depraved
wisdom of the ungodly, that feared not God, and the fortuous perverseness of
reasonlesse mad ones that are carried like beasts after their lusts, their
natural light of understanding and reason being extinguished.

Verse 26. And I find more bitter then death, the woman whose heart is snares
and nets, and her hands as bands: Who so pleases God shall escape from her,
but the sinner shall be taken by her.
AN explication of the infiniteness of this wickedness and folly, by an
example of special observation of one kind of folly, to wit, of the harlot.
And I find: The harlots devilish subtilties he illustrateth, First, by a
comparison of the Less to the Greater, more bitter then death. Death is
terrible, and the pains of death are grievous. Yea, all creatures abhor
death as an enemy to nature, and a most grievous evil, because it is a
deuourer, and a destroyer. But this is a small thing in comparison of the
sorrows, calamities and miserable destruction that the flickering harlot
brings a man unto. For she is Vorago, the death and destruction both of body
and soul, goods, and good name. So that she grindeth a man and his estate all
to powder. Secondly, her subtle devices are compared to snares and nets. As
the fowler and fisher are skillful to catch fowls and fishes by their snares
and nets, which otherwise are out of man's power and reach: so the harlot by her
wily devises insnareth the wise by inflaming lust in them, which blinds
their understandings, and brings their souls in the end into the bondage of
the body, the Harlot, and the Devil How she makes and sets her snares, and
nets, Solomon depainteth out by an hypotyposis, or lively description, Pro. 7.
10. to the end. Her bates or songs are pleasant, witty, and sugared words. Pro.
5. 3. The lips of a strange woman drop as an home comb, and her mouth is
smoother than oil. She is subtle both by words and gestures, to kindle lust,
to enamour and ravish the simple with the love of her, she makes her self a
beautiful and precious Iewelin his eyes, she transformeth her self to delude
the senses, and like a lugler draws the imagination after her shows to make
him phantasticate on her as an angel, whereupon she seems to be an angel in
his deluded eyes, when she is indeed but an Empusa, Lamia, Strix, a beastly
whore, to be put to grind in the house of correction, acommon pocky Jade.

And her hands are as bands. After that she has once entangled their
affections, she then binds them as prisoners are bound, as Delilah did
Sampson, and leads them to hell. She in effect says, as Delilah did. The
Philistims be upon thee Sampson, death and destruction be upon thee my sweet
heart, Prou. 7. 27. Her house is the way to hell, going down to the chambers
of death. She kisseth, she imbraceth the fool in her arms, she joins hand
in hand, she dallieth, she mingleth now and then a discord with her lascivious
concords to whet the affections, but her arms are ropes wherewith the gentle
loving beast is bound for the slaughter, and the feet of the spider inwrapping
the be or fly in her copwebs. Yet are these simple ones strongest, and the
wisest also in their own conceits, and so are they led as an Ox to the
slaughter, and as a fool to the stocks, Prou. 7. 22. This of the illustration.

Who so pleases God shall escape from her. Here he amplifieth her deuillish
subtilties, by the power and force thereof in the persons tempted. First,
negatiuely only he that fears God, as did Joseph, shall escape from her; or
he that is good before God in his election, being taken by her shall escape
from her though he be, through humane frailty, for a time deluded by her. For
the elect may fall, but neither wholly, nor finally. The seed of grace shall
be of force in the end to ouer-power her force. Secondly, affirmatively, but
the sinner shall be taken by her. He whom God has forsaken shall be surely
taken by her, he shall never be able to overcome the strength of her
temptations, but give place to his fleshly lusts, provoked and inflamed by her.
For she is the rod of Gods indignation upon the sinner, and her house is the
wide gate and broad way that leads to hell.

Verse 27.
Behold, this have I found (says the Preaecher) counting one by one to find
out the account.

Verse 28. Which yet my soul seeks, but I find not: one man among a
thousand have I found, but a woman among all those have I not found.
A Confirmation of the infiniteness of the harlots wicked subtilties, and the
fools madness, by the impossibility of finding it out. Behold. A note of a
wonder, of attention, and serious consideration, of vehement asseueration, and
of sensible proof. For a man will believe what he sees, or else nothing,
behold, consider, think well of it, see in your own experience if it be not
true. This have I found counting one by one to find out the account; That is
to say, weighing one thing after another, or diligently searching out, by
discourse and observation, all the subtilties and devices of the harlot, and
the mischiefs that ensue thereof. Which yet my soul seeks. I still desire
to find out her turning of devices, her innumerable plots and fetches, her
blindings, her variable trans-forming of her self, to work upon the
affections, as the Musician turns his instrument to what tune he pleases.
But I find not: That is, there is none end of her wickedness. She is thespawne
and fountain of all manner of evils: For every word and gesture is a world of
deceits. Her apparel, and every part theseof, her motion, countenances,
looks, glaunces, frowns, flickerings, are innumerable. She fills the mind
full of fancies, and configurateth them as she list, like a devil. She
stirs up the flesh into rebellion against the spirit, like a devil. Omnia
spirant delos. Her fingers are snakes, her words drops of poison, she weepeth
with the crocodile lovingly and compassionately, her eyes stream out the
venime of the cokatrice, she has Hyaenaes voice, and deuoureth as Leuiathan.
For she brings the fool into a paradise of pleasure; but his out-gate at the
last is the stocks, pocks, gallows, hell. Says the Preacher. A confirmation
of the truth of this discourse and observation, concerning the infinite
wickedness of these subtle fools and made fools, by the testimony of the
person searching, discoursing, observing: The Preacher, a man of age and
experience, and exercised all his life in the studies of wisdom, and
knowledge of all things good and evil.

One man of a thousand have I found. q. d. there is a possibility to find out
the subtle devices and turnings of men that are wise and wil-full in evil,
though they give themselves over to delude, and ensnare. For there is some
curb of reason, some small remorse, whereby their ways are something more
plain, they all deuiate not altogether from the principles of humanity into
diabolical falsehood, cruelty, and shamelessness, and so some few of them may
be found out and comprehended. But a woman among all those have I not found:
there is not one of these witty wicked harlots can be found out, i. their
infinite ways and deuillish devices to deceive, circumuent, ensnare, yea, and
to spoil by subtlety and cruelty, is not to be comprehended by the reason of
man, because the wicked woman is reasonlesse, remorselesse, senseless, dead in
sin, her proceedings, and sudden enterprises are unnatural, and void of all
reason; her spirit is buried and extinguished in her lusts, and so has Satan
more power over her, and more powerfully works by her. Therefore her strange
devices, deceits, pleasing allurements, yea, and her cruelties also are like
the devils. Though Ahab had sold himself to commit wickedness, and was even
sick of his covetous desire, yet such a wicked and sudden plot, whereby to
obtain his desire, never entered into his mind, or if into his mind, yet not
into his heart, to act it, without further provocation, as that of Iezabels in
murdering innocent Naboth.

Verse 29. Lo, this only have I found, that God has made man upright: but
they have sought out many inventions.
A General conclusion of the difficulty of wisdom, concerning foolishness
and madness, and of the infiniteness thereof, illustrated by the contrary,
namely the state and condition of man in his creation. God made man upright in
his understanding, reason, will, affections, but they have sought out many
inventions, that is to say, the whole nature of man being corrupted, evil
cogitations, studies, and devices proceed from him, partly through ignorance of
God and his truth, partly of hardness of heart, yea, his unity with God being
dissolved, he is become a beast, his spirit being cast down into utter
darkness, even the sediment of concupiscence, or the cursed flesh. For all
that is in this world, is the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life. There is nothing but lust. Therefore there is no truth but lies,
and deceits in man, and they are partly brutish or fleshly, and partly
deuillish. For he is the Lord of the flesh.

CHAPTER VIII.
Verse 1. Who is as the wise man? and who knows the interpretation of a
thing? a man's wisdom makes his face to shine, and the boldness of his face
shall be changed.
SOtomon in the former Chapter, having treated of wisdom, the practice of
wisdom, and difficulty thereof, the scope whereof was that we should rest
contented with these things that God for the present offers us, and also
abstain from all wearisome and curious searching into the works of God, and
evil works of men, wherein God has a ruling, and ordering hand; he I say
taking occasion by this last instruction or remedy of wisdom, proceeds on
forward to demonstrate the vanity of worldly things, by the instable and
uncertain administration thereof, which is twofold; the one of man in this
Chapter, to the end of verse 13. the o^h^r of God, from the verse 14. to the
end of Chapter 9. To which the former is subordinate, and both of them so
variable and confused to man's reason, as that no certainty thereof can be
defined by any man, but things are swayed no man V. Example of vanities
observed in outward things, but the remedies of those vanities are still (...)
at.
can tell how, nor whether they ^end. And this is the fist example of vanities
observed in outward things: For here he speaks of things according to their
outward appearance to humane reason.

Of this Chapter there be two parts. The first contains the duty of men in
ciu^^state, to the end of verse 8. wherein the awful state it self the weth
vanity, being caused through the corruption of man's crooked disposition; and
much more does the transgression of his duty herein, bring forth vanity and
misery. The second part touches the tyrannical abuse of government, from the
verse 8. to the end of the 13. verse. But this he does by way of instruction,
as in the former Chapter, showing here also what the practice of wisdom is in
civil state, to arm a man still farther with this remedy against the miseries
and evils that in this regard also may befall him, that so he may obtain some
measurable joy, contentation, and comfort in this life.

This first verse is an Eulogie, praise or commendation of wisdom, and that
by the excellence of wisdom, and the effects thereof, The excellence is set
forth by a comparison of equals denied, figured by a communication, and that
again by an exclamation, or Epiphonema, more significantly or emphatically to
express the worthiness of wisdom Who is as the wise? What man of any
estate, degree or quality may be compared to a man of wisdom? None, Who
knows the interpretation of a thing? An explication of his excellence,
illustrated, and figured in like manner: Who has understanding, judgment and
discerning of things, persons, places, times and seasons, as has been already
said, and is now to be further declared, who has these, I say, but the wise?
Who knows what to speak, and when to speak? Who knows when, and how to
begin a business, to proceed, to surcease, to handle a business, to tarry
for occasion, to take opportunity, but the wise?

Moreover wisdom is set forth by the effects. A man's wisdom makes his face
to shine, and the strength of his countenance shall be changed. These words
have relation to the former Chapter, verse 2. 3. 4 5. 6. That is to say,
whereas I said before that a man was armed against the vanities of this life,
by mourning, anger, sorrow, sadness of heart, countenance, behavior, etc. and
that was a point of wisdom; so now contrarily in another case or respect, the
same wisdom makes the countenance of the wise lightsome, amiable, serene,
that no token of indignation, grief, anger, displeasure, may appear therein,
but the frowning severity, and sadness thereof is changed into the contrary.
The understanding of this point of wisdom appears by that which follows
after.

Verse 2. I counsel thee to keep the kings commandment, and that in regard
of the oath of God.
THe principal proposition of a man's duty toward the higher powers, wherein
the practice of wisdom consists. The words are an admonition or counsel. I
counsel thee to observe the kings mouth, or word, or to keep his
commandments, according to the intent thereof, as it comes from his mouth,
and is maintained by his power, and that not so much for fear of his power,
and punishment, as for the oath sake, in faithfulness and conscience, whereby
thou art bound to God, and to him under God. In old times some of the kings of
Judah caused the people to swear that they would serve the Lord, and cleave to
him, and renounce idolatry. This loyal obedience is subordinate to our
obedience to God, and is our obedience to God, forasmuch as rulers and
governors are ordained of God, to which therefore we must submit our selves
under him, and to him in them, and to their laws being agreeable to his laws,
and grounded on his laws. For the laws of God are general for all nations,
and generations of the world, and respect the conformity of man's nature
thereunto, and therefore continue the same for ever; but the laws of Princes
are alterable, and changeable, at their discretion, according to the condition
of times and people, but yet by the direction of the laws of God. This is
godly wisdom, godly policy. For the maine intendment, spirit, and life of
man's law, is the preservation and keeping of Gods law, that those that have not
an inward conscience and fear, yea, love wrought within them by the preaching
of the word, or light of natural principles before the word comes, that
those may have an outward conscience, to which they shall be enforced by the
power of the magistrate, to make brutish men civil, and civil men religious,
if God give grace, and religious men to continue religious.

And therefore as Saint Paul terms the Gospel of Christ, his Gospel, which
according to his wisdom and discretion, he propounded, used, and applied to
the best, for the planting and further building up of the Church; so is Gods
Law the Kings Law, and his word the Kings word, as he takes it into his
custody to impose it, and to enforce the obedience thereof under God upon all
men, and to punish under God the breakers thereof. Est enim medicus reipub.
Therefore must we chearefully, readily, willingly, faithfully obey the same,
as if we had received it immediately from the mouth of God.

Verse 3. Be not hasty to go out of his sight, stand not in an evil thing,
for he does whatsoever pleases him.
AN explication or illustration of the former general instruction, by the
contrary practice of folly, here forbidden. Be not hasty to go out of his
sight. If any thing displease thee, because thou think it not to be
agreeable to justice, and right, or some way inconvenient, or some damage
thereof to ensue to thy self, etc. take heed of pride, and choler, let it not
appear in thy words, countenance, or gesture, which are appearances of a
rebellious disposition, yea, seeds of future rebellion; when occasions, and
further prouocations shall come thereunto, show no token of displeasure at all,
but in wisdom humble and submit thy self, and speak as by good and lawful
leave thou art permitted, that it may plainly appear, that thy heart is for
the Kings honor, and safety. Therefore do not unadvisedly, or in discontent
depart out of his presence, nor in such sense or appearance refrain from his
presence, lest the disposition of thy heart be suspected to be rather from him,
then toward him. For that is the seed, or beginning of a disease, which
doubtless shall be purged, or with disgrace curbed, or at lest he shall
always have a jealous eye over thee, and how doubtful things may be
interpreted in that case, consider. For great evils may come upon thee
causeless* but yet unknown; for he that is in an ill name, is half hanged.
Howsoever, thou have given advantage to thine enemies, and laid a way open for
them to come between him and thee.

To conclude, boast not thy self before the King, neither arrogate any thing
to thy self, be not too wise before him, as though thou were an instructor or
teacher, or had a reach beyond him; but let thy wisdom and counsel be so
covertly ingested, as that rather it may appear to him to be his own, thy
words being as it were an occasion to bring it to his mind, so shall he
conceive and utter, and do that which thou would have him, without any
impeachment of his honor at all, seeing that that which was thine, is made his
own, and so is his own counsel and will, not thine. Put not thy self forth
before the King; Prou. 25. 6. Lest thou carry the show of a corriuall, or part
stake, but be modest, and humble. And herein Ioab did wisely, when he sent to
David to come and take Rabbah himself, lest the victory should be imputed to
him, but Saul undeservedly enuyed David, for the songs that the women sang of
his victory of Goliath. Stand not in an evil thing. Stand not in a thing
proudly, though thou be in the right, as it seems to thee, neither stand
in an evil without pride. For pride marreth a good substance, and evil
marreth a good circumstance. If thou stand in an evil thing of error, it
shall bring present disgrace, and if it be of pride, it shall bring present
destruction. In this case therefore ask counsel of wisdom, and she shall
give thee true direction to come out of both, to avoid both. It is discredit
enough to err before a great man, to stand in an error is disgrace, for it
betokens folly, but to stand in it in pride, is stubbornness and madness.
For he does whatsoever pleases him. A reason to enforce the former
admonitions. It is in vain, and a point of greatest folly to contend with him
that has power in his own hands, yea, who only has power, which cannot be
opposed without just punishment. For contention controuleth and rebukes, and
then is power no power, and the heart that prepares it self to resistance,
intrudeth it self into his room, who has sole command under God: an evil
matter indeed may be resisted, but neither the person, nor place. Well,
concerning the cause, there is great wisdom to be used, be not thou for thy
part too just, nor too wise, as was said before, lest thy cause be construed to
be but a pretense, and the beginning of a disease in the Commonwealth. For the
King is the Commonwealths Physician. By King, we may understand every man in
authority, by going out of his sight, to depart from duty and obedience. It is
an Hebrew phrase. Jonah 1. and 3.

Verse 4. Where the word of a King is, there is power: And who may say unto
him, what do thou.
A Prossyllogisme or confirmation of the former reason, Where the word, etc.
The commandment of a King is with power to have it done. He may do very much,
be it right or wrong, by the weight of his power, and who may say unto him,
what do thou? What subject can oppose himself to power, to control, or
expostulate there with? Seeing that he sustaineth the person of the whole
Commonwealth under God, how can one or a few branches contend against the
whole tree, or against the root, or body thereof? The strength and power of all
is put into his hands. What then is a private man, or a private cause, be what
it will? A common and dangerous grief indeed is equivalent, and easily
persuades a Prince, but it is enough for a private man to have displeased, for
who shall stand in for him?

Verse 5. Who so keeps the Commandment, shall seele none evil thing: and a
wise man's heart discerns both time and judgment.
A Reason enforcing the practice of the instruction, verse 2. He that keeps
the commandment, etc. He that shows himself modest, and obsequious to
these, whom in duty he ought to obey, shall be free from many dangers,
troubles, and encumbrances, and prevent such calamities, as may not only for
the present, but afterward upon displeasure arise. Howsoever a great man will
contend for his honor: And he that resists, shall make himself a prey to
every man. But he that is dutiful and loving, shall avoid all. And a wise man's
heart discerns both time and judgment. The wise in heart knows what is
lawful, what unlawful, and how far. He discerns when to obey, when to
dissemble, how to obey, how far, and when to be ignorant, when to withdraw
himself, in what sort, in what measure. The wise has discerning of the
providence of God, to which he gives place, and therefore in all things he
tries what is the good pleasure of God. These words I take to imply an answer
to an objection, thus. A man sometimes for being too ready, obsequious, and
hasty in obeying the commandment of a Prince, may procure to himself and
others great evils, as Doeg did. For Princes have their errors, and are
tempted to evil as well as other men; and often times a small error at the
first occasioneth great evils, and who is he that says or does not sometimes
that, whereof he repents him not? Therefore may too quick obedience
displease afterward, as well as present slacknesse. Again, a Prince is not
himself, but all his subjects inclusiuely, even the whole body or state of the
Kingdom: So that in a King there is not only an union of body and spirit, as
in all men, but also of his person, and the politic body or state. Now if in
commanding he swerue from this union, here is the difficulty of wisdom.

Answer. All this is true. But the wise man in obeying observes time and
judgment, and so in slacknesse also. Opportunity calls him forth, judgment
bids him speak, and hold his peace. Doeg was destitute of understanding,
both in his words and deeds; 1 Samuel 22. 9* 10. But the Kings Sergeants showed
wisdom, verse 17. Ioab answered wisely, 1 Chro. 21. 3. but too harshly; 2 Samuel 19. 5. 6.

Verse 6. Because to every purpose there is a time, and judgment: therefore
the misery of man is great upon him.
AN explication of the answereshewing a reason, why that a wise man observing
time and judgment, shall feel none evil, at least so far forth as by man's
wisdom can be avoided. Because to every purpose, etc. All things are in the
hands of God, and the hearts of Kings also, and his purpose in the least thing
is unchangeable. So that for every thing there is a time prefined of God,
together with a most wise, and right means and manner, whereupon every event
necessarily depends. Now he that observes this work of God, shall avoid
all evils. A thing in his kind good, may by evil usage be made naught; and a
good deed must be ordered by time and judgment. If time be prevented, it
shall be frustrate, yet afterward, though otherwise effected. For God does all
in time and season, and will have them clothed with his own circumstances
also; but the vain imaginations of man are innumerable, and he is given to
take too much upon him, as though all things were in his hand. But God will
make him know that he is but vain man. Therefore is the misery of man great
upon him. A consequence or collection of the manifold and great miseries of
man, applied to the disobedient, and ouer-wise: Because there is a due time,
and right means, and manner in the providence of God, for every thing to his
own glory, which is the ground and guide of good wisdom; therefore is there
so much vanity in all counsels, words, and works, and the endless troubles
and miseries of presumptuous man are occasioned from hence.

Verse 7. For he knows not that which shall be: for who can tell him, when it
shall be?
A Reason why that the vanity and misery of man should be increased by the
most wise and good providence of God. For he knows not what shall be. The
good wisdom of God is not the cause of vanities in politic state, but an
occasion, and man's ignorance and malice is the cause. For being deprived of
wisdom and justice through his own malice, his imaginations are all foolish
and vain, and his folly is upon him. The deliberation of the wise stands in
comparing things past and to come, but the one is far off, and the other is
deep, as was said in the former chapter. But foolish men, impatient, and
ouer-wise, are altogether ignorant of that which shall be, neither do they
regard whether it shall be, or no, in the providence of God, but they have a
providence of their own, a false, coined, or apish world, to which by their
subtilty and violence they think to cause all things to incline, and to make
Gods providence and wisdom to stoop down to theirs, persuading themselves
that that shall be which they have purposed, and closely plotted, and devised
the means, and manner how it shall be effected. Here is vanity and misery
enough. If a man stand in opposition for a good thing, he cannot tell whether
that good thing shall be or no. For there are many things good in our
understanding, which are not so in the wise providence of God. But as it is
good, so must it be well, and it cannot be well, but in Gods appointed time,
with all circumstances fitting. Who can tell when it shall be? Although this
good to be effected, or evil to be reformed, is to be taken in hand because it
shall be done in the common judgment and desire of men, yet who can tell a man
when it shall be done, and how it shall be done? If a King himself would do a
thing, he must depend on Gods providence, and tarry till the appointed season.
For God is the chief Pilate of the ship, and the Watchman of the city. And if
a thing shall be done by him, yet the time and manner is uncertain. He must
not strive against God, neither must thou being a particular branch, of
particular capacity, strive against the root that bears thee and all the
branches, whose general good, first, and consequently particulars in their
kinds, it respects, as thou do thine own. Well, seeing that a man either
knows not what shall be, or else knows not how and when it shall be, his
contention intangleth himself in great errors, troubles, and dangers, and his
disobedience, and contention shall be punished, he shall not escape: He must
depend upon the providence of God, and opportunity offered of God, and not
stand in an evil thing, nor euilly in a good thing before the higher power.

Verse 8. There is no man that has power over the spirit to receive the
spirit, neither has he power in the day of death: and there is no discharge in
that war, neither shall wickedness deliver those that are given to it.
AN exposition of the miseries that the foolish and rebellious run into.
There is no man has power over the spirit to preserve the spirit, etc.
Although that the man of strength and subtlety verily thinks through his
power, wealth, and subtle plots to effect his wicked designs, and to escape
punishment, yet is this but foolishness and imprudence, caused of hautinesse
of stomach. For his life is not in his own hands, neither has he power to
live, or free himself from death by any means or device, when the king
requires it as a just reward of his wickedness.

There is no discharge in that war. There is no casting of weapons then to
ouer-power the kings power, which is to alter and change the state of a
kingdom, a great work of Gods providence. For when the king in justice
exacteth his life, the whole burden of the kingdom presses him to death. But
if there be injustice, or rigorous extremity in the matter, who shall stand up
in defense for him against the king? Who shall take up arms with him?

Neither shall wickedness deliver those that are given to it. It is the
custom of the wicked to seek to avoid imminent dangers by evil means, as
Caiaphas and Pilate did, but he that fears the frost, the snow shall fall
upon him: Many think to avoid poverty with theft, usury, covetousness, but
all in vain. Neither shall violent nor crafty courses prevail or help a
man. It is impossible to break off the whole politic body in him. If the
king will be avenged of him that has offended, who shall stand on his part to
deliver him? For who shall expostulate or examine the cause? Who shall bring
the King into judgment? If the case be all men's, and every man's, there is
indeed an equiualence in the matter, for the whole body matcheth the head, and
the head is not for it self but for the body. Surely it is an hard case, that
the head should make all the body sick. For the disunion of the head and the
body is lamentable. When the body of Israel took a new head to it, namely a
king, God was displeased. God appointed them Judges, but they had rather
imitate the nations, then stand to Gods ordinance. Again, afterward, when it
took another head to it, Jeroboam the son of Nebat, what was it the better?
That was not the salve for their sore. It is one thing to change a state, or an
head, and another thing to purge out a corruption, or in time to wear it out.
Wickedness can never deliver those that are given to it. Surely if one man,
then all men in one body must abide the trial, and the rod of correction. For
if they will needs avoid the scourge of God one way, they shall bring a scourge
upon themselves more grievous to be borne another way. Not the Senate of Rome,
but the whole world executed Nero: For he was an enemy of mankind, and
defacer of the image of God, a resolute dissolute tyrant. He was no governor,
but a destroyer, and put himself out of office, and left the body of his
dominions destitute, and for his part exposed it to dissolution. So did not
Saul, nor Rehoboam, nor Manasses, nor Amon, etc. Wickedness is not to be
reformed by wickedness in the ordinance of God, but evil is to be overcome
with goodness says the Apostle. This of the duties or practice of wisdom in
civil state, whereby to avoid, at least to mitigate the vanities, troubles,
and vexations of this miserable life. Whereupon we may gather by necessary
consequence what vanities or miseries a man is subject to in a politic state.
And for a man to live out of such an estate is misery it self: For men should
be, as in old times dispersed people have been, more vile then beasts, and
better is the worst commonwealth then none, and the worst peace then the best
war. All which things argue the necessity of vanity: And the practice of
wisdom, is to mitigate the same, by reducing mankind to the best of
miserable estates, according to the providence and ordinance of God, and to
abide an inconvenience to avoid a mischief. So it is in the body, and so it is
in the Commonwealth.

Verse 9. All this have I seen, and applied my heart to every work that is
done under the Sun: There is a time wherein one man rules over another, to
his own hurt.
THe second part of the Chapter of tyrannical abuse of government, or that
which is done vainly, against law and right. All this have I seen. A
confirmation of the proposition following by the testimony of his own
experience. All this that I have spoken, and am to speak of, of people and
magistrates in civil government, I have seen, even with mine eyes, and
applied my heart to every work that is done in the world. This is a
confirmation of his observation, by the means and diligence that he used to
obtain the true and exact knowledge of things. For as a man's heart and
diligence is, such are his observations. The wise takes the right course, and
finds out the truth. But the fool brings forth superstition, false rules,
and like conclusions.

There is a time wherein one rules over another, to his own hurt. The
proposition of this vanity. Rule and sovereignty is desired of all. For
herein the pomp and glory of man shows forth it self most. And great states
are commonly counted happy. For in regard of superiority, splendour, and
administration of humane things they are termed gods. But sometimes this
title, state, and power is turned into greatest vanity. It becomes vain,
first in respect of those that are governed, when a Prince seeks rather the
hurt then the good of the people, as when he falls to covetousness, and
oppression, when he exalts, deiecteth, graceth, disgraceth, according to his
own lust, not regarding the worthiness, or unworthiness of the persons,
whereby virtue is put to rebuke and silence, and all manner of vice
flourishes, as weeds in an unclean or untilled soil. Secondly, in respect of
the governors, whose wickedness shall be punished with everlasting ignominy.
For as they are most eminent in place and degree, so shall the commendation of
their virtues, or the shame of their folly be eminent also and memorable for
after times. That a man should reign over others to his own hurt, is but
vanity, and of other vanities the chief.

Verse 10. And so I saw the wicked buried, who had come and gone from the place
of the Holy, and they were forgotten in the city, where they had so done: This
is also vanity.
AN exposition of the evils, or vanities, that follow tirannie, to wit, burial
and oblivion. And I saw the wicked buried. Their wickedness profited them
nothing, they were as gods, but they died like men, yea, they arrogating the
glory of God to themselves, lived like beasts, and were pitted like beasts,
tumbled into the grave, or deprived of the honor of the grave, as was Cononiah
and Iezabel, and Ahabs blood was lickt up of dogs. There be many examples
hereof of Emperors and Popes. Who had come, and gone from the place of the
Holy. An illustration of their misery by a comparison or unlikeness of their
place and dignity, and their end. They went and came with pomp and terror, to
the place of judgment, they sat in majesty upon the seat of judgment, which
is the place of the most holy, they sat on the throne of God, and forgetting
themselves to be but men, usurped the glory of God, as Nabuchadnezzar,
Senacherib, Antiochus, Herod, Antichrist did. Therefore so much the more
remarkable was their latter burial or latter end, the vanity o^ pompous
tyranny more evident, the pride of the wicked wise more despicable, and their
end made a document to the living of man's madness and misery. Howsoever they
are covered with darkness, and return to their dust. Their show, and stir,
and tumult in the world, is but the crackling of thorns under a pot, which
makes a noise for a while, and suddenly falls into ashes, which are cast
upon the dunghill. This is their end. And they were forgotten in the City,
where they had so done. A second evil or vanity of tyrants. Whereas in their
life time they would be as gods, they died like men, and were soon forgotten
as beasts. As soon as they were put into the grave, so soon were they put out
of mind and memory. They were not worthy to be thought on, nor spoken of, but
their names rather to be clipped and curtalled, as Ieconiahs, Ier. 22. 24. or
cast into the ground to rot and consume with their corpses, and to be made
documents to the living to their everlasting shame and contempt. As Princes are
the most eminent and excellent in their kind, I mean of mankind, so in their
degenerating are they most vile, and as salt having lost the savor, most vain
and miserable. For the earthly felicity and glory of a Prince, is his honor,
which being turned into shame is the greatest misery. Virtuous Princes shine
as stars in the world, their names are always fresh in memory, their names
are honored and reverenced in the hearts of men, as though they were yet
living, and their works here done in the flesh, increase still to the glory of
God in the world. Their influence has a perpetual lively operation. For their
worthy acts, their counsels, wise sentences, are rules of instructions and
direction to all ages, and peoples. But it is quite contrary with wicked
Princes. Therefore in life, in death, after death are they most vain and
miserable.

Verse 11. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil.
A Conclusion of these vanities, containing a most heavy sentence or judgment,
wherein: First, he declares the cause of wicked men's boldness in sin, in
this verse. Secondly, he propounds the judgment it self in the two next
verses. This verse is an exposition of the reason or cause, why that men, both
Prince and people are so bold and fearelesse in wickedness. Their heart is
fully set in them to do evil. They are fully bent on mischief, and will
presumptuously do it, why? Because God does not presently power down the
fierceness of his wrath upon them. If God should presently send his hangman,
the Devil, to pluck the thief by the throat, and fly away to hell with him,
he would be afraid to steal. If he should send his executioner to pluck out
the tongue of the swearer, blasphemer and scorner of his word, and so carry
him to hell in the sight of all men, tearing out his bowels, and sprinkling his
blood in the air, he would be afraid to open his mouth, le^t he should offend.
Some sinners of all sorts God has, and does strike suddenly, as Senacherib,
Antiochus, the Sodomites, etc. to be insamples to the living. But so long as a
sinner has escaped once, twice, etc. and that he sees others to live long,
and die in sin without punishment, or extraordinary vengeance, he is
emboldened, and hops the best, thinking that God has forgotten, or sees
not, or that his sins are not so great, or that God will not punish him. And
thus abusing the patience and long-suffering of God, he continues and
hardens himself in sin without remorse. And so will by no means be
brought to confess, and acknowledge his errors. But if he do it, yet will he
not amend his ways, but hoping of pardon, rather add drunkenness to thirst.

Verse 12.
Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged; yet
surely I know that it shall be well with them that fear God, which fear
before him.

Verse 13. But it shall not be well with the wicked, neither shall he prolong
his days, which are as a shadow; because he fears not before God.
AN exposition of the judgment it self in these two verses, which stands of
a denunciation of punishment on the sinner, and a pronunciation of deliverance
and blessing on the good. Concerning the former. First, it is illustrated by an
argument of the diverse, which is figured by a prolepsis, whereof the objection
is the imagination of the presumptuous sinner, as before. The answer is
expressed here. Though a sinner does evil continually, figured by a synecdoche
of the special, to wit, a finite number put for an infinite, an hundred times,
amplified by a comparison of the less, to argue the greater, and his days be
prolonged in evil, meaning many years, figured by a Climax or gradation thus.
Though a sinner does evil, and not only so, but continually, and not only
continually, but long time does evil, that lives extraordinarily long to do
evil, yet shall he be punished, figured by an hyperbole, to wit, a meiosis, or
liptote, yet shall it not be well with the sinner, illustrated by a
commoration, the wicked* neither shall he prolong his days, illustrated by a
similitude of a shadow; as Job 8. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15.

Secondly, this denunciation is explicated by the cause thereof, Because he
fears not before God. The contrary is understood by anantapodosis, but in
hypocrisy before men, or for fear of the Sword.

Concerning the later part, to wit, the pronunciation of deliverance and
blessing of the good. But it shall be well with the good. First, confirmed by
the testimony of his own knowledge. I know, which is further confirmed by the
certainty and infallibility thereof, Surely. Which is spoken in opposition to
the vain imaginations of dreaming sinners or slumberers, in the verse
afore-going, who imagine that they are good in doing evil, and in doing evil,
hope well. Secondly, by the cause, That fear God. Which is illustrated by a
distinction or difference of fear, that fear before him. To wit, not in show,
but in truth and deed, behauing themselves always godlily and reverently, as
in his presence. The wicked have a servile fear, which causes them to run
out of his presence, as Adam did, and they labor to expel that fear also, to
live securely in sin; but by the preaching of the Law, it is maintained, to
bridle and compel them by outward force of the civil sword. Thus far of
vanity increased by the instability and variableness of humane things, in
regard of civil government.

Verse 14. There is a vanity which is done upon the earth, that there be just
men, unto whom it happens according to the work of the wicked; again, there
be wicked men, to whom it happens according to the work of the righteous: I
said, that this also is vanity.
HEre Solomon begins to declare how vanity is increased, by the uncertainty
and variableness of the divine administration of all things, as they appear
to carnal reason, or worldly wisdom, which cannot comprehend the secrets of
Gods infinite wisdom, in the government and disposition of all things. For
those things are in measure revealed only to Gods secret ones. They that fear
him, and keep his Commandments, as David says, are wiser then the experienst
aged, and worldly teachers. But Solomon speaks here of the vanities of all
worldly things in state of corruption, both within man, and without man, not of
the gifts and graces of Gods children, to whom all things are sanctified, and
greatest miseries turned into comfort, and means to felicity, which to the
natural man are sorrow, and beginnings of endless sorrow. For though every
carnal man strive to work a contentation, and felicity out of them, yet shall
he never do it, but trouble and sorrow shall be his portion, when he has
striuen with might and maine all his life, when he has salued, and smeeted,
and skinned over, and with what gentle deceitful lenitiues he can, healed
himself; yet shall all be rotten within, and vanity shall break out as filth
out of an old festered sore skinned over, or a rotten egg broken under the
Hen, at the time of her hatching.

There is a vanity which is done upon earth. As if he should say; when I
considered the condition of men in the world, both the good, and the bad, him
that does his duty in that state of life wherein God had placed him, and him
that does it not, him that fears before God, and him that casts the fear
of God; then I saw another thing contrary to man's reason, namely, that there
were just men, who deserved praise and preferment, but they had the reward of
the wicked, and there were wicked men who deserved to be disgraced and
punished, but they were countenanced in their wickedness, and by wickedness
obtained preferment. Neither had the just man a benefactor, nor the wicked man
an auenger, the godly man oppressed had no deliverer, nor the sinner oppressing
any that would curb, and punish him. But contrarily, the ungodly man
flourished as a green bay tree in favor, prosperity, and honor; wealth and
honor was heaped upon him: on the other side, the godly was wounded with the
tongue, despised, and suppressed, and subject to many afflictions and miseries;
his goodness was not regarded, his wisdom set at naught, and both enuyed.
But vice was set aloft, and the vicious exalted. In which case there seemed to
be no providence of God in the World, but confusion and chance rather, or a
careless ouer-sight, things being carried topsie turuy, without all regard.
And this was also vanity among many others before specified.

Verse 15: Then I commended mirth, because a man has no better thing under the
Sun, then to eat, and to drink, and to be merry: for that shall abide with
him of his labor, the days of his life, which God gives him under the Sun.
A Conclusion and consequence of the right consideration and use of worldly
things. And I commended mirth, etc. Seeing that there is such confusion and
disorder in all things, which no man can comprehend, nor redress; I thought it
best for a man to cast off all unprofitable and endless curiosity, which is
irksome and grievous to the flesh; and to cheer his body, and rejoice his
heart with those worldly goods, which God has by honest labor and travel in
a lawful calling bestowed on him, seeing that that is the fruit that only
shall abide with him, and for that end has God given them, which use only is
to be made of them, and none other, all the days that a man lives here under
the Sun.

Verse 16. When I applied mine heart to know wisdom, and to see the business
that is done upon the earth: (for also there is that neither day nor night
sees sleep with his eyes.) Verse 17. Then I beheld all the work of God, that
a man cannot find out the work that is done under the Sun, because though a
man labor to seek it out; yea, further, though a wise man think to know it,
yet shall he not be able to find it.
A Confirmation of the former consequence, concerning the right consideration
and use of worldly things, namely, that it is better to rejoice in that which
God gives for the present, then curiously to search out the works of God for
further contentment. The reason is drawn from the unprofitableness of such
kind of labor, because it is endless, and fruitless, which he proves.
First, by his own endeavor, and other men's also, in this verse. Secondly, by
the issue or event thereof, which is a knowledge of the impossibility of that
which seemed possible, verse 17.

Concerning the first. In the time when I applied mine heart to know wisdom:
When I set mine heart with full resolution to know by diligent search, as God
had given me extraordinary gifts and means to seek out this unknown
wisdom of God in the administration of things here below, and to see the
business that is done upon the earth, to see the reason, and to find out the
good of men's great labors, and endless toil in all places and ages, which
are full of strife and contention about obtaining some great matter, which in a
confused imagination and hope they aim at. For also there is that neither day
nor night sees sleep with his eyes. For there is that strives by all
endeavor of body and mind, night and day; one laboring by practice to
obtain, another by the studies of learning, and learned observations to search
out that imagined good, and the right means to obtain it, which are the
secret ways and paths of God, whereof they imagine to themselves a certain
possibility: Then I beh^ld all the work of God, that a man cannot find out
the work that is done under the Sun. I saw that the way of divine
administration, by which all things, and every thing is governed and ordered,
exceeded all apprehension, and capacity of man. This was the issue and event
of my labor, and exercise of my wisdom in this business, even
impossibility to find it out. For, or because though a man labor to seek it
out, yet shall he not find it. A reason of the impossibility. Let a man
labor, even the best Emperike in this kind, by manifold experience, and by
greatest contention, and extention of strength and wit continually to seek it
out, yet shall his labor be all lost. This reason is figured by a Reuocation,
or Correction in the next words, Yea, further though a wise man think to know
it, yet shall be not be able to find it. Every man is an emperike in this
kind, but what shall I speak of the vndergatherers, or aftergatherers, and
short witted ones? For let the learned man that has gifts and means, and
seperateth himself to this diligent search, who is able to comprehend in mind
the whole frame of the world, both the conditure and use of this great engine,
that comprehends at once the state and course of times from the creation till
this present, that can descend from the most universal nature to the most
particular, and contrarily, this is the best reader and interpreter of the
book of nature, this is he that thinks and hops to find out the works
of God; let this man I say, do what he can, yet shall he not be able to find
it, but be tossed about in a Labyrinth, or as a wayfaring man in an unknown
desert. If a man cannot define any thing because the forms of things are
unknown, if he know not the creatures themselves, ab imo ad summum, neither
shall he know the wisdom of God in the use of them. The world is Gods engine
by which he works, he that cannot know the engine, cannot know the work that
may be done with it. The wisdom of God in the making and using of this
engine, is infinite, constant, certain, and unchangeable, not to be
comprehended of that which is finite, imperfect, and changeable. Therefore
there is nothing better then to rejoice in that which God gives, with
contentment, in the fear of God. This has he given us, the rest has he
reserved to himself. It is enough for the servant to do his masters will, to
understand what he reuealeth to him, and commands, not to inquire into his
secrets, and demand reasons. For then shall he be no longer a servant, but
his masters fellow, and equal. But God will have no equals nor fellows,
neither can he.

CHAPTER IX.
Verse 1. For all this I considered in my heart, even to declare all this, that
the righteous, and the wise, and their works are in the hand of God: no man
knows either love, or hatred, by all that is about him.
THis Chapter is an explication of the vanity aforesaid, verse 14. chap. 8.
increased by the instabilitie, and variableness of divine administration, or
aeconomie, as it seems to carnal reason, or outward appearance. And also of
the consequence of the right consideration and use of worldly things, verse 15.
The maine substance and scope is, that the divine government both in civil
and natural policy, both of man and all things with man, is secret and
unknown to man, that there seems to be nothing in the world but at axie and
anomie, disorder and confusion, which plainly euinceth that no man can by any
endeavor or wisdom, work or find out any good to himself by or in them.
Which thing some men vainly labor to do. Others again, upon this
consideration take occasion to be dissolute, and Epicurish beasts. But the
maine intent of the holy Ghost, is to teach men to quiet their hearts in
contentment with their lot, and to seek for the chief good elsewhere, even in
fear and obedience, chap. 12. 13. Of which good every state and condition of
life is partaker (else could it not be the chief good) because all worldly
things are but subseruant to this good, God having turned the curse into a
blessing to them that believe, and is therefore subseruant to this good also.
So that the poorest may enjoy it as well as the richest, and the greatest
Monarch in the world. This explication is made by an induction of particular
examples in this chapter, The first is of the event of all persons, to the
verse 7. The second is of the event of the deeds and endeauours of men, verse
7. 8. 9. 10. The third is of the event of counsel and wisdom, verse 13. to
the end.

For all this I considered in my heart, even to declare all this. This is the
first example of induction. For] is here a note of a conclusion. q. d. Whereas
I said before that to some just men it happened according to the deeds of the
wicked, and contrarily, which is confusion, disorder, and vanity: And that
therefore it is the best thing for a man to eat, drink, and to be merry,
which thing only is certain to him, because no man can find out the work
that is done under the Sun, as I my self and many others also have found by
much study and experience; therefore even for this cause have I let that
curious and vain search alone, and considered another thing in mine heart, to
which even by common observation daily before mine eyes I was enforced, namely
to understand all this perfectly, and manifestly to declare all this, as
follows, that the righteous, and the wise, and their works, and whatsoever
befalls them, as also contrarily, the wicked, the foolish, and their wicked
follies, etc. Which words are understood by anantapodosis, or ellipsis, are in
the hand of God, set apart from the power, disposition and will of man, and
governed by a secret way, unknown to man, and by man's wisdom unsearchable.
No man knows love or hatred of all that is before them. Henee it is that no
man is able to determine of Gods love or hatred by any thing subject to man,
whether good, or evil things, perfections or defects, whether natural gifts
of mind and body, or outward possessions, or any thing that occurreth to the
senses and mind of the natural man. Therefore it must needs be a vain
labor, and fruitless, study to seek for any profit, contentation or
happiness, in any thing by the endeavor of man's wisdom here under the
Sun. Yet is every man of the earth thus vain, neither can he be otherwise.

Verse 2. All things come alike to all: there is one event to the righteous,
and to the wicked, to the good, and to the clean, and to the unclean, to him
that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not: as is the good, so is the
sinner; and he that swears, as he that fears an oath.
A Confirmation. For all things come alike to all, that is to say* wit, and
simplicity; beauty* and deformity; health, and sickness; soundness, and
diseases; wealth, and poverty; strength, and weakness; abundance, and want;
long life, and untimely death; joy, and sorrow; honor, and ignominy: finally,
all kinds of prosperities and adversities, happinesses and miseries in this
World happen to all, as well to the just as to the wicked, and contrarily. All
men are subject to the same things, both the good and the clean, and the
filthy that is polluted with all kinds of vices, he that sacrifices (a
Synecdoche of the special) he that worshippeth God, and diligently exercises
himself in all Christian duties, and he that is a contemner of Religion, a
scorner of devotion, a mocker of the godly, and their lives; there is the same
condition of life, and fruition of earthly things, both to the good man, and to
the sinner, to him that swears without reverence of God, and makes no
conscience of perjury, as to him that dreadeth to use lightly the name of God
in his mouth, much more for to swear falsely, but makes conscience both of his
deeds and words.

Verse 3. This is an evil among all things that are done under the Sun, that
there is one event unto all: yea also the heart of the sons of men is full of
evil, and madness is in their heart while they live, and after that they go
to the dead.
AN amplification of the former vanity by a comparison of all other evils or
vanities, figured by an Exclamation or Indignation. This is of all vanities the
chiefest, and most grievous to man's reason, yet not to be thought on with
patience, that it should be done to the wicked as to the good* that of men so
much differing, as light from darkness, heaven from hell, there should be
made no difference in the dispensation of worldly things, as though there were
neither wisdom nor justice in the world but plain chance and blind fortune
serving all alike. Yea also the heart of the sons of men is full of evil,
etc. A continuation of the comparison figured by a Climax or gradation. As it
is a most vain and grievous thing, that the same event should be to all men,
so does this aggrauate their misery, that the hearts of men all the time of
their life, are full of grief, sorrow, wrath, envy, angu sh, ^eare, despair,
even a lump of miseries, vexing and tormenting the whole body, and breaking
forth into incurable madnesses and follies, to the disquieting and vexing one
of another; and then after all, to be buried and ro^te in the earth, and to
consume i^t^ slime and dust, as though they never were, or had any being in the
world. This is a thing most vain and grievous to be thought, that of a vain
life there should be a more vain end, yea* that life and death should be
nothing but a crackling nothing, suddenly vanishing.

Verse. 4. For to him that is joined to all the living, there is hope: for a
living Dog is better then a dead Lion.
A Reason, why that death augmenteth this grievous vanity. For to him that is
joined to all the living* etc. The Hebrew is, Ki mi a sher jebuchar, quia vter
sit, qui eligatur, First, because whether of them he be that is chosen, that is
to say, whether the just or the unjust, he that makes conscience of his ways,
or he that lives in his lusts be approved of thee, whose ways and manner of
life thou best likest, and most followest; when he is dead there is an end of
all, and use of all both good and evil. But to him that is yet remaining
amongst the living, there is ever still some pleasing hope, and delightful
expectation of better things to the contentation of a man's mind. As he has a
present fruition of good things, so has he still an hope of more, and if of
evil things, as crosses and troubles, dabit Deus his quoque finem, they shall
have an end, and the remembrance of evils past, shall affect the mind in time
to come, I know not with what delight. The remembrance and relation of things
past, even of troubles and dangers delight the aged, as a desire of hearing,
seeing, and looking into the world tickleth the young that are unexperienced.
For the world promises to the young man great matters, it puts them in
great and proud hopes, but it performs I know not what. ^t beats him home
that will needs raven and range. He therefore that has euaded out of many
dangers and evils, is better then he that knows not the difference.
Therefore to the living there is still a feeding hope of a better condition in
this inexhaust treasurehouse of the variable world replenished with innumerable
blessings and benefits of all sorts.

For a living Dog is better than a dead Lion. The former speech is figured
here by a prouerbiall sentence. He that is but poor and of mean estate, is
better then the man of authority, strength, wealth, and honor that is dead,
who has lost the society of the living, the good things and pleasures of this
life (whatsoever they be, or howsoever mixed) and is cut off from all hopes,
and joyful complacence in the fruition of things desired.

Verse 5. For the living know that they shall die: but the dead know not any
thing, neither have they any more a reward; for the memory of them is
forgotten.
A Reason why that the poor man living is better then the corpse of the noble.
For the living know that they shall die. They know that they cannot always
live here, but while they live, they enjoy the blessings of God here, which all
men do desire, and in hope and possibility the poor man yet living enjoys
all things. For God shows forth many examples of exalting and humbling, that
the meanest may hope, and the greatest may fear. For they rise and fall by
him, not by themselves* The careless often times attaineth to great wealth, and
the wrestling niggard comes to poverty, but neither of them can describe
how. Likewise, the remembrance of death does put them in mind of their end, and
their account, to refrain from evil, and to prepare themselves to die in joy
and comfort, by purging their hearts and consciences more and more through
daily renouation of faith and repentance. For which cause a man at the point of
death desires to live but one hour longer, thinking himself for that, better
then him that is dead already; the lifting up of his heart and hands once
more, gives great contentment to him: and if after that he is dead in the
judgment of his friends, he revive again but to look up on them, and to
speak two or three words, it gives them wonderful satisfaction. But the dead
is deprived of all. There is no knowledge of any thing in the grave, no more
hope, no repentance.

Neither have they any more a reward. They can add nothing further to
themselves in any respect, neither can any good thing more be hoped for, being
cut off from all possibilities. Again, as the time of labor is here, so is
the means of reward here: as he here works, so shall his reward be
increased: as he sows, so shall he reap in this world, and in the world to
come.

For the memory of them is forgotten. Whatsoever they have said and done here,
though they have striuen to draw all eyes and ears after them alone, yet now
is there not any thought of them, but they are as though they had never been
borne into the world, in respect of the living. Both their future hopes, and
their glory past is vanished away, as smoke in the air, as the body into
dust, and dust into the wind, which disperseth it all over the earth and the
waters.

Verse 6. Also their love* and their hatred, and their envy is n^w perished:
neither have they any more a portion for ever in any thing that is under the
Sun.
AN amplification by an enumeration of some particulars. Also their love and
their hatred, etc. These words are to be taken actiuely, whether in the good or
evil sense, thus: Their loves, kindnesses, liberalities one toward another,
their feastings and reioycings one with another, etc. for which they were
praised and extolled of men here, is perished. Their hatred, opposition,
contention, revenge, their glory in overthrowing and vanquishing their
adversaries, which also is a blessing promised to the godly, though the godly
glory not herein carnally, as the wicked do, but as the wicked are enemies
first to the Lord, and to them for the Lord. In this sense the Saints in heaven
rejoice at the vengeance of the wicked which persecute he Church, and wait for
the day of vengeance, as men rejoice when their grounds are purged of weeds and
serpents; all this, I say, is now perished. Their envy also, emulation and
ambition, contention of honor and preferment, is now perished.

Neither have they any more a portion for ever* etc. They are now no longer
partakers of earthly things, that are so much desired and hoped of the living,
no fruit of any faculty, or possession redoundeth to them, they have no part,
no footing here any longer, but are swallowed up of the grave, the pit has
shut her mouth upon them; so that their paths and ways of life are closed up
as the paths of a ship in the waters and of a bird or arrow in the air. The
intent of the holy Ghost in all these things, is to show the vanity of life
and death; to crucify the world to us, and us to the world, that we might live
in the Lord, and not to give way to dissolute, careless, epicurish living, as
the wicked do interpret all things according to their lusts, and use them to
their damnation, which by words and deeds they call unto them.

Verse 7. Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a
merry heart: for God now accepts thy works.
THese next four verses are an explication of the consequence, verse. 15. chap.
8 by an enumeration or an hypotyposis of the use of worldly things, by way of
an exhortation or permission of their comfortable and joyful use, whereof many
make some doubt; as man is most apt to place a devotion and conscience in
things indifferent, with neglect of that which is necessary. Our own things
please us best, but other men's we see a far off, and are coldly affected. So
we deal with God. But the kingdom of God stands not in meats, drinks,
wedlocks, etc. which are worldly and transitory things, but in a new creature.
For no ordinance of God is to be disanulled. But if we be renewed, all things
shall become holy to us. For to the pure, all things are pure and holy:
otherwise, the best things are unclean to us, and defiled by us. We are not
under the bondage of any thing, but all things are subseruant to us, and
lawful, except in case of offense. Go thy way. The first particular is of the
comfortable use of meats and drinks. Give over thy careful and unprofitable
studies, and idle speculations, leave secret things to the Lord; be content
with that which he gives by lawful means in a lawful calling; desire not
other men's labors, pled not in difficult, hard and uneven bypath with grief
and greedy desire, but eat thy bread with joy, live comfortably of that which
thou have; cast thy care upon God. Drink thy wine with a merry heart: Let
faith and peace of conscience expel the bitterness of distrust and fear; the
arm of the Lord is not shortened, nor his hand emptied; thy care can neither
add nor diminish: the Lord is merciful, not cruel to leave his servants; he
is bountiful, not niggardly; if he tarry long, it is but to try thee. Though
he kill thee, as Job says, yet believe in him. Hope in God, says David, do
good^, dwell in the land, and thou shall be fed. Eat and drink therefore with
an hopeful heart, comfort thy body with thy goods, For God accepts thy
works. Because thou art not careful, distrustful, fearful, not leaning to
thine own wisdom, not relying on thine own providence, nor arrogating the
gift of God to thy self, and blessing thy self as infidels do, therefore
does God accept thy works, for he accepts thy person, and has taken thee
into his protection and wardship: therefore eat with joy, drink with mirth,
live in comfort. Observe here, that first we must please God by faith in him,
which is his own gift and work. Secondly, when he is thus pleased, then do
our persons please him, we are his, and accepted of him in his Son, in whom
we believe. Thirdly, when he accepts our persons, then do our works please
him, both religious exercises, and external works, as eating, drinking,
feasting, rejoicing, apparelling, marrying, etc. For God is glorified in all
things by his children. For they respect the glory of God their maine end, not
the satisfying of the flesh in the affections and lusts thereof. The feasts of
Abraham and Jobs children were accepted of God: the royal attire of Solomon,
David, Hester, pleased the Lord, because their persons pleased him. The Wedding
dinner of the Jews pleased Christ, Ioh. 2. 2. The labor of the husbandman and
tradesman: the honest care of every householder, the work of every servant
pleases him. Faith and a good conscience remoueth away the curse from us, and
then are all things blessed to us.

Verse 8. Let thy garments be always white, and let thy head lack no
ointment.
THe second particular is of Apparel; Let thy garments, etc. As God has
crcated all things for the service and use of man, as well for satiety delight,
and pleasure, as for necessity, not only skins of beasts, hair and wool
for clothing, but also silks, and fine linen for elegance, and ornament, and
has given an understanding heart to man to find out the skill and knowledge of
converting them to a man's comfortable use; he may also use the same according
to the dignity of his person, yet in modesty and sobriety, in careless
comeliness, to show forth reverend gravitie, not contemptible leuitie, as
fantastical apishnesse is now in most people ridiculous, making themselves
spectacles of folly one to another, as though the soul were made for the
apparel, and the apparel, to show forth the lust of the body, which is in
these days like the fire of hell, devouring up all things, firing men and
women of all sorts out of their possessions, and bringing many into
desperation, their pompous shows ending in ignominy, and making them by-words
to the basest people.

Let thy head want no ointment. In those countries there are many aromaticall
plants, and much use of ointments which are in those places most precious, and
delicious, used for the refreshing of the spirits with the fragrant odours
thereof. The use hereof our Savior Christ approved in receiving the ointment
brought him, and commending the woman for it. John 12. 3. 7. and elsewhere. By
ointment, is meant all kinds of sents and perfumes, and whatsoever else for
the comfort and delight of all the senses, all precious and pleasant things
dainties, and novelties, used not for prouocations to lust, or of pride, but
for the ornament of the souls palace, that she may more cheerfully execute
her functions therein.

Lastly, white garments and ointments signify joyful and comfortable living
in the right use of the fruit of faith, and peace of conscience.

Verse 9. Live joyfully with the wife, whom thou love all the days of the
life of thy vanity, which he has given thee vuder the Sun, all the days of
thy vanity: for that is thy portion in this life, and in thy labor which thou
take under the Sun.
A Third particular, is of wedlock, or housekeeping. Live joyfully, etc. As
heretofore he has showed, that wisdom, in respect of worldly goods, is the
gift of God to extenuate the miseries of this vain life, and that both in
their getting and spending; and also, that fellowship and community of life in
mutual duties, is a great means also; so here he shows, that in aeconomie
or wedlock, conjugal love and society is a means also, and the gift of God,
Proverbs 18. 22. whereby many miseries in housekeeping, and vexations from
without also, are avoided or mittigated.

Live joyfully, etc. This he speaks not as though every thing in wedlock
were lawful, seeing that it serves specialy for the procreation of children
for the supply of Gods Church, and accomplishment of the number of the Elect:
and also to avoid fornication, not for brutishness, and lasciviousness, after
the manner of the heathen, and Epicures, who pamper their bodies by all means,
and devices for none other ends. To this end the Apostle, Romans 13. 13. exhorts
Christians to live honestly as in the day, not in gluttony and drunkenness,
nor yet in chambering and wantonness, for marriage is honorable, Hebr. 13. 4.
and the lawful use of Matrimony in these words, and the bed undefiled. Which
words are opposed to whooredome, and adultery, whether it be with another, or
a man's own wife, the affections and imagination being fixed on another. To
be brief, his meaning is, that the continuance of conjugal amity, or first
union of affections, which is the inward bond of matrimony, is a great means
to avoid much vanity, which arises of the violating of this union. This
joyful living is maintained by giving due benevolence, 1, Corinth. 7. 3. and
Genesis 26. 8. which text let a man interpret as he pleases, I think that in
all things for man's use, there is not only a mere necessity given of God,
but also a satietie permitted, not saturitie, which in this kind is salacitie
and proteruious behauionr. For if we must marry in the Lord, as the Apostle
there teaches, then we must live in the Lord, even keep our bodies undefiled
members of Christ's body, else we cannot glorify him in body and spirit, 1.
Cor. 6. 20. To conclude, to weigh this and all things moderately and
indifferently by wisdom, let us note what the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 10. 13.
There has no tentation taken you, but such as appertains to man. Yet his
meaning is withal, that we should aim at perfection in all things. Though God
bear with our frailties and impersections, yet we must not make a stand for
all that, much less grow remiss, but rather receive comfort thereby, and
thereupon encouragement in the way to perfection.

Whom thou love. Whom thou have and do sympathize and affect above all
other women. Love is the procreant and conseruant cause of this comfortable
living. What this love is, the Apostle sets forth by a comparison of Christ's
love toward his Church, which is also illustrated by the Equal, he loved his
Church as himself, even so must men love their wives, viz. as their own
bodies, Ephesians. 5. 25. etc. And this shall thou do, if thou delightest in her
love, (in the Lord) Prou. 5. 19. as the loving Hind and pleasant Roe love their
mates, if thou be faithful in regard of body and goods, that is, if thou
live only to her, and for her in the Lord; if thou prouidest for her, and
maintainest her without fraud, according to thy estate; if thou passest by her
infirmities, honoring her as the weaker vessel, and kindly entertainest her
friends for her sake.

All the days. q. d. Love one another, and live comfortably together as long
as ye live together, as well in old age as in the flower of youth, as well in
the fading as freshness of beauty. In that he says, All the days, it is
evident, that he means not Epicurish love (as some think he speaks all here
in the person of the Epicure) which proceeds from lust only, and is grounded
on outward beauty and mere fleshly allurements, and vanish away with beauty,
and that with youth.

Of thy most vain life. This he often repeateth to curb and draw back
roauing fancies and groundless imaginations of I know not what happy
contentation in this life, which withhold a man from present duties, and
present comfortable use of things, and constancy, tormenting himself with
coffeehouse and unsettledness, and so wants or fully enioyes not such
comforts or mitigations of vanity, as here by sobriety of wisdom may be had.

Which he has given thee under the Sun. That is, which wife God has given
thee. A good wife is the gift of God, and of worldly comforts the chiefest,
Prou. 18. ^2. An evil wife is a plague and scourge given of God to the wicked.

All the days) that thou should live with her in godly love and honesty, in
comfortable society, as long as thou live. Of thy vanity) of this miserable
life, which to mitigate, God has ordained this conjugal society, as a chief
remedy among others.

For that is thy portion. An argument of confirmation. As he said before, that
the comfortable use of worldly goods gotten with great labor, was the gift of
God, or remedy to cheer the body in the vanity thereof, Chap. 3. 13 and 5.
18. so here he says, that the joyful, cheerful, and comfortable use of
wedlock in the fear of God, is a man's portion, even the chiefest and best
good of outward goods, which who so wants, he can have no joy in any thing. For
if in ripeness of age he want this conjugal comfort, he is but half
himself, solitary and mournful. But if he be fellowed with a wicked woman,
then he is even no man, and weary of life.

In this life. Many men imagine to themselves a more complete and full portion
then this, whereof they make this to be but a part, but yet it is the
principal part, and remains to man when other fail. For whether a man be in
prosperity or adversity, in sickness or health, this is a living comfort,
even a special remedy, and universal remedy appliable to him in every
state. The faithfulness of Ouids wife was an only and special comfort to him
in his banishment, though she was at Rome, and he in Pontus, as diverse of his
Epistles make manifest.

And in thy labor, which thou take under the Sun. He says not, this is
the fruit or end of thy labor, which is the practice or life of swinish
Epicures, whose labors are only for bodily pleasures* and pleasure their
whole felicity; but in thy labor, in all thy travels, troubles, sorrows,
sufferings, this is a remedy, relief, succor, when a man has a prudent,
faithful, and loving fellow to compassionate and communicate with him in every
state and condition of life.

Verse 10. Whatsoever thine hand finds to do, do it with thy might: for there
is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou
go.
A Fourth particular of rejoicing, is sedulitie or diligence in a man's
vocation, both in the works of our Christian calling, and of our particular
calling. Whatsoever thine hand finds to do* etc. God has given a gift or
talent to every man to be exercised therein, God lays some work or business
before every one: work is provided for him against his coming into the world:
Ars long a, vita breuis: Skill, knowledge or art is long or difficult,
business is great, but life is short and sickly, time hastes, and is
irreuocable. Therefore perform thy duty toward God, toward thy neighbors,
toward thy self, without delay, while time and opportunity lasts: for God
has appointed a convenient season for every thing, even the least thing. Thou
have the gift, the work, the time, the opportunity and season from him,
observe and do thereafter. Then shall every thing go well with thee, thou shall
prevent manifold crosses and hindrances, thou shall have a quiet and peaceable
conscience, and avoid this vanity, even the penalty of idleness, which is
poverty and sorrow, and many evils. For whereinsoeuer we sin, therein shall
we be punished; That is Gods unchangeable decree. Therefore says Solomon, the
strong man attayneth to riches, and so to what comforts riches may bring.
Surely, whatsoever befalls a man, if it be not through his own idleness and
folly, it is not grievous, but he takes it as from the hand of God, and is
well contented, being for his good some way, and for Gods glory, as the example
of Job testifies. Doubtless this was a great comfort to Job in his
extreamitie, even the conscience of his innocence, sincerity and godly
endeavors at all times. This sustained him against the temptations of Satan, of
his kinsfolks, and his wife, for at this time he was thoroughly tried, his
comfort was only in God, and his good conscience.

For there is no work, nor device, etc. A confirmation. The time of working is
in this life, it cease in the grave. Here may a man rejoice in his work,
but when the night comes, a man leaves working, and receives his wages; no
man shall be benefited by thy works, wisdom, skill, or counsel, when thou
art dead, neither can thou praise God, nor glorify him in the grave. For
here is the time of using, and bestowing those gifts that God has given for
his glory in this life. The soul must be rewarded according to her works
done in the body, and by the body; but when the body is dead, the soul can
work no more for a reward. For her instrument wherewith she works, is taken
away for ever. If the soul glorify not God with the body and bodily things
(hear this ye Church-robbers, Bells, Iezebels^) i^ shall never glorify him in
heavens, but descend to him that is Lord of the flesh and death. For the
profane and unclean can have no fellowship with the Saints in glory, because
they are no members of Christ his mystical body, they are in their menstruous
cloth, in their blood, Ezeoh. 16.

Verse 11. I returned and saw under the Sun, that the race is not to the
swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet
riches to men of understanding* nor yet favor to men of skill, but time and
chance happens to them all.
THE second example of induction of the event of the deeds and endeavors of
men, euincing that nothing is in our power, but all is in the hand of God,
Verse 11. 1^. I returned.) whereas I said before, that sedulitie and diligence
is a means to avoid or mitigate many vanities and evils, whereby to obtain
some contentation of mind in this vain life* it is not so to be understood as
that a man can by his own endeavor obtain it, neither yet is he to place any
confidence in his gift or diligence, for they shall be either fruitful or
fruitless to him* as pleases God. For this is certain that there is no
certainetie in any thing, that man might fear God, and only depend on him,
and know that whatsoever he is, or has, it is Gods* and in Gods disposing to
his own glory, who will do with his vessels what pleases him, he forms
thee, and uses thee in his wisdom according to his own will; but the vain
imaginations of man are infinite. I returned and saw under the Sun. A
confirmation of that which follows by the testimony of his own observation.
That the race is not to the swift, etc. This have I considered, that the use of
those faculties of body and mind, which God has bestowed on man, either in
his birth, or by his industry, is not in man's power. For the race is not to the
swift, nor battle to the strong Again, if a man being endued with these
faculties, does also use them, and use them well; yet the profit and fruit
thereof is not in the power of him that uses them rightly. For do we not see
that bread is sometimes wanting to the wise, money, meat, drink, and
apparel to the learned, wealth to the prudent and men of understanding favor
and grace to men of learning and skill? Therefore both the faculty and gift it
self, the exercise of the gift and the benefit of the exercise is to be
referred to God, who is the author and disposer of all gifts and events.
Surely, this seems to be a great vanity and grievous to carnal reason, that
the swift should loose the benefit of the race, and another that sits still
receive it; that the strong man. should loose the reward of the battle, and the
wise man who procures much good unto others, should want necessary food and
payment; that the prudent and man of counsel, by whom public and private
states are settled, vpheld, and maintained, should want riches, and that men of
skill, should want good will and favor. Again, the swiftest man sometimes in
running, loses the race, the strong army loses the battle. So Abraham
with his three hundred servants put four Kings to flight, Genes. 14. Gedeon
with the found of Trumpets murdered the host of the Madianites, Judges 7.
David slew the Grant Goliath, 1. King. 17. Leonidas with six hundred men
massacred five hundred thousand of Xerxes host. Tomyris Queen of Scythia,
deuouted up the whole host of Cyrus, whose force Babylon could not resist. So
Judas Maccabeus cut down his strong enemies on every side. What should I
speak of the Prophets of Christ, and the Apostles the lights and life of the
world? What was the reward of their wisdom, their gifts and labors? And why?
Because dogs must have meat howsoever, gluttons must surcharge their
stomachs, whores must ^ide in coaches, and fare deliciously, and go
sumptuously; scuballs, that do nothing but devise how to grace a lustful
corpse are thought worthy of any thing, of all they have, be it never so much.
But Christ in his Ministers, as he was in his own person, must be exposed to
derision and contempt; any thing is enough for a Priest, they must want
necessaries in their greatest labors, as the Israelites did in Egypt. But Bell*
and Iezebel, and lay Impropriators aresuperfluous enough; but wherein they
sin, therein shall they be punished, let all men observe how they prosper, or
whether he deprive them of his grace, at least of continuance of temporal
blessings, as they withold his coat from him, and share it among them. Let,
I say, every man of wisdom note this, and then tell me how many escape
vengeance. Ministers must work on the week day for necessary food (to make
their title of Gentlemen ridiculous) and earne with great pains the other half
of their gown, if they can, and spend their strength on the Sabbath day, while
greedy Bell is all for his body, to make it fat and shining, and Iezebel for the
show: yet they sit with books in their hands, as in Ezechiels time, they can
read and talk to pride in their wits, their talking is but the crackling of
thorns under a pot. For the one takes away the Ministers food to give it to
dogs, and feed horses, and for voluptuous living; and the other plucks off his
coat, to further the beautifying of a carrion-Idoll. But if he will please
Bell, and admire Iezebel, (for she looks about to see who looks on her) then
he shall be allowed somewhat, the crummes under their table, a dinner or a
supper, to see and praise their finenesse, and to be blinded with Marthaes
courtesy. Bell and Iezebel are the moderators and censurers of his Sermons, if
the style and phrase be right, (that is, nothing to the purpose) the good
servant shall enter into the joy of his master and mistress. Stat fixum, the
corpse is the Idol that now must be adored and glorified. The Priest must
stoop and yield his neck: why? because the Friar domineered. Is there no
difference between staring and stark mad? Stulti dum vitant vitia in
contraria currunt, and tandem coincidunt. As good the Friar, as the Atheist: as
good Baal still, as the Calves of Bethel, and Bell: as good the better extreme,
as the worse, if we must needs be in extremes: as good and better Superstition
then Atheism. If we beat the devil out at the fore door, and let him in at
the back door, what are we the better? There must be a Judas and an
Antichrist, even so must there be an Atheist that can use the Scripture
politickly, or Turklike frame a religion and conscience to himself, according
to his lusts out of all opinions. For that he will be a Papist, for this a
Puritan, for that a Brownist, for this an Anabaptist, or Familist, etc. and for
all a fool and a beast.

But time and chance comes to them all. The time of rising, falling,
advancement, deiection, favor, disgrace, plenty, scarcity, etc come to all,
even to the wisest and most provident, according to the appointment of God in
his providence, whose ways and means of effecting his works are
unsearchable. The old world knew not their time of visitation. Sodom knew not
her time, Jerusalem knew not her time, Babylon knew not her time, the Whore of
Babylon knows not her time till she be trodden under foot as dung, neither
shall the last end of the world know their time. And as it is in visitations
and indgements, so is it also in mercies and deliverances, that men might
hereby be taught to fear God, and depend wholly on him.

And chance comes to them all. It is chance in respect of us, who are
ignorant of causes, and improuident; not in respect of God, who does all his
works in wisdom, according to the eternal counsel of his will, and from
whom no secret is hid, himself being the orderer even of all evil secrets to
his own glory and good of his elect. Therefore to God there is nothing
chancefull or sudden, but to us all things are uncertain, and chance brings
to pass such effects, as by all our own strength and wisdom could never
have been effected; yea often times what we by our silly wisdom and
insufficient strength are plodding about, chance notably effects. Yet are we
not to despise the means and gifts of God, no more then the husbandman
neglects the times, tools and means of earing and reaping. But we are
hereby taught, that although a man has all gifts and means, yet he must
commit the blessing and success thereof to God.

Verse 12. For man also knows not his time, as the fishes that are taken in
an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the snares, so are the sons
of men snared in an evil time, when it falls suddenly upon them.
A Confirmation or reason of the former example of induction. For man also
knows not his time. These words seem to be a comparison from the equals. Man
is so far from having any power or command of himself in the things
aforesaid, that he knows not what shall happen to him in any time, day, or
hour, no more then other creatures. This he illustrateth by a similitude, the
protasis or proposition whereof is double: As the fishes are taken in an evil
net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare, the apodosis or redition:
So are the sons of men snared in an evil time. The fishes in their kinds are
wise and provident, suspicious and cautelous, dreading many evils, and avoiding
many dangers. For as they are cunning to ensnare and devour one another, so
are they subtle to prevent evils, and defend themselves, and to provide and
gather food for the preservation of their kind. The like may be also said
of birds. But whereas all things are under the power and dominion of man,
created for his service, and therefore has also understanding and knowledge
given him to serve himself of the creatures, though they be high in the air
above him, and deep in the waters beneath him, and far in the forest from
him, all out of his reach, giving him as it were the farewell, and bidding
defiance to him, as being in their own power, and having nothing to do with
him, nor he with them, as they imagine; yet can they not escape his hand, nor
avoid his power, because the decrre must stand, Genesis 1. 28. Be fruitful, and
replenish the earth, and subdue it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea,
and over the foul of the air, and over every living thing that moves on the
earth. Therefore cannot that which is in the depth of the air, nor in the
height of the seas, nor in the far corners of the wilderness, nor that
builds in rocks and tops of trees, nor that is hidden in the thick bushes
and hollow trees, nor that lurketh in dens and caves of the earth, nor which is
bedded in the mud and roots of flags, nothing can escape his nets, grins,
hooks, bates, but they are taken unawares, they know not how, nor by whom,
they willingly run their heads into the net, their feet into the snare,
their jaws to the hook; all which traps they either see or discern not, or
else they are so privily laid and disguised, that they see not. For man is
wiser then beasts, he comprehends them, but they cannot comprehend him. As
the soul of man exceeds beasts, so does God exceed men: yet like beasts,
they think that they are far out of his sight: he is in the height of heaven,
they are in the depth and lower parts of the earth, they are covered with the
clouds, as Adam was hid from him in the thickets of the garden* Genesis 3. 10. as
at the day of judgment they shall run into caves and holes of the rocks to
hide them, and under the bottomes of mountains if it were possible; yea and
they cover with a covering, hiding their counsels deep from the Lord, and
keeping close their device in the bottom of their heart from the Lord. They
never think of him, nor know him, though he walk in the midst of them, no
more then wild beasts, wild foul and fishes know man their sovereign, being
always among them, and in their sight, but they discern him not. For though
the witty wicked think himself to be the wisest, yet he is a fool, Psalm.
14* 1. and a beast. And of foul, beasts and fishes there is a generositie and
a rusticitie, an innocence and a cruelty, yet all is beast. God comprehends
man, and all things, but he is infinite, and comprehended of nothing. The
subtilty of the wicked is but foolishness, he puts his foot into the trap,
his heel into the grin, his neck into the snare, with providence and cunning,
as the greedy fish and ravenous foul, that he alone may swallow up all the
hook into his throat, and be first taken. He diggeth up a pit, and falls
into it himself; he hides his trap privily, and his own foot is taken. He
imagines that all things must give way to his wisdom and counsel, for God
is not in all his thoughts: but when he least suspecteth, God that is greater
then he, whose power, command, sovereignty and glory he never regarded,
strikes him suddenly, and intangleth him in his own nets and traps.
Sennacherib, Antiochus, Nabuchadnezzar, Alexander, were become Behemoths and
Leuiathans, Elephants and Whales, surpassing the common condition of men,
Heroes, or Demigods; swords, stau^s, hooks, lines, snares, nets, were but
sticks and cobwebs: but in their greatest rage and tumult he puts his hook
into their noses, and turns them about with his bridle, Esa. ^7. 29. The
wicked conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity, and their belly prepares
deceit, Job 15. 35* as did Achitophel, Haman* Judas, etc. but they suddenly
perish, and come to a fearful end. For there is a snare in the prosperity
and hopes of the wicked. They are trap-makers and snare-setters for others, and
others for them. For so are the wits of the wicked exercised all their days.
They walk about with snares and nets, and walk among snares and traps. Now
are they taken suddenly in their own, now suddenly in other men's. They are
prevented by sudden death, as the unripe grape is shaken off, and the flower of
the olive with a stormy blast or nipping East wind, and their glorious
verdure is withered in a moment, as the joyous and luxurious grain is blasted
with lightning. Amnon perished when his heart was merry with wine, 2. Sam. 13.
29. Belteshazzar perished suddenly in the night of a festival day, Dan. 6. 30.
Nabuchadnezzar in the same hour that he exalted himself above all power, was
disrobed of his royalty, turned into a beast, and driven out from amongst men.
The rich man, in the same night that he blessed himself in the reuiew of his
worldly possessions, was carried away to hell. The old world was swept all away
with the flood, when they were eating, drinking, feasting, marrying. So were
the Sodomites in a morning, when they were ready to rise from nightly venery to
adorn their proud corpse for meetings, to eating, drinking, gaming, to provoke
to lust, and to make themselves strong for lust. For they were rich, and
despised the poor, they were farting full, and spuing full, proud beasts, they
regarded not the afflictions of Joseph, but were cruel, and mad against those
that reproved them, as their dealings and speeches to Lot do testify. We in
this land are growing into this vein, to be crafty and proud donaughts, the
child teaching the father, being it self reprobate to every good work.

Verse 13. This wisdom have I seen also under the Sun, and it seemed great
unto me.
THe third example of induction of the event of counsels and wisdom: the
vanity whereof (to carnal reason) shows the unknown and deep wisdom of
God, who most wisely, and to the best ends orders and disposes the same.
Whereas he said before, that bread was not to the wise, nor riches to men of
understanding, which was a special and remarkable vanity, he returns to a
better reuiew thereof, and expresses it at large under a Parable. Wherein it
is by an Hypotyp^sis, or lively description plainly set forth before our eyes.
It consists of two parts, of a Preface, and of a Narration. The Preface as in
this verse; This wisdom have I seen also, etc. This work of Gods wisdom
do I also observe, and it is a thing not vn-usuall, but it is to man's reason
strange and wonderful. First, that a man of counsel and wisdom should be
poor. Secondly, that the benefit and use of his wisdom should redound to the
unthankful, who being protected and enriched by his wisdom, should
notwithstanding leave him destitute, and let him live in poverty still. Which
thing is every where now adays verified in many worthy servants of Christ,
whose pains in the Gospel is of great desert, and the benefit thereof
inestimable.

Verse 14.
There was a little City, and few men within it: and there came a great King
against it, and besieged it, and built great bulwarks against it.

Verse 15. Now there was found in it a poor wise man, and he by his wisdom
delivered the City, yet no man remembered that same poor man.
THE Narration or Parable it self in these two verses, There was a City;
little in it self, and the inhabitants were few. It was neither fortified with
Towers, Castles, strong Walls, nor Gates of strength, nor yet provided of men
and munition for the battle. And a powerful King came against it with a great
army: he laid siege to it, and built great bulwarks against it, and made
engines to batter it down upon them. Now amongst all the rich, the strong,
the honorable, there was found a man of a very mean estate (as God bestows
his gifts as pleases him on the poor, and the young, Job 32. 8. 9.) but yet a
man of wisdom, judgment, and counsel, who by his wisdom delivered this
City. Every man took notice of him, for they were in great fear and
despair; and they were all partakers of this benefit. Their wives and
children, lives and goods were preserved by the wisdom of this poor man. But
what was the event of his gift, and practice of his gift? What fruit redounded
thereby to himself?

There was no man that remembered that poor man. Both they and all that ever
they had were in his hands; they received life and goods of him, for by his
counsel he pulled the City out of the jaws of the enemy, who was ready to
swallow it up at once, whereas he might have escaped free himself and left
them desolate. Yet for all this, as Nabal dealt with David, they regarded him
not. For having obtained what they desired, they let him shift for himself, as
wicked hypocrites use to deal with their painful teachers, as they do with
their emptied figge-frayles, they forgot him, and took no notice afterward of
him. So the Butler of Pharaoh, being set at liberty, forgot the affliction of
his fellow prisoner Joseph. David was ill rewarded by Saul, who of envy,
because the women sung Anthemes of that worthy and wonderful conquest of
Goliath, persecuted him with a wicked eye. Christ was ill rewarded by the nine
Lepers, who being cleansed of that grievous disease, would not return to give
him so much as bare thanks, not so much as to acknowledge the benefit. But he
was worse rewarded by him that being afflicted with an infirmity thirty and
eight years, Ioh. 5. who after that he was cured, discovered him to his enemies
that sought his life, verse 15. For he fearing the cruelty of the Pharisees
reproving him, verse 10. respected his own safety, as it may seem. And the
Pillars of our peace, plenty, and security in this Land, I do mean, godly,
painful and profitable teachers are of many little regarded. Yea many live in
beggary, and work for their livings, the proud epicurish laity rejoicing
thereat. Judge as ye will, ye swinish* Gadarenes, these despicable ones are
the pillars of your happiness, not your cursed wisdom in making the fine
great, and rent small to defeat them of their right, nor your manifold
subtilties to diminish the chippings, and parings, and small bitlockes, when ye
have already got the whole loa^e.

Verse 16. Then said I, wisdom is better then strength* nevertheless the
poor man's wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard.
AN amplification of the Parable by a Consectary, showing the excellence of
wisdom, and use thereof, in whomsoever it is, though the common sort respect
persons and outward appearances, and admiring the rich and the strong, despise
the same, or have it small in account. Then said I, when I saw that strength,
multitude, riches, nobility, had no power in them to benefit the owners thereof
in their greatest want, nor to deliver them out of iminent danger, but a poor
man destitute of these helps did it by wisdom; Then I saw, I gathered by
good consequence, and learned, and also teach others what the excellence and
dignity of wisdom is, and how that it is to be sought for, and embraced
above all other desirable things.

Wisdom is better then strength. An illustration of the excellence of
wisdom by an argument of the Less. Strength is a thing admired and desired
of all; the strong man glories, and secureth himself in his strength, as did
Goliath, but wisdom is better and a stronger defense. Samson was strong, yet
was he overcome by the subtilty of a woman. Abimelech was strong, yet a woman
unawares slew him with a piece of a Millstone, Judges 9. 53. and so delivered
the City. Cyrus was strong, yet by the subtilty of a woman (as Stories report)
was he and every man of his great army slain; and so was Holofernes also, and
his murdering host shorn up. Ahab trusted more to his strength then to the
counsel of Micah, therefore he perished. Zedekiah and his Princes trusted to
their strength, and despised the counsel of Jeremy, therefore was he and his
Princes slain, Jerusalem sacked and set on fire. Nabuchadnezar refused the
counsel of Daniel, and boasted in the defense of Babylon, and strength of his
soldiers; and so did Beltshazzar also, and Xerxes, of whom I spoke before, but
their strength helped them not, as Deuid says.

Though the poor man's wisdom be despised. Though the common sort which is
brutish, esteeming strength, beauty, wealth, apparel, etc. the most desirable
things, because they serve for the feeding and pampering of the flesh, do
lightly regard, yea despise wisdom, especially in him that does want these
outward things, yet is he better then they, as appears by his example before
mentioned.

And his words be not heard. A base conditioned person is honored for his
riches and apparel sake; and the speech of a fool in the place of honor, is
applauded. Externa personae dignit as conciliat dignitatem orationi. Haman was
honored, but not of Mordecai; and the mad common people dazzled with the royal
apparel of the fox Herod, cried, The voice of God, and not of man; but yet
Christ gave no such testimony of him, but as he was a beast, so he esteemed
him. So dealt the Prophets also with the wicked; and S. John terms Antichrist
a Beast and a Dragon, to whom the wicked hypocrites attribute title of Lord God
the Pope. S. Paul likened the High priest to a whited wall; and David the
wicked Princes to dogs and bulls* but all these had the spirit of prophecy and
discerning.

But the wisdom of a poor man is not heard. The rich does wrong, and is not
reproved, and utters folly and is praised: the poor man does right and is
not favored, he utters wisdom, and they say, What fellow is this? When as
Christ taught in the Temple, Ioh. 7. 14. 15. they say, How knows he the
Scripture, seeing he never learned? Here is a miracle, a plain evidence of
divine power and extra ordinary wisdom, yet they lightly pass by it, for
they judged according to his outward appearance, verse. ^4. They knew whence he
was, speaking contemptibly, verse. 27. So when he taught in a Synagogue, Mark.
6. ^. 3. whilst their minds were fixed on his speeches* (for the no^elty of
his doctrine wrought attention) they say, Whence has he those things? What
wisdom is this that is given him? But when his poverty, and meannesse of his
education, trade, parents, kinsfolks come into their minds, they are offended,
they yield no honor, afford no entertainment, they believe nothing, but turn
about to their old biasse. So Paul's Gospel is despised of the flanting
Preachers of Corinth, because his bodily presence was weak, and his Sermons
without Philosophy and ^^hetoricke. He was poor, humble, spiritual. So do our
flanting badges now adays, that suite themselves to men's humors, admiring
persons for advantage, and make themselves as strange to their brethren, as
Ruffians do to the grave, wise and ancient. They show what spirit they are of,
and which way they came in.

Verse 17. The words of wise men are heard in quiet, more then the cry of him
that rules among fools.
ANother comparison of the Less, to illustrate the excellence of wisdom, or
dignity of the wise man's speeches, though his words commonly be not heard. For
this verse has reference to the last words before. The loud noise and
thundering words of a proud and wrathful governor, among such like as
himself, ignorant, foolish and passionate, are heard. For terrible and
sounding words most affect the rude and passionate. But the words of a wise man
in quiet, namely of a poor or mean man that has no commanding power, but is
submisse, humble, and speaks under correction, not proudly and peremptorily,
are to be heard before him. For pride, stomachfulnesse* headiness, wilfulness
and presumptuous foole-hardinesse avail little; but things are rightly and
easily effected by wisdom: great weights are easily moved and removed by the
device of engines, which to plain strength are impossible. The great words,
great strength and power of Xerxes was nothing good to but to dig down
mountains, to make nearer passages of rivers, and to drink rivers dry, as it
is recorded of his host* For Leonidas with few words, and no noise, and few
men surprised him, as being a Whale on the sands, and the ioyntlesse beast Alce
leaning to a tree almost sawne through; for these are taken by wisdom, not by
strength. The submisse words of a poor man speaking with g ood understanding,
are rather to be heard of governors and honorable men, then are the boisterous
words of the proud and foolish among fools. For the matters of the world are
ordered by the wisdom of God, which he reuealeth to whom he will, without
respect of persons: for he respects his glory only. Therefore ^he regards
the lowliness of the poor, and sends the rich empty away. He despises not
the poor for his poverty, nor accepts the person of the rich to give him
wisdom, etc. because of his riches, though the rich fool arrogateth all to
himself, ta^qua^ proprio iure. All this is evident by the parable aforesaid.

Verse 18. Wisdom is better then weapons of war: but one sinner destroys
much good.
A Third comparison to illustrate the excellency of wisdom. Weapons and
engines avail much in wars, for no war is made-without them: but let them
be as good and as strong as they can be, yet wisdom is stronger. For where
wisdom is wanting, weapons are as ready to turn their points upon their
masters, as against the enemies, as the Madianites did, and as the Jews in
the last siege and utter overthrow of Jerusalem and their whole nation did.
This is a thing confessed of every good warrier, that weapons are nothing
without wisdom and counsel, and that wisdom gives the dead blow, as Tully
says, Parua sunt soris arma, nisi est consilium domi; and not Achilles* but
Ulysses is termed Poliporthos, the sacker of cities. One wise Commander is
better then many fighting men. The Lion that is Leader or Captain of Hearts, is
better then an Heart that is Captain and Leader of Lions. Therefore the silence
of wisdom is better then the noise of strength. If the ship be not governed
by the skillful Pilot, the rowers shall by their strength but run her on the
rocks and into the sands* therefore ^e that sits at the stern, and
discerns the coasts, brings the ship to the haven rather then the mariners.
And this was the glory of the Romans, that they conquered the world by
wisdom, not by strength. The Romans were civil and prudent, other nations
barbarous and strong. If beasts knew their strength, they would bear rule over
man, and bring him into subjection under them, to labor for them as they do
for him, and would prey upon him. If Absolon had obeyed the counsel of
Achitophel, 2. Sam. 17. 1. 2. 3. he had prevailed against David; but being young
and heady, strong and furious, such like violent courses best pleased him. For
when Hushai told him of an host like the sands of the sea shore for multitude,
and that it should fall on David and his men like dew, not leaving a man alive,
and that they would draw down cities with ropes into the river, not leaving
one stone behind them, he preferred this violent fury before the murdering
counsel of Achitophel. For the Lord had appointed to defeat the good counsel
of Achitophel, that he might turn Absolons foolish strength against himself.
If Rehoboam had followed the sage counsel of the Ancients, and not taken the
violent courses of the young men, he had not lost ten parts of his kingdom.

And one sinner destroys much good. The Hebrew is Vechotea, that is, one
declining, diuerting, aberring from the right way or straight course into
by-ways. The words may be taken as a confirmation of the former sentence
concerning the excellency and necessity of wisdom in wars. He that fails
but once in policy or counsel through neglect, shall weaken his host, and
give advantage to the adversary, and happily lose all his former victories, as
Hannibal and Attilius Regulus, and many more stout warriers have done Or rather
they are an explication or illustration of wisdom, by a distinction of
wisdom and wise men. For there is wisdom joined with the fear of God,
commonly called good wisdom; and there is worldly crastinesse, which Saint
James terms, earthly sensual, and devilish, Iam* 3. 15. and the son of
Sirach terms it, execrable malice. Such was the counsel of Achitophel and
Herod. This wisdom is serpentine and diabolical, like that of the High
priest, princes, and Pharisees against Christ, and his spiritual kingdom. It
is suggested of lust, and ingested of Satan.

One sinner destroys much good, as one wiseman, fearing God, does much good,
as the Parable before showed, and the example of good Obadiah and Job testify;
and of Hushai also. So again, one fraudulent, crafty guilefull person brings
a curse upon a whole commonwealth, as Jeroboam did, whose execrable device, to
stablish his kingdom; see 1. King. 12. 26. to the end* So Herod to stablish
himself in his kingdom, slew all the children in Bethlem, and the coasts
about, that were two years old and under. Such were the plots of Absolon
against David, of the high Priest, and princes of the Jews against Christ. The
one will get a kingdom by wicked wisdom, and the other preserve their
kingdom by wicked wisdom. But good is neither gotten nor preserved by evil.
For God will be God, and glorified only, and man shall be a beast. The
mischiuous imaginations of the wicked shall not prosper. Such is the wisdom
of Antichrist, and to conclude, of the Devil and all his children. All evil
proceeds of them, and in the end falls upon them, as the dew that rises
out of the ground, and falls down upon the ground. Therefore, how profitable
and wise soever the counsel of a wicked man seems to be, yet give no ear
unto him, though our selves (being evil) are ever inclinable to the worse
part. For his counsels and doings (in the end) will mar all. He will but
show forth witty folly, and bring desolation, shame, and perpetual ignominy.
All shall be in the end but the crackling of thorns under a pot. For they do
hatch Cockatrice eggs, and weaue the Spiders web, Esaias 59. 5. They are crafty
fools, hindering what good they can, and doing evil, hurting many, and killing
themselves. There is nothing in them but self-love, pride, hatred, and mocking
of them that are good. The good wisdom of God in his children which is humble
and loving, they despise, and deride, exalting and preferring their own
serpentine suttlety. For they are of the Devil, seeking their own wills,
lusts, and glory, not Gods, nor any man's good.

CHAPTER X.
Verse 1. Dead slies cause the ointment of the Apothecarie to send forth a
stinking savor: so does alittle folly him, that is in reputation for wisdom
and honor.
THis Chapter has two parts. First, an exhortation to perseverance in wisdom,
verses 1. 2. 3. Secondly, a remedy against vanities in civil government by
the direction of wisdom; from verse 4. to the end. The Exhortation is
enforced by an argument drawn ab incommodo, from the hurt, and inconvenience
that shall follow upon inconstancy, negligence, or leuitie.

A little folly staineth or disgraceth him that is in reputation for wisdom.
It is illustrated by a similitude of dead flies infecting the Apothecaries
ointment. As an ointment made by thou art of the Apothecary is esteemd most
precious, and desired of every one, yet is it corrupted with a few dead flies,
and contrarily casts forth a stinking savor that offends the sense: even
so a man that has been highly esteemed for his wisdom, does by a little
error, yet indiscreetly committed, lose his former grace and reputation. A
black spot in a white sheet is seen of every one, that can hardly discern
other colors; and secret envy that is put to silence by the common fame and
grace, yea and carried back with the sway of the multitude, as the Ship is
with the Tide, breaks forth as waters when a small gap or breach is opened.
And this is also vanity. God is only good, only wise, and will be known to be
so. If Solomon had not been tempted to folly by his heathenish wives, nor
Josiah given the battle to Pharao, without asking counsel of the Lord, yet
aftertimes shall bewray the ignorance and vanity of man, seeing that that
which seems to be both wisely and well done for the present to man's reason,
has a diverse and contrary event for want of wise providence. Therefore is God
only wise, only good. Man must not therefore be discouraged, but more
carefully imitate him, and learn as children do of their parents, and as
wisdom has taught us, Mat. 5. 48. Be you perfect sv your heavenly father is
perfect,

Verse 2. A wise man's heart is at his right hand: but a fools heart at his
left.
THis verse sets down the means whereby to prevent and avoid the blemish
of folly, and to maintain still the honorable reputation of wisdom. The
means is double, or has two members. First, the wise man is led and guided by
understanding, according to the fundamental truth, or the right ground* of
things. Secondly, if he err, he soon perceives it, and quickly recalleth and
recouereth himself. This is illustrated by the contrary, and both contraries
by a similitude of the right hand and the left. A wise man's heart is at his
right hand. The right hand is more strong, agile and operative then the left,
therefore the artificer handles his tool, and works with it, and so
proceeds well, and brings his work to perfection: but if he give but one
stroke with the left hand* he marreth his work; for the left hand is but an
helper or servant attending on and governed by the right. Therefore the eye and
mind of the worker, is ever at his right hand: so likewise sound reason or
good understanding is a man's right hand, and his affections are his left. The
wise man is always inclinable to good reason: his eye, mind, heart is
altogether fixed on the ground of the truth, and thereafter he works and
proceeds; and his affections are but attendants and servants to his wisdom,
which he has at command: but if he yield or give place but once to them,
P^ssima suggerunt, they are brutall, he marreth all the splendor or grace of
his work, even that one stroke shall be a great blemish and eyesore. Let not
him also that can fundamentally and methodically carry his work with him,
intermingle a foolish opinion or persuasion of another, lest it be as brimstone
cast into the lake or vessel of the Alchymist among gold, whereby his work is
marred. Moreover, a man is the right hand, woman is the left. For she was
created for an helper, an vpholder of the family, not an actor: (yet is some
man left handed,) the prudent man often times giving place to a woman, is as gold
mingled with brimstone, or as one that holds his work in the right hand, and
works with the left. Adam, Solomon, Samson, may be examples hereof; and if
Job had regarded his wives counsel, all his innocence had been utterly
corrupted* and his uprightness perverted, but the heart of a wise man is at
his right hand. The other member of the means is understood by anantapodosis
or ellipsis, and is gathered by the opposite, verse. 3. This is illustrated by
the contrary practice of the fool. The heart of a fool is at his left hand.
The fool is carried with his affections, he is always in clinable to folly, a
wicked and a vain thing sounds best in his ears, wisdom cannot enter into
his head, wholesome instruction he abhors. For he has an evil heart,
unpurged, unhallowed, and therefore is he ever inclined to the worse part. His
grounds are broken and confused, disturbed, and ruled by his lusts, so are his
proceedings disorderly, and bring forth vanity.

Verse 3. Yea also when he that is a fool walks by the way* his wisdom
fails him, and he says to every one that he is a fool.
THe second member of contrary folly, serving to illustrate the practice of
wisdom, or second member of the means, whereby the reputation of a wise man
is preserved from blemish. Yea also when he that is a fool, etc. When a wicked
man is entered into the way that his filthy lusts have drawn him into, then his
heart fails him, he considers not whence he is swarued, nor whither he
tends; but being proud and wilful, he will neither reclaim himself, nor be
reclaimed by another, but says to every one that he is a fool, he declares
his folly, and maintains his folly. He has no delight in understanding, but
that his heart may discover it self, Prou. 18* 2. seeking out reasons and
excuses for his folly, and giving foolish answers to every thing that is
objected against his folly, and also strengthening himself with the opinions
and testimonies of such like as himself is. Whereas contrarily, the wise man
presently acknowledges, concealeth, and speedily salueth his error, antequam
in publicum exeat, before it break forth, he kills it in the hatching. But
the fool never cease till he fall into utter obloquy and contempt, and in
the end becomes desperate and shameless, and as almost nothing offended at
the reputation of a fool or wicked person, but often times rather glories in
it. Or, by way may be meant every way wherein the fool walks, and place where
he is, he babbleth and declares his folly to every one where he comes, so
that all men may see his ignorance, wrathfulnesse, and wilfulness.

Verse 4. If the spirit of the ruler rise up against thee, leave not thy place:
for yielding pacifieth great offenses.
HEre begins the second part of the Chapter, setting down a remedy or rule
to arm a man against vanities and miseries incident to man in civil
government. The confusions and disorders thereof must be rightly considered by
wisdom to the pacifying of the mind, no^ be opposed by contrary vanity,
seeing that there is a wisdom of God in these vanities not vain and
irresistable. The scope hereof is to teach modest and submisse behavior in
wisdom toward Princes: for they are either the faithful shepherds of God,
or else the rods of his correction. If the spirit of the ruler, etc. If the
Ruler has taken a displeasure against thee, if his anger be kindled against
thee, that has authority and power over thee, leave not thy place, oppose not
displeasure to displeasure, though he be wrongfully displeased, go not out of
his sight in anger, nor move thy self from place to place, nor use any gesture
or countenance as they do that are angry. Neither rebel, nor show rebellious
disposition, but contrarily (understood by anantapodosis or ellipsis, most
frequent in the Scriptures) use what means thou can to save thy self, by
saluing the wound, or vexed spirit of the Ruler. For yielding pacifieth great
offenses. Heb. marpeaci, that is, sanctity, lenity, or healing shall make
great sins or offenses to cease.

The precept is confirmed by three reasons. The first is contained in these
words drawn from the effect of submission. The second from verse 5. to verse
12. The third, from verse 12. to verse 16. Concerning the first, yielding is an
acknowledging, submission and deprecation if a man be in an error, or have
justly offended; also patience and forbearance if a man be blameless and
innocent. For a Ruler er^ing is not to be convicted of error and reproved
oppositiuely, which does impair his place and person, but under subjection and
correction to be rightlier informed in the matter or business. And this shall,
in the end, give great content, and bring thee into greater favor then was the
displeasure. Whereas contrarily on the one side thou should provoke him to
devise evil against thee, whilst that he contendeth for his honor, or to
quiet his mind by revenge; and on the other side, inwrappe thy self in
endless troubles by sinister courses. For he is too high and heany for thee
to contend against.

Verse. 5. There is an evil which I have seen under the Sun as an error,
which proceeds from the Ruler.
A Second reason of the precept is, because that by patient submission the
princes ire shall not only be healed and retracted from revenge, as was said
before, but also the subject shall prevent and avoid many evils, that through
his sinister courses he should procure unto himself, to verse 11. and
afterward be inevitable, verse 11. This reason, as I think is propounded by
way of a complaint. First, geuerally in these three next verses, the answer
whereof is illustrated by comparisons in the next four verses after. There is
an evil which I have seen, etc. There is a principal and special evil to
be seen in this disordered world, as an error which proceeds from the
Ruler: an illustration of this evil by a comparison of the like. As the error
of the Prince is a public evil redounding to the hurt of many, yea of the
whole Commonwealth, as himself is a public person: so is this also an evil
very grievous, whereby great calamity often ensues to men both in respect of
their persons and estates. If any man understand this of the error of Princes,
Preferring unworthy and unfit persons to the place of dignity, and
magistracy, which causes much evil in the kingdom; I easily yield to it.

Verse 6. Folly is set in great dignity, and the rich in low place.
A Particular explication of the evil or disorder before generally propounded,
and illustrated in these two verses; Folly is set in dignity or height, and
the rich in low place. Folly, a Metonymie of the Adiunct, for fool* By
fool, is not meant him that is destitute of reason or understanding, but him
especially that having both, uses neither or abuses both. As the fruit of
cracked or crasie reason is folly, so of corrupt or wicked reason also. There
is more hope of a fool then of him that is wilful in his ways, corrupt or
wicked wit is worse then a weak understanding. By Rich, is not meant wealthy,
but rich in wisdom, understanding, discretion and gifts to discharge the high
calling of a Prince or Ruler, as it is said, that God gave to Saul another
heart, 1. Sam. 10. 9. and which was figured by the holy Oil, wherewith the
Kings of Israel were anointed at their coronation. This is the complaint of
Solomon, that unreasonable, and reasonlesse men should sit on the Throne, and
the Bench. That such should reign and sit in the place of Judgment is the
secret judgment of God, either because people despise the goodness of God in
his word, and so he sets evil princes or children to rule over them, or
else for their trial, that their faith may be tried under a wicked Ruler. But
it follows not, as this complaint intimates, that either wicked or childish
Princes should be seditiously thrust out of their place and office, as
Childericke King of France is said to have been by Pope Zachary: For that is
nothing else but to offer violence to God, to pull the scourge out of his hand,
which with patience we must bear. But we must rather look to the cause
thereof, our sins and hypocrisies; we must pray for pasience and repentance,
and pardon, and so remove evil with good, and not contend against God to
increase our miseries.

Verse 7. I have seen servants upon horses, and Princes walking as seruvnts
upon the earth.
BY servants is meant unworthy persons, of base spirit, and roguish conditions,
such as are enthralled to their Iusts, such as hate wisdom, and instruction,
despisers and mockers of godliness, and them that are good, which if they were
but separated from their riches and authority, and their cloth taken from
them, would be most contemptible do naughts of all other, Belialls, good for
nothing at all. Upon horses. Advanced to honors, sitting on the seat of
judgment, and place of justice, abounding in wealth, faring deliciously,
apparelled gorgeously, dwelling in sumptuous houses, stored with costly
furniture, enjoying the pleasures of the world, as Job complayneth chapter 21.
David in Psalm 73. and Amos chap. 6. riding abroad on pleasure, riding on strong
and shining horses, riding in Coaches, hunting, and sporting, intertayning and
being intertayned sumptuously.

And Princes walking as servants on the earth. That is to say, men of learning,
discretion, wisdom, godliness, gravity, wanting semblable meat, drink,
apparel, building, houshold*stuffe, lodging, friendship, and for want of an
horse traveling on foot, like to laboring men, and servants, and working for
want of necessary food and raiment, as the meanest men do. If this were not in
the Church as well as in the Commonwealth, it were more tolerable. But better
it is to walk on foot to heaven, then to ride on horseback to hell with the
fool.

Verse 8. He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it, and who so breaks an
hedge, a Serpent shall bite him.
THE answer to this complaint is contained in these next four verses,
expressing the evil that a discontented, immodest, or rebellious subject
brings upon himself, not barely propounded, but illustrated by four elegant
similitudes, whereof two are set down in this verse: He that diggeth a pit,
shall fall into it. A prouerbiall sentence taken from those that make graves,
or deep pittes, which often unawares fall into the same themselves. In those
Countries they use to make pits lightly covered over with straw, leaves,
sticks and dust to catch wild beasts in, and to catch me also in. It is
applied to plotters and deuisers of mischief, which going about to harm other
men, are cast down into the pit of their own counsels, Psalm. 7. 15. 16. He
made a pit, and dug it, and is fallen into the ditch, that he made, his
mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violent dealing shall come
down upon his own pate. So Haman was hanged upon the same gallows, that he
had prepared for Mordecai, Hest 7. and Perillus was first broyled in the brazen
Bull that he made for the tyrant Phalaris to torment others in. Ioh says, The
Lord takes the wise in their craftiness. This craftiness is the wisdom of
the world so much extolled. If a man be subtle and politic for his own
advantage, though others be hindered and harmed thereby, and God dishonored,
yet he is praised, at leastwise he is highly conceited of himself for his
wisdom. It is commonly said, The best gamesters have the worst luck, so
these crafty foxes play often wily beguile themselves For the Lord will not
let their wicked imaginations prosper, lest they be too proud He that
intends evil against the Ruler, is secret and deep, but he first falls
into his own pit. The savage Papists have afforded foorded us many examples
hereof in this Land* for God has given them up into a foolish and reprobate
mind, to make snares, traps and pits for themselves; it is all their practice,
they do nothing but work their own woe. They rush against the rock, and are
split in pieces.

And who so breaks an hedge, a serpent shall bite him. He that goes about to
dissolve the government, or alter it at his pleasure, which is compared to an
hedge, shall be stung of the serpent, evil shall light on him unawares, that
imagines evil against the Lords anointed. Therefore would not David touch
Saul* that wrongfully sought his life. Thus was Achitophel taken in his own
wiliness; and Absolon, 2. Sam. 18. 14. was stung with the darts of Ioab. And
Pharao persecuting the Israelites, or rather the Lord in his people, was over
whelmed with the waters; and so it fared with Guido Fauks and his
fellow-conspirators.

Verse 9. Who so remoueth*stones, shall be hurt therewith: and he that cleaves
wood, shall be endangered thereby.
Whosoever diggeth down another man's wall to enter into his house, or remoueth
land-markes, shall be punished, either with misfortune in the evil doing, or
by law. Or, the meaning is, he that diggeth stones out of the quarry or rock,
and lifts them up, or carries and recarrieth them, is in danger to be hurt;
and he that cleaves wood, is in danger to be hurt many ways. He that goes
about to remove a Ruler out of his place, and to divide a settled government
that is at unity in it self, undertakes a dangerous piece of business. As
he undertakes a desperate work, such shall his reward be. It is evil meddling
with edge tools, and heavy stones, and trees are not for children to deal
withal.

Verse 10. If the iron be blunt, and he do not whet the edge, then must he put
to more strength: but wisdom (...) profitable to direct.
IF the edge of his axe or wedges be blunt, and unfit for such works, and he
has not whetted or prepared and fitted them according to the greatness and
knottinesse of the tree, then must he add to more strength, and weary
himself, but effect nothing, unless the breaking of his tools, and maiming
of himself: so he also that diggeth a pit without knowledge and skill, that
rashly breaks up an hedge, and remoueth stones without consideration and art,
and good advice, shall effect nothing by strength, but hurt himself, for such
weights are not to be dealt withal by plain strength. But wisdom is
excellent to direct. Wisdom prepares a good tool to work withal, wisdom
considers the weight of the work, and contriueth accordingly. For plain
strength avails little in woodworkes, stoneworkes, ironworkes, which are done
by art and fit engines and instruments. Well, as these things are not done with
inconsiderate strength, but by art and diligence; so neither can any man by
wilfulnes, frowardnes, or foolish strength prevail against the Prince, nor
appease his anger or heavy displeasure by any such like opposite courses. For
this is an heavy matter or subject to work upon, not to be enterprised without
perfect skill, sharp tools, and mature deliberation to contriue it. A ship is
a weighty vessel, and cannot be used at our pleasure as a little boat or a
dish. A King counterpoiseth the kingdom, and the states of kingdoms are not
often changed: he therefore that undertakes that work is a fool, swimming in
a pit full of snakes to catch an eele. When God will bring a general judgment
or utter destruction upon a land, then shall he in wisdom effect it as
pleases him. The Papists will needs make themselves Gods actors, pretending
his cause: they are the devils sollicitors and actors, and God gives them the
overthrow. For what special revelation or command have they to stab and poison
Princes? or to set up a monarchy by bloodshed? The Church was neither so
planted nor augmented, as the Antichristian synagogue has been: for then
should Christ have had need of Peter's sword; and then the Apostles should have
killed, rather then have been killed, with a word, as Peter did Ananias and
Saphira. Therefore the Papists dig pits, and fall into them; they break up
hedges, and are stung of serpents; they cleave wood, and cut their own legs,
and trees^all on their necks, they remove stones, and are bruised therewith,
the whole quarry, the rock grindeth them to powder. For wisdom is excellent
to direct: but they want the wisdom which is of God, and comes out from his
throne, therefore are they taken in the wiliness that they have imagined.

Verse 11. Surely the serpent will bite without enchantment, and a babbler is
no better.
AN amplification of the evil which comes through improuidence and want of
solid counsel, which evil is inevitable and incurable, surely the serpent
will bite without enchantment, and a babbler is no better. As it is a vain
thing for a man to handle a serpent, trusting either to his strength, or hoping
that the serpent will not bite; and as it is more vain to begin his charm
after that he is stung, for then both strength, hope and charms are all in
vain: so is he upon whom the displeasure of the Prince is fallen for his
con^umacie and rebellion but a babbler, his afterwit is worth naught, it will
cost him a great price notwithstanding, which shall make it to be more abhorred.

Verse 12. The words of a wise man's mouth are gracious: but the lips of a fool
will swallow up himself.
A Third reason of the precept, verse 4. The words of him that speaks in
wisdom are acceptable, and procure him favor and grace, as they proceed from
a gracious heart. For he knows what is best pleasing to God for him to
speak, and what is most acceptable for good men to hear, and what deserves
to be accepted for faithfulness and truth. For by his wise handling of the
matter, the equity thereof is found out, and favored by reason of his
forcible and good arguments used in his defense. Also his mild and submisse
behavior and patient speech, works upon the Prince to pacify his
displeasure, and mitigate his fierceness; yea and he stirs up friends by
his wise discourse to stand in his defense, and to intercede for him, whereupon
his cause begins not to be his own, but other men's also, and so is the
Ruler soon persuaded. By Prince and Ruler is meant every superior. But the
lips of a fool will swallow him up. An illustration of the reason by an
antithesis or opposition of the contrary. As the mouth or gracious and
acceptable speeches of the wise delivers him, and reconcileth the Ruler, and
procures him favor: so contrarily the mouth of the fool deuoureth him, or
destroys him. For the fool neither knows nor regards those things, but
vomiteth out perverse speeches, such as tend to rebellion, and show forth a
rebellious disposition, an heart implacable and reuengefull, whenever
opportunity shall offer it self to do evil, contrary to the practice of
David. So Ioabs rustiei speeches were but harsh, 2. Sam. 19. 5. if his good
counsel had not qualified the rigor thereof, and at this time strength was in
his hands. His answer was better, 1. Chron. 21. 3. and he did wisely, verse. 4.
in that he contended not against him in that doubtful unlawful commandment.
For he knew not the intent of the Kings heart, yet he uttered his suspicion in
most wise sort, with a secret implicit reproof, verse. 3. For it was not his
duty to demand reasons of his master, because he was but a servant: and a
servant is but the hand, not the heart, the foot, not the head of his master.
That which a man knows to be contrary to Gods commandment, he may refuse to
do, yet wisely, though he suffer persecution for it. For then is God
persecuted, and not he, the cause is Gods. For every master is but a commander
under God, as he is commanded of God, Nemo sui iuris est praeter Deum. And even
things indifferent must not be enormous, but have relation to things necessary,
whence they are to be deducted by good consequence. For God must have no
corriuall in the least things. And we must not be the servants of men, says
the Apostle, but subordinately under God. Whatsoever we are enforced to do,
has externum principium, their sin is the greater, and ours the less. Let
our Rulers and all commanders therefore take heed, that they abuse not their
authority to persecution: for they themselves are but substitutes and servants
under God; and God shall be avenged on them righteously, that vex his people
wrongfully. For he alone is autexousios and aneuthunetos.

Verse 13. The beginning of the words of his mouth is fooleshnesse: and the end
of his talk is mischievous madness.
THe next three verses are an explication of the former words generally
propounded, amplified by the degrees of his folly. The beginning of the words
of his mouth is foolishness. The fool has not an understanding heart, he
apprehends not the ground of a matter, he discerns not the truth from
error to set himself in the right way at first, but he imagines and speaks
also according to the suggestion of his lust. He is an idiot, that well knows
what he would have, as all beasts in their kind do; but what is right and
fitting, he regards not. For God is not in all his thoughts, Psalm. 10. As
his speeches are at the first vain and frivolous, that a man cannot well
understand him what he would, for he is double and confused, so is the end of
his talk mischievous madness, he setleth down on his lees. In the end he
plainly bewrays that wickedness is in his mind, and madness or violent
wilfulnes in his heart, to procure much evil unto others, and more unto
himself.

Verse 14. A fool also is full of words: a man cannot tell what shall be; and
what shall be after him, who can tell?
SEcondly, he multiplieth vain words for the excuse and defense of his folly,
his foolish enterprises, and wilful proceedings, figured by aprosopopeia or
mimesis. As the fools heart is not fixed on God, nor has the love of his
truth in it, for he hates such knowledge; so he is full of groundless
imaginations according to his variable lusts: and though his words be not
always ill, yet he never speaks well. For a proverb or wise sentence is
odious in a fools mouth, he so polluteth it by misapplying it.

A man cannot tell what shall be, and what shall be after him who can tell?
These are the sentences of the wise, Chap. 6. 1^. Who can tell a man shall be
after him under the Sun? Chap. 8. 7. A man knows not that which shall be.
The intent hereof, is to show the vanities and miseries of this life, but the
fool applies them to defend vanity and wickedness, and to show the
possibility of his wilful and witless enterprises. So there are good words in
the devils mouth, Mat. 4. 6. but they are wickedly applied and used. The words
are an argument of comfort to the children of God, drawn from their safe
protection by the Angels of God: but Satan distorteth the true intent thereof,
to persuade Christ to refuse the ordinary means of Gods appointment to tempt
God. If the Angels have charge over thee, cast thy self down headlong. When
we do without warrant or command, we put our selves out of the Angels charge,
for they are faithful attendants on God, wholly depending on his will, not on
our disobedience and rebellion. To proceed, the fool has not wit, but will,
he will not be persuaded nor dissuaded by sound reason; but what he wills, he
hops, and what he hops, shall not be to him impossible, for he makes all
things chance and luck. And so deriding wisdom, he depends on fortune.
Whereas fortune is nothing but our ignorance and improuidence. The more
wisdom and providence, the less fortune; but fools term those things the
fortunes of the wise, which they by wisdom foresaw, and by counsel and right
means brought to pass. So the fool is wise, but for ill lucks and ill haps,
which he says none can be against. Who then shall persuade him that he is a
fool? who shall dissuade him from his folly? For a fool has examples pro and
contra, for his own lusts, but the intendment and circumstances he regards
not, the differences and conueniences he discerns not. If his contrary and
biasse courses produce not such effects as he sees in the world, then it is
ill luck, but whether himself be a wise man or a fool, that he discerns
not, whether his lust and desires be opposite to Gods providence or no, he
knows no more then a beast; but some have hap, and some stick in the gap;
and give a man luck, and cast him into the Sea.

The fool is so hopeful and chancefull, that he cares not much what he
says, how he speaks, to whom he speaks, when he speaks, or does any
thing. How spoke such a one? How did such a one? Why might not I say this, or
do that? (so Esopes Ass immitated the Dog, fawning and leaping on his
master) what can come on it? It is as it is taken, as it falls out, who can
tell until he try? What knew I whether this or that would have followed? who
can tell any thing? must not all be as God will? The fool indeed stands all
upon trialls according to his lust, but what the revealed will and commandment
of God is, he regards not, he is an enemy to that knowledge. But the wise
knows that there is a convenient season, and due time for all things in the
appointed time of God, that every season, and every conditure or condition of
time produces his own words, and deeds, silence, or surceasing. But the
fool observes nothing, he will say, as others say, I have said, and do as
others have done. That which in it own time is wisely spoken or done, is at
an other time flat folly, and iniquity. So the fool in his best mood
neither imagines well, nor speaks well, nor does any thing well. For, the
good that is past he cannot apply well to the present. For Nabal is his name,
and folly is with him.

Verse 15. The labor of the foolish wearieth every one of them* because he
knows not how to go to the City.
THirdly, the fool will never be wise, nor give over his folly. He is so
proudly conceited of himself, and so wilful, but wearieth himself in his
crooked and disordered ways, and is wearied with the evils that his follies
have entangled him in. He is full of troubles, for as he wants wisdom and
the fear of God, so he medleth in many matters that are above his reach,
whereof he knows neither beginning nor ending. Why is the fool wearied in
his manifold, crooked and presumptuous businesses? Because he knows not to
go to the City. The plain tract, and even path of wisdom, the Kings high
way, the royal commandment* Iam. 2. 8. he knows not, being like to a blind
man, or staggering drunkard, that can not keep the high way that leads
directly to the City, but wandereth in crooked, and turning by lanes, backward
and forward, to and fro, being wearied with these his own ways, when he has
forsaken the right way, as the men of Sodom were with seeking for Lots door;
fools are full of wit, as they think, and so, full of business. What is
meant by the weariness of fools, they themselves do interpret, Wised. 4. 5,
6, 7* 8. We have wearied our selves in the way of wickedness, and
destruction, and we have gone through dangerous ways, (by*wayes) but we have
not known the way of the Lord (that leads to the City.) What has pride
profited us, and pomp of riches brought us? These fools loved weariness, and
weariness was their portion. They loved to weary themselves, and others also*
and they were, and shall be filled with the fruit of their own ways.

Verse 16. Woe to thee, O Land, when thy King is a child and thy Princes eat
in the morning.
A Reitteration or renewing of the former complaint, verse. 5 6. 7. showing
forth the common discontent, and grief of the querulo us multitude, who being
impatient of afflictions which God has laid upon man si^ce the Fall, but yet
extenuateth the same in mercy, or augmenteth the same in justice, accordingly
as we obey or disobey him; who being I say impatient, and eagerly and
erroneously pursuing a worldly felicition, and joyful contentment murmr
against Princes as causes of their afflictions, or hinderers of their conceited
fantastical happiness. (Whereas they themselves are a weariness to
princes, and ^o themselves; so every contentious fool and wilful fool
curses Lawyers, and wishes that there were none, when his money is spent, and
his wicked will lost.) The Jews expected such a kind of Messiah or Redeemer
that should free them from the bondage of the Romans, and vexations of their
enemies, amongst whom they had been dispersed many years, and therefore they
followed Christ in such troops and multitudes, and many offered themselves to
be his disciples in such worldly respects, aiming at the advancement of their
persons and estates in the world; and the disciples being yet weak and rude,
hoped as much, but Judas especially: therefore, when both he and the people saw
that their expectation should be frustrate, as himself by many parables and
plain speeches reclaimed them from such vanity, he betrayed him, and they
crucified him. For they were afraid lest they should not only have no profit
by him, which they looked for, but also by his means procure the displeasure
of the Romans, and so lose that small freedom which they had. Wherein we may
learn what the spirits of the unsanctified common people are in such
complaints, and of those chiefly that talk so much of the goodness of the
old world. They falsely imagine that the Pope much eased them of the burden of
Princes, and Nobles, whereas they were both body and soul the Popes, and the
Devils vassalls, excepting the Elect. And that is a thing which the natural
man, who is filius gehennae, desires. To conclude* it is rebellion, not
religion. They would feign enjoy a carnal peace, contentation, and felicity
they care not how. The sons of Adam would feign be in an earthly Paradise
again, which thing Solomon reclaymeth them from in this book, to cause them
to look for the true, spiritual, and everlasting peace and happiness, and to
enter into the heavenly Paradise. Let us therefore murmr at our sins, and
be discontented with our discontentednesse, and behold our wickedness in our
afflictions and troubles, which are but the measurable punishments of our
unmeasurable sins, and set up our rest, peace, and comfort in him only* and
there only, in whom, and where it is to befound, and had.

Wobe to thee* O Land, when thy King is a child. This complaint in the verses
before, showed forth indignatio, which being pacified with Salomons answer
breaks forth again after another manner, to wit, in an exclamation*
commiseration, or desperation* which is further emphatically colored with the
figure apostrophe, to press it more forcibly. The parts, in respect of the
subject or matter, are two. First the childishnes, or insufficiecy of the King
to rule. Sece^dly, the voluptuousnes, or riotousnes of the Nobles. Woe be to
thee. This word always imports some great evil, as here it signifies the
foolish prince to be the greatest evil, and a sure token of Gods anger it is
indeed. Therefore the Lord threatened to set children to rule over the
rebellious Jews* under whom there should be neither peace, nor justice, but
oppression and wrong, every man vexing and devouring another. When thy King is
a child. By Child, he means not so much one that is young in years, as in
understanding, and discretion. S^nex aetate, and iuvenis moribus, old in
years, but a child in discretion, and contrarily, is a distinction well
known. When Ioash was young, he followed the counsel of Iehoiada the high
priest, and the Land prosperd, and the Church flourished, but in his elder
days, he became a child, being misled by the wicked princes, 2* Chron. 24.
So Vzzia^ being but sixteen years old reigned well, 2. Chroni^. 26. 3. And
Josiah began to seek the Lord when he was a child, and reigned well all his
days. 2. King. 22. But contrarily, Rehoboam was forty years old, when he
showed childishnes in refusing the wise counsel of the Ancient* 1. Kin. 12. To
conclude, that king is termed a child, when he is ignorant of the Law, and
without discretion, contrary to the commandment* Deu. 17. 18 19. 20. Secondly,
when he is mindlesse, and forgetful of the cause of the poor, and of the
righteous, which are always oppressed* and falsely accused by the rich, and
the wicked. Thirdly, when he that should govern, is rather governed and led by
others, giving place to crafty and flattering persuasions, as Ioash did, after
that Iehoiada was dead. Fourthly, when he commits the government and care of
the kingdom to others, which at their pleasure prey upon the subjects,
enriching themselves by oppression and robbery both of Church and commonwealth,
whiles he follows his pleasures and vanities. Fifthly, when he is provoked to
wrath for trifles, but passes by the great matters of the law, as the Pharisees
did. Sixthly, when being addicted to licentiousnes he crusheth the Church, the
godly and ancient, through the false suggestions of profane Princes, as Ioash
did, but opens the mouths, and strengthens the arms of wicked flatterers,
yea suppresseth the one, and countenanceth the other, as children love to be
pleased, and are kind to deceitful flatterers, but they hang down their
heads, and run away from their true hearted friends and best counselors.
Briefly, when he seeks not Gods glory in obedience to his word, but his own
glory, as Saul did. Therefore Samuel told him that he was become a fool.

The second part of the woe, is the riotousnesse of the Nobles and officers,
which give themselves to pomp and prodigality, not regarding the welfare of
the people, but their own bellies, which is meant by eating in the morning.
They meditate not, study not, consult not in the morning, when wit and memory
is fresh, for the welfare of the Church and commonaltie, but for covetousness,
oppression, pride and pleasures, as it is said of the idle shepherds* Esaias 56.
12. Yea rude Princes oppose themselves to the fear of God and practice of
religion, and contrarily give countenance to rude libertines, left their
rudeness should appear to the commons, and so breed contempt, and shake off
the yoke of obedience; whereas if they themselves were godly and gracious, they
should be loved of the godly and be a terror to the wicked* as Job was. They
should bind Kings with chains, and Nobles with fetters of iron, much more the
commons, such honor have all his Saints, Psalm. 149. 8. 9. And why should not
Kings be Saints? It is no disparagement to their royalty, though wicked
Amaziah bade Amos prophecy no more at Bethel, because it was the Kings
Chapel, and the Kings Court, Amos 7. 13. yet not many wise, not many noble,
not many learned after the flesh has God called, 1. Cor. 1. And it is hard for
the rich to enter into the kingdom of heaven, yet are all things possible with
God that sanctifies. When Princes are not godly and gracious themselves, their
own consciences breed iealousies and evil suspicions in them, even when there
is no cause at all. For the wicked man flies, when none pursues, when none
opposes, as Saul pursued David, and grew at length into such extremities as to
slay the Lords priests, and to account them his enemies and worst subjects that
feared God most, and most lamented his case, whereas his cauilling clawbacks
brought him to a miserable end.

Verse 17. Blessed art thou, O Land, when thy King is the son of Nobles, and
thy Princes eat in due season, for strength, and not for drunkenness.
AN illustration or aggrauation of the former grief, by the antithesis, or
opposition of the contrary blessedness of the land that is governed by the
royal hearted King, and truly noble Princes. Blessed art thou, etc. By noble
is not meant him only that is of royal blood or descent, for so was
Iehoiakim, who is likened to an ass, Ier. 22. 19. or carrion, and Ieconiah,
whose name was curtalled and cropped off in contempt, as the lappes of David's
servants were by the King of Ammon. verse. 24. Neither by son of Nobles is
meant him that thinks himself glorious for his ambition, pomp, pride,
cruelty, as Rehoboam did, and Sennacherib, Nabuchadnezzar, Antiochus, Herod,
etc. but he that was noble hearted, as was David, who was borne of mean
parentage, and Josiah, who was not given to pomp, pride, ambition,
superfluity, but was content with a mediocritie, and delighted in purging the
Church of Idolatry, in setting forth the glory of God, as David did* He that is
wise and godly, is the truly aged, though he be a child, and truly royal and
noble, though he be poo^re, as Solomon said before, Chap. 4. 13. He that
fears God, and has command over his own lusts, and not captiuated to his
own will, is truly royal.

And thy Princes eat in due season, etc. That is, when thy Magistrates,
Counselors and officers are moderate and modest, not given to feasting,
banketting, prodigality, pride, glorifying one another in the flesh, not to
proud apparel, proud buildings, not to sports and pleasures, drunkenness and
venery, Prou. 31. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. For who is then graced, preferred, rewarded,
but the vassals of their lusts? The Church and Churchmen go to wrack, wanting
necessary meat, drink, apparel, lodging, etc. but rather to sobriety and
parsimony, not to oppression and robbery, but to liberality and
bountifulness; not to careless wasting of the wealth of the land, but to
preserve and increase the same; not to rob and spoil, but to enrich the Church
and commonaltie: lastly so to serve the body, that the body of the Church and
commonwealth may be served by it, and the Lord by both.

Verse 18. By much slothfulness the building decays; and through idleness
of the hands the house droppeth through.
AN exposition or explication of the woe or misery, especially of the former
part thereof, verse. 16. illustrated and enforced by a comparison drawn from
the evil, and disorderly oeconomie or government of a private house or
family, which shows forth it self in the evil usage of the outward
building. These evils are slothfulness, and carelessness, or idleness. The
former is a vice of the mind, the latter of the body. A careless mind, an
idle hand. Where those vices reign, the house not only decays, but rotteth,
and droppeth upon the head of the improuident, slothful, vnthristie
householder. A man in respect of his person is known by his apparel,
countenance and gate what manner of one he is, as touching his ethics or
morality, says the son of Sirach. Again, he is known by his house, yard,
grounds, cattle, servants, and children, what manner of man he is, as touching
his economie or husbandry, Prou. 24. 30. 31. The house of the slothful man is
ruinous, and droppeth through, his yard is like a vaste desert, the fences and
walls broken down, as a vineyard laid waste, his fields are ouergrowne with
thistles and briers, his family is disordered and idle, one contending and
quarelling with another, girning one at another, all masters and unruly. Thus
it is in the house of prodigals, drinking slipthrifts, and Belials, do naughts.
Thirdly, in respect of his politics or magistracy he is known by his
subjects. For as the householder is in his house or family, so is the magistrate
in the city, and the king in his dominions. An house is a part of a street, a
street is a part of a city, the city is a part of the kindome. The king is
the head, the kingdom is his body, consisting of members, whereof some are
superior, as those that are placed in government under him, and are
subordinate one to another, others are inferior,

Whereas the Prince fears not God, but is either covetous or wastfull,
careless and dissolute, then the Church and common wealth go to wrack. The
governors are ravening Harpies, and riotous, devouring the commons, and
feeding themselves of the flock, yea every one after their examples preying
one on another. The ungodly, flatterers, lust-seruers are advanced, and placed
in offices for money or favor, for there is no care nor fear of God in the
superiors, but every one that fears God is dishearted, and he that speaks
uprightly is hated in the gate, and he that rebukes is abhorred, Amos 5. And
amongst those wicked ones, there is nothing but envy and contentions, every
one being given to oppression, pride and ambition, and all enemies to God and
godliness. Whereupon it comes in the end to be a vast desert of wild
beasts, and as a vineyard lying waste, spoiled with foxes and wild boares,
like a field ouerrunne and cropped up with cattle, and pastures rooted up with
swine, and ouergrowne with thistles and briers. Such desolations does the Lord
threat upon carnalitie and contempt of his word. All these things declare what
the Prince is, and by what manner of spirit the commonwealth is inliued and
moved. For as the spirit of a thing is, such is the thing. If the spirit be
weak, the body is ouergrowne, and overcome with diseases, as we see in plants,
in beasts, in men. Now the spirit of household government is pater familias, the
good man of the house. The spirit of polity, or commonwealths government, is
the king. A prudent and valiant Prince has a strong constitution, and sound
body, his spirit works effectually in the finger, and all utmost parts, as
well as at the heart and inward parts, that there may be soundness and joy in
all the body.

Verse 19. A feast is made for laughter, and wine makes merry, but money
answers all things.
AN explication of the complaint or woe, especially of the latter part thereof,
verse. 16. which was this, Thy Princes eat in the morning, that is, spend their
whole time, even the morning it self, wherein nature it self binds us to
sobriety and solitary study, in eating, drinking, pleasures, like to the
Sodomites, and beastiall Princes of Israel. It is illustrated by the contrary,
and right use of eating, drinking, and other expense. A feast is made for
laughter. The use of meat, is the reparation* and conservation of the body in
health and strength, that a man may be enambled to discharge the duties of his
calling, wherein God has placed him. He must keep his body in temperance,
sobriety and chastity, that the mind may be more clear and free, of greater
strength and vigor in the functions thereof, both for deliberation and
execution. As for a feast, that is made for laughter, for a recreation of the
mind and body at certain convenient times, and to preserve common society
and neighborhood, or rather to testify friendship and love one toward
another, though particular businesses and necessities have distracted them, and
drawn every man ad sua curanda, to care for his own things* of the use
whereof feasting and co mmon meetings testify a certain community, such as
in this disordered world, and miserable condition of man can be had. But to be
addicted to feasting, to make a trade of pampering the body, as epicurishnesse,
and beastliness. For beasts regard nothing but the belly; they are all body,
and to feed well, is their perfection.

And wine makes merry. Wine also has the same use that is of meats. He that
gives himself to drinking and companiship, is a drunkard, although he never
be drunk. Therefore the Prophet Esaias denounces a woe against them, that are
able to drink strong drink; Woe be to them, for they spend not only the time
of life idly, and wastefully, but also make others drunk, and glory in
evil. But wine is not for Kings, nor strong drink for Princes, Prou. 31. 4.
but for the sick to recover health, as Saint Paul said unto Timothy, Drink a
little wine for thy stomachs sake and often infirmities; and wine is for the
sorrowful to revive the spirits, and disperse the blood of the oppressed heart
to forget his poverty and misery.

And money answers to all things. This vetse may be interpreted thus. Their
feast is made for laughter and prodigality, not for recreation, etc. and their
wine makes them merry to cast off all care, that they may more freely live in
pleasure, Esaias 56. 12. and their money or abundance answers to all these
things, that is, to none other use, but to maintain epicurish living, as is
all ready said. Or else they may have dependence upon the former verse; The
Building of them decays, and their houses drop through, who prepare feasts
for laughter, and wine for rioting, and Luxuriousnes, and their money serves
to all these things, to none other use, but to provide for feastings, drinking,
and epicurish meetings. This interpretation may well stand. But to proceed in
the former. Money answers to all things. Having showed the right use of
eating, and drinking, he now shows the right use of money. Money serves not
for providing, and mayntaining of feasts, delicious fare, pomp, and pride, but
for all things. For money is not as other mettalls, limited to certain works,
vessels, or instruments, but it has in it, by humane constitution, the nature
of all things, and is all things. So that he which has money wants nothing
that the world can afford. Therefore it is so loved and desired of worldlings,
yea even of all men. If it were of a particular nature and use, it then should
be less desired, and of some not at all. It is made for change, and ready
supply of every man's need, that every one might be helped by other. Money
therefore is all things, and for all things; not for feasts and drinkings, but
to be laid out to other uses both divine and humane; not to be hoorded up from
use, which is theft, because no man is for himself, but for others also, and
others for him, which is the essence of Charity. He that gives money,
gives, meat, drink, clothing, and lodging. He that hoordeth it up burieth
all these necessary things in the ground, from God and the poor to his power:
seeing that without money they can not be had; yet both money and all things
under the Sun, and the Sun it self, serve for nothing but back and belly.
Man's body is the center of all material things. And if the body be the temple
of the holy Ghost, there is neither money, nor any thing else, for the body,
but all for God. If all men were for God, there should be no such hungring for
money. It should be the vilest metal of all other. For iron is better then
silver. If man were perfect in innocence and holiness, he should need no
money at all; it would be more trouble to him to carry money, then it is now to
want money. The self-love, hatred, and misery of man appears in this, that
he which has no money wants every thing; and he which has abuudance of
money wants nothing. Where abundance of money is, there is abundance of
covetousness, oppression, and all mischief; every rich thief striving who
shall buy, nay wring and weary the poor out of all. Contrarily, when there is
little money, there is greatest contentation and love amongst neighbors; but
when money comes in, it sets all on fire* and parts friends. The devil
comes in with it, for it in flameth the desire; and the devil blows the
bellows, and they that are in love with it, are beasts, Idolaters, the
children of the Devil. For it is his bait and his hook, whereby he catches
them, and as it were hangs them up by the chappes.

Verse 20. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought: and curse not the rich in
thy bedchamber: for a bird of the air shall carry the voice, and that which
has wings shall tell the matter.
THis last verse is an answer to the complaint; It is propounded by way of an
Admonition or Dehortation, which has two parts answerable to the complaint,
verse 16. The first is; Curse not the King, or, speak not evil of the King:
figured by an Epanorthosis, or correction, no not in thy thought: or it is a
Prolepsis answering to the common objection, Thought is free. If thou have no
evil thought, or evil disposition of the heart, thou can not speak evil
(otherwise thou can not speak well;) let this then be one of the things that
thou can not do, and thou shall be safe, thy tongue shall not slip. It
belongs to God only to reprove Kings by his word. For he is the servant of
God, Gods vicegerent, and must not be lifted up above his brethren, he is
subject to the word of God, as well as any other, and has special
commandment to have the Book of the Law by him continually to be exercised
therein, and he shall be punished for his transgressions as well as any other.
This denunciation is made by man from God, but the execution is in Gods own
hand. If a subject transgress, then he is punished, because the king is eustos
vtriusque tabulae. He has the Covenant in keeping; he must be true and
faithful to his master in punishing, protecting, rewarding his fellow
servants, acco^rding to his Lords appointment, not after his own lust, and
pleasure. Nemo sui iuris est praeter Deum. And things indifferent, wherein they
have most power, must not be discordant from things necessary, but attendants
and ornaments, not disparagements thereto. No man is his own, he neither
stands nor falls, lives nor dies to himself, but all to God. All men are
to be reproved and punished by the king, but the King by God alone: God
denounces judgment by men, but executes by himself. If the Kingsmaners
displease thee, look to thy self, and consider the beam that is in thine
own eyes. For thou in thy state and dealings, and to thy power ar^ bad enough,
and if honor and power were put upon thy back, what manner of man would
thou be? Magistratus indicat virum. What would thou do? Great matters
surely. It may be somewhat for a while. If the burden of the whole kingdom
were laid on thy back, thou would bear it lustily. Even as a child set
upon the back of a proud, stomackfull, unruly horse, would ride lustily. Art
thou in an office? Look to thy self how thou execucutest that. Art thou rich?
what good do thou? How behauest thou thy self toward thy poor neighbors,
and tenants and servants? Thou art now a Scholar, what if thou were a
Schoolemaister? Do thou know what thou art? what thou would be thou well
know not. Something lies curbed and pind up in a secret corner, as flies in
winter, that the warm Sunshine of Authority and Honor would produce. If
the handmaid were mistress, how gentle, kind, and good would she be to her
fellow servants and poor neighbors? Solomon says, Proverbs 30. 21. 22. 23.
For three things the earth is disquieted, and for four which it can not bear*
for a servant when he reigns, and a fool, when he is filled with meat, an
odious or froward woman when she is married, and an handmaid, when she is beire
to her mistress, that is, her masters wife.

And curse not the rich in thy bedchamber. The second part of the Admonition,
answerable to the second part of the complaint. By rich are meant Nobles, and
higher powers. Speak not evil of the King and his peers, otherwise then
their dignity requires. For they represent the person of the King, as he does
of God, and their authority is his authority and power. Therefore speak no
evil of them, neither in public nor in private, not in the hearing of thy
best friend, nor in thine own hearing alone, as the manner of some is to talk
to themselves, use not that. For as they that talk in a dream know it not; so
if thou be talkatiue in thy bedchamber of such things, it will out in
another place ere thou be aware. And out of the abundance of the heart the
mouth speaks.

For a bird of the air shall carry the voice. A reason enforcing the
admonition. It shall not be kept secret, but revealed; or thou shall be
punished as if it were revealed. Briefly, thou shall surely be punished. This
certainty of punishment is confirmed by the possibility of an impossibility in
nature, to take away all manner of objections. How shall my thought, and
private or solitary speech be known, none hearing of it? If it cannot otherwise
be known, then the bird that flies over thy head, or is wandering above in the
air, shall perceive thy thought, and hear thy voice, and relate the same to
the King; so shall thou be punished. And if the King of Kings shall punish
thee, who knows the secrets of thine heart, it is all one as if thy words
were brought to the kings ear.

And that which has wings shall tell the matter. An amplification of the
reason by a commemoration to inculcate the same more deeply into the heart. The
bird shall speedily carry it, the Post shall not ride on horseback, but be
carried on wings. Thou shall not only certainly, but speedily be punished.
Wilful murder and treason will out. For every man is the image of God, and the
King is next to him, his surrogate.

CHAPTER XI.
Verse 1. Cast thy bread upon the waters: for thou shall find it As the first
degree of felicity consisted in the comfortable use of worldly things, and wise
auoidance of evils: so the second degree thereof consists in doing good,
communicating and ^o^palsionating of others. The former, in one term may be
called sobriety, this charity.
after many days.
THis Chapter sets down a sovereign remedy against the vanities, Chap 9.
that seem to carnal reason to be in the divine administration of the world,
to arm the soul against despair, distrust in Gods providence, carnal
security, d ssolute and careless living, Epicurisme, to take away the offense
of the weak, who hearing that all things are carried hand over head in the
government of the world, may begin to be weary of well doing, and to give
themselves over to carnalitie. Whereas contrarily, letting alone things that
are above our reach, we must lay hold on the commandment that is before us, in
our eyes and ears, and be more careful and diligent, working out our reward
with fear and trembling, with all confidence in Gods providence and promises,
howsoever things be carried and ruled above and against man's reason. It is
enough for the servant to do his masters will. And also to learn to
understand and know the secret ways of God out of his word in all these
things, which the blind world confound, and term chance and fortune. As
before he has diverse times taught, that the good of worldly things consisted
in the bodily use thereof, the sustenance or comfortable maintenance of the
body; so now he farther teaches the spiritual use thereof, or good of the
soul, which consists in the exercise of says and charity therewith. For in
doing good, and communicating to others that need our help, we make our love
to God, and faith in Gods promises more certain to our selves. In these times
many search into the secret counsel of God for their assurance, and are much
perplexed about predestination, but in the mean time are full of pride and
covetousness, and worldly pomp, which in baptism they have promised to
forsake. Their spirit is full of guile. If they could by deep search know their
election, they would assuredly believe in him, and confidently rely on him, and
cheer their flesh in these transitory days. If they can attain to this
assurance, but some doubt still perplexeth them, they will yet be sure of one
thing, to live in pride, pomp, pleasure here on earth. So that whether they be
sure, they will live in pride and pleasure, or not sure, they will live in
pride and pleasure. Whatsoever else they can attain to be sure of, this in the
mean time they will be sure of. But whiles they follow the pride, pomp,
covetousness, ease and pleasures of the world, as many do, they shall be
always in perplexity as many are. Show me thy faith by thy works of love or
charity, says Saint James to such like Christians in his days, and I will
show thee my faith by my works; so shall we not deceive our selves, nor be
deceived one of another. Men imagine many things, and talk of many things, but
the work done, shows the resolution of the spirit. The whole course or frame
of life is the spirit. The condition of life shows infallibly the conditure
of the spirit. Simulations and dissimulations are but frivolous couerings.
Summer will show it self to be Summer, whatsoever the weather be; so will
Winter show it self, let the weather be as fair as it will be. An hypocrite
will show himself, do what he can to the contrary; and he that truly fears
God, cannot be hid with infirmities or slanders. The thick clouds cannot turn
day into night, nor the brightest Moon, night into day. He that is dead to the
world, and to the lusts thereof, and believes in God, is merciful and
liberal: but faithless worldlings will needs break into Paradise again
without Christ, which Solomon in this book reclaimeth them from. The devil and
the flesh are their deceivers and helpers, and so their whole life is nothing
but a Gigantomachie, the Giants battle against God, his word, his Ministers,
his people. They live like pompous and proud beasts, and die like filthy
beasts, their glory is to their shame, that mind earthly things. To conclude,
this Chapter has two parts: first a Catascue, instruction or confirmation, to
verse. 7. Secondly, an Anascue, destruction or refutation, from thence to the
end.

Concerning the first, it is an instruction or remedy propounded by way of
exhortation. This remedy is liberality or bountifulness, grounded on faith and
confidence in God alone, and contrary to humane reason. If we do good to
others, God cannot do ill to us: and if we believe in him, his promises cannot
fail. But why does Solomon here above all other virtues bring this for a
special antidote against the former vanities and miseries of this life? Go
ask Saint Paul why he so extolleth charity above all gifts, 1. Cor. 13.
Again, what virtue more becomes a Christian then charity, which is to show
mercy as he has received mercy, and to do good as he has received good. He
that receives good, and does none, makes God his servant, and himself a god,
a god of this world, or devil. Again, God requires the practice of this
virtue of us more strictly, and inforceth the same, and imprinteth the same in
the memory by his own example, Ioh. 13. 4. to verse. 17. here is the virtue of
charity dramatically set forth before their eyes, and things seen cannot be
forgotten. Also Ioh. 15. 12. Lastly, we shall be judged by the works of
charity at the last day, Math 25. Come ye blessed of my Father, etc. but this
is not meant of moral, or ethnicall works, Pharisaicall, Popish works. For
sinners are bountiful to sinners, they give and lend, and that freely
sometimes to such like as themselves in fleshly respects. But Christ says,
Whatsoever ye did to the least of my brethen, ye did to me.

Cast thy bread upon the waters. Every word of this sentence is emphaticall.
Cast, that is to say, give with a good heart willingly, and readily, and
freely, not being bound at all to the love of earthly things, as David says,
If riches increase, set not your heart upon them, Psalm. 62. 10. and God loves
an open heart, or cheerful giver, that gives confidently without fear, and
freely without compulsion. This goodness of the heart in this respect
consists of these particulars:

I. Thankfulness, when upon consideration of Gods mercy and bounty toward us
in Christ, we deuote in way of thankfulness our goods, not only to our own
use, but to the poor, and to the Church. 2. Cor. 8. 5. The Macedonians first
gave themselves to the Lord, and after to the Apostles, and to the poor at
their request. And the citizens of Tyrus being converted, deuote their
merchandise and gains to the Lord, Esaias 23. 18. Her merchandise shall not be
laid up and kept in store, but it shall be for them that dwell before the Lord,
to eat sufficiently etc.

II. Love, 1. Cor. 13. 3. If a man give all that he has, and has not love, it
is nothing. Many build Hospitals for the poor, and so do Turks also; but the
Lords poor, the brethren of Christ, Math. 25. they know not: nay, they had
rather take from such poor.

III. Compassion. We must rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them
that weep: we must relieve them that want, and make their case our own. The
wicked churl says, do as they will, shift as they can, etc. when he
dispossesseth a poor tenant for a little more rent; for one poor man will
oppress and dispossess another, and this is like the raging storm that
destroys all things. It is the voice of a beast, not of a man; every beast
cares only for himself, and when one is fallen, the other tread upon him,
and goare him, and so do beastly men.

IIII. Simplicity; and that is when we aim at neither profit nor praise, but
intend to obey the commandment of God. Therefore says Christ, Math 6. 3. Let
not the left hand know what the right does. Give in uprightness and sincerity
of heart, whether in private or public; otherwise he that gives, gives not
to God, but to himself; that is the meaning of these words.

V. Cheerfulness. Rich men must distribute and communicate, for God loves a
cheerful giver. 1. Tim. 6 16 Solomon says, Prou. 3. 28. Say not to thy
neighbor, go, and come again to morrow, and I will give it thee, if thou have
it now. Job says, that he restrained not the desire of the poor, nor made the
eye of the widow to fail, Job 31. 16.

VI. Bountifulness. He that sows plentifully, shall reap plentifully, 2.
Cor. 7.

Bread. A Synecdoche of the Special. By Bread he means all kind of
sustenance and maintenance, meat, drink, apparel, lodging, money, Matthew.
25. 35. etc. even whatsoever our brethren stand in need of, wherein we are
able to help them, their souls, bodies, states. For we must not only help a
man when he is fallen, with our alms, but assist him before he fall with our
relief, and succor, both by giving and lending. The deceitful hearts of
hypocrites and churles is herein damnable. They will relieve or assist no man,
but suffer him to fall, yea occasion, and cause his fall to buy up all that he
has, for need makes good penny worths. Then will they; nay, then must they
relieve him on the common alms, wherein the churl for his part will bear the
least charge. And if for his great penny worth he does any thing of free will,
he thinks that he has done a great work, deserving great commendation,
and reward at Gods hands. These are the common good works and alms of the
deceitful world. They are most commonly like unto persecuters and robbers that
do give (sometimes) to the poor part of their stolen goods. It is (indeed)
nothing but the offering of a Dogs head, and Swines blood in facrifice, yet
they think to merit heaven therewith.

Thy bread. Therefore thou must give thine own, not as merciless churles do,
guilefully; nor yet as their fellow thieues do, which steal much from one,
and give alittle to another; or benefit one, and hurt many. The thief that
robs by the highway gives to the poor, that beggeth by the highway, and
he is counted a good master, but he shall be hanged for his goodness, if
he be apprehended. Consider this ye covetous persons, extortioners, usurers,
and all unlawful getters, that enrich your selves by the hinderance of other
men, God indeed may in mercy accept your repentance, but your gifts and great
works are abominable in the sight of God without repentance, and denial of
all your deceitful and false goodness. For God is no receiver of stolen
goods. If ye be contented with that which ye can lawfully get in a lawful
calling, and trust in him, giving a little of a little, ye shall please him
better, then otherwise with thousands. Be thou content, and let them do great
works into whose hands God has put much wealth. If they will not, their
damnation shall be the greater, and God shall dispose of their wealth as pleases
him, it may be, to thee, or thine. The widows mite shall be as great a gift,
in the sight of God, the rewarder of every work, as the great sums of
Princes in the eyes of men. As for the gift of the covetous person, usurer,
extortioner, or oppressor, it is but the sacrificing of a dogs head, and
swines blood, as I said before, it is but a bribe to make God partaker of their
theft and robberies, Amos 2. 8. unless it be in the way of restitution upon
unfeigned repentance, as Zacheus did. Many, chiefly Popish worldlings will do
no good whiles they live, but at their last end they think to merit heaven
with a great funeral feast, or gift of money, of an house, or of some land out
of their superfluity. They have indeed made many good bargains in their life,
and this is one of the best. The earnest penny indeed is offered, if it will
be received, but heaven cannot be so bought. A wise man goes forth to his
work in the morning, he takes the day before him; but this person will
begin at Sunne-set (if at all) when the gates of the City are shut. In the
time of life I heard him say often, that all things may be done for money, and
with the bribe has he procured himself much favor, and avoided deserved
punishment, and the beast thinks now to deal so with God. For I see no token
of a penitent and contrite heart, nor sorrow for sin, but justifying of
himself, no restitution, but only a gift given out of superfluity; and
sometimes nothing at all.

Upon the waters. An illustration of the right manner of giving, by a
similitude of Seed or Bread sown or cast upon the Seas, signifying not only
the sincerity and freedom of the heart in giving, but also the persons to whom
it is given. The wise worldling thinks that whatsoever is given is lost; and
if neither profit, nor praise of men, nor any thing redound at all to him
again, he counts it quite lost. Therefore respecting himself only in
every thing, (neither can he do otherwise) he counts that which is given
to the poor Minister, who is nearest unto God, clearly cast away, because the
worldling is either Popish or Turkish, either an hypocrite or plain ethnicke,
neither would he have any man that fears God to have any thing. His spirit
tells him that he is of the world, and has his portion in this life only,
therefore he claymeth the world as his own right to himself, and such as are
serviceable and pleasing to his flesh. Their spirit, I say, says as their
father the devil said, Luc. 4. All is mine, and I give it to whom I will. The
children of God are not for the profit or praise of worldlings, therefore would
they have the world rid of them. They cry with open mouth, away with them.

The persons to whom we must give, are the poor, such as need our relief and
alms, that is, such as are not able to labor for living, by reason of
sickness, age, etc. These poor are either good, or else profane, idle,
Belials, donaughts. The good are those that live honestly, and labor truly for
their living as health and strength will permit, and are thankful to God and
to their benefactors. These are a fertile soil, worth the cost and labor, and
plenty of good seed. For that which is done to them, is done to Christ
himself. He calls them his brethren, Math. 25. 40. and his little ones. To
these must we do good especially, or else it is a sure token that the love of
God is not in us. For he that sees his brother have need, and shuts up his
compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? Again, the Law
says, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. The Macedonians were willing
to their power, and beyond their power to relieve their poor brethren, 2. Cor.
8. 3. yet it is not meant that a man should ease others and burden himself,
as he that lends his money without increase to him that is richer then
himself, and in the mean time wants necessaries, verse. 13. but to make an
equality in supplying one another want, verse. 14. Neither is this meant to
confound callings, for every one must be content with his calling, as Paul
says of servants, etc. but to relieve men's wants in their callings, yea and
friendly to help them forward; not to envy and suppress on every side, that
we our selves may be aloft alone, and have all at our own disposing. Neither
yet in wants is it meant of an Arithmeticall equality, but Geometrical, as the
Philosophers say, that relief be given according to the need and worthiness
of the person. I say worthiness; for the household of faith is specially to be
relieved, though our All-alikes can abide no difference, except in this, that
as the world loves his own, so do they most affect their rascals and
claw-backs. Herein they make a difference, for to these are they very
bountiful, when they will not bestow a good look upon a poor Minister, nor
honest poor man, these must lick their living of the thorn, and chew upon
the bridle. They will have no difference at all of grace and morality, (this
difference the Papist cannot abide) morality and flattery, infirmities and
profaneness, but all must be alike. But when all is alike, that is to say,
darkness and carnality, (for that their spirit intends) then will their
pride make distinctions and degrees enough. And this is nothing but to draw all
from God, that they themselves might be gods, censuring and judging, justifying
and condemning, helping and forsaking men accordingly as they please, and as
they are pleased.

The other sort of poor are neuer-goods or doenaughts, that have lived idly,
and brought themselves into want, and in want are still idle and thanklesse,
abusing themselves even in that little which they have, and is given them. These
are a barren soil for a man to cast his seed upon. They are water that
consumes and rotteth the seed or bread that is cast into it; and so in
respect of them it is lost. For they are rather ready to speak evil, and do
uill to those that do them good, and walk about with lies; yet in their
necessity and misery must we help them, though they be naught, because we our
selves are good, even the children of God, and followers of God, who causes
the rain to fall, and the Sun to shine upon all. Christ healed the nine
unthankful Leapers, as well as the tenth, and he did good to us when we were
his enemies. He prayed for his persecuters, for he came to save, not to
destroy. And Solomon says, Do good for the commandment sake. Relieve the
godly in love, the evil in pity: we may be sure of this, that our gift to
the evil in that sense shall do us good, and him good also, and more happly
then we are aware of; this being excepted, that we minister not matter to his
wickedness. I mean, that our liberality be not means to maintain his
idleness, drunkenness, whooredome, etc. to our knowledge. (Yet many are too
wise, too circumspect herein; they prove naught in seeming to be too good.) In
this case lend to the poor, and lend not) and if he be without grace or
government, put thy meat into his mouth, but let him not finger thy money,
neither be surety for such, lest the weight of his folly be laid on thy back.
For he has the plague, and would have all alike with him. The prodigal
loves not parsimony. His nature is to undo all that deal with him, and
follow his humors; neither regard his serpentine tongue, it is no slander.
As his neck is, so let him chew such a bit. For Solomon says, That a wise man
orders his affairs by discretion. Be not ashamed, says the son of Syrach,
to beat an idle stubborn servant to the blood. And Nature teaches us to cast
out unprofitable Drones. But what Drone can be worse then those that curse,
murmr, and speak evil of their Benefactors, when as they should pray for
them? Lastly, the Law says, Respect not the poor for his poverty, give
righteous judgment. By all this we learn what to do with an evil tongued
Drone, and a sturdy loins, and what course to take with the wicked laboring
man, that spends all, and spares naught, because the Parish must keep his
children. Some such like poor there are. Lastly, we must do good to strangers
whom we never saw, and are never like to see again; which are signified by
waters also.

For thou shall find it after many days. A reason to enforce this duty. Thy
benefit shall not be fruitless, though it seem to be cast into the Sea, and
utterly lost; yet it is in the hand of the Lord, who shall restore it to thee
again with advantage. The Seed that is seattered abroad upon the ground,
seems to be lost; yet it grows by little and little, and comes in the end
to a plentiful harvest; so shall that do which is sown on the waters. The
poor are compared to ground, 2. Cor. 7. ready dressed and tilled to our hands,
and our relief is seed cast upon it; and for our pains and cost in sowing
it, we are promised to reap the whole croppe our selves. For he says
Deuteron. 15. 10. The Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy works, and in
all that thou put thine hand unto, Prouer. 19. 17. He that has pity on
the poor, lends to the Lord, and that which he has given will he pay him
again. Also Math. 10. 42. He that gives but a cup of cold water to one of
these little ones, in the name of a Disciple, shall not lose his reward. A
cup of cold water given in this sense, is better then thousands and millions
in a carnal respect. For God respects the intent of the heart only, as for
the gift it self, that is Gods own already; the whole world is his own, he
has no need of our gifts, it is his already, and he can give it to whom he
will, he makes heirs; therefore he respects not the greatness of the
gift, but the sincerity of the giver; he needs, I say, nothing from us, who
can feed his poor at his pleasure, but we have need of faith and obedience,
that he might be glorified in our salvation, whose glory is not diminished,
though we were all damned. If God bless and prosper a man in his person,
family, cattle Lands, he shall soon be rich, although his beginning be right
little. For it is not to be regarded, how much a man has, but how it
prospers. Corn, hemp, flax, trees, herbs grow in a shortspace, but no man
sees how; so is it with him whom God prospers. For first, God gives him
wisdom, and a right forecast. Secondly, there is a blessing upon it, which is
above all endeavors. Some man grows rich, no man knows how, nor himself
neither. Again, some becomes poor, he knows not how; neither can any man
well tell him. Moreover, besides the continual success of his labors, God
stirs up others to do good to him after many days upon long trial of his
faith and constancy; and the Lord makes heirs at his pleasure, lands and
goods are in his disposing. But the wisdom of the flesh is quite contrary.
The way to be rich, is to spend nothing, to give nothing, to oppress the
poor, to detain their wages etc.

There was in a certain place, one that went among the neighbors to crave
some benevolence toward the Ministers maintenance, three of the richest and
wisest (so reputed) gave these answers. One said; The more I do give, the less
I have. Another old man said; I see the fore-end of my life, but I see not my
latter: I may come to want that which I now give. The third said; I know what I
have here, but I am not sure what reward I shall have when I am dead. His
meaning was, that if he had been sure that there were a Kingdom of glory, he
would have given somewhat to have purchased it. And a fourth old man said;
That he was old, and past preaching, let his son, if he would, give to
preaching. Yea and another aged man said; That he knew how to bestow his money
better. Here is fleshly wisdom, which is enmity to the Law of God But the
word of God teaches quite contrary. The former is man's wisdom, sensual and
devilish, but this following is Gods. He that will be rich, let him bestow
freely on the poor; he that will give, shall get; it is better to give then to
take; he that will save his life, shall lose it; and contrarily, he that will
keep and save his goods, shall lose them; and he that will cast them away,
shall save and increase them, and that either by prosperity, and continual
good success in innumerable small partciulars thereof; or else afterward, as
the Lord provided for the faithful widow of Sarepta, when she looked for
nothing but death; yet of that little Meal and Oil that was left, she served
the Lords Prophet first: a worthy example of faith. And Abigael, for a small
present bestowed on David in his necessity, became a Queen, whereas churlish
Nabal was stricken dead. So do these covetous wretches rake money together for
other men that never sweat for it.

Verse 2. Give a portion to seven, and also to eight: for thou know not what
evil shall be upon the earth.
THis verse sets down the extent of our liberality, showing to how many we
must give. Give a portion to seven, and also to eight. A Synecdoche of the
special, a finite number being put for an infinite; as Christ answered to
Peter, Forgive not thy brother till seven times, but till seventy seven times.
This manner of speech is used, Mica 5. 5. Then shall we raise against him seven
shepherds, and eight principal men: that is, so many shepherds, both
teachers and rulers as shall sufficiently feed the Church of Christ, and defend
it from the enemies, and break the power thereof. Therefore we must give to
all that need our help. Luke 6. Give to every one that asks. As charity
makes a difference of persons, so again it respects every man's necessity to
give to him according to his need. A gift bestowed on a man's necessity, is not
lost, because it is put into the hands of God, that is done for the
commandment sake, and of pity. For God regards the heart of the giver, not
the gift, nor so much the person to whom. A small gift of a good heart is
great; and contrarily.

For thou know not what evil shall be upon the earth. How long thou shall
enjoy thy goods, thou know not, and what need thou or thine may come to,
thou know nor. Surely, with what measure a man meateth, to him it shall be
measured again. Blessed is he (says David) that provides for the sick and
needy, the Lord shall deliver him in time of trouble. Dives provided for his
own belly, but nothing for the poor, but aft rward he stood in need of
Lazarus help, but in vain. So shall it be wi^h every rich glutton that loves
himself and hates the poor, When the rich man's soul is in hell, then shall
his goods be dispersed on the earth, and his children vagabonds, begging their
bread, and sometimes hanged for their lewdness. As the devils fetched away the
soul of the covetous rich man Luke 12. so commonly do^vsurers, whores, and
other miscreants carry away their goods. Surely, if Dives could have risen from
the dead, he would have done good; but the Apostle says, While we have time,
let us do^good, while we are living, and have goods to bestow. For while we are
living, they are ours, afterward they are none of ours: we are now the
stewards of them, let us now make friends of the unrighteous Mammon, let us
work while we have the instrument in our hands, and do good while God gives
power to do it. For riches are for the time our gift or talent, to be laid out
and used for our Lords advantage. It is a folly not to do good in time of life,
but to defer till death, as many brute heads do, serving God as they list,
and how and when they list, serving themselves first, and if ought leave, then
shall God have something; contrary to the practice of the faithful widow of
Sarepta, as though God were a beggar that stood need at all times, and so
nothing could come amiss, nor at any time amiss, and that he must depend on
us, and be thankful to us. Thou fool and mad man, God bids thee do good
in time of strength, not at thy last end; he respects thy faith and obedience
to his commandment, not thy gift, which is his own, not thine. Have thou his
grace at command? Thou that wilt not now do good, shall not then. For he will
cut thee off suddenly, thou shall die in thy sin; nay in stead of doing good,
thou shall happily end thy days in cursing and blaspheming God, and in fearful
desperation. Again, thou will give to the poor at thy last end, etc. How many
are suddenly taken, as one arrested by the Sergeant? and as thou have been
unfaithful to the poor, so may thy executors be to thee and them. But i^ the
poor be partakers thereof, that is no good to thee, but thy faith and
obedience should have been rewarded. The commandment is given to men living,
not to men dying. Thou have always been a thief, and art so still, for this
is but a small part of that which thou have unjustly withheld from the poor,
and wrongfully gotten. Therefore thou art but as one going to the execution for
theft, and restoring some small part of his stolen goods to the poor as he
goes, which cannot free him from the gallows, and leaving the rest to his
babes, which shall be taken, yea stolen from them again, or wither away, they
cannot tell how. For the curse of the poor is upon their patrimony, though
themselves be safe.

Verse 3. If the clouds be full of rain, they empty themselves upon the
earth: and if the tree fall toward the South, or toward the North, in the place
where the tree falls, there it shall be.
A Confirmation drawn from the creatures, or law of nature, whereof two are
specified; full clouds, and fruitful trees. Or, they are an illustration of
the rich man's duty or stewardship, and use of worldly goods, by the similitudes
or examples of clouds and trees, vegetables and meteors, even all the
creatures. As the clouds being full, do not withhold their rain, but power it
down upon the earth; so the rich man must not hoord up his treasures or goods
from others. When the merchants of Tire repented, they left off to hoord up
riches and gain, according to their old manner, and dedicated them to holy
uses. Our Savior says, Give alms, and lay up treasure in heaven. Thus did
Job, and the faithful in the Primitive Church sold their possessions to
communicate to the needy. Moreover, the clouds do not rain upon certain men's
grounds, certain fields and woods, but upon all places and all things where
they are carried with the winds. So the truly merciful, namely he that is
received to mercy, shows mercy on all, his compassion is extended to all;
which general extent is a print or stamp of Gods mercy set in his heart, to
wit, that he is received to mercy, and is again truly merciful, a fruit of
the former. Christ says, Be ye merciful, as your heavenly Father is
merciful. Now he shows mercy on all, as Paul says, He is the Savior of all
men, especially of them that believe. Rich men's houses are Gods storehouses.
His gold, silver, corn, wine, oil, etc. is not laid up in every house, nor
the charge and dispensation thereof committed to every one, but to certain
persons and places, where it must not lie as a talent hid in the ground, but be
dispersed abroad among other men. For ^e that has given power, right and a
commandment to gather his frui es, has also given a commandment how to
dispose them. As the clouds, so all creatures have their fullness, which is not
for themselves, but for the earth; and they envy their rain to no man. The
rich mansfulnesse is not for himself, but for all, and he must envy the same
to no man, for that is hateful to God and man. For the earth is the Lords,
with the fullness thereof, and the creatures with the fullness thereof; every
fullness is for man, and every man has a fullness to be rained upon all, to be
distributed and communicated* to all; and that is his gift or talent. All
creatures have not one kind of fullness, nor all members one office, nor all
men in a corporation one trade. But every one distributeth his fullness, and is
served of the fullness of others, that there may be a supply of all necessaries
to every man, and an equality. He that retains his fullness to rot within
him; is worthily hated. For he is a drone and a thief. Therefore Saint James
threatens judgment, mourning, and woe to them, Iam. 5. 1. 2. 3. The
rottenness of their riches, the mothes of their garments, the canker and rust
of their gold and silver shall be a witness against them, and eat up their
flesh as fire.

And if the tree falls, etc. The trees bring forth fruit for man, so must
man do for man. They are fruitful on every side, and where their fruit
falls, there it lies for all that need it: so must every man be fruitful of
good works, as he has received the gift and the fullness thereof. And in what
place soever the tree grows it fructifieth, so does a good man out of the
good treasure of his heart bring forth good unto all, wheresoever he is,

Verse 4. He that observes the wind, shall not sow: and he that regards the
clouds, shall not reap.
THe former exhortation is figured by a double Prolepsis in this and the next
verse: wherein the answers are wholly set down, figured by an allegory, but
the objections are understood. The first is concerning the time, and persons.
First, for the time. They say, that now they are not provided to give, they
have rents to pay, they have an hard Landlord, (it is because thou art hard to
the poor, Mat. 7. 2.) they have a purchase to pay for. They have laid all out
upon house, land, cattle, they will hereafter do something. When they die,
they will make a bequest to the poor. (Qui non est hodie, cras minus aptus
erit.) Money is scant, (but grace is more scant,) they fear a dearth, (that is
the churles desire) therefore they cannot yet do good.

Secondly, concerning the persons. They allege that they should have been more
provident and painful in former times, that they are unworthy of any thing;
that they are lewd and wicked (like thy self) and will spend it naughtily (as
thou gettest it,) that all is lost which is put into a riuen dish (not in a
close chest,) they must not do for every one (that do all for themselves,) and
so out of their selfeloue, distrust and infidelity, they pretend a thousand
excuses and delays, they find innumerable obstacles to hinder them that they
shall never do any good thing at all.

The answer hereto, is illustrated by a similitude of the sower and the reaper.
He that observes the wind, shall not sow. He that stands upon wind and
weather, calm and sunshine, shall never sow his seed in the spring. Now it is
rainy, now a drisling fog and claggie, now snow-like, now frosty and dry, now
windy and stormy, etc. no weather pleases, he will tarry for a more convenient
season, and that comes to be out of season, and sometimes, when earing time is
past. It is cold, threfore the slouch will not plow, Prou. 20. 4. It raineth,
the land will be too heavy; it dris^eth, that will rot the furniture: the
winds are aloft, that will blow his seed on heaps; it is ouermoist, that will
cause weeds; it is ouerdrie and frost-like, the seed will not come up; it is a
fair day and a convenient season, but there is a Lion in the way. So the
wicked rich cannot sow the seed of good works, for want of a convenient time
and person. Either the weather or land is not in tune, because himself is out
of tune. But the strong man attaineth to riches, the good husbandman
ouerpowreth the weather, and the stars: so a good heart of gracious disposition
can do good at all times, and to all persons, he is armed against all weathers.

And he that regards the clouds, shall not reap. He that will tarry for a
convenient season of his own devising, shall reap his own device, even
nothing. He that will not sow till he see and be sure of fair weather, shall
happily never mow, but let his corn, rot on the ground, or be all eaten with
beasts and birds. We must take the time as it is, and reap the fruits as they
are. As we serve others, so are we served again. Some man will do good when he
is old, some when he dies, some after death by his last will; some fear
poverty and want hereafter; some have now no leisure; some allege the
unworthiness and unthankfulness of the poor: but none of these can find a
time when, nor a person to whom to do good, till death summon them to
judgment, and then come they with their talent tied up in a napkin. Their
reward shall be according to their works.

Verse 5. As thou know not what is the way of the spirit, nor how the bones
do grow in the womb of her that is with child: even so thou know not the
works of God who makes all.
AN answer to the second objection, concerning a man's self, arising from his
diffidence in Gods providence, and denial of his power. It is thus: I know not
what need I may stand hereafter, for I see not my latter end, I must provide
also for my wife and children; the more that I lay up the more shall they
find, this I am sure of; and the more that I give, the less I have, that I am
as sure of I will not depend on chances, fortunes, and vain hope, I will not
make my self richer by other men's goods, and he that waits for old men's
shoes, may happily go bare foot in the mean time; and a bird in the hand is
far better then two in the wood: (but if she die, and be turned into
rottenness in thine hand, or be poison to thee when thou eatest her, what art
thou the better?) how, or which way shall God do this or that for me, or mine?
what will he do for me? when will he do it? While the grass grows, the
horse dies in the mean time; I will first rely on mine own providence, and
on Gods afterward. I will do for my self, (yea by stealing and lying amongst
hands;) such like were the distrustful and blasphemous speeches of the
Israelites in the wilderness, which are set forth as ensamples for our
admonition. They also limited Gods power and providence. How shall we do for
bread and water in this barren and thirsty desert? Can God prepare a Table in
the wilderness? We are weary of this Manna, can he give us flesh? would to
God we were in Egypt again: (or in the bottom of the red Sea with
Pharaohs army, if God should deal with you according to your deserts, but
that he respects his promise to Abraham, and glory of his name amongst the
heathen.)

The answer is illustrated by a similitude. As thou know not what is the way
of the Spirit. Lean not to thine own wisdom, nor limite the power of God.
He has commanded, thou must obey without reasons. He has promised, thou
must believe without interrogatories; thou must not bind him to times and
means. His secrecy is his glory, none is of his counsel, neither is any
worthy or able, for his wisdom is infinite* his goodness is to all, and his
mercy is over all his works, and on them that fear him throughout all
generations. As thou know not the way of the wind, when it shall come,
whence it comes, or whither, or how it goes: and as thou know not how the
bones do grow in the womb, so neither can thou know the works of God, who
makes all by the word of his power, and gouernes all by the word of his
providence; he only is all in all, showing mercy and justice on all. Fear and
obey therefore, trust not thine own counterfeit imaginations, make not a world
nor an estate to thy self after thine own will, for all that shall be but as
the cracking of thorns under a pot. Thy flame shall seem great, thy noise
loud, but both shall suddenly vanish into light ashes: without Gods blessing
thy riches shall never do thee good, thy provision shall come to naught, none
of thine for whom thou art so careful shall be the better for it. For a curse
is upon it. God blesses his own gifts, not thy gatherings, his own
ordinance, not thy device. The Manna gathered on the week day by Gods
appointment, prospered, but that which was gathered on the Sabaoths morning by
the covetous, fearful, and distrustful, was putrified and full of worms;
and they that were not content with Gods allowance, but would have flesh, had
their desire; but their desire was wicked, therefore their flesh brought a
plague with it. Neither did the Manna nor the flesh of their own gathering and
desiring do them good. For there was the man, but the meat was taken away;
here was the meat, but the man was taken away. So it is now. Therefore, be
thou contented, hope in him, be doing good, and thou shall have good, and thy
good shall be good to thee, and continue with thee. Be sure of this, that of
doing good there can come none evil, neither can wickedness prosper. If thou
have goods in thine own hands, and can look upon them, thou art joyful;
and if they be in the hand of God, not yet given thee, distrust not. That which
is in Gods hands, is (by faith) surer to thee then that which is in thine own
hands, if thou do but look upon thy sinful and polluted hands as well as
upon thy goods in them. Thy sins shall take these from thee, and thy faith
shall bring the other to thee. Note this work of God in the world. There is
many a rich heir that can never be at ease till all his patrimony be spent.
Again, there is that cannot thrive till his foul inheritance be clean washed
away, or his hands cleansed of that filth, and then afterward he prospers
and attaineth to riches. For the man that sets his heart to gather for his
children, withdraws himself commonly from relieuing the poor, and so
brings a curse on his house and lands, the executioner whereof is the heir
for whom he labored. He that has grace to beleene, to trust in God, to do
good, whether he has much or little, is heir to all things, and shall want
nothing that is for his good: and God knows what is for our good better then
we; he is our father, the Ancient of days, most wise, we are but children,
etc. Therefore fear not, God shall bring it to pass, cast thy care on him,
only be doing good. The good Counselor shall want no Clients; the good
Physician no patients; the good Tradesman no custom; the man that fears God
no friends and helpers. For the hearts of all men are in Gods hands, and his
works above reason, and beyond expectation are infinite; to conclude, limite
not God, but considder how the Lord brought Jonas to Nineue; and by what means
he advanced Joseph, and provided for Jacob with his sons in the great and
long famine of Canaan.

Verse 6. In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withold not thine
hand: for thou know not whether shall prosper, either this or that, or
whether they both both shall be alike good.
A Conclusion of the exhortation, verses 2. 3. 4. 5. with the answers to the
objections, verses 4. 5. figured by an Allegory. Therefore, in the morning
sow thy seed, and in the evening, etc. Lay out thy goods bountifully, and
that with a good and free heart in the morning, and let the day care for it
self. Do good all the day until the evening, and then also* and thus do
from day to day. Then shall thou rest in peace, and sleep in safety, when
thou have reposed thy self on God. Do good in thy young age, and mortify the
lusts of youth, and cares of middle age, and continue in well doing till old
age, and be then weary of life, but not of well doing; neither weary of life to
do well. And in thy last end, finish thy good life well, and do some good
work after thou have taken thy leave of the world, and turned thy back, as
the last word after a farewell for a memorial and good ensample to the living.
While a man's name is in memory, and his works in fight, he is not dead, but
living.

For thou know not whether shall prosper, either this, or that, etc. A
confirmation drawn from the uncertainty of the success of morning and evening
sowing, whether shall bring a better harvest, or both alike, thou can not
tell. Therefore do good, work at all times, from morning till night; from
youth till old age, and as at all times, so to all men, good and bad, known
and unknown. For neither do thou know which shall be most fruitful, nor
which God will most reward. A word in due time is like Apples of gold with
pictures of silver; and so is a good deed, which can never be out of due time.
A gift of small value often times does great good to a man, and procures great
good to thy self, for God will hear the prayer of the poor for thy sake, and
reward thee, when thou have forgotten and know wherefore it is. Even as God
does punish age for the sins of youth, else would not David have prayed,
Psalm. 25. 7. Remember not the sins of my youth: so does he reward the good
works of youth in old age. For he that gives in youth, laith up for age:
because, whatsoever he seems to cast on the waters to his present hinderance,
shall be paid him again with advantage. What then? will thou give because of
advantage? That is usury, which God hates. Give freely, of a faithful and
obedient heart, looking for nothing again at all. But thou will say, many
receive no such reward. I answer, God knows the heart of the giver, and thou
must remember the resurrection of the Just, as well as present things. God has
a better thing in store for thee, let not the trifles of this nonage discourage
thee. This is a sure ground, well doing shall be rewarded. If thou see not such
a reward here, thou art more blessed because more assured of the reward
hereafter. For the wicked also receive temporal rewards of external, and
hertlesse good works. Do good therefore continually, and to all; save not thy
meat, and lose thy life as Nabal did. Shall I give my meat, drink, money I
know not to whom? So the fool reasoned. But Abraham and Lot, by showing
kindness to every one, entertained Angels unawares. If they had been as wise
as Nabal thought himself, they might have perished in the fiery deluge of
Sodom, as Nabal should have perished by the sword. But bountiful Abigail could
not perish, no more then Lot; for the Lord delivers the merciful and
libetall in time of trouble, and plenteously rewards the proud doer.

Verse 7. Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes
to behold the Sun.
THE second part of the chapter, or anascoue, maintaining the former precepts
by a confutation or destruction of the corrupt and lustful imaginations of
man's worldly heart. It is figured by a double Prolepsis; the former whereof is
general. The objection is figured by a Prosopopeia, which is figured again by
an Allegory in this verse. The answer is given in the next; Truly the light
is sweet, etc. By Light is meant worldly prosperity, Esaias 58. 8. Then shall
thy light break forth as the morning. By the Sun is meant an happy outward
estate, excelling all other, splendide and pompous, whereof the worldly heart
is enamoured, as the only felicity, Job 31. 26. If I beheld the Sun when it
shined, or the Moon walking in her brightnesle. That is, if mine heart was
enamoured on my flourishing estate, if I blessed my self for my wealth, power,
and honor. To proceed, whereas Solomon has before recalled men from coveting
earthly things, and self-love to charity, and good works, that he might more
firmly settle this grace in their hearts; he now rooteth up the weeds of
fleshly pleasures, and worldly delights, by bringing in the careall man
objecting or replying against him for himself, or rather, upon his good
admonitions to retract him closely, clinging to his dirty god Mammon, as
Crabbes cleave to the rock, and one to an other when they are pulled away.

Ah! but for all that, a goodly inheritance is a sweeto thing: it is a pleasant
thing to be well seated in a fertile soil, in an wholesome air, near to the
river, not far from the city or market, to be free from all troubles and
cares that poverty brings. What an heavenly life it is when a man need do
nothing, but walk about his grounds for his pleasure, ouersee his workmen,
look on his cattle, etc. (as the covetous rich man did, Luk 12.) when he is
provided of the best housholdstuffe and lodgings, and withal able to make his
friend welcome, to entertain a gentleman, to keep gentlemen company, to
keep a couple of men and a good gelding, to ride with credit, and to change
the fashion with the better sort, and to have money always in his purse, to be
able to pleasure a friend or a gentleman at his request in his need, to be able
to maintain his wife in the gentlewomans fashion, and to bring up his children
in learning for greater preferment. Ah, this is a lovely and desirable estate
above all things, say what they will. I will go labor, and spare all that I
can, and cast about every way, that I may have as such a one has, and live as
he does, or might do if he were wise. Ah, what good could I do, if I had as he
has, or had been so well left? He dwells in a sweet seat, what goodly and
sweet grounds has he adjoining to his house? what sweet fields of wheat?
what goodly pastures? what a goodly root of wood? what pleasant groves? some
say, it will be sold ere long. He prospers not, he is indebted; who but a
fool and a beast would make away such a goodly thing? Ah, would to God I had
money to buy it, I would never part from it; well, I will have money if I live,
I will make all crack else. I shall live in pleasure and comfort hereafter
when I am old, and my son shall be a fine young gentleman, of good account
among gentlemen's sons, well accepted of the best sort, and shall easily
attain to greater dignity, as I mean to bring him up, and place him in
marriage. [What a zealous man is this! how his bowels yerne with pity on the
poor, and poor Minister! how he first of all seeks the kingdom of God and
his righteousness!] He means to be first, a covetous beast, to rake money
together by all means, quo iure, quaque iniuria, from Church and poor, and to
leave his substance to his heir; but when the devils fetch him away, and his
heir roguishly wastes all, and is at last hanged, then shall his folly and
madness appear. In the mean time nothing plagueth him, but precise
Preachers, they are his tomentors.

Verse 8. But if a man live many years, and rejoice in them all: yet let him
remember the days of darkness, for they shall be many. All that comes is
vanity.
AN answer to the reply, proponnded by way of admonition. The argument is
drawn from the contrary adiunct. Youth and prosperity are subject to age and
death, which begins in age, and forms him from the grave. Whereupon he
infers the common conclusion, to take away this and all other replies, All
that comes is vanity. But if a man live many years, etc. Put the case
(Dato, non concesso) that a man enjoyed that conceited happiness, confisting
in a free worldly prosperity, that earthly men so dream of, and aim at in
all their courses. Say that he live long, which is a thing desired of all men,
chiefly the rich, and that he rejoice as freely as it is possible for a man to
do in this confused and disordered world; yet let him remember that which he
cannot always forget, nor altogether forget in his freest iollitie, namely that
he is mortal, that his flower fades, his leaf withers, his verdure
vanishes testie and tedious old age hasteneth, light shall be turned into
darkness, pleasure into pain, delights into wearisomnesse, and the dark
days of old age and death exceed in number the lightsome days of life; I
say, the dark days of old age and death, because old age is the infancy or
childhood of death, as the sun setting to us is the sun rising to the
Antipodes? For these pleasant sunshine days, wherewith thou art so ravished,
are but a worm gleame, and momentanie glance; but contrarily, the days
wherein the body must lie in the dark grave, are many. These last words are a
meiosis or liptote, which are a kind of hyperbole, to wit, of defect. Many, is
put for innumerable, endless, eternal. It may also be a synecdoche of the
special. Let a man remember all this, and it will abate his lustful courage,
it will take down the pride of his flesh, it will mitigate the eagerness of
his desires, and the lushiousnesse, lothsomnesse of his worldly zeal, and make
him more out of love with his tender darling, his body, it will gather home his
wild dispersed fancies, and his rouing thoughts into their hold, and hang them
on their right hinge, and bring back the prodigal vagabond home, lastly it
will recover his wits, and restore him to his right mind. Therefore be
satisfied with this, be admonished hereby to contentation in things present,
strive not for an imaginary happiness, but exercise thy self in works of
charity, rather do good, which brings the true good, then seek for it in
goods which cannot afford it. For all that comes to man in this life as
concerning the outward, man, is vanity, seeing that old age comes, and death
follows after, and that is eternal. To conclude, eat, drink, rejoice in
the works of thine hands, but remember thine end, exercise thy self to good
works, that as thou live joyfully with Gods gifts, so thou may die
happily, and enter into everlasting joy. That light is sweet, that Sun
pleasant. For we eat to live, and live to do good; we live joyfully to put
away tediousness, that we may serve God more cheerfully.

Verse 9. Rejoice O young man in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the
days of thy youth* and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of
thine eyes: but know thou that for all these things God will bring thee to
judgment.
THis verse is an answer to the second objection, or reply, which is more
particular, to wit, concerning the young man, for whom there is some color of
reason pretended by the wicked civil. The reply is directed against the former
answer, but it is not here expressed, but understood by the context of the
words. I grant indeed, that when a man is full grown, and grown full, elder
and richer, he should be helpful to the poor, and letting all youthful
tricks pass, have a care of his family, and follow his husbandry, that the
poor may be relieved, and his children well provided for. But youth will be
youth, youth must not be abridged of liberty, young men must be borne withal,
if they be not too lewd. But indeed if they begin to fall to whoredom, and
unthriftiness especially, they must be bridled, else shall they lose their
good name, and spend that which their friends have left them, which is worst of
all. Again, when a man grows into age, he must begin to think of his end
(it is time I think) and come to Church duly to serve God (after that the
devil is first served) and at his last end have a chief care to set all right
and straight. For when things are rawly left, I see often times that variance
grows among his children^, and much heart-burne, and vain expense, the Lawyer
gets all in the end, and they all become beggars. That is the very fruit of
thy wisdom and works, it is Gods just judgment upon the worldly wise, which
seek not Gods kingdom, desire not his grace, nor teach their children the
fear of the Lord, but aim all at worldly wealth and credit, even that
imaginary happiness which Solomon here confuteth.

The answer to this objection, is directed to the vain imaginations of the
young man. First it is propounded, and figure by an ironicall concession, and
after rendered in plain words, by way of correction and threatening. Secondly,
it is amplified by a milder, but grave exhortation.

Rejoice, O young man, etc. Concerning the imaginations of the young man's heart,
which Solomon here meets with, they are three.

1. Some young men imagine the time of this life to be but a market of buying
and selling, to heap up treasure, and to set themselves into a covetous
course, and so fall into innumerable sins of that kind.

2. Some imagine it to be but a play. These enter into an Epicurish course of
life, and innumerable sins of that kind. Yet of these contrary lives, there are
sundry degrees and fashions, and the latter sort are most incident to youth,
the other to age.

3. Some hold a mean, Ne quid nimis, they participate of both these extremes,
and those are the moderate, wise, civil, and orderly wicked. The other two are
madness, and this is folly. For in man there is no true wisdom, nor true
goodness. As one holds on couetousuesse, the other on voluptuousness, so the
third on pride and worldly pomp, wherein soever it stands. He is meanly
covetous which he calls parsimonie, and meanly prodigal which he terms
liberality; but extremely vainglorious and proud, and as reprobate to every
truly good work as the other. This we have from our mother Eve, a desire to be
as gods. Parsimony, and liberality, and all other virtues are splendide sins
(as Austine says) attending on vainglorie.

To all these Solomon sh^peth this answer by way of mockage and derision,
seeming to yield unto their reasons and excuses, because young men, whether young
in years, or young in discretion, are proud, wilful, self conceited,
impatient of admonition and reproof, but in the end he leaves a sting in
their consciences at his farewell, to be a sour sauce to their dainties, to
stay their appetites from surfeiting. Thou art wise, young man, and valiant
hearted, thou need no counselor, it is a discredit to be taught, consult
with thy self, and be like thy self, live in pleasure, and* follow after
delights, cheer thy body in the use of those things that thy heart lusts
after, enjoy the fancies and pleasures of thine eyes, thou art yet young enough,
thou have a long time to live, now be merry and Ionill (louis filius) thou have
nothing to care for, put up no wrongs, avenge thy quarrel, brave it with the
proudest, maintain thy credit, try thy valor, follow the fashion, court it
bravely, a word and a blow, stand to it stoutly, make them stoop to thee, put
up no abuse, spend thy blood before thou put up disgrace, never yield, for
flesh and blood cannot endure it, spend frankly among thy companions, part with
thy money freely, sit not out for a little, show thy self right bred, take thy
liquor with thee, etc. Let base fellows go, avoid precise company for
staining thy reputation among the generous, it is neither for thy profit nor
preferment to regard Sermons, Ministers are but masters, they are no gentlemen
(yet is thy tongue too bad a clout to wipe their shoes whom thou most
despisest.) Well sir, feed on your fancies, and rejoice with your fleshly and
lecherous companions, and corrupt ye one another with your wicked blasphemies,
put away all remorse of conscience, and the day of evil, and make a league
with death and hell; but know this for certain, that God will bring you to
judgment, you must be summoned to appear before his tribunal seat, neither
your wit, nor your valor, nor your blood shall be regarded there. You must
give up a just account of all your words and deeds, as well of your youth, as
of your age, and as well of those things that you have forgotten, as those*
gross sins that ye remember, neither do ye know how soon. It is but your
folly to put the day of death far from you, death comes often like a
lightning or thunderbolt, it blasteth the green corn, and consumes the new
and strong building. As for those that you so scorn, and basely esteem as but
priests, precise persons, clownes, what if you see them your Judges appearing
in glory, and your selves as base miscreants and thieves holding up your hands
at the bar among your other fellow devils?

Will you needs be wealthy? remember the rich fool, Luke 12. Will you needs
live in pleasure on earth, with contempt of all that fear God? remember the
Sodomites. Will you be glorious and pompous spectacles? remember Dives. Do you
approve of any thing except Religion and the fear of God? Hear what your
brethren and companions say, that are gone to yours and their home before you:
hear what they said when they were alive as you are now, Wild. 2. throughout.
And again, hear what they say now being dead, as you shall be, Chap. 5. 4. 5.
6. etc. And you proud, oppressing, pompous mockers, what advantage is your wit,
your wealth, your pride, and pomp to you, when your riches are vanished? when
your idols your bodies are rotten? when your children are begging, and come to
fearful ends? and when your souls are in hell? Remember this thou young man,
to moderate thy fleshly joy, pleasures, delights, to pacify thy wrath, to
mollify thy rigor, to teach thee wisdom and humility, and above all things
to seek the kingdom of God.

Verse 10. Therefore remove sorrow from thine heart, and put away evil from
thy flesh: for childhood and youth are vanity.
A Conclusion with an exhortation, which is twofold. The first is destructive
or negative, teaching mortification, in this verse. The other is astructiue or
affirmative, teaching vivification, Chap. 12. by which means the heavy
judgments of God are avoided, and true happiness is attained. Therefore put
sorrow from thy heart, and put away evil from thy flesh, to wit, inordinate
affections and lusts. Put away moodinesse, anger, impatience, carnal love,
worldly zeal, hatred, envy, grief, sorrow, etc. And put away all inordinate
and insatiable desires, and lusting after worldly things, riches, honors,
pleasures, vainglorie, pomp, gluttony, voluptuous living, pride, venerie,
epicurisme, even all disordered affections and lusts. For childhood and youth
are vanity. A reason to enforce the exhortation. As childhood soon vanishes
away, so does youth or middle age; as morning is soon spent, so is the mid
day, and old age hasteneth, as the Sun to his going down. The pleasure of
youth is vain and momentanie, it is like the fading flower in the Spring,
whose verdure and beauty soon vanishes, the blast of the East wind, and the
scorching beams of the Western Sun cause it to wither in a moment. As the
time of youth is fleeting and transitory, so is the state thereof sinful and
dangerous. Sinful because the plasme or vessel of the soul is now strongest
in her temptatious; dangerous, because the devil and the world are now most
busy to imprint folly in the hearr of the young man. He is now in winning or
losing. The way of a young man is like a serpent upon a stone, a bird in the
air, a ship on the sea; which way these will turn, no man certainly knows.

CHAPTER XII.
Verse 1. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil
days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no
pleasure in them.
As the second degree of felicity consisted in the works of charity: so the
third and last in the practice of piety.
THis Chapter has two parts; an exhortation, and a conclusion. The exhortation
is contained in the first seven verses. It is the astructiue or affirmative
part of the conclusion. Chap. 11. 10. exhorting to Christian or godly life,
specially duties of piety, consisting in faith and obedience; as in the former
Chapter he exhorted to duties of charity.

Remember. This word is opposed to forgetfulness, the common corruption and
vanity of youth. For youth being violently carried with headstrong passions
and unbridled lusts, is most apt to forget God, to despise instruction and hate
correction. Remembrance is historical, or practicke and effectual. The former
is the bare understanding and bearing in mind of a thing past, as not
pertaining to us, but the wise man makes use of every thing. The latter is the
understanding remembrance of that which pertains to us to do, or a duty to
be performed. It is particular or general. Particular, is of every man's duty
in that calling wherein God has placed him. General, is of Christian duties
to be performed of all. Particular callings and duties, are sanctified by the
general, and comprehended under it. Therefore this remembrance is holy and
general; holy, because it is a remembrance of God, and his glory; general,
because it extends to the whole man, inward and outward. Therefore he says,
Remember thy Creator that made thee in his image, and all things for thee.
Remembrance therefore is to direct all faith, hope, love, fear, obedience,
every action of life, and cogitation of the mind to God only, even to his
praise and glory. Contrarily to forget, is to be unthankful and disobedient,
Deuteron. 8. 11. Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God, not keeping his
commandments, and his laws, and his ordinances, etc. 14. Then thine heart be
lifted up, and thou forget the Lord thy God, etc* Therefore this word Remember,
implies continual obedience in every thing, or perpetual thankfulness.

Thy Creator. This is not an ampl fication, but an argument of confirmation.
Remember God, f^r he has made thee an^ that in his own image, therefore art
thou bound to him in pe petuall duty and service.

Now. He speak in of the time present, as the Apostle does, Hebr. 3. 13.
Exhort one another daily while it is called to day A d what is this but to
remember God, while we have our being, as David says? Let every thing that
has breath praise the Lord; even whiles it has breath. Then must we needs
remember him from the coming in, ti^l the going forth of the breath. And, so
often as we draw our breath, let us remember that we draw life, and all
things for life, from him. And as we send forth our breath, so must we return
all in thankful obedience to him. We draw the allnourishing air into our
bodies, and send it out of our bodies; even so what we have received from God,
let us return it again to God with advantage. This is the practike or
effectual remembrance here spoken of.

In the days of thy youth. He says not, whiles thou art young, or in time
of youth, but makes mention of days, to intimate, that every particular day
of this life, is to be consecrated to the Lord, that is, not the bare time, as
some give the Sabbath to God, but all our thoughts, words, and works in the
day, and not some, but all. For we are not our own, but the Lords, as Saint
Paul says to Servants; Serve the Lord, not men. And to speak as the thing is,
the whole time of life is a Sabbath. The Sabbath was ordained for the relief
and help of our infirmity, and also to show forth our consociation and
fellowshippe with our fellowmembers, and fellow-seruants in the Church
triumphant, as far forth as the necessities of our bodies here below will
permit. For eternal life is here begun. Therefore we owe nothing to the
flesh, not one minute of time, nor one thought of the heart. We are the Spouse
of Christ, as Paul says, he presented the Corinthians a pure Virgin to
Christ. We must be chaste, as the Angels are beautified with all chastity.
Concerning old age there is no doubt made. For every one thinks that a man
must then begin to draw near unto God, but they imagine young age to be a
time of liberty. But herein these indifferent minded men are like the
sacrilegious Jews, Malach. 1. 13. 14. They offer, the torn, the lame, the
sick, the corrupt, the lean, as Caine did. Therefore are they accursed, verse
8. Go offer it to thy Prince, will he be content, and accept thy person? It
is the offering of an old Dog. Men commonly offer health, strength, beauty:
Youth to their lusts, to the world, and to Satan; but sickness, weakness,
deform tie, old age to God. When they can serve the world no longer, then come
they to God, the adulterer, and the old whore The world is an harlot, when
her lover is quite spent, she casts him off, then comes he to God with his
old carcass. Those things that the world contemns, or little regards,
must God have; but howsoever, the world must have the first offer. Poverty and
baseness we can be content to give to God, but riches and honor to our
selves, and the devil. For he says indeed, All is mine. Luke 4. 6. God must
be served of Lazarus: Dives is too great, too good; therefore he must not
abase himself to stoop so low, but rather honorably deuote himself to his
belly, and to the Devil the lord of the belly. The virginity of the tender
beautiful woman, is too good to be consecrated to the Lord, to live chastely,
so the lewd lourdaine thinks. So Nabal thought any morsel of his meat, or
bottle of his drink, too good for David, but nothing was enough, nor good
enough for himself. So the Churl can spare nothing to the poor Minister, nor
give one hour of the week to God. But the old whore, the old thief, the
old adulterer, the old Nabal, etc. that are sodden, and rotten in their
lusts, can be well content to give their carcasses unto God. And when they have
at their last end disposed their goods to their children, and their rich
friends and kinsfolks, they will happly send for the Minister to instruct
them, and to pray for them, but they will not yet remember the afflictions of
Joseph. And wherefore to pray? that God would now accept that carrion-idoll,
and receive it into the kingdom of glory, and company of the Angels of
Light. These wicked beasts think that they owe no more service to God all
their life but this. But dogs, whoores, whooremongers, gluttons, liars and
covetous persons shall be without, and cast down into the fiery Lake among
their fellow devils, for whom is reserved the blackenesse of darkness for
ever, Reu. 22. 18. Solomon teaches here a contrary lesson. And so does David,
Psalm. 119. 9. Wherewithal shall a young man redress his way? Even by taking
heed thereto according to thy word. Here is both rudeness, ignorance, and
ethnicall civility excluded. A young man must redress his foul ways, and
purge out his menstruous or natural filth by the word of God, that both
mortifieth, and quickens, kills, and makes alive. The young man must be
offered in sacrifice with Isaac, and grow in grace as he grows in years. Young
children were to be taught the meaning of the Passover; and so is the word to
be preached to children, the grounds of Religion are to be settled in them.

But let us examine and insist upon the words of David alittle, or whosoever
was the Author. Wherein, heb. bammeh, that is, In what thing principally, or
in what thing alone. The words do imply an excellency or singularity. Young
man. heb. nagnar, that is, rude, precipitant, inconsiderate, passionate; it
properly signifies a confusion or mixture of things cast out of the lap,
without regard of order. Redress his way. heb. iezakkeh, in the con ugation
piel, that is, wholly, and all together, and also always and continually. For
the first, there are no excuses, delays or alleadgements for young men, they
are t^e^ to sobriety as well as old, though every man's infirmity be to be
borne withal. Young men are rash and heedlesse; old men are peevish, and
rigorous, etc. Saint Paul says, Tit. 2. 6. Exhort young men that they be sober
minded; graec. sophronein: id est, temperantes esse. Now temperancie is a
virtue ouerruling all lusts, and inordinate appetites, subdewing them to the
Law of God, or godly reason. The parts thereof are shamefastness, honesty,
abstinence, sobriety, chastity, continence, humility, modesty, severity,
parsimonie, innocence.

The Apostles will is, that the faith of young men and women be exercised in
these virtues. Again, verse 10. Servants must adorn the doctrine of God in
all things; and they are most commonly young, and especially arrogate
rudeness, and liberty, as it were by their own right. Moreover, Ephesians. 6. 4.
Children must be brought up in instruction, and information in the Lord. graec.
en paid^ia, cai nouthesia. Instruction stands in encouragement to virtue, and
in correction, and reproof. Concerning the former he says, Provoke not your
children to anger, to grow into stubborn resolutions, but cheerfully to obey
you with love and delight. Concerning the second, Prou. 22. 15. Foolishness is
bound in the heart of a child, but the rod of correction fetches it out.
Information stands in doctrine or catechizing, and in precepts of good
manners.

For the second signification, he must redress his way always and
continually, even in childhood. First, because, as in the time of the Law the
first fruits were offered to the Lord, Deuter. 26* 2 and every male first borne
was given to God: So men must consecrate their children unto the Lord; and
young men must offer themselves to the Lord. To which offering Saint Paul
alludeth, Romans 12. 1* specially the young man, 1. Corinthians. 7. 34. In the Law,
God commanded young men to be taught the meaning of the Passover; and to
rehearse his Laws to their children; according to which precepts Timothy was
brought up, and Obadiah 1. Kings 18. 12. Abraham's and Cornelius families, and
2. John 4. I rejoiced greatly that I found thy children walking (not in
ethnicall civility) in the truth. This condemns all unclean beasts. Again,
young men have promised in baptism, and set their seal, that they will forsake
the world, the flesh and the devil. For baptism is the restipulation or
repromission of a good conscience. It is the badge of our pro, session, which
is to consecrate our selves wholly to Christ, into whose name we are baptized.
Now we are consecrated to God, when we die to sin, slain with the sacrifice,
crucified with Christ, yea risen out of the grave of sin, and glorified or
sanctified with him, Gal* 2. 20. Young men are to remember their promise or vow
in baptism, and not like careless dingthrifts to throw the debt on their
sureties, as Esau that preferred a mess of pottage before his birthright.

While the evil days come not* etc. An argument of confirmation, drawn from
the instable state of young age, which passes away as a shadow in the dial,
and as the day and summer passes away, and the winter and night draws on.
Moreover, the force of the argument lies i^ the consideration of old age, as
a means to cause the yo^g to remember the duties of charity and piety in the
stre gth of his years, while he has time, while the day serves, and summer
lasts. The day is for labor, as David says, Man goes forth unto his work
until the evening, the night is for rest. Our Savior Christ says, Ioh. 12.
35* Walk while ye have the light, lest darkness come upon you. Work out your
salvation with fear and trembling, says the Apostle. Now the day is for
work, and as well the morning as the evening, and rather. Why stand ye idle,
says Christ, get you into my vineyard. The harvest is great, the laborers are
few. The works of charity and piety are great and many, we are but frail
and we^ke. Let us recompense our weakness with willingness, our short time
with sedulitie and diligence. If there be first willing mind, God accepts
according to that which a man has. Let us carefully husband our talent while
we have time and strength. The Spring produces all things out of the earth,
that were buried in Winter; even so what lies buried in childhood, shows
forth it self in youth. Corruption must not show it self forth now, but the
practice of instructions and godly informations formerly taught, even grace
wrought in childhood by these good means. The Summer ripeneth what the Spring
brought forth; let middle age bring to maturitie and perfection that which has
been taught us in our young age. The old in evil dies in evil, a thousand to
one.

Now that the consideration of old age may take the deeper impression in the
heart of the young, he depainteth it out by an allegorical hypotyposis, or
lively description, first generally in these words, and after particularly in
the next six verses.

While the evil days come not. By evil days in general is meant poverty,
weakness, sickness, lamenesse, blindness, and other afflictions of body and
state, whereby a man is disabled from the actual performance of such duties as
he is called unto. Whatsoever ability or gift a man has, that is his talent.
And in all affairs and works of this life, men take the appointed sea on, and
use the time with diligence; night lets, rain lets, wind and tempest
lets, these lets men redeem with diligence, (and some with double
diligence) and reserve some works for letting days, that every moment of time
may be supplied; so they will never be idle, that mean to be wealthy. So it
must be with us in our Christian calling. We must work with the Oar while we
have strength, and after sit at the stern. Let every man do good while he is
able. Let him take grace when it is offered and use it when he is bidden. The
Law says, yea the heart and whole drift of the Law is this, Love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, mind, soul, strength, soul and body, superior and
inferior powers, even while thou have an heart, which first lives, and last
dies, while thou have a mind and a memory, while thou have strength, while
thou have health, while thou have wealth. Suffer no gift to be unfruitful.
Every talent must fructify. Secondly, by evil days more specially is meant
the disease of old age. For old age is a disease, it is the consumption of
the whole body, whereby a man is disabled from doing any thing. It is grievous
and wearisome. The lame is past labor, and the sick past study. These words,
the evil days, as I think, have relation to the body, and the next to the
mind.

Nor the years draw nigh, wherein thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them.
An amplification figured by a Prosopopeia, whereby he sets the future age,
person, words of the young man before himself. Men draw forth as lively as they
can, the pictures of their young age, that in old age they may see their youth
before their eyes, this is but a vanity; yet may good use be made hereof. So
contrarily, Solomon draws out the picture of old age, that men in time of
youth may see and look upon, and remember their old age, and death which
follows, and their account which follows that. This is an instigation to
works of charity and piety. Better it is for a young man to have the picture
of death before him, then for an old man to have the picture of youth in his
eyes. An old dotard is odious, and an old babbler hateful.

I have no pleasure in them. These words have reference to the mind of the
old man, when the body is pained, the mind is grieved. When the bones are
full of ach^ it is past work, and suffers not the mind to be exercised in
study, meditation, counsel, advice, direction, etc. Every thing is tedious and
irksome to the weary, he delights in nothing, but in ^esting, sleep is
sweet to him, and so is death to the aged. The mariner speaks of the
winds, the shepherd of his flock, the plowman of his grounds and cattle
and the old man of his diseases, infirmities, aches. His relations of things
past are concise, independent, confuse; he cannot manage and use his
experiments and observations to profit withal: yea his former practices are but
speculations to himself, much more to another, therefore he has no list to
speak, all things are quite altered the world is new, it surpasses his skill.
And thus it is with every old man throughout all generations of the world,
insomuch that if they which have been long dead should rise again as but out
of an hundred years sleep, they could not know the world nor the way of it,
and might as well cause the Sun to go backward, as to reduce it to the former
state; and though it should be the same, and continue like it self, yet should
a man be unlike himself; and so should the world one and the same in it self,
appear in new and strange forms to him. As for example; All things are full
of vanity, misery and grief to the afflicted, and to him upon whom God
turns his back; whereas contrarily at the same time it is a paradise of
pleasure to an other. It is now an heaven, but if God instantly forsake a man
utterly, it is an hell. And as Dives desired to be out of hell, so would he
desire to be out of the world; whatsoever his estate should be hereafter, he
had rather stand to the hazard then live. If health, strength, wealth and honor
could, at an instant, be put upon the poor, sick, lame, blind beggar, the
world should be a new world, and such a world as he never imagined, the other
days world should be passed as in a dream, and as but a dream. And so does
old age wonder at the change of the world, he longs after the former
generation, and desires to be dead. All is vanity, vexation and weariness. But
the young generation thinks not so. Their endeavors* expectations, and hopes
are strong and possible; but the aged despaireth, and sorroweth, and is vexed
to see vanities, and foolish presumptions. To conclude, that which to his youth
was a pleasure, is to his age a pain; that which was a delight, is a
weariness and anger, and the Palace is but a prison house.

Verse 2. While the Sun, or the Light, or the Moon, or the Stars be not
darkened, nor the Clouds return after the rain.
Here he begins the particular description of old age, drawing it out in
lively shape and colors to represent it to the eyes of the young men, that
being now young, he may see himself old before his eyes. And this he does
allegorically, by manifold similitudes drawn from common and usual things
continually obuious to the eyes and ears, the more firmly to fix it in the
memory; to the end that considering the shortness of time, and weakness of
age, and certainty of death, he might the more diligently and carefully
b^stirre him to his work, and in his work; even doing good while time
serves, to finish his work before Sune-set, to inn his fruits before winter.

While the Sun, or the Light etc. quasi dicat, before the sight of thine eyes
be dim, through the weakness of the spirits, dryness of the sinews, and
humor of the eyes, and through vapors, which arising out of the body into the
head, through coldness of the brain, are clouded into rheum, which trickleth
down the nose and eyes; and being done away quickly, returns again, as
clouds after rain in a moist season, and waters into an emptyed fountain,
which causes old age to wear his napkin at his girdle, to keep his head and
feet warm, that cold strike not up into his head; and being there, may not
congeale, but euaporate forth through the poares and seames of the head, and
for the same purpose to wear a cloth about his neck, to keep the poares
open, that the vapors may there break forth; qu^ data porta ruant, to prevent
headache, toothache, joynt-ach, rheum in the eyes, nose etc. The air to aged
eyes seems duskie, and mistie, and the Sun wadeth, as the Moon in a foggie
evening, and the Stars are out of sight. Let the ouer-shadowing clouds,
drisling mi^^es, thick fogges, watrish air, dewing moisture, dropping of
trees in a mist, the dullness of the dark day, the sluggishnesse of the
rainie day, the dropping of the eaues, the siping through of waters into the
house, put us in mind of the irkesomnesse and annoyances of old age, and to
do our duties, while we have the use of our sight; which once failing, we
are disabled from innumerable things, wherein we might be profitable to man,
gainful to God, and furtherers of our salvation.

Verse 3. In the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the
strong men shall bow themselves, and the grinders cease* because they are few,
and those that look out of the windows be darkened.
By the Keepers of the house are meant the hands: The hand (says Aristotle) is
the organ of organes, or instrument of instruments. For whereas other members
have their several offices, the office of the hand is manifold, and general,
serving all the rest. The body is an house, or city, or kingdom in it self;
the king or chief ruler is the head, the hands are the keepers or guard. Every
creature has his weapons for defense; man has his hands, his hands are all
weapons, even as he is a little world. What all particular creatures can do
with their weapons, that can he do with his hands; yea what suttleties or
means of getting food is in them, all is in him, humano more. When the
keepers of the house shall tremble. that is, with the palsy, caused of cold
binding, or of heat consuming, or of humors stopping the sinews.

And the strong men shall bow themselves. When the thighs shall be weak,
standing loose in the bases, or sockets of the knees, the spirit languishing,
the sinews withring, the blood settling, and thickning in the veins as rivers
in the drought of summer. For strength is attributed to the bones, thighs, or
legs Psalm. 147. 10. He delights not in the strength of an horse, he takes
not pleasure in the legs of a man. Old men's knees buckle or bend forward,
like an elbowe, through the weakness of their joints and sinews; as
drunkards go staggeringly when they are top-heauy, nimio solutus Iaccho; and
their sinews dissolved, and heat euaporated with loud talking, vehement
contending, and much drink. And the grinders cease: that is, when the t^eth
are worme-eaten, or moskered, or mildered away, or stand wedshodde in slimie
humor, standing like weather-beate stakes, and mos^e begrowne roots, hollow,
and stumpie, falling out one after another, as the cogges of a mill, worn
thin and narrow at the top, or else rotten in the root, which partly are
troublesome to the aged, and partly they are afraid to break those odd
straglers remaining. And those that look out at the windows be darkened. That
is, the eyes which are as ones head looking out at an hole, or window; the body
is an house or tower; the eye-holes are windows, through which the soul
looks out into the City of the world. The eyes of the aged are like an old
dustie window.

Verse 4. And the doors shall be shut in the streets, when the sound of the
grinding is low, and he shall rise up at the voice of the bird, and all the
daughters of music shall be brought low.
BY doors is meant the lips. The windpipe is the entry, the mouth is the
doore-gate, the lips are the two-leafed door of the heart or soul, as our
Savior says, Out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks. Evil
thoughts come out of the heart, passing by the entry of the throat through the
door. The lips of old people are often pendulons, and tremulous, they keep
them shut, to stay the daily distillation of rheum; neither have they what to
speak among strong men, because their understanding and memory fails them;
they are testie, morose, choleric and passionate, their voice is weak, and
breath short, and the state of all things is so altered since they were young,
that they cannot tell what to think or say. Children and old men are neither
Counselors nor Actors; the one commits both these to the elder, 1. King.
3. 7. 9. the other to the younger, 2. Sam. 19. 35. 37. The strength of the one
is to come, the other is gone.

When the sound of the grinding is low; because the teeth stand thin, or loose,
or moskerd at the root, or that they are fallen out, and he cheweth with his
gummes, and the grinding* cannot be heard.

And he shall rise up at the noise of the bird. The fullness of humors, corpus
succiplenum, is the aliment or food of sleep, as is to be seen in children
and young folks; but the humors of old men are dried up, as the stalks of
plants, and the corn in harvest, and their skin rough, withered and wrinkled
as old trees. Hence it is that they cannot sleep soundly, but the crowing of
the cock, the noise of little birds, the whimpering of mice, every small
stirrage w^keth them.

And all the daughters of music shall be brought low. An Hebrew phrase of
speech, as 2. Sam. 12. 5. He that has done this, is the child of death. By
daughters of music is meant the natural organes or instruments of the voice
or song, as the lungs, the windpipe, the teeth, the lips, whereof some shall
be weak, some wanting, as in old untuneable instruments. Or, by daughters of
music, may be meant the ears. As old men are dim of eyesight, so dull of
hearing, they discern not the harmony or distinction of sounds, neither are
affected with music, as Barzillai to David, I am this day fourscore years
old, and can I discern between good and evil? can thy servant taste what I
eat, or what I drink? can I hear any more the voice of singing-men and
singing-women? 2. Sam. 19. 35.

Verse 5. Also when they shall be afraid of that which is high, and fears
shall be in the way, and the Almond tree shall flourish, and the grasshopper
shall be a burden, and desire shall fail: because man goes to his long home,
and the mourners go about the streets.
BY that which is high, is meant knobbie hillocks, or small extuberances in the
way, little stones or clods, which old men fear to stumble on. And fears
shall be in the way. As children going abroad fear many things, so do old
men, because they are vnwealdie, and unable to avoid dangers; a little fall or
turning aside hurts them, and they arise up again with difficulty and
pain; they are afraid of dogs suddenly rushing out and crossing the streets
at every noise; they fear the thronging of people, some on foot, some on
horseback, some running and hasting about business, others bearing burdens,
whereof many are rash and heedlesse, hurting children, and thrusting old
people against the walls.

And the Almond tree shall flourish. A Synecdoche of the special, for all
trees. The Almond tree has white flowers, it flourishes betimes in the Spring
before other trees; it is therefore of special note, and a welcome forerunner
of Summer, ^untius veris, cheering the mind after drowsy Winter, with the
vernall thoughts of pleasant and lively Summer. ^ut the old man little
regards, his couch, and the warm fire, and multitude of clothes, and therein
keeping himself warm at an even stay, does most comfort him. For the hot
Sun soon enfeebleth him, the cool Northern and Eastern air offends
him. For though the Sun be hot in Summer, yet the air is variable as in
Winter, and the influence of the stars have a composition, but not a mixture
in the air. So that though the Sun be hot, and scorcheth the face of the
beholder, yet is the air frostie, and nippeth the neck. He that bestirreth
himself in labor, sweateth and pants, but the waterish cold or frostie cold
suddenly pierces through the powers of his body, and distempereth his blood.
Summer and Winter are all one, excepting the Suns revolution. Young men
perceive not those differences of middle weathers, but only extremities of
heat and cold, strong winds and stormy blasts, etc. but old men feel every
change of the air, yea when the stars begin their business, and are
preparing their work. They feel it before it come, and are therefore said to
carry their Almanacke in their bones, whereas young men feel but the height and
extremity thereof, and bear it off without hurt, by reason of heat and
fullness of humors.

And the Grasshopper shall be a burden. A Synecdoche, as before, for the
whistling and singing of all Birds. As the Almond tree in the Spring, so the
Grasshopper in Summer or latter end of the Spring, Nuntia aestatis, affects
not old age with any delightful fancies, Cant. 2. 13. The melody of
grasshoppers is more pleasant in Summer, because the air is more clear and
pure, and therefore more silver sounding, but both natural and artificial
music to old age is no more then the cr^aking of a door, or s^raming of a
new axeltree, for the noise ouerpowreth their feeble spirit, and youthful
fancies are vanished away through coldness, dryness and earthlinesse of the
dull dreggie humors; the fiery humor, alme air, spirit of life is feeble,
and is little quickened with the warbling of melodious air. And desire shall
fail. All desire and delight in such things shall vanish, wherewith youth is
most affected. Concupiscence, and feminine appetite shall be extinguished; no
objects affect the dull and dying senses, but are rather grievous as the Sun
and Rain are to old stumpes, and trees, rather rotting and hastening
putrefaction, then quickening them. All things, but death, are tedious to the
old man.

Because man goes to his long home, and the mourners etc. A reason of the
tediousness and irkesomnesse of all things to old age; because the old and
decrepite is past the world, and near to death, his time is spent. his
pilgrimage is finished, he has no more business here to do, in this
strange Country, he is weary of the world, and the world is weary of him; he is
but as an obstacle in the way, an hinderer of busy workers, not an helper.
Mothers and Nurces have pleasure in Infants, and Parents in Children, and every
one affects young people, whether free or bond, but old people are
burdensome to all, neither their talk nor company is acceptable. Therefore
seeing himself despised, or little regarded, and a burden; yea himself a
burden to himself, he is desirous to be at home, he would be out of trouble
and at rest. For here is nothing but vanity and misery, all is winter both to
the body and mind of old age; well were he if he were at rest. And the
mourners go about in the streets. His friends and neighbors are preparing
themselves against his funeral, and the widows to make lamentation. As the
Midwiues bring them into the world with joy; so the widows (as it was a
custom among the Jews) bewail their death with mourning. This kind of
symphonie, heavy, and dead-sounding flattes is most befitting querulous and
mournful old age. The hoarse Grasshopper, and the warbling Harp, the
whistling Bird, and the Flute, with all wind instruments, isntrumental and
vocal consents, as Barzillai said to David, are more fit for Chimham, 2. Sam.
19. 37. then for aged Barzillai, whose desire is to turn back, that he may
die in his own City, and be buried in the grave of his father, and of his
mother.

Verse 6. Or ever the silver cord be loosed, or the golden bowl be broken, or
the pitcher be broken at the fountain, or the wheel broken at the Cisterne.
BY silver coard is meant the marrow in the back, which is enclosed in a
bright smoothe skin like to silver, it is more properly called of the
Arabians the Nuche of the back, whereof this word Eunuch is compounded. For
marrow is but the superfluity of nutriment arising from the blood for the
moistening and nourishment of the bones. But the Nuche is of the nature of the
brain, engendered of seed, created for sense and motion; to wit, to procreate
the sinews. For from the brain, and the Nuche, proceed diverse combinations or
couples of sinews, serving for the senses, as hearing, seeing, feeling and
motion of the members. For many sinews are derived, thirty couples as the
Anitomists write, are sprung of this cord, and derived from the knuckles or
turning-joynts of the chine or back bone into all the body serving for bodily
motion; from which again, small hairs or threeds, like those of the roots of
trees and leaves are dispersed. When this cord is loosed, the back bends,
motion is slow, and feeling fails.

Or the golden bowl be broken, This golden bowl is the thin membrane, or
sinewie skin of yellow color, called Pia matter, compassing the brain like a
swathing cloth, or inner thinde of a tree, and entering within the diverse
infoldings of the brain, and as it were clothing the sides of the three
ventricles, or hollowes wherein the imagination, reason, and memory are formed.
It serves not only to inuolue and keep the brain whole and solid, in his
place, as the shel or skin next the shell does the eggs: but also to contain,
to gather together and sustain the veins and arteries which are derived from
thence like small ramified channells, or pipes, or like a net. All the brain
within, and without, is enwrapped and encompassed with this veiny and
arteriall, or sinewy net. The veins feed and nourish the brain with blood,
the arteries bring heat and spirit to it from the heart, to give the sense of
feeling unto it. For though it impart sense to all other parts, yet it has
none of it self, namely the narrowie white substance, but conuerteth or
digesteth the vital spirits of the heart (attracted by this sinewie pia matter
or golden bowl) into animal or sensible spirits. In like case the sperme has
foture and sustenance in the matri^e by and from the chorion or secundine.

Or the pitcher be broken at the fountain. By the pitcher he means the
veins, by the fountain the liver. For the liver is the shop of blood,
converting the white chile which comes of the meat digested in the stomach
into blood. The substance thereof is red, and like clottered or curded blood,
assimulating the chile to the quality of it self. In the nether hollow part
thereof is the portall vein, called the great carrying vein, which has many
branches (venae mesaraicae) like the small and threddie roots of a tree, by
which the chile or juice of mea^ concocted in the stomach, is transported from
the stomach to the liver. And the portal vein has issuing from it many small
veins like a net throughout the whole body of the liver, that the chile being
distributed into small parcels, might be more perfectly concocted and converted
into blood. And the blood is ingendered and purified in the middle of the
liver, which contains the mass of the four humors. Now it being here
purified and boiled, the more heavy superfluity, which is seculent or
dreggie, settleth to the bottom, and is carried by a vein into the spleen.
It is the earthly sour or tart part of the chile, and is called black choler,
or melancholy. Again, the lighter superfluity boyleth upward, which is the
fiery, bitter or sharp part of the chile called yellow choler, which is carried
by a vein into the gall. Understand by melancholy and yellow choler, not the
purest thereof, which is mixed with the blood, but the separate superfluity or
impuritie thereof. Thirdly, the waterish superfluity is carried to the kidneys
and passages of the urine. In the convexitie or upper bowing part of the liver
is the hollow vein or bloudgate, whose branches receive the blood purified in
the middle of the liver, from the branches of the portall-veine. From the
bloudgate are innumerable veins ramified throughout all the body. For as the
bulk of a tree receiving sap from the root, as that again does from the
small spires, is ramified into all the branches, so does the hollow vein,
being the greatest in all the body, (vehiculum alimenti) distribute the blood
throughout the body by his other veins, and first into the right ventricle of
the heart, to receive his vital heat for the nutrition of the whole body.

Or the wheel be broken at the cisterre. By wheel is meant the head, by
cisterne the heart, from whence the vital spirits are conveyed to the brain,
and there converted into animal, to give sense and motion to the body. When
the brain is weak, the sinews loosed, and the head hanging down, the wheel
begins to break.

Verse 7. Then shall the dust return to the earth, as it was: and the spirit
shall return to God who gave it.
AS before he has showed the unaptness and disabilitie of old age to perform
such service as the Lord requireh to be performed of man, having liuelily
depainted it sorth before his eyes, to the end that every one may be stirred up
in youth and middle age to do good works, even with all diligence to practice
the duties of piety and charity: so here he puts them in mind also of
death, and their account that they must make before their Judge.

And the dust return to the earth as it was. By dust he means the corpse
made of the dust, by a metonymie of the matter. By earth he means the
elements whereof the body is compounded. As the body was created of the earth,
so shall it return thither again, even into the first and simplest matter.

And the spirit shall return to God that gave it. By spirit he means the
soul, which is compared to wind or air, as the body is to dust or earth.
Because wind or air being an invisible substance, is the fittest thing in
nature to understand the nature of the soul by. For whiles we are in the
flesh, we understand and conceive of invisible, spiritual, eternal things,
humano more, by the fantasy, per similitudines and locos, as Tully says, and
that either affirmatively or negatilely.

To God that gave it. He does not here define, whither the spirit shall go,
but to whom, namely to his Judge, who shall require a just account of all the
works done in the flesh good or evil, and shall accordingly give sentence
upon it. 2. Cor. 5. 10.

Verse 8. Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher, all is vanity.
A Conclusion which is twofold; particular, of this treatise of mortification,
to the 13. verse. General of all Christian doctrine, from thence to the end.
Vanity of vanities. He concludes the prossyllogisme propounded in the
beginning in the same words, to intimate both his mature deliberation, and the
certain truth thereof. For having seriously considered, and by long experience
found out the condition of man, and state of all things, he could conclude no
otherwise then at the first he propounded, namely, that all things are vanity,
most vain. All things are uncertain, full of corruption, and matter of
grief. There is nothing whereon to trust, nothing that affoordeth happy
contentment. Every state of life is miserable, both the contemplative, the
sensual, and the royal, both the private and the public, both the civil
and also divine government to humane reason is nothing but confusion and
disorder. And even those things that seem to be in our power, have their
events contrary to our intention and expectation. Now all this is to bring us
to the denial of our selves, to restrain our greedy desires, worldly vain
hopes, and unprofitable endeavors, to trust in the living God, who only is most
wise, most good, and gives all at his pleasure, and in his own time.

Verse 9. And moreover, because the Preacher was wise, he still taught the
people knowledge: yea he gave good heed, and sought out, and set in order
many proverbs.
AN amplification of the conclusion, by an admonition begun here digressiuely,
figured by a Prolepsis, the objection whereof is understood, and is such like;
we are not bound to give credence to all things contained in this treatise,
seeing that no man is so perfect in this life, but that he may err, and is
defective and weak in the truth it self. Besides that, the inordinate life of
those that write, to instruct and admonish others, is a means to diminish
their authority, and to make their labors fruitless. The answer is, verse. 9.
10. 11. wherein he procures authority to his doctrine, by sundry arguments.

Because the Preacher. The first argument is drawn from his person or office.
He is not now Solomon seduced by his idolatrous wives and flickering
concubines, he is not Solomon giving the reins to inordinate desires, not
Solomon enamoured with the glory of the world and worldly delights; but Solomon
aged, experienced, prudent, repenting, mortified, reconciled to the Church of
God, near to death, near to judgment. Therefore is he the fittest, and most
able to admonish others by reason of his knowledge and much experience in all
things.

Was wise. The second argument drawn from his extraordinary wisdom. He was
wise, yea the most wise, therefore are his admonitions to be regarded and
followed.

He still taught the people knowledge. A confirmation of the admonition, by the
end and use of his wisdom, which was the godly government of his people, not
merely politic for his own tranquillity and pleasure, and vainglory of his
own person, but divine and religious, that the people might be contained in
obedience, even in the religious fear of God, rather then either by plain
force or other beguiling devices, without care or love of Religion, which come
to naught. 1. King 3 7. what the intent of Solomon's prayer there is, and his
meaning here, is evident, Deuteronomy. 17. 19. 20. by the charge of Moses; the King
must be continually exercised in the book of God, that he may learn to fear
the Lord and obey his word, without arrogating liberty to himself to decline
either to the right hand or to the left, that his heart be not lifted up above
his brethren to tyrannize and rule in his own name, but to join in the
worship and service of God with them, yea to be a pattern and example of
virtuous and godly life unto them.

Yea he gave good heed. The third argument is drawn from his careful
observation and experience. He was wholly and continually attentive to hear,
to see, to discern, to judge, as the Hebrew word aizzen of the conjugation
piel signifies.

And sought out. As he was attentive and heedfull, so was he industrious and
painful to know much by lively and selfexperience; this is the fourth argument.

And set in order many proverbs. A confirmation of his knowledge,
attentiveness and industry, by the effect or fruit thereof, as 1. King. 4.
31. 32. 33. 34. He was wiser then all men, then Ethan, Heman, Chalcol or Darda;
he spoke three thousand proverbs, and his songs were an hundred and five* he
spoke of all the creatures, and there came of all people to hear his wisdom.
By all these arguments we learn what the calling, gifts, and duties of true
teachers are. Cursed therefore are these Popish ignorants, and our Atheistical
politicians. They are both alike enemies to knowledge and the true fear of God.

Verse 10. The Preacher sought to find out acceptable words* and that which
was written was upright, even the words of truth.
A Fifth argument drawn from the profitablenesse of his doctrine. The Preacher
sought to find out words of delight, or acceptance, not vain speculations*
carnal inventions, unprofitable fables, curious and fruitles fancies, vain
ianglings; but wholesome doctrine profitable for edification in faith and
obedience to the word of God, as S. Paul says, 2. Tim. 3. 16. The Scripture is
given by inspiratio^ of God for doctrine, and reproof, for correction and
instruction, that we might know the truth, and by the truth destroy lies and
errors. And that we might be mortified and dead to sin, and quickened and
renewed into holiness and righteousness. The setting forth of truth and
righteousness, and the destruction of lying errors, and vice, is all that the
Scripture aims at, that the man of God might be perfected to all good works
of piety and charity. This is the drift of the Holy Ghost in the Penmen of the
Scriptures, and of Solomon here, and so of every teacher sent of God.

And that which was written, was upright, etc. A sixth Argument. As they were
profitable writings or delightful to them that loved truth and
righteousness, so were they upright and true, not deceitful, flattering,
men-pleasing, but the true wholesome food of the soul. Solomon, in uttering
the words of this Treatise, had the infallible assistance of the Spirit.

Verse 11. The words of the wise are as goads, and as nails fastened by the
masters of Assemblies, which are given from one Shepherd.
AN explication of those acceptable, and upright words of truth, taught by the
truly wise, that are inspired of God, by the effect or use thereof, which is
illustrated by a twofold similitude of goads, and nails. The words of the wise
are as goads. The heavy and idle Ox, minding no other thing, of himself, but
eating and sleeping, is rouzed up, and caused to do profitable service to his
owner, by the pricks of the goad, as the horse is by the spur* and ^he
whippe: even so by the reproves and checkes of the wise, are the drowsy and
sluggish carnalls stirred up to duties of piety and charity, which of
themselves are but self loving lumpes of sin, unwilling, unapt, dull and
blockish to learn or practice any works, either of worship or service. Pride,
covetousness, gluttony and venery make them like oxen, horses and swine,
spiritual sluggards, drunkards and bedlums; yea, as unprofitable drones and
vermin, such as are for wast, destruction and evil. These drossie ones are
moved, rouzed, awaked, and provoked to some good duties by the pricking,
sharp, or smart words of the wise, chasing and rubbing these dead sleepers in
sin, and mollifying, yea scarifying their rough, crusted, barked consciences
that cannot bleed, stirring up the idle worm to her work, with the tarte
vinegar of Gods judgments and plagues denounced against them in the Law. This
is the effect and use of words spoken by the wise, inspired of God. But
contrarily, such as speak of themselves, making merchandise of the word, are
flatterers and claw-backes, sowing pillowes under the elbowes of sleepers, to
make them sleep out their eyes, and to make fools run stark mad. They
wink at proud carnalls, but do not mortify them, that they might deuote
themselves to good works; yea they do rather glorify them, and admire their
persons because of advantage, and so both fall down into the same condemnation.

This has been always the practice of false prophets, false apostles, and
shepherds of old, and is now at this present. And the proud, covetous,
oppressing carnalls prefer and countenance such teachers, they dignifie them
and honor them to be flattered by them, and partake with them in their sins.
But their madness shall in the end be manifested, and the patient abiding of
the meek shall not always be forgotten Paul says, Let him not be a young
Scholar, etc. But who is now so fit as a young Scholar, proud and talkatiue,
a fashionable fool, civil, ethnically civil and courtier like? The finest
Gentleman, the best Minister. But a fine Gentleman, and a Romish reader, will
prove all one in the end, I fear; yet is the Reader better then the proud
Corinthian Preacher.

And as nails fastened by the masters of Assemblies. Even as nails being
driven into pales, do fasten them to their ^a les; so the godly and grave
sentences of teachers which are the masters of Assemblies, or congregations
gathered together to be instructed in the knowledge of God and their duties, do
pierce into their hearts to unite them unto God and one to another, and to
contain them for ever in that holy union of faith and communion of love, which
is the true coporation of the Saints or invisible Church. Contrarily, false
teachers and schismatickes break this union of faith, and dissolve this bond
of love, bringing in erroneous doctrines and opinions, to corrupt the minds
and manners of men, whereby they fall from the godly purity and plainness of
the Gospel, to contentions and proud ianglings, but in the mean space live
according to their lusts, yea without all sense of Religion, and are to every
good work reprobate, yea enemies to the truth of that which outwardly in
hypocrisy they profess, as they do which stand up at the Creed, but fight
against the Gospel; which make a leg at the name of Jesus, but hate his
commandment of faith and love; which receive the sign of the cross, but
fight under the devils banner against Christ and his kingdom. This is the
miserable condition of Papists, Libertines, Atheists, Epicures, whose hearts
are not brawny but stony, that neither goades nor nails can pierce into them.
Woe be to them, for they are full of envy and hatred as Cain, they are mockers
as Ismael, devoted to their bellies as Esau. They are as they that strive with
the Priest, Amos 5. 10. Woe be unto them, for they are false accusers of their
brethren, and stir up hatred against their brethren that are better then they.
Woe be unto them for they are dogs* and wolves in sheep clothing, thirsting
for the blood of the Saints; they present themselves among the people of God,
as Satan did, to cavil, Job 2. and take all occasions to disgrace the truth,
and to bring the fear of God into slander. Woe be to those reuolting Pagans,
which oppose Princes laws against the kingdom of Jesus Christ, whereof they
are the guard and protectors. These as the first begotten of the devil, oppose
the letter of the law against the intent, equity and conscience thereof,
saying that they are for law, not for conscience.

Which are given from one Shepherd. An amplification of those acceptable and
upright words of the wise, by the efficient cause or author thereof, namely God
in Christ, termed a Shepherd, or chief Shepherd, because he gathers
together and feeds his people with the spiritual bread and waters of life,
as shepherds do their flocks. Psalm. 23. 1. Ioh. 10. 11. Chap. 4. 14. and 6.
50. 51.

Verse 12. And further, by these, my son, be admonished: of making many
books there is no end, and much study is a weariness to the flesh.
A Regression to the admonition interrupted, ver 9. 10. 11. This verse
contains first the admonition it self* secondly the reasons. The admonition
is in the former words, wherein are to be considered, first the subject of it,
namely the persons to whom it is directed, every faithful Reader, and
therefore he speaks to all under the name of one, and that out of love as a
father to his child; and that every one might hearken to him as a loving and
dutifnll child to his father, he calls him his son. Secondly, the matter
it self. By these be admonished. An exhortation is a provocation or incitement
to embrace and follow that which is good: an admonition is an inducement of a
cautelous consideration, or practicke remembrance of that which is hurtful and
evil to avoid it. It is enforced by destructive arguments, tending to deter
and auert the party admonished from an error, to embrace and follow the
contrary good. Exhortation and admonition are of a thing already proved and
granted; bnt persuasion and disswasion are of a thing doubtful and probable.
Be admonished by these arguments evidently euicting the vanity of worldly
things, and avoid the unprofitable courses of worldly minded men, who seeking
for an happy state in the state of corruption and misery, find nothing, but
rather lose the true felicity. Contrarily, lay hold on these precepts of
wisdom, charity and piety, and rest thy self on God, who shall without thy
carking and thoughtfull caring administer all things needful for thee and
thine. For thou cans^ not add one cubite to thy stature, nor make one hair
white or black, but every plans which God has not planted shall be rooted
up. Let this therefore that has been said, be sufficient to settle and
stablish thine heart and mind in the right path, that I have showed thee.
Rejoyee in that which God sends, strife, and vain fears neither make nor
mend; be content with thy state, do good always to thy ability, and there set
up thy rest. If this will not yet satisfy, then remember Lots wife. Remember
Dives. Remember the covetous rich man, Luke 12.

Of making Books there is no end, etc. A two*fold reason enforcing the
admonition upon the Reader. The first is drawn from the unprofitableness of
many words and writings of men, which are discordant and distractiue of men's
minds, which falls out whereas the infallibility or direction of the spirit
is wanting* which gift was promised to Solomon, 1* Kings 3. 12. and he was
assured thereof; and therefore, without vain presumption, may justly retract
the Reader from other warbling, erroneous, imperfect discourses, and treatises
of men, wherewith doubtless he was acquainted, as in his Book he intimates
plainly enough to this diuine-inspired Treatise of his own concerning the
chief good. So that all writings, except those that are warrantable by, and
grounded on these special pen men of the Holy Ghost, are unprofitable, and to
little purpose, affoording no tranquillity, peace, durable joy, comfort to the
heart and conscience. For they can not impart that to others which they
altogether want themselves. For they being in darkness seek only for it,
where it cannot be found, seeing that God has subdewed man, and all things to
vanity, which can never be the mother or fountain of felicity. And the
earthly paradise is destroyed. This text makes little for those that being so
eagerly and seruently devoted to their worldly and fleshly lusts think, and
say, that so much preaching and writing is neceelesse. For Solomon taxes not
the holy and great Labors of the Lords Ministers, who keep themselves within
the compass of his written word, but he taxes these slothful ones, sleepie,
and spiritual drunken ones, ignorants, and fools that even weary the
Messengers o^ God, with calling, crying, lifting up their voices li^ e
Trumpets, early an la^e, and yet will they not be awaked; they are
heauy-hearted* dulleared, pore-blind, long about alittle, and that little is
quickly forgotten. If the Preacher be but silent a while* they are ready to
dance about the golden Calfe, and begin to think and talk of Egypt again.
They are like the stone of Sisiphus* or heavy logges pulled up the side of a
stiepe hill, which lush down again, when a man lets his hold go. Again on
the contrary side, this taxes those, that are quick of hearing, but heavy
footed, ripe in the top, dead at the root, nimble*chapt, and slow handed.
There is none end of their hearing, new instruments, new voices, new tunes, new
forms, new styles, they are all for novelties, full of the itch* full of
curiosity, but their heart goes after their pride, after their covetousness.
These extremes are at length coincident. There is none end of speaking and
writing to the sluggish and curious. They are both a great burden to their
teachers, they will never be pleased. Solomon therefore in these words wills
them to be doers, and diligent practisers, the one sort to humble themselves,
the other to rouse themselves to obedience, that they may have experience, and
feeling in themselves of the grace and wisdom of God; (manus est causa
sapientiae) and then shall they comfort, not weary to death their teachers, as
many do. But those greedy ears, proud and covetous, that are so zealous to
hear, and yet their teachers but figge-frailes, and themselves sucking
spiders, casting them out when they have sucked them as they do their oyster
shells, are but gadding carnalls and bloud-suckers. When they would be rid of
their teacher, then will they put him out of breath; and when he cannot preach
twice a day, he may sit under the Juniper tree with Elias, to be fed with
Ravens. I speak not this to set dogs on barking, to whom all things are
alike; but the God of order hates confusion) which take up all occasions of
evil speaking, but rather to stop their mouths, by putting a difference
between the truly religious, and truly devoted, and gadding talkers, whose
backs and eyes are full of pride and adultery. But our Allalikes are not for
differences, but confusion. But when they have once made a confusion of good
and evil, sour and sweet, light and darkness, then in the flesh will they
make differences, they cannot abide confusion, every one strives for
superiority and pre-eminence, every one prefers him self before other* and
glories in his riches, in his learning, in his knowledge, in his skill, in his
friends, in his strength, and men acknowledge such differences; but of light
and darkness, carnal and spiritual, precious and vile, they will admit no
difference: all must be alike; and the more carnal the more acceptable. The
civil and orderly vicious, the best garnisher of vice in virtues robes and
colors, is the most wise, and most commended.

And much study is a weariness to the flesh. He speaks not this of the
pains of the holy writer, nor of the reader, that ought to exercise himself
day and night in the Scriptures, and that with delight, but of those erraticall
extreme persons, of whom I spoke before, both writers and readers. David
exercised himself continually in the Law, Psalm. 1. 2. but he got wisdom by
doing it, Psalm. 119. 98. 99. 100. And Plato says. Manus est causa sapientiae.
When a man has disquieted and tormented himself long about predestination,
etc. yet shall the joyful and cheerful practice of Christianity sustain him,
and faith in Gods mercy toward him shall be his only comfort in life and
death. For all our felicity is in Gods acceptance: and he puts none away
that constantly seek him with their whole heart, that is, sincerely, not
guilefully, Psalm. 32. 2. Neither does he forsake any that do not first forsake
him. The understanding of this may we see in Judas the guilefull disciple, and
the eleven true disciples. Know thy masters mind, hear what he says to thee,
and apply thy self to do his will without seaching into his secrets, and thou
shall never lose his favor, nor be turned out of his service. For he is not so
easily displeased, but bears with innumerable imperfections and infirmities
in his children, whom he measurably chasteneth, and delivers not over to
death. He is most wise, most good, most merciful, if thou do not account
his mercy greater then thy sins, thou do limit him who is infinite. To
know thy sins, to acknowledge and confess them, and to despair of
righteousness and salvation in thy self and by thy self, is that which he
requires: for then thou will fly to him, trust in him, rely on him, and be
ever thankful to him. Surely, when thou art none of thine own, then art thou
his. Much reading and studying is indeed a weariness, but it is a delightful
thing to do the commandments. Experimental knowledge is full, delightful and
comfortable. A little that one eats, is better then all that a man can hear
of, read of, study of, dream of. Greedy speculatists and hearers, are but
dreamers, they are never satisfied, but soon weary of well doing: but God will
be heard of us, seen of us, and served of us as if he were a King in bodily
presence. This is the fullness of sound faith, fear and obedience, not
fantastic dreaming, as they that would seem to be as devout as Mary, and yet
are as proud as Iezebel; as zealous as David, but as covetous as Nabal* A mere
delusio^.

Verse 13. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and
keep his commandments, for this is the whole duty of man.
THe general conclusion of the whole scope of all Christian doctrine and
exhortation. For all is but the mortification of the old man, and the quickening
or renewing of the inner man, and both these are one* They are one motion, and
differ but in respect of the terms, a quo, and ad quem. For what is that which
mortifieth but life? The spirit of mortification enliueth, and the spirit of
life mortifieth at one and the same instant, vno actu. The conclusion is
inferred by way of exhortation, to move attention, to print in the memory the
substance of all, and the maine end of all writings, which whosoever has not
rooted in his heart, he can neither understand rightly, nor do truly, but is a
liar, even a very hypocrite in his best speechss and best actions. Thomas said
to Christ, Ioh. 14. 5. We know not whither thou go, and how can we know the
way? The knowledge of the place goes before the knowledge of the way; and the
maine end and drift of every instruction and action, is first to be weighed.
What is the end of all writings, but to fear God and keep his commandments?
He that does not this, knows nothing, and is but a dreamer.

Fear God and keep his commandments. This is the substance of the
conclusion, consisting of two precepts; the one whereof concerns the inward
man, or the affection; the other concerns the outward man or the action; the
one the heart, the other the life. Concerning the first; by fear is meant a
reverent awe of Gods majesty, proceeding from faith, whereby through the
feeling of his love, as well as the weight of his displeasure, we are afraid to
offend him. Fear is put for the whole worship of God, by the figure
Synecdoche. It is the principal part of Gods worship, and keeps all the
other in their duties, all evil being committed where it is wanting. Therefore
says the Scripture, Blessed is the man that fears always. It is the beginning
of wisdom, true and saving wisdom, Prou. 14. 16. and the perfection of
piety. For the better understanding hereof, I will insist a little upon it.

There are sundry sorts of fear.

First, Dabolicall, Iam. 2. 19. The devils believe and tremble.

Second* Natural. It is an affection or passion of the heart, whereby we fear
not only death or dissolution, but dangers and evils that are destructive of
our good estate or welfare. This fear is by natural instinct in all sensible
creatures as well as in man, and in the godly as they are men, and in Christ as
he was man, subject to our infirmities, not to sin. This fear of it self is
not a sin, for Christ could not sin, but in us it is sin, by reason of our
corruption, because we do not order it according to the law of God; but Christ
in fearing death did also submit himself to the decree of his Father,
according to the commandment, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thine
heart, etc. So fear was overcome of love, or rightly ordered by love. So the
godly after the example of Christ, though they fear death, yet they humble
themselves to death and to all crosses, because the love of God takes away or
extenuateth fear.

Third, Worldly fear. This is the corruption of natural fear, when as men do
forsake or deny God and Christ, in what measure soever, that they might not
lose their goods, good name, pleasures, preferments, etc. The worldly, jealous,
zealous, devout, are full of this fear. Their fear is great and continual;
but it is a pernicious and damnable fear: and all that they fear, be they
never so subtle and provident, shall fall upon them. Math. 10. 28. Fear not
them which kill the body, etc. Ioh. 12. 42. many believed on Christ, but durst
not confess him, lest they should be put out of the Synagogue, and incur the
displeasure of great ones. This was Nicodemus his infirmity, Ioh 3. 2. The
Princes, Priests and Pharisees were drunk with this fear, Ioh. 11 48.

Fourth, Servile fear. It is proper to the wicked. For their conscience being
guilty of sin, they fear the wrath of God, both temporal and eternal, Prou.
28. 1. The wicked fly, when no man pursues. The wicked are like a raging sea,
Esaias 57. 20. It has two effects: First, it restrains from gross crimes, and
constrains to outward duties, at leastwise it mitigateth the extremities of
sinners, as does also the sword of the magistrates, which curbeth those that
are senseless, or have but a dogs conscience. Hence the Poet says: Oderunt
peccare boni virtutis amore,
Oderunt peccare mali virtutis amore.
When as Paul disputed of righteousness, temperance, and the judgment to
come, Felix trembled, Acts 24. 25. Secondly, it works hardness of heart and
desperation in some, when it grows to an height of wicked resolution, all
hope being utterly quenched.

Fifth, Filial or sonlike fear. This is proper to the regenerate, who by this
fear are moved to avoid sin and to live godlily and righteously. It arises
from the knowledge of God and out selves, and from the feeling of his
acceptance and love of us, wrought in our hearts by the holy Ghost. Of this
Solomon says* Prou, 1, 17* and Psalm, 111. 10. The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom, a good understanding have all they that do his
commandments. Job 28. 28. The fear of the Lord is wisdom, and to depart
from evil is understanding. More plainly, this fear is thus begotten.

1. When a man hears the Law, what is there commanded and forbidden, the
Holy Ghost comes and takes away the veil of natural blindness, and
slumbering, causing him to see his sin, and to behold the wrath of God upon
him even to lay them both to his hard heart, whereupon fear troubles the
conscience, and breaks the hard heart.

2. When a men in this case hears the Gospel, the Holy Ghost inlightneth his
mind to understand, and believe, and to apply the promises to himself,
whereupon he begins to feel quietness, and peace of conscience, being
more and more persuaded that he is beloved of God. Now on this persuasion
arises the love of God for his love, grace, and mercy in Christ* On this love
arises a new fear, namely, to displease God so loving and merciful, Psalm.
130. 4. There is mercy with thee that thou may be feared.

Of this filial fear there be four degrees expressed by the fear of
children toward their parents, whereof there are four degrees.

First, a child loves his parents, and flies to them as his chief refuge,
yet is he held in obedience with threatthreatnings, and fear of the rod.
Secondly, partly by reason, partly by the rod. Thirdly, less by the rod,
and more by reason. Fourthly, by reason alone without the rod. Now to apply
this.

First, children have a sincere love to their parents, and a general
disposition to be conformable to them in all things; yet being left to
themselves, they are carried by their childish fancies and vain desires, both
unprofitable to themselves and to their parents for want of reason. Hence
Solomon says, Folly grows in the heart of a child, but the rod of
correction fercheth it out. So the regenerate newly converted have a sincere,
though weak love of God, and a general disposition and right motions to obey
God in all things; yet without the consideration of Gods justice, and fear of
punishment, or rather corrections, they are apt to be carried and overcome with
the lusts of the flesh, allurements of the world, and baits of Satan.
Therefore David said; It is good for me that I have been in trouble. And Paul
1. Corinthians. 11. 32. When we are judged, we are chastened of the Lord, that we
might not be condemned of the world.

Secondly, parents instruct their children in what is to be done, and what to
be eschewed, and that with threatenings of punishment. And for fear of the
rod more then upon consideration of their own good, they obey, because
reason is yet weak, and they have but small discerning of good and evil: So
likewise, God teaches us what we ought to believe, what to do to his glory,
and our own good; with threatenings of temporal punishments, and crosses of
sundry kinds* by which we are held in awe* and contained in duty till we come
to more perfection and discerning.

Thirdly, when a child, by reason of age, is riper in understanding and
reason, he begins to know his parents, and his duty toward them, and what
is for his own good. Therefore he is held in obedience, not for fear of the
rod, but instruction and exhortation prevails most. So we, growing more
perfect in the knowledge of God our father in Christ, what his love has been
toward us, what he has done for us, and will do for us, are moved to obey
him, not so much for fear of punishments, as by instruction, which we desire,
and exhortation unto which we yield with delight. And as faith and love grow
stronger, so does the Law with the threatenings and curses thereof grow the
weaker. The Law is our Schoolmaster in our nonage, but when the fullness of
years are come, we are our own instructers, and able to govern our selves
by our own reason.

Fourthly, when the child comes to perfect reason and discretion, the fear
of the rod goes away. For, having now the perfect knowledge of the love, care,
and benefits of his father toward him, and also of his duty toward him
again, he performs obedience with willingness, delight, ioyfulnesse,
fearing to displease and offend him, and is ashamed of childish follies: So we
growing stronger in faith, and perfect men in Christ, do willingly,
cheerfully, and with delight worship and serve God, fearing to displease him
upon consideration of his greatness, goodness, mercy, and benefits toward
us, Galat, 3. 25. After that faith is come, we are no longer under a
Schoolemaister, that is, the ceremonies and threatenings of the Law, childish
rudiments and fears, Romans 8. 15. Ye have not received the spirit of bondage
to fear again, but the spirit of adoption, etc. He is called the spirit of
bondage, when he works weakly in us, as in babes and younglings, whom the
Law terrifieth from sin, and compels to obedience. He is called the
spirit of adoption, when he works more strongly in us, or has brought us to
a greater perfection of the degrees of faith, hope, love, whereupon we are
termed perfect men in Christ. The Magistrate is not terrible to the innocent,
nor the rod to the man of age, Romans 12. 3. Will thou be without fear of
the power* do well* and thou shall have praise: So likewise, will thou be
without fear of the curse, of wrath, of hell? be strong in faith* hope, love,
and thou shall delight, in God, in his word, Ministers, and children. His word
shall be thy delight and joy. ^. John 3. 21. Beloved if our hearts condemn us
not, we have boldness with God. Chap. 4. 18. There is no fear in love, for
perfect love casts out fear: For fear has painfulness, he that fears
is not perfect in love. Thus much of fear.

And keep his Commandments. This is the effect of true fear, The root is
faith, the sap or juice is fear, the fruit is obedience. As is the inward
man, so is the outward man, the heart is deceitful* but the hypocrit cannot be
hid, for the tree shall be known by his fruit, not by the sight, or outward
show thereof, for the wilding makes a fairer show then many a good apple, but
by the taste. Who is he that in sincerity keeps the Commandments? He that
sets God always before his face. Moreover, obedience is Legal, or
Evangelical: of the latter Solomon here speaks. For both the curse, and
rigorous exaction of the Law is removed away from them that believe, which are
the ingenuous and free borne sons of God. In these times there are many
masters, but few doers; therefore shall they receive the greater condemnation.
They would have good done, so that they themselves have no hand in it. Here is
no fear of God, but a deceitful and wicked spirit* For how much a man does,
so much he fears. He that does the commandments is true, the rest are
babblers. Neither have there been so many tongue-tied Christians in times of
Popery, as there shall be fantastical babblers and deceitful Satanists in
these last times, whose words and deeds are all falsehoods and lies: yet it is
but that multitude of malignants, who will either be idolaters, or Atheists, of
a false religion, or of no religion.

For this is the whole duty of man. A reason drawn from the end of creation
and redemption, which is nothing else but to fear God* and keep his
commandments, which who so does not, is a son of perdition. Ephesians. 1. 4. He has
chosen us in Christ, that we should be holy, and blameless before him in love.
Tit. 2. 14. He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify us unto himself, a peculiar people, zealous of good
works. By zeal he means not the bare pulpit zeal, but devotion. Many can
counterfeit zeal, as upon a stage, but when they are out of the pulpit, they
are of a quite contrary fashion, gallants, proud, stately. But the Friar shall
rise up in judgment against them. To conclude, to fear God and keep his
commandments, is the adequate, object or subject of the whole man inward and
outward. To this one thing must a man have respect in every thing. Hither must
he refer all his studies and labors, if he will be partaker of true felicity.
This only is true profit, and all exccept this is vanity, though the blind
world seek for felicity and means of bliss in any thing, and in every thing
besides this.

Verse 14. For God shall bring every work into judgment, with every secret
thing, whether it be good, or whether it be evil.
AN argument of confirmation, drawn from the last judgment, whether the
general or the particular, tending to terrify the wicked* and comfort the
godly* For God shall bring into judgment* The Judge is God, most mighty, not
to be resisted by strength; most just, not to be corrupted with bribes; most
wise, not to be blinded with cauils, Every work with every secret thing. A
declaration of the judgment by the objects, viz. things known, whether words
or works, public or private; and things unknown, not only done and spoken
in secret, but the thoughts and imaginations of the heart, with the affections
and dispositions thereof. All which are amplified by a division in respect of
their qualities, good or evil. As every person since the creation till the
last consummation shall be summoned, and not one escape; so shall every deed,
word and thought be judged, not one shall escape. For the books shall be
opened, and every secret thing shall be revealed, the book of Gods
omniscience, and the book of man's conscience. That which is now forgotten as a
thing in sleep, shall then be brought to remembrance as a thing to a man
awaked, which is as fresh in memory, and more fresh then it was before. As the
root lying buried in the earth in Winter, shows forth it self in the
Spring; so shall all things now buried in forgetfulness, be then made manifest
unto us, as if they were laid before our eyes. All hearts shall be laid open,
to the discovery and terror of the wicked, and to the manifestation of the
godly, whose faith and truth shall now appear, and these shall enter into
everlasting rest and joy, but the other shall go into everlasting fire.

FINIS.
A TABLE.
The number shows the Page, the Letters, b, beginning: m, middle: e, end, or
thereabouts.
A.
ADam, what it signifies. 90. e. Administration divine, unsearchable. 220. 222.
Admonition, what. 333. m. Adultry with a man's own wife, how. 232. e. Air,
food of living creatures. 15. e. Alexander. 43. b. Ambition, and curiosity how
punished. 81b. 82. Anger, Effects thereof. 168. e. 169. b. Appetites of the
Creatures 139. Appetite of man universal. 139. The universe, and object
thereof. 139 Appetite of man infinite. 141. 142. e. Alexanders personal
appetite. 141. Heliogabalus his bodily appetite. 141. Appetites, 4. sorts., as
of men. 143. m. Assurance, search for the same. 218. e. Aprarrell, use, and
abuse thereof. 231. b.
B.
BEhold, what it signifies. 41. b. 197. e. Beast, spirit of beast, what. 91.
m. Behavior before great men. 203. 204. Believe, 3 sorts of men to be
believed. 4. b. Blood engendered, how. 325. m. Bloodgate, or hollow vein. 325.
e. Body, or vessel, what, 139. b. Brain, without sense. 324. b. Books opened,
what. 344. m. Bribe, and Briber. 166. Bribe, how the wicked would bribe God.
285. m.
C.
CArdplay, and Diceplay, what. 20. e, Circle, al things Circular. 24. b.
Chance. 240. m. Charity, excellency thereof. 282. m. Charitable heart, the
signs. 283. Charity of churles. 284. m. Charity of thieues. 213. e. 285.
Charitable works not to be deferred. 292. m. Charity, Churles excuses. 295.
296. e. 5 old men's answers to a motion of godly charity. 290. m. Community of
life. 104. the benifite thereof. 103. Coheleth, what it signifies. 2. b.
Common people inconstant. 107. m. 108. e. Christian profession, what. 60. b.
Cheek, turning of the cheek, what it means 78. b. Conscience, submonitious
thereof. 29 e. Coueteous rich a martyr. 130 m. Creatures, a book sealed. 40.
b. Craesus his demand of Selon. 145. e. Crookednes of all things. 42* Curse, or
corruption, what. 10. b.
D.
David, why so called. 2, m. Democritus always laughed. 50. b. Death, the
benefit thereof. 154. b. Devotion in things indifferent. 229. m. Diceplay, and
Cardplay, what. 20. e. Diligence, fruits thereof. 235. e. Drunckard, who. 275.
b. Dust of the earth, what. 90. e. 91. b.
E.
EArth of magnetical nature. 14. m. Earths breath. 15. m. Earth an hell to
devils, an heaven to the damned. 130. m. 131. b. Envy, the object thereof. 95.
Eunuch, why so called. 324. b. Exhortation what. 333. m. Eye, a wise, and
foolish, eye. 62. e. 63.
F.
FEast. uses thereof. 274. e. 275. b. Fear what it means. 338. b. 5, sorts
of fear. 338. Sonlike fear described* 339. e. 340. 4. degrees thereof. 340.
Fear of God two fould. 216. e. Felicities of the world many. 5. m. Satan a
perswader, and maintainer of such opinions, 6. It is a false show. 7. who only
seek it. 8. e* Felicity to be obtained of the poorest. 222. e. Felicity, where
to be known. 109. m, Fishes* their wisdom. 241. b. Seafish why not salt. 14.
e. Flora. 43. b. Folly, what it means. 57. e. 61. e. Flesh and spirit partly,
what. 59. e. Fool, who is a fool. 275. m. Fool described. 264. m. Fooles'
their conversation. 162. m. 163 Fool, who his companion. 9 Fools 2 sorts. 58.
b Fools natural 2 sorts. 58 Foolishnes spiritual. 58 e Foolish rulers a
judgment. 269. m Foot, what it signifies. 110. m. Forget, what it means*
310. b.
G.
GIft. In gifts, and works, what God respects. ^89. m Good, chief good,
what. 3. m Good name commendation thereof. 1^2 153 God needs not our gifts,
and works 289. m Good world of common papists confuted 170* 171 Gospel a
burden to who^. 32. m Greedy getters how punnished. e 2* 9. b
H.
HHarlot described, 196 Hands the office thereof. 319. b Heavens the basis, or
firma^ent 12. m Heavens, an universal vessel* 140 Heart, a sphere. 24. e
Heraeclitus always wept. 50. b Hypocrites sacrifice described. 3. m
Hypocrites, their manners. 335
I.
Idleness, evils thereof. 96 m* Idleness, effects thereof. 97. e Idle persons
described. 96. e there excuses. 98. m Impatience, what. 1^5. b Indifferent
things. 263. e* 277. e 278. b. Instruction, what. 313. m Influence of stars
in the air 322. b. Just men perishing. 18. m. 218. Just, too Just, who. 182
K.
KIng, termed a child, when 269. e
L.
LAbouringmans happiness 123. e. 124. b Law of God, the extent. 2^2. m Laws of
Princes alterable* 202 Law of God, the Kings law, how. 203* b Laws
iron-chaynes* 22 b Laughter, the object. 49 e. 50. m Christ never laughed. 50. b
It proceeds of corruption. 50. m Democritus always laughed. 50* b
Learning twofould. 39. e Lending for increase not always usury. 287. b
Light, why first created. 140. b Liver described, 325. b Libertines described.
332. m Love, conjugal love. 233. m how it is maintained. 233. Epicurish love.
234. b
M.
MAn* vegetable man, 99. e described. 100 Man most sociable. 101, e Man the
sperne of the world, 140 The center of the world. 140. 16, Man, How Gods image.
140. e Men more miserable tha^ beasts, how. 135 Mankind, a double motion of it,
13. b Man an universal uatures. 16, b Man, how the little world. 16. m Man's
twofold anatomy. 16. m Man's condition seen in the creatures. 17 b Man's
nackednes what. 17. m Madness what it means. 57. e Mean, the fools mean.
58. e. 59 Mediocritie of the civil wicked. 187. e, 316. b Melody, or
symphonie, what ^^ e Mercifulnes, a token of mercy received. 293. e Marrow,
what. 324. b Mortification, 3 sorts. 154. e Money is all things. 276. b, use
thereof. The occasion of all evils. Music tedious to old age. 322, e
Multitude, querulous, why 267, e Men's phronema, what. 5, e Must, often times no
good reason* 29
N.
Nakedness, what. 17, m Nero slew Seneca, why. 46 e, 47. b Nero justly executed,
why. 210, e Noble, who. 271, e 272 b Nuch of the back. 324 b
O.
OBedience twofold. 342, e Observation of Gods works. 207 Observations, wise,
and superstitious. 212. b Ointments, perfumes, their use. 231, m Old age
described. 316. m. 320 Old men, 5 old men's answers. 290. m Old men impatient.
25. m
P.
PAtience, what. 164. e Palsy, whence. 316. b Personal syn. 192, b Pia matter
described. 324, m Psalm of the soul, what. 16, b Poor wicked, to be
relieved, how 288 Prophesies, and miracles ceased, 28, b Remaning still* how. 28
Princes wicked, their miseries. 213 Princes rude, why enemies to knowledge, and
piety. 270. e Prayer repetitions. 113. e, 114, b Lords prayer. 114, m what it
is, used of the disciples. e Particular prayers, how. 115 Reading of Prayers.
116, m What prayers to be said at all times. 116 Prosperity, how to be used
178. e
R
REsistance. 78, b Religion, outward exercises how abominable, 102 Remembrance
twofold. 309, m Riches, their event. 125, their sickness, 126, m, 127, use
thereof, e Riches an harlot. 128, b Rich man Idolatour, how. 128m Rich wicked,
how they get riches, 290 Rich men's houses Gods storehouses. 294 b Romans
conquests, how, 250. b Rulers, behavior toward the^. 255, e256, b, etc.
S.
SAbbath, the end, and use. 310 Sacrifice, intent thereof 111 e Sacrifice of
hypocrites deseribed. 111. m Saltwaters how made fresh 14m Safety of Princes
wherein. 47. b Scripture, the whole scope thereof. 330. b. Servant, who. 258. m
Search, for assurance. 280. e Sin, the ground of all evils. 126. b Sin,
not to be reformed with sin. 177. e Sinners, some notorious, why 141. e
Sinners bold, why. 214. m 215. Society of brutes, and vegetables. 101. e.
Sight, dimnes thereof whence. 316. b Sinnewes whence proceeding. 324. m Solomon
notified by 4 names. 2. b Solomon had peace, why. 35. e Solomon's Wisdom gotten
how. 38. b Solomon's Royalty. 52. to 56. b Sloothfull described. 273. Spirit of
Aeconomie, and polity. 273. 274. b Spirit of man how known. 221 m Spirit of
the world. 286. b Spartans answer to Alexander. 23 b. Summer and winter how all
one, how not. 322. m Sun, how it corrupts inferior things. 12. m Strength, how
profitable* 246. m
T
Temperance, what* 313. b Time, 64. b
V
Vain, what it signifies. 4. Vein, portall vein. 325. m Venae mesaraicae.
325. m unthankfulness. 245. Use of all worldly things. 133. b Usury to God,
how. 300. m
W.
VVEdlocke. right use thereof. 234. e Weep, Heraclitus always wept 50, b
Wicked, their destruction sudden. 243, b Wicked unthankful. 245 Wicked men
prospering. 181, b, 218 Wicked overmuch who. 184, 185 Wickedness not to be
reformed by wickedness. 211, b Wisdom how it is grievous. 46, 47 Wise and
foolish described. 62. Wisdom, excellency thereof. 248. 249. Wisdom, and
wise, two sorts. 250. e Wicked wisdom destroys. 251. b Wisdom above
wealth. 175. Wisdom true, what, 175. e Wisdom above strength. 189. Wisdoms
object. 192. Wise overmuch, who. 183. Wilfullnes, 105. World, Gods book: 62: e
World, the spirit thereof: 286 b Worlds infinite, how: 25 e Worldly goods,
their use. 69. e 132. 133. Who use them not. 71 b Works, how they please God
230 Works of God, considered how. 177. m Worldlings crafty dealing with God.
311.
Y
YOngmans imaginations. 315: e 316: b Yongman what it signifies in the heb:
312, e Yongmen must redress their ways, why? 113, e,
FINIS.
Faults. Corrected. Page. Line. Comparise. Comparison. page 21. line 2. Seamen.
Seaman. page 25. lin. 3 before. beyond. page 3. lin. 34, PomPeous. Pompous. page
56. lin. 27. abide. avoid. page 75. lin. 34. this, there. page 225. 1. yet, Yea.
page 228. lin. 8. first. for. page 226. lin. 1. of the fruit. of all things the.
page 231. l. last. bithocks. bitlocks. page 249. lin. 2. his. this. page 246. 10:
Wisdom. Wisemen. page 250. lin. 32. me. men. page 259. lin. 17. felicition.
felicity. page 267. end, vnsatiablenes. vnsociablenes. page 99. lin. 24.
verture. virtue. page 103. lin 29. Resistefull. Restfull. page 108. lin. 28.
Rest. reason. page 119. lin. 26. posterity. prosperity. page 126. lin. 26.
comporting. comforting. page 152. lin. 28. thus. true. page 158. lin. 3. betting.
letting. page 165. lin. 22. actus. astris. page 175. lin. 4. vivant. vitant. page
185: lin: 32* can. cannot. page 281. lin. 7. know. know not. page 300. lin.
9. anascoue. anasceue, page 301. lin. 12. from. for. page 303. lin 12. powers.
pores. page 322 lin: 14. narrowie. marrowie. page 326. lin. 4.

In the Table.

and object, for the object.

sperne, for sperme.

psalm, for plasme.


