HEAVEN and EARTH Reconciled.

A Sermon preached at Saint Paul's Church in Bedford, October. 3. 1612. At the
visitation of the right Worcester. M. Eland, Archdeacon of Bedford. By Tho. Adams
Minister of the Gospel at Willington.

1. Corinthians. 5.19. For God was in Christ, and reconciled the world to himself,
not imputing their sins unto them, and has committed to us the word of
Reconciliation.

LONDON, Printed by W.W. for Clement Knight, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the holy Lamb. 1613.

To the right Honorable Lord HENRY Earl of Kent, Lord of Hastinge, Weisford,
and Ruthyn.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
I Know not under whose wings I might better shelter an Apology for the
Ministry, then under your Honors, who have ever lived a ready Patron to
defend us from the oppositions and wrongs of our Adversaries; making them no
friends to your self, that are enemies to the Gospel: wherein you have
procured some (blessed) trouble to your self, by frequent complaints;
deserved great love of your Country, and secured your Soul of an eternal
recompense: Let it be your praise, happiness, comfort, that you have (not
only not lived in opposition to the Truth, as our refractary Papists: nor in
the lukewarm Neutrallitie of this age, that conceiues a mixed Religion,
compounded of Syon's and Babilon's; nor thought it enough to countenance
Preachers, as some that would make God beholding to them for their looks; but
you have) stood to, seconded, succored, and (which is yet a higher testimony)
relieved, many a distressed Servant of the Lord, not with Micha's wages, or
pittances of Charity, but with ample Rewards, worthy your Honor's bounty to
give, and their necessity to receive. Let all these true and happy reasons
plead for, and (somewhat) justify my ambition, that have dared to look so
high for Patronage, at your Honor: Worthier Pens have contented themselves
with meaner Protections: It is not the excellency of the work, but the
Nobleness of your disposition, that incourageth me, who am thence prompted,
not to fear your acceptance. You that have been s^ gener^ll^ Shadow of
Refreshing to Ministers, take from me all cause to distrust your favor:
specially in the countenauncing of that written, which you have ever actually
and really furthered. Proceed (most honored Lord) to affect the Truth, (yet)
more zelously, by your help to support it, by your favor to protect it: so
shall you make blessed use of that Honor, God has here invested you withal,
and interest your self to the honor of Heaven: and whiles Nobility without
Religion dies in infancy, and is buried in the grave of Oblivion, your Noble
zeal, or zealous Nobleness, shall live here to your Makers glory, and the
Churches comfort: and hereafter leave behind it a neuer-decaying monument of
Honor; which if the ingratitude of men should forget, shall never pass the
hand of God, unrewarded with glory. This Book salutes your Honor with the New
year: may they both give you happy content. The God of mercies multiply his
favors and graces on you, and make your Cup to run over with his
blessings.

Your Honor's humbly devoted, Tho. Adams.

Heaven and Earth Reconciled.
Dan. 12.3. They that turn many to Righteousness, shall shine as the Stars,
for ever and ever.


THese words are prophetically spoken, and turn over to us a golden Leaf;
whose Incke is Nectar, and the Pen from the wings of Angels: I mean, the
matter expressed, is wholly Celestial: Quis sit finis iustorum, et
iustificantium iustos, What shall be the end of the Righteous, and of them that
make them so? (Porta patet cael^-procul, Oh procul este profan^, I must in some
sort open you the everlasting Doors, and show you the King of glory, and your
glory in him: Let a holy reverence possess your souls, and say with Jacob the
place is fearful, Genesis 29.17.
none other, but the House of God, and this is the Gate of Heaven. Suppose that
great Prince set on his Throne of universal Judgment, and upon all Creatures
that have borne the image of God (summoned before him) having past an
irreuocable sentence, Ver. 2.
will you hear what shall become of the lust? Open your intellectual
sanctified eyes, able (with Steven) to pierce through the curled Clouds, and
with meditations r^p't to the third Heavens, behold them, as here described.
The We shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and they that turn many
to Righteousness, shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever. A lofty
metaphor, when the lowest part of it, is not less high then the Firmament,
then the Stars. Just men, shall parallel the brightness of the azure Sky;
and Ministers shall shine as Stars in it: nay, they shall transcend both, in
glory: We shall then see the Firmament and Stars as far below us, as now
our humbled mortality thinks them above us: and could they shine as bright as
ever their creation left them, Philip. 3.21.
the Righteous shall outshine them; for, They shall be fashioned to the
glorious body of Christ.

The words may be distinguished, In opus, et mercedem, into the Work, and the
Wages. Here is Earth, and Heaven in this text: our Way, and our Country: Via
et patria.
dishonor, and honor: trouble, and peace: Our Earth, Way, Trouble, goes thus
far; They that turn many to Righteousness: Our Heaven, Country, Peace,
follows; Shall shine at the Stars for ever and ever.

1 We Ministers on earth, are not unfitly compared to logical copulatiues,
that must join together a Subject and a Predicate. 1. The Subject we work
on, is Men, Many Men. 2. The Predicate we work them to, is Righteousness. 3.
Ministers are the Copulatiues, that unite these, Conuertentes, that make Men
and Righteousness friends; which never naturally and heartily loved one
another, since that Apple set our first Parents teeth on edge.

2. Our Heaven follows; and there is nothing but joy in it. 1. We shall
shine: No more be counted the Dross and offscouring of the world, as Paul
says: No more be like low Hedges, which every Nimrod hunter persecutor,
treades down for his sport: No more be like rejected and unthought of things,
which the eye of scorn looks over: We shall stand, where we shall be seen;
Mal. 4.2.
We shall shine. 2. Not meanly, and with a glimmering light, but as Stars,
reserved to the Son of righteousness, his greater and chief glory: we shall
shine, as Stars. 3. This for ever: not like Meteors whiles a gross, spuncie,
squallid substance lastes: Nor like Stella cadent^, falling Stars, which
seem fixed in some Sphere; but are not, as S. John says, They went out from
us, for they were not of us: 1. Ioh. ^ 19.
But without passing the Horizon of glory, without obscuring, without
interposition of any Clouds, We shall shine for ever and ever. This is our
Heaven: but I must keep you on Earth awhile, though you long more for the
other place.

THE SVBIECT.
The Subject we must exercise our skill on, are Men, tempered of the same
mould, having a soul inspired from the breath of the same God, as dear to
him, as our selves, bought with no worse Blood then his Sons, guarded with
Angels, protected by the same providence, and compassed about with the same
mercies that we are. God made Man after his own likeness, that there might be
( Quoddam in terris dei simulachrum,) a certain Image of himself on earth,
wherein he might be delighted: as it is natural to every being, to affect
that, which suffers deriuation from it; as Apelles was delighted with his
Tablets, Pigmalion with his Yuorie Statue, Narcissus with his form in the
Fountain, a Woman with her face in the Glass, and Parents with the offspring
of their loins. S^crates then is composed of no better metal, then his
Scholars, nor the Minister then the people: Think not your selves Lords over
them; all persons are equally respected of God: Praesumus offici^, 1. Pet. 5.3.
pares sumus dignitate coram deo, We are above them in Office, not in Dignity
with God.

Let this meditation suppress our pride, either naturally borne with us, or
accidentally contracted by a self opinion: it is an easy fault, and soon
incurred, for a Minister to be proud of his gifts, of his place, as Mirion^
was of the spirit, and to prefer himself to those he teaches, nay to his
fellow teachers. Let me have no need to remember you of that, Vnum restat, one
thing is wanting, an humbled soul: Thou have overcome many corruptions,
subdued lusts, qualified infirmities; take heed, least ( Vincenda superbia
restat,) Pride remaynes yet to be overcome. He that contemnes others, makes
himself most contemptible. But, Quorsum haec? to what end is this? no such
vice cleaues to us. I would it did not: I would no Star did envy the brighter
shining of another. But alas, Pride is a subtle insinuating nature, ever
conversant in good things: it crept into Paradise; nay, it stoale into Heaven:
No sin is more saucy, none more bold with God, none less welcome: It took
up lodging in the Pharise, that was so precise in tything, alms, prayer. Many
a Pharise is proud, that he is not proud: so subtle is that temptation of our
Adversary (when a man will be humble) to make him highly conceited of his
humility; not unlike the Cynicke, that condemned Plato's pride, with a worse
of his own. I thank God, J am not as others, says that Pharise: he was not
indeed, but had little reason to thank God for it. The emptiest Barrel, makes
the loudest sound: He that is truly learned, has learned this, not to boast
it. It often befalles such, as it did that Cardinal, who making a show of
bringing much Treasure into the Land, one of his Mules stumbled, and the
Port-mantle broake and there was a goodly show of Moss, and Straw, and Stones.
They that look so big upon their brethren, were their Cabinet opened, all
the great supposed Treasure within, would appear to be mere Husks, Froth,
and Ignorance. The Sun excells the Moon in glory; yet both are Stars
without emulation one of another. The higest Cedar will suffer the lowest
Shrubbe to grow under it. He that digges the ground, has his use in the
Garden, as well as he that draws the Knot. Silver is Metal, as well as Gold:
and the Beggar may be as good a Subject as the Lord. Christ gave his life for
his Sheep, as well as for his under Shepheardes: Despise not then thy fellow
Servants, least the Master of us all, despise thee.

This Subject is set down indefinitely, Many: Whence observe, that the power
of God is here perspicuous, that designs a few, to convert many; nay, one man
to have the charge of a Congregation: Compare the Minister with his Charge, and
think the difference. 1. One man to a multitude. 2. One without pomp, to many
mighty, wise, rich, noble. 3. A weak man with a few leaves of Paper, to those
that are armed with a prejudicial opposition of Nature against it. 4. The
Message not promising liberty, ease, encouragement to lusts; but threatening
persecution, cross, rod, trouble: yet to bind Kings in Chains, and Nobles
in Fetters of Iron: to recover the Heathen from their ancient and national
Idolatries, and prostrate them to the name of Jesus: to make the drunkard
sober, covetous merciful, malicious charitable; Hic digitus Dei, This is the
Finger of God. Thus, one Moses shall give precepts to six hundred thousand
men, able to bear Arms. One Peter convert three thousand at a Sermon. One
Minister (full of weakness) affect a great congregation, erect, depresse, with
either threats or promises; and persuade wild Japheth (as tame as a Lamb) into
the Tents of Sem. Thus a doosen weak Apostles passed once through legions of
Soldiers, prohibitions of Laws, menaces of adversaries, oppositions of flesh,
Pride, Religions, Satan, into the Courts of Kings, and overcame them with the
Gospel. What shall we say? We admire the Conquest of Alexander, that with
forty thousand men, subdued all Asia: If his Army had been greater, his
victory, his glory had been less: If he had atchiued it with fewer, we would
have doubted his honor; but if with twelve, deified him. Jesus Christ has;
and does daily, make greater conquestes with fewer Soldiers, subduing souls
(which a greater victory, then that of bodies) sine vt et armis, without
Military engines: Yet who apprehendes the immensenes of his power, or admires
the deapth of his wisdom?

Indeed, it is admirable, if any such thing be wrought in these days: time
was, one Sermon could turn many; now many Sermons cannot turn one: Many
thirsty souls have drunk at one Fountain, and been satisfied; infinite
Fountains are now open, and none will drink: They come indeed to Jacobs Well,
but they bring no Pitchers with them, no Faith, no Attention, no Conscience;
hence their thirst, burning and killing thirst, is not quenched: God has set
open the doors of Mercy, Gospel, Grace, Glory; only our Hearts are shut up:
we may as well preach to these material Walls, and move the Seats, as your
canteriz'd and nummed consciences. When we have studied our color into
palenesse, our strength into weakness, our bloods to Gelly, and spoake away
our spirits into air, you are the same still, and your sins in the same
strength; not a Mammon, Belial, Melchom, changes their lodginges, or is
vnroosted out of your hearts: You come before the Pulpit, but your Faith and
Conscience is left behind you: Your Clossets, Shoppes, Fields; nay, perhaps
Tauernes and Tap-houses, plead possession of your affections: and all the Law
that comes out of the Chair of Moses, cannot give the Devil a Defeasance.

What then? shall we not shine in this glory, because so few have been turned
by us? Nothing less, and we have precedent for it: Though Jsrael be not
gathered, yet shall J be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, says the Prophet.
Esaias 49 ^.
Though when we have spent our strengths in Jsrael, the Widow of Sarepta is
more charitable: Though the Altar has enjoyed our labors, we not her
privileges; yet for us, is laid up a crown of glory: ^. Timoth. 4.8.
Though it cannot but griue us to be a savor of death to many, and to rise up
condemning witnesses against those that would not believe our report; yet since
God is glorified in both Heaven and Hell, and we have faithfully discharged the
duties of our callings, and consciences, leaving the success to God, though we
have Turned few to Righteousness, yet we shall shine as Stars for ever and
ever.

PRAEDICATE.
The Praedicate we work men to, is Righteousness: Righteousness is so fair
an object, that a man would think there needs no great solicitation to it.
What heart would not be inamored on the beauty of Righteousness, if we saw
it? Even the most unrighteous men have been convinced to approve
Righteousness. Surely Integrity is not loved, because it is not seen, the
Devil so takes up our eyes with the flourishes of sin, and gay colors of
Lusts, that we are blind to the sight of goodness; whose face if we could
behold in that mirror of clearenesse wherein we were created, we would be in
love with nothing else but God, and that: But as an ill affected Stomach is
best pleased with crudities, our poisoned and infected Natures are dotingly
taken with corruptions, and have no love to Righteousness: No love, said I? no
familiarity, no knowledge, no acquaintance; that if God should suffer our
blinded souls so to go on to our deaths, we should scarce ever dream of
Righteousness: Therefore he has given us helps, his word, and the vocal
Organs, to make it sound to us his Ministers, who may turn our hearts to
righteousness: Here is offered to us this instruction.

The end of the Ministry, is to bring men to righteousness. Ephesians. 4.
Christ when he had led captivity captive, gave Gifts to men: What were they,
and to what end? Paul declares both the Guiftes. ver. 11. He gave some to be
Apostles, some Prophets. etc. The end, ver. 12. For the repairing of the
Saints, and for the edification of the Body of Christ; a task hard enough: Ars
artiu^^, regimen animar^m, It is the cunning of all cunninges, to govern
Souls: It is no easy work, to make men righteous. If they could retain
couetise, licentiousness, vainglory, in their service, and withal be
Righteous, there were some hope: but when you tell them, that carnal Lust, and
Righteousness, are two ends that shall never meet; 1. Cor. 15.
that Flesh and blood shall not inherit the kingdom of Heaven: When you bid
them weep for, and restore their Injuries, Vsuries, Sacriledges, charm their
tongues from Blasphemies, their hearts from Vanities; you shall almost as good
bath a Moore, in hope to whiten him. Men naturally love any thing better then
Righteousness, and think any burden lighter then Repentance: Hence it is,
that we are not so welcome as the Ministers of Satan. 1. Behold, thy Minister
mournes to thy soul in the Pulpit, and persuades thee by the blood of Christ,
not without his own tears, to have mercy on thy soul; not to cast away all
the hopes and comfortes of a better world: to bewail and beware of sins,
which will make a Hell in thy boosome here, and sink thee to a worse Hell
hereafter: Nihil agit, he cannot prevail. Let but a Ruffian hold up his
finger, thou art gone: All Auditors are not Ruffians, and so addicted; God
forbid, that our S^r^i should not have a few names left in her; but many are
thus, and more of a contrary disposition, but a worse: Psalm. 4.
the most attend the World, Who will show us any good? The Ministers voice is
not so audible, as Profits; nor can Divinity make so sweet Music, as the
world. If to condole this, were to help it, and the discovery of the disease
were no less then the remedy, I should soon cure it, but shall I tell you?
The general opinion of most in our Parishes is this, (if the life do not
belie the mind) that a competent measure of righteousness, is enough for
Heaven; and Salvation does not stand on so hard conditions as we teach: No
bounds or measures of iniquity are enough, but a little righteousness serves:
It is matter of amazement to see how the most live, as if they were neither in
Gods debt, nor danger: Men strive who shall sin most, and give Jesus Christ
the deepest wounds: they swear, bezzell, covet, and laugh at him, that tells
them they sin: there is not so much shame left in their bloodes, as to give
testimony of their gultinesse: If it were possible, they would annihilate their
souls, and quench all difference twixt themselves and beasts; Let us eat and
drink, for we shall dye: It is soon said, and soon eaten; but not so soon
digested. They advance the colors of Satan, Blasphemies, and Lies, in the very
face of God, as if they sent Challenges to Heaven, and dared their Maker to
combat: For the ministry of the Word, whose intent is to beget in our souls
Righteousness, they make this the end of it, to pass the time, to keep
Holy Days from sleep, and to move the hearts of Idiots: they visit the
Temple of custom as Fools, of example as Apes, for necessity as Beasts, for
praise as Hypocrites, or for peace as Politicians: How few think their
Minister placed over them, to turn their hearts to Righteousness.

I have showed them the end of the Ministry, we may not forget to apply it to
our selves: Gods intent in sealing thee this Commission, is to work in men's
hearts Righteousness. Who knows not that? God grant none forget it; I am
not worthy (Fathers and Brethren) to inform your understandings ( Saltem
concedatur refricare memorias) only give me leave to rub your memories. It
is easy to propound sinister ends to our best, ordinate, and most regular
works. There are five bitter Herbs to spoil all the Children of the
Prophets Pottage: Five affections to distaste our ministry; I will not say, to
make them ineffectuall: Fame, Flattery, Ease, Necessity, Covetousness.

1. Are there none that catch at popular Applause, and rather hunt themselves
into Fame, then Souls in-Heauen, Se pr^dicantes, non Christum, preaching
themselves, Ierom.
rather then Jesus Christ: Mancipia popularis aurae venalia, Creatures bred of
the peoples breath, whose excellencies consist only in opinion; rare men in
their own judgments, and the flattered multitudes, Hoc ipso plecere cupiunt,
quod placere contemnunt.
that speak more desperately against doubted and questionable actions, then
against known and manifest sins: that inueigh against some, to please the
rest; and even curry favor, by speaking bitterly: of whom he spoke truly, that
said, They care not to be condemned of the Learned for ignorant, so they may be
commended of the ignorant for Learned. Ovid.
Quid petitur sacris nisi tantum f^ma poetis? What gape these for, but only
Fame? They intend not ^rection of hearts, Non vt aliqua illic vitia deponant,
vt aliquam, etc Sed, vt oblectamento auriu^ perfruantur. Sen. ep. 10^.
direction of lives, correction of vices; but they have a strange kind of
pleasure, to hold men by the ears, as the Fisher the Pike by the gilles, and
neither takes him, nor letts him go: there is in these, more affectation of
Fame, then affection of Truth.

2. Are there none, that mould their Sermons with Court dough, Flattery?
Cushion Chaplains, that carry their Mistresses Fannes, to keep the heat of
Reproof from their painted faces; that cry, it is either cold or hot, as their
Patron listes to feel it? Si pr^nderet olus patienter, regibus vti Hot. ad
scaenam. lib. 1. Ep. 17.

N^llet Aristipp^s; si scir^t regibus vti,
Fastidir^t olus etc.
They get more by flattery, the^ just men by their impartial censures: But it
was Aristotle^, amicus Plat^, amicus Socrates, m^gis (...). Thy Patron is thy
Friend, and the chief man of thy Parish is thy Friend: Truth is thy Friend
above all.

3. Are there none, that leap out of the troubles of the world, into the peace
of the Church, only to be fed at the Altar, and live idle? That entertained
to build up Gods House; and once sure of his pay, lay down their tools, and
fall to play?

4. Are there none, that make a Virtue of necessity; and when all trades
fail, turn Priests, Optimum est non vltimum resugium Presbyt.
making that their last refuge, that should be their best: This is a rank
custom among the Papists; but I hope, it has not gotten over our Seas. Oh
how vile is it, and an argument of a desperate mind, when Divinity is made
but a shift? If to dig they are too lazy, to beg ashamed, to steal
afraid, to cheat want wit, and to live, means, then thrust in for a room
in the Church; and once crope in at the window, make haste to sharke out a
living; nay, and perhaps she apace with the wings of golden Ignorance, into
Patrons Books, and Presentations to good Beneficer, when Learning is so ill
horsed, riding upon Penury, that the Benefice is gone, ere he comes; no matter
how poor the stock of Learning be, so the stock of Money hold out, to the
Patrons content: Sometimes such Beggars are made Priests, when good Priests
are made Beggars.

5. Are there none sick of the Pearl in the eye? a shrewd disease, and no
less common; whose souls are taken up by Mammons commission, as Demas, that
gave Religion the Bag, when the World offered him the Purse, and vowed to
serve Christ no longer for nothing. I have showed you many oblique, indirect,
and sinister ends; but among all, this carries it, for custom, for
hatefulness: Proh pudor! that ever a Minister should be covetous, as if we had
lost all our former time, and were now to recover it with a preposterous
emulation of the hungriest Worldlings: How should we reclaim others from the
World, that cleave to it our selves: They must needs think, we have a brother
way to Heaven, then we teach others. It is obseruable, that the Creatures
nearest to the Earth, are most greedy to accumulate: What Creatures store up
such heaps of provision, as the Ant: But the Birds of the Air, Math. 6.26.
that fly next He^uen, Neither sow, nor reap, nor carry into the Barn, says
our Savior. We are next to Heaven in profession; let us hate to be farthest
off in conversation.

These are all unblessed and pernicious ends, and whereof, I trust, no soul is
here guilty: I confidently use the words of Paul: Heb. 6.9.
I have persuaded my self better things of (...) and such as accompany
salvation, though I thus speak: I hope, the least Feather can brush these
dustes from our Conscience: Let not Fame, Flattery, Ease, Necessity,
Covetousness, task our endeauours, to this holy work: ^. Cor. 4.2.
we are then but ( Adulterantes verbum (such as adulterate Gods word; as the
Fornicator makes Lust his end, not Generation: so such a Minister intendes not
to beget souls to God, but Fame, or Gain to himself. If we do thus, the
worst is our own: Phil. 1.15.18.
Whiles some preach Christ of strife, some of goodwill, yet so long a^ Christ
is preached, I do joy, and will joy therein. It shall be the best for us, that
our intentes sympathize with Gods; his Ordinance, with our Perfour^ance, to
turn souls to Righteousness.

COPVLATIVES.
This for the Praedicate. The persons, whom God has deputed to atone these
two contrary natures, sinful men, and Righteousness, are the Ministers: there
is no weak contention between these, and the labor is hard to reconcile
them: 2. Cor 5.
To us is committed this ministry of reconciliation: God has honored us to
tie this ^notte, though it be indeed, ( Dignus vindice nodus) a sacramental
bond for the hand of the most high God to perfect: yet he vouchsafes this
honor to us, (as his instruments) that we in his name and power, shall tie a
double knot on Earth: a temporal knot of the husband to the wife; which none
but the Minister may do: a Spiritual and eternal knot of the believing soul
to her husband Christ: ^. Cor. 11.2.
I have prepared you for one Husband, to present you a pure Virgin to Christ:
He has designed us, to turn men to Righteousness.

Is this possible? Est Deus in vobis, etc. God is in you, if you can do this:
no power rules, constraines, conuertes the heart of man, but God only. I say
again, thus is God pleased to honor us, that we shall be said to convert
sinners: ^am 15.20.
He that conuerteth a sinner from going astray, shall save a soul from death,
and hide a multitude of si^nes. And Paul thus charge Timothy: 1. Tim. 4.16.
Continue in learning, for in doing this, thou shall save thy self, and them
that hear thee. Yet, absit, far be it from us to think, or any
superstitious soul to ascribe it to us, that by our own arm, we have gotten
this victory. If the Psalmist denies power to any, of rescuing his brothers
body from the Grave, he much more excludes thy redemption of his soul. This
then is true, when the external voice of man, and internal operation of the
spirit, shall iumpe together; Mala. 4.6.
then John Baptist shall turn hearts, then the Priest shall make thy soul
clean: Leuit. 16.
When the agent of Heaven, and instrument of Earth, do concur, or are
comprehensiuely taken: but when they be either compared in opposing, or opposed
in comparing, then all is in God: then Paul can (but) plant, 1. Cor. 3.6.
and Apollos water, God gives the increase. Then John Baptist poures on Water,
and Christ baptiseth with the holy Ghost, Math. 3.11.
and with Fire. Will you hear them united; God was in Christ, reconciling the
world to himself, and has committed to us, 1. Cor. 5, 19.
the ministry of reconciliation; else there is no power in my perishable
voice, to affect your conscience. Break away this Analogy and virtuall
association of the spirit from our preaching, and you depart from the Temple,
with as foul hearts as ever you came thither. No beloved, lift up your eyes
higher then the Pulpit, and know, he dwelles in Heaven that pierces the
Conscience: Behold, I stand at the door, and knock. Reave. 3.20.
etc. I, says the Son of the eternal God. It is he, that cleares the eye,
vndeaffes the ear, vnlockes the heart, and shakes the inmost powers of the
soul, as the Thunder shakes the Wilderness. Were we all Bo^nerges, the Sons
of Thunder, we were not able without him, to turn your hearts to
Righteousness: Indeed the Word is strong in operation, Heb. 4.12.
diuidyng the marrow and the bones; and our ministry is not of the Letter, but
Spirit, says S. Paul: thus far exceeding the external commandment of
Moses, whereunto he could not convert his own soul, that it shall not only
require Faith, but give it: yet still, Virtus a Deo, the virtue, life, spirit,
is from God.

This cleares us from that Popish imputatio^, that we build our Faith on a
silly Minister: we build it on the testimony of the Spirit, and the Word of
eternal truth, delivered to us, by such an organ: The truth examined, they
rather build their salvation on a silly Minister. Thus far, they and we go
hand in hand; we agree that Faith and conversion is wrought in the heart by an
especial grace of Gods spirit: But here we part; They say, the holy Ghost
uses the authority of the Church to beget Faith in our hearts: We say, he
uses the Ministry only, not the Authority. Thus, whereas they raise the
credit of the Doctrine from the Minister; we raise the credit of the
Minister, from the Doctrine: so that of both, Papists may be trulier said to
build their Faith on the credit of Men; yea, and such men, as some of them,
have been Sodomites, some Coniurer^, some Murderours, and scarce inferior to
Devils, unless now perhaps they lie as deep and low in Hell. Thus are their
blinded souls bound to believe, not by their Ministry as Christians; but by
their Authority, as Pythagoreans.

I confess, the Word caryes Authority with it, in any lips which God has
touched with a Coal from his Altar, and woe to the soul that disobeyes it.
There is an easy Distinction, says that excellent P^still, D.B.
betwixt the Lawyer, the Physician, and the Divine: The Lawyer begins with
Reason, and so descends to common Experience and Authority: The Physician
begins with Experience, and thence proceeds to Reason and Authority: The
Divine begins with Authority, and so to Reason and Experience: Our personal
Authority then is nothing; the Authority of Gods word not to be withstood.
These then are the Copulatiues, and this the means to bring you to
Righteousness, or else despair it. If thou living within the sunshine of the
Gospel, wilt not be enlightened by it, thou must perish in darkness. If the
Preacher convert thee not to Righteousness, God must work Miracles, or thy
soul is in hazard.

We should now come to our Reward, our Bliss, our Heaven: Shall shine as
Stars for ever and ever: But I find it, Reu. 1. The seven Stars, are the
Angels of the seven Churches. Ministers shall be Stars hereafter, says the
Prophet Daniel: they shall be Stars here too, says S. John. Without question,
both speak truth, and there is a shining of this world, goes before that
Heaven: We must be Stars in Grace, that look to be so in Glory. It was
directed to the Apostles, Vos estis lux mundi, Math. 5.14.16.
you are the light of the world: And, Let your light so shine before men, etc.
So God has disposed, that, Lumen gracia antecedat Lumen gloria, the light of
Grace shall preceed the light of Glory: And none shall shine hereafter, that
have been dark here. First then, consider what kind of Stars we are: then,
what we shall be. Ministers are said to be Stars in five repectes: in Name,
Substance, Sight, Motion, Effects.

Nomine.
1. In Name, Stella astando dicitur, a Star (quasi) not stir, further then
the Orb carries it; God has fixed them in their Spheres, and confined them
to Stations; like good Soldiers, they know their Ranks and their Orders; and
observe their, Non vltra. The Sun knows his rising, and his going down.
Ministers must be like Stars, fixed in their orbs: ours is a stable
profession, 1. Pet. 5.2.
not a gadding Ministry. It was S. Peter's counsel, or rather the holy Ghosts
charge, Feed that flock, that depends on you. (He spoke merely, the Tribe of
Leuj must have no mind to the Tribe of God.) The Apostles indeed, went through
the world; but they had their Pasport for it, Go teach all nations, etc. It
must not be so with us: not that you, which are full, should grudge the hungry
souls some Crummes from your Tables. How many are yet in this Land, that would
be heart-glad of those Sermons, which you sleep out and despise? How many
would close the Minister in the arms of joy, whom you contemn? So easy is it
for a full stomach to forget the benefit of Meat. The feet of those that
bring good tidinges of peace, are no where less beautiful, then in their most
frequented streets. Never found Prophet less honor, less welcome, then
where his perpetual pains have best earned it. Like pampered children, you
play with your Meat: Give us leave to gratify with some comfortes (I say not
with our Savior, the Dogge^, but) the Children of our own Father, which want
them. Theod^r^t writes, that when Valent with his Arrian heresy had bepesterd
the Christian world, and stroke a deep wound in the white boosome of the
Church. Aphr^^d^^ a certain Monk, contrary to his order, came forth of his
vowed and confining Monastery, to succor the endangered truth: being asked by
the offended Emperor, What he did out of his Cell? I did keep it, says he,
so long as Christ's Sheep were in peace; I can not be cooped up, and suffer
them in hazard of ruin: If being a Virgin, I were confined by my Father to a
Closset; yet seeing the House on fire, I were bound to come forth to quench it.

Thus it is, when the affairs of the Church call us forth, our own may not
find us so ready: They are wretched Stars, that will be fixed in no Orb,
admit of no certain Charge; nay not Stars, but mere Meteors, Exhalations,
Ignes f^tuj, Commets portending delusion to others, confusion to themselves,
unstable Lights, Jude. 13.
C^r^ed about with every wind of doctrine: Wandering Stars, as Jude says, for
whom is reserved (not this shyning in glory, Reu. 12.4.
but the black darkness for ever. They were such Stars, that the red
Dragon with his tail swept from Heaven, and cast down to the Earth, that had
no true location in the Orb of the Church, Stellae errati^a, following their
own fantasies. Let us beware of such wandringes, least it be said of us, as
the Poet of that Star, Etsi non c^cidit, poterit cecidisse viderj, though we
have not fallen away, yet we have seemed so: Let no storms blow us from our
Charges: Menaces, Miseries, Gustes, Waves, shall beat upon us, yet ( S^ fract^s
illabatur orbis, impauidum ferient ruinae) let us stick closse and fast to our
Spheres: Hor. lib. car. ^. od. 3.
when Gods general afflictions of plague, famine, mortality, are most
frequent, our councels are most seasonable. Oh when will the iron hearts of men
bow, if not when they are heat in the flame of judgments? They are wretched
Stars then, and incapable of this glory, that are ( Subito a parents,
subito disparentes, Labantes et Labentes) suddenly up, and suddenly down;
giving a glimmering, but no solid and certain light: Let no such Stars shine
in our Firmament.

Substantia.
2. In substance, stella est solida et pellucida materies, non vetustate, non
putredine corrumpenda, non casu vllo dissipanda. a Star is a more solid part
of his Orb, every way round, light, simple, and most pure: a Minister must for
substance be a Star, possess a Starre-like, and substantial light, not a
flash of lightning, but a continual lamp of learning, which like the fire of
the sanctuary, must never go out. You are the light of the world, says our
Master, but if the light be darkness, how great is that darkness? light, as
well as place in the Firmament, is substantial to a Star; and learning as
well as office is requisite for a Minister: They that handle the two-edged
sword of the spirit, must have skill, when to strike with it, when (but) to
shake it, and when to sheath it. An unlearned Scribe, without his treasure of
old and new, is unfit to interpret Gods Oracles. Mal. 2.7.
The Priests lips shall preserve knowledge, is no less a precept to the
Minister, then a promise to the poeple; we are unfit to be Seers, if we cannot
distinguish between Hagar and Sara, but Ixion-like take a cloud for June: we
are poor Stars, if light enough comes not from us, whereby to distinguish of
colors, to discern the Manna of Jsraell, from the inchaunted Cup of Babell: a
Minister without learning, is like a mere Cipher, which fills up a place, and
increases the number, but signifies nothing. There have been some niggardly
affected to learning, calling it man's wisdom: they thrust out the use of
arts, as if with Julian they would shut up the School doors, and send all
humane knowledge into banishment. If the moral says, of a Poet, or a
Philosopher, or perhaps some golden sentence of a Father drop from us,
Pernassus waits on Sion: Helicon on the fountain of grace.
it is straight called (venenata facundia) a poisoned eloquence; as if all
these were not the spoils of the Gentiles, and mere Hand-maides unto
Divinity: They wrong us; we make not the Pulpit a Philosophy, Logic, Poetry,
and School, Secular learning has the use, if it be washed in the soap of the
Prophets.
but all these so many Stairs to the Pulpit. Will you have it? The Fox
dispraiseth the Grapes he cannot reach: If they could beat down learning, they
might escape censure, for their own ignorance: For shame let none that has
borne a Book, dispraise Learning; she has enemies enough abroad, though she
be justified of her Children at home: Let Barbary disgrace Arts, not Athens.

The Papists brag much of their Schollership, though indeed, all the salt of
their Learning, can not keep their Doctrines from stinking. I should hardly be
held an impartial Judge, if I should censure them; therefore I will be silent:
Yet in one thing I can not but commend them: They have one kind of learning
beyond ours, and it consists in arguing: their disputing is strong, victorious,
and full of (desperate) valor: That argument of his was but here by: God
rules the Church Triumphant in Heaven; therefore the Pope rules the Church
Militant on Earth: and so as once, ( Diuisum imperium cum Joue Caesar habet.)
Caesar is half with Jupiter, the Pope is joined purchaser with Christ: But he
will be sole possessour: This was but reasonably audatious, that holds from
Heaven to Earth, from God to the Pope. They dispute with us, yet stronglyer; by
a demonstratiue argument, ( Quod ex veris primis, (sed non) necessarijs
secundis consi^t^^.) Which consists of true principles, but not of necessary
consequences; a Syllogism in Barbara, a very barbarous one. I will show you
how, as the Jews reasoned with Stephen.

Every Blasphemer deserves to be stoned:
But Stephen is a Blasphemer: ergo,
Stephen deserves to be stoned.
Stephen graunts the proposition, that a Blasphemer is worthy to be stoned; but
denies the assumption, and says, I am no Blasphemer, therefore not to be
stoned: They prove it, take up stones, and knock him on the head: An
invincible argument. So the Papists with us.

All Heretics deserve to be burned:
Ratio barbara.
All the Protestants are Heretics: ergo,
All the Protestants deserve to be burned.
We stand not much upon the mayor, but resolutely and truly deny the minor;
and say, we are no Heretics, therefore deserve not to be burned: They prove
it; tie us to strong Stakes, lay on Wood, put too Fire, Actio barbarissima.
and burn us to ashes: an unanswerable syllogism; yet we have answered it,
and overcome it, ( Et fortiores ignibus facti sunt) our Martyrs were stronger
in Faith, Cypr.
then the Fire in heat; and though, Lord, For thy sake we were killed all the
day long, and counted as Sheep for the slaughter; Romans 8.36.37.
yet in all these things, we were more then Conquerours through him, that
lou^d us.

But otherwise for the substaunciall light of Learning, our Stars shall
compare with the Stars of Rome: yet, Oh that there was no fault in us of this
nature, worthy to be censured, deplored. Take the district eye of a
true-iudging God ((...)) and, ^. Cor. 2.16.
Who is sufficient for these things? All our Learning Dexterity, Sincerity,
Diligence, comes short of the required perfection. Let us treasure up what we
can; and produce it to the edification of others. Do we think it enough to
have Learning, and not to shine in this dark world? They are strange Stars,
that will give no light: if not here, then not hereafter. They are deep
Wells, from whom can be drawn no Water: We unto me, if I preach not the
Gospel: 2. Pet. 2.17.
If thou be called, and endued with answerable gifts, and wilt bury thy
Talent, I need not tell thee the danger. I cannot say ( Ex ^re tuo) out of
thine own mouth, for thou say nothing; but ( Ex silenti^ tuo) by thy
silence, Luke. 19.22.
because thou say nothing, God will judge thee. If it may be said of him,
that would and cannot Preach, Non volentes, non valentes.
he is a dumb Dog; it may as fitly and justly be said of him that can, and
will not Preach, Post. D.B.
that he is a dumb Devil. It is not enough to wear a decent Surplisse, etc.
(though some out of their curiosity think that too much) when the peoples
Souls are starued for the bread of Heaven: There be good injunctions, for the
comely ceremonies of the Church, to preserve us in peace, in unity; so also
good orders for weekly Sermons: Haec fecisse, illa non omisisse iustum est.
These ought you to have done, Luke 11.42.
and not to leave the former undone: Let not the first be true Canons, whiles
the latter are only Pot-guns.

A double beam, then, you must expect from your Stars, your Ministers,
preaching, and praising God: the means and the end; both I say, not one only:
some of you are all for prayers, and care for no preaching: some all for
preaching, and care for no praying: if there be no sermon, they will sit
still, and serve God at home; as if he had promised his presence to the chimney
corner, sooner then to the Temple. Indeed says S. Paul, despise not
prophesying, but for ought I see, ^. Thessalonians. 5.20.
he allows no where, the vilipending of public prayers, but rather seems to
imitate, Magnify praising God; for he prefixeth, if not prefers, Pray
continually, ver. 17.18.
and, in all things give thanks, etc. adding under them; Numb. 11.29. 1. Cor.
14.5.
and, Despise not Prophesying. I speak it not to vilefie Preaching, (so
principally a necessary means for our salvation,) J would ye did all
Prophecy, was the the speech of Moses and Paul: Neither would I hearten the
common disestimation, and contempt of public Prayers: both are necessary;
yet is the last best (if I be not deceived) so far as the end transcendes the
means: Your health is more precious then the Physic, that recouers you,
though it come as far as the East. All our Preaching, labors and Aims at
this, to beget in you a knowledge, and a conscience, how to serve and praise
God. Opus via: o^us patriae.
Preaching is the work of our way, praising God, of our Country: in Heaven
there shall be no Sermons, but even then Hosa^na's and Halleluia's: We shall
spend the time, nay that eternity, in praising our Creator and Savior, and
Sanctifiour, when there shall be none to preach to us. Love then Preaching and
do not despise Praying; both are the lightfull and delightful beams, that
come from your Stars, your Ministers.

Situ.
3. In situation, the Stars are placed in their Orb, and thereof being
circularly and regularly carried, do finish their course in a determinate
space of time. Philosophy says, that the Sun does partly enlighten the
Stars of Heaven: But Divinity (says) the Son of Righteousness, Mala. 4.
does wholly enlighten his stars of the Church. The Stars are placed high,
the more commodiously to shine to us: God has put Ministers in an eminent
place, that their light might be more perspicuous. Candles once accensed, are
not to be thrust into abstruse corners. If then Paul requires it of others,
then much more of us, that are Stars, To have our conversation in Heaven. It
is not required of the Firmament, Phil. 3.20.
to shine so bright as the Stars: more holiness is expected of us, then in
the ordinary station of a Christian: whiles other men's places are less
notable, their vices are less notorious: we run not in a common line, but are
set forth as copies of Sanctification: every blot in us, is so much more
dangerous, as tiis more obseruable: every Learner is apt to tax his precedent,
if faulty: he has need to be circumspect, that says to others, Be ye
followers of we, and look on them, that walk so, as you have us for a^
ensample. Phil. 3.17.
We have all infirmities, if not enormities, and let S. Paul himself refer
you to the most absolute pattern, and reserve to your imitation, certain
limittes, Follow me, as I follow Jesus Christ: We must follow thee, oh
Savior, and strive to be holy, as thou ^^t holy.

This is our seat in Heaven; and we should be like the Stars, if it were
possible; free from Elementary corruptions. To speak by roate of Repentance,
Faith, new Birth, is seldom profitable, when no such thing is felt in our own
bossomes, or manifested in our lives: We (rather) trust our health into those
Physicians hands, whose Drugges have recovered themselves. If thou have an
Angels tongue, and a Devils heart, thou art no better then a Post in the cross
way. that rottes it self, to direct others; or a Torch, that having pleasured
others with the light, goes forth it self in Smoke and stinch. To speak
well, and do ill; is to build up Heaven with the voice, Hell with the
couersation: Sic dic^^m, vt qua fu^runt verba, Caelum aedificat Lingua,
infernum vita.
sint opera. Let us so speak, that those which have been our words, may be
our deeds. In deed it should be thus ( Si been dixerimus, vestrum est) If we
have said well, Sen. ep. 1. lib. 19.
it is your good: ( Si been vixerimus, nostrum est) If we have done well, it is
our own good: And for Ministers words, ( Dicunt qua dei sunt) they speak that
which is Gods: For their lives, (^atiunt qua sua sunt) they do that which is
their own: but our persons are in their sight, when our words are gone from
their ears: and withal, Segnius irrita^^ animos demissa per ^^res, H^rat. in
art^.

Quam qua sunr^cidis subiecta fidelibus.
There is a quicker perspicuitie in the eyes, and a better retention of the
received object, then in the ears. The Thunder first breaks the Cloud, and
lets forth the Lightning? yet is the latter seen, before the former is heard:
Hence it is, that Examples teach soonest, ( Longum iter per verba, Senec.
breue et compendiosum per exempla,) It is a long way by Precepts, a short by
Examples: The force of a hundred good Sermons, is loft by one enormitie: so
easy is it to weaue Penelop^^ web. Let us then have some respect to our
Life, as our Doctrine: the credit is a thing next tender to the Conscience, (
Qua semelamissa, postea nullus eris,) which once shipwrack'd, thou art undone:
It is a great difficulty, to play an after game of Reputation. It was an
excellent exhortation of Paul, and implied no small difficulty to Timotheus; 2.
Tim. 4.5.
Cause thy Ministry to be thoroughly liked of: adorn it with a pure and holy
Conversation. His charge was no less to Titus? Tit. 2.15.
See that no man despise thee. Say they did; can Titus help that? Paul^
meaning is, Give just cause to no man, to despise thee. Let them then murmr
till their tongues are hoarse with contumelies, so long as thou can applaud
thy self in the conscience of thy well deseruinges, and say with that
persecuted, maligned, reviled, yet holy Psalmist; Oh Lord, thou know mine
innocence. Calumnies against the Minister are facile, frequent: If austere with
John Baptist, they are censured, precise: if sociable as Christ, dissolute. Our
merriment is thought madness, when others madness, i^ but merriment: It is
guiltiness enough in us, to be but ill reported they will believe a scandal
raised against us, sooner then against a Ruffian; and what they dream, is so,
no arguments shall euade it. Men are glad of color to despise us; and great
ones, at once to save their credits, and their purses, pick quarrels with
their Minister: When all tricks fail, to shake off him, that has earned thy
love and bounty this shall do it; accuse him to be thine enemy, and so
excuse thy self from being his friend: it is hard if the eye of Malice cannot
spy a Moate in a Black coat; or at least, say it is a Moate, though it be
but a White one, a work of honest simplicity. I fear, I am too plain with
the times, that are so subtle with us: I comfort my self, and all my partners
in this common misery; Male de me dicunt, sed mali, Sen.
they speak evil of me, but they are evil men, and would speak better of
me, if I were worse. It hurts not, to have no grace, of them that have no grace.

1. Pet. 3.16.


Let us proceed in the integrity of our conscience, that When they speak
evil of us, as of evil doers, they may (in the end) be ashamed, which
slander our good conversation in Christ. Let us live well, the success to
God: a good word has the time when to be spoken. There is a season to
benefit, and a season to hurt by our speech, (therefore it is preposterous in
men, to be Consonantes, when they should be Mutes; and Mutes, when they should
be Consonantes,) But a good life is never out of season. A high Place, and a
low and base Life, Seeds prima vita ima.
have no analogy or correspondence: Our seat is in Heaven like Stars; let
not our conversation be on Earth like Beasts: Other men's indifferences, are
our rank evils: that which is scarce worth notice in others, in us is
censured, taxed, condemned. This for the site.

4. The Motion is fourefold. 1. Circular. 2. Incessant. 3. Swift. 4. Orderly.
Mota.


1. Circular: The Stars move roundly, Orbicularis.
according to their Orbs: Our Motion, that are Ministers, is not unlike; A Deo
caepimus, in Deo chau^^m^^, We begin from God, in God we end: Jehou^h called
us, A Jove principium.
and we strive to bring souls to him: As we are Pastors, Per lustrandum cuile.
we must compass about our Flocks, as Watchmen surround the City, to
fortify the breach: Satan compasses the earth, by his own testimony: Job. 1.
The roaring Lion goes about, 1. Pet. 5.8.
by the description of Peter, watching whom to devour. Let our diligence match
his, with a saving intent, that the tempted may have our Antidotes, the
doubtful (...) Counsels, the erring our Conuictions, and the languishing our
Encouragements.

^riequietus.
2. Incessant: Our Motion is without intermission; for the Adversary never
gives truce, or admittes conditions of peace, without his sensible advantage.
Therefore our calling allows us no time to sit still and sing R^quiems to our
souls under our Fig Trees of peace. A Soldier should die in the Wars
standing, and a Minister in the Pulpit preaching. It was the Lord of the
Vineyards reproof, Why stand ye here all the day idle? It is not permitted to
us, to stand still; What, and all your day? and idle too? Paul's example was
other, and that excellent: J ceased not to admonish every one night and day
with tears: I ceased not, ( Ecce Laborem) behold his labor: Act. 2^.31.
To admonish, ( Ecce Officium) behold his Duty: Every one, ( Ecce Amorem)
behold his Love: Night and day, ( Ecce vigilantiam) behold his Watchfulness:
With tears, ( Ecce compassionem) behold his Pity.

Velocissimus.
3. Swift and speedy; Noscit tarda molimina spiritus, The holy Ghost cannot
abide delays: We may give warning too late, when the Enemy has surprised the
City. It was the Master of the Feasts charge, Go out quickly into the
Streets and Lanes, Luke. 14.21.
etc. The Angels are said to have Wings, for their speedier expedition of Gods
hestes; and, Cursed is he, that does Gods business negligently, says the
Prophet. Indeed we may run too fast, when God sendes us not: Jonas made
^reposterous haste, when he took. Tarshish for Nineueh: and they run ( Curu^
pede, Praedicare volunt, imo volant.
with a swift perhaps, but) with no straight foot, that are in Moses Chair,
ere they be aware; and wonder too late, how they came thither. I cannot call
this Motion speedy; but hasty: and much haste, is seldom incountred with good
success: The Stars move swiftly, but not madly. They that fly into the
Ministry without Wings, run without Legs; I mean, without Knowledge, move
short of their own benefit, of others expectation: The Clouds pour down no
rain, till they have first sucked it up: (Praepropera praxit, praepostera
lectio,) To practice first, and study afterward, is an ill habit in action,
and no good figure in Rhetoric: They that will so run, that they may
attain, have neither too many feet, nor too few: If they abound, as the
Monsters the sons of Anak, that had six Toes on a foot: Impediuntur
necessarijs auxilijs, their necessary helps, are their hindrances: If they be
defective, they can but limpe. Therefore in our Motion, let Zeal further
Discretion, that not too slow Discretion moderate Zeal, that not too fast: but
having thy Commission, and being placed by God in thy Orb, be not unwilling to
move: Practice is like a Wheel, the more it is turned, the better it goes.

4. Orderly: We must keep as the Stars do, Ordinatissimus.
our known and equal distance: it is not to thy praise, to run into other
Orbs, desiring there (Ostendere, nay, Ostentare lucem tuam) to show, yea to
boast thy light, with a proud conceate, to darken the Star, which God has
there placed: such an emulation is odious, and thou may flash out (like a
Meteor) for a time, but at last, God will ask thee, who sent thee thither? Let
every Star be loved of his own Orb, though one Star differs from an other
Star in glory. 1. Cor. 15.
Nothing better becomes us, then order; for our God is the God of order:
Contention disables us, and eneruates our Ministry: So long as the water is
stirred, the Fisher can catch no Fish: Love is the Maister-veine of the Soul,
and Peace knittes the Joints: (...) Ephesians. 4.12.
Are we called to put the luxate members of the body of Christ into their
places, and shall our selves be disioynted? Our peace, is the Milk of our
Land, let not our strife like Runnet, Leo.
turn it to Curde. When the people were together by the ears, a Fellow as
thick as long, got up into the Theater, and aduauncing himself, they began
all to laugh: go to, quoth he, laugh and spare not; I have a Wife at home,
rounder then my self: (at this they laughed louder:) yet when we agree, one
Bed can hold us, when we are at variance, the whole house is too little for us.
You can apply it.

Effects.
5. The last circumstaunce of our Similitude to the Stars, consistes in the
effects; these are three: J^fluendi, Illuminand^, orratu Delectandi, 1. Our
Influence. 2. Light. 3. Delight.

Influendi.
1. Influence. Philosophy teaches us, that the Stars in Elements, and
Elementall bodies, do stir up the first qualities, Astra regunt homines, sed
Deus astra regit.
hot, cold, moist, and dry; and cause other effects, serving to the
inclination of man: Surely as we are Stars, all the Influence we can derive
to men of our selves, is to incline them by our charity. This is no weak
persuasion, but one of those 3. Feedinges, that at least they expect: Egentis
animum doctrinae sermo non penetrat, si hunc miserecordiae manus non co^mendat.
Grig. Past.
If they find not Hospitality the Porter at our gates, they strait censure us
for Dark stars. Many of our people liked Popery well, for nothing else, but
because they were fatted with the superfluities, that fell from their libertine
Feasts. Now these that measure Religion by their bellies, will be tempted with
handfulls of Barley, and morsells of Bread, to speak well of us: As the Jews
once in the Prophet, so these cry now: When we served the Queen of Heaven,
and might pray to our Lady, we had Bread enough: Now they have pleaded so hard
for Faith, they have forgotten Charity: They say, We set Faith at our own
Tables, but thrust Charity out, to dine with our Servants. These are the
scandalous clamours of their invincible ignorance, who, (as many of the Jews,
Christ) follow the Gospel, only for their bellies: they consider not, in
whose hands Abbeys, and Monasteries, and the best Parsonages are: He was a
friend to us, that told the Beggar, The Vicaredge is but the Parsonages spawne.
(beating hard at the Vicars door for releife,) he knocked at the wrong door:
here dwells, quoth he, the Spawne, but yonder the Pickerell. The Pope and his
For so are Impropriators.
Heirs, have got all; we have not the tenth of the tenth, the very interest
left; yet they claim as much of us, as of them that have the principal. Well,
our reward is in Heaven; let us give them what Influence we can, and having
fed their souls, spare also some relief to their bodies.

2. Light. This the second effect, to enlighten them: the substance and nature
of a Star, has already taught us this duty: I will sparingly urge it.
Illuminandi.
We illuminate them by speech, by conversation. Our Doctrine is the Light;
Life, the Lantern: if we carry the Light without the Lantern, the wind of
Malice will strive to blow it out. He went not far from this allegory, that
prescribed a Ministers duty, (Tonare voce, fulminare vita,) our words,
thunder: Grig. Naz.
our lives, lightning. If we be lightfull in preaching, darksome in living; we
do (as it were) propound our Doctrines, as impossible to be kept. If we have
knowing Minds, and dissolute Affections, it may be said of us (as of that
stigmaticke Roman Emperor Galba, who was both deformed, Ingenium Galbae male
habitat.
and witty) that a good Instrument is put in an evil Case. If we live well,
and say nothing, we have an Orb and seem Stars, but are none: for God
(sure) never placed Star in the Firmament, that gives no light. Whether they
be idle, or unable, like Aesop's Hen, too fat to lay; they are but a burden
to our Orb, a disgrace to our Church: only do thou take heed (thy Star not
shining so bright as others) least thy Clouds darken it: The peoples sins,
are not seldom the cause of the Prophets darkness; to himself be his own
negligence, He stands or falls to his own Master: Perhaps there is yet more
in it, then so; God has his special work in all euentes: it may be, in thy
Ministers insufficiency thy sin is plagued, and God strikes thee through
him. This is no light, though insensible stroke: thou have slighted his sacred
and maiesticall Word; behold, as to a Swine unworthy of this Pearl, he denies,
withholds it. Hos. 9.7.
The Prophet is a fool: the spiritual man is mad, for the multitude of
thine iniquity. Go then and bewail thy sins, Coloss. 4.3.
and Pray that the doare of utterance may be opened to him, least whiles he
shines not, thou perish in darkness.

Ornatu delectandi.
3. Delight. The Stars are the grace of the Sky: so are Ministers of the
Church, when they all move in peace and unity, ( Ordine quisque suo,) every
one in his own order. We often see the Stars, their contemplation, their
benefit is never tedious: no more is the society of Ministers to them, that
desire to read in those Books, the constellations of Heaven, the mysteries of
Salvation, and to know how to govern their souls and their bodies. God gave
man an upright Countenance, Ovid. met.
directing his Mind together with his Looks to the Stars; Erectos ad
sydera tollere vultus: Look on them, which walk like us, says S. Paul; Phil
3.17.
not as some Star-gasers, that stare on us, only to entrap us: to whom we
reply, as Diogenes did to him, that so subtly disputed of the Stars; How
long is it since you came down from Heaven? Quam pridem de caelo descendisti?
Let them beware a success, like Thales, who gazed so long at the Stars
above him, that he fell into the Ditch below him. If then, you look on us,
keep the Creeples intent at the Beautiful gate of the Temple; Act 3.5 6.
Give heed to us, trusting to receive some thing of us: and then, though
Silver and Gold we have none, yet what we ^a^e, we give you, in the name, and
by the virtue of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, better things are derived from us.
Fables and toys content us with a transient glaunce. -- videtur Fabula, qua
posci vult, et spectata reponi. Hor.
A Fable requires no more, but to be seen, and then thrown by: But here (Non
satiatur oculu^ visu) the eyes are not satisfied with seeing: such joy is the
Minister to the good man's soul, that he could be content to have him ever in
his sight.

You have heard, how we are called Stars, I would direct the Application of
this, to 3. sorts of people: Patrons, Laity, Ministers.

1. To speak much of Patrons, Patrons.
you will hold it frivolous: they hear not, being absent; neither would they
believe, being present: But let not sin be balked, though it be not by, to
answer for it self. Many of them care not whom they present, if his Purse can
speak learnedly, though his tongue ignorantly. Ignorance, Superstition, and
Symonie, were once proper to the Romish Sea; I know not what unfortunate wind
has blown the last into our Land, and defiled the pure professors of
Reformation. But you will say, there is no Simony, wherein the Minister is not
one party. It is too true; woe to us the whiles: I mean not only the woe of
misery, fatally forced on us by these evil days; but the woe of Judgment,
which we voluntarily call on us by this wickedness. I will not speak to
excuse us a t^to, sed a tanto: durum telum, necessitas: You that are the
Donors, have the things consecrated to Piety and Faith, committed to you upon
trust, and you have sworn it a law in your boosomes, (which you more strictly
observe, then the law of your maker) that we shall buy them at your hands, or
go without them. Christ threw out of the Temple, not only the buyers, but
(let me say rather) the sellers: And though the Law of the Land, makes you not
(Pares ^oe^a) equal with us in the punishment; yet the Law of Heaven shall
find you (Pares culpa,) in equal fault: I think, I might boldly say (under
correction) you are in the greater damnation; as it had been more heinous in S.
Peter to exact money of Magus, then in Magus to offer it: the reason is
impregnable, you sin through a voluntary covetousness, we through extreme
necessity; being constrained, either to beg with our families, or study
euasions for so strict and religeous a law: If we therefore be condemned as
Simonists, your easiest censure, is to be esteemed Infidels. Me thinks I
hear them reply; There is enough left to satisfy all, if there might be an
equal division; but some have all, some nothing: To whom I will not answer,
since that grave Father has for me: Thus their Fathers have played the
Thieves, D. Smirh.
and they come to compound the matter. If we speak of this, we are censured
for covetous, but how lewdly? Is this couetise to desire our own? I say not
the Churches superfluities, which they called once ( Bona Pauperum) the goods
of the Poor, but even the Churches necessaryes, which are ( Bona Christ's) the
goods of Christ; which now (Latci possident) profane men enjoy: for Gentlemen
have cut out their gallant suites out of the Churches Broad-cloth, and left the
Church her self nothing but mere Shreds: shall I say? Who have more done it,
then they that stand so for the beauty of the Church? None more deface her,
then they that most seem to adorn and pollish it: Let them undo two or three
Ministers by their impropriations, and they will reward one (of their own
humor) with the plasters of their bounty: Such corrupted Patrons are of
Dionisius mind, that robbed his God of his golden Coat, as more fit for
himself: They say, Nero and Agrippa came into the world with their feet
forward, and what Monsters proved they? sure, never worse to the Commonwealth
of Rome, then Simonicall Patrons to the Church of England. Well, if briberie,
fraud, Simony, will not carry them to Hell, let them hope still to be saved:
but (I would they heard me) if they be saved so living, and so dying, there is
hope for the Devil to be saved. It is granted sin, but they may repent:
true, but did ever man repent, that having time and means, could and would not
restore? let them return their extorted money, which they have cruelly gotten
by Simonicall contracts, to the poor Minister, or if he be dead, to his Wife
and Children; or I will sooner believe, that Judas repented: Judas restored,
yet repented not truly; and shall they repent truly, that restore not? Let
them brag of their gains, that have thus coosoned God, the Church, their
own souls: If ever they come with Simony on their backs into Heaven, I may
be of the Indians mind, who dying under the Spanish cruelty, and admonished
to prepare for Heaven, and to escape Hell, asked to what place the Spaniards
went? They answered, to Heaven. Then, quoth the Indian, let me never come
there: For surely, Simonistes, and honest men, do not belong to one house.
There are 3. Pees in a line of relation, Patrons, Priests, People. Two of
these Pees are made lean, to make one P. fat. Priests have lean Liuinges,
People lean Souls, to make Patrons have fat Purses. I accuse not all in
general, no one in particular, ( Namque mihi nec equos, mihi nec rapuere
inuences,) but for Zions sake I cannot hold my peace, which is so sick of this
disease, Esaias. 62.1.
that she lies at the mercy of God for recovery.

2. Let me speak yet more particularly to you, over whom God has placed a
Minister as a Star, Despise him not; at your peril, you despise God
himself, Laity.
and shall not go scotfree: on your souls be it, that hear me this day,
whose table talk is furnished up with iestes, with inuectiues against
Ministers: Whatsoever thou art, God has honored the poorest Minister above
thee, and taken him as worthy to serve at his own table, but not thee, nor thy
fathers house, were his head Gold, his Treasure richer then Hezekiahs, and
every room in his house better furnished then Salomons,, he may stand in need
of the Minister: as great a Potentate as Pharaoh was, and as despiceable as he
thought Moses* yet his Courtiers often heard him; Send for Moses: so was
Phenustocles ever banished in peace, but sent for home in war: we are passed
over in the days of pride (as superfluous creatures, of whom no use) but when
the wrath of God falls on the naked conscience, then the Minister is thought
on; and the soul receives some comfort, whiles he feels the sicke-beating
Pulse, or leanes on the groaning Pillow, speaking from us to Heaven, the humble
devotions of a penitent heart, and from Heaven to us the comfortable things of
Sion, and the never failing mercies of a tender Savior: Thus like some Fruit
trees in fair weather, you throw Cudgels at us; in foul, run to us for
shelter.

I will not speak affirmatively to you, in these rotten days of ours, wherein
nothing but priuations are in force and frequent: Despise not, afflict not,
impouerish not your Stars; I will not say magnify, bless, enrich them,
because I cannot hope it: yet, Oh for shame, do not their contraries.

1. Despise not. Why should I entreat this? We might imitate the fashion,
Spernere se sperni, Scorn them that scorn us: but I persuade you for your
own sakes, since it is not possible, you should honor the message of God, and
despise him that God has chosen to bring it. We shall be your good Ministers,
till discordant things drop from us, and then farewell good conceit; as
Tertullian spoke merrily of the Heathen; Unless God please Man, he shall be
God no longer: Now Man must be propitious to God. Nisi homini deus placuerit,
deus non erit homo iam deo propitius esse deberit. Tect.
Reproves are good Physic, though not so well rellish'd: Indulgence is
sweet, and you may think it better cheer; but you will not be so well after
it. In these misiudging days, it is exceeding hard to ouer-reach the Devil;
if we let sin alone, his Kingdom flourishes; if we strike at him, and hit
not the bough he sits on, we move him not: if we do, we are judged partial,
personal, and wreakers of our own spleen. There is scarce a man that can
read English, Tractent sab^ilia fabri.
scarce a woman that can make her self ready to Church, but will presume to
teach the Minister; and either we must preach what you will hear, or you will
not hear what we preach. In Holiogabolus time, there was a Senate of Women, we
have Conuocations; they consulted about Tyars, ours about Religion. Let us take
heed, it is one of the Devils subtilest and shrewdest tricks, to make us so
zealous in Religion, that we grow wanton: and this sin is so much the more
dangerous, as it endures not the reproouing: thus if an holy impatience arm
the Ministers tongue to speak too smart against your sins, he is straight
said to rage: So Semeiah said of Jeremy, Iehu of Elisha, the Jews of Christ,
and the Gentiles of Paul. Of those that never will be sober, we are called
Bedlams. But S. Aug. well cleares this, under the person of David, Aug. Psalm*
33.
Jnsanire videbatur, sed regi Achis insanire videbatur, id est, stultis et
ignorantibus: David seemed mad; but he seemed so to the King of Achis. We are
called madmen, but of none, save madmen; their common exceptions against us,
and contemptes of us, are these 4. 1. They say, we are Men, why does not God
send by worthyer Messengers, as by Angels? They had best teach him: Send by
whom thou should send. 2. They say, we are simple men: As the Apostles were
Fishermen, Exodus 4.13.
and Amos an Heardman. Gallants scorn that a Clown should teach them their
duties. They call us Idiotes, Innocents: (...), the word signifies such as do
no hurt, but taken for Fools, that do neither good nor harm. 3. They say, we
die like men, we can neither keep our selves from sin, nor our bodies from
death. 4. They say, all we say, is but words: So Galuo called the Gospel,
Act. 18.15.
a question of words. I answer:

Homines.
1. Men indeed; but men of God: so were the Prophets received and called: and,
Let a man so think of us, as of the Ministers of Christ. 1. Cor. 4.1.
We are intelligent creatures by Nature, but of Divine understanding by Grace:
The things which no eye has seen, etc. has Gods spirit revealed to us. 1.
Cor. 2.10.
Surely the Lord will do nothing, but he reuealeth his secrets to his
Servants the Prophets. Amos. 3.7.
Thou braggest thou have two eyes, as well as thy Minister: thou have indeed;
one eye of Nature, and that is ( Nequam,) a wicked one: another of Reason, and
that is (Necquicquam,) a blind one: the one naught, the other naughty, and
stand in need of the Ministers eye to guide thee. Thou demaundest a worthyer
Messenger; but when God spoke to Israel in thunder, when by Angels, they cried,
Oh let Man speak to us, least we perish. If an Angel or a Man say, Christ is
borne, it is not more true in the Angel, then in the Man.

Insirmi.
2. Simple men, yet is the word powerful: The Jews thought, they knew Christ
and his breeding, is not this the Carpenters Son? yet, he taught as one
having authority, Math 7.29.
not as the verbal Scribes: You think it shame enough, and extreme disgrace
against us, to say, you know our beginnings, yet is God able to turn the
proudest of you, by the simplest of us; or if not convert, as the savor of
life, yet convince as the savor of death, and make your Mutimus to that common
Iaylour, 1. Cor. 5.5.
delivering your incorrigible Souls to Satan, for, whom we bind on Earth, are
bound in Heaven.

We dye like men, but our words live: Mortales.
the Prophets told the Jews, that they should go into Ba^ilon Captives: The
high places of Jshac shall be desolate, Amos. 7.9.
and the Temples of Jsraell destroyed, etc. Behold, the Prophets dye, but their
words live: Judah is carried away Captive, Lam. 1.3.
she dwells among the Heathen. And by the rivers of Babell, they sit and
weep, when they remember Sion. Psalm. 137.1.
So we denounce the judgments of God against the obstinate, and tell the
Usurer, maugre his pile of Bonds, heap of Pawnes, bags of Coin, morgages
of Lands, De male quaesitis non gaudet, etc.
that his seed shall inherit the wind, and his hoords are no other then the
gathering of the clouds, which once full, promise the dispersion of the greater
showers; behold, we are laid low in our graves, yet our sayings have their
timely proofs; the seed of the covetous come to ruin: behold the ryotous
Heir, sick and diseased through his intemperance, his intemperance bred of
the fullness of his state, his full estate begot by his Fathers Parsimony,
miserableness, nay perhaps injustice. Behold (I say) this man glad of a room
in the Hospital for necessity, which his Father built of his superfluity.
Thus the word we preach, passes not, but is more immortal then the Heaven.

4. All we say, is but words, mere talk; Tabulantes. Ioh. 1.
so you may contemn all the works of God, and say, it was but talk that made
the world; for, By his word he made it. This is a common slander, when the
Hel-hound (the covetous wretch) pincheth on the Priests side: No matter, let
him talk for his living; yes, and have none: the time may come (if they call
it talking) they may talk for Mercy too, and have none. If they call Gods
speaking to them, talking; what is their speaking to God? There is difference
betwixt speaking, talking, and saying: speaking comes by nature, talking by
custom, saying by art: Children speak, Fools talk, Learned men say: All
that have the organs of voice, Cicer. Orat. Satis loquentiae, eloquentiae patum.
can speak and talk, but not say, Solius est oratoris dicere, vulgi l^qui.
Tulli^ could affirm it, that an Orator only says; the common people talks.
Our Preaching is not then talking, but saying a sententious and deliberate
speech, uttered to purpose, composed by study and the direction of Gods holy
spirit; who with our words, winds, deeds, shutting where we shut, and
opening where we have opened.

2. Afflict not. Is this possible? can Lambs be among Woolues, and not be
bitten? Ecce mitto vos, etc, Behold, I send you as Lambs among Woolues: he
said so, Ierom. contr. Iouinian. ^ib.
that foreknew our usage. Amara est veritas, et qui eam praedicat, repletur
amaritudine. Bitter is the Truth, and he that preaches it, shall be filled
with bitterness. The cause of the worlds ((...)) hatred of Christ, Joh. 7. is
((...)) because J witness against it, Job. 7.7. Tacit.
that the works thereof are evil. It is written of the Christians, in the
life of Nero, that they preserved the state; yet Dogs must devour them: they
made Aurelius Army to prosper, and by their Prayers obtained thunder to
destroy the enemies; yet ( Christianos ad Leones) throw the Christians to the
Lions. It has ever been the Poesy of the Church, Lactan.
( Facere bonum, et habere malum,) to do good, and to suffer evil: So Christ
himself sped, he healed, and was hurt; he pittyed, and was mocked; he saved
others, himself was killed. The color of our Livery on earth, is either
Black, mourning; or Read, persecuted. The Arms of the Church is the Cross,
and her perpetual Song, is her militant state, Aristoph.
like that oppressed Servants ((...),) J suffer, I suffer: this is Christ's
Dish, and the Apostles Sauce. Behold oh Minister, the strait thou art in;
neither wonder, nor weep, nor faint: this thou might have prevented, by
keeping out, cannot be avoided, now thou art in: If we do our duty, the
World will hate us; if not, God will curse us: by the first, we are in danger
to loose our goods, good names, lives: by the second, our Souls, our Heaven,
our God. At pretium pars haec corpore maius habet: Our worldly losses may be
dear to us, yet dross, and trash, and rubbish, in regard of God, and bliss:
Woe unto us that suffer; more woe to you that make us.

3. Impouerish not: I do not say, make us rich by your own poverty, as your
progenitors did by our predecessors; but at least give us our own: The old
Pharise was an honest man in this, for he thought it a true position, Decima
vt dives fias, Tyth, Gal. 6 6.
and be rich: but we think, tyth, and be poor: To communicate with our
Teacher in all our goods, is not Scripture, though Paul himself speak it: a
competencie will serve: they are wiser then God: their competencies have
brought us to impotencies: a Stool, a Cruze, and a Candlestick, and a small
Room, are superaboundance for a Priest: we need not with that order of the
Popish Priests, pull on our selves a voluntary beggary, for Gentlemen (we
thank them for it) have enforced us to it on necessity. I will not dispute,
whether Tithes be due to us (iure diuino) by the law of God; or whether the
with-holders come within the compass of that Curse; Ye are cursed with a
curse, because ye have spoiled me in Tithes and Offerings; Mal. 3.8.9.
Since the Law present allows no power to sue such, on an action of detinue:
to omit, that Melchisedeck had Tithes, and that of Abraham, and even by the law
of Nature, besides the Leuiticall of the Jews, which they say is abrogated,
that would say no less of the moral law of God, for an advantage: Yet Paul^.
(...) in all his goods, must needs euince, that the Minister must have some
share in his peoples substance: if any, Gal. 6 6.
why not that portion, which in all ages and Churches has been given them? If
they be consecrated to Jesus Christ, (I say not, by blinded superstition, but)
by true and warrantable devotion, before the Pope ever put out his apparent
horns, who dares rob our Savior of them, that never passed fine of his
royal prerogative, to any purchaser? If they were his, whose are they? let
them prove, he has assigned them to Gentlemen, and I will clear them from
that menace of Solomon; Prou. 20.25.
It is a destruction to devour holy things, etc. Ministers were once held
Angels; now, unless they do bring Angels in their purses, Ibis Homere for as,
for all their music, they are shut out of doors: They say, the Italian
Ducades make their Priests Duces, Princes, Captains, brave fellows. The
Spanish Pistolets make their Priests terrors to be feared, the word
signifying Tormentigenus, a kind of torment: witness the Jnquisition. The
French Crowns crown their Priests with wealth and dignity; Status
insolidus, qui caret solidi^.
but (Defectu^ Angelorum Anglicorum) the want of English Angels, leaves our
Ministry in the dust. The words of so reverend and honorable a Prelate, come
here to my mind; L.B. of London in his lectures on Jonas.
Time was, Religion did eat up Polici^, and the Church devoured the
Commonwealth, but now, Polici^ eats up religion, and the Commonwealth
deuoures the Church. Men are professed Politicians; Floreat respublica, copijs
referta, etc. et quid ad nos? Let the Commonwealth prosper, Aug. de ciuit.
Dei. lib. ^. cap. 2.
and what care we for the Church. If we had no souls, this might be some
shadaw of equity; but seeing we have, it is the substance of rank impiety.

And let me say, if men would imagine and plot a course to loose the souls,
that Christ has bought, they could not find a directer: for if Learning beg,
study Arts that list, Romans 10.
will be the general voice: If there be none to preach, there will be no
believing; if no believing, (...) saving. Never plead your Faith in the
Gospel, whiles you reward it not: perhaps you can afforde Desert, some bare
and naked commendations; but we are not Camelions, to live on the air of
commendations. It is certain and invincible truth, not relieve the Gospel,
not believe the Gospel. God grant, that our corruption this way, bringes not
Paganism, and flat Atheism in the end: Needs must you loose con, and sci,
Devotion and Knowledge, when you take from us entia, our Liuinges. It is a
shame, that we should cease studying of Sermons, and be driven to study for
Bread to put in our mouths, and the mouths of our Families. It was a sin in
the old Law, to destroy Matrem cum filijs, the old with the young: and can it
be less in conscience, to pine to death those two fruitful Mothers, the
Universities, and starve the Children in their bosoms: At which two Fountains
of learning, before we are suffered to drink, how many miserable and weary a
day do we pass over in the inferior Schools: then not without much pain to
our selves, cost to our Parents, we are sent to one of those glorious Suns,
to ripen our b^ddes: the exhibition they there allow us, they charge us to take
for our Patrimony, and to expect no further means at their hands: We
restrain our thoughts, I say, not only from pleasure (whereof to have no
small measure is some Unhappiness under the Sun) but even from competent
experience in the world, who had need be wise as Serpents, in these
Machiauellian days. We subject our bodies to many Diseases, and grove out our
remaining days under the burden of some wasting sickness: at last, ( Cru^^
^hym^ Plena) having stored our selves with the riches of Art, we come into our
Country, to exchange them for their riches of earth: and yet how unworthy a
thing is, Calestibus mercari terrena, to buy corporal things with spiritual,
Bern.
and to choppe Heaven for Earth? After all this, how hardly is any thing
attained, without paying to the Patron, either a Fine, or an annual Rent, or
reservation of his own Tithes, or (some way) above the rate of a Copyhold, to
have a Lease during a sickly and spent life: Were the Goods of the Church for
this, entrusted to Gentlemen and Lords of the Mannours, that they should set
them to sale, and turn the Benefit into their own Purses? Why were not the
Donations in the hands of the poor, who have more need? It is supposed,
Gentlemen by nurture well instructed, can make the fittest choice, for Gods
glory, and not for their private gain. Must we then run ( Per vari^^ casus
per tot discrimina rerum,) through so many dangers, and difficulties, cares and
troubles, and in the end arrive at Beggars haven, a necessary and enforced
penury? Iuuen.
Oh! Jnuitatus ad haec, aliquis de ponte negabit: a Beggar in the high way,
will in the end, scorn to be a Minister. There is no vocation in the land,
(honest in it self, and industriously followed by the professor) wherein a
man may not live well, except only in the Ministry: and here, like the Jews
under the tyranny of Egypt, when we should make Brick, work in our
profession, we are forced to gather Straw, labor for sustenaunce.

But in vain we speak, the Sons of Zeruiah will be too hard for us; there
is small hope to stench this bloody issue, till Christ touch their hearts by
Faith. But you will say, many of the Clergy are rich: they are few; if any one
of these four sorts. 1. Either enriched by some Patrimony or gift of
Friends. 2. Or else such as distill a dry Rose-cake for Water; I mean by
Parsymonie, and miserableness, get something out of Gentlemen's leauinges, like
the gleaning after the Vintage; for others carry away the croppe. 3. Or else
such as have lighted on the vnruined things of this Land, which stood out of
the Popes way, and in that sickness of Superstition, escaped the plague of
Impropriation; Benefices which (the Devils Surgion) Sacrilege has not let
blood, by custom, composition, enclossing, depopulation; though the Grape
gatherers come, would they not leave some Grapes; if thieves come in the night,
they will (but) destroy, till they have enough. Ier. 49.9.
4. Or lastly, they are those ( Antiqui Hero^^, nati me^^oribus annis) that
came to their Liuinges, when that good Queen Elizabeth came to her Crown; at
which time, Benefices went a begging, as Ministers do now: as for the rest,
that have Livings, Leauings, not Livings.
they are scarce Liueones, or enough to keep themselves and their Families
living: and for those that have none, they may make themselves merry with their
Learning, if they have no Money; for they that bought the Patronages, must
needs sell the Presentations; Vendere iure potest, emerat ille prius: and then
if Balaams Ass has but an audible voice, and a soluble Purse, he shall be
preferred before his Master, were he ten Prophets. If this weather hold,
Julian need not send Learning into exile, for no Parent will be so irreligious,
as with great expenses to bring his Child at once to misery and sin. Oh
think of this, if your impudence have left any blood of shame in your faces:
cannot you spare out of all your riot, some crummes of liberality to the poor,
needy, and neglected Gospel? Shall the Papists so outbid us, and in the view
of their prodigality, laugh our miserableness to scorn? Shall they twit us,
that our, Our Father, has taken from the Church, what their Paternoster
bestowed one it? Shall they bid us, bate of our Faith, and better our Charity?
Indeed, where heard you of a Papist, that cuttes short his Minister? Where see
you a Protestant, that does not? I speak not to commend the Religion of the
Papist above the others, no more then Christ preferred the Religion of the
Samaritane, to the Priests and Levites, when he praised his charity; but to
apply that to us, which Christ once to the Jews, Tire and Sidon shall condemn
you: So the Papists shall judge us. The Papist comes with ( Omnia dabo) to his
Priest, I will give all: the Protestant with (Omnia eripiam) I will take away
all. Do the Alps bar up all reward from us? Cannot Bounty creep over
those frozen thresholdes? Flere licet, reparare vetatur.

I may perhaps be censured, to speak so home, in the respect of some
particular advantage; and loosers may have leave to speak: I confess, it
would be a joyful day to me, to see the breaches of Jerusalem made up again;
yet he is my witness, that does now search, and shall hereafter judge all
hearts, that the present Theme, the wants of the Church, the poverty of
Ministers, and the hard hearts of their oppressors, together with the
commiseration of the Students yet unborn, that shall feel this burden
heavier, as the world grows (at once and insaparablely) more old, more
covetous; have been occasions only to induce this speech: For I not with out
cause fear, that as we may say of the Church in this our age, Omnia ad ruinam,
all things are going to ruin; so our Children in the next generation, may
justly cry with the Poet, Etiam periere ruinae, even the very ruins are
ruined. Though I cannot but hope, that so long as our royal and religious
Jacob (whose days God make as the days of Heaven) and his seed, shall bear
rule in our Judah, he and they will make good that deserved title, and be
defendours of the Faith, and not give leave and authority to any violence,
further to forage the Church: God also put it into his Subjects hearts, to
love the Gospel, and then it shall not decay, for want of encouragement and
reward: But for the detainers of the poor Ministers right, let them hear
their reward. W^e to him, that hea^eth up that, which is none of his: Heb. 2.6.
you that have taken away the Unction, and left us nothing but the Alablaster
box, the Shreddes, the Sheardes, the scrapings of our own; as happy and rich,
as you think your selves, when you have summed up your gains, and cast your
accountes at the end, if ever you be the richer, for that you have stolen from
your Stars, let me come a begging to your Doors. Judas sold his Master for
thirty Pence; he might put his gains in his eye: his losses stuck by him,
when his money was gone: he lost a God, a Heaven, a Soul; but he threw away his
cash: take heed, least you cry one day with him; We, and our Extortions are
both perished. Remember, you must give account of your Stewardships; a
fearful Bill of Reckoning, that many shall put up at that day to God. Jtem,
so many scores of pounds in Malice and Suites at Law, Item, so many hundreds
of pounds spent in Lusts and Vanities. Jtem, so many thousands in building
Eglons Parlours. Item, to the Poor in a year, three pence. Jtem, to the
Minister, just nothing: Nothing to God, and nothing from God, shall be your
reward.

3. Let me end with our selves, and all to comfort; Ministers. Hor. ad Aug.
lib. 2. Ep. 1.
Ploramus nostris non respondere fae^^en^ speratum meritis, We lament on Earth,
the ill success, and worse reward of our labors: but, ( Sat erit mer^^sse) it
is enough that we have deserved. As dark as the World keeps us, and thinks
us, We shall shine, and that with no ordinary glory; but, As the Stars: and
this not for a time; but, For ever and ever. 1. If I had been in Heaven, I
would describe this glory to you, You shall shine.

2. I would show you the differences of Glory, which are here employed; Good
Men shall shine as the Firmament: but, Good Ministers, as the Stars. If I be
not deceived, the Stars have a brighter glory then the Firmament. 3. Lastly,
if I had ascended above the wheel of Time, where nothing but eternity
dwells. I would strive to make you conceive the length of your glory, For
ever and ever: but, Haec meditanda potius, quam dicenda, your meditations are
better able to conceive these things, then my weak tongue to express. And so
I cease to speak of that, which you shall never cease to enjoy, ending my
Sermon, not my Text; and commending you to the Father of Peace: who, as he has
called us to so troublesome an Office for a time, will reward us with glory
beyond all time, even for ever and ever. This God grant for his Mercies sake,
Jesus Christ for his Merits sake, the holy Ghost for his Names sake; to whom,
with whom, and for whom, be all glory, honor, and praise, now and for ever.
Amen.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by W.W. for Clement Knight, and are to be sold at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the holy Lamb. 1613.


