Greenes farewell to Folly.

SENT TO COVRTIERS AND Scholars as a president to warn them from the vain
delights that draws youth on to repentance.

Sero sed serio

Robert Green

Vtriusque Academiae in Artibus magister.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Scarlet for T. Gubbin and T. Newman.

1591.

TO THE HONORABLE MINDED GENTLEMAN, Robert Carey, Esquire: Robert Green
wishes as many good fortunes as the honor of his thoughts do merit.
Having waded (noble minded Courtier) through the censures of many both
Honorable and worshipful, in committing the credit of my books to their
honorable opinions, as I have found some of them not only honorably to
patronize my works, but courteously to pass over my unskillful presumption
with silence, so generally I am indebted to all Gentlemen that with favors have
ouerslipt my follies: Follies I term them, because their subjects have been
superficial, and their intents amorous, yet mixed with such morrall
principles, that the precepts of virtue seemed to crave pardon for all those
vain opinions love set down in her periods. Seeing then (worthy Maecen^
ofletters) my works have been counted follies, and follies the fruit of
youth, many years having bitten me with experience, and age growing on bidding
me Petere grauiora, to satisfy the hope of my friends, and to make the world
privy to my private resolution, I have made a book called my Farewell to
Follies: wherein as I renounce love for a fool, and vanity as a vain too
unfit for a Gentleman, so I discover the general abuses that are ingrafted in
the minds of Courtiers and scholars, with a Colling Card of counsel,
suppressing those actions that straie from the golden mean of virtue. But
(right worshipful) some are so peremptory in their opinions, that if Diogenes
stir his stumpes, they will say, it is to mock dancers, not to be want on,
that if the fox preach, it is to spy which is the fattest goose, not to be a
ghost ly father, that if Green write his Farewell to Folly, it is to blind the
world with folly, the more to shadow his own folly. My reply to these
thought searchers is this, I cannot Martinize, swear by my faie in a pulpit,
and rap out gogs wounds in a tavern, feign love when I have no charity, or
protest an open resolution of good, when I intend to be privately ill, but in
all public protestations my words and my deeds iumpe in one simpathie, and
my tongue and my thoughts are relatiues. But omitting these digressions (right
worshipful) to my book, which as it is the farewell to my follies, so it is the
last I mean ever to publish of such superficial labors, which I have
adventured to shroude under the shelter of your worshippes patronage, as under
his wing, whose general love bought with honorable deserts, may defend it from
the injury of every envious enemy. I can shadow my presumption with no
other excuse but this, that seeking to find ou^ some one courtier, whose
virtuous actions had made him the hope of many honors, at whose feet I might
lay down the follies of my youth, and bequeath to him all the profitable
fruits of my ensuing age, finding none that either fame could warrant me, or my
own priuatfancie persuade to be of more hope then your self, I set down my
rest, and ventured boldly on your worships favor, which if as I have found
before, I obtain now, I shall think my self as fortunate in getting so
honorable a patron for my new endeavors, as unhappy for blemishing my
forepassed youth with such frivolous labors. And thus hoping my honest
resolution to do well, shall be countenanst with your worships courteous
acceptance, I commit you to the Almightic.

Your worships in all humble service, ROBERT GREEN.

TO THE GENTLEMEN Students of both Universities health.
GGentlemen and Student^s (my old fri^ndes and companions) I presented you
alate with my Mourning garment, how you censure of the cloth or cut I know
^ot, but the Printer has past (...) all out of his shop, and the Peddler sound
them too dea^e for his pack, that he was feign to ba^gain for the life of
Tomliuolin to wrappe up his sweet powders in those unsavory papers: If my
garment did any Gentleman good I am glad, if it offended none I am proud, if
good man find fault that has his wit in his eyes, and can check what he can
not amend, mislike i^, I am careless, for Diogenes has taught me, that to kick
an ass when he strike^, were to smell of the ass for meddling with the ass.
Having therefore Gentlemen (in my opinion) mourned long enough for the
misdeedes of my youth, least I should seem too (...) in my fastes, or like
our dear English breethren that measure their prayers by the hour ^lasse,
fall a sleep in preaching of repentance. I have now left of the intent, and
am come to the effect, and after my mourning present you with my Farewell to
follies, an vltimum vale to al youthful vanities: wishing al Gentlem^n as well
Courtiers as Scholars, to take view of those blemishes that dishonor youth
with the quaint show of pleasant delights. What a glorious show would the
Spring present if the beauty of her flowers were not nipt with the frostes?
how would Autumn boast of her fruits if she were not disguised with the fall
of the leaf, and how would the virtues of youth shine (polished with the ripe
conceit of wit) if they were not eclipsed with the clouds of vanity. Then
sweet comp^nions and louemates of learning, look into my Farewell, and you
shall find the poisons which infect young years, and turning but the leaf
read the Anti ^otes to prevent the force of such deadly confections. Lay open
my life in your thought and beware by my loss, scorn not in your age what you
hau^ learned in your Accidence, though stale yet as sure as check, Felix quem
faciunt aliena pericula cantum. Such wags as have been wantons with me, and
have marched in the Mercers book to please their Mistress eye with their
bravery, that as the frolike phra^eis have made the tavern to sweat with
riotous expenses, that have spent their wits in courting of their sweetehearts,
and emp^ied their purses by being too prodigal, let them at last look back
to the follies of their youth, and with me say farewell unto all such vanities.
But those young nouices that have not yet lost the maidenhead of their
innocence, no^ have not heard the melody of such alluring Sirens, let them read
that they may (...), and that seeing into the depth of their folly, they may
the more detest that whose poisoned sweetness they never tasted. Thus
generally I would wish all to beware by me to say with me farewell to folly.
Then should I glory that my seed sown with so much good will should yeel^
a harvest of so great advantage. But by your leave Gentlemen, some over cu^ous
will carpe and say that if I were not beyond, I would not be so b^ld to teach
my (...), their du^ie, and to show them the Sun that have b^ighter eyes than
my self, well Diogenes told Alexander of his folly and yet he was not a
King. Others will flout and over read every line with a ^rumpe and say it is
scuruie, when they them selves are such scabd Iades that they are like to dye
of the fazion, but if they come to write or publish an^e thing in print, it is
either distild out of ballets or borrowed of Theological poets, which for
their calling and gravity, being loath to have any profane pha^phlets pass
under their hand, get some other Batillus to set his name to their verses: Thus
is the ass made proud by this under hand brokerie. And he that can not write
true English without the help of Clearkes of parish Churches, will needs
make him self the father of (...). Otis a iollie matter when a man has a
familiar style and can endite a whole year and never be beholding to art? but
to bring Scripture to prove any thing he says, and kill it dead with the text
in a trifling subject of love, I tell you is no small piece of cunning. As for
example two lovers on the stage arguing one an other of unkindness, his
Mistress runs over him with this canonical sentence, A man's conscience is a
thousand witnesses, and her knight again excuses him self with that saying
of the Apostle, Love covers the multitude of sins, I think this was but
simple abusing of the Scripture. In charity be it spoken I am perswad^d the
sexten of Saint Giles without Creeple gate, would have been ashamed of such
blasphemous Rhetoric. But not to dwell in the imperfection of those dunces,
or trouble you with a long commentary of such witl^sse cockescombes, Gentlemen
I humbly entreat pardon for my self, that you will favor my farewell and take
the presentation of my book to your judicial insights in good part, which
courtesy if I find at your hands as I little dout of it, I shall rest yours as
ever I have done.

Robert Green.

Green his farewell to Folly.
WHen the state of Italy was pestered with the mutinous factions of the
Guelphes and Ghibellines, so that the common wealth groned under the burden of
their seditious tumults, and the Church infected with sundry schismatic
optnions, was stained with that blemish of dissension. Florence, a city
greatly molested with this civil controversy, in sted of palms that
presented peace, was stored with armor that denounced wars, the streets that
were a mart for the traffic of merchants, served for a place wherein to
martial soldiers, the Senate went not in roabes of purple to challenge
reverence, but in coats of steel to maintain their safety: age, honor nor
religion bar^ no privilege in their foreheads, but the nobility with ambition
and the commons with envy, so dissented in their several thoughts, that the
particular ruin of the City, and the general subversion of the w^ale
public was daily expected. Yet amidst these broiles the house of the Farneze
so behaved themselves with such equal prop^rtion, that they were neither
friends to the Guelphs nor foes to the Ghibellins, but with an indifferent
poise of affections, countermanded the factious mutiny of those two mortal
enemies. The chief of these was Ieronimo Farneze, a noble man, bonorable for
his parentage, and ^onoured for his virtue, one that in his youth armed his
actions with prowess, and in his age made a proof of his life by wisdom, who
discovering (...) of time by experience, found that sweeter was the deaw that
dropped from peace, than the showers that powered down from wars, that the
garland of Mercury was more precious than the helmet of Mars, that quiet and
content sooner rested under the marble altar of Pallas, than under the silver
targets of Bellona, not that the noble man thought it dishonorable to be
martial, but that he counted it prodigal to be factious: to avoid therefore
all suspicion that might ensue by his ^dence in so troublesome a City, setting
his household affairs in some good order, accompanied with his wife, three
daughters, and four young Gentlemen, allied unto him by affinity, he
departed from Florence, seated himself in a farm of his about sixs miles
distant from (...): the eldest of his daughters was named Margaret, the second
Fraunces, the youngest Katherine, all which as joining in a sympathy of their
pareuts propagation, were beholding to Nature for beauty, to Fortune for
wealth, and to the Gods for wisdom and virtue: the young Gentlemen were
these, Seignior Peratio, seignior Bernardine, seignior Cosimo, and messieur
Benedetto, all as I said before, allied to Farneze by affinity, and therefore
honorable, and directing the course of their lives after his compass, and
therefore virtuous. These thus associated both in nature and nourture,
accompanied the old County to his house, where arryuing they found a Grange
place by situation melancholy, as seated in the midst of a thicket, fitter
for one given to metaphusial contemplation than for such young Gentlemen, as
desired sooner to dance with Uenus, than to dream with Saturn, whose
thoughts aimed not at the stoicke content of Pythagoras, but at an exterior
conceit of honest pleasure, which contrary to their expectation in such a
centurie or Country cottage, they found for Ieronimo Farneze, seeing the
picture of discontent shadowed in their foreheads, conceiving this froward
humor to come, for that the place of their abode was so solempnely seated,
began at the enteraunce into the base Court to use these words.

Gentlemen, the learned and wise worldlinges, whom experience and wisdom
has privileged to censure rightly of the due expense of time, have thought
with the ^tion, that as the stomach has his orifice strengthened as well with
the juice of bitter wormwood as with the sap of sweet liquerice: so the mind^
often steppeth as soon to content by being passionate as pleasant, d^re hangs
not always on the heels of delight, man has his time to meditate, and holy
writ tel^ us, that as we have a day for mirth, so we have a day to mourn,
Solomon whose content passed al proportion of measure, counted all things
vanity that stooped to the center of the earth, Alexander amidst al ye
Ambassadors at Babylon, stole three days to be solitary, Philip would be
put in remembrance of his morta'itie: and we Gentlemen, that have lived
pleasantly at Florence wearing out time with vanity, may now refine our
senses dulled with the taste of sundry vain obie^s, and for a week or two
betake our selves to this solitary place, wherein I think to find no other
pleasure but a sweet meditation and friendly conference of the vain suppose
of such as think none Philosophers but Epicures, and none reli^ious but
Atheists. Thus Gentlemen, I appoint your penance, and therefore show me your
opinion by your countenance. Seignior Peratio who was nephew to Ieronimo, made
answer for the rest and said, they were all content, wherewith the old
Countis leading the way entered the house, where ^ding all things in a
readiness they w^t to dinner: the fresh air had procured good appetite, that
little talk past till they had ended their repast, dinner being done, counting
it Physic to sit a while, the olds Countess spying on the finger of seignior
Cosimo a ring with a deaths head engraven, circled with this posie, Gressus ad
vitam, demanded whether he adorde the signet for profit or pleasure, seignior
Cosimo speaking in truth as his conscience wild him, told her that it was a
favor which a Gentlewoman had bestowed upon him, and that only he wore it for
her sake. Then, quoth the countess, it is a whetstone to sharp fancy: if it be
madam quoth Cosimo, I am not so old but I may love: nor so young sir, quoth
she, but you may learn by that to leave such folly as love: no doubt nature
works nothing vain, the Lapidarie cuts not a stone, but it has some virtue:
men wear not iems only to please the sight, but to be defensiues by their
secret operatio^s against perils, and so seignior Cosimo would I have you use
the gentlewomans favor, not for a whetstone to further folly, but for a
cooling card to inordinate vanities. Themistocles wore in his shield the
picture of a storke, his motto Antipelargein, for that he would not be stained
with ingratitude. Socrates had but one toie in his house, and that wos the
counterfeit of patience, for that he had a shrew to his wife: By your leave
madame (quoth Cosimo) had not Socrates cou^terfait also a sentence: yes
answered Farneze, but my wife plays like the Priest that at his Eleuatio left
out his Memento, the motto was this, Neque haec sufficit, meaning patience was
as good a medicine to cure a waspish woman of sullenes, as an ants egg in
sirop for him that is troubled with the Sciatica. The Gentlemen laughed at the
dry frumpe of Farneze, and the Countess for that she had talked of patience,
took it for a president, and prosecuted ^er intent in this manner. (...) how
you please Gentlemen, still I say that well cannot be gainsayd how the image
of death figured in Cosimos ring, should be a glass whereby to direct his
actions, that the pagans who build their bliss in the sweet conceit of Fame,
used the picture of death as a restraint to all forward follies. Alexander when
he named himself the son of Jupiter, was revoked from heresy by the sight of
a dead man's scull that Calistenes presented to him in a casket. Augustus Caesar
set on the door of his banketting house the scalpe of a dead man, least
extrem^ie should turn delight to vice: so seignior Cosimo, use you your
mistres favor as a benefit to profit the mind, not as a toy to please fancy.
Cosimo was driven into a dump with this sudden insinuation of the countess, as
in deed he stood like the picture of silence, whereat Bernardin smiling made
the Countess this answer.

I cannot deny madame, but you say well, yet your censure is a little too
peremptory, neither can I gainsay but such a resolution would do well in age,
whose sap shronke from y^ branches, co^forts the water, but affoords no
blossoms, your hairs being silver had a so^mons unto death, and therefore to be
armed with devotion, our years grown and budding forth a restles desire to
pleasure, which if we should cut off with a continual remembrance of death, we
should prevent time and metamorphose our selves by conceit into a contrary
shape: the Astronomer by long staring at the stars forgets the globe at his
feet, so fearful was Phaeton of the sign in the zodiaock, that he forgot his
course: and so would you have the delight of youth dashed with the sight of a
death head, y^ laying aside al recreation, we should fall to be flat
Saturnists. By this doctrine madam, you would erect again the Acadenne of the
^ks, and make young men either apathoi to live without passions, or else so holy
to die without sin: the gentlemen were glad that Bernardino had made such an
answer, and Farneze to draw them farther into talk, told his wife y^ he
thought she was driven to a non plus: no sir (quoth she) but the gentleman
mistakes me, for I mean not to have him so holy as to live without sin, but
so honest as to live without follies, which our Florentins shroud under the
shadow of youth, that in deed are mere enemies to the glory of youth.
Messieur Benedetto interrupted the countess, as one amongst all the company
most given to folly, for he was a fine courtier and was thus quick in his
reply. I remember madame that Phocion carped at all men that went shod,
because he him self was ever barefoot. Antisthenes admitted no guest but
Geometritians. None supt with Cassius but such as never laughed, and they which
feel your humor must (though not in years yet in action) be as old as you, or
else they are fondlings. But they which at ^ood Diogenes tubbe came as well to
laugh as to learn, and we that hear, you may sooner fall a sleep than follow
your doctrine, for I perceive under this word folly, you abridge young
gentlemen of every laudable pleasure and delight, allowing mirth in no
measure, (...) pourd out after your proportion: As to hunt, to hawk, to
dance, to love, to go cleanly, or whatsoever else that contenteth youth his
folly. And thus by an induction you conclude omnia vanitas. The Lady Katherin
hearing her mother so sharply shaken up by messieur Benedetto pro^ her
boldness with a modest blushe made this answer: And sir quoth she, they which
laughed at Diogenes perhaps were as foolish as he was cynicall: and might with
Alexander whatsoever they brought take a frump for a farewell, my mother sets
not down peremptory precepts to disallow of honest recreation, but necessary
persuasion to diswade men from vanity, she seeks not with Tullie to frame an
Orator in conceit, with Plato to build a common wealth upon supposes, nor with
Baldeslar to figure out a courtier in impossibilities: but seeing the wings of
youth trickt up with follies plumes, (...) to persuade him with Icarus from
soaring to high. And I pray you, quoth Benedetto, what term you follies, women's
fancies, no sir, quoth she, men's favors, Sylenus ass never saw a wine bottle
but he would winch, and you can not hear the name of folly but you must
frown, not that you mislike of it in thought, but that decked in your
pontificalibus a man may shape and cetera by your shadow: Benedetto let not
this bitter blow fall to the ground, but told her her Latin was very bad and
worst placst: for and cetera was no word of art for a fool, but in deed he
did remember Parrats spoke not what they think, but what they are taught: And
so, quoth Cosimo, you make a bare exchange with Lady Katherine for a soole to
deliver a popingay, but in deed to take her part in this, we Florentines, nay
more generally, we Italians over wise in our own conceit, stand so much
upon wit that folly treading upon our heels bids us often look back unto
repentance: Seignor Farneze taking time by the forehead iumpt in with Cosimo;
and said that not only Italians but other nations whatsoever were faulty in
that imagination, and that folly was as common as love, and love so common
that he was not a gentleman that was not in love: and by this argument, quoth
Cosimo, you conclude all gentlemen both fools and lovers: I reason not
answered Farneze a coniugatis, but seeing we are thus far entered into the
Anatomy of follies, let us spend this afternoon in discoursing of the
fondness of such our countriemen, as ouergrowne with self love drownes
themselves in that ^ollies which all the world gives unto us as due: I mean
pride, which seignor Peratio for that I know you always to have borne the
profession of a scholar, I commit unto your charge: Not to me si^ quoth
Peratio, I pray you keep decorum, let the Lady Katherine discourse of that
which best beseems her sex: for if we may give credit to men very skillful
and excellent in Chronographie, the first pattern of pride came from Eua the
moother of women and the mistress of that fault: You mistake the matter,
quoth the Lady Katherine, Eua was obedient and simple, following nothing but
what her hus band foreshewed and foretaught her. Let us leave women, quoth
Farneze, and privilege them a little to be proud, only Signor Peratio touch
you the folly of our Italians and we will be silent auditors to your good
philosophy: The gentlemen settled themselves in ^ilence, which gave a pro^fe to
Peratio that they agreed to Farnezes request, and therefore he began his
talk in this manner.

Although gentlemen it has pleased the county to give me in charge the
discourse of such a weighty matter as the discovery of pride, yet I know my
sufficiency so sarre unable to perform his request, as of force I must crave
pardon if either my censures be too ra^he or verdict offensive: resting
therefore in hope of your courteous pa^ience, thus to the purpose. The learned
cl^rkes those experience may auouche their sayings for Oracles, affirm this
folly to descend by course of propagation, as naturally inserted into the mind
of man ab ipsis incunabilis, setting down by physical reasons that pride does
possess the inward senses of infants, as sensum co^munem and Phantezian before
any exterior object can delude the sense with vanity, which Plato considering
in his Timaeo calls it Anthropomasia, the scourge of man, as a vice so
deeply bred by the bone, as it will hardly be rooted out of the flesh,
alluding the reason that his master Aristotle did for the heart which living
first dies last: so pride entering at the cradle ^deth in the grave. Scipio
Aff^icanus the great whose triumphs had filled the streets of Rome with
trophes, being demanded why the state of Rome began to ruinate, what made him
forsake the senate, why he lived solitary from the civil government, why he
tasted not the fruits of his foregotten glories? answered to all these demands
briefly, for that Rome wa^th proud, meaning that pride as ill befitteth a
crown as a cottage, what ouerthrewe the house of the Tarquins but pride, what
wrought the confusion at Babel but the pride of Nemroth? Pride overthrew the
pomp of Alexander, and had not pride hatched ambition the Romans had never
bewailde the death of Pompey, to repeat a catalogue of infinite examples were
frivolous: and therefore leaving this general discovery let us come to a more
particular discourse of this folly. Our Florentins which profess themselves
to be soldiers, are wedded to this vain, as men shadowing the very substance
of pride with the two colors of same and honor: for what attempts they seek
to atchieue by martial prowess, what exploites they perform in wars, what
days and nights they spend in watching either to prevent or prejudice the
enemy, still claim the final cause of those actions to be fame or honor.
But who hears the sundry and several brauados our martialistes make of their
strange encounters? how cunningly they ordered their squadrons? how courageously
they incountered the enemy? how stoutly they assaied the push of the pike? how
strongly they bare the shocke of the horse? what lances they brake? what
massacres they made? what stratagemes they performed? what cities they both
assaulted and sacked, shall find this report to taste of self love, and these
warlike endeavors to savor as much of pride as either of fame or honor. But
grant their allegati^ns true, they covet to be famous and honorable, yet shall
we find the end of these virtuous imaginatio^s, to be touched a little with
the stain of this folly: for the desire of fame aimed with aspiring thoughts
soreth so high, that seeking with Phacton to rule aloft, his very prescription
draws them in a self conceit of their own glories. Had not Haniball found
pride in the hope of fame, he had never scaled the Alps to besiege Capna. Had
not Alexander been proud in the glory of his victories and conquestes, he
had never sighed that there was but one world to subdue. Hercules was proud
of his labors, Hector of his combats with the Grecians, and to be short, the
meanest soldier getting ^ither (...) or honor by sundry hardy and happy
attempts, glories so much in the glorious reward of his inde^or that willingly
he passes his proportion, and comes within the compass of this f^lle.

Seignior Bernardino, who all his life time, had professed him self a
soldier, seeing Peratio so (...) to appech his profession of pride, made this
answer. I can not think, seignior peratio, but your nativity being rightly
calculated, has Mercury so predominant, as we may censure without offense,
that you are far more bookish than wise, especially in martial affairs,
whose honorable conceit I see is so far beyond the reach of your capacity,
that in gazing at a star you stumble at a stone, and in aiming particularly
at a (...), you generally load him with the fault of the whole world: are you
so simple your self as to account every humor that ^itteth man with delight
to be pride, that the desire of fame and honor is nothing else but self love?
Then sir, let me say, that Mineruas owl was proud, for perking under ^ir
golden target, and that Apelles boys aimed at self lone for grinding colors
for their masters (...). But it did not prejudice the (...) of Themistocles to
be called coward at the mo^th of Aristot, because the fool was a fiddler and
knew scarce a spear front a syi^ot, neither may s^uldiours take offente to be
thought proud at your hands, which never saw ^attell but in your book, and
^et I can not deny but there be such fantaslicke martialists as you talk of,
whose tongues are more hardy than their hands, and dare sooner scale the
heavens with a brave than anger a man with a blow: such seignior Peratio as
Thrasonically countenance themselves with the title of a souldior, comprehend you
within the compass of folly: but those personages which in defense of their
country and despite of the enemy, seek after fame and honor, and glory in
the gain of such a golden benefit, let them triumph in their conquests, ^
delight themselves in recounting those favors which fame has bes^owed upon
them for their warlike endeavors. But sir, in this discourse of pride, you are
partial and play like Diogenes, who carrying at the beggary of Antisthenes,
neuen marked the patch on his (...) cloak. Sylenus would often ^nuey against
(...) with a bot^le of wine in his hand. Thersites (...) Menalcas of
deformity, him self being most ill-favored: and you sir, induce a ^ouldiour as
prologue to your comedy of pride, where as you scholars ought to be for most
in the scene, for he that makes but a step into the university of Padua,
where the youth of Florence chiefly flourishe, and with a deep insight
marketh the nature of our Mercurialists, shall find as ^it a harbor for pride
under a scholars cap as under a soldiers helmet, and that as great self
love lurketh in a side gown, as in a short armo^r. Tell me good seignior
Peratio, is not Mercury as arrogant as Mars is presumptuous? The one is
figured with wings as be wraying his aspiring thoughts, the other pi^tured in
arms, as im^orting a resolution. Turn they not over many leaves? Read they
not large volumes? Consume they not long time? Apply they not their wits and
wills? Some in Apply to gaze at the stars, some in Physic to search ^ut
the nature of simples, other in the (...) to work out metaphysicall
experimentes, every a particularitie in every art: spending all his life to
have the world give a plauditie of their studies. Is not this, seignior
Peratio, a tickling humor of self love, that may bring scholars within the
compass of pride? Tullie gadded the streets of Rome, that the people might
call him pater patriae. Demostenes took such a conceit of his eloquence, that
he walked up and down Athens to have the citizens say, hic est ille
Demostenes. Plato was so proud that he scarce thought king Dionysius his
fellow, and not only in learning, but in life and apparel so neat, that
Diogenes seeing a brave cursier richly decked with golden trappers, demanded of
him when he was in Cumaeo, as taking the horse for one of Platoes disciples:
and I think ye scholars of Padua have so long read Platoes wor^es, that ye
taste of platoes vanities, I mean not of his philosophy but of his follies: for
now he bears no touch in padua that can not as well brave it with plato as
reason with Plato, that co^et as well to imitate Aristotle in the sumptuousnes
of his apparel as the subtilnesse of his arguments, that has not a tailer as
well to picture out his lineaments, as a Stationer to furnish out his library:
therefore seignior peratio look to your own last, measure not the length of
an other man's foot by your own shoe, but join the soldier and scholar in
one sillogisme, and then the premises equal, conclude how you list. Seignior
Farneze and the rest smiled at the sharp reply of Bernardino, and among the
rest messieur Benedetto galled peratio with this gleeke. By my faith gentlemen
seignior Bernardino in my opinion has done well not only in his defense of a
soldier, but in his Satyricall inuectiue against scholars, wresting
argumentum coniunctum against Peratio him self: I hope sir you are a
batcheler, and therefore this kind of phrase gives the less offense. peratio
thought to push him with the pike, as he had hit him with the lance,
resembling the fall of Hector, who while he vnarmde Patroclus was unhorsed
himself: Peratio somewhat cholerike and not well able to brook the frump of
Benedetto, was thus rough with him: mass courtier I am glad you keep so good
a decorum, as to let the lightness of your head and lauishnes of your follies so
well to agree in eode tertio: you take Bernardinos part, but when the gentleman
ran so merry a descant on the pride of scholars, had he by hap but glancst at
the gaudinesse of your apparel, he had spoken far more reverently of
scholters than he did: for you Florentine Courtiers, nay to be flat, we
Florentine Gentlemen, to bring my self within the same predicament, discover
our selves to be the very anatomies of pride: for he that marketh our follies
in being passing humorous for the choice of apparel, shall find Ouids
confused chaos to affoorde a multitude of defused inventions. It was objected
to Caesar for a fault in his youth that he ever used to go untrust, and we
count it a glory, by a careless clothing of our selves, to be counted
malcontent. Sardanapalus was thrust from his empire, for that he was a little
e^minate, and we strive to be counted womanish, by keeping of beauty, by
curling the hair, by wearing plumes of feathers in our hands, which in wars
our ancestors wore on their heads, they feared of men, we to be favored of
women. Alexander fell in hate of his Macedons, being the monarch of the whole
world for wearing a Persian roabe imbroidered with gold, and we Florentines
that are scarce masters of one town so deck our selves in costly attire, so
rich and so rare, that did the Macedons live and see our follies, they w^ould
grant Alexander to wear^ (...) robe witho^ envy as a privilege: yea now a
dai^s Time has bro^ght pride to such perfection in Italy; that ^e ar^ a most
as fantastic as the English Gentleman that is painted naked with a pair of
sheeres in his hand, as not being resolved after what fashion to have his coat
cut. In truth, quoth Farneze, to digress a little from your matter, I have
seen an English Gentleman so defused in his suits, his doublet being for the
wear of Castile, his hose for Uenice, his hat for France, his cloak for
Germany, that he seemed no way to be an English man but by the face. And quoth
Peratio, to this are we Florentines almost grown: for we must have our
courtesies so cringed, our conges delivered with such a long accent, our
speeches so affected, as comparing our conditions with the lives of our
ancestors, we seem so far to differ from their former estate, that did Ovid
live, he would make a second Metamorphosis of our estates. Now mass
Benedetto, are not you and the scholl^r fellows comperes in follies? Has not
pride taught the on^ as large principles as the other? Are not Courtiers as
proud of their coats as (...) of our boo^? Nay Gentlemen, not soldiers,
scholars and courtiers only, but all other estates whatsoever are comprised
within the compass of our inquisition, and may veri^ well and rightly be
appeached of this folly.

But seignior Peratio, quoth the old Countess, what do you think every one
proud that wears costly apparel? No Madam, quoth p^ratio, ne^ do I think
but very beggars have their their, and prid^ appoint the seat of this folly in
the ^eart, no^ in the habit: for as the coule makes not the mo^ck, nor the gray
^de the friar, so sumptuous attir^ p^cureth not (...) presumption, neither
doet^ prid^ ever harbor in ^lkes: pride looks as low as the cottage, and
poverty has his conceit tainted with self love. Crates was more proud of his
scrip and wallet, than Cressus of all his wealth. Plato had such an insight
into the peevish pride of Diogenes, that he durst boldly say, Calco superbia^
Diogenis. The beggar Irus that hanted the palace of Penelope, would take his
ease in his Inn as well as the peers of Ithaca. Thoughts are not measured by
exterior effects, but by inward affectes. Koabes made not Agathocles leave to
drink in earthen vessels, but rags shrouded a proud mind in Eubulus, that
presumd to call him the son of a potter: it is as bad a consequent to call a
king proud for his treasure, as a beggar humble for his want, and therefore in
my opinion, from the ^ing to the ^egger, no estate is free from this folly.
But pride as the predominant quality in every sex, degree and age
challenges in every ones mind some special and particular prerogative. To
confirm^ which, Gentlemen if you will give me leave, I will rehearse you a
pleasant history. The County and the rest of the Gentlemen and Ladies,
d^sirous to hear Peratios tale, settled themselves to silence, and ^e began
in this manner.

The Tale of Peratio.
WHile the city of Buda remained free from the invasion of the Turk and was
one of the chief promon^ories of Christendom, there is reigned as king Johannes
Vadislaus, a man so possessed with happiness in the prime of his youth, as it
see^d the stars in his nativity had conspired to make him fortunate. By
parentage royally and rightly descended from the ancient kings of Hungaria by
birth sole king and monarch of all the Transalpine regions, nature had so
curiously performed his charge in the lineaments of his body, and the planets
by happy aspects so carefully enriched his mind with sundry gifts: as it was
in question which of all these might challenge by right the supremacy. But as
the purest crystal has his strakes, the cleerest s kie his clouds, the
finest die his stain: so Vadislaus amidst all these golden legacies bequeathed
to him by nature, Fortune and the gods, had yet a blemish darkened all his
other glories with disgrace. For his mind was ^o puffed up with a disdainefull
kind of pride, that he purchased not only a special envy of his nobility,
but a general hate of his commons: seated thus by his own conceit in a
secure content, although in very deed daily standing upon thorns: for that
the lives of kings pinched with envy are as brittle as glass, he thought
Fortune had been tied to his thoughts in a string, and that the forehead of
time had been furrowed with no wrinckles, that kings might command the
heavens, and that such monarchs as he might attempt with Xerxes to tie the
Occean in fetters: but exeperience taught him that the counterfeit of Fortune,
was like the picture of Ianus, double faced, in the one presenting flattery,
in the other spite: that time had two wings, the one plumd with the feather of
a dove to foreshew peace, the other with the pens of an eagle to denounce
wars, that kings might determine but God dispose: that a scepter was no
warrant to privilege them from mis^ortune, that every bliss has his ban^,
that every pleasure has his pain, and every dram of delight counter poised
with a whole the of misery. But in the blossoms of his youth, when self love
tickled him forward to ouerweene of his own estate: consideration, the enemy
to untimely attempts, had not trod on his heel, but taking the raines of
liberty in his hands, he ran with Phaeton headlong into his own
misfortune. For on a day, as often he desired to delight his senses with the
fragrant verdure of the meades, intending to be solitary, for he hated
disport, in that he scorned any of his nobility should bear him company, he
passed secretly out at a posterne gate, only accompanied with one of his
nobles, whom amongst all the rest he admitted into private familiarity: an
Earl he was, and called Selydes, and went to a grove hard adjoining to the
palace, where in an arbor that nature, without the help of art, had most
curiously wrought, he passed away part of the day in melancholy meditation: at
last tickled with a deep conceit of his own happiness, commanding his noble
man a part, he began thus to sooth him self in his own follies. Have thou
not heard Vadislaus, nay do thou not know, that kings are gods, and why
gods, because they are kings, that a crown contains a world of pleasures,
and Fortune ever stoupeth at the sight of a sc^pter, that the majesty of a
prince is like the lightning from the East, and the threats of a king like the
noise of thunder? What say thou Vadislaus, are kings gods? Why do thou
so much abase thy self, kings are more than gods, for Jupiter for all his
Deity was glad to reign a petty king in Creete, Saturn sued for the Diadem
of Italy, both gods, if Poets say true, and yet both inferior unto thee in
crown and kingdom. The Transalpine Regions that border upon the Rheine are
thine, thou art sole king in all those dominions. The stars fears to cross
thee with any contray aspect, the temple of pea^ opens her gates at thy
presence, rich thou art, featured thou art, feared thou art, happy thou art,
conclude all that may be said either of honor, favor, or fortune, a king
thou art Vadistaus: yea, so surely seated in thy Monarchye, as did the heavens
oppose themselves against thy prosperity and happiness, their spite were in
vain to determine thy ruin and overthrow. Therefore Vadislaus bring not
contempt to such a royal dignity by too much familiarity, disdain in a
king is the figure of majesty, it is glorious for princes to let their subi^as
fear at the thought of their Sovereign: so then Vadislaus, let this censure
be ratified, and from hense forth use thy nobility as necessary members to
perform thy command, but for companions, none Vadislaus, but kings. At this
he swelled and being droncke with the dregs of his own folly, desirous to
be soothed in this imagination, be called unto him the County Selydes, unto
whom he uttered these words.

Thou see Selydes I am a king, to be feared of men, because honored of the
gods, tell me freely without flattery, what d^ thou think either of me or
my government. The County w^o all his life time had been a courtier, and yet
never learned nor loved with Aristippus to be Dionysius spaniell, craved pardon
of the king, which granted, he framed his talk in this manner.

I can not deny (mighty sovereign) but kings are gods, in that they ought to
resemble their Deities in government and virtue, but yet as the fairest Cedar
has his water boughs, the richest Marguerite her fault, and the sweetest rose
his prickle: so in a crown is hidden far more care than content, for one
moment of perfect ^ase a whole month of disquiet thoughts, that were the
perils apparent that are hid in a Diadem, hardly would ambition boast in such
triumphs, the gold of Tholosse glistered and yet it was fatal, Seianus horse
was fair to the eye yet unlucky, a scepter beset with stones is beautiful,
but dangerous: kings (my liege) are men and therefore subject to miss, mortal
and therefore ^aues unto Fortune, and yet the title of a crown o^t puffs up
their minds so with pride, as forgetting themselves, they suddenly prove
unfortunate, Polycrates so swelled in the conceit of his happiness, as he
thought the heavens could not countermand his prosperity, yet experience
taught him that Time and Fortune stood on a gloabe and therefore mutable, that
the calmest sea has his storms, and the highest steps to ^itie, the deepest
fall to misfortune: for the beginning of his youth was not so prosperous, as
the end of his age was tragical. Nero was proud, and therefore tyrannous, for
the one is a consequent to the other, and so by pride lost both life and
Lordship, kings (my liege) have found this by experience, and have feared to
make proof of it by trial: so that Philip had a boy to put him in mind of
his mortality. Alexander would be called the son of Jupiter, but
Calistenes made him deny such arrogancy in Babylon. Cresus was proud of his
pelf, but Solon pulde down his plumes by preferring Byton before him in
happiness, kings heads are not impalled with fame, for that they are kings,
but because they are virtuous. Augustus Caesar was not famous for his Empire
but for his clemency. Seuerus was not chronicled for his treasure but for his
justice. Antonius Pius had not his picture plast in the Capitol, because of
his scepter, but for he was merciful: So my Lord to your question, I think
your majesty a king in deed with large dominions, and honored with royal
titles of dignity, and it fitteth not a subject to mi^ike of his princes
government: only this I conclude, and this heartily I wish, that your
highness may live favored of the gods, and loved and honored of men. He
that bruseth the Olive tree with hard iron, ^etcheth out no oil but water, and
he that pricketh a proud heart with persuasions, draws out only hate and
envy. For Vadislaus so grudged at the friendly aduertisementes of the Counti^
Selides, that choking his choler with silence, he made no reply, but went
home to the palace: where, for the receipt of a fish, thinking to repay a
scorpion, he whetted his thoughts only on revenge. And Fortune, who still
thought to favor him in his follies, soothed him with success in his envy,
that raising him to the highest sphere of self conceit, she might throw him
down to the lowest center of despair: for many days had not past before, by
some sinister means, he had wrought so with the rest of his nobility, that
the County was found faulty by false witness in a penal statute, that his
goods were confiscated unto the kings use, his body exiled into Germany, and
his only daughter for one and but one he had as a distressed virgin, was
refte at once both of parents and patrimony. The County arming his thoughts
with patience, against the despite of Fortune, counting it good counsel to
make (...) virtue of necessity, left his daughter in (...) of a dowry to
inriche her marriage, fatherlye doctrine to increase her manners: for giving
her coin that envy had reft, leaving her advise and counsel that experience
had taught, counting it more happiness to have his daughter prove wise than
wealthy, as preferring the gi^tes of the mind far before the goods of
Fortune, parting thus from his only child, from his friends and from his
Country he could not but sorrow, and yet in such measure, as despair
could take no advantage of his passions. The Lady, as made of a more tender
complexion, let loose the fountaynes of her tears, and having taken her
farewell of her father lamented his case, as far as the rech of her eye could
keep the Bark within ken, after the ship was out of sight, and she left
alone and comfortless on the shore, she began after this manner to
complain with her self.

Distressed and sorrowful Maesia, for so was her name, where shall thou
begin to recount thy greefes, or make an end of thy dispayring sorrows: the
prime of youth, which to others is a summer of good hap, being to thee a
frostie winter of misfortune. Now does experience teach thee for truth,
which erst thou accountedst for a fable, that the privilege of honor is
sealed with the signet of time, that the highest degrees have not the surest
leates, that nobility is no warrant against mishappe, that the highest cedars
are blasted with lightning, when the lower shrub waves not with the wind, small
brooks bubble forth silent streams, when greater seas are troubled with
tempests: envy yea envy the very caterpiller of content, spares the touch
of a cottage, when he endeavors the ruin of a palace, he scorneth a beggar
when he stricketh a king, and vouchsafes not to check poverty, when he
gives honor the mate. Then Maesia, what reason have thou to be ^ayle thy
present fall, and not rather to joy at thy future hay, accuse not fat^s or
Fortune as thy foes, when their despite r^dounded not to thy loss, but thy
liberty, whilome thou were honorable, and therefore fearful, now thou art
poor, and therefore secure, alate restless, fear of mishappe disquieted thy
sleeps in a palace, now a quiet content shall asoorde thee sweet ^umbers in
a cottage, there did thou sigh in silks, here may thou sing in russ^t,
there nobility was counter poysed with care, here poverty is enriched with
quiet. Then M^sia, change thy affections with thy fortunes, live as though
thou were borne poor, and hope as one assured to dye rich: for there is no
greater honor than quiet, nor no greater treasure than content. But alas my
sather, mine aged father: Scarce had she^ uttered these words, b^t grief
presented such a heap of distressed thoughts, that either the heart must
burst by smoothering such s^alding sorrows, or else the tongue and eyes
resolve unto playntes and tears. Ah despightfull and injurious Fortune, quoth
she, well did Zeuxes paynt thee blind, and yet without a vale, as having
thine eyes not covered with a lawne, but darkened with despite, the frost
nippeth the budde when he spares the root, the gods slew the brattes of
Iocasta but spared Oedipus, the wrinckles of age should be warrauntes of
weal, the silver hair^s should be pledges of peace. But ^ynde or fury as
thou art, thou have threatened my father with a contrary m^lice, in the cradle
giving him sweet syrops, at the grave presenting him with bitter potions, in
the prime of his youth bring him a sleep with honor, in the end of his days
disquieting his thoughts with poverty. Silence Maesia, least Fortune hearing
thy complaynts, joy in her own spite, and triumph in thy sorrows, the
sweetest salve of mishappe is patience, and no greater revenge can be offered
Fortune, than to rest content in misery, tears are no cures for distress,
neither can thy present plaintes pleasure thy absent father: then Maesia
comfort thy self and what time thou should bestow on discoursing thy
misfortunes, spend in orisons to the gods, to redr^sse thy fathers cares and
revenge his injuries, and upon this resolution she rested, and for that she
would keep a decorum, as well in her attire as in her actions, she put off her
rich roabes and put on homely ragge^, transforming her thoughts with her
apparel, traveled from the court into the country, where seeking for
service, she had not passed long, before she met with a welthy farmers son,
who handsomely decked up in his holy day hose, was going very manerly to be
foreman in a Morice da^ce, and as near as I can guess thus he was apparelled:
he was a tall slender youth clean made with a good indifferent face, having on
his head a strawne hat steeple wise, bound about with a band of blue bu^kram,
he had on his fathers best tawnye worsted iacket: for that this days exploit
stood upon his credit, he was in a pair of hose of red kersie, close trust
with a point before, his mother had l^nt him a new muffler for a napkin, and
that was tied to his girdle for loosing, he had a pair of harvest gloves on
his hands as she wing good hus ba^dry, and a pen and inckhorn at his back: for
the young man was a little bookish, his pompes were a little too heavy, being
trimmed start-vps made of a pair of boot legs, tied before with two white
leather thongs, thus handsomely arrayed, for this was his sunday suit, he met
the Lady Maesia, and seeing her so fair and well formed, far passing their
country maids in proportion, and nothing differing in apparel, he stood
half amazed as a man that had seen a creature beyond his country conceit,
and in deed she was passing fair, for this I remember was her description:

Her stature and her shape was passing tall,
Diana like, when longst the lawnes she goes,
A stately pace like Juno when she braued,
The queen of heaven fore Paris in the vale,
A front beset with love and majesty,
A face like lovely Venus when she blush^
A seely shephe^d should be beauties judge,
A lip sweet rubie red, gracd with delight,
Her eyes two sparkling stars in winter night,
When chilling frost does clear the azurd sky,
Her hairs in tresses twind with threads of silk,
Hoong wauing down like Phoebus in his prime:
Her breasts as white as those two snowie swannes
That draws to Paphos Cupids smiling dame:
A foot like Thetis when she tript the sands,
To steal Neptunus favor with his steps:
In fine, a piece despite of beauty framd,
To see what natures cunning could afford.
Thus I have heard the Lady described, and this her rare form drove this
country youth into this marvelous admiration, at last Maesia seeing the poor
fellow in a maze: after salutations done as country like as she could, and
yet too courtly for his calling, the enquired of him if he knew any good and
honest house, where she might be entertained into service. The young man who
all this while had starde ^er in the face, told her that she came in pudding
time, for his mother wanted a maid, and if she could take any pains, no
doubt she should find a house fit for her purpose. And (quoth he) I have such
good hope that you will prove well, that although this day I should have been
foreman in a may game, yet I will rather mar the play then your market, and
so will turn back to lead you the way to our house. Maesia gave him
thanks, and together they went to his Fathers, whereafter the young springall
had talked a while with his mother, for he was his fathers eldest son, the
good wife had such liking of the maid, that she gave her an earnest penny to
serve her for a year, and so hired her before the Constable. Maesia being
thus honestly plast, by her good behavior grew into such favor with all the
house, that the old fools began to think her a fit match for their eldest
son, and in this hope used her m^ruailous well. But leaving her to her
Country content, at last to Vadislaus, who having now glutted envy with
re^enge in bannishing the good Earl, pearked so high with Danidas Parrat,
that at the last he fell to the ground: For pride had taught him this
principle, that princes wills ware laws, and that the thoughts of kings could
not err, disdain and contempt, two monsters of nature, had so sot ted his
mind with self love, that as his actions grew to be insolent, so his
government began to be tyrannous, commanding as fancy wild him to ^fect, not
as justice wished him to afford: he foug^t not with Augustus to be called
Clemens, but with Tarquin to glory in the title of Superbus: alluding the
d^ike ^ich Virgil wrote in the praise of Caesar to himself, Diui sum
imperiumcum Jove Caesar habet. He would not with Phillip be called martial,
but with Alexander be honored as the son of Ammon: he sought not to sit in
his throne with a branch of palm, to govern with peace, but used a swoorde
as a scepter to rule with constraint. Long he did not continue in this life,
but that he grew in mortal hate with his subi^ctes, the poor commons
grudged and groned under the burden of his cruelty, the Nobilitis began to
consider with themselves, that more did the state of Rome ruinate in one year
under the government of the Emperor Calygula, then it prospered in many under
the virtuous regiment of ^raian, that more blossoms die the first nippe in a
morning, than the heat of the Sun can revive in a whole day, and more harm
does the pride of a king in a moment, than good policy can restore in a
month: whereupon they determined to forewarne him of his follies, and to
persuade him from that course of life, which would in time bring the
commonwealth to mischief, and himself to misfortune: finding fit time and
opportunity with a general consent they began to dissuade him from his
presumption, but Vadislaus who br^kt not to be countermanded by any of his
nobles, returnd^ them this scornful answer.

My Lords, as the Sun is set in the heavens, so kings are seated upon
earth: the one too glorious an object for every ei^ to gaze at, the other too
full of majesty for any man to control. The woulse had his skin pulled over
his ears for prying into the lions den: the actions of Princes are like the
pearls of Arabia, the one too cestly for every merchant to prise, the other
too honorable for every base person to censure of. Dare the proudest bird
bear, wing against the Eagle^ Is not the print of a lions clawe a seal of his
safety, and the very title, nay the very thought of a king, a warrant of his
bliss. Take heed my Lords, let the prejudice of others be a president for
you to beware: me think the County Selydes mishap might warn you from
pressing too much on my favor. Seneca by grudging at Neros bliss procured his
own bane, Calistenes checking the thoughts of Alexander wrought his own
overthrow. Kings must not be controuled for that they are Kings, and therefore
from henceforth doom not of my doings least. And with that he flung from them
in a rage, as one aiming at revenge, if hereafter they mislikt of his
government. The nobles whom disdain had armed to des^aire, began to murmr
at the kings wicked resolution, and either to free the commonwealth from
misery, or by attempting such an enterprise to procure their own mishap:
amongst them all Rodento, a noble man more bold then the rest, burst forth
into these passions.

My Lords and worthy Peers of Buda, feared for your valor, and famous for
your victories, let not the private will of one man be the ruin of such a
mighty kingdom, kings are Gods, then let them govern like Gods, or give us
leave to account them worse then men, let the cramples of other nations tie us
to the consideration of our present estate. The Athenians preferred the weal
of their Country before the pride of Alcibiades, Caesar was slain in the
Senate for his pride, Hannibal twice eriled Carthage for his presumption,
Dyonisius banished out of Scycily for his insolency: Crowns (my Lords) are n^
plackardes of wickedness, Security waits not anielonger upon a Scepter than
it is swayde with equity, a Diadem is no longer glorious then it is deck^
with virtue, so y^ occasion presents us a double proffer, either by soothing y^
king in his pride to suffer the common wealth to perish, or by r^ting out such
a prince, to save both our seiues and the ^ingdome from prejudice: now my Lords
the balance is poised, choose which part you please, Rodento having set their
hearts on fire with these words, they all consented to recall County Selides
from banishment, and if at the second persuasion the king would not take a
better course, to make him sole mona^h of Buda: they were not slack in their
purposed intent, but dispatched letters secretly by a speedy Post into
Germany, which the County Selides receiving, suspected at the first a further
mischief, but at last thoroughly satisfied by the messenger of their ^aithful
intent, he cut over with as much speed as might be, and secretly in the night
came to the house of Rodento, where being honorably entertained, the next
day all the nobles assembled, and there in counsel told the County Selides
how in requital of his exile they meant either to set him in his former
estate, or else to enrich him with the benefit of a crown. The County was
unwilling to grant to their requests, yet at last seeing denial could not
prevail, he consented, and all jointly went together to the Court: where they
^ounde the king walking according to his wonted manner in his accustomed
melancholy: who scarce saluting his Lords with a good look, yet straight had
espied the County Selides: at whose sight with a ^ace inflamed with cholar,
and eyes sparkling hate, he demanded why the County Selides was revoked from
exile, how ^e durst presume so nigh to approach his presence, or which of his
Lords was so hardy as to admit him into their company? Rodento speaking for
the rest made answer, that as the County Selides was banished without cause,
so he might lawfully return without pardon, that offenses measured with enu^e,
were to be salued without entreaty, and therefore did no more then they all
present were ready to iusti^e: and further, whereas his majesty was so s^tted
in self conceit that he held his will as a law, and made a metamorphosis of a
monarchy into a flat government of tyranny: they were come to perswads his
highness from such folly, wherein if he resolved to persiit, they were
determined not only to deprive him of his crown and kingdom, but before his
face to celebrate the coronation of Selides. Vadislaus hearing this peremptory
resolution of his Lords, was nothing dismaide, but with a countenance
ouershadowed with disdain, told them he seared not their braues: for quoth
he, the treacherous attempt of a subject cannot dismate the princely courage of
a king. When the slaves of Scyth^a rebelled against their Lords, they were not
subdued with weapons, but with whips. Cirus punished traitors, not with the are
to infer death, but with a fools coat to procure perpetual shame: therefore
my lords I charge you upon your allegiance take hold of that outlawe Selides,
put him in prison till he hear farther of my pleasure, and for your own
parts submit your selves and crave pardon. The noble men plaide like the dease
Addar that hears not the sorcerers charm, neither could they be dissuaded
from their intent by the threats of a king, but following their purpose,
presently deposed him of all regal dignity and cclebrated ^he coronation of
Selides: who seated in the regal throne, had no sooner the scepter in his
hand, but envy began to grow in his heart, and revenge haled him on to seal
up his comicall success with tragical sorrow, for he commanded Vadislaus to
be pulled out of his roabes and put into rags, in stead of a crown to give him
a scrip, for a scepter a palmers staff, making general proclamation that none
o^ what degree so ever, should allow him any maintenance, but that his
inheritauce should be^ the wide fi^lds, and his revenues naught else but
charity. Vadislaus thus at one time deposed and metamorphosed from a king to a
beggar, was now disdayned of those who^e before he did (...), and l^ught at by
such as before he did envy, the nobility shakt him off as a (...), the
commons used him as a bad companion, (...) jointly forgot he had been their
king, and smoothl^ smiled at his misfortune. Vadislaus as a man in a ^rance,
being past a little from his palace, seeing the place which whilome was the
subject of pleasure, now (...) object of discontent, that where he did command
as a king, he was centrolled as an abject, he sell into these di^ressed passions.

Is youth the wealth of nature, to be wracked with every flawe? Is honor the
privilege of (...), subject to every fall? Has majesty that makes us fellow
partuers with the Gods in dignity, no warrant to grant a sympathy of their
deities, that as we are equal in highness, so we may be immortal in happiness?
Why do thou enter Uadislaus into such fri^olous questions, when thy present
misfortune ^elles thee kings are but men, and therefore the very subjects of
Fortune? Ah unhappy man had thou confessed as much as proof sets thee down
for a principle, the ouerflowing gale of self love had never brought thy bark
persorce to so bad an harbor. Had then governed like a God in equity, thou
had still ruled like a God in honor: but pr^de persuading thee a crown had
made thee more then a man, has now induced time to assure thee, that thou art
the worst of all men. (...) seats are like the (...) that Egistus made sor
strangers, wherein being placed, the care was delighted with melody, the cie
with sundry shows of content, the smelling with sweet favors: but to
coun^ruaile these pleasures, over their heads hung naked swoordes in slender
fillets of filke, which procured more fear than the rest did delight: majesty
is like the triple string of a Lute, which let too low makes badde music,
and stretched too high, either craketh or sets all out of tune. Fortunes
favors resemble the pricks of a Porcupine, that carelessly gazed at, pleases
the eye and the touch, but narrowly handled, both hurts the sight and the
sense. Ah Uadislaus, had consideration foretaught thee these untimely
principles, thou had neither found the seats of ^ings unsure, majesty out of
time, nor fortune but as she is to all men, inconstant. But pride, what say
thou of pride Vadislaus? Was it not lawful for thee to be pro^der then all
men, that were higher in dignity then all men? Might not a crown yield thee a
self conceit in thy actions? What did thou being king that (...) not a
king? Disdain I tell thee is the glory of a Scepter, and in that still be
resolute, be thou never so poor in estate, be still a Prince in thought,
parentage is without the compass of Fortune, the Gods may dispose of weith,
but not of birth, imagine thy palmers bonnet a p^inces diadem, think thy
staff a scepter, thy graie weeds costly attire, imaginations are as sweet as
actions: and seeing thou can not be a king over nobility, be yet a king
over beggars: hold poverty as a slave, by thinking thy want store, and still
disdain all that art despi^ed of all: Dionisius was for the same brave mind
exiled out of his kingdom, but he kept a (...) in (...), and there although
he were not a prince over men, yet ^ee was a king over boys, and the force of
his imagination soothed him in a princely content. Tush Vadislaus, never
shrink at this shot, now thou art more the^ a king, for thou art a monarch
both over fates and fortune, and yet this privilege is left thee that none in
Buda can challenge, thou may boaste thou have been a king, and whosoever
gives thee for alms, never yield him thanks, for he bestows but what once
was thine: Vadislaus arming himself thus with a desperate kind of patience
passed poorly disguised and despised through his own Country. And Selides
safely seat^d in the kingdom, after he had set the affairs of the weal
public in good order, took all his care to know where his daughter was
bestowed, but hearing no news where she was harbored, made general
proclamation through all his dominions, that who so could tell news what was
become of the lady Maesia the kings daughter, should be greatly advanced in
calling, and have a thousand crowns for his pains. The Farmers son happened
to (...) with his mothers butter at the market when this proclamation was made,
and coming home, told it in secret for great news, how that the king was
deposed from his crown, and Selides created in his place, and that whosoever
could tell where Maesia was should be well rewarded for his labor. The old
Farmer nodding his head at these news, made answer: you may see son, quoth
he, what it is to be a great man, I tell you the gaie coats of kings couers
much care, as they have many pleasures, so they have mickle perils, the plowman
has more ease then a King: for the one troubles but his body with exercise,
the other disquiets his mind with weighty affairs, I warrant thee wi^e we
have as much health with f^ding on the brown loaf, as a Prince has with all
his delicates, and I steal more sweet naps in the chimney corner in a week,
then (God save his majesty) the King does quiet sleeps in bi^ beds of down
in a whole month. Often have I beard my Father say (and I tell thee our
predecessors were no fools) that a husbandman plowed out of the ground three
things, wealth, health and quiet, which (quoth he) is more worth then a kings
ransom: but it is no matter, let not us meddle with kings affairs, but if the
council have thought it good to put down Vadislaus, he may thank his own
pride, which son learn of me, is the root of all mischiefs, and if they
have crowned Selides, we see a goodly example, he that humbles himself shall
be exalted, but I would I could tell where the kings daughter were, for he that
reaps favor and wealth gets a double benefit. Maesia who heard these news of
her Fathers preferment, smiled in her own conceit, that fortune had made (...)
sharp and short a revenge, and that now after many miseries past over with
patience, she might not only say Dabit Deus his quoque finem, but Hec olim
maminisse iuuabit. The remembrance of honor tainted her cheeks which a purple
die at the sight of her present drudgerie, the hope of dignity tickled her mind
with a sudden joy, to think what a metamorphosts should happen at her
pleasure, but when she called to mind^ the Country sayings of her old
master, and saw by proof ^ow ^ckle fortune was in her favors, and had
considered what mishap lay in majesty, and what a secure life it was to live
poor, she found dignity over s^owed with danger, whereas poverty ^ept quietly
at his plough beam. Honor wild her to bewraie what she was, quiet persuaded
her that content was a kingdom. Perplered thus with sundry thoughts after her
house was handsomely and huswifely dreast up, she took her spinning wheel to
the door, and there setting her self solitarily in the shade, she had not
drawn forth three or four threddes, but Vadislaus in ^is beggars roabes came
to the door, and seeing so neat a Country wench at her wheel, without any
salutations, after his cynicall manner began to gaze on her beauty. The maid
taking him sor no other but some stout beggar, as Country maids use to solace
themselves, began to carroll out a song to this effect.

Sweet are the thoughts that savor of conrent,
the quiet mind is richer then a crown,
Svveet a^e the nights in careless slumber spent,
the poor estate scorns fortunes angry frovvne
Such ^vveet content, such minds, such sleep, such blis
Beggars enjoy, when Princes often do mis.
The homely house that harbors quiet reft,
the cottage that affoords no pride nor care,
The mean that grees with Country music best,
the sweet consort of mirth and musicks fare,
Obscured life sets down a type of blis,
a mind content both crown and kingdom is.
The song of Maesia somewhat touched the mind of Vadislaus, that meruailing
what pretty musition this should be that had so sweet a voice and so pithie a
dittie, he began to interrupt ^er melody in this sort. Fair maid, for so I
may term you best, in that I give thee but thy due to say thou art
beautiful, and allow thee a favor in thinking thou art honest, tell me, is
this Country cottage thy fathers house? and if it be, thy birth is so base and
thy bringing up so bad, how hap thou have sound disquiet in dignity, and care
containd in a crown? Have thou seen the court, and so speak by experience,
or learnd this dittie as a song of course, and so hittest the crow by hap.
Maesia hearing the beggar so inquisitiue, especially placing his words in such
a commanding phrase, thinking him to be no other then his rags did report,
shook him up thus sharply. It Is for beggars (quoth she) whom fortune has
tied to the courtesy of others, to crave alms with treaties, not to demand
questions with inquisition, for as they have no other plackard than poverty,
so their charter is submission and lowlines, what so ever my tongue contained,
step not thou farther than thy scrip, thou art mean enough, therefore quiet
enough, no alms would do thee more good than a question, and therefore stay
while my thredde is drawn, and thou shall have my devotion. Vadislaus whose
pride was not changed with his apparel, told her y^ the virtue of the tree was
not discerned by the outward bark, but by the inward s^p, that the Lapidarie
might be deceived in colors, that ro^bes made not kings, nor rags beggars,
that Appollo being a God, metamorphosed himself, not into a prince, but to a
shepherd, that Mercury for his pleasure took the form of a cow heard, to
try the tabling of Bacchus, outward shows are not inward effects, and therefore
she might mistake him, and though his cloathng discovered poverty, his calling
might be honorable. Maesia hearing so well ordered an answer to come from such
a disordered person, began to note more narrowly the linea^ents of his face,
and at last perceived it was the quondam king Vadislaus, but still dissembling
what both she thought and knew, made him this answer: Friend, if I have shot
awrie blame the mark that I aimed at, and not my censure by outward show, for
we Country maids are so homely brought up, that we count none kings but what
wear crowns, and all beggars that carry scrippes and crave alms, if your
degree be above your show, it was your own fault, and not my folly that made
me so foolish, my song I hope what so ere ye be, has given none offense: if
thou have been rich, it tells thee what disquiet is in dignity, and that the
cottage affoords more quiet then a kingdom: if thou were never but as thou
art, then may thou see what content is in poverty, and lear^ that the
obscure life contains y^ greatest bliss: kings are men, and therefore
subject to mishap, Fortune is blind, and must either miss of her aim, or
shoot at a great mark, her boltes (...) not so low as beggerie, when honor
is pierced with every blow, and therefore Marcus Curcius that had thrice been
dictator, and as many times triumphed hid himself in a poor farm to be
free from the injury of fortune. Vadislaus driven into a passion with this
parle, asked her why she told him of the stratagems of kings, seeing her self
was a beggar: for that, quoth Maesia, thou did scorn even now to be counted
a beggar: nay quoth Vadislaus ^or that thou know, or at the least do
suspect I am a king: Maesia told him she had small reason to make ^uch a
surmise, but desired that she might know if he were Vadislaus, that of late
was deposed: I am quoth he, the same, I tell thee maid, every way the same,
for mishap has no whit altered my mind. Then (quoth Maesia) has fortune done
ill, to join in thee both poverty and pride, for either has Report a blister
on her tongue, or thy fall did ensue of disdainful insolency: thy fault has
been always the fall of princes, the ruin of states, and the utter subversion
of kingdoms, Dyoclesian the Roman was so proud, that he called himself
brother to the Sun, and was the first that ever made edict to have the feet
of Emperors kissed, in sign of seruill submission, his end was madness: the
pride of Pompey was his overthrow: the desire of ki^gly title caused Caesar to
die in the senate house: but thy harvest is out of the grass, and my council
comes now, as a shower of rain does when the corn is ripe: yet seeing you
ar^ fallen into poverty, let me a^ise thee how to bear it with patience.
Want is not a deprivation of virtue, but a release of care and trouble.
Epamynondas was not called half a God, nor Lycu^gus a savior, because they
abounded in wealth and were slaves to their passions, but because they were
Princes, and yet content with poverty: then let their lives be a mark whereby
to direct your actions, that as you are fallen from dignity by default, so you
may live in poverty with patience, and so die a more honorable beggar then
thou did li^ a king, and if thou marvel who it is that gives the such
friendly council, know I am daughter to Selydes, who driven by thy injustice
to this distress, although my father now a king, yet I find such content in
poverty, as I little have to exchange this life with dignity.

Vadislaus carefully marking the weight of every word, especially proceeding
from her whom he had injured, blushed at the sight of her patience, and yet as
a man whom despair had hardn^d on to mishappe, nothing relented at her
persuasions, but in a melancholy fury ^ong from the door without saying one
word, or bidding her farewell. Maesia noting still the perverse stomach in
the man, said to her self, What folly is there greater than Pride, which
neither ag^ nor poverty can extinguish? What afterward became of Vadislaus,
the Annals of Buda makes not mention, but only of this, that he died poor
and yet proud. For Maesia pitying her fathers sorrows tha^ he made for her
absence, more for his content than for any delight in dignity, shortly after
she forsook the Country and went to the court.

Peratio having ended his tale, the whole company commended his discourse, and
especially the old countess, who not only gave him praise as a laurel for
his labors, but thanks, as due to him by deserts, saying, that in deed pride
was one of those sins which nature had framd without change, that Fortune was
a mistress over other passions, and Time had a medicine for other maladies,
only pride and the gout has his similitude in effects, that they were
incurable. Well madam, quoth Bernardino, Peratio has done well, but pray God
he resemble not the rich Bishop of Cullen, that preaching against covetousness,
had a poor man's lease to pawn in his hands, which he used as an instrument
to act against usury: he is a scoller madam, and therefore within the compass
of his own conclusions, for we see th^se University men overcome them selves
deeply in this folly, insomuch that not content to be proud at home, they
seek by travel to hunt after vanity. As I cannot, quot^ Peratio, excuse my
self, so I will not accuse all generally, because the premises are to^
peremptory that infer such censurers, but no doubt, scholars are men, and
therefore subject to this fault. And so be courtiers, quoth Lady Katherine,
for you may smell their pride by their perfumes. ^is well, quoth Benedetto, that
seignior Farneze has made an exception of women, otherwise Peratio had never
made an e^de of his discourse. Peratio taking hold of Lady Katherines talk,
thought to cross Benedetto over the thumbs, and therefore made this reply.
Truth it is, that ^ully writ to Atticus, that the conquest of Asia had brought
sieve notable follics into the Citi^ of Rome, to make glorious sepulchers, to
wear rings of gold, to use spice in meats, to alay wine with sugar, and to
carry about sweet perfumes and smells. These m^ssieur Bdnedetto, Tully countes
follies, and ye use as ^auours: he thought them prejudicial, and ye courtiers
count them as necessary, and therefore argue how you list, I will have you
within the compass of my discourse. I can smile, quoth the Lady Katherine, to
see how messieur Benedetto thinking to wring water ont of a stone, has
stumbled on a ^int, which striking too hard has brought fire. Yet (quoth
Cosimo) his luck was good, for he burnt but his own clothes. Seignior
Farneze hearing these dry blows, broke off their talk at this time by
commanding one of his me^ to cover for supper, which done, sitting down with
his guests about him, every one plied his teeth more than his tongue,
Benedetto excepted, who was so chafed in conceit at the Lady Katherine, that
his thoughts only were employed after dinner how to be revenged, which indeed
^e performed in this sort.

The second discourse of Folly.
AFter Farneze and the rest had satis^d their ^marks with meat and their minds
with mirth, Cosimo seeing Benedetto so passionate, began to whet him on to
prattle in this manner. Mass courtier, quoth he, to draw you out of your du^ps
with a dema^d, I pray you answer me to this question: why do y^ painters in
figuring forth the counterfeit of love, draw her blind and covered with a vale,
when as we see that in nothing there is a deeper insight than in love:
Benedetto seeing Cosimo put forth this question only to move talk, told him,
that if he had spent but as many idle hours about y^ substance of affection, as
he had done days about the quiddities of fa^cy, he would willingly have
answered his demand: but seeing twere folly for a soldier to teach Orpheus how
to handle his har^e, he would answer him as Zeuxes did king Persius, who
desiring him to shew^ how he could draw the picture of envy, presently
brought him a looking Glass, wherein Persius perceiving his own phisnomie
blushed: And yet for all this, quoth Bernardino, seignior Cosimo does not change
countenance, and yet we all know him to be a lover: and therefore, quoth the
Lady Frances, within the compass of folly, for this I remember that an Acrion
says, Cupid was deprived of his sight, not by nature but by injury, for the
Gods summoning a parliament, whereat appeared all the heavenly deities, Cupid
by hap, or rather by fatal presence of the destinies, met with Folly, who
surcharged with ouerweening passions, began to dispute of their several
powers, the b^y not able to brook comparisons, bent his bow, and was ready to
discharge an arrowe against Folly, but ^hee being readier furnished with
wepons, neither regarding his youth, beauty, nor deity, scratched out his
eyes, in requital whereof she was by the Gods appointed his guide. Then by this
quoth Peratio, there is no love without folly. That I deny, answered the Lady
Frances, for true and perfect love is beyond^ the deity of Cupid, and
therefore without the compass of folly. But such love as you young Gentlemen
use, that has as great a confusion of passions, as Ouids chaos had of simples,
is that which I mean, in truth it is lust, but shadowed with the name of love,
which rightly Euripides calls a fury. I am glad, quoth Farneze, that we
are entered into the discourse of love, for I will inioyne this nights work to
be about the discovery of the very substance of lust, which drowned in
voluptuous pleasures, haleth on the mind to the soul^ deformed sin of
lechery, a fault that we Italians greatly offend in, and yet the custom of
sin has so taken a way the feeling of the offense, as we shame not often
times to glory in the fault. And for that seignior Cosimo I have known you
amongst all the rest to be most amorous, though I mnst needs confess
always honestly, yet for that you have been acquainted with such passions, I
commit the charge unto your hands. Cosimo seeing the company smile, in that the
County had tied him to such a task, willingly would have surrendered up his
right into an other man's hands, but fearing to displease Farneze, and by
shrincking, to discover where his shoe wroong him, arming him self with
patience seemed very content: and therefore began to frame his speech in this
manner. Although (Gentlemen) Hipa^chon could play on his flute, yet he was not
to dispute of Music, in that be knew more by the practice of his finger,
than by skill of the concordes. Ephestion could handle Bucephalus, but not
ride Bucephalus. Menecas the Macedonian was a very good simpler, but knew not
how to con^est a potion, as one aiming at the virtue of the herb, not at the
quality of the disease: so although I have, as a nouice, gazed at the temple
of Venus, yet I am not able to discourse of the Deity of Cupid: it is no
consequent, that by feeling a few passions, I should be able to set down
principles, or that a spark of fancy should kindle a whole flame of wanton
affections, yet that I be not accused to be more scrupulous than courteous, I
will say what I have heard and read of this folly. The Cyriniake Philosophers,
as Aristippus, Metrodorus and Epicurus, who founded their summum bonum in
pleasure, to shadow their brutishe principles with some show of reason, drew,
as Phidias did over his deformed pictures, courteines of silk, that the
outward vale might countenance the imperfection of his art, placing the
substance of pleasure under the simple superfici^s of virtue, covering an
inuenomed hook with a fair bait, and like Ianus presenting a double face,
the foremost of flattery, the hindmost of sorrow. Hercules meeting vice and
virtue, found the one gorgeously tricked up in ornaments of gold, the other
coursely attired in simple clothing, virtue bare faced wering in forehead the
counterfeit of truth, vice valed with a mask to cover the deformity of her
visage, wherein appeared the sta^nes of pleasure, as the infection of leprosi^,
which Plutarke noting, being demanded what (...) was: answered, a sweet
step to repentance, alludinge unto the censure of Phocion, who wrote of the
pictur^ of Venus this sentence: Ex vino Venus ex venere ruina and mors. But
seeing my charge is not to speak generally of pleasure, but of that folly
which claiming the name of pleasure, most besotteth the senses of all other
obiectes with deceit, I mean lust, which the better to bring in credit, is
honored with the title of love, I must confess my self herein to be of
Aristotle's opinion, who being demanded by Alexander the great, what love was,
answered, a met amorphosis of men's bodies and souls into contrary shapes: for
after that the impression of lust, inueigled by the fading obi^ct of beauty,
has crept in at the eye and possessed the heart, we wholly deliver our selves,
as slaves to sensuality, forgetting our God for the gain of a goddess, whose
altars savors of stinking perfumes, and whose temple is not perfumed with
roses, but infected with hembloeke: they which sacrifice unto Vesta offer up
incense with fire, they which stand at the shrine of Venus offer up bladders
only filled with wind, the one representing the pureness of chastiti^, the
other the lightness of affection: you say true, quoth the Lady Frances, Venus
coffers are always empty, and therefore giving great sound, her garments
imbroidered with feathers, as noting inconstancy, for be that marketh the
confused estate of you Florentines, who covet to be counted lovers, shall find
how under that one folly you heap together a mass of mischievous enormities,
for the Gentleman, that drawn by a voluptuous desire of immoderate affections,
seeks to glut his outward senses with delight, first lays his platform by
pride, seeking to allure a chaste eye with the sumptuous show of apparel,
under that mask to entise the mind unto vanity, others by an eloquent phrase
of speech to tickle the ear with a pleasing harmony of well placed words:
well placed in congruitie, though ill construed in sense, some by Music to
inueigle the mind with melody, not sparing to spend part of the night under
his mistresses window, by such pains to pro^ure her dishonor and his own
misfortune. These (Gentlemen) be fruits of your loves, if I term it the best
way, and yet follies in that they prejudice both purse and person: the same
batte is flattery, which gives the sorest battery to the bulworke of their
chastity, for when they see the mind armed with virtue, hard to be won, and
like the Diamonde to r^suse the force of the file, then they apply their wits
and wills to work their own woe, penning down ^itties, songs, sonnets,
madrigals, and such like shadowed over with the pensell of ^atterie, where
from the fictions of poets they fetch the type and figure of their feigned
affection: first, decyphering her beauty to be more than superlatiue,
comparing her face unto Venus, her hair unto gold, her eyes unto stars:
nay more, resembling her chastity unto Diana, when they seek only to make
her as common as Lais, then how her fe^ture has fired their fancy, how her
sight has besotted their senses, how beauty has bewitched them, paynting
out their passions as Appelles did puppettes for children, which inwardly
framed of claye, were outwaredlye trickt up with fresh colors, they plunge
in pain, they wail in woe, they turn the restless stone with Sysyphus, and
allege the torments of Tantalus, what grief, what pain, what sorrow, what
sighs, what tears, what plaintes, what passions, what tortures, what death is
it not they endure till they optaine their mistress favor, which got, infamy
concludes the tragedy with repentance: so that I allow those pleasing poems
of Guazzo, which begin: Chi spinto d amore, thus englished.

He that appaled with lust would sail in have to Corinthum,
There to be taught in Layis school to seek for a mistress,
Is to be traind in Venus troop and changd to the purpose,
Rage embraced but reason q^ite thrust out as on exile,
Pleasure a pain rest tournd to be care and mirth as a madness
Fi^ie minds inflamd with a look enraged as Alecto,
Quaint in array, sighs fetched from far, and tears marie fained,
Pen sick sore deep plungd in pain, not a place but his heart whole,
Days in grief and nights consumed to think on a goddess,
Broken sleeps, sweet dreams, but s^ort fro the night to the morning
Venus dashed his mistress face as bright as Apollo,
Helena staind the golden ball wrong given by the she heard,
Hairs of gold eyes twinkling stars her lips to be rubies,
Teeth of pearl her breasts like snow her cheeks to be roses.
Sugar candy she is as I guess fro the wast to the kneestead.
Naught is amiss no fault were found if soul were amended.
All were bliss if such fond lust led not to repentance.
So that of these verses I conclude, that such young Gentlemen as tickled with
lust, seek to please their senses with such pernicious delights, may ius^ly
come within the compass of this folly: may (quoth the Lady Margarite) let the
self same predicament comprehend such fantastike poets, as spend their times
in penning down pamphelts of love, who with Ovid seek to nourish vice in Rome
by setting down Artem amandi, and giving dishonest precepts of lust and
leacherie, corrupting youth with the expense of time upon such (...) fables:
and therefore deserve by Augustus to be banished from so civil a country as
Italy, amongst the barbarous Getes to live in exile. Stay there, qu^th
messieur Benedetto, your commission is too large, and your censures too
Satyricall, we read not that any woman was ever Stoicke or Cynicke, either to
be so strict in passions, or bitter in inuectiues, and to write of love not to
favor the folly, but to condemn the fault; and therefore Madam either be
more partial or more particular. These, glances (quoth Farneze) are nothing to
the purpose, and therefore seignior Cosimo to your charge: I know sir,
answered Cosimo, that Madam Frances has said well, in painting out the
phantasticke description of a lover, yet has she been favorable in figuring
out their follies: for this love or rather lust ends not, till it tastes of
the very dregs of adulterous lechery, a folly, nay a sin so in hate with
God and contempt with man, as Seleucus forbad it to be named amongst the
Locrians. The end of concupiscence is luxuria, says Socrates in his
disputation with Euthydemus, from whom flows, as from a sea of wickedness
incest, murder, poison, violence, subuersio^ of kingdoms and infinite other
impieties. Aristotle being demanded what adultery was, made answer, a curious
inquiry after an other man's love, and being desired to pen down the effects,
wrote these or such like words. He that seeks by a plausible shadow of
flattery to seduce a mind from chastity to adultery, sins against the law
of nature in defra^ding a man of his due, his honor and reputation, spoiling
him of a most precious jewel, which is the loss of his wives love and
friendship: for as the sethim tree being cut or pierced with brass straight
perishes, so the league of marriage violated by adultery extinguisheth love,
and leaves behind^ at the most, naught but the painted vale of flattery, the
peace of the house is changed into discord, dissension in stead of laurel
presents a sword, and content sleeps not with Mercuries melody, but waketh
with Alectos disquiet, the face that in form being honest, resembles the
sun in beauty, stained with adultery, blusheth to see the same as gultie of
her own detormitie, credit has suffered shipwreck and fame as spotted with
the foil of dishonor, all these hateful discommodities ensuing by the
voluptuous des^re of such young Gentlemen, as wedded to vanity, glory in the
title of this folly. I marvel then, quoth Peratio, what woman (these effects
considered) will listen unto the melody of such Sirens, whose allurementes
persuades them to such misfortunes, or how they can think that man to love
them, which by fulfilling his momentary lust, procures their perpetual
discredit and subversion both of soul and body. Know you not (quoth
Benedetto) the reason of that, are not the thoughts of women like the
inhabitants of Scyrum, which knowing that the savor of Dates is deadly unto
their complexion, yet never cease till they dye with Dates in their mouths.
You mistate it, quoth the Lady Frances, it is because men consume them selves
into tears with the Crocodile, till they have gotten their pray, and then they
neither respect their honor nor honesty. Howsoeu^r it be, quoth Cosimo, I
have not to deal with women, but for our Florentines, I know none more
addicted unto this folly, which to conclude, has been so odious amongst our
ancestaurs, that it has been chastned with severe punishments. Alexander
greatly blamed Cassander, because he offered but to kiss a minstrels maid.
Augustus Caesar made the law ^ulia, which permitted the father to kill the
daughter for adultery. Cato banished a Senator for kissing his wife in his
daughters presence. Marcus Antonius Carcalla was banished his Empire for lust,
with infinite other, whose miseries, mishappes, and misfortunes were
innumerable only by this folly, as Tarquinus Superbus for Lucrece, Appius
Claudius for Virginia, Julius Caesar for Cleopatra, John County Armiake for
his own sister, Anthony Uenereus duke of Uenice for his Secretaries wife,
Abusahid king of Fez for the wife of Cosimo de Cheri, as Leon in his
description of Affrike sets down: but amongst all these Gentles, an
history at large for the confirmation of this my disscourse.

THE TALE OF Cosimo.
WHile Ninus the son of Belus reigned as Sovereign over the dominions of
Egypt, and kept his Court Royal in Babylon, there dwelled in the suburbs of
the City a poor laboring man called Maenon, who was more honest than
wealthye, and yet sufficiently rich, for that he li^ed content amongst his
neighbors, this poor man accounted his possessious large enough, as long as
he enjoyed and possessed his ground in quiet, imitating Cyncynatus in his
labors, who found health of body and quiet of mind the chiefest treasure, by
tilling his field with continual ^oyle. But as content had satisfied his
thoghts in this, so Maenon was as greatly favored of Fortune, for he had a
wife of the same degree and parentage, so beautiful, as there was none so
fair in Babylon, so honest, as there was none more virtuous, so courteous,
that there was not one in the whole city who did did not both love and like of
Semyramis the wife of Maenon, for so was hi^ name: insomuch that Ninus desired
to have a sight of her beauty, and in disguised apparel, went to the poor
man's house, where seeing such a heavenly saint about her homely huswifery,
fitter (as he thought) to be a paramour for a prince, than a wife for a
scbiect, sighed and sorrowed that she was not in his power to command: yet
favoring her in that she was honest, as fancying her for that she was
beautiful, he departed with resolution to be master of his own affections,
and not to deprive the poor man of so great good. After he was returned to the
palace and was solitary by him self, the Idea of her perfection representing
a humane shape of a heavenly creature, so assaulted his mind with sundry
passions, that giving the raines of liberty to his wanton appetites, he fell
into these terms. Unhappy Ninus, and therefore unhappy because a king and
subject t^ sensuality, shall the middle of thy years be worse than the prime
of thy youth, shall love conquer that Fortune could never subdue, shall the
heat of affection search that in the fruit that it could never ^urt in the
budde, shall thou govern a kingdom and can not subdue thine own passions?
Pear Ninus name not so much as love, race out fancy with silence, and let the
continency of other kings be presidents for thee to direct thy course aright.
Alexander made a conquest of his thoughts, when the beauty of Darius wife bad
him battle. Cyrus abstained from the ^ight of Panthea, because he would not be
intemperate. Pompey, would not speak to the wife of Demetri^s his fr^ man for
that she was fair, and what of this Ninus? Yet had Alexander concubines,
Cyrus a lemman, and Pompey was not so chaste, but he liked Phrinia, and so may
thou make a choice of Semyramis, she is poor and unfit for a king, I but she
is fair, and fit for none but a king, love fills not the hand with pelf,
but the eye with pleasure, she is honest, truth, but thou art a monarch, and
the weight of a scepter is able to break the strongest chastity: but that is
more Nynus, she is another man's wife, but her husband is thy subject, whom
thou may command, and he dare not but obey: have not beggars their
affections as well as kings? may not Semyramis, nay does she not love poor
Maenon better than ever she will like Nynus, yes, for crowns are as far
from Cupid as cot^ages, princes have no more privilege over fancy than
peasants: yet Nynus fear not; love and fortune favors not cowards, command
Semyra^is, nay, constrain Semyramis to love thee, and upon this resolve, for
kings must have power ^oth over men and love. Nynus resting upon this
resolution, determined to try the mind of Semyramis how she was affected
toward her husband, and therefore dispat^h a Letter to her to this ^ffect.

It may seem strange Semyramis, that the monarch of Egypt should write to the
wife of a poor labourer, seeing the proportion of our degrees are so far
unequal, but if it be considered that kings are but men, and therefore
subject to passions, sooner shall thou have cause to sorrow for my griefs,
than muse at my writings. Did my desire aim at a kingnome, I would attempt to
satisfy desire with my sword? Did envy cry for content, then could I ^tep
to revenge: were my thoughtrs as insatiate as Midas, the world is a ^orehouse
^reasures, these desires are to be satisfied with friends or fortune, but the
restless sorrow that so pin^th my mind with disquiet, only r^steth in thy
power to appease. It is Semyramis the deity of beutie, which is privileged
far about dignity, that Gods have obeyed, and men cannot resist, the sight
of thy perfection entered at the eye, the report of thy virtues tickling the
ear, and both jointly assaulting the heart with sharp and furious alaru^s have
so s^ared my mind, as naught pleases the cies that is not thy object, and
nothing contenteth the ear but Semyramis. Seeing then the Egyptian monarch,
who has triumphed over all the nations of the South and East climate with many
bloody conquestes, is by them brought as a cap^iue, servile to thy beauty and
his own passions, boast that ^oue has lotted thee such a victory, and be not
ungrateful to the Gods, by denying me that I deserve, favor. But perhaps thou will object thou art married, and therefore tied to poor Maenon, (for love
has taught me thy husbands name) that honesty bears blossoms as well in a
cottage, as in the court, that virtue harboreth as soon with beggars as
princes, that fame or insa^ie can stoup as low as they can (...) high, that
report and envy sonner sting^th want than plenty, this Semyramis I conf^sse,
but yet the picture of the ^agle placed over the temple of Venus, feared the
^aulcon for offending her offending. Damaetas po^niay pearched under a dragon
of brass to avoid the vultures tyrannies: dishonor touches not the ve,
sture of a king, and the concubines of princes purchase renow^e, not infamy:
Maenon is p^ore, and will joy to have such a rival as Nynus, the want of
Semyramis darkens the glory of her beauty, which the love of a king shall
enrich with orna^entes. Then ^emyramis pity his plaintes, who is thy
seueraigne and might command, and yet desirous to be thy paramour, seeks a
conquest, not by constraint, but by entreaties: in granting which thou
climbe^t to dignity, and sleep at the foot of a scepter, honor and quiet
entertaines thee with delight, and to these thou addest thy friends preterment
and thy husbands welfare: if as thou art poor, thou art proud, and self
conceit arms thee with disdain, consider that the counterfeit of kings cannot
be drawn without the shadows of duty, and that the pill that purges the
cholar of a prince is revenge. This think, and farewell.

Nynus Monarch of Egypt.
He committed this Letter to the charge of one of his Secretaries, whom he made
privy to the contents, who poasting in have to the house of Semiramis, foun^
her bringing one of her ba^es a^eepe with a song. The Secretary delighted with
the pleasing harmony of her voice, stood a little listening to her melody, at
last stepped into the house, at whose presence the poor woman amazed, for that
her cottage was not accust omed to such guests, she blushed, which gave such a
glory to her former beauty, and such a president of her inward virtue, that
the Secretary envied the happy placing of his soueraines passions, yet after
her homely fashion the entertained him, greatly fearing when he delivered her
the letters, y^ they had bin some warrant to apprehend her husband for some
fault, but by the superscription ^he perceived they were directed to her,
having set before y^ secretary a mess of cream to b^sie him, she stepped aside
to read the contents, which when she perceived and well noted the effects, not
only allurin^ with promises but persuading with threats, she burst into
t^ares, cursing that day where y^ king had a sight of her face as dismal and
unfortunate, falling a^ last from tears into these fearful complaints: Ar^
the destinies (poor Semyramis) fore-pointers of good or ill, so inequall
allotters of mishappe; that some they bless with daily favors, and others
they cross with continual hard fortunes? Had the fates no proporti^n in their
censures? could it not suffice thou w^rt poor, but thou must be miserable?
cannot envy paint the picture of content at (...) cottage door, but she must
grudge? is there no shru^ so low, but is subi^ct to the wind: no woman so
poor if she be fair, but some blasing her beauty aims at her chastity?
Then Semyramis be patient but resolute, rather choose despite and sorrow than
disgrace and infamy. Is labor an enemy to love, how then should affection
touch me who am never idle? therefore fond fool, does love en^e thee, because
thou art not idle, but by labor she west thy self a recreant to his law. But
yet Semyramis ^onsider who it is that persuades thee to love, Nynus a king, a
monarch, and thy sovereign, one whose majesty may shadow thy miss, and
whose very name may warrant thee from the prejudice of envy, if thou offend,
dignity counteruailes the fault, and fame dare not but honor the concubines
of kings. For shame Semyramis sooth not thy self in such follies, are not
kings seats objects for every eye to gase at? Are not their actions censured
by every base person? As the pyramides are marks for the sea, so their doings
are notes for the world: Does not fame build in the foreheads of princes? yes
Semyramis, kings faults though they are passed over with fear, yet they are
judged of with murmr: the greater the dignitic, the greater the offense,
shame follows vice every where, and adultery, if laws were not partial,
des^rueth punishment as well in a king as in a beggar. Maenon is poor, but thy
husband, in loving him thou please the Gods, Nynus is rich and a monarch, in
contenting him thou dishonourest thy self and discontentest the heavens: has
Babylon counted thee fair, so thou art still by reserving thy beauty? has
Babylon counted thee honest? so remain still by preserving thy chastity: be
not more charie over thy beauty than over thine honesty, for many know thee
by fame that never saw^ thy face. Then Semyramis, answer the kings passions
with denial, but alas he threatens revenge, sweeter it is to die with credit
tha^ live with infamy. Then why staiest thou thus fondly debating with thy
self, reply as one that prefers fame before life, and with that she slept
to a standish, and taking paper wrote a Letter to this effect.

Kings are Gods, not that they are immortal, but for they are virtuous:
Princes have no privilege to do ill, Fame is not partial in her trumpe: the
chiefest treasure is not gold, but honor, to conquer a kingdom is a favor
of fortune, to subdue affection is a gift from the Gods, love in kings is
princely, but lust is pernicious: kings therefore wear crowns, because they
should be just: justice give every one his due, Semiramis is Maenons wife, and
therefore his inheritance: the Gods threaten Princes as well as poor men: hot
love is soon cold: she eye is variable, inconstant and insatiate: Adultery
is odious, though graced with a scepter, beauty is a slipperie good, Princes
concubines prise honor too dear, in selling the precious jewel of honesty
for gold: death is a far more sweet than discredit, fame to be preserred
before friends, Nynus is a king, whose seat is sure sancturie for the
oppressed, S^miramis is poor, yet honest, love of Maenon in her youth, and
loyal t^ him in her age, resolved rather to dye than be proved (...): subjects
pray for their sovereigns, wishing they may live princely and dye virtuous.

Semyramis the faithful wife of poor Maenon.
This confused chaos of principles being written and sealed up, she delivered
it to the Secretary, who courteously taking his leave hied in have to the
Court, where the king carefully expecting his coming, receiving the letter
vnript the seals, where in stead of an amoro^s reply, he found nothing but a
heap of philosophical axi^mes, and yet his (...) answered to the full: the
^ithie sentences of Semyramis whom by her p^nne he found to be poor, honest,
beautiful, and wise did not take (...), which poor soul she aimed at, for in
^tead of cooling his mind with good counsel, she inflamed his mind with a
deeper affection: for where before he only was allured with her beauty, now^
he was entised with her wisdom. Pallas gave him a deeper wound than Venus,
and the inward virtues were more forcible than the outward shadows: s^ that
he persisted in his passions, and began to consider with himself, that the
means to procure his content, was only the simplicity of Maenon, with whom
he would make an exchange rather than be frustrate of his desire, an exchange
(I mean) for Ninus being a widower had one only child, which was a daughter,
about the age of sixteen years, her he determined to give in marriage unto
Maenon, rather than he would not enjoy Semyramis, thinking that the fear of
hi^ displeasure, the burden of his own poverty, the hope of preferrement,
the tickling conceit of dignity would force the poor ^assall to look twice
on his fair wife before he refused such a proffer: thinking this pretense to
be his best policy, he resolved presentlye to put it in execution: and
therefore forthwith (...) a Pursuiuant to fetch Maenon unto the Court, who
coming with commission unto the poor man's house, found him and his wife at
dinner, to whom, after he had declared the sum of his ^essage, he departed,
willing him with as much speed as might be to repair unto the Court. Maenon
although amazed with this news, yet for that his conscience was clear feared
not, but with as much have as was possible, made him self ready to go.
Semyramis dissembled the matter, (...) her husband forth his new hose, and
his best iack^t, thinking to sponge him up after the (...) fashion, that Ninus
might see she had cause to love and like so proper a man: setting her husband
therefore forth in print, he took his way unto the C^urt, where at the gate
the Secretary awayted to bring him into presence, whither no sooner he was
entered, but the ^ing taking the poor man aside, began to common with him
in this manner.

Maenon for the Sovereign to make a long disscourse unto the subject were
frivolous, seeing as the one for his majesty is privileged to command^ and
constrayne, so the other by obedience is tied to obey: therefore omitting all
nee^elsse preambles, thus to the purpose: Maenon thou art poor, and yet a
Lord over Fortune, for that I hear^ thou art content, for it is not richesse
to have much, but to desire little, yet to thy want thou have suc^ a favor
granted th^e by the Destinies, as ^uerie way may counter^ayle thy pou^rtie, I
mean the possession of thy wife Semyramis, whom mine eye can witness to be
passing fair and beauti^ull: envy that grudged at thy happiness, and love
that frowned at my liberty, joining their forces together, have so disquieted
my mind^ with sundry passions, as only it lies in thy power to mittigate the
cause of my (...), for know Maenon, I am in love with thy wife, a censure I
know, which will be hard for thee to digest, and yet to be borne with more
patience, for that thou have a king and thy sovereign to be thy rival, ber
Maenon I crave of thee to be my concubine, which if thou grant not, think as
now thou have poverty with quiet, so then thou shall have both con^ent and
dignity. The pooreman who thought by the kings speeches that his wife had been
consenting to this pretense, framed the king this answer.

I know right mighty sovereign, that Princes may command, where poor men
cannot entreat, that the title of a king is a writ of privilege in the court
of Love, that chastity is of small force to resist, where wealth and dignity
joined in league, are armed to assault, kings are warranted to command, and
subjects to obey, therefore if Semiramis be content to grant the interest of
her affections into your majesty's hands, I am resolved to red^liuer up my fee
simple with patience. No Maenon, quoth Ninus, as thy wife is fair, so she is
honest, and therefore where I cannot command I will them constrain, I mean
that thou force her to lou^ me. Maenon grieuing at the words of the king, made
this reply. If my wife, mighty Ninus, be contented to prefer a cottage
before a crown, and the person of a poor labourer before the love of a
Prince, let me not (good my Lord) be so unnatural as to resolve upon such a
villainy, as the very beasts abhor to commit, the lion kills the lioness
being taken in adultery, the swanne kills her make sor suspicion of the
sa^e fault, and shall I whom reason wills to be charie of my choice, force my
wife persorce to such a folly: pardon my liege, never shall the loyalty of my
wife be revenged with such treachery, rather had I suffer death than be
appeached of such discourte^ie. Ninus hearing the poor man so resolute,
thought there was no adder so (...), but had his charm, no bird so fickle but
had her call, no man so obstinat but by some means might be reclaimed,
therefore he made him this answer. Maennon be not so fond as to prefer fanci^
before life, nor so insolent as to refuse the favor of a king, for the
affection of an inconstant woman, though I mean to depri^e thee of a present
joy, so I means to counteruaile it with a greater bliss, for the exchange of
Semyramis, I mean to give thee my daughter Sarencida in marriage, so of a
subject to make thee a son and my equal, so that nothing shall be different
betwixt us but a crown and a kingdom, for a poor wife thou shall have a rich
princess, from poverty thou shall rise to honor, from a beggar to a duke:
consider with thy self then Maenon, how I ^auour thee, which might possess my
desire by thy death, and yet seek it at thy hands by entreaty and
pref^rrement: take time now by the forehead, she is bald behind, and in
letting her turn her back, thou bidst far^ well to opportunity, if thou refuse
dignity, my daughter and the favor of a sovereign, hope not to live nor
enjoy thy-wife, for this censure hold for an ^racle, Ninus before night will
enjoy the love of Semyramis. This severe resol^tion of the king drone poor
Maenon into a thousand sundry passions, for he considered with him self
Semyramis was a woman, and in the (...) of her age, and though she were
beautiful she was but a woman, and had her equals: he knew that Sarencida was
honorable, of royal parentage, the daughter of a king, beautiful, young, and
(...): he felt poverty to be the sister of distress, and that there was no
greater woe than want, dignity presented to his imagination the glory that
deaws from honor, the sweet content that pre^errement afoordes, and how
princely a thing it was to be the son in law to a king, these unacquainted
thoughts sore troubled the mind of the poor man, but when he called to
remembrance the constancy of Semyramis, how the motion of such a mighty
monarch, was in vain to mitigate one spark of her affection, that neitheir
dignity, nor death, no not the majesty of a king could persuade her to
falsify her says, returned Ninus this answer. As (my liege) kings have honor
to countenance their actions, so poor men have honesty whereby to direct
their lives. Diogenes was as desirous of good fame, as Alexander was of glory.
Poverty is as glad to creep to credit, as dignity, and the thoughts that
smoke from a cottage, are (...) as sweet a sacrifice to the gods as the
perfumes of princes: the heavens are equal allotters of mishap, and the
destinies impartial in their censure: for as often does re^enge follow
majesty for injustice, as poverty for doing (...), the one offendes with
intent, the other either by ignorance, or nec^ssitie: then my Liege, if ^our
Highness ^ffer me wrong, by taking away my wife perforce, assure your self
that honor is no privilege against infamy, neither will the ^ods sleep in
revenge of poor Maenon: for your proffers: know this, I account preferment in
ill (...), not dignity, and the sanour of a Prince in wickedness, the frown
of God in justice for your daughter, I am sorry the unbridled fury of lust
should so far ouerrule the law of nature, as to alienate the love of a
father for such folly: ^er I utterly refuse, not that I (...), the Princess,
but that I pity her estate, and wish her better Fortune: for death which your
highness threatens, I scorn it, as prefering an honest fame before mishap, and
the love of my wife before death, were it never so terrible, for poverty
denies me to make other requital for her unfeigned affection, than constancy,
which I will pay as her due, though with the loss of my life, why should not
the examples which historiographers pens down for presidentes, serve as
trumpettes to encourage poor men in honest and honorable resolutions: when
Marcus Lepidus the Roman Consul was driven into banishment; and heard that
the Senate in despighte had given his wife unto an other, he presently died for
sorrow: when Nero the tyrant (pardon my liege I infer no comparisons)
inslamed with lust toward the wife of Sylaus, a Roman, neither respecting
the law Iulia made to the controrie, by his predecessor Augustus, neither
justice nor the gods, but opposing himself to the heavens, reft the poor
citizen of his wife.

Sylaus ^lewe him self at the palace gate, which brought the Emperor in
great hate with his Commons. I infer not these examples as fearful of your
Highness dis^auour, but as one determined to follow these Romans in their
fortunes, and either with quiet to live still the husband of Semyramis in
Babylon, or to let the world witness I never was so cowardly to deliver up so
dear an interest, but by death. Nynus storming at the answer which poor
Maenon made, did not take his speeches as persuasions from his foliye, but as
preparatiues to further choler: for so deep was the insatiable desire of
filthy lust engraven and imprinted in his mind, and the foul imagination of
adulterous thoughts had so blinded his senses, that as a man ^alfe fraught
with a lunacie he became furious, that in a rage taking a sword that hoong at
his beds head, he rusht upon the poor man and slew him: this cruel deed
being thus unjustly executed, he felt no remorse in his conscience, but as a
man wholly soulde over unto mischief, proceeded in his purpose, and presently
sent his Secretary for Semyramis: who no sooner heard the mcssage, but fearing
that her husband for her cause might come to mishap, in her woorst attire, as
she was, hied to the Court, where being brought into the kings chamber, Ninus
having caused the dead body before to be carried away, told her briefly all the
matter, how her husband was slain, and that now he had sent for her not to
make her his concubine but queen. Semyramis no sooner heard of the death of
her hus band, but she fell into a pasme, and was hardly brought to life, but
at last being revived she burst forth into fountains of tears, and into
bitter exclamations against the tyrant, who sought to appease her with sundry
sweet promises, but seeing nothing could prevail, he sent for his daughter
Sarencida to whom he committed the charge of Semyramis, as of one that should
be a queen and her mother, Sarencida as nothing daring (whatsoever she
thought) to disobey her fathers command, led her by the hand into her chamber,
and as women's perswas^ues are best confectaries for women's sorrows, did
somewhat mitigate some part of her grief that she ceast from her tears,
till at night being alone in her bed, the Idea of her hus bands person
presented it self, though not an object to her eyes, yet to her imagination,
that overcome with the passions of love, thinking to take the benefit of the
place and time, and determining to follow her husband in his fortunes, took
her knife in her hand, and standing in her smock by the bed side, fell into
these furious terms. Semyramis this day has been the beginning of thy
sorrows and the end of thy good fortunes, the same of thine honesty so
generally blazed abroad through all Babylon, shall this day without desert be
spotted with infamy, the bloody action of Ninus shall be attributed to thee
for a fault, and the intent of his death harbor under the suspicion of thy
dishonesty, if thou live and become queen, yet shall this deed make thee a
table talk amongst beggars, honor shall not privilege thee from the hate of
them which are honest, neither shall the glory of a crown shroud thee from
discredit. Then Semyramis seeing thou seek after fame, seek not to live,
use the knife thou have in hand, as a means to requite thy husbands love, and
to warrant thy former honesty: Panthea the wife of Abradatus, seeing her
husband slain in the camp of Cyrus, sacrificed her self on his dead corpse:
when Iulia the wife of Pompey saw but a gown of her husbands bloody,
suspecting some mishap, sell into a trance, and never revived. Portia the wife
of Brutus hearing of her husbands death, choked her self with hot burning
coals. Aria the wi^ of Caecinna died with her condemned husband before the
rapitoll. Let the resolute love of these noble dames encourage thee to the like
constancy, consider Semyramis thy husband is dead, and deeds done can not be
revoked. Ninus means to make thee his wife: his wife cowardly wretch as thou
art, answer to this foolish objection which Pisca the wife of Pandoerus did,
who being slain by the king of Persia, after the slaughter of her husband, he
proffered her marriage, but holding as thou do, the instrument of death in
her hand, ^he uttered these words: The Gods forbid, that to be a queen, I
should ever wed him that has been the murderer of my dear husband. And
with this she was ready to stab her self to the heart, but staying her self
and pansing a while, she began as women are prone to conceit revenge, to
think with her self how in time bett^r to quite the injury proffered by Nynus
to her pore husband. This Gentlemen, I conjecture was her imagination, for she
suddenly let fall her knife, leapt into her bed, and past the rest of the night
in a sound sleep. And in deed had not the sequel (...) the contrary, it
might have been coniectured that the hope o^ a crown had been a great peswas^on
from her desperate resolution: but letting these supposes pa^se, to Nynus, who
made it his mornings work, as soon as he was up to visit Semyramis, and
finding her in a better tune than he left her, conceived such joy in the
appeasing of her passions, that presently he sommon^d all his Lords to a
Parliament, where he unfolded unto them the intent he had to make Semyra^is
queen, and therefore craved their consents. The nobility whatsoever they
thought, durst not gainsaie the will of their Prince, but assented to his
demand, so that all things were prepared for the coronation: but when the brute
of Maenons death was noised abroad in Babylon, every one after their sundry
and several imaginations began to confer of the action, all generally
^eruailing that so honest a wife should commit so heinous a fact, for every one
thought her an actor in the tragedy, yet they considered that ambitious h^nour
was a mortal enemy to honesty, and that few women were so chaste but dignity
could draw to folly. Well, murmr what they lis^, the kings purpose took
effect. The day came, and the coronation was most solemynely and sump^ie
perfourmed^ the king conceiving such felicity in his new wife^ that he
continued the feast for ten days: which term ended, every one departed to
their home, and the late married couple lived so contentedly to eueri^ man's
coniectured, that Scmyramis won her same half lost by her obedience, and
especially she gained the love of the commons, for preferment had not pufte
her up with pride, nor dignity made her disdainful of the glory of a crown,
nor the title of a queen had made no metamorphosis of her mind, but in this,
that as she grew in honor, so she increased in courtesy, bountiful to all
that were poor, and envious to none that were noble, preferring the suits of
them were wronged, and seeming as near as she could to cause the king do
justice to all. This her virtuous disposition not only stole the hearts of
the commons, but also the love of her husband, who to increase affection more
had a son by her called Nynus. Passing thus three or four years in great
pleasure, the king surcharged with content, commanded his wife to ask
whatsoever she would, that was within the compass of his Babylonish monarch,
and it should be granted her. Semyramis refused such a proffer, but the king
^eeing urgent, semmoned all his Lords to the Court, and there made them p^uie
what a free grant he made to his wife. The noble men although smiling at the
fondness of the king, that so wilfully would put a naked swoorde into a mad
man's hand, yet outwardly seemed to allow of his wilt, so that Semyramis
demanded that she might absolutely without check or controlement rule the
Babylonian Empire, as sole queen for three days. The king who no whit
mistrusted that revenge could so long harbor in the heart of a woman, granted
her request, and therefore presently with all convenient speed caused a
sumptuous seaffolde in form of a Theater to be erected in the midst of
Babylon, whither calling his nobles and commons by the sound of a trumpet upon
the next festival, which was ^olden in honor of their God Iphis, he there in
presence of all his subjects, resigned up his crown and scepter into the
hands of Semyramis, placing her in the Imperial throne, as sole queen,
monarch and gouernesse of Egypt. Semyramis being thus invested with the
Diadeame and regal power: first publicly declared the effect of the kings
grant, how she was for the term and space of three days to reign as
sovereign over the land, to have as great authority to do justice, and to
execute martial law as her husband: to confirm which, Ninus as a subject did
her reverence, and jointly with the rest of the nobility, swore to perform
whatsoever she should command, and to obey ^ir as their sole and sovereign
princes. After the king had solemnly taken his oath, Semyramis uttered these
or such like speeches to the people. It is not unknown (worthy peers of Egypt
and inhabitants of Babylon) that I lived in my youth the wife of poor Maenon
with credit fit for my degree, and with fame equal to the honesty of my life.
Occasion never a^med report to stain me with disgrace, neither was the wife of
Maenon accounted to be prodigal of her affections, although perhaps a little
proud of her beauty, the poverty of my husband never touched me with
mislike, nor the pro^ers of preferrement could persuade me to inconstancy,
but Fortune that is ever ^ckle in her ^auours, and envy that grudgeth at
quiet, seeing we lived securely in love and content, set king Ninus to be the
means of my overthrow: for he in^amed with the sight of my beauty, yielded
presently to the allaromes of lust, and sought with the golden bait of
dignity to hale me on to the wrack of my honesty, which by no means he
could bring to pass: joining murder with the pretense of adultery, he slew
my husband in his bed chamber, so the better to obtain his purpose. After
whom, I call the Gods to witness, I have lived for no other cause but to see
this day, neither has the gain of a crown counterua^ed my former content,
the glistering show of dignity has not tickled my mind with delight, the
vain pleasure of preferment never made me proud, onclie (worthy peers of
Egypt) the hope that one day I should make revenge of poor Maenons in^urie,
has made me live in such contented patience, which now is come, for it
befitteth a queen in justice to be impartial, and two mischiefs are never
found to escap^ mishap: therefore how say thou Nynus, quoth she, declare
here before the Lords and commons of Egypt, were thou not the sole murderer
of my husband without my consent? Nynus answered as one half afraid at the
countenance of Semyramis. I con^sse that ^ly Maenon was murdered by me, but
for the love of the, which I hope thou hold not in memory while this time.
Yes Nynus, and now will I revenge the injury offered to Maenon, and therefore
I command that without further delaie thy head be here ^mitten off, as a
punishment due for murder and adultery. The nobility and commons hearing the
se^ere sentence of Semyramis, entreated for the life of their sovereign, but
it was in vain, for she departed not from the scaffolde till she saw her
command executed: which done, she intombed his body roiallic, and in so famous
a sepulchr^, that it was one of the seven wonders of the world, and after
swaied the kingdom with politic government until her son Nynus was of age
to rule the kingdom.

Seignior Cosimo having ended his tale, Farneze greatly commended the
discourse, applying the effect of this history to the Gentl^men present,
telling them that in deed the yeuth of Florence were greatly given to this
folly, as a vice predominant amongst them. Peratio who meant to be pleasant
with the old County, told him that he had learned this fruit in Astrono^ie,
that the influence of Venus and Saturn kept the same (...) to infer as well
age as youth, and that respect and experience had taught him, that old men
were like lee^es gray headed, and often green tai^de, that they would find one
foot at the door for a young wife, when the other stumbled in the grave to
death, so that Diogenes being demanded where a man left off from lust: unless,
quoth ^e, he be virtuous, not until the coffin be brought to his door^,
meaning that time never wore out this folly but by death. And yet to see,
quoth Benedetto, what cynicall axioms age will pr^scribe to youth, when they
themselves are never able to perform their own precepts, allowing more
privilege to their (...) hairs, than to our green years, an^ (...) under
the shadow of virtue the very substance of vice, being as intemperate in the
s^ostie winter of their age, as we in the glowing summer of our ^outh, and yet
for that they are old, and though they cannot deal more cast, yet will work
more ca^, and simply conceal that we rashly reveal, they are in age
generally taken sor Gods, when compared even with youth they are mere devils.
Yet by your leave messieur Benedetto, quoth the Lady Margeret, you speak too
generally of age, for the very constitution of the natural temperature of our
bodies is able to infringe your reasons, seeing that same naturalis calor is
ouerpressed with a cold dr^nesse in age, which in youth furthered with
moisture, causes such voluptuous motions. Cupid is painted a child, Venus
without wrinkles in her face, and they which calculate the influence of
Saturn, set not down many notes of venerie. How philosophically you speak,
quoth Peratio, and yet small to the purpose, for although natural heat be
extinguished in age, yet remains there in the mind certain Scyntillulae
voluptatis, which confirmed by a saturnall impression, were harder to root out
than were they newly sprung up in youth, neither did messieur Benedetto
conclude generally of old men, but brought in as a premisse or proposition,
that age as well as youth was infected with this folly: but well it is Lady
Margeret, that our discourse stretches not so far as women, nor to talk of
their wanton affections, least happily we had ^ntied such a (...) of their
lascivious vanities, as might have made us sooner desire our rest then end the
discourse. You are always glancing at women, quoth Cosimo, not that you are a
(...), and hate that sex, for sir I know your lips (...) digest such
lett^ce, but that (...) were out of temper if once a daic you had not a woman
in your mouth, herein resembling Marcus Laepidus, who made an innectiue
against sumptuousness of diet, himself being called the glutton of Rome, not
that he was sparing in his cheer, but that Ath^n; abstaining srom dainty
^ates, might leave the market more stored with delicate dishes.

Benede^to was nipt on the head with this sharp reply, esp^cially for that
all the whole company lau^ht to see how he answered with silence, and Farneze
about whom the talk began, made this answer, I can not deny Gentlemen, but
anger is subject to many foolish and intemperat passions, and therefore to be
comprehended within the compass of this folly, but neither age or youth, it
breeds many inormities, so that for this night I will take in hand to send
you all to bed with a farewell of four verses, which I read once in the
monastery of Santo Marco in Uenice, the author I know not, the verses are these:

Quatuor his paenis Certo afficietur adulter,
Aut Egenus erit, Subita vel morte peribit,
Aut Cadet in causam qua debet Iudice vinci,
Aut aliquod membrum casu vel Crymine perdit.
The time of the night being somewhat late, they took his jest for a charge,
and solempnly taking their leave, every man departed quietly unto his lodging.

The third discourse of Folly.
THe in^ning being (...), and the Sun displaying her radiant beams upon the
glomie mantle of the earth, Flora presented her glorious obiectes to the e^e,
and sweet smelling parfumes to the nose, with the delight of sundry pleasing
and odoriferous flowers, when these young Gentlemen ashamed that Tytan should
sommon them from their beds, passing into the garden, sound the old County,
his wife and four daughters walking for health and pleasure in a fresh and
gr^ne ar^our, where after they had saluted each other with a mutual God
morrow, they joined all in several parlies, amongst the rest ^ernardino
spying a ^arigesde opening his leaves a little by the ^cate of the Son,
pulling Lady Frances by the sleeue, began his morning mattens on this manner:
The nature of this herb, Lady Frances, which we call the marrigolde, and the
Grecians Helitropion, and the Latinistes Sol sequiam, is thought by the ancient
Philosophers to be framed only by nature, to teach the duty of a wife
toward her husband, for seeing that as Aristides said, a woman was the
contrary of a man: this flower presents a president of her affection, for
which way so ^uer the Sun turns, it still opens the leaves by degrees,
and as y^ sun declineth, so it shuts: that Phoebus being gone to bed, the
marrigolde denies any longer to show her glory: so says Plato, should a good
wife imitate her husbands actions, directing her self after his course in his
presence, being pleasant to content the eye and humor of her husband in his
absence with a modest bashfulnes, scarce with the wife of Tarquin to look out
of her window. In deed, quoth the Lady Frances, I have heard say, that
young me^nes wiu^ and maidens children are always well taught, no doubt sir,
^ur ^icall pr^ceptes are very good, and happy is she that hears them and
never believes them, I pray God your wife may be a marigolde whenever you
are married, that to avoid jealousy, you may ever wear her pinde on your
^eeue. Peratio over hearing stepte in and asked the Lady Frances if she
thought Bernardino would be jealous. I have not, ^oth the Lady, such assured
sight in phisognomie, as I dare avouch it for truth, but I promise you sir, the
Gentleman is well forehanded and well foreheaded, two of the nine beauties to
have a fine finger and a large browe, now take the pains to conclude how you
list. Peratio laughed, and Bernardino replied, it is no marvel if men be
jealous, when He^iodus affirms, that he which tru^eth to the love of a woman,
resembles him that hangs by the leaves of trees in Autumn. But in carnest
Bernardino, quoth Peratio, what do think of him that is married? That he
is quoth ^e, ares^ed with a grievous action, for no doubt young Gentlemen
should fly up to heaven if they were not kept back with such an arest: but
for better answer to thy question, take the reply of Metellus to Pyso, that
asked him why he married his son being so young, and b. fore he was wise:
Because Pyso, quoth he, if my son grow to be wise, he will never marry: nor
if you were wise, quoth the Lady Frances, would ye speak so irreverently of
marriage, but it is no matter, we shall find you in time like Crates the ^ynike
Philosopher, who inneighing greatly against this honorable society, was seen
begging a piece of bread at Lais door in Corinth. If the law that Ephorius of
Lac^demonia constituted were kept, such as refused marriage should be
banished, but I think Bernardino, if you were br^ught within the (...) of such
a statute, you would^ (...) that for a (...), which a Lacedemonian banished did,
being produced before Lycurgus for the like crime. And what was that madame,
quoth Peratio? Marie Sir, qu^th she, being assigned to exile, he brought
forth witness that he had b^gotten three children, and upon that excuse
Lycurgus made the strict law against adultery, yet mittigated before some
part of the punishment. I think madame, answered Bernardino, the Priest
has a penny for your banes, your sophis^rie is so good for marriage. Only
Sir, quoth she, I speak it against such severe censure^s of matrimony as you
are, which, for what cause I know not, living ^ale bachelors, are of
Appollonius ^ianeus opinion, and therefore (...) principles. According to your
precepts, as no doubt one of your sect (...) who made these two verses:

L'amor del donna il vin del flasco,
Null ^era bon nel matutina guasco.
Such stoicall Gentlemen as run into such inconstant and heathenish
conclusions, I had as liefe have their room as their company. Bernardino
perceiving the Lady Frances was half angry, thought rather to recant than
make her c^olerike, and therefore told her his meaning was not to condemn
marriage, but merely to jest for conference sake. Then sir, quoth she, all is
in jest, and so let us to the rest of the company, whom they found talking
with a Cook that was come to his master, to know if he would have any
extraordinary dishe provided for dinner. No Sir, quoth Farneze, I will
answer with Socrares, if they be virtuous there is enough, if they be not,
there is too much. The old^ Counti^ took occasion ^eereof to speak of
temperaunce in (...), (...) thus he ^egan. I remember Gentlemen that Tymotheus
a Grecian Captain, having supped with Plato in his Academie, at a sober and
simple repaste, for their festival fare was Olives, cheese, apples, cole
wortes, bread and wine, told the next day certain noble men his companions,
that they which supped with Plato digest not his viandes in a long time,
meaning that wise banquet void of excess, not to content the body with
Epicurisine, but to ^ecke the mind with philosophical precepts, such were the
^easts of Socrates, Zenocrates, and other: the sages which compared the
pleasures conceived in delicates, to the savor of parfumes, which for all
their sweet smell pass away like smoke. The Egyptians used in the midst
of their banquets to bring in the ^natomie of a dead man, that the horror of
the corpse might mitigate immoderate delights. In deed sir, quoth Bernardino,
I remember that Alexander before he fell into the Persian delicacy, refused
those cooks and p^erers that Ada queen of Caria sent unto him, saying to the
messenger, for my dinner I use early rising, for my supper a slender dinner,
for he did use to eat but once a (...): so that Plato seeing Dionysius making
two meals, reported in Athens he saw nothing in Sycillia but a monster, that
did feed twice before the sun set. Cyrus monarch of the Per^ans in his
childhoode, being demanded of his grandfather Astiages, why he would drink no
wine, aunfwered for fear they give me poison: for (quoth he) at the
cel^bration of your nativity, I noted that some have made mixture of the wine
with some enchanted p^tion, since at the end of the feast there was not one
^parted in his right mind. So did (quoth Perato) Epam^ondas the greatest
captain and philosopher in his time, for be^ invited by a friend of (...),
the tables over charge^ with super^uitie and (...) of fare, he told his host in
great choler that he thought he had been requested, as a friend to dine
competently, not to suffer injury by being entertained like a glutton. Caius
Fabritius a notable Roman knight, was found by the Samnit ambassadors that
came unto him eating of reddish roasted in the ashes, and that in a ^erie poor
house, and by the wai^ to induce a strange miracle that Saint I^rome reports
of one Paul an heremit, who lived from sixteen to sixty of Dates only, and
from sixty to ^ixe score and ^ue (at what time he died) he was sed by a little
bread brought to him by a crow. Truth (quoth Farneze) infini: are the examples
which might pers^ade us to temper^ce, but so ^nde are we now a days as we
leave the study of philosophy to learn out kitching commentaries, but if we
persevere still in this dissolute kind of super^uity, being Christians in name
and Epicures in life, we are to fear that in the ends need and necessity
will force us to forsake it, and as it happened unto king Darius, who when he
had lived a long time in delights, drowning him self in the (...) of the
Persians, not once looking so low as hunger and thirst, as he fled from
Alexander, and waxed very thirsty, drinking puddle water taken from a river
tainted with dead carcasses, he burst ^oorth into this speech, that in all
his life he never drancke sweeter: so will it befall to us by our inordinate
excess, and seeing we may best see this virtue of ^rugalitie by discovering
his contrary, we will spend this forenoone in dscoursing the folly of
superfluity or gluttony, which Bernardino I appoint unto your charge, as one
which we all know to have been an enemy to such disordered bankets.
Bernardino not greatly discontent with this command, began after the
gentlemen were seated in the arbor, to frame his speech in this manner. Plato
the prince of the Academickes, who for his sacred sentences with his master
Socrates, amongst all the Philosophers, challenged the name of divine, had
always this saying in his mouth, that whatsoever exceeds this word
necessary is superfluity, which genus, he divided into two especial parts
of apparel and fare: for the last whereof I am appointed to entreat, thus to
the purpose. Those Gentlemen which build upon the doctrine of the Epicures, and
place their chief felicity or summum bonum in the delicacie of fare, consider
not that gluttony is like to the Lymons in Arabia, which being passing sweet
to the mouth, are inf^ctious in the stomach, like to the flower of Amyta which
glorious to the eye greatly molesteth the smell, the sweet content or rather
the bitter pleasures that proceed from these follies, feeding our lust with a
tickling humor of ^elight, for every dram of pretended bliss presents us a
pound of assured enormitie, for we are so blinded with the vale of this vain
sollie, that forgetting our selves we run headlong with Vlysles into Cyrces
lap, and so by tasting her inchaunted potion, suffer our self to be like
beasts transformed into sundry shapes, sor that was the meaning Homer aimed at
by the Metamorphosis, saying: some were changed into Lyo^s as by drunkenness
mad^ furious, some into Apes, whom wine had made pleasant, seem into s^ine,
whose brutishe manner bewrayed their imperfection by sleeping in their pottes,
comparing the alt^ration of men by overmuch drink to no other but a bestiall
change of their natures, besides this discoucrie Galen, Hypocrates and other
learned Physicians approve it the source from whence all diseases and evil
dispositions of the body do flow, for says Plutarch we are sick of those
things whereof we do live, and by our natural disposition are wholly given to
health, if the disorder of our diet did not infringe the perfect temperature of
our complexions. Homer going about to prove the immortality of the Gods,
and that they dye not, groundeth his argument upon this, because they eat
not, as if he would argue, that as eating and drinking maintains life, so
they are the efficient causes of death, and that more dye of glutto^e than of
hunger, having often more care to digest meat than care to get it. Seneca said
that the Physicians in his time cried out that life was short and art long,
that complaint was made of nature, that she had granted unto beasts to live
five. or six ages, and to limite man's days but the length of a spann^, which
notwithstanding, being so short and momentarie, was often consumd in excess,
drawing on death by our own desires, and offering up our gorged stomaches unto
Atropos as sacrifice to entreat that the date of our years be untimely
prevented, so that (as the wise man says) more perish by surfeit than by the
sword, unto whom (says Solomon) falls woe, affliction, sorrow, strife,
tears, redness of the eyes, and diseases? Even to them that sit long at the
wine, which at the first pleases both the eye and the t^st, but at last
stingeth as deadly as a scorpion.

Heraclytus was of this opinion that the insatiate appetite of gluttony does
obscure the interior virtues of the mind, oppressing the divine part of man
with a confused chaos of sundry delicates, that as the sun eclipsed with
dark and undigested vapors, has not the perfection of his brightness, so
the body ouercharged with (...) of meats, has the senses so sotted, as they
are not able to pierce by contemplation into the Metaphysicall secreates of
any hono^rable science. Innumerable also be dissolut^ fashions and wicked
enormities that spring from gluttony and drunkenness, for where this folly is
predominant, there is the mind subject unto lust, anger, sloth, adultery,
love, and all other vices that are subjects of the sensual part: for as the
ol^e Poet says,

Sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus.

And by the way I rem^mber certain verses written by our countriman Dante to
this effect.

Il vitio chi conduce:

Englished thus:

A monster seated in the midst of men,
Which daily fed is never satiat,
A hollow gulf of vild ingratitude,
Which for his food vouchsafes not pay of thanks,
But still does claim a debt of due expenee,
From hence does Venus draw the shape of lust,
From hence Mars raises blood and stratagemes,
The wrack of wealth the secret foe to life,
The sword that hastneth on the date of death,
The su^est friend to physic by disease,
The pumice that defaceth memory,
The misty vapor that obscures the light,
And brightest beams of science glittring sun,
And does eclipse the mind with sluggish thoughts,
The monster that afoordes this cursed brood,
And makes commixture of these dyer mishaps,
Is but a stomach ouerchargd with meats,
That takes delight in endless gluttony.
Well did Dante note in these verses the sundry mischie^es that proceed from
this folly, seeing what exp^ces to the purse, what diseases to the person, what
ruin to common wealth, what subversion of estates, what misery to princes
^aue insued by this insatiate sin of gluttony: We read of the Emperor
Vitellius Spynter that he was so much given to superfluity and excess, that at
one supper (...) was served with two thousand several kind of (...), and with
seven thousand flying fowls, but the heavens storming at such an insatiable
monster, that so highly abused the benefits of God, conspired his overthrow,
for (...) did not only dispossess him of the imperial Diadem, but caused him
to be publikly executed in Rome. Dionysius the younger from gluttony fell to
tyranny until he was exiled for his wickedness out of Sirilia. Mulcasses
king of Thunis was so drowned in pleasure and delight of superfluous
banketting, that in the midst of his miseries when the Emperor Charles had
forsaken him, and left him of a king almost the (...) of the world, yet as
Paulus Iouius rehearses, he spent a hundredth crowns upon the dressing of a
peacocke, whereat his musicians playing, he covered his eyes to reap the
greater content: but the judgment of God speedely followed this vain
delicacie, for within two days after his own sons put out his eyes with
bars of hot iron. Infinite also were the examples might be brought of
dronckennesse, and of his discommoditie: of Alexander how he prepared crowns
for them that exceeded in that filthy vice, and made a great cup which he
called Alexander, after his own name, wherein he did (...) to his nobles, but
Calistenes his dear friend refusing, and saying: for drinking in Alexander I
will not stand in need of Esculapius, he fell into such fury, that he
commanded him to be put in an iron cage with dogs, which Calistenes not
brooking poisoned him self. At an other dronken feast he ^iue his faithful
friend Clytus, a worthy captain and a counselor, to whom he had so many
times been beholding for his life: but afterward when he came to him self,
he was so grie^ed for this fact, that he sought to shorten his days with his
own sword, and spent many days in continual tears for his friend, whereby
we evidently see how the best that insueth of this folly is shame and
repentance. This meant Heraclytus to teach his country men, when after a
mutinous sedition was appeased, and the comm^ns demanded of him, what (...)
were best to prevent the like misfortune, presentlye (...) him up to a place
where the magistrate used to deliver Or^tions to the people, and there in
^teade of pronouncing some eloquent and learned discourse, only began to
feed on a morsel of brown bread, and to drink a glass of cle^re water,
thus setting down a golden precept by silence, for by this he signified unto
them that as long as daintiness and riot and needelesse expenses flourished in
the city, so long should they stand in danger of civil sedition, but this
vain excess abolished a pea^able and perpetual quiet was like to ensue: if
this counsel of Heraclitus were (...) in a monarchy, what n^de have we of
such necessary principles, in whose common wealth nothing is glorious, but
super^uitie of food and appa^ll. Let me borrow a word with you (quoth Peratio)
in this, for in deed if men thoroughly consider the vain delight diverse of
our Florentines took in trimming and decking out the body, which Epaminondas
called the prison of the soul, we shall be at length forced to con^ with
Erasmus, that they rather serve to whet the eyes of the beholders to wicked
desires, than unto any honest opinion or conceit.

Epictetus gave this only precept unto his countrymen at his death: Friends
(quoth he) deck not your body with curious superfluity of apparel, but
paint them with temperaunce, for the one is but a shadow that bleareth the
eyes, the other an ornament that inricheth the mind, which counsel the
ancient Monarkes and Chiefetaines of the world foretaught us: for Augustus
famous through the whole world for his fortunes, and honored for his
maicstie, never ware other garments than such as his wife and daughters made,
and those very moderate. Agesilaus king of Lacedemonia had but one coat for
winter and summer. Epaminondas general captain of the Thebans, was contented
with one only gown all the year long: this simplicity and moderate use of
apparel in such worthy personages, might well serve us for presidentes, but
that vanity has so long lulled our sense^ a sleep with pleasure, as the
custom of the fault has taken away the feeling of the fact. Well ^r (quoth
Bernardino) this belongs to your discourse of pride, and therefore again to
our purposs which seeing I have confirmed with sufficient reasons and cramples
to be an inordinate vice and more folly I will now also ratify it with a
very brief and short histori^.

Bernardinos Tale.
IN the city of Auspurg in Germany there ruled not long since a duke whose
name for reverence I conceal, and therefore will term him Don Antonio, a man
of very honorable parentage, but so given to the filthy vice of dr^kennesse as
he almost suvuerted the state of the city, with his gluttonics. For oftimes he
fell into tyranous and barbarous cruelties, as one that had martial law in ^is
power, and other whiles gave wrong sentence against the innocent, as his humor
fit^, which excess had led him. But above all the rest a poor man having a
matter to plead before him, which he was acertained by law should go on his
side, Don Antonio coming drunk to the place of judgment, sleeping in his
sur^s, never considered the equity of the cause, but gave s^ntence against the
poor man, and condemned him in so great a sum, as scarss all his moueables
were able to discharge, well the verdict given he had no other remedy but to
abide the censure of the just judge, and to make sale of all that he had to
answer his condemnation: which done so little remained that he had nothing
left to maintain his wife and children, whereupon poverty being the hea^iest
burden a man can bear, presented unto him a glass of many miseries, which
were apparent to ensue by distressed want, wherein after the poor wretch had a
lon^ while gazed, he fell to despair, that flinging into his back side, he
took the balter out of his stable, and running into the field went to hang
himself in a thicket hard adjoining to his house, where yet a little entering
into consideration with himself, he began thus to debate.

Unfortunate Rustico, for so we will term him, how art thou oppressed with
sundry passions, distres haling thee ou to despair, and the care of thy soul
willing thee rather to choose poverty than hell. Well did ^ymon of Athens see
the misery of man's life, when he bought a piece of ground, wherein he placed
gibbets, and spent his time in such desperate Philosophy, as to persuade his
friends to hang themselves, so to avoid the imminent perilles of innumerable
misfortunes, so Rustico seem thou an Athenian, be one of Tymons friends,
listen to his doctrine, follow his counsel, prevent misery with death. But
alas this is not sufficient, for in freeing thy self from calamity, thou
leauest thy wife and children in a thousano sorrows, and further thou cuttest
off all hope of reuenges. Revenge, yea revenge Rustico, for assure thy self,
if thou live not, yet God will revenge, have two sins escaped unpunished,
has not the accursed duke to his drunken m^sse added injustice, yes and
therefore deserves to be revenged with thin^ own hand, let examples arm
thee to the like attempt. Philip king of M^cedonia was flaine by a mean
Gentleman Pausanias, because he would not let him have justice against
Antipater, who had offered him wrong. Demetrius having received many requests of
his poor subjects, as he passed over a bridge threw all their supplications
into the water, for which cause he became so odious to his subjects, that they
suffered Pyrrhus his enemy to drive him out of his kingdom without battle.
Ferdinando the fourth putting to death a knight more for anger than any just
cause, the Gentleman at the sentence, cried out: Injurious Emperor, I cite thee
to appear before the tribunal seat of God, to answer this wrong within
thirty days, on the last of which expired term the Emperor died. Then
comfort thy self Rustico, let not despair arm thee to such an heathenish
resolution, rather live to revenge than die to double thy misery, and seeing
the duke has dealt thus hardly, use him as Alexander Seuerus handled his
secretary, who being a caterpiller in the Court, and selling the very
favorable looks of his master for coin, promising poor men to prosecute
their suits, when he never moved their cause: at last in requital of this
treacherous dealing was tied to a post and choak^d with smoke, having a
proclamation made before him by sound of trump^t, that they which sell smoke
should so perish with smoke, the poor man from these plaintes fell into
tears, that overcome with the passions he fell a sleep, where in a dream
was by God reueaied unto him the means of revenge, as soon as he awoake and
called unto mind the vision, thinking it to be no fantastic illusion of the
brain, but a strickt command from the heavenly powers, presently went home
and waxed contrary unto his woonted custom very merrye, frequenting daily the
Dukes Palace, where giving him self unto drinking he became in time to be in
some savor with the Duke, who never remembered that he sat in judgment
against the poor man. On a time seeing that opportunity ^auoured him, he
requested the Duke that as he went on hunting, he would take the pains to
visit his poor house, where he should find no dainty fare, but only that he
durst promise a cup of good wine. This word was enough to persuade the Duke to
a greater matter, so that be granted to come. The poor man glad that his
purpose was like to take effect, went home and made a sale of all that he had
even to his veri^ shirt, to the great sorrow of his wife, and wonder of his
neighbors which knew not his pretense. As soon as he had prettily furnished
himself with money, he bought great store of excellent and delicate viandes of
strong and pleasant wine, and conua^ed them home to his house, whether within
two days after the Duke foresent his cook, certifieng the poor man that he
would dine with him, who providing most sumptuous fare, set all his wealth upon
the table at one dinner, and entertained the Duke with such a hearty welcome,
that he not only wondered where Rustico got such store of victuals, but gave
great thanks for his good cheer. Rustico served in wine in such abundaunce,
that don Antonio fell to his old vice of dronkennes and in such sort, as he
never took so much in his life. The poor man seeing him take his drink so
freely, went to one of his Trumpetters, and told him that the Duke commanded
he should by sound of Trumpet presently summon all the Citizens to appear
at his house, either without delaie or excuse. Which command, he forthwith
executed: and the Burgomaisters and chiefs men of the City meruailing what
this should mean, yet hasting to the house of Rustico, they found a sca^folde
erected at the door, where after they had stayed a while, Rustico came forth,
and began to speak in this manner.

Worthy Citizens and Burgomasters of (...), I know you marvel what the
cause of your coming is, especially seeing me that am poor and unlettered
prepare to offer an Oration to such politic governors, but it is the ^are of
my Countri^, and especially of this City, which is like to rui^ate through the
want of the possession of a perfect magistrate, that drines me to this resolute
and desperate attempt: The duty of a magistrate, as I have heard, a certain
Philosopher should set down, consists in three especial points, in ruling,
teaching and judging, that he be wise to govern, virtuous to give insample,
and impartial to judge: for as Cicero says, sooner shall the course of nature
fail, than the subjects will leau^ to follow the steps of their Prince. If
then that common wealth be happy that is governed by such a king, in what
distress is that City that wants such a magistrate, and has one that
neither rul^th, teaches, or does justice, but censures all things by the
pallet. Philip of Macedonia being desired by an old woman to hear her
complaint, answered, he had no leisure. Then, quoth she, be not ^ing, meaning
that a Prince ought to have more care over the affairs of the common wealth,
then over his own private business: Then worthy Citizens, what may that City
say, whose governor is addicted to his own pleasure, that delights not in
justice, but in superflui^y, that honors not the seat of judgment with
Philosophy, but polluteth the place with dronkenesse, that studieth not in the
law, but his library is in the kitchen, that seeks not to learn wisdom,
but to gorge his stomach with delicates, such a one, worthy Citisens have we,
for our Duke, our governor, our m^gistrate, and as he uttered that word, his
poor wife and children dragge^ the Duke upon the scaffolde, who was all
besmeared in his own vomit, and resembling rather a brute bea^t then a man,
bred loathsomnes to all the people: which ^e poor man taking ^or his
advantage, cried out: See Burgomasters and Citisens of Auspourg, your duke,
your magistrate, your governor, who is come upon the (...) to hear^ the
compla^ of the widow and (...), and to minister iud^ment. This is the the man
that condemn^d me in the half of my goods, by (...), and the other h^lfe I
have sold to present you this spectacle: the o^e half he gave away being
(...), and the other this day he^ has c^nsumed in gluttony. Now citi^ns,
shame you not at such a sight, what shall G^rmanie, France, Italy, and all the
bordering Cities report of our town? What stranger will desire to traffic
where there is such a glutton? What City can joy where there is such a
governor? If you suffer this, the common wealth is like to ruinate, and you
and your children like to bear the burden of a superfluous tyrant: See what
Rustico has done for his Country now use him as you please. The Bu^gomaisters
by a general assent, gave commandment that he should be vucouered upon the
scaffold til he came to himself, and in the mean time they assembled
th^mselues and determined his exile. The duke alter he had taken two or three
hours sleep, sinding himsel^e upon an open scaffolde, was ashamed. But
hearing what had happened to him by the means of Rustico, and how the
Burgomaisters had resolved on his banishment, as one feeling the horror of the
fact, desperately went into the poor man's back side and ^anged himself. Which
ne^es being brought to the Burgomaisters, with a general voice they created
Rustico governor of the City.

This short and sweet tale of Bernardino greatly pleased the County and the
rest of the company, all praising the policy of the poor man, that had made
so speedy and sharp a revenge. Well, quoth the old Count^sse, we have so
long discoursed of gluttony, that our simple cheer having so good a sauce as
hunger, will prove very good delicates, therefore Gentlemen, seeing we must
either make our Co^ke cholerike, or else leave our present parle, let us at
this time not disturb his patience, but hie us in to dinner, and repast being
taken, willingly we will continue our discourse. Then ^eignior Farneze and the
rest having their stomachs armed to such a combat, willingly ob^ied, and so
for this time we will leave them.

FINIS.

