A COPY OF THE ARTICLES AND CONDITIONS OF his Excellency, granted to the
Governor, Captains, Officers and Soldiers of the Garrison of the town of
Grave.

Also a copy of a Letter dated the 28. of September 1602. in the Hage, sent
from a man of Worship to his friends here in England.

AT LONDON Printed for Matthew Law, 1602.

A Letter written from the Haghe the 11. day of September 1602. Stilo Anglio.
I Came yesterday from Minegem, two leagues from the town of Grave. On
Wednesday we heard they of the Grave sent out to parley, when the Mines were
ready to be blown under their walls, and that night the next morning fell to
agreement, to retire toward Die and Mastricht with 140. wagons for their
hurt men, with bag and baggage. Some think they are much spent. This day
they are to depart: but three hundred of our men were put in the possession of
the Castle, and ostages given. From our side the Ringraue is one. That day we
thought it a happy parley, for the River Mosa did grow, that our works began
to come under water, and there was feared some extraornarie flood of upper
water for raines. But since it is fallen.

The town was very strong, but brought to extremity, and well defended, of
the which I will write more with the next.

The Estates were in the Camp and viewed all the trenches, and have resolved to
continue the Germans yet for two months in wages. And it is thought some more
service is in hand, either upon Venlo, or to seek to fight with the Admirant,
being weak as it is thought, or some other service. The Mutinados be strong,
and grow daily about Hoochstrate, and ransom all. It is thought these
soldiers of Grave will do the like if they be not paid.

THE CONDITIONS, which his Excellency agreed with the Governor, Captains,
Officers and Soldiers of the Garrison of the town of Grave.
INPRIMIS, that the said Governor, Captains, Officers and Soldiers, as well
horse as foot, shall depart the said Town, with their Horses, Arms,
furniture and baggage, their Colors displaied, Drum sounding, Match alight,
and their bullets in their bags.

2 To the end they may the better carry their baggage, their sick and hurt,
his Excellency shall cause them to have 150. wagons, from hence to the town
of Dieste.

3 That they shall leave here two Captains in hostage, for the assurance of
the said Chariots, horses and driuers, till their return.

4 That his Excellency shall give them Pasport to pass to the town of Dieste.

5 That the soldiers, which have served the said State, shall enjoy the same
conditions that are enjoyed by the soldiers of the said Garrison.

6 That all prisoners, of what quality or condition soever, as well of the one
side as of the other, shall be at liberty, paying their charges.

7 That all the officers of the King, as well private as public, of the wars or
the State, shall depart freely with their baggage, as the Garrison: and those
that cannot follow the troops, are permitted to stay yet certain days
within the town, and at their departure they shall have Barques to carry them
to Mastrich; provided that they gave assurance and pledges for the said Barques.

8 That the officers of the victuals, or munition for war and artillery,
shall be bound to deliver the said victuals, munition and artillery, into the
hands of the Commissioners, that shall be sent on this side to receive them,
without diminishing or wasting any part thereof, upon pain of forfaiting these
conditions.

9 That the Governor, Captains and officers do promise so to deal with
their friends, that whatsoever the Magistrate and Burgiosses of the town have
lent them, shall be repayed with all convenient speed.

10 That the said Gouenour, Captains and Soldiers, shall depart to morrow:
and if perhaps they do not depart to morrow, the said Governor shall suffer
to enter into the Castle and the Bulwark behind the Castle to the number of
100. men, which his Excellency shall send to that purpose.

Written at the Camp before Grave, the 19. of September. 1602. Written be me
Paulus Demetrius.

ANOTHER LETTER written out of the Hage the 28. of September. 1602.
WOrshipful Sir, sithence the surrendering of the Town of Grave, we hear his
Excellency Prince Maurice is instaulled at Grave as Earl of the Country of
Cuyck. The Dutch horsemen are licensed to depart, and are paid for eight days
more then they have served. What we shall hear moreover the time will learn.
The Camp is not as yet broke up, but the horsemen are gone by the mutined
soldiers toward Breda and Hoochstrate. It is said they are agreed not to hurt
or endomage the united Countries, and provide and supply their want and
necessity for their money at Breda and there abouts. And in case they should be
as^aulted by the Archduke, they may betake themselves under Seuenberghen and
proffer service, if men would trust them. It is reported they 1300. horse, and
seven or eight hundred foot, all old soldiers, of al nations, none other they
will accept in their company, then those which are eight months pay behind
hand. With the remaining new-come Italians and Spaniards, and with a company
of Boores of Walls Brabant does the Archduke purpose to assault them: but does
not trust his person but by soldiers which are paid. What hereof shall ensue
the time will learn. The States general are all yet in the Camp with his
Excellency, which makes that we do not yet know what resolution will be
taken.

FINIS.

