CICERONIS AMOR. Tullies Love. Wherein is discoursed the prime of Ciceroes
youth, setting out in lively portratures how young Gentlemen that aim at
honor should level the end of their affections, holding the love of country
and friends in more esteem then those fading blossoms of beauty, that only
feed the curious survey of the eye. A work full of pleasure as following
Ciceroes vain, who was as conceipted in his youth as grave in his age,
profitable as containing precepts worthy so famous an Orator.

Robert Green in Artibus magister.

Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit vtile dulci. AT LONDON, Printed by Robert
Robinson, for Thomas Newman and John Winington. 1589.

To the right honorable Ferdinando Stanley, Lord Strange, enobled with all
titles that Honor may afforde or virtue challenge, Robert Green wishes
increase of virtuous and Lordly resolutions.
THe Tripos (Right Horable) engraven with ^etur Sapienti, was by the Oracle
allotted to Socrates, Achilles shield maintained with the sword, fell to
Ulysses for his wisdom: Pallas had her library, and her lance: and such as
read Non vltra, on Hercules pillars, pointed out the Caracters with their
spears. Proportion the mother of Geometry, and mistress of Arts, commands
that Hector have his Honors, Alcides his glories, and that Olympus be never
without bright glittering armor, nor green wreathed garlands: as well to
grace the soldier, as to glory the Poet. This considered (Right Honorable)
having done my endeavor to pen down the loves of Cicero, which Plutarch, and
Cornelius Nepos, forgot in their writings: I presumed to present unto your
Honor not high written poemes, as Maro did to Augustus, but the fruits of well
intended thoughts as Calymachus scholar did to Alexander: Thinking nothing
rare, nor view-worthy, sufficiently patronaged, unless shrouded under the
protection of so honorable a Moecenas. Whatsoever was pleaded in Rostro was not
pend by Hortensius, and yet the Senators heard and gave plausible censures.
Homer spent verses as well on Irus the beggar, as Eurymachus the wooer. Every
sentence cannot Cleanthis lucernam Olere, and yet men will read poemes and
praise them. Then (Right Honorable) if my work treating of Cicero, seem not
fit for Cicero, as eclipsing the beauteous show of his eloquence, with a harsh
and vnpolis^^d style: yet I crave that your Honor will vouch of it only, for
that it is written of Cicero. Ennius labored as hard in his rough poesies, as
Virgill in high poemes: Phidias pensill in his own conceit was as sharp
pointed, as Pigmal^ons chasing tools: mean wits in their follies, have equal
pains with learned Clerks in their fancies. Apollo yielded Oracles as well to
poor men for their prayers, as to Princes for their presents: Stars have their
lights and hayres their shado^es* Mean scholars have hie thoughts; though
low fortunes. Thus persuaded and imboldened (Right Honorable I present this
pamphlet of Ciceroes loves to your Lordship, resolved upon your courteous
acceptance that weighing the mind not the matter, your Honor will say, if not
Bucephalus, yet a horse. And in this hope resting, I wish to your Lordship as
much health and happiness as your Honor can desire or I imagine.

Your Lordships humbly devoted. ROBERT GREEN.

To the gentle Readers health.
GEntlemen I have written of Tullies love, a work attempted to win your
favors, but to discover mine own ignorance, in that coveting to counterfeit
Tullies phrase, I have lost my self in improper words: but hoping as ever I
have done of your courtesies, I have like bold bayard put my head out of the
stable. If my method be worse then it was wont to be, think that skill in
music marde all, For the cliffe was so dissonaunt from my note, that we
could not clap a concord together by five mark. Chiron the Sagitarie was but a
fained conceit, and men that bear great shapes, and large shadows, and have
no good nor honest minds, are like the portraiture of Hercules drawn upon the
sands. If I speak mistically, think it is musically, and so desiring that you
will take Tullies loves, as pende for your pleasure, I bid you farewell.

Robert Green.

Ad Lectorem Hexasticon.
In lucem prodit tenebris exuta malignis
Romulei petula^s, vaesanaque flammula Phoebi:
Rora^tem Authori (Lectores) spargite flore^,
Intyba, Narcissos, Latacen, pictique roseti
Dulces diuitias: Illum concingite lauru:
Emerito solers industria reddat honorem.
Thomas Watson. Oxon.

Ad Lectorem de Ciceronis amore, Hexasticon.
Miraris fortasse legens Ciceronis amorem?
Desine mirari, qui been scribit, amat.
Crimen inesse putas? semel insaniuimus omnes,
Quae faciunt iuuenes, condoluere senes.
Linguam qui laudat Ciceronis, laudet amorem,
Greni solus honor, sit Ciceronis amor.
G. B. Cantabrigiensis.

VArro and Tucca wrote of Maroes verse,
And Dares dared to tell of Homers skill,
Of Ouids works Latins have made rehearse,
And Poets have discourst of Pindars quill,
Many have writ Cosmographie of lands,
And told of Gihon and of Tagus sands.
Of Helens beauty and of Ledas hew,
The winged fancies of the learnd have told,
But of the prowdest Poets old or new,
Who dard sweet Tullies fancies once unfold,
As far to hie for all that yet has been:
Then give the palm and glory unto Green.
Thomas Burneby, Esquire.

Now bloomes the blossoms of fair Adons flower,
Cupid is stolen from Paphos secret shrine,
Diana lurkes, she and her nymphs do lower,
Bacchus that tempers sacred Love with wine,
Ceres and all the gods have made agree,
That Love is god and there is none but he.
The Poemes wanton Ovid set in verse
His art of love that banished him from Room,
Did never such quaint Amorets rehearse,
As are deciphred under Tullies doom,
Whose Romain phrase fetched from Parnassus hill,
Says none but Tully in the depth of skill.
Edward Rainsford, Esquire.

Tullies Love.
THere dwelled in the City of Rome being metropolitan of the world, famous
as well for martial Champions, as delicate for beautiful Ladies; a Consul
called Flaminius, made glorious by fortune, as having twice road in the
triumphing chariot and worn the Laurel wreath, given as a Palm to such as
have been happy for many great victories. This consul famous in the common
wealth for his martial exploytes, Fortune whose conceit rests in extreemes,
either too prodigal in her favors, or prejudicial in her frowns, to make this
man the miracle of her deity, lent him one only Daughter of such excellent
exquisite perfection as Nature in her seemed to wonder at her own works. Her
hair was like the shine of Apollo, when shaking his glorious tresses he makes
the world beauteous with his brightness. The Iuorie of her face over dashed with
a vermilion die, seemed like the blush that lept from Endemions cheeks when
Cynthia courts him on the hills of Latmos. So did the proportion of her body
answer to the perfection of the mind and the honor of her thoughts so
fitted to the glory of her favors, as it rested doubtful whether her outward
beauties or inward virtues held the supremacy. In so much that as men flock
to Delphos to hear the Oracles of Apollo, so diverse resort to Rome to take
veiw of the excellency of Terentia: who once delighted with the sight of her
graces set down this as an Axiom, that Pallas the Patroness of Troy for
wisdom: or Venus the wonder of Heaven for beauty, might not disgrace the
dignities of this gorgious Damsel. Rome swelling with the pride of this
matchless Uirgin, whose thoughts were more humble then her face beautiful:
and yet the Painters of that time feared to attempt her portraiture, as finding
the perfection of nature to exceed the proportion of Art, made her the
Mistress of their vestals, as one that counted fancy as vn^it for a maid, as
Alexauder cowardice for a soldier. Cupid sitting on his mothers knee by the
fount of Alcydalion, seeing how Terentia enemy to his amarous Philosophy,
set love at so light esteem, and for a charm against his magical
inchauntments, carried the euerburning fire of Vesta in her breast, clasping
his mother wantonly about y^ neck he began thus to prattle. Seeing mother we
have left the places of our accustomed reside^ce, to avoid y^ troops of such
suitors as only end their loves with their lives, and have st^ln to this secret
fou^t here a while to be solitary to wear away the time with some conceited
chat, I pray you tell me whereof are women's hearts made? I ask the question
mother for that I find the distinction of their fa^cies like the difference of
their faces, which as they be distinguished in proportion, so they be altogether
unlike in properties. Venus hearing her son make such a waggish demand,
began thus to reply. Some say my boy of the liver of a Camelion, whose nature
is to be changeable in hues, and women as variable in their thoughts. Others
of a Pyrit stone, which handled softly is as cold as ice, but pressed between
the fingers burns like fire: they which inser this comparison, say that women
brook not favorable persuasions, nor may be woone by entreaties, but the
ready way to kindle them to Desire is to cross them with Disdain. Some say
their hearts are of Marble which being hard yet drops tears against every
storm: Some of wax that is soft, admiting every impression, those women have
their loves in their looks, which taken in with a gase is thrust out with a
wink: Some of Adamant, they be hard hearted, and yet men say the Lapidaries
have tools to pierce them: Others of gold, and they be like Danae that will
admit no lover but such as Jupiter. To be brief my boy, so many fancies so
many fictions, every one censuring of women's hearts as his own experience has
found her froward or favorable. Cupid hearing his mother discourse thus
cunningly demanded amongst all these, whereof was Terentias heart of Rome
formed: At this Venus fetching a deep sigh prosecuted her former premises
thus. Well wag for all you play the wanton, have thou insight so far into thine
enemies thoughts that thou have coted in thy tables the resolution of Terentia,
whom men count more beautiful then my self, and more chaste then Diana? Her
heart my boy is framed of the purest Diamond, which as it is hard to enterteine
love, so it is clean, fit for the receipt of virtue: I tell thee Cupid Terentia
makes Desire her drudge, and Disdain her Champion: She honors all the Gods
but thee, and admits all recreations but love: She armeth her youth with
Contempt of passions, that she may finish her age with Content of patience:
The prime of her years are grave that the fruits of her time may be gracious,
and she strives to be as full of honor in her life, as full of favors in her
looks. To conclude my boy she is Terentia, who seeks with labors to avoid
loves, and endeavors to be called as virtuous, as other Ladies amarous. Thus
Venus ended with a frown and Cupid began with a smyle, she scorning at her
honors he studying on revenge. after a little pause y^ choloricke boy burst
forth into these terms: And shall Terentia offer perfumes to Vesta and
Hemblocke to Venus, shall she mother straw Dianaes Lawnes with Roses and your
Palaces with Nettles? shall she set Desire in rags and Disdain in silks?
No, Cupid has his boults fethered with the wings of swallows that fly
swift, and his arrows headed with strong tempered steel that pierce deep,
like to Achilles lance, that did wound and heal, my shaftes mother are of
sundry mettels, the strongest of them all will I aim at Terentia, and if my
fortune fail me not I will change her songs to sighs and her chaste prayers
to amorous passions. And with that leaping from his mothers lap he bent his
bow shot an arrowe and hit Terentia on the heart, but it was of such proof
as the boult rebounded and brake into a thousand shiuers. At this Cupid scorned
seeing his de^tie counterchect with such constant chastity, and Venus smyled
seeing her son in such a rage: which so increased his chollor that he
discharged all his arrows at randon, careless of his aim so he might any
ways revenge. Amongst the rest young Lentulus a Roman Caualier, under whose
conduct the consul sent many legions to make war against the Parthians, was
one of those unfortunate men that Cupid had bruised with his arrows. For having
(...) a set battle and bought the victory with great l^sse, fresh supplies
were sent him from Rome. Lentulus ^^lcoming his new come soldiers, demanded
what: (...): after they had made report of the state of the com^^^ wealth, they
(then as a thing miraculous and superna^urall^ ^is^oursed to him the
excellency of Terentia, setting out her glories with such Emphaticall
discriptions t^^t Lentulus leaning his head on his hand became a willi^^
audit^r to such pleasa^^t philosophy. Smiling thus in the ouersweete potions
that Love had tempered like Circes to bewitch the wary and warrelike Ulysses;
he caused his Soldiers with often repetitions of (...) beau^ie to grafte in
the syenus of his new (...) sanci^s. In the day his head was troubled with
thoughts of Terentia: in the night conceit presented the visio^s of Terentia.
Where before he laid plots how to circumuent the Parthians, now he devised how
to compass his passions: Love wished him to make light esteem of war, but
growing to be careless, he gave his enemies occasion of incourageme^t. Being
thus perplexed with unacquainted fits, he began thus soldier like to debate
with himself. Have not the ancient Romans whose statues and trophies has
filled the world with wonder of their Chiualry made the end of their honors
to consist in arms? have they not fetched Fame from the heavens with their
swords, and bound her to their fortunes with circumscriptions of blood: have
not their lances pierst oblivion to the heart, and their martial deeds
registered their names in the Cronicles of memory? and yet Lentulus do thou
make light esteem of war, whose very frowns are honor, and whose favors
immortal glories? Blush at thy thoughts that are so base, and weep with
Caesar that thou have not done wonders with Alexander. Thou art elected by the
Consuls as a choice man of Rome, as high prised for thy valor, as thy
parentage, and yet thy mother was of the great Aemilij: thou art sent against
the Parthians, a Nation warrelicke and resolute, either to challenge thy grave
with thy sword or carue out their tombs with thy Courtelax. Dare thou then
Lentulus amidst those glorious thoughts of a soldier admit the least passion
of a lover? shall thy policies too little for the Parthians, be employed in
purchasing Terentia? No Lentulus draw thy Fauchion, brandish it against Rome,
and if Love look but over the walls menace her with thy Martial weapons: and
yet Lentulus be not so stoicall as to reject such a mighty Deity. Have not
the Romans erected a Temple near unto Campus Martius? Are not Knights dubbed
to defend Ladies? Make they not their Helmes proud with their Mistress
favors? Mars has his amors as he has his armours: Alexander gloried in his
loves as he triumphed in his victories? Great Pompey has his Iulia, Caesar his
Paramour, Soldiers have loved, and so will I. Having thus discoursed with
himself, the hope of his loves drove such an invincible courage into his mind
that he past not many days without giving battle to the Parthians, in which
getting a glorious victory, he sent great treasure and many Captives home to
Rome, with great intercession to the Senate that he might not winter from his
own Country. The Consuls gald to favor him with any reasonable grant, sent
Lepidus to take his place, and recalled Lentulus home to the City: The fame of
whose high intended thoughts, his conquest enlarged with infinite treasures and
rich Captives, made Rome to ring with echoes of his matchless excellency:
Insomuch that passing through the streets to the Capitol, there to be invested
with the honors due to his victories, multitudes of Romans were placed on
Scaffoldes to take view of so brave and hardy a Captain, and the gorgeous
windows of the City were stuffed with troops of beautiful Ladies tickled
with an earnest desire to satisfy their sightes with his Personage. Passing
thus in pomp, Julius Caesar then being Dictator after the solemn rites and
magnificent triumphs were ended bad him home to dinner, where he feasted him
with such royalty as might beseem the greatness of the day and the highness of
his own thoughts. Thus flewe the fame of Lentulus through Rome as the wonder
of this time, but all those triumphant dignities could not extirpate the
melancholy of this Romans thoughts inserted into his mind by the fond
enchantments of love, but as the wounded Dear wringeth forth tears, and the
Myrtle pierced yields Gum, so Lentulus after this deep impression of love,
could afforde naught but sighs and sorrows. The Iemme of Terentias
excellency reflected in his mind like an object in a Crystal myrrour that
amiddest his most serious affairs he found the passions of love to be
intermedled. Fortune that had tied her favors in the top of his Crest half
persuaded to become constant to this warlicke Champion seeing Cupid wrong^ him
without cause thought with a souereign Antidote to prevent y^ further ensuing
preiudices of fancy: forcing therefore opportunity to dance attendance upon this
her darling, it fell out y^ Flaminius, the father of Terentia seeing how
Lentulus was generally feasted of al y^ senators in Rome, thought amongst ye
rest, to welcome home y^ warrior with a ba^ket, and therefore meeting him at one
Titus Annius Milos house, he solemnly invited him home to dinner. Lentulus as
full of courtesy as courage, after great thanks, promised to be his guest,
whereupon Flaminius passing home made provision, and Lentulus stealing to his
lodging being solitary, conceived such inward joy at this sweet opportunity,
that leaning upon his left hand smiling to himself, he breathed out these
words: viz. Such I see well as Mars honors with favors Venus will not cross
with frowns: those that conquer in wars shall not perish in loves. Cupid
favors his fathers followers, and such as Fortune smiles on in ba^tail, she
laughs on in fancies. I coueted to bear charge against the Parthians, and the
Senate elected me Lord of their Legions: Desire wished me to have a sight of
Terentia, and her father interteines me for a guest: I made conquest of mine
enemies with the sword, and why may I not win my love with my loyalty: Fear
not Lentulus, these concluded comparisons are prodigious, be Augur then to thy
self, and calculate thy good fortunes by thy thoughts: Loves and wars craves
courage. Fear not man, for thy entreaties are as mighty as her denials can be
contrary. As thus he was debating with himself the Clock told him it was
time to go visit his Host, so that he made himself as sumptuous as might be,
and at the parting from his Chamber-dore he said thus. If Venus (quoth he)
thou favor me in my loves, I will become thy vowed servant in my life: I will
strewe thy Altars with Roses, and set thee up shrines at Paphos: I will bind up
my temples with myrtle bows, and for the Martial garland wear a wreath of
flowers. I will have Doves nests in my Palaces, and what belongs to thee, shall
be some of my delight, only grace me with the favor of Terentia. Ending this
his vow he pased forward with his train toward the house of Flaminius,
where being arrived the grave Senator entertained him with such magnificence,
as Lentulus perceived his welcome by his honors. The board covered and the
company ready to sit, Lentulus was placed chief at the table, who all this
while having no sight of Terentia, sat as a man nipped on the head, although
there were at the table to grace the feast many brave and beautiful Damsels.
Sitting thus in a dumpe he was cheared up by all the company, but at last to
set him in his iolitie, Terentia was commanded by her father to bring him in a
cup of Greekish wine. She that little cared to be seen in open bankets as
holding it contrary to the rites of Vesta, durst not yet but with all
diligence signify her obedience. Therefore attyred in a rich roabe of white,
spotted with stars of gold; tempering the porphury of her face with a
vermilion blush, looking like Diana when she basht at Acteons presence, she
came into the hall, where humbly saluting all the company, she delivered the
wine to her father. Lentulus seeing Fame had but blemished her favors in being
to partial of her praises, sat so amassed at the beauteous excellency of
Terentia, as did the Centaure enamoured of Juno. His eye made survey of her
beauties who posting them over to the contemplation of his thoughts, so set on
fire his heart with her perfections, as his stomach shut up her Orifice, to
give his eyes leave to wonder at the serious conceit of natures cunning: his
looks began to sparkle love as did those of Adon when he pried upon the face
of his Paramour, the change of his color bewraied his new entertained
passions which noted by Terentia half angry at loves folly, she discovered her
collor with such ablush as Lentulus letting fall his knyfe on his trencher
said aloude, Non fortuna non Bellum meaning that neither the highest state of
fortune nor the fatal intent of war could conquer that heart y^ her beauty
has made subject. Terentia at this unexpected exclamation abashed and the rest
of the company marvelled: but Flaminius willing to move some table talk
demanded of Lentulus what he meant by this soudaine emblem. Lentulus, willing
to make flight at the foul and yet not to have a bell at his heel, answered
thus. Whilst I lay in legar intrenching the Parthians more hardly with legions
of men then with deep raised contermures, my soldiers discovered a castle
which once woone displaced the strength of the country, seeing the Romans had
made me Uicegerente of their forces although the place seemed impregnable
being as well defended by nature situate upon a mount, as by prowess stored
with men and munitio^ yet prising honor more dear then blood, and countries
profit beyond the content of life, I bent certain legions against the castle
and following the opinion of Quintus Fabius Maximus sought by delay to drive
them to composition. For it was said of him, Vnus homo nobis cunctando
restituit rem,
Non ponebat enim rumores ante salutem,
Ergo postque magisque viri nunc gloria claret.


Seeking so to get conquest by famine which would have been prejudicial with
the sword, at last seeing their forces greatly weakened I gave assault and
entered putting the soldiers to the sword yet willing to save the Lord of the
castle for that his valor discovered his thoughts, searching him out I found
him in his bed chamber his wife slain and the blade yet varnished with blood
grasped in his fist staring me in the face with a ghastly look, that stood
amazed at the stratageme he spoke thus. Romain report in the Senate house that
where you excel us in policy, we exceed you in resolution, this Lady which
thou see here weltring in her goore is my wife, and for she brokes not
second fancies, she craved to end her love with her life: I married her a
virgin and honorable, she dies a wife and honest, as famous in Parthia for
her virtues, as your Romayne Dames for their braue^ies. We lived without
iarres, for y^ the desire of the one was the content of the other, constancy
banished jealousy and true love held supition at the lances point. Our
fortunes Romayne thou have pulde down, with thy prowess war has made
wrack of our safeties, but for our loves this sword shall link them together
by death, so that Non fortuna, non bellum. And with y^ the resolute soldier
stabbed himself. Astonished at this peremptory massacre, although all stained
with the blood of the Parthians: yet I could not but grieve at the passion of
the man, and enter into consideration what that Love should be, that wrought in
men's minds such resolved effects: So well liking of his determined death, y^ I
vowed in my thoughts if ever I obtained the favor of some gracious Damsel to
write in blood with the Parthian, Non fortuna, non bellum. The remembrance
(honorable Senators) of this tragedy made me to show my self so passionate.
Lentulus having ended his discourse, the Senators generally praised the
resolution of the Parthian, and the Ladies the constancy of his wife, all
concluding that no impression could be so deeply inserted into the heart love.
Terentia spying the flame by the smoke, smyled to see how covertly Lentulus
had cloaked his thoughts, and how in vowing to be constant, he discovered his
conceit, so that turning her back she went into her Closet, and there blamed
Venus that had wrapped so br^ue a Champion in her subtleties: not feeling either
the personage or perfections of Lentulus to stir the stayed continency of
her mind. Well the Senators not willing to let this fall to the ground,
talked still of the Parthian, and amongst the rest of those honorable guests
that were there feasted, Archias the Poet a man of a pleasant disposition,
took the tale by the end, and began to prosecute it thus.

Grave Senators I remember I have heard Hortensus the great Orator say, that
in times past the Consuls for recreatio^ would use light and honest pastimes
especially mirth at meat, as ye fittest minister for digestio^, alleging
Scipio and Gracchus, who coueted to be as iocund at their banquets, as they
were serious in matters of estate. Seeing then (reverend fathers) Lentulus has
entered into the discourse of love, producing the Parthian, who amongst his
other singularities, boasted that his fancy had never been stained with
Jealousy a plague that is greatly now a days predominant in Rome, might it
please you to favor us with your gracious consent, we would entreat Lentulus
to discourse to us his opinion of jealousy. The Senators granted, and
Terentia, being come to give attendance on her father, smyled. Lentulus casting
his eye upon his love, seeing a dimple in her cheek which was to him Cos
amoris, made Archias this present answer.

Had the Thebans appointed Zetus to have discoursed of Music, or they of
Thessaly, Menalcas to have described the Court: The principles of the one had
been as void of art, as the precepts of the other far from honor: The one
being an enemy to Music, the other a swain and a shepherd. So (reverend
Senators and honorable Ladies of Rome) Archias, how skillful so ever in
Poetry, yet has faild in his policy, to request him to discourse of
jealousy, that never as yet offered incence at the Altars of Love. If it had
been to make description of a battle, to have discoursed the order of the
Phalaux, or any point of Martial discipline, then could I as a soldier have
dilated such principles, as warrelike Captains register in the field with
their sword: But of love whose amarous Deity greeth not with Drum and
Trumpet, or of jealousy as the shadow of fancy, it fitteth me as little to
discourse, as the shoemaker of Apelles portrature. But if ever Venus shall
vouch me that favor to grace me with a special look from my Mistress
excellency, and that mine eye be allowed as Paris was to judge of beauties,
Archias shall command me as a friend, in the mean time, for Poets and Painters
ought to have their conceits fethered with Mercuries plumes: I will desire
Archias to supply my ignorance, and to describe the effects of jealousy. The
Senators and the rest of the company, hearing how cunningly Lentulus retorted
the argument upon Archias, with a resolute consent they enjoined Archias to
play the Orator, who being pleasantly disposed began thus.

The wolves in Syria that bark against the Moon suffer small rest and great
hunger. Arrows shot against the stars pierce downward: and the Sirens that
^ought to intrappe Ulysses, perished themselves. So gentlemen, I sought to make
experience of Lentulus eloquence, and fortune has allotted me to discover mine
own ignorance, but least I might be counted either too stoicall, or to too
full of self conceit: for jealousy, thus.

Archias discourse of Jealousy.
SUch as have searched into the deepest Aphorisms of Anacreon, or pried into
the principles that Ovid set down in his volumes, find Love to be such a
pure passion of the mind, as like y^ Crystal it admits no bruise without a
crack: It grows from the union of two minds conceived by y^ special liking
of some excellent good, consisting in exterior beauty, or interior virtues,
or the combining of them both in one sole, and singular perfection. This choice
of excellency confirmed by election once imprinted in the heart is so precious
as the pearls of Cleopatra. The fleece of Colchos, the sands of Tagus are
trash, if brought into compare with this divine and metaphysicall passion: man
having swilled in this nectar of love is so chary that he not only brooketh no
corriual of his thoughts, but admits no partaker of his favors, and from
this fear proceeds that fury which men call jealousy, being a secret
suspicion that others should enjoy that excellency that he has chosen sole
and singular to him self. This noble Romans is that f^end that Pluto sent to
check Cupid in his deity, this springing from hell brings worse torments to
the mind then the stone of Sysiphus, vulture of Titius or wheel of Ixion.
This is the cankar that fretteth the quiet of the thoughts, the moath that
secretly consumes the life of man, and the poison specially opposed against
the perfection of love: after the heart be once infected with jealousy the
slepes are broken, the dreams disquiet slumbers, the thoughts cares, and
sorrows, the life woe, and misery, that living he dies, and dying prolonges
out his life in passions worse then death. None looks on his love but
suspicion says, this is he that couetes to be corriuall of my favors: None
^n^ckes at his door, but starting up he thinks them messengers of fancy,
none talks but they whisper of affection: if she frown, she hates him and
loves others, if she smile it is because she has had success in her loves,
look she frowardly on any man she dissembles, if she favor him with a
gracious eye, then as a man straught with frenzy he eryeth out that neither
fire in the straw nor love in the women's looks can be concealed, thus does he
live restles and makes love that of it self is sweet, to be in taste as
bitter as gall.

This discovers reverent Senators that love being of it self a most
excellent passion is only blemished by this soul and disgraced stain of
jealousy; as hateful and hurtful to the mind as the Cockatrice to the eye, or
hemlocke to the taste. The purest Chrisolite has his strakes, the flowers in
Sydon as they are precious in the sight so they are pestilent in favor: Love
as it is divine with loialtie, so it is hellish with jealousy, wherefore by an
ancient Poet were written these verses, When Gods had framd the sweet of
women's face,
and locked men's looks within their golden hair:
That Phoebus blushed to see their matchles grace,
and heavenly gods on earth did make repair.
To quippe fair Venus ouerweening pride
Loves happy thoughts to jealousy were tied.
Then grew a wrinckle on fair Venus browe,
The amber sweet of love was turned to gall:
Gloomie was heaven: bright Phoebus did auowe
He could be coy and would not love at all,
Swering no greater mischief could be wrought
Then love united to a ielous thought.


Had not Juno been ielous over Jupiter, Io had not been turned into a Heifer:
if suspicion had not pricked Menelaus, Helena had not stolen away with Paris.
Procris had been alive, had she not suspected Cephalus: Then worthy Romans
we see what a prejudicial monster grows from the fearful excess of love
that not only shortneth the life, disquieteth the mind, but often is the cause
of most strange and unnatural massacres. If fortune frown in love we fly to
patience: If their happen iarres, why lovers braw^es are introductions to
delight, If poverty, why they hope upon time thinking that there is
vicissitudo omnium rerum, The lowest ebb may have his flow, and the deadest
neepe his full tide, if greefes, sorrows, repulse^, unkindness, these be but
Amantium irae: And t^ere^ore Amoris redintegratio: but as the pumice stone
(...) the paper from spots, and the fire consumes fla^e so ^^is in^ernall
plague of iealousi^ rooteth and raceth all true love (...) the heart, that
yielding my censure I conclude with this Poem,

Vita quae tandem magis est iucunda,
Vel viris doctis magis expetenda,
Mente quam pura sociam iugalem,
Semper amare?
Vita quae tandem magis est dolenda,
Vel magis cunctis fugienda, quam quae,
(Falso suspecta probitate amicae)
Tollit amorem?
Nulla eam tollit medicina pestem,
Murmur, emplastrum vel imago sagae,
Astra nec curant, magicae nec arts,
Zelotipiam.
Archias having thus ended his discourse the Senators greatly praised his
description of jealousy, and from that fell to other pleasant talk as
occasion offered. Till dinner being ended they arose, and after many thanks and
courtesies according to the custom of the Romans, Flaminius to honor Lentulus
the more, taking him by the hand carried him into a garden where Terentia sat
accompanied with other Uirgins of Room: namely, Flauia, Cornelia, and Iulia,
all of such exquisite features, as they seemed to be the choice Paragons of
that time. Lentulus amazed at this gorgious sight wondered not only at their
beauties, but maruailed why Flaminius brought him so friendly into their
presence. At last the old man burst forth into these words: Lord Lentulus, I
measure the thoughts of young gentlemen by the prime of my forepassed youth,
not being so cinicall as with Chremes in Terence to proportion young affections
by the cynders of old age, but to think with Menedemus that the spring has
flowers and blossoms, where as winter has dried branches and tawnie leaves:
We old men over whom Saturnus is predominant having infused melancholy in our
minds, covet either to sit solitary, or that our talk be serious: you that
are young whose thoughts aim at delight seek to pass the time in pleasant
discourses. Least therefore the time might be tedious, I have brought you
amongst these fair Ladies y^ you may make experience of loves, as you have
done of wars, Mars no sooner puts off his helmet but he salutes Venus: and
you come from conquest of the Parthians, see how you can enter combat with
passions: and so Lord Lentulus I leave you.

Lentulus seeing himself thus environed with these miracles of beauty, casting
his eye upon the Goddess whose favorable aspect might be the sum of his
fortunes, bashed at the first as Paris did in the vale of Ida, and stood as
the foes of Perseus when he uncased the head of Medusa, and turned them to
marble pictures, so amazed stood Lentulus at the sight of such divine
excellency, till the Ladies seeing this Nouice thus in a quandarie began to
smile, which reviving a kind of amorous choler in the soldiers mind, he
began thus to play the Champion.

Ladies believe me, Love is of more force then wars, and the looks of women
pierce deeper then the stroke of Lances, their is no Curtelax so keen, but
armor of high proof can withstand, but beauties arrows are so sharp, and
the darts that fly from women's eyes so piercing as the Corslet tempered by
Vulcan for Didoes paramour, holds not out the violence of there stroke. The
Gods tremble when Mars shakes his Lance, but he fears when Venus casts a
frown. Alexander never took notice of the legions of his enemies, but he
stood frighted at the beauty of the Amazon. Then sweet saints of Rome marvel
not if I were driven into a maze at the sight of such beauteous creatures whose
faces are Venus weapons, wherewith she checketh the pride of over daring
warriors: I cannot (Ladies) court it as your Roman yongsters that tie their
wits to their fancies: nor fill your ears with amarous discourses as Cupids
Apprentizes, that spend their time in such loving philosophy: Nor can I feign
conceited supposes of affection to prove my self louesicke by Poetry. But as
a blunt soldier new come from the wars, I offer my self a devoted servant
to your beauties, swearing to defend your honors against all men with the
hazard of my blood, and in pawn thereof generally to you all, but specially to
one (as love has his unity) I desire to be entertained as a duetifull
servant to the Lady Terentia. Lentulus having thus boldly boarded these lovely
Uirgins, the Ladies seeing with what affection he offered his service to
Terentia, began to byte the lip, and she to blush who seeing her self
touched to the quick made him this answer.

I know not Lord Lentulus how to answer of love, because as yet I never knew
love: ignorant of his forces because never acquainted with his fortunes. Vesta
forbids us virgins to name Venus, as they of Ephesus hateful Erostratus. Diana
deals not in Paphos, nor suffers she any of her maidens to hunt on Erecynus,
least meeting with Venus mecocks they skippe with Calisto, and so seek after
loss. The less you are private to loves passions, the more welcome to our
presence: for rather had we still our ears with wars fortunes, then with
loves f^llies: and sweeter are the tears that grows from a constant
stratageme, then a smyle from a comike tale of fancy. For your service Lord
Lentu^us, finding my self unworthy, I crave pardon: Nor can we by Vestas
charter admit such servant. But if it please you to be accepted as a
worthy Roman and my fathers friend, look for such favor as mine honor and
virginity can afford.

Lentulus hearing the plausible answer of Terentia, although her first
insinuation seemed to answer for his purpose, as preferring the lawnes of
Diana, and fires of Vesta before loves holy temples, yet she concluded so
sweetly as might stand with the modesty of her honor: he therefore made thus
his reply.

In that madame we are both nouices in love, the simpler are our thoughts, and
the nearer should be the simpathy of our affections. Doves match ^hen ^hey are
young: Syenus are grafted when they are sprigs, the one part not but by death,
nor are the other severed but they perish. Soldiers are like virgins, the one
striving to live virtuous, the other to die valiant: both enemies to love,
while they wait on those which brook not love, I mean war and Vesta: But
both must love as having hearts and thoughts, eyes to see beauty, and ears to
judge of virtue. I madame while I thought none greater then Mars, was vowed to
Mars, but seeing women's wits are worse then weapons, and that their looks
pierce deeper then lances, I have resigned over my fortunes at the shrine of
war, and mean to make proof of the sweetness of love: Glad that in my
first entrance I have the patronage of your gracious favor, armde with the
which Mars well may frown, but not conquer. But sir, quoth Terentia, I
granted my favor to Lentulus the soldier, not to Lentulus the lover. And so
madame quoth he I accept of it, for I am a soldier to do you honor, and a
lover despite of my self. Flauia hearing Lentulus, began to reason pretily
to the purpose, being a Lady of passing mirry disposition, whose wit was as
full of wiles as her face of favor, second in the excellency of beauty to the
Lady Terentia, thought to sift her soldier in this manner.

I see well Lord Lentulus, that as women have their favors, so men have their
sayings: the one prodigal in graces, the other polliticke in deceits, being as
cunning to dissemble love, as we chary to discharge love. We Roman Ladies
thought to have found you a flat soldier, as ignorant in loves as we of
fancies: but how closely soever you cover the flame, the fire will be known by
the smoke: For your talk so savors of loves principles, as we iudg^ you are
as cunning in faining a passion as in figuring a battle, and can as soon
deceive a woman with a pen, as slaughter an enemy with a lance. This will
make us to take you for a day friend, and what we like in you present to
disallowe to morrow, swearing if you bring amongst us Venus roses, we will
beat you with Vestas nettles: and therefore if you will be admitted as our
soldier, we either forbid you the name of love, or else you shall be out of
our favors. Cornelia willing to break a jest with this Champion thwarted
Flauia thus. And what of that madame, has not war taught him patience: he
has past sharper brunts the^ women's frowns. But how your level is without
aim? If madame Terentia smyl^ his penny is good silver, ^is her favor that is
the load-star of his fortunes, and how can we enter into her thoughts but by
conjectures: she full of beauty, and he a proper young gentleman. At this frumpe
the Ladies smiled, and Terentia blushed for anger. But Lentulus seeing such a
broad jest, pinde on his shoulder willing to make answer for his Mistress,
although he was sore put to his trumps as half set at a Non plus, yet he
followed his fortunes thus.

Indeed Ladies think I have patience to bear women's frumpes that has
incountred an enemies blow, but if I could as well answer the one, as quit the
other, you should neither carry it to hell, nor to heaven. But to revenge my
self as well as I can, thus. First madame to clear my cunning in love, I
refer my self to the verdict of your own conscience: who were you but as
favorable, as you are frumpish, would soon censure by my talk how deep I am
read in loves principles. But women speak by contraries, crying like the
lapwing farthest from their nests, and so I take it being checked for overmuch
love, when you see I am a nouice in love. Or perhaps madame Flauia you would
have me love, if it be so I will become more studious to satisfy your wish:
but your calling me a day friend that peremptory punishment were passing
sharp for one fault to shake me out of service, were it not that for so deep
a wound the Lady Cornelia brings in a lenitiue plaisture alleging my
security if I be armed with Terentias favor. Blame me not sweet goddesses
if I aim at the fairest, soldiers have eyes that can judge of beauty, though
they have not weapons to win beauty: and ears to deem of perfections,
though they want tongues to discover passions. The harmony of love, I have
heard them say, consists in unities, and nothing is more prejudicial to
fancy then plurality either of thoughts or of persons. Amongst many then am I
charged but to like of one Mistress: If I make choice of Terentia, and she
vouch to grace me with her favor, Cornelia concludes truly, that armde with
the imagination of her beauty, I think my self able to brook your frumps,
and to withstand the hardy resolution of Mars.

I marvel then quoth Flauia half in choler (if women's beauty be like
Delphicus gladius, of high proof to defend, and of sharp edge to offend) why
the Senators choose not out legions of Ladies, that with little cost and great
assurance, they may make conquest of the world: but perhaps all soldiers be
not of your temper, for they use their weapons and you your looks.

No madame quoth Lentulus y^ is not the cause, for were it not that every woman
would be a Captain, and strive for supremacy, they had resolved upon this
long ago, but fearing a mutiny amongst themselves for superiority: since every
one at home will be counted most wise, and most beautiful, though their wits be
mean, and favors less, the Senate are glad to foresee such an inconvenience.
The Ladies hearing how cunningly Lentulus had gald madame Flauia on the right
side, began all to smyle, and she after a blush for very anger began to laugh.
Lentulus glad that he had given her a soppe of the same sauce, and paid her
her debt in her own coin: Calling to his boy to fetch him a Lute, willing to
show his mistress he was not ignorant in music, said he would prove the
force of beauty by a sonet which he heard was made by Orpheus when he fell
first in love with Euridice, tuning therefore his Lute to his voice he sung
this ditty.

Mars in a fury against Loves brightest Queen
Put on his helm, and took him to his lance:
On Erecynus mount was Mauors seen,
And there his ensigns did the God advance.
And by heavens greatest gates he stowtly swore,
Venus should die for she had wronged him sore.
Cupid heard this and he began to cry,
And wished his mothers absence for a while:
Peace fool quoth Venus, is it I must die?
Must it be Mars? with that she coind a smile:
She trimd her tresses and did curle her hair,
And made her face with beauty passing fair.
A fan of silver feathers in her hand,
And in a coach of Ebony she went:
She past the place where furious Mars did stand,
And out her looks a lovely smile she sent.
Then from her brow lept out so sharp a frown,
That Mars for fear threw all his armor down.
He vowed repentance for his rash misdeede,
Blaming his choler that had causd his woe:
Venus grew gracious, and with him agreed,
But chargd him not to threaten beauty so.
For women's looks are such inchaunting charms,
As can subdue the greatest god in arms.
Lentulus having sung this ditty, Terentia willing a little to show her wit
began thus. I remember Lord Lentulus, I have heard my father say that soldiers
were w^^nt to carry favors in their helmes, not fancies in their heart: and
made choice of their mistress to encourage their thoughts, not to inchaunt
their affections. But I see the ancient hon^ur of the Romans is slipped from
prowess to passions, and the men covet to be counted rather amorous wooers,
then hardy warriors: gasing Mars in the face with bright armor, but offering
Orisons to Venus in secret conceits. This did not Quintus Lucius Cincinnatus,
who set it down as Crimen Capitale to speak of love in the Army. Nor
Scypio Affricanus the great who made laws that no women should be brought
prisoners within the Camp, least love entering pele mele with war might hazard
y^ haughtines of their houors: And yet madame quoth Lentulus Cyncinnatus ha^ a
wife, and Scipio was marrieed. But quoth she it was in their age rather chosen
for succors then amarous passions: their youth was wholly spent in wars as
enemies to loves, counting fancy as a dishonor to their martial dignities:
rightly in deed with a deep insight entering into ^he enormities that grow
from following to precisely the court of Venus. For believe me gentleman Poets
and Painters err much that ascribe a dei^y to Cupid, and were worthy to bear
some grievous punishm^nt for such a new invented heresy, which I will
app^^oue with a Sonet that one of Dyanas nymphs made when Jupiter had faulted
with Calipso. And so Terentia taking the Lute in her hand began to warble out
this ^oundelet.

Fond faining Poets make of Love a God,
And leave the Laurel for the myrtle boughs:
When Cupid is a child not past the rod,
And fair Diana Daphnis most allows.
I Will wear the bays and call the wag a boy,
And think of Love but as a foolish toy.
Some give him bow and quiver at his back,
Some make him blind to aim without advise:
When naked wretch such feathred bolts he lack,
And sight he has but cannot wrong the wise.
For use but labors weapon for defense,
And Cupid like a Coward flies thence.
He is God in Court but cottage calls him child,
And Vestas virgins with their holy fires:
Do cleanse the thoughts that fancy has defilde,
And burns the palace of his fond desires.
With chaste disdain they scorn the foolish god,
And prove him but a boy not past the rod.
Terentia having ended her roundelay, as Lentulus was ready to reply,
Flaminius came into y^ Garden with ye rest of ye senators, whose grave presence
brake of their amorous prattle, so y^ he leaving ye Ladies taking his leave
friendly of them all, but specially with a pitiful glancing look of Terentia
as craving some favor for his farewell, he went to the Senators amongst whom
he ^^^coursed long of the manner and custom of the Parthians, (...) their
resolution in wars, and of such serious matters concerning martial
discipline. Passing thus away part of the afternoon, the company at last
taking their leaves yielding great thanks to Flaminius for their good chee^e,
they parted to their several mansions. Lentulus s^ipping from the rest of the
company and with a gracious courage took his adue of Terentia and the other
of the Ladies, vowing to be theirs ever in any due honorable service, and so
staying Terentia by the hand he went home with Titus Annius Milo: where he
found Marcus Tullius Cicero, then a youth in Rome about ye age of twenty years
and very private and familiar with Milo. The fame of this Tullies surpassing
^loquence was so bruted abroad in Rome as they counted him the myrror of that
time and as in Greece they wondered at Demosthenes for his orations, and the
popular people fed their eyes with his sight, so as Tully past through the
streets they cried out, Hic est ille Cicero: saying that as Orpheus with his
music made the stones and trees pliant to his melody: so Tully tied the
peoples cares to his tongue by his eloquence: And that Plato who for his
philosophical sentences was called divine, in whose lips bees rested as
presaging his future excellency was inferior to Tully in the musical concord
of his phrase. Lentulus noting his perfections although his parentage was base,
yet thinking his eloquence might be profitable to his loves, grew to be very
familiar with Tully, insomuch that of unacquainted citizens they grew to be
dear and private friends, that their thoughts were united with a sure league
of amity, and their hearts were receptacles for their mutual passions, so that
their most secret affairs were frankely participated without any doubting
suspicion. But leaving their familliarity, conuersing in Milos house: Let us
gentlemen see how Terentia brookt his departure. Cornelius Nepos forgets it in
Tullies life, (...) if you will believe me it was thus.

No sooner were the Senators and Lentulus departed from Flaminius house, but
Flauia and the rest of the Ladies took leave of Terentia, who being solitary
by her self sitting alone in an arbor of roses, began to ruminate on the
Idaea of Lentulus perfection, and to call to mind his several and singular
qualities, his parentage, his person, honors, and his great possessions, but
all in vain. Loves poison was prevented with an antidote, and her thoughts
sealed up with an invincible chastity. For after she had long sat: At last
with a smyle she burst forth into these terms.

If Venus could not infuse more dismal aspects in other Ladies thoughts then
into my mind, they should neither hold her as a goddess, nor honor her
temples with presents: Fond are those women that are inquisitiue after
Astrologers, whether Venus be retrograde or combust in their natiuities. Had
they but tasted the sweet favor of Vestas incense, they would abandon her as
a planet careless in their natiuities: and not trouble the Augurs or Aruspices
to censure of their fatal or fortunate fancies. For had they but insight into
the sweet life of virgins, how secure they live, if they live virtuous, they
would never entangle themselves with the inconstant snares of fancy. Vesta
allows us free thoughts, Venus disquiet passions^ at her Altars we have sweet
s^eepes, in the others palace broken slumbers. Diana counteruailes our labors
with mirth and quiet, in Cipres we find toil tempered with care and sorrows.
Being virgins we have liberty: married we tie our selves to the variable
disposition of a husband, who be he never so excellent in perfection, or
exquisite in proportion, we shall find sufficient whereof to gather di^^ike.
Then Terentia, let Lentulus pass with his honors he has subdued. What though
Alexander woone the whole world, his glories are but fortunes favors. Account
him then only as thou promised, thy fathers friend and thine as far as he
treats not of weddi^^ and with this upon a sudden she start up, and went to
pass away the time amongst company, holding Cupids deity at disdain, and
accounting of love as the Samnites did of gold: which they sent as presents to
their enemies, but banished from their own common wealth. But Flauia poor
Lady, was not pierced with so easy a passion, for she having more deeply
imprinted in her thoughts his honors and virtues, and measuring the man by
the height of his fortunes, fell into these bitter complaints.

With what little proportion does injurious Love bestow his favors? With how
small regard does blind fortune power out her treasures? Making in all their
actions contrarieties. that so they may triumph in inconstancy. Love has
brought Lentulus from the wars to Rome, only to see Terentia. Fortune has
brought Flauia to the house of Flaminius only to love Lentulus, she little
regarding him, he lightly respecting me. Thus has the contrariety of love and
fortune made Lentulus unhappy, and me without hope. Ah but Terentia though she
seem coy at the first, will be more courteous at the last, when she has had
but a months meditating on the excellency of Lentulus. Then, oh then sigh
Flauia, and say oh then will Terentia not reject so honorable a personage: When
she considers his youth, his beauty, his parentage, his dignities Lentulus no
sooner shall woo, but she will be woonne: This is the conjecture of her hap,
and the despair of my hope. And yet it may be that the destinies have
appointed their disagree. For stars are sticklers in love, and fates are
principal fautors of wedlock. If my prayers may serve ^o Venus, if my incense
to Cupid, if my vows to Lucina, if my suit to Love. Let their love perish in
the budde, and wither in the blossoms. Had I Medeas magic, the drugs of
Calipso, the inchauntments of Cyrces, the skill of Hecate, all these should be
employed to break the love of Terentia, and Lentulus. Fond Flauia, to be so
frantic in thy passions: suppose Terentia hated Lentulus, can this conclude
he will love thee? No, his thoughts are settled, his rest set down, his vows
made, his fancy fixed, and all upon ye beautiful Terentia: I there Flauia y^ is
ye word ye galleth to the beautiful Terentia. For of such surpassing beauty is
the Lady, that as Cynthia brooks no compare with her glorious brother: so thou
must not enter comparison with y^ daughter of y^ Senator Flaminius. But what
is this to Lentulus. If she be fair, yea as fair as ever was Sulpitia: if
she be as coy, and disdainefull as Caelia, had he not better love homely
Flauia, who will counteruaile with love, what she wants in beauty, and
proportion out in duty, what she defects in dignity. But what of this, love
admits no exceptions, he cannot mis^ike ^ught in Terentia. Does not present
examples yea instances executed in Room auerre so much? Is not Anthonio
enamoured of the black Egyptian Cleopatra: Does not Caesar envy him in his
loves and couets to be corriuall of his fancies. Affection is often blind and
deemeth not rightly, The blackest Ebon is brighter then the whitest Iuorie:
and Venus thought Vulcan at the first a proper stripling. Were Terentia never
so coy, Lentulus will count her disdain but chastity: yet Flauia pray then
she may live in this mislike, then have thou yet some cause to hope, otherwise
weep thy fill, despair and then die, for sweeter is death then to live and
see Lentulus enjoy the love of Terentia. Having at this period breathed awhile
ready to go forward in passions, one of her waiting women came in who
breaking of her complaints past away the rest of the day in prattle. Leaving
her therefore and her maid at chat, again to Lentulus, who took such inward
grief at this new conceited love, that his color began to wax pale and to
discover passions his sighs many and often to bewray his sorrows, his sudden
startes in his sleeps, and his musinges surcharged with melancholy. These
noted by Tullie his private friend made him conjecture that somewhat was
amiss with Lentulus. Having therefore fit opportunity he began to sift him in
this manner.

The ancient Greetians sweet Lentulus y^ set down principles of friendship,
account the secret conuersi^g of friends, and their mutual participating
either of private sorrows or concealed pleasures, the principal end of such
professed amity. Therefore did Theseus choose Pirithous, Orestes Pylades and
to that end, or else you wrong me, serves Tullie to his Lentulus. If then it
be requisite in friendship to abandon suspicious secrecy, I cannot but take
it unkindly that Tullie is not made partaker of Lentulus passions. For as the
Carbuncle is not hid in the dark, nor the fire shut up in straw, so sorrows
cannot so covertly be concealed but the countenance will purtray out the cause
by the effects. Think me not then so blind but I can Judge of coullors, nor
so simple but I can deem of affections, what mean these far fetched sighs,
broken slumbers, this new delight to be solitary, but that Lentulus feeling a
passion that pierces to the quick, yet seeks to keep it secret from his
friend Tullie. Know this my good Lentulus that smoke depressed stiffleth more
deadly. That the Oven the closer it is damd up the greater is the heat: and
passions the more private the more prejudicial. Stop not then the stream,
least it ouerflow. Conceal not sorrows least they ouercharge, and prove like
wounds, that kept long from the Chirurgian grow to be incurable ulcers: If
it be a Fathers frown, an enemies wrong, a friends mishap, reveal it and
seek remedy. If Lentulus greeues has left his honors in Parthia, fear not,
Rome will have more wars and Lentulus new dignities. If the Senatoures have
dealt ingratefully: Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris. The most famous
Romans have forerunne thee in such hard fortunes. Scipio subdued Africa,
what his reward was let our annualles report. If Lentulus misliks ought in
Rome, let him abandon Rome, and Tullio will banishe himself from his country
too with his friend Lentulus. If since thy coming into this storehouse of
natures prodigality, thiue eye has made suruaie of any gorgious Damsel, and
so my Lentulus be in love although wisdom wills to hide amors even from
amity, and to tie fancy in the lowest cell of his heart, yet reveal it to
thy friend Tullie, and if any way he may ease his Lentulus passions, he
vows to salve thy sore, though with the hazard of his own safety. Lentulus
hearing his friend level so near the mark gave a great groan at the name of
love, and fetching a deep sighe said Actna grauius Amor. And with that
starting from the place where he sat taking Tullie by the hand, he began thus.

Were it my Tullie that my passions had any hope of remedy, or that my wound
were such as might be cured by counsel, long ere this had Lentulus powered his
plaintes into the bosom of his friend Cicero: but my sorrows, as they are
piercing so I have kept them private, as hoping for no ease and yet delighting
in my martiredome. The bird flies the snare of the fouler, No sooner does the
woodman bend his bow, but the Dear trippes through the lawnes: every
creature is taught by nature to fear his fall, and yet wretched Lentulus
hunteth after his own mishappe. So have I described the fury of my passions,
as I can not but say it is love that is thus impatient. Love my Tullie that is
such a lord as ins^nuating his power with favor he keeps possession by force.
Wars have their ends either honors or death, and in battle prowess often
makes constraint of fortune, but in love delay is the unhappy deathsman that
holding thee up neither saues nor killes. Since my coming to Rome (my Tullie)
coveting to converse with beautiful Ladies as before I had done with martial
soldiers, amongst many curious Pearls I found one Orient Margarite richer
then those which Caesar brought from the western shores of Europe: so long I
gased at the beauty of this precious Iem that I found my self gald with such
affection, as well repeat I might, but recall I could not: and for thou shall
say she is love worthy. hear how in discribing her excellency I have plaide
the Poet.

Lentulus description of Terentia in Latin.
Qualis in aurora splende scit lumine Titan,
Talis in eximio corpore forma fuit:
Lumina seu spectes radiantia, sieve capillos,
Lux Ariadne tua and lux tua Phoebe iacet.
Venustata fuit verbis, spirabat odorem,
Musica vox, nardus spiritus almus erat:
Rubea labra, genae rubrae, faciesque decora,
In qua concertant lilius atque rosa.
Luxuriant geminae formoso in pectore mammae,
Circundant niueae candida colla comae:
Denique talis erat diuina Terentia, quales
Quondam certantes, Juno, Minerua, Venus.
Thus in English.
BRightsume Apollo in his richest pomp,
was not like to the tramels of her hair:
Her eyes like Ariadnes sparkling stars,
shone from the Ebon Arches of her brows.
Her face was like the blushing of the east,
when Titan chardge the mornings Sun to rise:
Her cheeks rich strewed with roses and with white,
did stayne the glory of Anchises love.
Her silver teates did ebb and flow delight,
Her neck colummes of polisht Iuorie.
Her breath was perfumes made of violets,
And all this heaven was but Terentia.
NO sooner had Lentulus ended his well written Poem, and concluded his cunning
with the name of his mistress, but Tullie hearing Terentia was the saint at
whose shrine Lentulus offered up his devotion, entering his exordium with a smyle
he began to be thus pleasaut.

And is there no fruit will serve your taste but such as grow in the Gardens
Hesperides, nor no color content your eye but such as is stained by the fish
Murex. Must your senses be fed with nothing but that is excellent, nor your
love have no mean but to aim at the fairest. What Terentia the beauty of
Rome? the pride of nature? the wealth of all the favoring graces, whose
excellencies are spread throught the triple division of the world? I see my
Lentulus soldiers have eyes as they have hands, and thoughts as they have
weapons, and that how bluntly so ever brought up in the wars yet they are
curious in the choises of their loves. Well, be it Lentulus loves Terentia, an
honor to set his fancy on her, but he kept his love secret from Tullie a
fault to be suspicious of his friend. But why greeues Lentulus? Is not his
parentage greater then the house of Flaminius? Is not his honors sufficient to
counteruaile her beauties? Why then is he so impatient in so agreeable a
passion? Lentulus upon this discoursed unto Tullie from point to point the
success of his loves, how he gave his charge over to Lepidus only that he
might have a sight of Terentia, and then recounting what prattle had past
betwixt him and her after dinner: Her coy answers and firmed resolution to
remain chaste: craving counsel how he might ease the disquiete of his
thonghts: Tullie pitying the extreme passion of his friend, devised sundry
means how to make him lord of his desires. But after the discourse of sundry
plottes, it was decreed that Lentulus should write unto Teren-Terentia.
Lentulus dispairing of his own style and method, required Tully to write him
a letter passionate and full of familiar eloquence, which at his request Cicero
contrived after this manner: where by the way gentlemen, I am to crave you to
think that Terentia kept the copy secret, so that neither it can be found
amongst Lentulus loose papers, nor in the familiar epistles of Cicero. If the
phrase differ from his other excellent form of writing, imagine he sought to
cover his style, and in his pen rather to play the blunt soldier, then the
curious Orator, neither using those verborum fulmina, that Papyrius objects,
nor that sweet and musical cadence of words, which he uses to Atticus, but
howsoever or whatsoever, thus it was.

Lentulus, Terentiae salutem.
QVod natura in venustatis and formae tuae Idaea formauit (suauissima Terentia)
nullo modo silentio praeterire possum: Ne cum nimis cautus amoris ignem celare
conarer, incautus tanquam Aetna meipsum consumens, in cineres redigar. Cum
inter Parthos versarer, nihil nisi bellum and arma cogitans, a Roma vsque
formae tuae pulchritudo, morumque integritas a multis saepe nuntiata est. Cuius
rei faema ca iucunditate aures meas permulsit, vt (syrenum quasi cantu
delectatus) arma abijcere and amorem cogitare coeperim, meque totum in
Terentiae potestatem tradere non erubescerem. Diuinae autem excellentiae tuae
cogitatio, eos mihi pro tempore in bellicis negotijs addidit animos, vt breui
deuictis and profligatis Parthis, totam hanc Prouinciam Lepido commiserim, quem
vnum tum honoris, tum fortunae meae participem feci, Parthisque relictis Romam
me contuli, vt iucundissimo fructu tum aspectus, tum consuetudinis tuae frui
liceat. Formae vero and pulchritudinis tuae dignitas, tanta tamque excellens
fuit, vt non modo famam, sed expectationem meam long superarit. Vnde
exquisitam tuam perfectionem oculis contemplans, and singulares animi dotes
auribus accipiens, excellentiae tuae Idaeam in imo pectore collocaui meque
totum amori, quasi constring endum tradidi. Cum igitur tua vnius causa
(suauissima Terentia) famam fortunasque and arma proiecerim, verum amantis
officium fac praestes, and me non meritis, sed amore fac metiare, vt in amore
tu mihi respondens, ego in omni officio tibi satisfaciam. Taceo genus and
parents, quos tamen bonos ciues and senatores fuisse constat; taceo triumphos,
qui quales fuerint Capitolium populusque Romanus locupletissimi sunt testes; de
diuitijs non glorior, quas t^men mediocres esse constat, sed virtutis vim and
amoris constantia^ tibi propono, quae nec parui facienda, nec ingratitudine
compensanda sunt. Me igitur fac redames (mea Terentia) and pulchritudini
comitatem coniungens, parentibus honorem, a^icis fidem, Lentulo amorem tribuas,
vt parentibus gaudio, amicis vtilitati, and Lentulo voluptati esse possis. Non
diserte, vt Orator, sed peramanter, vt imperator tibi scribo, quod si
amorinostro consentire digneris, de patris voluntate nihil est quod dubites:
sed si alieno amore non nostro delecteris, d^lores meos and augebo and celabo,
and quamcunque in partem te flexeris, tibi tum vitam tranquillam, tum mortem
gloriosam, vt fideliss. amator exoptabo. Vale, plus oculis mihi dilecta
Terentia, and me tui desiderio iam pene languentem aut ames cito aut oderis
semper, vale and rescribe.


Lentulus to Terentia health.
I cannot (sweet sovereign of my thoughts, and chief myrrour of our Roman
excellency) smother that with silence which nature has figured in the
portraiture of my looks, unless keeping the flame too secret, I should like
A^tna consume to cinders. When seated amongst the Parthians having nothing in
my thoughts but wars and stratagemes, thy beauty was repeated as special
news from Room amongst the Legions: The melody seemed so pleasing to mine
ears as if the music of the Sirens had inchaunted my senses. I ceased from
wars to think of love, and from love to doat on the conceit of Terentia. The
thoughts of thy excellency doubled such courage in my attempts, that I
conquered the Parthians, yielded up my charge to Lepidus, made him partaker of
my honors, and fortunes, and came to Room only to see Terentia: whose sight
was so beauteous, and so far beyond the report of fame, that mine eyes
surueying exquisitely thy perfections, and mine ears censuring of thy wit and
virtues both in league conspired to present the Idea of thy self to the
contemplation of my heart, which greedily intertaining such rare beauties, has
ever since remained a poor distressed captive. Since then Terentia, thy
Lentulus has left his fortunes to follow fancy, and has forsaken the wars
to win thy loves, holding thee more dear then country or hono^r, show thy
self a Roman Lady, that striving in mind to be matchless, thou may be
more prodigal in favors, then I worthy in deserts, and yield me such meede
for my love, as Lentulus for his loyalty does merit. I ^oast not of my
parents, they are Citizens and of the Senate with thy father. I speak not of mine
honors, the Capitol can witness what showtes past from the Romans as victors:
what tears from the Parthians as vanquished, both these passions growing from
the fortunes of Lentulus. My revenues are such as satisfy my desires: But all
these are external favors, which though I rehearse yet I brag not off. But
the constancy of my love, the loyalty of my thoughts: These Terentia are gifts
of the mind, deserving no light esteem, much less to be requited with
ingratitude. Consider then (sweet goddess) the sincerity of mine affections:
weigh how Lentulus loves, and so use him in love, measure his fortunes by his
fancies. As thou art beautiful, so use justice, give every one his due: Honor
to the gods, reverence to thy father, faith to thy friend, and Love to
Lentulus, and if it please thee to grace me with the title to thy husband
Lentulus: for I covet to like honestly, not to love wantonly. I write Terentia
as a soldier without eloquence, and as a lover without flattery, if thou
satisfy my love with thy favors, I doubt not to seal up thy content with thy
fathers and friends agree. If either thou art tied to former loves, or
mislikest of mine, I will close up my sorrows with silence. Howsoe^er it shall
please thee to return answer: Live with content, and die with honor.

Terentias new entertained soldier, Publius Cornelius Lentulus.


If gentlemen I have not translated Lentulus letter verbatim word for word,
let me in mine own excuse yield these reasons, that neither the familiar
phrase of the Romans can brook our harsh cadence of sentences: nor durst I
attempt to wrest Tullies eloquence to my rude and barbarous english: fearing
either to wrong so worthy an Orator in displacing or rather disgracing his
phrase: or in too far presuming purchase your frown, which I have ever in all
duty sought to avoid. But howsoever my translation seems wrested, I have kept
his. And so to Lentulus, who hearing Tully read the epistle, both conceited
the method, and allowed of the manner: Only careful where to get a fit and
convenient messenger. Tully at last called to remembrance one Eutrapelus, an
especial friend of his, who frequented the house of Flaminius, by him did
Lentulus send the letter, and so living in hope of a happy answer, he left
Tully in his study, and went to the Capitol. Cicero no sooner was by himself,
but calling to mind the description of Terentia: set out with such excellency
by Lentulus in his new learnd poetry, and weighing how al Room woondred at
her beauties: began to feel certain sparks of love kindling in his young
desires, which made him blush at his own thoughts, and smile that fancy
should lie lurking amongst his library to take him at discouert. But as soon
as he remembered that Lentulus was in love with her, the faith to his friend,
was a cooling card to his affections: and he quenched those sparks at the
first, lest suffered they might grow to a greater flame: yet was he maugre his
head forced to say thus much.

Have thou lived fortunate, and favored in Room? has honor raised thee from
a mean cottage to be a companion to the sons of Senators? Do the Consuls
make thee for thy learning one of the Pret^xtati? and will thou for the hope of
foolish beauty stain all thy favors and fortunes with disgrace? Nay rather
Tully it will be honor to woo the daughter of so famous a Roman: but shame
to thee to take the repulse and be denied. Think thou Terentia will look so
low? will Eagles catch at flies? will the wonder of our time, the paragon of
our age, allied to the noblest houses in Room, make choice of so base and
mean a person? What have thou to deserve her love, any more then a little
babbling eloquence. Women's ears are not their touchstones but their eyes: they
see and make choice, not hear and fancy. A dram of honor weighs down a
pound of wit: and better is it to court with welthy revenues, then with sweet
lines, or fine coucht poemes. Thou have nothing left but a poor farm called
Cumanum, whose rents quits not the charges of thy studies. But suppose thou
could win Terentia, suffice she is loved by Lentulus: and therefore from
this day name her not in thy mouth, nor wear her in thy thoughts, least thou
violate friendship, which thou ought to prise dearer then life. Thus Tully
appeasing his passions went out of his study and willed Eutrapelus to deliver
the letter with secrecy: who being one of Tullies chief familiars, went with
all speed to the house of Flaminius, where finding the Lady Terentia sitting
with Flauia and Cornelia at work, he being homo facetus began merrily to
commend their huswifery and after some jests broken betwixt the gentlewome^ and
him he craved to speak with Terentia about certain serious affairs y^ greatly
imported her father. Whereupon she rising and going with Eutrapelus into her
closet he there delivered unto her Lentulus letter. Terentia abashed at the
sight blushed as half angry with Eutrapelus, that he made him self messenger
in so vain a matter, yet considering it came from so honorable a personage as
Lentulus, she vouchsafed it and wished Eutrapelus in the evening to come for an
answer. He was no sooner departed, but Terentia unripped the seals and then
red the contents, which being contrary to her resolution, she determined to
return with a denial. But for that she would make her friends privy to her
new loves passions she went smiling in, and showed them the letter. Upon poor
Lentulus plainesong they all began to descant. Cornelia praising Terentias
fortunes that was so enterely beloved of so honorable and brave a Gentleman,
but Flauia hung the lip and saying little, only asked what a loving answer
she would write. I know not how to reply quoth Terentia, he has written so
eloquently and so cunningly. But quoth Flauia I durst pawn my credit it was
written by young Tullie, that brave Orator: for I have red some of his
Epistles, and it is both his method and his very phrase. That Tullie, quoth
Terentia whom I have heard my Father and the Senators so highly commend for
his wit, thinking him to exceed either Crassus or Hortensius? and with that
sitting down they began to enter into discourse of Tullies excellencies,
concluding all that he was as singular amongst the Romans, as ever
Demosthenes was amongst the Grecians. At last Terentia remembering her self,
took leave for a while of her two friends, and stealing into her closet
stepping to the standish she was about to write, but calling to mind the
discourse of Tullies perfection, letting fall her pen she fell into a
passion. Cupid waiting to spy this vestall at advantage, seeing her half at
discouert vulosde a bolt headed with desire, and fethered with conceit, which
piercing the tender briest of this young Damsel, he made her shrinck at the
blow, and so breath out this complaint.

Have thou Terentia been wondered at in Rome for despising love, and will thou
now doting gyrle stomble on desire, shall fancy eclipse all thy former
glories* shall Vesta leese a virgin, and Venus win a wanton? Will thou
resemble the buddes of an Elder tree, which young are sweet and wholesome, but
blomd forth are bitter and prejudicial: think with thy self that Dianas
shrubs are more pleasant, than Cupids bowers, the one harbors chaste thoughts,
the other amorous fancies. Truth, but Lucina is a goddess, love is divine, and
marriage honorable. Cedars are fair, but in yielding no fruit they purchase
the less esteem. To be a virgin is a glorious title, but to live ever so, is
to wrong nature in her favors. Well have thou not then Terentia a noble
gentleman of Rome, Lord Lentulus to be thy husband, a man whose youth is
filled with honors and whose spring time ^^orisheth dignities? has he not
triumphed over the Parthians in conquest and bound fortune to his temples with
wreathes of victory. Is not his parentage one of the greatest families in
Rome? Is he not for beauty like the fair Greeks Paramour? For wisdom like
wise Ulysses that Cyrces could not inchant? For courage Hector? And of such
revenues as may maintain thee with the most gorgeous dames of Italy? But the
chief of his graces is he not enamored of Terentia and sues for her favor.
This I confess, Sed deteriora sequor. Love ah that foolish passion which we
term love allows nothing excellent but what it likes. It shadowed begarie in
Crates. For Hipsycratea thought him rich in that he was virtuous: deformity in
Vulcan, for Venus would not believe he had a poult foot. Love has no lack,
and less reason: yet must I love, and whom, ah Tullie sweet Tullie, from
whose mouth flows melody, more inchaunting then the Sirens, on whose lips the
muses make a new Parnassus, in whose thoughts rest Platos divine spirits, and
in whose head is contained the subtil^ wit of Aristotle. Is not he as
glorious in Rome for his eloquence, as thou for thy beauties? Does not the
Senators wounder at his learning, as at thy perfection? Why should not then
both our singularities be lincked in the union of Love? why should not
Terentia live to Tullie, and Tullie to Terentia? Ah but he is base, the first
of his kyn that tasted of honor, I but he is virtuous and famous for his
eloquence, graces that counteruaile the meanness of his parents. I see love
has reasons being out of reason still to argue against reason, therefore
without further pro and contra in mine own passions, I will love Tullie, and
therefore thus to Lentulus. With that taking up her pen she wrote him this
answer.

Terentia to Lentulus health.
WHen I red Lord Lentulus thy letters and spied thy loves, I blushed at mine
own thoughts, and sorrowed at thy fortunes. I search not the cause of thy
love, for it suffices to me thou do love, if it lay in me either to grant
thy desire, or satisfy thy passions. Thy reasons are sufficient to move, were
it not my vow and my destines direct my mind to contrary thy affections. Thy
honors Lentulus knockes at the closet of my heart, thy victories sue for their
lords liberty, thy loyalty enters pele mele with my thoughts and gives a
sore assault to my settled resolution, all these put in their pleas to purchase
favor for young Lentulus. But Vesta hard hearted Vesta that makes her virgings
pliant to her owue properties, commands that I shut mine ears against such
alluring Sirens. I count my self greatly honored with the love of so worthy
a Romayne, and ever will Terentia co^et to prove as thankful as he
affectionate; only in love pardon me, for that either I never mean to love,
or if I do love, my thoughts were fixed before Lentulus came from Parthia.
Wade not there where the ford has no footing, bark not with the Wolves of
Syria against the Moon, look not to clim^ Olimpus, way not at
impossibilities, but pacify that with patience which thou can not obtain
with being passionate. If thou suest to my Father and he grant to conclude a
marriage, yet shall thou want a bride, for I will first die before I violate my
resolution. Seek not then by my prejudice to aim at thy own content, which
be it every way, yet it shall never be in my love: not that I hate Lentulus,
but that my fortunes forbides me to love Lentulus. If thou think these
denials be but words of course, and perswadest thy self that women will be
first coy and then courteous as the marble that drops of rain do pierce. Thou
shall deeply deceive thy self and highly wrong me, but I challenge thy
promise, that howsoever I fr^strate thy expectation thou will bury thy
conceipte in silence. In which hope greeuing that thy showers came in Autumn,
I wish quiet to thy thoughts and an end to thy loves.

Thine ever but in love Terentia.


TErentia having thus ended her letter and new begun her loves, the one
directed to Lentulus the other devoted to Tullie, she went straight to her two
friends Cornelia and Flauia showing them the contents of the letter. Cornelia
said she was too severe and stoicall in sending such a peremptory answer to
so brave a gentleman. Flauia ouercharged with joy praised the resolution of
Terentia, wishing that all maids were of her mind, mis^iking that which she
most loved, thinking by retreating Terentia from the chase, to be mistress of
the game her self. Well this letter at last was sealed, and delivered to
Eutrapelus, who hying him fast to Tullies lodging found Lentulus and him in
secret and serious discourse, and all god wot was about Terentia. Lentulus
having received the letter entering with Tullie into his study read the
contents. No sooner had he viewed and reuiewed over her cruel determination
but in a great extas^e of mind, he cried out (Dulcior est mors quam Amor.) And
with that flinging out of his study he fell into bitter and extreme sorrows.
Tully grieuing at his friends hard fortune sought with plausible persuasions
to appease his furious melancholy, wishing him whatsoever Terentia wrote still
to think her a woman that would one while thrust out fancy with a finger, and
straight interteine love as a friend: that either time or his constancy would
make her stoop to the lure of his desires. Thus sought Tully to wrest him from
his passions but in vain, for her resolution confirmde with such effectual
and perswasiue determinations so quatted the conceit of his former hope, that
going passing melancholy to his bed, he fell into an extreme fever, which
aggrauated with the inward anguish of his mind grew to be so dangerous that
Asclapo the physit^on excellent at that time for his faculty, judged the
disease ^o be mortal. The Senators hearing of Lentulus sickness sorrowed,
as fearing Room by death should be deprived of such high ensuing hope: his
friends f^ocked to his lodging to visit him, who noting, the heat of the
ague, and the passions of his mind, his sudden starts, his gash looks, and
his abrupt answers, judged the extremity of his sickness had half brought him
to a lunacy, all seeking by counsel to cure that which neither counsel nor
medicine could mitigate. Frustrate of their expectation they wished his weal
and returned with grief. Only Tully whose settled friendship no misfortune could
remove, still day and night as a second Esculapius, waited upon this perplexed
patient. But as the depth of his passion pierced into the center of his heart,
so the fever increased, that generally Room began to sorrow so brave a
warrior should be cut off in the very prime of his fortunes, insomuch that
the report of his sickness came to the ears of the three Ladies. Terentia made
light account as having her heart hardened with the love of Cicero, but Flauia
grew passing passionate, as being touched at the quick with the weak
disposition of Lentulus, wishing he might have cure for his malady, so it were
not by the means of Terentia: she frequented the temples, offered orizons,
made vows and burnt incense to the gods, that they would be favorable to her
lover Lentulus, coveting if possible it might be with the prejudice of her
self to have profited him: but in vain, Terentia was resolute, and he was
resolved: as she was dainty, so to die in disp^ire. Flauia if her modesty
might have permitted, would have accompanied with other Ladies gone to his
lodging, but the rights of Vesta forbidding such familiar conuersing, she
rather was restrained by force then withhelde by reason. But seeing she could
by no means come to his sight, yet to manifest the sincerity of her love, she
sent him a letter to this effect.

Flauia to Lentulus health.
IF I could (Lord Lentulus) pourtray with outward actions, the secrecy of my
passions, or force as many tears from mine ^ies as there fly sighs from my
heart: The anatomy of my thoughts would discover a disquiet mind, and the
source of mine eyes a fountain of bitter laments. But seeing that barrels the
fuller they be the less sound they yield: And where the current is deepest
there the water is most still: and the mind surchargd with extremes, has
least utterance of grief: I leave you to suppose of my sorrows which I cannot
manifest. But know Lord Lentulus, that when the report of your sickness came to
the ears of your new entertained friends, Terentia sighed as pitying with a
common passion the ill of her countryman, but as one that might not relieve
being intercepted with other loves. Cornelia chid, as holding your self in
highest esteem, alleging reasons to her that admitted no reasons, but her
own love which is without reason. My self sorrowed, as wishing desert should
have his due, where the honor of the man merits no less: we persuaded in
vain, and in seeking to bring Terentia to the bay, we endeavored to quench
fire with swords. Seeing then your thoughts level at a wrong mark, and that
no suits can divert her from her froward conceit, in careless extremes use
patience, wrestle with love, being wronged by love: yield not to the arrest of
Cupids mace, but as he is young so hold him a boy. Consider as Terentia is
fair, so she is cruel: and as she is full of favor, so she is too too
unkind. Fly not with Apollo after Daphnis: Dyana has more nymphs as chaste,
and yet not so coy: use love my Lentulus as children do puppies, which while
they are pliant and gentle they cherish up with crummes, but when they wax
churlish they beat away with strokes. Think Room is the mistress of the
world, and has many fair dames, if not of such excellency as Terentia yet
are they more courteous, and no less virtuous. The curious Herbalists measure
not the plants by their colors but by their properties: the Lapidaries make
estimate of their stones not by their outward hue, but by the secret virtues.
Use then the ancient custom of Esculapius, let lillies wither on the stalk
and wear violets in thy hand, the one fair and unsavory, the other black
but of sweet verdure. Let these counsels Lentulus confute thee, apply them
not as outward plastures, but as inward potions: which if they profit, none
shall be more glad then Flauia, who wishes if she might in this hard extreme
to discover the honor of her thoughts, and the resolution of a friend: if
ought rests in me that may pleasure Lentulus, command it of Flauia, as one
knowing Lentulus desires are wholly honorable. Thus praying thou may have
ease in thy passions through end of thy loves: I will offer sacrifice for thy
health as she that fears her own prejudice without thy recovery.

Thine, Flauia of Room.


No sooner had Flauia ended her letter, but she sealed it and sent it away,
and with as much speed as might be, it was conveyed to Lentulus, who reading
the superscription, and perceiving it came from a woman, supposing it was sent
from Terentia, started up in his bed and rent open the s^ales: when he had read
the contents, and saw it came from Flauia, noting the extremity of her love by
the plain discovery of her passions: he said to himself.

Unjust love that settles thy delight in crossing with contraries. Some thou
piercest with desire, other with disdain: infusing sundry effects in diverse
affects. I covet Terentia and she is cruel: Flauia favors thee, and thou art
tied to other loves. What restes in these extremes but to curse fancy, that
makes such a confused chaos of her follyes. Oppose then reason against
affection, and admit not of loves conclusions unless they be approved
principles Thy thoughts are devoted to Terentia, and she only vouchsafes thee
the verdict of her ears. Thou art more honorable then she, of richer
revenues then her dowry can satisfy, having as many deserts as she has
beauties: and yet coy dame as she is, she twits thee with Vesta when God
wotte Venus is the goddess that hears her orisons. If thou have this insight
into her thoughts, why wrongs thou thy self with such careless passions? If
she be so ^amage let her fl^e and seek for a (...) that may prove more
gentle: Let her glory like Narcissus in her beauties: Love can chastise if it
be but with self love. Use no physic Lentulus but the consideration of her
frowardness, Let the drugs of Apollo serve for others not for thee. Thrust out
fancy by force, and setting Terentia at light esteem, make choice of Flauia:
Though (...) be not so beautiful, yet she is second to her in graces, and
far beyond her in courtesies. Tie not thy self Lentulus so strick^ly to a
wo^ans face, beauty is but times flower, that as it is delicate so it s^^e
withers: Like the colors that Phidias drew in his pictures, which showing
most glorious to the eye was yet blemished with every breath. Venus was fair
and wanton: Helen the miracle of Greece, but ask Troy of her qualities. Ah but
Terentia is as chaste as she is bautifull. So is Flauia to, and far more
loving. Her birth is of higher descent, her wealth more, her virtues no less:
but her love such as may challenge thy affection for debt. Ah but Lentulus yet
Terentia her excellency is more then can be shaken off with so slight reasons:
and with that he shrunk down into his bed, falling to his old complaints:
yet did this letter of Flauia somewhat comfort him, that he found it his best
physic. But leaving him in his bed, again to Terentia who felt the disquiet
of her mind as restless. For the Senators daily repairing to her fathers
house, had no other table talk but of the eloquence of Tully, some commending
his wit, other his study, some his virtues, but all his special gifts of
nature, that they put oil into the flame: and with these praises so set on
fire Terentias fancy, as nothing tumbled in her thoughts but the excellency of
Cicero: being so impatient as she sought by all means possible to come to his
sight, and to feed her eye with that wherewith she had enchanted her ears,
finding no ready way to attain the end of her desires, until love that like
Mercury is full of shifts and subtlety, devised this plot. Tully being borne in
a little village adjoining unto Room called Arpinatum, used often to make his
intercourse between the town and the city for his pleasure: Which Terentia
having learned out, thought this the fittest means to have a sight of her
Cicero. So that one day to take the air accompanied with her two friends
Flauia and Cornelia, having but a page to attend upon them, she walked abroad
into the fields. Passing thus in merry chatte toward Arpinatum, having some
glances at the sickness of Lentulus, they had not walked above a mile before
Flauia spied Tullie coming from Arpinatum to Room. As Soon as she had
discried him, and for certainety knew that it was he, yonder quoth she comes
that odd man of Room, that excellent Orator Marcus Tullius Cicero, so highly
renowned through all our provinces for his eloquence, now shall we hear from
Lentulus, for they are the most familiar friends and private companions in
Room. Terentia at (...) as one wakened out of a dream gave a start, and
casting up her eye espied the Paramour of her thoughts, which drive her into
such an ecstasy, that surcharged with over much joy she felt an unacquainted
trembling in her (...). Being thus perplexed Tully drawing nigh, and seeing
Terentia accompanied with his f^iende Flauia, gave (...) to opportunity that
she had so highly favored his (...) Lentulus, as that he might now plead for
his safety. Tully thus incountring those three Roman damsels after a
courteous Salve which made Terentia blush, he began thus to board them.

The place sweet Romans so aptly agreeing to the person, this valley
resembling Idas, and Rome Troy, I cannot but bash with Paris at the sight of
three such god^^^ses, whose deity surpassed those which iudicially y^
shepharde suruaied with his eye: Humbly therefore saluting you as Dianas
darlings and beauties wonder, seeing so small a train for such excellent
personages, although my affairs be serious and of importance, yet please it
you to vouche of my service, I will attend on your walks and conduct you safe
to Rome. Terentia feeding her eyes on the sweet of Tullies face, and swilling
down the nectar of his divine eloquence, stayning her cheeks with such a die,
as did the fair queen of Cartharge courted by Aeneas, she made him this
answer.

How you make compare Cicero of this valley with the plains of Troy as little
skilled in Geographie or red in Homers Iliads I leave without reply. For y^
goddesse^ that Paris incountred we are equal with them in nu^^er though far
inferior to them in beauty. For your service we accept it, and for your wages
you shall have gracions looks and hearty thanks. Seeing therefore we are
merrily minded, supposing your self to be the sheepeharde which of us shall be
your Venus? Not you madam quoth Tullie above all the rest: And why so quoth
Terentia? because quoth Tullie the least ^lie has his spleen the smallest ant
her gall, no hair so little but he has his shadow, and no man so mean but
he has his envy: Why then quoth Terentia I will discarde you from the office
of Paris as a man partial. But I pray thee Cicero wherein should I offend
thee having never seen thee before? In this quoth he that Lentulus has seen
you: with that she blushed, and Flauia and Cornelia fell into a great laughter,
that Tullie had so roughly crossed her over the thumbs. Tullie prosecuting his
purpose went forward thus. For know madam that Lentulus the richest Trophee
that fortune settes up in the Theator of honor made shipwreck of his liberty
for the report of your beauty, leaving the wars and the great hope of his
fortunes to have a sight of Terentia, who unkind not like Venus in courtesy,
though in favors; have counterpoysde his fancy with mis^ike, and for the
honey of his amorous thoughts have powered him down heaps of bitter and
displeasing gall. The cruelty of Cresida never amated so the hardy Troilus as
the frown of Terentia has pierst Lentulus, making so deep a wound as no
physic can cure only your sweet self, whose resolutions are so far from
the properties of your face, as it seems the gods wronged nature in placing an
adamant heart within a crystal couerture. The Ladies hearing Tully so sharp,
bitte the lip and Terentia grieved: angry she could not be as one that was
over the shoes in affection, but thus she cut him off.

I cannot judge Cicero by your sharp and peremptory inuectiues upon so small
acquaintance, but you profess your self a Cinicke. If your philosophy be
such, I will br^^k the blows as well as Alexander, and think nothing ill that
is spoken from Diogenes. Howsoever or whatsoever Cynicke or stoicke, I argue
thus against Lentulus, that vows made to Vesta are to be holden inuiolated,
and resolutions to live a virgin are not to be broken with marriage. Cornelia
and Flauia hearing them thus far in by the ears, walked a little aside and
left Tully to school Terentia: who maintained her arguments thus. Suppose
Tully it were not chaste thoughts but new loves that forced me to this refusal:
have not trees their strings and women their fancies and affections? If his
autum showers coming too late cause not his crops to prove, what is that to
me? Love consists in unity: the heart has but one string, the heaven one
sun, and the Iris one property, and women but one love: and that I tell thee
Tully, is placed on one that is as famous for his virtues as Lentulus for his
wealth and dignities. And what then can I give, or he rightly challenge? Tully
although he conceived in his thoughts that Terentia yielded great reason, yet
he would not give over the chase so, but made this reply. Ah but madame have
an insight into the depth of his affections, how he aims not at your
treasures hoping to be enriched by your great dowry, For Lentulus is of the
welthiest family in Room: but leuels at your virtues, the sirens against whom
he could not use Ulysses policy. If affections be but a little past, if love
has but drawn one line in your thoughts with his pensell: wrestle with
fancy, blot out loves shadows, and help Lentulus: who if you remain so
cruel shall be no more Lentulus. If he dye for love, how shall the streets
swarm with statues of his constancy? If you be known the chief actor of the
tragedy, how will the people murmr of your cruelty? Weigh this madame, I
speak as a familiar of Lentulus, and no enemy to Terentias honor. If he be a
Roman that Terentia loves, let him either be more honorable, more valiant,
more affable, more excellent every way then Lentulus, nay more loving then the
poor gentleman, or else discarde him for a man insufficient either to taste of
Terentias beauty, or to be corriual with Lentulus in his loves. Terentia had
yielded at this fierce assault, had not love laid an instance before her of
her resolution. For the more Tully pleaded for his friend, the more was
Terentia enamoured: so that she made him this answer.

If I knew how to certify Lentulus of this days discourse, he should highly
reward you for playing so well the Orator. But I marvel Cicero that being
young, and of such eloquence, we hear not of your loves: I fear you reach so
hye, that you think no maids in Room honorable enough for your paramour.
Were I a man and had Tullies grace, and his tongue, I would plead for my self:
and use one word for my friend, and two for my self. So madame (quoth he)
should men account me a faithless friend, and a flattering lover. But
leaving these suppositions madam, how answer you my last reason? With love
quoth she and that is without reason, for how might the gentleman to whom I
find my self affectionate, think himself wronged if without cause I should
be inconstant. Grant I my love to the meanest citizen, a monarch shall not
make conquest of my thoughts. Suppose sir it were your self, and that Terentia
loved Tully, could you brook an other to brave you in your affections. I
would madame quoth Tully if it were no supposition. And how then quoth Terentia
if it were not? Then would I quoth he become Esculapius to Lentulus, and
swear his disease should not be incurable, for I would conjure you by the
rightes of love, by the sacred laws of Venus, and by the affection that were
imprinted in your thoughts, to bestow what y^u would impart upon me to my
only joy Lord Lentulus. But women cannot make love voluntary. Tush madame what
cannot women do for love? Any thing quoth Terentia but change love. Therefore
concealing the party that I love, I will say and swear Tully is my love, and
so say to Lentulus. With this Terentia blushed, and for very grief that Tully
would not see into her thoughts the tears stood in her eyes: which Tully
spying, it so pricked him to the heart, that it never after was rased out. To
smooth therefore his rough method with a few fine filed phrases, he salued
the matter thus. It is madame impossible to drive fire downward, or to make
heavy things to mount: Nature will not be wronged, nor love drawn out by
constraint, therefore I will leave any more at this time to sue for Lentulus:
hoping the consideration of his martyrdom will at length make battery into the
bulwark of your breast, and whereas you will swear Tully is your l^ue: you
know madame we have in ou^ twelve tables a law against perjury, but if you
vouch to grace me that title, in all duty I will rest your ever bounden servant.
Why then servant quoth she, let us to yonder two Ladies, that for want of a
companion are feign to make an amarous knight of my page. Flauia seeing they
were half agreed, ^earing Tully by his eloquence had persuaded Terentia, waxed
pale and incountred them thus. What news quoth she, does Lentulus win or
loose? Neither madame quoth Tully but his cause hanges still in suspense, the
next court day I will end my oration, and then the Judge shall give verdict. As
they were ready to have gone forward in some pleasant prattle they espied a
horseman making toward them with the greatest speed that might be. When he
came within ken, Tully knew it to be Lentulus man, and before he had leisure to
do his message, he demanded how his master did: passing sick sir quoth he,
and has sent that you be with him presently. Tully who was touched at the
quick with this news, put foot in the stirrup and mounted, yet as one
forgetting himself he used these words. Pardon Ladies, if I pass manners and
promise, in leaping up without leave, and returning in such post without your
company: It is for Lentulus whom you all love, and therefore I hope to rest
blameless. Now madam Terentia what shall I say to Lentulus? No more quoth she
then what I said to Tullie, but how concludes Tullie of his last premises?
that quoth he, Terentia shall frame the argument, and so with this dark
Aenigma he took leave of the Ladies: who after his departure fell in talk of
his perfections. Terentia so deeply praising the man that her companions
easily perceived her loves, and smilde that in forsaking a flower she light
upon a weed. Well tracing still amongst the medows they chanced into a valley
most curiously decked with Floras delicates, in which were such variety of
flowers, that nature seemed there to have planted the storehouse of her
prodigality. Adjoining to this valley was a pleasant river and a grove that
gave a grace to Cloris excellency: delighted with the situation of this
place, as they passed along they met^e a shepherd, who doing reverence to the
dames: Terentia demanded of this swain what the name of this pleasant place
was. Madam quoth he we sheepehardes here call it the vale of Love, And why so
quoth Cornelia? Although madam quoth he my flock has no guide but my dog, and
now in yeaning time the wolves are very busy, yet for that I see you are
Senators daughters, and with all passing courteous I will show the reason, and
with that leaning on his staff the Ladies sitting down he began thus.

The Sheepheardes tale.
NOt many years since here in Arpynatu^ dwelt a shepherdise called Phillis, so
famous for her beauty that the Senators sons which you call Pretextati not
only came to feed their eyes with her favors but to satifie their fancies with
her loves: in so much that she was courted of many brave Roman Gentlemen.
But she that held love at the staffes end, although her parents had left her
rich, yet to banishe Cupid with labor she vouchsaft to be keeper of her own
flocks, fearing the pride of the beauty (if s^e should marry with one of
Rome) would prove an enemy to her humble thoughts: Living as chaste as she
was inrouled for a Vestall, and quoted by Diana for one of her special
followers, her excellency was bruted abroad through all Italy. But she who
feared to gase at stars, for stumbling at stones laid her thoughts low and
made choice of her company with country maids, and homely shepehards: yet
was her attire rich as diverse that traueled this way took her rather for a
Nymphe the follower of some goddess, then a maid and daughter of a poor
swain. While thus she lived lady of the field, there was in the same village
one Coridon, son to a simple sheepeharde who as a Mercinarie man kept sheep
for Vatinius the Senator, that has a Farm hard by. This Coridon was a man of
a pe^fect perfection his hair hung in tresses and his face was beautiful,
wise he was and wanted nothing but wealth to make him the chief of all the
sheepehardes, being of equal years almost with Phill^^ in some two years
elder, he fell extreemely in love with Phillis Enamored was poor Coridon and
pensive by his flock sat ruminating of his passions he smothred his love in
silence for that he was meanest of the swains and she mistress of us all. He
sat and sighed and had none but echo to pity his plaintes his flock left
their food to see their (...) sorrow his pipe ceast, the fol^es were never
^^re partaker of his melody, and all these thoughts and ^^res for Phillis.
She wily and spying this wanton dal^^^ in the flame, looked narrowly into the
perfection of the man whom she found worthy of love, if his parents had not
been too mean and his wealth none at all, suppres^ing this love with lack^ and
quenching the fire with the defe^^^s she found in Coridon. But Cupid that
could not b^ooke such exceptions pitying the passions of the poor sheepharde,
pulled forth an inuenomed b^ult and pierst Phillis so deep that Coridon began
to be master of her thoughts, now she praisd his beauty, his behavior, his
wit, his gestures, ^o that nothing was amiss in Coridon. If he pipt, Apollo
was not like her Pan, if he sung his voice was without compare, if he told
tales they were excellent, if put forth riddles they were witty. Coridon was
the sheepehard that Phillis did fancy, and no flocks might grase by hirs but
those of Coridon. This mistress can love do, who thought he be choisly honored
in Rome, yet he finds some idle time to dally amongst sheepehards. Well at
last Coridon spyed Phillis looks and got some hope of favor, first he
courted with his eyes, and after natures law fell to prattle with interchange
of glaunces, after from looks to words, which after their homely fashion was
very faithfully performed with sighs and tears, such persuasions as
sheepehardes use. Long had they not wooed, but Phillis was willing and she was
won, that after faith and troth as soon as the sheepehards could come
together a feast was made we kept holiday and they were married, and because
these lovers made this place the concealer of their passions the sheepehardes
for perpetual memory of Phillis and Coridon call this the vale of Love, and
in praise thereof we country sheephards made an Ode, which if it please you to
stay I will rehearse. The Ladies passing willing, thus the shephearde began
report.

The Sheepeherds Ode.
WAlking in a valley green,
Spread with Flora summer queen:
Where she heaping all her graces,
Niggard seemd in other places.
Spring it was and here did spring,
All that nature forth can bring:
Groves of pleasant trees there grow,
Which fruit and shadow could bestow.
Thick leaued boughs small birds cover,
Till sweet notes themselves discover:
Tunes for number seemed confounded,
Whilst their mixtures music sounded.
Greeing well, yet not agreed,
That one the other should exceed.
A sweet stream here silent glides,
Whose clear water no fish hides.
Slow it runs which well bewraid,
The pleasant shore the current staid:
In this stream a rock was planted,
Where nor art nor nature wanted.
Each thing so did other grace,
As all places may give place.
Only this the place of pleasure,
Where is heaped natures treasure.
Here mine eyes with wonder staide.
Eyes amasd and mind afraid:
Ravished with what was beheld,
From departing were withheld.
Musing then with sound advise,
On this earthly paradise:
Sitting by the river side,
Lovely Phillis was discride;
Gold her hair, bright her eyes,
Like to Phoebus in his shine.
White her brow, her face was fair,
Amber breath perfumde the air.
Rose and Lilly both did seek,
To show their glories on her cheek.
Love did nestle in her looks,
Baiting there his sharpest hooks.
Such a Phillis nere was seen,
More beautiful then Loves Queen,
Doubt it was whose greater grace,
Phillis beauty or the place.
Her coat was of scarlet red,
All in pleates a mantle spread:
Fringd with gold, a wreath of bows,
To check the sun from her brows.
In her hand a shepherds hook,
In her face Dianas look:
Her sheep grased on the plains,
She had stolen from the swains.
Under a cool silent shade,
By the streams she garlands made.
Thus sat Phillis all alone,
Mist she was by Coridon
Chiefest swain of all the rest,
Lovely Phillis like him best.
His face was like Phoebus love,
His neck white as Venus Dove,
A ruddy cheek filde with smiles,
Such love has when he beguiles.
His locks brown, his eyes were gray,
Like Titan in a summer day.
A russet Iacket sleeves red,
A blew bonnet on his head:
A cloak of gray fencst the rain,
Thus tired was this lovely swain.
A shepherds hook his dog tide,
Bag and bottle by his side:
Such was Paris shepherds say,
When with Oenone he did play.
From his flock straid Coridon,
Spying Phillis all alone:
By the stream he Phillis spide,
Brauer then was Floras pride.
Down the valley began he tracke,
Stole behind his true loves back:
The sun shone and shadow made,
Phillis rose and was afraid.
When she saw hit lover there,
Smile she did and left her fear:
Cupid that disdain does loath,
With desire struck them both.
The swain did woo she was nise,
Following fashion nayed him twice:
Much adooe he kissed her then,
Maidens blush when they kiss men:
So did Phillis at that stowre.
Her face was like the rose flower.
Last they greed for love would so,
Faith and troth they would no mo.
For shepherds ever held it sin,
To false the love they lived in.
The swain gave a girdle red,
She set garlands on his head.
Gifts were given they kiss again,
Both did smile for both were feign.
Thus was love among shepherds sold,
When fancy knew not what was gold:
They woed and vowed, and that they keep,
And go contented to their sheep.
The end of the shepherds Ode.
As Soon as the shepeharde repeated his Ode, Terentia delighted with the
description of the pastoral love for that it touched her passions gave him
hearty thanks and so the swain took his leave and departed. Terentia and
the rest hereupon growing into the effects of love that keeps no proportion
of persons, wandering on talking toward the grove. And for that the sun^e
grew hot and was risen to the highest zenith of the heavens, seeking for
shelter they went into the grove which was seated hard by the pleasant current,
finding out there a place convenient, these three Ladies ^it them down upon
the grass, where delighted with the melody of the birds, and the c^^lenesse
of the shade they fell a sleep. Then lived in Rome Vatinus y^ Senator which
was one of the most wealthy in possessions of any that had been consul in
the City, favored every way by fortune, had he not been thwarted by one
grievous and doleful misfortune. For this Vatinius amongst many children had
his eldest son as first in birth, so brauest in proportion, of such exquisite
lyneaments touching the outward shape, as nature seemed to have been curious
in her workmanshippe: but otherwise he was so foolish and of clownish
capacity that there was no hope of his future conceit, his name was after his
father Vatinius. But for because neither by the diligence of any master, nor
the flattery of his friends, correction, or any other industry he could be
made capable of learning or civility, using fashions and words from a harshe
and gross voice, reresembling rather a brute beast then a reasonable
creature, he was in derision called of every man Fabius the Fool. Vatinius
greeuing that the gods had offered him this wrong for that the presence of
Fabius was the continual source of his sorrows, he commanded that he
should go to his Farm, and there live amongst his shepherds. This was no
little content to Fabius as one that delighted more in the nature of Clownes
and bondslaues then in the courtly behauior of libertines and gentlemen. Fabius
thus being in the country applying himself to all principles of husbandry,
one day amongst the rest walked forth with a great batte on his neck to
ouer-see his fathers pastures, at last for y^ the Sun was hie and shone hot,
he went into the grove then all ouerclad with leaves, for it was far spring,
and feeling a place wherein at pleasure to rest himself, he stumbled by
fortune on the fount where Terentia lay a sleep, who when Fabius espied being
clad in a robe of Bisse so thin as the whitenes of her skin did appear,
having her two companions by her side, he began as one amazed to behold.
Leaning therefore on his great batte without vttring one word, he stood in
great admiration what she should be, as though he had never seen so brave a
creature before. Now entering into his rusticall and blunt understanding (where
never before could be engraven any impression of honest civility a thought of
fancy which made him confess in his gross and material spirits that this
maid was the ^airest thing y^ ever could be censured by sight. In this humor
he began to descant of her several beauties, praising her hair to be of gold,
her forehead of Iuorie, her lips ^oral, and above all her two breasts which
then began to appear like pretty tender buddes, in such simple sort so
distinguishing of her favors that from a gross clown he became to be a
Judge of Beauty: especially coveting to see her eyes which heavy sleep had
shut up, determining often to have waked her to have contented himself with
their sight. But seeing her more fair then any creature that before he had
seen, he thought her to be some Goddess. Having thus far knowledge that
things divine should be reverenced more then human, and therefore durst not
attempe to wake her, but (although she had a sound and long sleep) took
such pleasure in contemplating her perfections that he would by no delay
depart. At last after a long space Terentia awaked before any of the rest,
lifting up her drowsy eyes she saw before her Fabius leaning upon his
staff, whereof being half amazed she asked of him. Fabius, what seek
thou here in this grove? Fabius who as well by his countenance as clemency and
for the nobility of his house, as the riches of his father, was generally
known of all the Romans, made no answer to Terentia: but seeng her eyes open
he began to look steadfastly upon them feeling a pleasing content to issu^ from
those Lamps which sparkle as the very flames of love: insomuch that Terentia
seeing him gase so earnestly fearing the sturdie clown might offer her some
violence wakened her companions and starting up said Fabius farewell. To whom
Fabius made answer I will go with you. And although Terentia refused as
being surprised with great fear of his rustical disposition, yet he would not
forsake her till he had brought her to her Fathers house, where bluntly leaving
the Lady he went home to his Fathers; saying he would not return ani^ more
into the country. Although it grieved his Father to have his sorrow
continually before his eyes, yet wondering what ye occasion of this strange
motion should mean, he was content to let him remain at home in the City.
Loves arrows thus piercing into the heart of Fabius whereinto never before any
civil thought could enter, made such a Metamorphosis of his mind that not
only his Father and friends, but all Room began to wonder at his sudden
alteration: for he required to be apparelled as the son of a Senator which
his father with all diligence performed, then frequenting the most courteous
and honest young Gentlemen of the City, especially such as were amorous, he to
the great astonishig of all not only learned his letters, but became very
studious, grew to have deep insight into philosophy, to be skillful in
music, to ride a horse and to be expert in all gentle and manlike actiuitie,
to conclude in short space he was one of the brauest young men of Rome.

Here by the way courteous Ladies and brave gentlemen what shall I say of the
transformatio^ of Fabius? only in my opinion this: That y^ high virtues of the
heavens infused into his noble breast were imprisoned by y^ envious wrath of
Fortune within some narrow corner of his heart, whose bands went a sunder by
love, as a Lord to mighty for fortune. Cupid the raiser up of sleepy thoughts
dispersed those virtues into every part of his mind obscured before with the
eclipse of base thoughts. Let us then think of love as of the most purest
passion that is inserted into the heart of man. Well, leaving Fabius studious
how to excel in all laudable virtues, again to Tullie, who arrived in post
haste to the lodging of Lentulus and found him passing sick, yet somewhat
comforted at the sight of Cicero, as of him y^ he held most dear in the world.
Tullie seeing him so ill and full of passions durst not tell him y^ he had seen
Terentia least her froward answer should augment his misery, concealing
therefore his chat y^ he had with y^ Ladies, at last Lentulus showed him the
letter of Flauia: whereupon they fell to discourse of her beauties and virtues,
how she was not much inferior to Terentia in favor, but far beyond her in
honors, discoursing so long from point to point that after a vole of broken
sighs tempered with some tears he fell a sleep. Tullie glade that he took
a nappe stole softly out of the Chamber, and being by himself calling to mind
the words of Terentia began to enter into this combat with himself.

So pliant are the aspectes of the foreappointing stars in some men's nativity
as they force fortune mauger her own variable nature to be constant. Amongst
all that have been borne in the poor village of Arpinatum, thou may Tullie
say that thy planets have been pleasing, and thy desires favorable, who the
son of a poor Fermour art in hope to make thy house equal with the most in
Room. Measure but thy honor and Judge of thy fortunes: thy family base, yet
art thou companion with Senators and men of grauest account in the City.
Honor treades on thy heel and dignity daunceth attendance at thy looks: but
love Cicero, that deity, that divine essence that seals up content in all
estates he stoopeth at thy frown, presents thee wreaths of myrtle that thou
may enter into Paphos without check. Terentia the wonder of Rome, Natures
Paragon, the refined beauty of the heavens, she that seems to glaunce on the
Pretextati: she that makes no account of the miracle of our time, Lord
Lentulus: she Cicero commanded by love, yields her self captive to the son
of a poor country villager in Arpinatum. Then Tullie strew Venus temple with
roses, say there is no fount but Alcydalion: no hill but Erecinus: no bird but
the dove: no god but Cupid. Loose not opportunity, take her by the foreheade,
let not slip occasion, for she glydes away like a shadow, nor love, for she
hangs at the heels at time. Now Terentia has put the iron in the fire,
strike then while it is hot, pay her down pounds of love for drams of fancy,
for in matching with the daughter of a senator, think it presageth thou shall be
a Senator: so shall thou gain at one time honor, dignity, wealth, and beauty;
but with that loose thy faith Tully, thy faith thou have vowed to Lentulus, who
shuts up his secrets in thy heart, and rests his thoughts on thy bosom.
Will thou prefer honor before thy friend, or wealth before conscience. Ah
Tully if thou be the man y^ Room woondreth at for thy eloquence, be also the
man that they shall canonize for thy virtues. Beauty is but a bauins blaze,
wealth is but a fickle favor of fortune, dignity is haunted by envy: but
friendship that is the precious treasure that neither time nor fortune can
violate. Why but Terentia will never love Lentulus, then Tully hate thou ever
Terentia. I am a man and subject unto love as well as Lentulus: So art thou a
man and being false to thy friend art unworthy all love. Abandon Tully these
vain imaginations, ^ount Terentia foul, deformed, vicious and what not, as
long as one spark of love lies rakt up in the cynders of thy thoughts: and as
long as Lentulus loves her, hate her for thy self, and ^oue her for Lentulus.
Setting down his rest at this period, he went into the chamber to see if
Lentulus were awake, but finding him still fast a sleep, he went toward the
Capitol, where he met with Flaminius the father of Terentia who demanded very
heartily how Lentulus did. Cicero with a deep sigh said passing sick. Whereof
quoth Flaminius grows the disease, I heard that Asclapo judges his sickness to
be mortal. Tully thinking to set all on the dice, not respecting his own love
but his faith to his friend, began thus. Grave Senator, I need not rehearse
Lentulus birth, as being a citizen, nor his revenues, his possessions long
known to every man, nor his honors ended in victories, for the Parthians are
sufficient evidence of his well discharged dignities and valor. Lentulus
graced in the prime of his youth with these favors, hearing of the beauty of a
Roman Lady, left the wars and came to Room, where courting his mistress
not with wanton poemes, but with terms of marriage: he f^und her froward,
and his love dashed in the prime. The impression of her beauty graven with too
deep a caracter was too fast rooted in his heart to be thrust out with
denial: yet Lentulus to content her, plays like the phoenix, burns in his
own parfumes, rather wishing to die then to contrary her resolution. This is
the cause that first brought Lentulus to his bed, and this ere long will
bring him to his grave. And who may it be quoth Flaminius, of what family, of
what beauty, of what degree, that can or dare deny Lord Lentulus? Is he not
mighty and may command by force, what he cannot obtain by entreaty? will not
the soldiers at his beck rise in arms? Fear not the Consuls themselves to
wrong Lentulus? Does not all Room hang their thoughts at his looks? Ah
miserable father that harbors such a daughter, and stubborn huswife that
denies so brave a Roman. In friendship Tully tell me who it is. Cicero
willing to put a spur to a free horse, and to loose his own content to win
his friends quiet, told him flatly it was his daughter Terentia: and for
proof he showed him the letters that past betwixt Lentulus and her. As Soon as
her father had read the contents, as a man half mad he fell into furious and
frantic terms, exclaiming against the headstrong humor of foolish Terentia.
After he had breathd out the heat of his choler, he fell to be somewhat
appeased, and bad Tully home to supper, promising all should sort according
unto Lentulus mind. With that departing from the Capitol, Tully and he went
home to his house, where the Cook being somewhat slack: Flaminius hearing his
daughter was all alone in the garden, he wished Tully to try her once again,
and to persuade her by all possible means to grant to the request of Lentulus.
Upon this Tully went into the garden where finding Terentia sitting solitary in
an arbor up to the hard ears in a dumpe, he wakened her out of her muse thus.
Vestas chief paragon, and Venus new interteined darling, you madam Terentia I
mean, that sit in a muse: are you offering orisons to Diana for your chastity,
or thanks to Cupid for your loves: or what are you thinking on when you think
on nothing? Terentia turning her head and seeing Tully all alone, blushed more
then Cynthia did when she wantond it with her fair faced shepherd, yet
welcomming her love with a smile, she took him by the hand and made him this
answer.

Your subtle salutation concluding Vesta and Venus in one Dilemma commands me
answer that I was doing my devotion to both, offering prayers for my old
thoughts and thanks for my new loves: and scarce had I said gramercy to the
goddess, but you must come Cicero to make my thanks prodigious: for my
thinking when I thought of nothing it was of men's loves which are lighter then
the flame, and sooner faded then a flash of lightning: But I pray you say what
wind has driven you into this coast.

Marry madame the very sighs that fly from Lentulus breast grew to so great a
storm that I was blown hither to seek shelter for the tempest. You have
nothing quoth Terentia but Lentulus in your mouth: I pray you say how fares the
gentleman? Ill madame quoth Tully every way, for his diet is badde in that his
stomach is naught, and his health is doubtful in that his thoughts are
disquiet: and madame it rests in you to save so honorable a gentleman not
only from sickness but from sorrow: Aeneas was a straggling Trojan an exile
perjured and banished even from the ruins of Troy, yet Dydo the famous Carthage
queen made him her paramour. Demophoon a pyrat a robber in Greece cast up as
shipwreck on the shore, yet interteind by Phillis. Phao a ferryman, a slave,
yet favored by Sapho. Lentulus the hope of the Romans, more beautiful then
Eneas, more courageous the Demophoon, more honorable then Phao, more loving
then them all, is refused and rejected by Terentia, his neighbor and familiar.
Think not Terentia but love as he has roses so he has nettles, as he has
perfumes so has he hemblocke, and holding favors the claspeth revenge, as
ready to pierce as to pacifi^. If you procure Lentulus death, Cupid has power
to enforce your despair, and to cause your love to be as fickle to you as you
are froward to him. Then madam let me be the messenger of life, and from your
sweet self carry such conserues to Lentulus as may recover his health and
increase your honors. This discourse of Tully did but set Terentias heart
more on fire. For hearing the pleasant harmony of her Cicero, she likt of the
music as of the Sirens melody, and so entangled her self with many new
conceived fancies, insomuch that forgetting whose daughter she was, she burst
forth into these terms.

Did I not Cicero tell thee twixt Arpinatum and Room, y^ love has but one
cell wherein to place the Idaea of y^ party loved: will thou have me like the
Camelion to have many colors, or like Helena to intertain many loves? I know
Lentulus dignities are beyond my degree, that his honors are more then my
fortunes, that his love is great, and so I hold him the second in my most
secret thoughts: first he cannot be and that he craves. Thou do wring
water out of the flint, fire forth of y^ dry sands, and immodesty from her
that has ever been honored for chastily: so that by wastlesse persuasions
for thy friend, I am forced to say thou art the friend that Terentia has
chosen amongst all the worthy Romans: Before I saw thee Tully I loved thee,
and now I have settled my affection, and thou wrongst me with discurtesie: but
either cease from entreating for Lentulus, or look to see me worse then
Lentulus. And with this blushing at her own overmuch loves, she poured forth
such abundance of tears, as well might bew^ay the sincerity of her affections.
Tully greeuing to see the goddess of his thoughts in this passion answered
her, mildly thus. Blame me not Terentia if I plead for Lentulus, seeing his
sorrow, and entering into mine own promise. Then friendship is no sweeter
jewel, then how can I but labor ere I loose so rich a prize. But seeing
Terentia has vouchsafed of so mean a man as Tully, whose honors only hanges
in his studies: love being the strictest league of amity and no such
friendship as is marriage: I vow by the Roman gods, ever to be a duetifull
servant unto a Terentia: and with my loyalty so to requite her favors, as
Room shall more admire my affections then they have woondred at my eloquence:
yet with this prouiso (my sweet Terentia) that although I prefer thy favors
before mine own life, yet if thou can strive to love Lentulus, which if
either the gods, love, fortune, or thy self can bring to pass, I will with
mine own prejudice conquer mine own thoughts to satisfy the content of
Lentulus. As Terentia was ready to reply, one of her fathers servants came to
request Cicero to come to supper, who taking his leave of Terentia went in to
her father Flaminius, who sitting down to supper, passed away the time in
ordinary talk. Their repast being taken, Flaminius calling Tully on the one
side, demanded what his daughters answer was. Peremptory quoth Tully still to
hold Lentulus in mislike. Then you shall hear quoth her father what I will
say, and so report to Lentulus: so calling for Terentia they three being
together, he began thus.

I know not how Terentia to insinuate my exordium, whether friendly to
persuade with a smyle, or fatherly to admonish with a frown: thy follies are
so great, and my care so tender. Room has hitherto admyred thy virtues, and I
have praised thy obedience: thou have been counted honorable and chaste, wise
to eschew wantonness, but never coy to be thought disdainefull: and shall now
all these graces end in disgrace? Then Terentia may thou repent hereafter,
and I power forth present sorrows. I speak thus, for that I hear in the city
what makes me to grieve, and may force thee to blush. They say Terentia is
beautiful and proud, witty and ouerweening, having coy disdain crept into the
place of courteous desire: this men say that envy thy follyes, and grieve at
Lentulus fortunes. Now daughter thou see the mark I aim at, and may
judge of my shot by the level: Lentulus is fallen into a fever, which Asclapo
that famous Physician of Patras censures to be mortal. Thy frowardnes was the
efficient of the disease, and now thou deniest cure of the malady. Unaduised
gyrle, that neither weighest of thine own honors, nor his miseries. Lentulus
requires Terentia in marriage: let us make compare of the parties, and so
examine the cause of thy denials. He is descended from the Lentuli and Aemilij,
two houses that ever have been the props of the Roman dignities. His honors
are great, as proconsul in his youth against the Parthians: His fortunes
mighty, doubled with his conquests and victories: His revenues such as he may
with Crassus maintain Legions. If like Venus darling thou seek to feed
thine eye, his favor is more then his that pleased Cynthia. If thou couetest a
soldier, Lentulus in Room is as Hector was in Troy. If a Courtier, who braues
it so in Italy? To conclude if Terentia covet to love, there is none so fit to
love within the Roman Empire as Lentulus. Whereas Terentia is but the
daughter of a mean Senator, her dowry cannot be much, for that her fathers
wealth is not great: Beautiful she is, and so are many in Room, who are of
meaner parentage. Her glories are but fortunes pelf, that florishe in the
morning, and fade before night. What then can move Terentia to oppose her
self against Lentulus? unless she fatally presageth her own discredit, and
the ruin of her fathers house. If then daughter thou art child to Flaminius, I
charge thee by the strickt law of nature, which Philosophers call Regius amor a
kingly love, if thou be a maid, by the holy fires of Vesta: if beautiful, by
Venus deity: if a Roman, by thy Countries love, that thou love Lentulus:
which if thou refuse to perform, thy father shall curse thee, Vesta shall shut
thee from her temples, Venus from her favors, and thy country from inioying
the sweet content of honor, and then make thee outcast of all the Roman
virgins. More are my reasons to allege, then thy reasons able to contrary:
but omitting all and saying he is only Lentulus: Daughter what answer?

Terentia seeing her father in such a choler, and that he was induced unto it
by Ciceros perswasio^s in a fury began thus frantike. I not deny but Fathers
challenge love by nature and obedience by duty, and both those sir I hope I
have ever performed, if not I rest sorrowful and heartily crave pardon: but in
love parents have no privilege. For the liking of the Father is no contract
of the daughter. Venus conclusions grow not of parents pr^mises, nor can
affection be like the fire stricken forth a flint, for love is chosen by the
eye and confirmed by the heart, women's thoughts are not the spoils of Mars,
nor is the battle of fancy fought with the sword, but with the Senses, and
loves arrows are pointed by fate and fortune. Weigh then Terentia, who has
not her loves in her hand but in her heart and thereinto none can make breach,
but such a one as the pleasing constellation of the stars have appointed. I not
deny the excellency of Lentulus as well in exterior show of honors, wealth,
dignities, and proportion, as in interior virtues and perfections of the mind,
and that he merittes a Lady of far more esteem then Terentia, but I know
not what contrary aspect either of the planets in our natiuities, or of loves
in our thoughts, or of fortune in our resolution ^o like, has crossed his
desire and my fancy, but of all the Romayne Gentlemen I cannot my Lord fancy
Lentulus. Cressida confessed Troylus was the better knight, and yet the Greek
held her lovely in his tent. Since then affection grows from desire, and
desire is tied to destiny, seek not sir to wring water out of the pumex, to
couple the Mouse and the Elephant at one stall, to unite those loves that Venus
in her Sinod house has expreslie countercheckt. For to answer your
objection, Terentia cannot force her self to love Lentulus. She thus
concluding with a few tears, her father departing from her with a frown, told
Tullie that not reason was sufficient to induce his daughter to be
affectionate, and therefore that he wished Lentulus to appease his passions
and to salve such impossibilities with patience, whereupon they after
interchange of salutations and common courtesies parted with a friendly
farewell. Tullie at his home coming revealed unto Lentulus the whole discourse
how Flaminius had searched into the depth of Terentias thoughts both with
plawsible persuasions and enforced reasons, and could find no other
conclusion but that she could not love Lentulus. Although this news pierced
the very center of his heart as mortallie as if he had been wounded with the
sting of Aspis: yet cheering himself a little he sat up and in his own mind
having about or two with fancy, he gave her so deep a reuie that he held
affection at the swords point. But Tullie who between friendship and love
felt a furious combat, allured with the beauteous perfection of Terentia, and
forbidden that favor by the entyre amity he had vowed unto Lentulus: entered
into so deep a melancholy that not able to master his passions, he fell sick
and kept his bed. Lentulus seeing his Tullie thus distressed grieved at his
friends misfortune, and cheered up himself that he might somewhat comfort his
Cicero that newly was crossed with a distempered sickness. He sought by
physic to search out the nature of the disease, but Asclapo could not deem
the cause by the effects, he sought by entreaties to wrest out the occasion of
so sudden a sorrow, but in vain, Tullie was too secret and silent to make
any show of his loves though he bought such secrecy with death. This grieved
Lentulus who feeling himself every day to amend, perceived that Cicero daily
waxed worse and worse. Lingering thus in inward passions, Terentia that took it
discourteously at Tullies hand that he should force her Father to enforce her
to love Lentulus, seeing she had only devoted hirselfe as his, howsoever
fortune should oppose her self; to ease her mind of some choler that boiled
in her secret thoughts she took pen and ink and wrote him a letter to this
effect.

Terentia to Marcus Tullius Cicero health.
AS my thoughts are secret and my loves extreme, so is unkindness bitter
and the more uneasy borne. Thou playest Tullie with me, as do the Leopards
with there keeper; that ever wrong them most that give them greatest store of
fodder. Are these Venus laws to pay hunnie with Gall, to make rods of nettles
for Garlands of Roses, to hate them most that love most. The ingratitude of
Tullie has drawn Terentia into this choler, and if I write sharply blame me
not that am used so shrowdlie. Before I ever saw thy face I allowed thy
favor, and only hearing of thy virtues with mine ear, I registered them up
deeply in my heart. Terentia has been courted of many, yet never made
account of any: sundry have sought my loves, but they have returned with loss.
Lentulus the terror of the Parthians, the honor of the Romans and thy
friend has long wood, but what has he won? only Tullie has obtained that
which so many have mist, and yet he deals with Terentia as crabbedlie as she
used him courteously, do lovers for fishes proffer scorpions, or do they like
the serpent sting him which cheerisheth him up in his bosom. I seek to favor
Tullie and he importunate sues for favor for Lentulus. Art thou so deep a
philosopher, as to deem friendship above marriage, or faith above fancy, or
thy Terentia less then thy Lentulus? If it be so take heed that Terentia too
much wronged scorns not both thee and Lentulus. Women's thoughts consistes often
in extreemes, and they that love most, if abused, hate most deadly, fear this
and beware of my frown, as yet there is but one wrinckle in my brow, but if it
once prove full of angry sorrows it will be too late to take hold of
occasion behind: Thou art forewarnd be forearmd and so farewell.

Thy Terentia if thou wrong not Terentia.


AFter she had written this Letter she causde it to be conveyed by
Eutrapelus to Tullie, who reading the contents found not a salve to cure his
malady, but that Terentia rubbed the scare a fresh by shaking him up so
sharply, yet coveting rather to die with an honorable mind to Lentulus, then
with a discredit to enjoy beautiful Terentia, he laid his head on his
pillowe, and with many sighs bewraide the depth of his sorrows. Having laid
his letter at his beds head ouercharged with many cares poor Tullie fell a
sleep and so sodenlie that Lentulus by the help of Eutrapelus got to have a
sight of his letter. As Soon as the Gentleman saw how deeply Terentia was
affected to his friend and perceived by the circumstances that he chose rather
to die then to falsify his faith, such a secret love toward Tullie so
pierced the closet of his honorable thoughts that he ^ell to conceit but
meanly of Terentia and to wish that his friend Cicero might both recover his
health and his love. Now began the fancy of Lentulus to freze that erst was
so great a flame, and he that like the Salamander delighted to live in the
fire, began to fear to accedere ad ignem, least he should Calescere plus
quam satis. Now he called to mind the resolution of Terentia tempered with
frowardness, and with this he did proportion the virtues of Flauia mixed with
courtesy, finding the favor of the one aunswerable to the beauty of the
other. Then the faith of his friend, his sickness and extreme sorrows. These
weighed with deep consideration he vowed to seek by all means how to win
Terentia wholly for his friend Cicero. In this humor he conuaide the letter
under his beds head and rested silent till occasion might offer him
opportunity to discover the perfection of his amity. Thus grew Lentulus at
one time from his sickness and his love, walking abroad and visiting Flaminius
who entertained him in all sumptuous manner. But Lentulus seeing the three
Ladies, made no show to Terentia nor scarce glaunced a look upon her
beauty, but only courted the Lady Flauia, who he found so agreeable and
plyant to his suits, that Terentia and Cornelia might easily see how depely
they were linked in the league of affection. Leaving Tullie thus sick on his
bed and Lentulus in sweet content with Flauia, again to our new transformed
Fabius who in this time proved one of the brauest Gentlemen in Rome, and
finding a restless passion in his mind for the beutie of Terentia, as having
continually before his eye the Idaea of her person seeing by her means he was
metamorphosed and brought to this perfection making the force of his love
privy to his Father Vatinius, he was not only praised for his good choice,
but willed to go forward in the optayning of his affections. Whereupon not
willing to make a long harvest to a small crop, to prevent as he thought that
none should cut the grass from under his feet, he went to Terentias Father
and blunt^^ craved his daughter in marriage. He knowing him to be of honorable
parentage and of rich revenues, seeing she would not condiscende unto
Lentulus gave him his francke good will if he could creep into his daughters
favor, who taking the advantage of the time went to find out Terentia, who as
then was very melancholy sitting with Flauia and Cornelia talking of the
sickness of Tully. As they were thus in that, came in Fabius who they straight
knew and wondered at his strange alteration, he to show he could as well
court it as the brauest young gentleman in Rome, began thus courteously to
salute the Ladies.

Marvel not Ladies if a country swayne presume to attempt y^ presence of such
rare excellencies seeing Oenones sheephearde durst with his eye suruay the
beauty of divine goddesses, and they to show they were as gracious and full
of favors gave him the greatest minion that was counted the sweetest Peragon
of the world. Earthly creatures you be, fair Romans, but heavenly faces,
whose looks lighten divine influence into the thoughts of such as dare to
contemplate your affections. I speak this as being the man that from the cart
live in the court, thus metamophosed by your supernatural beauties. For which
favor I am come in duty to rest a bounden voterie to your sweet selves.
Terentia was so pensive for Tullyes passions that she would make no answer:
but Cornelia whom already Cupid had set on fire with Fabius feature she
returned him this reply.

I remember Fabius that sitting in the grove by Arpinatum a gentle swain much
like your self, in proportion though not in properties, seeing we were
slenderly guarded with a page conducted us home to Rome with his friendly
company, if it be your self, had we as brave a Lady as Helena was and were
she in our power to bestow, we would make you master and sole possessour of
her beauties so to reward your courtesy. Fabius seeing the mark so fair
thought not to loose his shoot, but aim^ his level thus.

And for that cause Ladies is Fabius come that his mee^ may not want his
merit, glad that Venus dewes down such favors, and opportunity such showers
of good fortunes to find you all here in so fit a time. For know honorable
Romaine^ that for my gross and rude nature hating the civil behavior of the
city. I was surnamed Fabius: in which obscure life I lived having my senses
eclipsed with folly, till the gods grudging at natures spite, sent you three
to be ministers of my happiness. For coming into the grove where you lay all a
sleep casting mine eye on the beauty of Terentia: Such a deep impression was
figured in my mind, that I felt an unacquainted motion with a mild reverence
to think well of her perfection: surueying her singular beauties, I fell so
far in love with her excellency, that from the country I came to y^ city,
and how since by her gracious sight I have metamorphosed my self your own
ears and the wonder of Rome is best able to witness. Then Ladies I count the
renewing of my life to come from the feature of Terentia, and that she not as
Diana changed me from a man to be a beast, but contrary full of favor has
reduced me from a sensual beast to a perfect reasonable man. How deeply then
I ought to be vowed to her whose sight is the welspring of my happiness, let
the greatness of my benefit make manifest. In so much as feeding my thoughts
with the contemplation of Terentias beauty, I have been thus transformed, but
withal so surprised with her love that as I have gaind a second essence by
her sweet self, so I have lost my self within the labyrinth of her looks,
that I remain her captive while it pleases her to grant me liberty. Be
then brave Roman Dames, impartial doomers of my suit, whether my deserts
crave not Love that thus have been changed for her love. My Parents are
Senators, my revenues inferior to none, old Vatitinius glad of my choice, and
Terentias father thrice happy if his daughter might like of Vatinius. Now
restes it only in Terentias power to make me blessed or unfortunate. At this
discourse of Fabius, the Ladies were astonished, and Terentia galled to the
quick with this demand held her tongue, till Cornelia and Flauia, looking
earnestly upon her, asked her what answer she made to Fabius. Such quoth she
as I returned to Lentulus, for know sir if either the honor of a Soldier, y^
dignity of a Romain, the revenues of a Senators son, or the deep impression
of fancy might have drawn Terentia to love, I had been ere this the wife and
paramour of Lentulus. But not y^ courage of Hector that woone Andromache, nor
the wisdom of Ulysses that entangled Calipso, nor the beauty of Priamus son
that drew Greece in arms to Troy, these perfections if combined in one man
should not move Terentia to listen to the allurements of Venus: not that I
make light esteem of Lentulus, or that I hold small account of Fabius, as two
chief myrrours of our Roman gentlemen: But that either my vows are resolute
to Vesta, or if Cupid has taken me by the heel, it was before Lentulus came
from Parthia, or you from Arpinatum: so that conclude howsoever it is I cannot
become affectionate to Fabius. At this reply Fabius stood so amated as if he
had been an unwelcome guest at the feast of Perseus, which Cornelia noting,
deeply in love with Fabius she told him thus. Nor may you Fabius think much
at this repulse since Lentulus and you are in one predicament, now both become
gainers in liberty, that have been loosers in love: and either get the
willowe garlande and so mourn for your Ladies frown, or seek a mistress
that may show you more favor: For as for Terentia she has chosen, and none
must please her but Orators. If there be Fabius but one Sun that is thought
the beauty of heaven, yet there be planets that though not in shine, yet in
influence are as virtuous: what there be Ladies I mean of such course die as
my self and Flauia, that when Terentia is once married, look for husbands.
Fabius hearing Cornelia thus pleasant, noted this quippe that none must please
her but Orators, which made Terentia blush for anger, and Fabius to make this
answer. I know no Orators in Room quoth he whose years are answerable to
Terentias thoughts but only Marcus Tullius Cicero, and if it be he, I swear
by the fitch that gave him his syrname, Terentia shall be mistress of a goodly
Cottage in Arpinatum. Terentia hearing Fabius to give Tully the frumpe answered
thus.

The more his fortune if it be he whose virtues has made him master of his
own desires, for his lands in Arpinatum as they be little, yet shall his lack
be counteruaild with his loves: and if he has not one to enrich him with
dowry, yet I may perhaps content him with beauty. And therefore Fabius to take
away all suppositions, it is Tully, and none but Tully y^ shall enjoy Terentia.
And quoth Fabius in great choler, nor Tully, nor none besides Tully, but
Fabius shall enjoy Terentia. Whereupon departing without taking his farewell,
going unto her father and discoursing unto him that Tully was the man that his
daughter had chosen for her husband: swearing that his sword ere it were long
should end their loves. Although Flaminius were grieved, yet he sought to
pacify Fabius, but in vain: for he flung out of the doors in a rage, and
went to Milos house to seek Tully. Where breathing out many despightfull
threats against the Orator, it came at last to Lentulus ear. Who now to make
manifest the deep affection he bare to Cicero, trouping himself with a crew
of the Praetextati, and chief Roman gentlemen that had been soldiers and
trained up with him in the wars, he went to seek out Fabius: and found him
with certain his companions about the Capitol. Lentulus not brooking the
brave of any, as carrying the heart of a Conqueror, singled out Fabius, and
after some words they fell to blows: but Fabius part were the weaker, so that
many were wounded, and some slain. Upon this the next day parts were taken,
the people began to mutiny, and to fall to intestine and civil iarres: that as
in the time of Scilla and Marius, so the streets were filled with armed
Soldiers. The Senators seeing what bloody stratagems would ensue of this
strife if it were not pacified: sent for the Consuls, and charged them to raise
up some of the Legions and to bring Lentulus, Tully and Fabius, the next day to
the senate house, with Terentia and her father. They obeying their command put
this charge in execucution, and so qualifiyng somewhat the fury of the people,
brought these three wooers with Terentia before the whole state of Room. Where
being arrived Tully fearful of nature and sick, yet somewhat strengthened
with the sight of his mistress, being glad Lentulus was his friend in his
loves, after due reverence began thus.

Tullies Oration to the Senate.
COnscript Fathers and grave Senators of Room, I was borne in Arpinatum of base
parentage, the first of the Ciceroes that ever pleaded in Rostro, or bare title
in the city. If then advanced by your favors to these fortunes, I should
aspire without proportion to clime beyond my degree, let me be the first and
last whose presumption shall grow to this prejudice. The temple of Ianus in
Room has her gates shut, the s^reetes are full of armed men, the stones of
the Capitol blusheth at the blood of Romans shed against her walls: and all
this mutiny (cry mine adversaries) grows from Tully. Not that Tully was then
out of his bed, but that men of poor families lifted up to honor are soonest
bitten with envy. I appeal grave Senators for my life to your own censures:
if ever I have not been more careful to profit my country, then desirous of
preferment for my labors. But what then say the people is cause of such
broy^es, Terentia the daughter of Flaminius, that firebrand that set Troy to
cinders. Beauty is like to bring Room to confusion: For the greatest houses
and families are divided, the Lentuly and Vatinij, and this for Terentia. Let
the cause be examined before the Senators, and as they hear so let them doom,
Lentulus chosen by the Senate, was sent Captain ever many Legions against the
Parthians, where he tied fortune to his thoughts: and by his great victories
and conquests set up trophies of Roman chiualry. Returning with glory to
Room, having set in his place Lepidus, he was enamonred not only of the
beauty but virtues of Terentia: the fame of whose excellency was spread amongst
the Parthians. Coveting to match with so honorable a Lady, he courted her, but
in vain: not that she disdained Lentulus, but that she had fixed her fancy
before she saw Lentulus: and the platform of love is able to receive but one
impression. If honors, if conquestes, if parentage, if revenues, if courage,
if goods of fortune, body, or mind, might have woonne Terentia, all this was
united in young Lentulus: But Love that likes without exceptions, had ouerbard
her heart with such former fancies, as the passionate suit of Lentulus could
have no entrance. His thoughts were extreme, and the disquiet of his mind
brought a disease to his body. But when he knew that Terentia loved his friend,
he appeased his passions, and rested content with his fortunes. The unconstant
goddess whose smyles are ouershadowed frowns, not content honor should spring
up without envy: sends Terentia to walk abroad toward Arpinatum where then
Fabius lived, as famous for his rusticke and uncivil life, as now he is
woondred at for his brave and courtly behavior. Spying Terentia he was as
Lentulus snared in her beauty, that the Romans to report a miracle said love
made him of a clown brave and resolute gentleman. The excellency of Terentia
having new pollished nature in Fabius, he sues for her favor, but her
thoughts that were forepointed with other passions, intreates him to bridle
affection and to make a conquest of himself by subduing the force of fancy,
seeing her resolution was directed to love none but one, and that was Tullie.
This word grave Senators and Romans sounding basely in the ears of Fabius,
caused him take arms, and Lentulus to defend his friend Cicero, as for him
before had lost his love, so he meant to loose his life and withstoode him in
the face. Thus grew this mutiny not against beauty for it is a chief good of
it self, nor against Tullie for he is mean and unworthy to be revenged by
arms, but against Terentia because she vouchsafed to love Tulllie. This
Romans is the cause of this mutiny to suppress which let Tullie die, for
rather had he pacify this striffe by death then see the meanest Roman fall
on the sword. The common people at this began to murmour, pleased with the
plausible Oration of Tullie, which one of the Senators seeing, stood up and
said thus. Terentia? Cicero here has showed reasons why thou should love
Lentulus and Fabius, but what reason can thou infer to love so mean a man as
Tullie. Terentia blushing made this answer. Before so honorable an audience as
these grave Senators and worthy Romayne Citizens women's reasons would seem no
reasons, especially in love which is without reason, therefore I only yield
this reason, I love Cicero not able to ratefie my affection with any strong
reason, because love is not circumscript within reasons limits, but if it
please the Senate to pacify this mutiny, let Terentia leave to live, because
she cannot leave to love and only to love Cicero. At this she wept and stained
her face with such a pleasing vermilion die, that the people shouted none but
Cicero. Whereupon before the Senate Tully and Terentia were betrothed, Lentulus
and Fabius made friends, and the one named Lentulus as the Annals make mention
married to Flauia, and Fabius wedded to the worthy Cornelia.

FINIS.

