man on horse W. M. scul:



THE COMPLETE HORSEMAN AND EXPERT FERRIER In two Books.

The first, showing the best manner of breeding go Horses, with their choice,
nature, riding and dyeting, as well Running as Hunting, and how the Rider ought
to behave himself in Breaking and Riding of Colts, as also teaching the Groom
and Keeper his true office, touching the Horses and Colts committed to his
charge, and prescribing the best manner how a perfect Stable ought to be
situated and made, not hitherto so fully described by any.

The second, directing the most exact and approved manner h^ to know and cure
all maladies and diseases in Horses: a work contain^ the secrets and best
skill belonging either to Ferrier or Horse-Leech^ the Cures placed
Alphabetically: with many hundreds of medicines never before imprinted in any
Author.

Published at the earnest request of sundry Noble and worthy Gentle^ for the
general good and benefit of the whole Kingdom: And dedicated to his most
Excellent Majesty,

By Thomas de Gray Esquire.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, and are to be sold by Lawrence Chapman, his
Shop at Chancery lane end next Holborne, 1639.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY MONARCH, CHARLES, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, KING OF
GREAT BRJTAINE, FRANCE, AND IRELAND, DEFENDER OF THE FAITH, etc.
SIR,
YOu are justly placed in a glorious sphere, elevated in a most conspicuous
altitude above other inferior and subordinate Orbs, from whence (as a
sovereign Arbiter) you behold and judge of our Motions, as they either relish
of worth or demerit, and (like the Sun) impartially dispense the propitious
beams of your favor, as well to the humblest plant, as the tallest Cedar. As
I am a recent and fresh existent example of your life-tendring influence, for
when depressed and trampled upon by the insolency of an unkinde-adversary that
raised me up to tread upon an equal Basis with him, who lately had designed me
for his footstool. An admirable example of Clemency and Justice, eminent
virtues, and truly inherent in your most Royal bosom: for which with all
humility I bow, and thankfulness acknowledge, infinitely honoring them so
conspicuous in your Majesty, and by you so frequently exercised. Thus restored,
I come charged with a Book, which I most humbly prostrate at your feet,
because I fear it is not conscious of so much worth, as to merit a kiss from
your sacred hand. It is the Embrion of my study, travels, experience, and
practice, and cannot arrive to form and perfection without the reflection of
your Majesty's favor. It brings with it a front not altogether inglorious, of
Horsmanship and Ferriery; the first not incompetent with the most illustrious
title and Heroic Spirit; the second not unworthy the knowledge, yea the
practice of the most accomplished Gentleman. I know this Treatise cannot hold
proportion with so elated a patronage, as that of your Majesty, although it
were informed with a far nobler Genius; yet for all this infinite
disproportion, the Dedication of it unto your sacred Majesty will not appear
much improper; for first I received the ability to prosecute it from your Grace
and favor: so that deriving its being from you, it belongs of right unto you,
and must have recourse unto your Majesty for its safety and protection.
Secondly, it is the offspring of my age, and cannot but leave a fatal
participation in its Parents infirmity, and therefore (especially in these
censorious times) cannot possibly subsist without your Royal protection.
Lastly, as you have taken the rational creatures of this your tripartite
Kingdom into your titular care, so have you not excluded the irrational,
albeit in a different condition, much less the Horse, whose Generosity, and
use have given him the precedence in your Majesty's esteem, before all other
bruit species; so that this Book (which beautifies his shape, increases his
courage, delivers rudiments for his menage, prescribes cures for his diseases,
and in all, enables and advances his race and bravery) hopes to find your
Majesty's hand extended and open to receive it. The work concerns the
Commonwealth in general, and if accepted and perused with as much zeal and
care as I have used in the publishing of it; I presume it will not be found
empty of profit. My many years have given me the privilege to have seen and
known this kingdom rich both in the number and quality of her Horses, and it
would infinitely grieve me that I now live to see her reduced to so deplorable
an indignity, but that I am confident I shall see her restored to her precedent
glory and opulency by your Majesty: and now that I have assumed the boldness
to inculcate her poverty, my zeal and respect to my Country, transports me yet
a little further to discover the causes of it, together with the redresses and
remedies. First, those Forests, Parks, Commons, Fennes, Moors, and other
marrish and waste grounds, which paid yearly so rich a tribute of young, able,
and serviceable Horses to the universal use of this Kingdom, are at this time
disafforrested, dispark't, taken in, drained, laid dry, and converted to other
(but much different) uses, so that those brave breeds and races of Horses are
much extenuated, or altogether intermitted. Then the Gelders, who in every
shire so confidently and frequently exercise their faculty in a most unlawful
manner, and spay young Fillies, by which means they become barren, the breeds
of Horses discontinued, and the Commonwealth highly prejudiced and
unfurnished; for instance I can and will (upon occasion) produce a Gelder who
spayes more then a hundred Fillies. For redress of the first, your Majesty may
be pleased to command that those Statutes which were enacted for the breeding
of Horses, may be speedily and exactly put in execution. For the second, that
you will likewise please by your Proclamation to inhibit all Gelders that
unlawful and prejudicial exercise of their profession, then shall your
Majesty see the noxious and exorbitant disease meet with a sudden and easy
cure, and the whole Kingdom derive a sensible and inestimable benefit from it.
Now it rests that I make an humble Apology for my boldness, which indeed
would be a matter of trouble and difficulty for me to accomplish; did I not
know your Majesty to be a Prince infinitely tendering the good and welfare of
your Kingdom; so that this treating of a business not inconsequent, I
despair not of obtaining your Royal pardon, but promise my self from your
benignity and clemency, a gracious acceptance of that I have most zealously
delivered.

Your Majesty's most humble and faithful Subject, THOMAS DE GRAY.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, JAMES, MARQVESSE HAMILTON, EARL OF ARRAN AND
CAMBRIDGE, BARON OF EVEN, Aberbroth, and Ennerdale, Master of the Horse to his
Majesty, Knight of the Honorable order of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's
most honorable privy Council.
My Lord,
TO have presented this piece of Horse-manship to his Majesty by any other
hand then Yours, had been very improper; as well in regard of the place your
Lordship bears, as of my respects to your Noble person.

Here is a subject (my Lord) worthy of your consideration, and the employments
of your thoughts even serious; for in this most generous Creature, next unto
Man, consists the pleasure, honor, and defense of a most flourishing Kingdom.

I have given part of my Youth to the investigation of this beautiful and
useful Creature; I have searched many Nations for my better information; and
albeit I have found some Climates more Fortunate then this of Ours, in the
production of a happy shape to this Creature, for the most part our Horses not
being drawn out with such delicate Lineaments, nevertheless some of them, I
have (where care and diligence have been used in the Breed) of most absolute,
and perfect shape, and whereas frequently, the Barbary Iennet, Turk and
Neapolitan Courser, are cried up for their beauties, yet as in some shapes they
excel, so in some other they may be found defective.

But if we regard the Spirit, Vigor, and doing of a Horse, no Nation, or Soil,
produces a more Active, then this our Island of Great Britain, as has been
well experienced by many Noble and memorable Services.

Unto which if we add a due observation in our Breed, both on the one side of
the Stalion or Sire, and the Damme, our lost glory will be soon recovered.

But since the laying aside of the great Saddle and Cannon, and neglect of the
Horse of Menage, since the applying our Breed only to Racing, or, (as I may
better say) in furnishing our selves with Horses of speed to run away from
our Enemy, the most ancient honor of Horseman-ship peculiar to this our
Kingdom, and for which all other Nations highly esteemed us, is now almost
vanished and lost; insomuch as were we pressed with thoughts of defense (from
which the most prudent and watchful Eye of our most gracious Sovereign,
Guards us, through his most happy Government) we should be forced (I write
this in blushes) to to pull Horses from the Coach, and Cart, to fill up our
Troops.

Let it therefore be recorded, (my Noble Lord) that whilst you were Master of
the Horse to his Majesty, an exact observation was established throughout this
whole Kingdom, for the due breeding of serviceable Horses; to the furtherance
of which most Noble design, if these my Observations shall, any way conduce, I
shall bless my Pen that it ever waded in such a subject: professing my self
to owe unto my Sovereign and Country all I have, and unto them my Labors as
a most loyal Subject and true Patriot, I most humbly offer.

And my good Lord, these Observations gathered in my Youth, I was advised and
pressed by some Noble Friends (though now old) to publish for the general good
of this our Kingdom: Otherwise for my own part I should have rather
suppressed them, as not being now so fit a subject for me to treat off, but
the public good has over swayd me. Wherefore with these Oblations I
Conclude, Kissing your Lordships Hands, and shall ever profess my self

Your Lordship Most humble Servant. THOMAS DE LA GRAY.

To the Reader.
WHen I do consider (benevolent Reader) the inconvenience whereinto that Man
is plunged, who brings himself upon the public Stage of promulgating his
Books in print, be the subject never so laudable, and the Author no less
cautelous and sufficient, endeavoring with all diligence to prevent the brand
of a black cole: nevertheless all industry applied, he shall not pass without
obloquy and aspersion.

This very consideration has so afrighted and deterred me, that albeit I have
had many great motives exciting me to make a tender of the Love, Duty, and
Service I bear to my Country; yet when I do contemplate the many censures I
must undergo, I have been evermore disheartened as well from beginning, as
going forwards in this my desired purpose. Notwithstanding partly through the
respect I bear to my Countries profit and honor, and partly by means of the
importunity of many my right Noble and generous friends, who have been
eyewitnesses to sundry of my Cures, and those not a few uncouth and rare: I
have adventured even now in my declining days, to leave this Work as a
Monument to ensuing times, no whit doubting, but that the judicious will
friendly accept thereof; but as for the malevolent and ignorant, I am most
confident that the quils they shall dart at me, cannot go as from a Porcupine,
and therefore will do me the less hurt or damage.

I therefore am bold to put into thy hand, this poor work of mine, which I
have digested into tw Books: In the first, I lay thee down rudiments how thou
may breed Horses to thy best advantage and liking; which albeit they may
appear unto thee to be recent and unknown, yet if thou will be pleased to put
them in ure, and make trial (not digressing from my principles) thou will (I
do assure me) be so far from disliking them, as never hereafter to swarve or
dissent from them. For if we shall seriously ruminate in how high esteem that
man is who is owner and possessor of good Horses, how much commended, how much
respected, how much talked of, and how well proffered for them: but when he
shall be known to be a breeder of such good Horses, will not his encomiums be
the greater? but when together with these himself shall be known to be
exquisite in Horsemanship, whereby to cause his Horse to show himself in his
Pace, Menage, and all other his postures like as well becomes a right good
Horse, perfectly mouthed, delicately borne, obedient to the hand, and to answer
the Switch and Spur, will not (I say) that Gentleman be highly commended, and
have more eyes upon him as he passes a long, than are commonly cast upon a
Comet or the Sun eclipsed? yes undoubtedly. For if we do but note when a
handsome Horse passes along, we may observe the people not only gaze upon him
as he comes toward and against them, but to turn themselves and look after
him so long time as he continues within their view and sight: Man's love to the
Horse is generally so great.

Sithence then the Horse is a creature so generous, and therefore so much liked
and beloved of all, in my poor judgment, it should suit very well with every
Gentleman of worth, rank, and quality, to endeavor (if not to breed, yet at
least) to be masters of such Horses (which he must keep) that shall be truly
handsome and comely, rightly bred, of good color, clean shape, well marked,
and singularly well ridden and made, and so he shall the better advance his
honor and reputation.

Having now bred, or otherwise by thy diligent endeavors attained unto such
Horses as be truly good, and for thy turn; the second thing to be thought of,
is, if they be not already made unto thy hand as thou desire to have them,
that thou then do procure such a Rider, who is known to be a master of his
Art, or otherwise thou will be much deceived, and far to seek of enjoying
thy wished desires, and therefore I have given thee instructions how to make
thy choice of such a man, whereby thou shall not be wronged in thy expectation,
nor thy Horse marred in his first making and handling. Neither have I taken
upon me to teach him his Art, (for that were a thing very impertinent) but
those documents which I have set thee down must serve only to show thee how
thou should soon find whether the Rider may be for thy turn or not.

The third thing which thou art to take to thy consideration, is, the good or
harm that may come unto thee by the choice thou make of thy Groom or
Keeper, who may either through his ignorance, or inconsideration, soon make
him unfit both for thy own use, or any man's else: out of which reason I have
depainted thee a Groom in his lively colors, and if his conditions and
qualities shall be otherwise than what I have delineated, assure thy self thou
do run a manifest hazard of marring that Horse thou did hope should have
been to thy hearts desire. And forasmuch as it is a matter very much
praiseworthy to be a Master of good Horses, to have them made perfect and
ready, to have such Riders, Keepers, and Grooms, as be very perite in their
faculties; yet if thy Stable be not every way sitting and correspondent, much
disprofit and inconvenience may thereby soon redound to thy Horse. I have
therefore prescribed thee the means how thou may have a perfect and good
Stable, with all commodities and accoutrements thereunto belonging: and
therefore if thou will be pleased to make use of these my rudiments, and
punctually observe these my grounds and principles, assure thy self thou will
in short time aspire to that which will be thy honor and renown.

And to the end thou may the more perfectly and easily understand the full
drift and sum of this my first Book, I will here give unto thee an Epitome
of it in a few lines, which may do thee much pleasure in the perusal thereof.

In the Introduction, I show thee how needful a creature the Horse is beyond
all others, and what admirable things Horses in former times have perpetrated
and done, whereof I produce thee instances of the famous acts of sundry brave
and generous Horses, whose love to their Masters have been so great great, as
hardly to be credited, if ancient Histories and Annals of good integrity, had
not engraven them in the memory of never-dying posterity. We read of
Bucephalus what he did for the good, life, and safety of his Master; of the
Horse of Dionysius, with what undaunted courage he comported himself in
battle for the relief and succor of his Lord; it is recorded also of the
Horse of Antiochus, what ill success befell Centurettus, who when he had
slain Antiochus, would needs back the Horse of his slain Master. It is also
noted what inly love Nicomedes his Horse bare to his Lord and Master, when
after his death of mere grief, famished himself. We read of Aethon, the
Horse of Pallas, who was evidently observed and seen to weep at the funeral of
his Master. Silius makes report of two famous Horses called Pelorus and
Ciraeus, the one eminent for his prowess and hardiness in war, and the
other for his unparalelled swiftness. Moreover we may read, how that this
poor creature has so well merited of man, as that many have erected Monuments
and Sepulchers, celebrated Exequies, builded and founded munificent Cities, set
up Pyramidies, made Epitaphs, erected goodly Statues, instituted Plays and
Games; and all these in honor of the Horse; besides many other remarkable
things right worthy of note.

In the way of Breeding, I do intimate unto thee the manner how, the season
when, the place where, together with the colors, marks, and shapes as well of
thy Stalions, as of thy Race, or Stud Mares, and from what defects they must be
free: what Signs are best wherein to cover, what course to take with them that
they may conceive, what exercise is fittest for them as well when they be with
Fool, as after foling; how to cherish thy Mares when their Colts shall run by
them, and how to breed up thy Colts till they come to handling, backing, and
riding, with other circumstances very necessary to be known: and thus much
briefly for the first Book.

The second Book consists chiefly of the manner how thou may cure all
such diseases and maladies (both intrinsecall and extrinsecall) whereunto
either the life of the Horse, or any of his limbs or members may be any way
endamaged or in danger. This I have handled by way of familiar Dialogue, which
I hold to be best, for avoiding of prolix and over-tedious discourses, by
reason it will very much help the memory of the Reader, and keep his mind the
better attent upon the state of the Question or subject in hand, and by that
means I may my self be the better able also to explicate and deliver my
meaning, much more clearly. In which Dialogue, I have introduced as
prolocutors, three persons only, viz. First, Hippophilus a Gentleman, one who
is the true lover of the Horse: Secondly, Hippiatrus the Ferrier or Marishall,
one most expert in Horse-leech craft: And thirdly, Hipposerus his Servant or
Iourneyman, sometimes his apprentice bred up by him, from whom Hipposerus has
had his education and knowledge in this Art: these be all the Dramatis personae
to this Scene. Wherefore in the first Chapter, I do endeavor to illustrate
unto thee the true Office of the Ferrier, wherein I do produce an exact examen
of his function.

In the second Chapter, I do inculcate as well the causes of health as of
sickness, wherein I make an abridgement of all those things which all learned
Physicians and Chirurgions (both ancient and modern do from the grounds and
principles of profound Philosophy) find to govern and bear rule in the body
of the Horse, without which he can have no flesh, bones, sinews, blood, or
life it self, wherewith to make up the entire structure of an orginall body,
and such are first the Elements; secondly, the Humors, thirdly, the natural
faculties; fourthly, the isntrumental members; fifthly, the spirits animal;
sixthly, the spirits vital; seventhly, the natural parts, and so of the
residue. And having sufficiently discussed all these things in due order and
method, I do then show thee what means we have to preserve the Horse from all
inward diseases, which I do find to be four in number, viz. By Purge, by
Sweat, by Phlebotomy, and by Vomit: and then I do proceed to inculcate unto
thee the causes of health and long life, which I do make to be in number
twelve, which if thou do well observe, they will redound to thy great utility
and profit.

In the third Chapter I do demonstrate certain things most befitting a Ferrier
to know and understand well, before he shall take upon him to administer: in
the handling whereof I do begin first with the four Elements, anatomizing unto
thee their true natures and virtues, and how and where they be situate, things
most needful to be known; then I go along with the two proper Elements,
showing from whence the seed and menstruall blood is engendered, then I pass
forwards in entreating of the four Humors, explaining their natures and
virtues, poynting unto the places of their abode and residence, and what
relation and coherence they have unto the four Complexions, I do also show
thee what are the two spirits animal, and the two vital, their natures
virtues, and places of abode and residence in the body of the Horse. After all
this I show thee, that by duly observing the complexion of the Horse thou art
to cure, thou may thereby the sooner, better, and with more security and
ease, perfect thy Cure; nay, I go yet further with thee, in showing unto thee
an exact way whereby to know by the complexion it self, the diseases whereunto
the Horse is most propense; then I make known what be the causes of the evil
dispositions of the Horse, which brings and begets unavoydable infirmity
and sickness, whereof they be two in number, viz. Intrinsecall and
Extrinsecall, together with a definition of the nature of sickness; and so I
go along in teaching thee the manner how thou ought to administer such
Drinks, Potions, Clisters, and Medicines, without any the least peril to thy
Horse, as also the time of the day most suitable to that purpose: and what
exercise is most requisite to be had after Physic or Medicine. And lastly I
come to touch briefly upon his urine and ordure, whereby to give the rules
infallible how to know and understand the true state of the body of the Horse
as well in health as in sickness.

In the fourth Chapter of this second Book, I do begin to handle the Cures in
particular, wherein I run a course by my self, which I have not known any
before me undertake: for whereas Master Blundevile, Master Markham, and others,
do begin with all the inward diseases which are to be cured by way of Physic,
and then with the outward maladies which do appertain unto Surgery; I have
thought it much better to take the diseases Alphabetically, mixing the
extrinsecall with the intrinsecall, by which means they will the sooner and
more easily be found, and turned unto more readily. And wheresoever you shall
find this mark inserted in the end of any cure, I have set the same there, to
let you know that receipt to be undoubted, and approved for good and certain,
being by my self often practiced and used. And those receipts that have not the
mark, are such Cures which I did procure from sundry able Ferriers, whereof I
have had no trial or experience at all, for want of time and means, and
therefore dare not avouch or cry them up for mathematical, albeit they do
appear unto me to be probably good, but by reason I have not tried them, I
would not adventure a probatum, or ecce upon them. Nevertheless if God permit
me to reprint, I doubt not but by that time to give them for approved and
warrantable, and to add many more unto them which I have already by me, which
I do forbear to publish at this present, albeit I do know many of them to be
as probably good as any of those.

In the other Chapters I go clean through the whole Alphabet, according to
that Method used in that 4th. Chapter; and therefore let this abstract suffice
for the present. And forasmuch as I have discussed the former things of
Breeding, etc. in my first Book: Yet my intention was not at the first to
trench so deep into that subject, but to show principally the Ferriers Craft
and Art, out of an earnest desire I have to excite and stir up our young
Gentlemen to assume some knowledge of a Mystery so necessary for them to
apprehend, or at leastwise to have a glimpse of, considering how rare a thing
it is to find a skillful Ferrier among our rural or Country Smiths. For if
the Nobility and Gentry of this our I Will of Great Britain did truly know how
honorable, and how commendable Horsemanship were, and how much they are
esteemed and admired, who are the true professors thereof, they would labor
more than they now do, to breed and have good Horses; but it much troubles me
to see how little esteem Gentlemen now a days have thereof. Some Horses they
have, though not for Menage, yet for Hunting; but what manner of Hunting?
Fox-hunting forsooth, or Harriers which be as fleet as petty Greyhounds
wherewith they do so much over-straine the strength of their poor Horses
(forcing them over deepe-Fallowes, tough-Clayes, and wet and rough Lands) that
albeit those Horses be strong and able, yet are they so toyled out therewith,
as that when they come home at night, they would pity the heart of him who
loves a Horse, to see them so be mired, blouded, spurred, lamentably spent,
and tired out: Whereas if such Horses had been ridden to the great Saddle and
Cannon, they would have infinitely delighted all men who should have beheld
them.

But let me leave them unto their toylesome sports, and let my speech be
directed to such Heroique and Generous Spirits, who have a desire to inform
and better their understanding in the secrets of this brave Mystery; who if
they have a will to be edoctrinated therein, then for a Mathematical ground
of true Horse-manship, I must tell them, that they having and possessing of
good Horses, yea and Riding it self is little worth without the knowledge of
the Ferriers Craft, at the least in the Theorique or Speculative part, if not
in the Practique: and therefore I could wish that every worthy Gentleman should
have a good insight thereinto, albeit he does not make it his Trade,
Occupation; or frequent practice and profession. Yet it will not be amiss, he
be able to know every disease in a Horse, its Symtomes, and how it comes,
together with the true sign thereof, which indeed is a matter of very great
consequence. For when a Nobleman (V. G.) Knight, or Gentleman shall have a
Horse that does well merit his affection, and which shall be for his turn, if
any accident or Malady shall befall him, albeit he may not himself take upon
him the Cure, and to Drench, Bloody, or Dress him with his own hands; yet
(sending for a Ferrier) he may discourse with him upon the Nature of the
Disease, and thereby come to understand whether the Ferrier speaks according
to Art or not, and whether his intended course of administering, be answerable
to true Art and perfect Science, and probably a secure way to perfect the Cure;
so as if the Master and Owner of the Horse be not himself enabled with some
superficial knowledge at the least, at what time he shall consult with the
Ferrier, if not, (I say) able to judge of the Man's sufficiency (the Smith
himself being indeed insufficient) by mistaking the Infirmity, he may
ignorantly administer or apply such contrary Medicine, whereby instead of
laboring to cure him, he shall most easily and infallibly kill him, to the no
small regreet and grief of the Owner.

But Ferriers and Smiths may peradventure greatly repine, and grumble at the
publication of this Work of mine, like as to my knowledge, and in my hearing,
they have most virulently exclaimed, and vehemently inveighed against Master
Blundevile, Master Markham, and others, wishing their Books burned, and the
Authors at the Goodyere, for publishing and Printing them: pretending much
wrong to be done, to such poor men who have served Apprentiships to the Trade,
having none other way or means of livelihood but only this. But hereunto I
answer, that these Men have no cause at all to fear any prejudice thereby;
and I dare boldly affirm the promulgation of Books will be so far from their
harm or hinderance as that it will be infinitely to their benefit: for when
they shall find any one Nobleman, Knight, or Gentleman who will undergo so
much pains as either to Bloody, Drench, Corosive, Cauterize, apply
Cataplasines, Emplaysters, Powders, Unguents, or the like to his Horse,
whatsoever he has attained unto by reading, or otherwise; you shall have a
thousand who upon any the least occasion will send for a Ferrier to take the
Cure in hand. Again, instead of this pretended prejudice, this commodity will
accrue to my brethren Smiths, Marishalls, and Ferriers, viz. they shall (by
promulgation of Books of this Nature) become much more able, and Imbui in
studijs, that is, much more learned and indoctrinated in this generous Faculty
then ever they were before, by which means they will be esteemed much more
famous and eminent, and cried up for most expert and able Men in this Noble
Science. For how comes it to pass, that Physicians, Chyrurgions, Lawyers,
Divines, and all others Artists do become so great Doctors of their Arts and
Professions, and admired for most famous and learned Men, and so frequetly
sought after, enquired out, and sent for when occasion is? Is it not for what
they have attained unto by study and reading, until which time they were not
so hardy as to adventure upon practice? so as without their Library, they could
never have been able to have attained unto that eminent knowledge they have
afterward aspired unto; neither could they otherwise have been possibly able
to practice and work by true Art and Science. For the Works of learned and
eminent Men, is the only thing that does enable them, which are left as a
never-dying Monument to ensuing and endless Posterity, as the common good to
the weal public, even to all ensuing Ages: Imitating therein the ancient
Sages of Greece, that when any man had invented that thing which was known to
be commodious to the Re-publique, least the thing should be buried with the
Inventer, and by that means taked up with him in the ashes of perpetual
oblivion: they ordained that the first Inventer should set up his Science be or
known by way of Record in their public Schools in spacious Tables and in
Capital Characters of gold with with this Impresse, or Title, viz. (...) Bonum
pulchrius, et divinius, quod Genti est quam Vni. That is, That thing is to be
esteemed better and more excellent which is communicated to the weal public
in general, rather then to be imprisoned in the Bosom of any particular man.
Wherefore that thing (I say) whereat I do principally aim, is to publish the
true Art of the Ferrier, a Faculty wherein I have been daily versed, and
diligently practiced for more than forty years, and that unto my no small
labor and expense: and I do well assure my self that peradverture no one
Gentleman in this our Kingdom more, who has done greater, more difficult, or
desperate Cures.

During the time of my travels, I have for my better indemnity, not only
perused what Authors I cold meet with, who have written upon this Subject;
but I did also make my self an Eye witness to the Cures of the most famous
Marishals and Ferriers, the Cities, and places afforded where I came, omitting
no diligence which might inform or enable my knowledge: neither would I be
too credulous, or give too much belief to fame or reports, for we have a
Maxim in the civill-Law, which says: Fama p^r se parum momenti habet ad
probandum: Fame alone is not of credit sufficient to satisfy or convince the
understanding of Man, until such time as he has made trial. For the common
Proverb is; Qui facile credit, Facile decipitur. He that easily believes, is
easily deceived. And truly thus much I am able to speak, that France and
Flanders (for that in those two places I had most commerce and experience,
albeit I traveled many other parts of Christendom) were the two Kingdoms in
which I found the best, ablest, and most expert Marishalls, or Ferriers; but of
all the places where ever yet I came, I am able of my own knowledge to say thus
much (and that with no small grief) that the worst Ferriers generally I do
find to be those who are of our own Nation: nevertheless, I do not conclude
or condemn all for insufficient, for some there be well known unto me very
quaint and expert Ferriers, who can work very well, and according to true Art
and Method. I have therefore in this illaborat Work of mine given you several
Receipts for every Cure, and most of them approved by my particular practice
and experience; Others again I have inserted which are the Cures of other able
men, which by reason they do sound probable unto me, I have suffered them to
pass among my own, (though I never had means or opportunity to make trial
of them.) And the reason why I have inculcated so many several Receipts to
each Cure, are two; viz. First because that Receipt which will Cure one
disease, will not always cure the same Malady in an other Horse. Secondly, you
shall find some Receipts either very difficile to make, or the Ingredients not
easy to be gotten, otherwise they prove more chargeable than the Owner of the
Horse is well able to defray: and therefore I have given the Receipts for all
sorts and degrees of Horses; howbeit those Receipts which are most costly and
intricate to make and compound are commonly the very best, and works the best
effects, and therefore I leave thee to thy self to make thy own choice.

Now if any man shall say, that I have robbed or rifled other men's labors: I
answer, I have not robbed, but approved them: for by the same rule I may as
well object, that whosoever works by my Book robs me, for if that be
theft, I pray what Physician is there in the whole world, (promulgating his
Science) may not be as much censured and accused for rifling the Aphorisms of
Galen and Hipocates, yea and of others the Ancients and Modern Authors also.
But howsoever, I am so far from traducing other men's endeavors, as that I do
both reverence and admire them, and esteem my self unworthy their Scholar.
But I know no reason why I may not publish my knowledge of this Noble Art, for
what says a venerable Author Qui se dicit scire quod nescit, temerarius est:
et qui negat scire quod scit, ingratus est. As that man is to be accounted for
most temerarious and rash, that shall take upon him to know that which in truth
he knows not; so also does he show himself to be most ingrate, who denies
to know that thing which truly he does know. Innumerable are the grounds which
may be laid to the rearing of this Structure, which being so well known to
all, by setting each down in particular, I shall therein but only Sisyphi
saxum volvere; consume much time (which to me is most precious) and labor to
little purpose, and less profit; and therefore I will in this discourse draw
toward an end, least I might tire thee out with too long an Epistle; Yet less
I thought I could not inculcate, by reason there are many things in this worthy
and noble Science, which might otherwise seem to be very dark and abstruse,
and the Cures I have (I say) carried Dialogu^-wise, Ne inquam et inquit saepius
interponeretur; merely to avoid confusion: For Aristotle says well; Omne Ens
naturaliter appetit suam perfectionem. Every Ens, that is to say; Every man
has a natural propension to arrive unto that perfection to which he has a
will or desire to understand.

Now the reason why I did enterlace my first Book with the Honors and
perfections which Horses in former times have achieved, as also with such
rules and principles of breeding, shape, marks, colors, etc. was, lest
otherwise I might be like to one who tells a sick man of a sovereign medicine
for his infirmity, and yet conceales from him the use thereof. And therefore I
do make it my chiefest desire, and principal intention, yea my obligation,
not only to illustrate each disease, together with its cure, but also to make
up all the attributes belonging to a perfect Horse, and such defects which be
incident to so noble and useful a creature, being likewise discovered.

If therefore it may please thee sometimes to retire thy self in the perusal
of this Treatise, and with due and serious judgment, not so much to reflect
upon the method and form of this world, as of the matter or subject it self,
then I doubt not but that thou will receive such benefit and contentment, as
that thereby thou will be much bettered and enabled in thy underhanding, both
for the breeding and well ordering of young Horses, and in the cure of every of
their maladies.

And forasmuch as I have brought this my first work to its period, which I may
rightly resemble to a Structure or Building, my special care has been to make
it fair and beautiful to the eye, and to grace, garnish, and set it forth
with varieties of diverse sorts, wherein I have been very diligent to give it
all satisfaction I have been able, and therefore I have labored to paint and
polish it forth with what variety is most necessary for so exquisite a building.

Lastly, sithence nothing more imports a building, then to lay a sure and
substantial foundation, and withal to make the walls so tite and impregnable,
as to be able to resist not so much wind and weather, as the violence,
assaults, and battery of detracting enemies: my care therefore has been to
have it founded and situate upon the immovable Rock of a pregnant truth. And
therrfore considering I have applied all this pains, and spent so much time
and cost, which I might have otherwise both employed and applied to my more
particular commodity, by which I have not only finished this Structure, and
made it commodious for thee, but I do also present it unto thee merely for thy
proper use and habitation; and therefore I hope that thou will not make such
use thereof, as men do of an Inn, where he takes a bait or repast, for one
meal, or for a lodging, for one night, and away, to wit, by only taking a
superficial view thereof: but that thou will make it thy abode, at the least
for some time; I mean, by reading and digesting the whole work in order as it
lies treatably and seriously, and after by putting in practice what therein
thou shall find to be fit for thy use; so shall thou reap, and enjoy the
benefit; my self the comfort, and the Commonwealth the honor.

If any leakes be in the printing, impute them either unto the misprision of
the Printer, or else to the negligence of him unto whom the charge of the
correcting was committed; and if any be in the Author, let the fault light upon
those who spurred him so fast on to haste it to the Press; but howsoever show
thy charity in correcting the faults and slips, as well of the one, as of the
other: So shall thou show thy self to the world like thy self, truly Noble,
and oblige the Author to remain ever thy humble Servant, and true Friend:
Farewell.

THOMAS DE GRAY.

To my Worthy Friend, Monsieur de Gray, upon his exquisite piece of
Horsemanship and Ferriery.
WHen Troy's Palladium, on whose fatal stay
Their fortunes, hopes, their Gods, their Altars lay;
Was by Ulysses cunning hand surpised,
And Pallas wooed to see Troy sacrificed:
The Greeks pretending recompense, return
A Horse, whose entrals that vast City burn.
How different is thy Gift, since here we see
Pleasure with safety, strength with wit agree?
This frame exceeds that; but to nobler ends,
That hurts by fraud, by knowledge this defends:
And though in Ilium's Horse an Army rest,
'Twill be far more to COMPREHEND this Beast;
Since Ignorance has taught our I Will to lay
Her Art, on Iades that only run away.
But when I look on thine, and there behold
Soldiers made knowing, and the knowing bold:
I cry, had this been given for that of Wood,
Minerva had returned, and Ilium stood.
S. I. B. B.

To his good Friend, Thomas de Gray, upon his Book called the Expert Ferrier.
WHilst other, Readers vex in fruitless ways,
And write adventurous lines for vulgar praise,
Thou in a noble Art, and useful skill,
Ventest the labors of a modest Quill,
To make us by thy well-spent industry,
Supine neglects to know, and rectify;
Since in this piece of thine, the Horse appears
(Whilst him his Rider as a Pilot steeres
Through storms of Courage,) by thy awful hand
Enforced to suffer, and obey Command.
Then, thou, his innate Spirit to maintain
By propagation of a generous strain,
Vnpractis'd precepts with judicious heed
Freely afford'st us in his better breed,
And lastly, that this Work may fully please,
Experimental Cures of each disease,
Which frequently occur in this brave Beast
Are, with the less approved, by thee expressed:
That all may say, we, in this Book have found,
A ^orse well bred, well mennaged, and sound.
S. T. H.

To my knowing Friend, Monsieur De Gray.
OLd Edward, Noble Worcester, that branch
Sprung from great John of Gaunt, and Royal Blanch.
Of thee our de la Gray was wont to say,
To see thee on thy Horse of menage play,
Was solid pleasure, for the Excellence
That fed the eye, went further than the sense.
And I believe it, since the Active part
That shines in precepts of thy skillful Art,
And comes to us from speculations taught
Through ^ong Experience, and with labor wrought
In these thy choice Phylippicks, makes this Land
Blessed in the fair production of thy hand.
Our skillful Markham, and old Blundevill,
Or whosoever has touched this marshall Quill,
Receives by thee more light than was his own,
Or was by the Ancients, or by Modernes know^.
G. F.

To my well-deserving Friend, Thomas de Gray, upon his exact piece of
Horsemanship and Ferriery.
IF I who love a Horse next to my life,
Should now be mute in the commending strife
Of this thy Horsemanship, my de la Gray,
I might henceforth be banished all the play
At Bansteed, Winchester, and Salsbury,
And sit me down under this Horse and dye.
Nay, I will write before thy Book, and fill
The vacant room of some deserving quill.
And wish in all my sport to be as sore,
As when thou work'st upon a desperate Cure.
Wolferstone.

Upon Monsieur de Gray, his most elaborate piece of Horsemanship and Ferriery.
THis Book's informed with a high Genius! this
Above the malice of detraction is!
Nor needs a friends Encomium blaze it forth,
It Is proper virtue vindicates it is worth:
Yet, since, by the Authors happy care and pain
I understood how first to use the reyne,
And menage sonipes, I could not choose
But vent this grateful rapture of my Muse;
How that by it he amply does impart
The essence of the Horseman's, Ferriers Art;
So that the Horse shall to perfection grow,
And no disease his courage brave overthrow.
Now I will leave Pegasus aerie courses,
And sue to mount one uf his well-train'd Horses.
Ed. R.

To the Author of the Expert Ferrier.
Here Is Mirror, eak Model of true Honor.
Fame wait's on Thy name. Thou wait'st upon Her.
By Cavall'ry the Golden Fleece thou have won;
Therein, Thou art a Non p^reill, That One.
Whose Fame shall dye? Thine? It shall remain
The age, presaged by Ovid's sublime strain.
I. H. D. M.

To my ever honored Friend Tho. de Gray upon his select Piece of Horsemanship
and Ferriery.
SAge h'ast Thou made our Later age,
Thou art the Phoenix of our Time;
Certes, Thy rare Piece I presage
Has won the Fleece it is so sublime.
My younger Pen cannot but wait on Thee,
Whose Name shall ever be most dear to me.
Francis Hawkins.

THE EXPERT FERRIER.
CHAP. I. THE INTRODUCTION.
IF we will but take to our serious consideration how many great obligations we
have to admire the infinite goodness of Almighty God in creating such a
mavelous number of creatures, merely for the use and service of man, whereof
no one of them can be wanting; and that amongst them all, we have none more
useful, or which can be less spared, then the Horse; no dumb creature more
generous, nor any that comes so near unto the pleasure of man, none can
serve him better in time of peace and war, none better for manuring and
tilling the earth, and to cause it to produce its fruits; none more useful for
bringing in the fruits of the earth; none more behoofefull to bear and carry
him his long and tedious journeyes, in heat and cold, through thick and thin,
by night and day; none better to carry him from danger, and to land his master
at the port of safety, then the Horse: and for his pastimes and recreations, no
creature to be compared to this: neither is there any creature created by the
great Creator of all things, which does so perfectly understand and connive
with the nature and mind of man, or that bears a more inly love to man, as
does this poor creature the Horse; for upon all occasions he sweateth, he
trudgeth, he toyleth, he drudgeth, he moyleth, he labors pro viribus, with
great alacrity and cheerfulness (so long as his vital spirits last) to give
comfort and content to him that feeds and cherishes him, yea and that (I
say) with such joy and alacrity, as if (like to a reasonable creature) he found
himself obliged thereto in the bond of all sincere duty and gratitude. For
should I speak rather like a Philosopher then a Christian, I could not but
agnize nature to be admirable in all her works, wherein man does owe unto her
infinite, and those very great thanks, in that she has accommodated and
plentifully furnished him with all things needful for his use, as also in that
she has propagated (amongst all other) the Horse, the most useful for the
service of man, and who best acknowledges his Master. And that this may be the
better anatomized, I will show you what I find recorded by authentical
Authors of the excellency of this praiseworthy creature.

The so much-renowned Bucephalus, who carried his Master through so many
conquered kingdoms, serves for an example to all ensuing ages, who would not
suffer any man but great Alexander to back him, who seemed to be proud at what
time he carried so glorious and victorious a charge, and it is also written of
him, that being wounded at the siege and sacking of Thebes, he carried him
courageously through the troops and throngs of all the combatants, with
incredible valor and courage, nothing at all esteeming or prizing the loss of
his blood, being most desirous, and no less willing to do his master all
faithful service, to the utmost of his power, and to the effusion of the last
drop of his blood, laboring to purchase unto himself by his (not to be
parallelled) valor, and his resolute perseverance, a victorious advantage over
the enemy. What never-dying high renown, the horse of Caesar got, I hold little
inferior to that of Bucephalus? Dionysius the tyrant of Sicily, in a great and
well fought battle, was himself so hard put to it, that he was constrained to
forsake his horse, nevertheless the poor beast made his way through the
throngs of the enemy; who all bloody and miery as he was, gat him to a
randevous his Stable. Centaurettus of Galatia, having in battle flaine
Antiochus, he in a bravado mounted his horse, who soon found by good
experience, (albeit no whit to his advantage) that the said horse retained a
resentment of the death of his slain Master, for the horse so soon as he felt
this his new Lord upon his back, never gave over flinging, yarking, plunging,
and bownding, commanding the Bit with his teeth, launching out sometimes this
way, sometimes that way, with so great impetuosity and fury, that at length he
cast his rash rider to the earth, and then fell to him with his heels,
redoubling his strokes in so thick and violent a manner, not giving over till
he had slain him outright, whereby he gave him little cause to triumph and
glory in his temerarious attempt. We read of Nicomedes, King of Bithynia,
whose Horse so entirely loved him, as that his Master was no sooner dead, but
the Horse presently forsook his meat, and so continued, until such time as he
languishing for very grief, dyed of famine. Virgil, the Prince of Poets,
makes honorable mention of Aethon, the Horse of Pallas, son of Evander, who
says that this Aethon being present at the funeral of his master, wept for
sorrow, as these two verses do inculcate: After came Aethon, bold in fight, now
weeping,
And in his tears, his mournful visage steeping.


Silius Italicus in his ninth Book, does highly extol two horses, to wit,
Pelorus and Ciraeus, speaking of them in this manner: Ready Pelorus was to the
hand and rain,
Obedient still, and of a generous strain:
Hearing his Masters voice, Ciraeus hies,
Before the beholders, and the wind of flies.


The tractablenesse and love that the Horse bears to man, have been the
occasion that sundry great personages have reciprocally answered it, by
erecting of Statues, and by building of most famous Cities to their honor and
memory. Alexander before mentioned, founded an opulent City in honor of
Bucephalus, and gave it his name, and celebrated his exequies. The Egyptians
erected most magnificent Piramides, and sumptuous sepulchers to such horses, as
had served them well in their wars. Octavius Caesar, and after him, Adrian
the Emperor, interred their Horses with great pomp and solemnities, and caused
famous Epitaphs to be engraven upon their monuments. The Emperor Commodus, did
the like to his Horse Parsinus, and commanded that he should be buried in the
Vatican. Romulus did institute Plays and Games called Equitiae, in honor of
Horses, and caused them to be presented in the field of Mars. The Ethiopians
did so highly esteem of these noble creatures, as that they armed their Helmets
with the skins of Horses, suffering their ears to remain on, and they did
wear their tails upon their Crests, like as now a days men use their plumes.
Other nations have done the like, who held Horses in no little esteem. We read
of a Roman Emperor, who made his Horse a Senator. The ancient Astrologers have
likewise attributed so much to Horses, that they have placed one winged amongst
the celestial signs. The Poets hold that the Fountain (where the nine Muses
used to bath themselves, and to drink) sprang up, by the blow of the foot which
Pegasus gave against the two topt hill, Parnassus. Neptune, God of the Sea, is
surnamed Hippius; by reason that (as the Poets do fable) the first Horse that
was ever seen, received his origin from him, or from a stone whereon Neptune
had poured water. There remains much more to be said in honor of the Horse,
then their has been already delivered. Wherefore omitting further Encomiums,
and attributes, I hasten to matters of greater consequence. Sithence therefore
the case so stands, that this dumb creature is by Almighty God given unto
man, as a creature of so useful importance, what thankfulness then are we
bound to give unto him for so great a blessing and benefit? And therefore what
diligence is required of us; yea, and what carfulness ought we to use, in
traveling to attain to this so necessary a creature in the most exact manner
we are able? Nor can this possibly be acquired to our true content, unless we
do apply our best endeavors herein; for the Ancients have this Proverb, All
rare and excellent things are hard to compass: and therefore we ought to apply
all care and industry to attain unto good Horses, which can never be so well
done, as by breeding them; for they must be the Horses that will be able best
to serve us in those offices whereunto we shall intend them, according as
hereafter shall be most exactly illustrated.

CHAP. II. Of the best manner of breeding.
THere are so many diversities of opinions so mainly defended pro and con, that
makes men fearful to bring that to public view, which long practice and
experience has brought them to know and understand to be most true and
infallible: Nevertheless I presuming that the more judicious may peradventure
favor my reasons and grounds; allowing them at least for probable and good, if
they shall adventure to make trial, which if they be pleased so to do, I am
confident they will both allow and approve of this my manner of breeding, above
all other ways heretofore practiced; who finding it to be much better, will
never be brought from the same method, and therefore I would not have any man
to condemn me before he shall first have made trial.

My counsel therefore is, that such generous spirits, unto whom Almighty God
has extended his benign hand, would take to their consideration, how needful
a thing it is for them to lay hold upon this so noble and profitable a blessing
and benefit, by applying their best care and diligence to breed, good, able,
and serviceable Horses, which may be as easily performed, and in a manner with
as little cost, as in breeding Iades and Baffles, unusefull and unprofitable.
For by procuring a good and able Stud of choice Mares, and by endeavoring to
get select Stallions, which for mettle, spirit, shape, color, marks, and the
like, shall be known to be rightly bred, and truly generous, as well (I say)
the Mares as the Stallions; and these, young, handsome, of size indifferent,
that is, neither too small, nor too large, long-legged or under-bodied; but
well knit, limbed, and joynted; it will be beyond all peradventure but that you
shall have Horses fit wherewith to serve your Country upon all occasions, and
your own turn and your friends, and acquire to your self no small honor and
commendations both from your Prince, and the weal public. And this the
better to be performed, you must understand that some things are necessary to
be considered. First, that your grounds be fit for breeding, and those not to
be such as be low, wet, fenny, moorish, or marish; but they must be pastures
upland, hilly, and in some places stony and rocky, for grounds of this nature
are very profitable for your Colts, to scope, run, and play in, it helps
their wind, it knitteth their joints, and hardens and makes tough their
hooves: some of your grounds ought also not to be without Underwoods, Bushes,
Fursells, Broom, and the like; these will serve for shelter at what time the
cold winds do blow: the residue of your grounds ought to have Lawnes and
Plains, wherein should be better grass then the former; and in these Lawnes,
is needful there should be great Oaks, and such like timber trees for them
whereby to shelter them from the scorching sun in the extreme heats,
especially during the time of the Canicular days; and these trees will also
defend them from the buzzing and stinging Fly, which otherwise would greatly
annoy and afflict them: you must also accommodate your grounds with partitions
convenient, as well for change, which sometimes is most requisite, as also
whereby to segregate each sort of cattle by it self; as your young and old,
raze or breeding Mares by themselves, your weanlings by themselves, your
Fillyes by themselves, and your stoned Colts by themselves, according as your
best judgment shall dictate; otherwise your breed will be in confusion, and
come to nothing, and so you may run the hazard, to lose both your cost and
pains. Places must be also made apart, wherein both your Mares with fool, and
those who have their Colts sucking upon them, may run by themselves with all
quietness and retiredness; and every of these partitions must be so
sufficiently fenced, as that no one sort of cattle can break into the other.
And I do yet further advise, that these grounds be well furnished with sweet
and wholesome water, whereof ought not to be any want, either in winter or
summer, for otherwise you may endanger the tainting and surfeiting of them.

Furthermore, that certain Sheds and Hay-houses be erected for them to be fed
in during the time of the winter, when grass is scanty and not so much
nourishing, and the cold winds, frosts, raines, and snowes, may greatly pinch
and annoy them; in which housings, would be set up Rackes and Mangers whereat
to feed them; there would also be laid clean straw for them to lie upon, which
will very much comfort and keep them warm: But above all, the greatest care
must be had to the fences in general, whether wall (which is evermore the
best) pale, quicksets, broad ditches, or high banks, lest they should at any
time break forth, and trespass your neighbors to bastardize, and wrong your
breed: and you ought also to institute a trusty and diligent Bayliffe or
servant, whose only function should be to make his fence-walke morning and
evening, as duly as any welexperienced Keeper or Wood-man does his Pale-walke,
to see that the fences be fast, and his cattle safe: and let him not fail
every day once at the least, to take a true tale and inventary of every sort of
cattle he has in his several grounds, for fear any should be missing, or
some misfortune befalne any of them; and it he shall find any wanting, let
him not rest searching, until he has found it; and if it be in danger or
sick, let him not give over himself if he can, (otherwise let him haste to
call company and strength enough) to free it out of harms way.

Now as touching the grounds themselves, as I would not have them too rich, or
too rank and deep with grass; so must they not be too barren, short, and
mossie; for as well in this subject, as in all other things, the golden mean
is evermore to be preferred. Having thus provided your self of a Stud of the
choicest and ablest Mares, for age, color, shape, and marks, your Stallions
also of like attributes your care must be to see your Mares well covered, for
in this chiefly consists the life and quintessence of your breeding. Be you
therefore mavelous careful, that neither your Stallion or Mare, have any of
these ensuing defects; viz. neither Moon-eyes, watry-eyes, or
Bloud-shotten-eyes, or other defect in their eyes or sight, no taint in their
wind by Glanders or otherwise, no way subject to Mainge, Mallender, Sellender,
Splents, Spaven, Curb, Ring-bone, Scratches, Kybed-heeles, or any other the
like sorances; that they be not Cock-thropled, but their Throples very loose;
for let either Stallion or Mare have any of these maladies, then be you well
assured their Colts will take them as hereditary from their Parents: insomuch
as when you esteem your self confident of such young Horses, you so much
desired to be master of, you will be mistaken; for instead of a Stirrier or
Horse for manage, you have bred him fit for naught else but the plough; and in
the place of a Hunter, he proves a Mil-horse; and in hope you had a Horse for a
Course, he proves for no better use but the Cart; and him you desire to have
for your own Pad-saddle, you will be constrained to sell him to a Carrier, to
bear a Pack-saddle with a burden.

To come to entreat of the time most fitting for covering your Mares, let that
be so done, that they may cast their Foles in the dead of winter; as either in
December, or January: for during their time of going with Fool, to wit, from
the day of their Covering, unto that of their Foling, is commonly 12 months,
and 10 days; yet some do aver, they do want 11 days of 12 months, of which
computation there is just three weeks odds: others again do affirm, that a
Mare goes but only 11. months and 10 days, wherein is greater odds: but I
have found it to be a most certain rule which never did fail me (unless in a
young Mare upon her first Colt, who will want some few days of the ordinary
account) and long and frequent experience has made me to be very perfect, that
a Mare goes (unless some mischance or other accident has otherwise
occasioned) twelve months and ten days: for when at any time I have been
present when a Mare has been covered, I have in the very minute entered into my
Almanacke, the very day and hour in which she took the Horse; and because I
would not be deceived, I have been present at her foling, and I have found the
time never to fail me. And therefore I could wish all breeders to observe with
me the same course, and they shall find this account to fall out just as I
have delivered. If your Mare be covered about S. Lucies day, which is the 13 of
December, then will she fool about S. Thomas day the same month in the year
following: But before you suffer her to be covered, let neither the Stallion or
Mare be at grass, but taken into the house, six weeks or a month at the
least; during which time, let them be both very well fed with good old Hay and
Oats well dusted and sifted, to the end they may have strength and seed to
perform the office for which you have them. But if you will have your Mare
certainly to conceive, then take blood from both sides of her neck, and let
her bleed at either vein well nigh a quart; which must be done five or six
days before she is to be covered; and the next day after her bleeding, give
her in a quart of new milk, half a iij. of Artimesia, alias Muggewort,
chopped very small, a piece of sweet Butter, and 2. of London Treacle warm; all
these put upon the fire till the Butter and Treacle be dissolved, and give this
to the Mare bloud-warme in the morning fasting, and so the next morning again,
and let her drink be white water. This drink is most sovereign to cause
conception, it provokes seed abundantly, it opens the pores in the body, and
causes the Mare to keep the seed she receives from the Stallion; Moreover
this drink comfort the womb and matrix very much: so as it is great odds
but that she being thus ordered, will be sped and conceive, unless she be a
Mare of great sterility, which supposed, she is not to be kept for a race or
breeding Mare.

Moreover, if you be desirous to have your Mare to conceive a Horse-colt,
rather then a Filly; observe then this lesson I shall here give you, and you
shall find it an infallible rule, which will never miss, viz. At what time
you would have your Mare to be covered, Let it be done, when one of the first
five masculine Signs do reign, which are either Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer,
or Leo; but if she shall be covered when any of the Feminine or watery Signs
are predominant, as Virgo, Libra Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius,
or Pisces; then be you confident it will be a Filly. For this have I often
tried, and found it seldom or never to fail me, especially if the wind be
either West or North (but West is best) at the time of her covering, and you
will find this my rule to be most infallible, for experience has taught it
me: And I have attained unto more knowledge by experience, then I was ever able
to aspire unto, either by reading and study, or by hearing what others have
dictated, taught, or told me: For we have a maxim, Experience is the best and
ablest mistress and moderatrix.

Now for the manner of the covering of your Mares, let her be brought into some
place abroad, and there fastened to some strong post; then bring out to her some
stoned Jade first to dally with her, and he will provoke her to an aptitude and
desire of coity; which done, let the Stallion be led forth toward her, betwixt
two or more lusty strong men who may be able to master him if he should prove
unruly, and let him leap her; and let this be done in a morning betimes
fasting; which done, another man standing by with a paile of cold water ready
in his hand, in the very time when the Horse is dismounting, let him cast the
cold water upon her shape; which by reason of the coldness, the strength of
the caster, and the suddenness thereof, will cause her to shrink in, and
trusse up her body, and it will be the means to make her retain the seed in
the matrix, otherwise the womb would not peradventure so soon enclose it, but
for some time after, howsoever the womb would draw together, but not so
suddenly, whereby upon the Mares motion, there might be some danger of
dissolving. Take then away the Stallion, and let the Mare be put into some
remote place alone, from sight and hearing of other Horses and Mares, but let
her neither eat nor drink in four hours after, neither let her have any
water at all till night, and then give her either a sweet Mash, or white water.
After she has been thus Covered, you shall know whether or not she has either
conceived, or lost, or cast her seed, by many evident symptoms which will
appear to your eye; for if she retains a good stomach to her meat, and so
continues, if she do not neigh at hearing or sight of other horses, if she do
not piss often times in the day, casts not her eye about gazing continually at
every noise she hears, pricketh not up her ears, and that in three or four
days after her Covering, her belly seems to be more gaunt, her hair more
slicke and close to her skin, showing of a brighter color, and she seems to
fall away and become lean: if (I say) any of these Symptoms do appear in
her, then is it an evident sign she has kept her seed and conceives, but if
the contrary appear in her, then has she lost it, and engenders not.

But as for offering her the Horse again ten days after, together with such
like circumstances, I hold them impertinent for this place, being so frequently
known and practiced, and therefore my labor may well be spared. But for her
keeping and ordring after her Covering, let her not drink that she desires,
but continue her with the same diet which formerly she had before her covering
for three weeks or a month after, lest the seed might fortune to be impaired,
before the Colt be sufficiently formed in the womb, and let her be kept sweet
and clean as may be, and that without any labor or exercise during that three
weeks or month: after which term you may if you please, inure her to moderate
labor, wherein have a special care of four things: first, that she be not at
any time gallopped,

She being thus with fool: she must be kept in the house until mid-May at
least, and then let first her shoes be taken off, her feet pared well, the
Frush and heels opened, and plates after the manner of running shoes (but not
to come home to the heels) set on; let her run in the driest ground you have,
yet not so short of grass, but that she may at her ease fill her belly at
least once a day, and about the latter end of September, (if not before) let
her be very carefully taken into the house, but so quietly that you shall not
endanger the hurting of her belly, either by the rushing of other Horses and
Mares against her, or through her unruly leaping, or inconsiderate brushing
against posts, doors, or the like. Let her be kept thus in the house to the
time of her foling, and long after, and let her diet be as before is prescribed.

And when the time of her foling approaches, let her keeper attend carefully
upon her, putting her into a house convenient for her, unhaltred and untied,
lest in foling, the colt receive damage, by reason that Mares do commonly cast
their foles standing: wherefore let not the room whereinto you put her, be too
straight, but very warm, (for warmth is a great comfort as well to Mares with
fool, as in foling) and let good store of straw be laid, that the Fool may
fall from the Mare the softer, and be in less danger of harm, and let her (I
say) be watched for fear the Fool come not right; and so soon as she has
foled and licked it dry, let her keeper presently milk and stroke her, and
that before the Colt do suck her, which will both cause her to give down her
milk, making the same to multiply, and also keep the Vdder that the milk do
not clod, which if it should do, the Mare might happily in short time become
dry, whereof if there be any peril, I then advise you to draw as much milk
from her as you can; and boil it with the leaves of Lavender, or Spike, and so
bathe her Vdder therewith warm, continuing so daily to do, until by this
means you have broken the curd, knobs, and knots, causing them to be
dissolved. And as for the water which she is to drink for some time after her
foling, let it be either sweet Mashes, or white water, and a month after her
foling, give her a Mash, putting thereinto the powder of Brimstone, or Savin,
or the like, which will be a great preservation of the Colt; and then if she be
moderately labored either at Plough or Harrow, if she will draw, as well the
Mare as Colt will prosper the better; provided she be kept from raw meat while
she remains in the Stable, by which means she will the sooner recover
strength, lust, and courage, and have store of good milk, which will cause the
Colt to thrive the better, and to grow to be of the greater bone, which above
all things is a matter of greatest consequence. And that you suffer not the
Colt to suck the Mare when she comes from work, until she be thoroughly
cold, lest thereby you surfeit the Colt.

Thus much I have thought fit to handle of this subject; and albeit I have
labored herein to attain to brevity, nevertheless the premises well
considered, I shall not greatly offend in prolixity, howsoever this my manner
of breeding being different from the old received customs, will not (I do
assure me) pass void of censure. But as touching old customs, thus much I do
aver, that as they are in many cases of that force, as no law is able to
abrogate; so on the contrary part, many of them are so absurd and ridiculous,
as nothing can be more; for what says the civil Law? Those things which by
event or success of time are found to be pernicious or hurtful, even these
things ought to be repealed, yea albeit they were at the first found
profitable. Which ground holds good in nothing so much as in old customs,
for of their absurdities, I am able to produce instances not a few, howsoever
with many, It is one of Hercules greatest labors to beat many a man from his
old customs be they never so bad, albeit Custom is a mere tyrant, and his
sovereignty most insufferable, as a grave Author very well observes.

CHAP. III. How to make and order your Stable.
HAving thus waded into this mystery of breeding, I hold it a thing very
behoovefull to be handled, how your Stable ought to be accommodated. First
therefore your Stable should be situate where the air is wholesome, pure, and
good, and the ground dry: the structure would be either of free Stone or
Brick, but Brick is best, most wholesome and warmest: besides this benefit
Brick has, which Stone has not, of being very dry, for Stone will weep, and
sweat drops of water against rain and misty weather, which begets damps,
and causes rhumes in Horses. Your Stable ought not to have any unsavory
Gutter, Channel, or Sink near to it; no Iakes, Hogsties, or Hen-roust,
whereby to annoy it. It would be also seeled over head, and have strong doors,
with locks, bolts, and bars unto it. The Rack would not be made too high,
or too low, but placed in an indifferent proportion, and so artificially set,
that neither the dust or hay-seeds may fall into his Mane, or upon his neck
and face. The Manger would be set at an indifferent height, made deep, and of
one entire piece, as well for strength, as for convenience to be kept sweet and
clean. Let the flore be pitched with Flint, and not planked. The windows
would be made with handsome shuts and casements, and well glazed, as well to
keep out cold and wind, as also (when there may be cause) to let in the cool
and fresh air. Again, take heed there be no lome wall or plaster, so near
as that the Horse may reach thereto with bis mouth: for upon that he will gnaw,
which may do him much prejudice, and be the cause of much dangerous sickness,
for Lome and Lime are suffocating things, they will infect and putrify the
blood, endanger the Lounges, and be no friend to his wind: neither suffer any
dung to lie near him. Furthermore there would be made a fair Loft wherein to
lay Hay, and convenient lodging chambers for your Grooms, whose nearenesse,
together with their care and vigilance might prevent many dangers and
inconveniences which may accrue unto your Horses by night. Also let a neat
Saddle-house be contrived with Bings for Provender, and in it Presses, wherein
to lay up the Saddles, Bridles, and all other furniture appertaining to Horfes,
and an Aqua-duct wherewith to bring water to the Stable. And lastly, other
Stals would be erected remote, wherein upon occasion to sever the sick from
the sound. Many other accoutrements there are belonging to a perfect Stable, as
partitions with boards, posts, and bars, with pins driven into every post,
whereon to hang Bridles and the like; shelves also fastened to the wall serving
for many uses, to place necessaries upon, etc. which being known to all men,
will be needless for me here to repeat.

But you may peradventure startle at paving, rather then planking your flore,
preferring planks as warmer, and much better then flint or a pitched flore can
be; as also for that it is a new thing, little practiced, and seldom heard.

But give me leave (I pray) a little to inform your understanding in this one
point, by which means your judgment may fortune to be much bettered. First
therefore, whereas novelty may be objected, I shall most easily assoile that
point, even from the selfsame ground in the civil Law, which I inserted in
the conclusion of the precedent chapter, viz. That things found to be
prejudicial, ought to be inhibited, although they might be thought needful,
and good in foreknown times. For that paving of Stables is better then planking
them, Paving Stab^ much b^ then pla^ing.
I have reasons not a few wherewith to satisfy a reasonable man. First, it is
much more durable and lasting, supposing the flore to be pitched by an expert
workman: Secondly, it is less charge by much, and therefore in that point the
better: Thirdly, for a Horse to stand continually upon a pitched flore, it
emboldneth his feet, and treading the will be as bold to go upon stones, rocky
and hard ways, as Horses that are shod: neither will a pitched flore suffer
the hoof to go abroad in manner of an Oyster: besides the use thereof will
make their hooves more tough, durable, and hollow, insomuch as when they shall
come to be shod, and to have exercise, they will carry their shoes much
longer, better, and with more ease then otherwise, if they had been used to a
planked flore.

The inconvenience of a planked flore.
Now on the contrary part, which concerns the planked flore, that (I say)
cannot in reason be so good by many degrees. First, it is more slippery, out of
which reason a mettled horse may soon be in danger to be lamed or spoiled by
some sudden slip, whereof I have oculatus testis: Thirdly, when you put forth
your horses to run at grass all, or the most part of Summer, during which time
the scorching heats will so siccicate and dry the planks, which will cause them
to warp, and the pinnes which holds them down to the joyces will rot, and so
the planks give way, especially when horses (who not being handled in some
months before) becoming wild, rammage, and unruly, are newly brought into the
Stable, who feeling the planks to move, yield, and give way under them, will
fall from starting thereat, to slinging, leaping, bounding and plunging, till
they have dislocated the planks, and thereby have endangered both themselves,
the residue of their fellows, and those who might come to their help and
succor, which is a thing very frequent in a flore of this nature: Fourthly,
whereas you may imagine that a planked flore is warmer then a paved or pitched,
I do know the contrary; for your pitched flore has no vaults or channels
under them, like as has your planked, wherewith to convey the water which
passes from the horses; hy which means the horse lies over a moist and
dampish place and vault; and besides that, the evil savor of the horse-pisse
will be evermore in their nose, which is most unwholesome, noisome, and many
times the cause of much infirmity; neither can it in reason be so warm as is
the pitched flore, for that the chinkes and awger-holes bored through the
planks (which must always be kept open to let forth the urine) does give way
to the cold wind, which continually ascends up to the horse, as well lying as
standing, cannot but do him much damage. I do therefore affirm, that if
your Groom have a care to litter his horse well, so as he may lie soft and
warm, (which is a prime property appertaining to his office) your horse will
then prosper, and like much better upon a pitched flore, then he can upon a
planked; provided your flore be laid even, not higher before than behind, more
then so much that may make the water to avoid to his hinder feet, where there
ought to be a small gutter to cause it to pass away, for in raising your flore
so much, I do abstract from the ancient ill custom, by reason that a horse
stands higher before then he does behind, his hinder legs will swell, and
so he becomes lame; besides; it gives him a taint in the back and kidneyes;
and to conclude, his long standing in this uneasy manner, begets in the
poor beast much pain and grief, and this occasioneth unto him (which would not
otherwise be) the putting forth of Windgals, Pains, Scratches, and such like
noisome sorances.

Another thing may peradventure be thought strange, which I have handled in the
former chapter, where I entreat of breeding; Of the tim^ of foling.
in that I would have the time of the Mares foling to be, either in December or
January, this being in the very depth of winter, as well when the season is
commonly coldest, and when little or no grass is to be had, so as of necessity
the Mare must be housed, and fed with hard meat, whereby her milk will be in
so small a proportion, as either to endanger the starving of the Colt, or else
at leastwise keep him so poor and feeble, as not to be able to grow, thrive, or
prosper to any purpose. To satisfy this scruple, I say from long experience,
that the winter season for a Mare to fool in, beyond all peradventure, is the
very best, as well for the Mare as the Colt, supposing she be kept in a warm
house; and as for her milk, she will have great plenty, and that much better
and more nourishing than that milk which the Colt shall suck from his damme
at grass; so as thereby the Colt shall be more lusty, strong, healthy, greater
of bone and stature, The Colt better no^rished in t^^ Stable, the at grass
(...) winter.
better able to endure hardiness, better knit, cleaner limbed, more neatly
joynted and hooved, and keep his flesh better than that Colt that is foled in
May, June, or any the hotter months: and my reason is, that albeit grass
causes greater plenitude of milk, (which I deny not) yet is not the same so
good and nourishing: for the milk which the Cost sucketh at grass, is very
thin and watery; and albeit winter food begets not so great a quantity of
milk, yet the same will be thicker, more substantial, and of greater
nutriment, (the Mare being very well fed) which will feed the Colt very fat,
and make him more lusty and strong, (as I have said) then if the Mare the whole
Summer and Winter through, and in all the extremity of the heats and colds had
been kept abroad. Moreover, the Colt besides the milk he draws from the
Mare, will also feed with her upon Hay, Oats, Bran, and such like food, which
will do him much pleasure: But some again will say, that their teeth are so
tender, as that they will not be able to chew and eat such kind of hard
meats; I answer, they are very much mistaken, for, not only my self alone,
but sundry others have with me been eyewitnesses of the contrary; therefore
this needs no further solution. And whereas it has been objected unto me, that
that Colt which is foled in May, or Solstice, in that season, the Mare will
have store of milk, thus much I do ingenuously confess, but then what manner
of milk will it be? None other then such as shall be mavelous thin and
watrish, (as I said before) which abundance will also fail, even when the Colt
has most need thereof, that is, when the Colt begins to come up to some
strength, and at what time he should receive most nutriment, to wit, when the
winter comes on, whose Snows, Frosts, cold raines, and Floods; will not a
little nip and pinch the Colt, and enfeeble the Mare in such terrible and
desperate manner, that she will want her former plenty of food, warm and dry
lodging, and other necessary relief and sustentation, and so in like manner,
her abundance of milk, at what time her poor Colt should depend upon the
enfeebled Mare, who is not able to supply its own need: by means whereof it
must necessarily fall out, that she must bring both her self and her Colt to
extreme poverty, not being able to sustain her own life, much less her Colts
and her own, and so become feeble before winter be half spent; and over and
above all this, the Colt will by his running abroad with the Mare, become so
salvage and wild, as that if any infirmity should happen to seize upon it, its
own unrulinesse will be so great, that the cure may thereby become the more
difficile: for to speak truly, infinite have been, and daily are the numbers
of Colts; yea, and those many times rightly bred, which have miscarried and
perished in this nature.

I do therefore conclude, and as a friend to my Country aver, that the
ablest way to breed up the best and most serviceable Horses, is (as I have
before inculcated) after this method and none other; and therefore I am bold
to advise all noble Gentlemen who are lovers of good Horses, and of this
mystery, to make trial, and to put these my rudiments in execution, and he
will never (I do well assure me) hereafter, either alter or swerve from them;
for of this kind of breeding, I have had more then forty years good
experience: during which time, I intimated these my grounds to a Knight, an
intimate friend of mine, who was a great lover of good Horses, and as great a
Breeder, as a lover of them, and very well versed in Horse-man-ship, who
hearing my reasons, and thoroughly digesting them, approved of them so well, as
that he fell to follow these my instructions, and esteeming them sufficient,
would never be brought from them after; he affirming, no way comparable to
this: for he found by plain demonstration, that whereas in former times in
breeding (as commonly he did, ten or twelve Colts yearly; when they came to
Backing, Riding, and proof of those ten or twelve, he thought himself well
appayed, and his labor and cost well bestowed, if two or three at the most
proved right, and to his mind; whereas ever after in ten Colts thus bred and
reared up, hardly any one missed, which proved not right and to his good
liking: and this manner of breeding, made him more in love with this mystery,
then ever before, reason dictating it so well unto him. For, most certain it
is, when the Stallion and Mare are both right, and have all their true
attributes, and the time, season, and manner of breeding, with all
circumstances thereunto belonging, punctually and in every point duly observed;
it will be a hard matter for the Colt to prove ill: but if otherwise, then
marvel not if the Colt answer not your expectation, according to the Greek
Adage, which says; (...), Jade Sire, Jade Colt. Wherefore if upon trial it
shall appear to you, that you have hitherto been to seek of the true grounds,
and of the original causes why you have not bred so many good Horses as you
have desired, do not then wonder that The cause of your error, and of so
great a mischief has stolen upon, and deceived you: for the great decay of
good Horses, together with those infinite errors in breeding, and
Horse-man-ship; that increase that is, being in so vile a manner of base Iades;
have so swarmed in this kingdom, as that (a lamentable case to be related) of
one rightly bred, we now adays have a thousand Iades; to the great dishonor,
disprofit, and weakening both of King and Country. And what is the reason? I
shall in a word tell you: It is impossible for a man to bring his work to its
wished perfection, who never knew the true grounds of his principles.

CHAP. IV. Of the Marks, Colors, and Shapes of Horses.
THe next thing befitting our subject, is to speak (albeit briefly) of the
Colors, Marks, and perfect Shapes of Horses: Wherein I will first deliver
other men's opinions, and lastly, mine own. Some there be who hold that
Colors, Marks, and Shapes are little material to make up a perfect Horse,
which I will not contradict, for my meaning is not to traduce or control any
man: but this I will say, that if a good horse have these properties adherent
to his goodness, then is he questionless in much better esteem, for if beauty
be added to his other inward virtues, then is he (like to the Nightingale in
the beginning of April, heard and hearkened unto, more praiseworthy, and
better prized. For a horse, who if he be good and serviceable, well metled,
bold, and hardy, of a gentle condition, of a round and comely trot and pace,
lightly and well borne, obedient mouthed, sure on foot, tough, strong, and
easy; will (I say) not such a horse be well esteemed? But if together with
these good properties, there shall be added, good color, true marks, and
perfect shape, which causes him to appear most beautiful to all beholders:
will not these endowments set him the better forth? and cause him to be the
better esteemed, of every man desired, and much more money offered for him?
nay, shall not you (whose the horse is) be come unto, be sued unto, have
letters sent you from sundry friends, and will not your self prize him at a
higher rate than otherwise you would have done? yes assuredly; and hereof I
make no question. True it is, and I must confess no less, that a horse may be
very good, and perform his function very well, who has neither good color,
true marks, or perfect shape; nevertheless these extrinsecall virtues are more
frequently to be found, and better observed to be in good horses, in whom are
color, marks, and shape; than in horses which are otherwise. Wherefore
because these things are termed exterior virtues, and therefore takes its
object from the eye only, I will conjoyne them altogether in this my
discourse, and show you what has been, and is, the opinion of both ancient and
modern Writers. Virgil in his Georgickes, handling most accurately sundry
points of husbandry, among other things in his third book of Georgicks,
describes the horse, as well his breeding, and his several sorts of
employments, as his color, shape, and marks; yea, and that in most exquisite
manner: And thus he begins: Let the Males go
Without restraint to venery, and so
By timely breeds, preserve a perfect kind.
Their first age best, all wretched mortals find;
After diseases, and old age do come,
Labor, and death's inexorable doom.
There still will be, whose bodies with thy will
Thou would wish changed. Therefore repair them still;
And lest thy kind quite lost thou find too late,
Prevent the loss, and yearly p^opagate.
And such a choice you must in Horses make,
By him, whom you for Stallion mean to take,
As hope of all the race, elect with care
Even from a tender Fool such Colts as are
Of generous race, straight, when at first they are fol'd,
Walk proudly, their soft joints scarce knit, and bold,
Dare lead the way, into the rivers enter,
And dare themselves on unknown seas to venture.
Not frighted with vain noyses, lofty neck'd,
Short headed slender bellied, and bro^d backed;
Broad and full brested; let his color be
Browne-bay, or gray, white proves not commonly,
Nor flesh-colors, when wars alarums sound,
His nostrils gather, and breath fire, no ground
Can hold his shaking joints, his fear advances
His thicke-curl'd Mane on his right shoulder dances.
His backbone broad and strong, the hollow ground
Trampled beneath his hard round hoof does sound.
Such was that Horse, which Spartan Pollux tamed,
Fierce Cyllarus, and Mars his Horses famed
By the old Greek Poets, or those two that drew
Achilles Chariot: such a shape and hew
At his wives coming, flying Saturn took,
And all high Pelion with shrill neighings shook,
Yet when disease or age have brought to naught
This Horses spirit, let him at home be wrought,
Nor spare his base old age. A horse grown old
Though he in vain attempt it often, is cold
To venery, and when he is brought to try
(Like that great strengthlesse fire in stubble dry)
In vain he rages; therefore first it is good
To mark his age, his courage and his brood,
With other arts; how sad a horse will be
When overcome, how proud of victory.
Do thou not see, when through the field in speed
Two racing Chariots from the Lists are fled,
The young men's hearts all rise, as forth they start,
And fear with joy confounded strikes each heart?
They give their Horse the raynes, and lash them on,
Their hurried wheels enflaming, as they run;
Now low they go, now rise as they would fly
Through the empty air, and mount up to the sky:
No resting, no delay, a sandy cloud
Darkens the air, they on through shoutings loud
Of standers by, all sweat, and fom'd do fly,
So great's their love of praise and victory.
First Ericthonius Chariots did invent,
And by four Horses drawn in triumph went.
The Peletronian Lapithes first found
The use of backing Horses, taught them bound,
And run the Ring; taught Riders t'exercise
In martial ranks, both equal Mysteries:
The Masters of both these have equal need
To find out Horse of courage, and good speed,
Though never so nobly born, though often in game
They won the prize, and for their Country claim
Epire, or famed Mycenae, or else took
Their birth at first from Neptunes trident stroke.
These things observed, at Covering time, they care
To make their Stallion strongly fat and fair
The father of their brood; for him they mow
Choice grass, sweet streams, and corn to him allow,
Lest he should fail his pleasant work to do,
And th'young ones starvelings from his hunger grow.
But they of purpose keep the females light
And lean: and when they have an appetite
To venery, let them not drink nor eat,
And course them often, and tie them in the heat,
When in full Barnes the ripe corn crowded lies,
As empty chafe before the west wind flies.
And this they do, least too much rankness make
The breeding, soil, and fatted furrows take
Too dull a sense; but that they should draw in
Seed with desire, and lodge it safe within.
But if thy mind thou more to war do give,
Or through Jove's wood, would racing Chariots drive,
And swiftly pass by Pisa's river side:
Thy first task is to make thy Horse abide
To see the soldiers arms, hear their loud voices,
The trumpets sound, and rattling Chariots noyses,
And often within the stable let him hear
The clashing whip, he will more and more appear
To be delighted with his Masters praise,
And when he strokes his neck, his courage raise.
When first he is weaned from sucking, let him hear
These things, and trembling be compelled to wear
Soft haulters often about his head; but when
His life has seen four Summers, teach him then
To run the Ring, in order high to beat
The ground, and both ways skilfully corvet
As if he toiled, then let him with his speed
Challenge the wind, and from all curbing freed,
Scour over the champion fields so swift, that there
The sands no print of his light foot do bear.
So when the Scythian gusts, and North-west wind
From their cold quarter fiercely blow, and bind
The dry clouds up: all over the waving field
Corn bows with equal blasts; woods tops do yield
A murmuring noise, long waves roll on the shore,
Forth flies the wind, sweeps lands and waters over;
Thy Horse thus ordered to the races end
All bloody fom'd, victoriously will tend,
Or else his tamed neck will better bow
To draw the Belgian Chariot; let him grow
Full fed, when (...) he is broken well, nor fear
His growth; so fed before he is broke, he will bear
Too great a stomach patiently to feel
The lashing whip, or chew the curbing steel.
But no one care does more their strength improve,
Then still to keep them from veneriall love. etc.
See how the Horses joints all tremble, when
A Mare's known sent, he through the air do feel;
No stripes, no strength of men, no bit of steel,
No Rocks, nor Dikes, or Rivers in his way,
Which roll whole mountains, can his fury stay. etc.
But strangest far
Is those Mare's furious love, which Venus sent,
When they their Master Glaucus peece-meal rent.
Love makes them mount over lofty Gargarus,
And swim the stream of swift Ascanius.
And when Love's flam^ their greedy marrow burns,
Most in the Spring, (for heat then most returns
To the bones) upon high rocks they take their places,
And to the western wind all turn their faces,
Suck in the blasts, and (wondrous to be said)
Grow great with fool, without the horses aid.
Then over the Rocks and Valleys all they run,
Not to the North, nor to the rising sun,
Nor Caurus quarter, nor the South whence rise
Black showers, which darken and disturb the skies.
Hence flows thick poison from the groynes of these
Which Shepherds truly call Hippomanes;
Hippomanes, which often bad Step-dames use,
And charming words, and banefull herbs infuse.
But time irreparable flies away. etc.


Du-Bartus that famous French Poet, does likewise in his Treatise of the
Handy-crafts, excellently describe the color, shape, and properties of a good
horse, in the fourth part of the first day of the second week, which begins
thus: Cain as they say with his deep fear disturbed,
Then first of all th'undaunted Courser curbed;
That whilst about another feet he run
With lusty speed, he might his deaths-man shun.
Among a hundred brave, light, lusty Horses,
(With curious eye marking their curious forces)
He chooses one for his industrious proof,
With round, high, hollow, smooth, brown, jetty hoof;
With pasterns short, upright, (but yet in mean)
Dry sinnowy shanks, strong, fleshless^ knees, and lean,
With Hart-like legs, broad breast, and large behind,
With body large, smooth flanks, and double chin'd:
A crested neck, bowed like a halfe-bent bow,
Whereon a long thin curled Mane does flow:
A firm-full rail, touching the lowly ground,
With dock between two fair fat buttocks round.
A pricked ear that rests as little space
As his light foot; A lean, bare, bony face,
Thin joule, his head yet of a middle size,
Full lively flaming, sprightly rolling eyes:
Great foming mouth, hot fuming nostrils wide,
Of chestnut hair, his forehead starrifi'd:
Two milky feet, a feather on his breast,
Whom seven years old at the next grass he guest.
This comely Iennet gently first he winnes,
And then to back him actively begins.
Stedy and straight he sits, turning his sight
Still 'twixt the ears of his Palfrey light.
The chafed horse, such thrall ill suffering,
Begins to snuff, to snort, to leap, to fling;
And flying swift his fearful Rider makes,
Like some unskilful Lad that undertakes
To hold some Ships Helm, whilst the headlong tide
Carries away its vessel, and her guide;
Who near to drowned in the jaws of death,
Pale, fearful, shivering, faint, and out of breath,
A thousand times (to heaven erected eyes)
Repents him of so bold an enterprise:
But sitting fast, less hurt then feared, Cain
Boldens himself, and his brave horse again
Brings him to pace, from pacing to his trot,
From trot to gallop, after runs him out
In full career, and at his courage smiles,
In sitting still, he runs so many miles.
His pace is fair and free, his trot is light
As Tigers course, or Swallows nimble flight:
And his brave gallop seems as swift to go,
As Biscaine Dart, or shafts from Russian Bow.
But roaring Canon from his smoking throat,
Never more speedy spewes the thundering shot
(That in an Army mowes whole squadrons down,
And batters bulwarks of a summoned town)
As this Light Horse sends, if he do but feel
His Bridle slack, and in his side the heel;
Shunning himself, his sinewy strength he stretches,
Flying the earth, and flying air he catches;
Born whirlwind like, he makes the trampling ground
Shrink under him, and shake with doubling sound,
And when the sight no more pursue he may,
In fieldy clouds he vanishes away.
The wise-wax't Rider not esteeming best,
To take too much now of his lusty beast;
Restraines his fury, then with learned wand,
The triple-corvet makes him understand:
With skillful voice he gently cheares his pride,
And on his neck his flattring palm does glide:
He stops him steady still, new breath to take,
And in the same path brings him softly back:
But the angry Steed, rising and rearing proudly,
Striking the stones, stamping, and neighing lowdly;
Calls for the combat, plunges, leaps, and prances,
Be^omes the path, with sparkling eyes he glanc^s;
Champs on his burnisht Bit, and gloriously
His nimble Fet-locks lifts belly-high;
All side-long jaunts, on either side he justles,
And's waving crest courageously he bristles;
Making the gazers glad on every side
To give more room unto his portly pride.
Cain gently strokes him, and now sure in seat,
Ambitiously seeks still some fresher feat:
To be more famous, one while trots the Ring,
Another while he does him backward bring:
Then of all f^^re he makes him lightly bound,
And to each hand to menage rightly round:
To stop, to turn, to caper, and to swim,
To dance, to leap, to hold up any limme:
And all so done, with time, grace, ordered skill,
As both had but one body and one will:
The One for his art no little glory gains,
The Other through practice by degrees attaines
Grace in his gallop, in his pace agility,
Lightness of head, and in his stop facility:
Strength in his leap, and steadfast menagings,
Aptness in all, and in his course new wings. etc


A famous Ferrier of Paris delivers these colors of a good horse, which
because they are in French verse, I have englished them verbatim thus.

If you desire a horse thee long to serve,
Take a browne-bay, and him with care preserve:
The gray's not ill, but he is prized far
That is cole-blacke, and blazed with a star:
If for thy self, or friend, thou will procure
A horse, let him white-Lyard be, he will long endure.
And the same Frenchman shows, what be also the properties and mark^s which
a good horse ought to have; Of the colors of a Horse.
whereof three are to be of an Ox, three of a Fox, three of a Heart, and three
of a Woman. Those three of an Ox, are to have, a fair, and full eye, a large
neck, and to be strong and short joynted. Those three of a Fox, are, to have
a comely and short trot, small, and long ears, and a bushy tail. Those three
of a Heart, are to have lean and dry legs, to be well risen before, and a
lean head. Those three of a Woman, are to be large and fair breasted, to have
a beautiful and full hair, and gentle to his Rider and Keeper.

The same Author delivers yet further what ought to be the color and shape
of a good horse. Those horses (says he) that are of a chest-nut color, with
Mane, and Tail black, are commonly good. The Sorrel, if his Mane, Tail,
Knees, Fet-lockes, and list along his back, be black, and are for the most
part good, if they be otherwise free from evil conditions; as not at any time
to lie down in the water, restife, and such like bad qualities. The
Browne-bay, Dunne, D^pple-grey, iron-grey, if their extremities be black, are
many times very good, if they be well chosen. All horses (says he) must have
good Legs, Of the shape of a Horse.
good Feet, and their Fetlocks must not be overcharged with hair; they must
have also good eyes, obedient mouthed, and well metled: they must not have fat
or fleshy legs, but to have a great belly, well risen before, straight backed,
not charged with overgreat shoulders, he must have a thin bended neck, like a
Carps back, a good Crouper, large Thighs, round well spread Buttockes, and a
train well set on: a lean, dry, and thin Head, a full sparkling Eye, a wide
Nostrill, a wide, thin, and lean Iaw, a loose Thropell, a
well-trussed-together Body, and Legs not too long being thus accooterd and
shaped, it is probable he will be very serviceable. He also shows signs
whereby to know the good or evil sight of a horse. How to know the good light
from the bad of a horse.
Every horse (says he) has a feather in his Face betwixt his eyes: if the
said feather be high above the eyes, then has he assuredly a good and perfect
sight; but if the feather be below his eyes, the horse then has often times a
bad sight: Observe this rule well, and you shall find it to be a thing most
certain. He also gives other marks touching the Legs of a horse: which
briefly are, that a horse must have his forelegs above the knees, to be
strong, flat, and large, albeit the lower part of the Legs be small: provided
he have a good foot, which supposing, he may prove a horse of long continuance.
Another Author speaking of the colors of Horses, Which be the best colors of
a Horse.
does denominate them after this manner, viz. A Brown-Bay, a Black-Roan, or
Black full of silver hayres Cole-black, Chest nut, Dark-Bay, Fly-bitten, or
White-Lyard. The Browne-Bay is so highly esteemed with all Nations, as that
they do with one assent always rank him in the very first place of colors:
the Italians and French do so much prize the Brown-Bay, as that they evermore
call that color Bayary Loyal, the Loyal Bayard, or more properly according
to our English phrase, Trusty Bayard. The French, Italians, and Germans do
very far commend and prefer three sorts of colors in Horses: to wit, the
Browne-Bay, the Chest-nut, and the Cole-Black; but they do evermore prefer
the Browne-Bay to the first place. Master Blundevile, and Master Markham do
both accord in the choice of the Colors of the Horse, and they never do fail
in preferring the Browne-Bay to the first place.

What shall I need speak any more of Colors; I will now proceed to their
Marks, wherein, albeit in most things all in a manner do agree; yet only in
some few points there is some small difference. All generally assent in the
white star, and white foot, if the blaze be not too broad, or the foot too
high white above the Pastern, for then it is called hosed, or Buskened: some
commend the shimme, Of the m^ of a Hors^
or raze down the Face, if it be not much broader than a three-penny silk
Ribben, but then it must come to end just between the Nosthrils, and not be
more on the one side of the Face, than on the other. This indeed is of all
true Horsemen esteemed a most beautiful good Mark, and well becomes a good
Horse. Some would have the foot being white, to be on the far foot behind,
and some again on the near foot before: I have heard some highly commend the
Horse to have two white feet a cross, to wit, the far-foote behind, and the
near foot before, like as had a Horse of the old Lord Sands, being a Courser,
which he brought out of Italy, with so much charge, labor, and peril of his
life, (as his Lordship did sundry times report unto me,) which was of a dark
Bay, and his two feet a cross white, howsoever I have known some Horsemen,
dislike of the same Marks, yet I could never hear the reasons of their
dislike. A Knight of my acquaintance would highly commend the Horse, who had a
white foot, which was bespeckled with black motly spots; affirming that a
Horse so marked did betoken good mettle, great valor, and a heroic spirit,
for he would always call such a Horse, Equus generosus, a Horse of a brave
spirit; and this he would report, was taught him by old Sir Henry Lea, that
famous Horseman, and no less excellent Breeder, of whom this Knight bought
many delicate Colts, some of which were thus marked. All good Horsemen do
attest, that the Horse with much white upon his face, raw nosed, sheath, yard,
tuell, and hooves white, skin white, and legs hosed, and waleyed; is generally
weak, faint, of a cowardly condition, tender, and washy of flesh, subject to
rebellion, restifenes, to starting, stumbling, evill-sighted, subject to tire,
dangerous to his Keeper, for biting and striking; and in a word, of a most
base, and evil condition. For the countenance is the true Index of the mind:
And a lewd look prognosticateth a lewd condition: And again; a deformed
countenance does delineate a wicked and deformed disposition and manners.
Feather ^den to (...) good m^ in a Ho^^
It is holden for a good Mark in a Horse to have many Feathers about his body,
as upon his forehead, so it be situated above the eyes, and the higher it
stands, the better: also upon the middle of the Neck near to the Crest, under
the Neck in the middle of the Throple, upon the Breast, and upon both the
Flanks, and upon both Buttocks, which for Horses to have Feathers in these, and
such like places, is most commendable.

Now as touching the perfect and true shape of a Horse, wherein we have more
contrariety of opinions, than are either in the Color or Marks, whereof I have
given you a taste already: Nevertheless, I will demonstrate how far commonly
all do meet in the shape of a well timbred Horse. The perfect shape of a
Horse.
First therefore it is required that the hoof be black, smooth, dry, large,
round, and hollow: the Pasterns straight, and upright, Fetlocks short, the
legs straight, and flat, called also lath-legged, the knees bony, lean and
round, the neck long, high-rear'd, and great toward the Breast, the Breast
large and round, the Ears small, sharp, long, and upright, the Forehead
lean, and large, the Eyes great, full, and black, the Brows well filled and
shooting outward, the Jaws wide, slender, and lean, the Nosthrills wide, and
open, the Mouth great, the Head long, and lean like to a Sheep, the Mane thin
and large, the Withers sharp and pointed, the Back short, even, plain, and
double chined, the Sides, and Ribs deep, large, and bearing out like the
cover of a Trunk, and close shut at the huckle-bone, the Belly long, and
great, but hid under the ribs, the Flanks full, yet gaunt, the Rump round,
plain, and broad, with a large space betwixt the Buttocks, the Thighs long,
and large, with wel-fashioned bones, and those fleshy, the Hams dry, and
straight, the Trunchion small, long, well set on, and well couched, the Train
long, not too thick, and falling to the ground, the Yard, and Stones small; and
lastly the Horse to be well risen before. And to conclude, the perfect shape of
a Horse, according as a famous Horseman has described, is in a few words,
thus; Viz. A broad Forehead, a great Eye, a lean Head, thin, slender, lean,
wide Jaws; a long, high-rear'd Neck, high-rear'd Withers; a broad, deep
Chest, and Body; upright Pasterns, and a narrow Hoof: And this is the common
allowed, and approved shape of a perfect Horse; so as if any of these things be
deficient in him, he cannot be said to be a Horse of a perfect Shape: Wherefore
I conclude that if a Horse of a good Color, well Marked, and rightly Shaped,
and right also by Sire, and Mare; it will be seldom seen that he should prove
ill, unless his Nature be alienated, and marred, either in the Backing and
Riding, or else that he be otherwise wronged, and most shamefully abused by the
means of a hare-brain, negligent, or inconsiderate Rider or Groom. But I may
in this point be taxed to hold a Paradox; for some may object unto me, that
many times Horses, who are of the best Colors, best Marks, and truest Shapes,
do nevertheless prove arrant jades, restiffe, stubborn, ill natured, subject
to tyring, and the like: I answer, I acknowledge all this to be most true, for
I have known Horses, who upon their first view, have been in extrinsecall
show so hopeful, as that they have promised what a man could expect from them;
which notwithstanding when they have come to the test, they have been a
scandal to their sex; but this is not a thing frequent, for in every one of
these who have thus miscarryed; you shall have twenty who will prove right, and
answerable to your mind: I have also known Horses, which wanting these good
attributes, and who have been as different from those we call good, even as
Chalk is from Cheese, who have proved very good Horses: howbeit I will not
counsel you to breed upon such an one, who albeit he may bring you Colts, yet
I dare not promise you he shall ever bring you a good Colt, whereof I have
oftimes made trial, as well for Horses of Mennage, as for Hunters, and Horses
for the Course. Neither need there any more be said upon this subject.

CHAP. V. Of the Office of the Rider and Groom.
HAving now bred Colts according to my instructions, which you may well hope
will prove to your mind and best liking, nevertheless some things there yet
remain whereof duly to consider; and that is; that when you have thus (I say)
bred your Colts which you may very well hope are right, your eye and judgment
for Shape, Color, and Marks promissing no less; it then behooveth you to be
very cautelous in the Handling, Breaking, Riding, and wel-ording them, whether
you intend them for Menage, Course, Hunting, or the Rode; in any of which an
especial care would be had to provide you of Riders, Grooms, and Keepers,
such as shall be known to be expert in their faculties; in which principally
consists either their direct making, or marring, and final ruin. For we
cannot say, that a Colt (yet unhandled) at three or four years of age, is or
can be a perfect good Horse, whilst he remains (I say) unridden, unhandled,
and unmade, until such time, as he has been taken up into the Stable, made
gentle, taught to lead, content to be shod, to be Backed, Broken, Ridden,
Wayed, Mouthed; and to be brief, brought to his utmost perfection. By this
time, you will come to be able to know and understand his true Worth, Virtue,
Nature, Disposition, and Quality, his Pace, his Rain, or Bearing his Toughnes,
Strength, and Affability, his true worth and goodness, and what other
attributes are befitting a generous Horse.

What manner of man a Rider ought to be.
His Rider therefore must be an expert and able Horseman, and his Keeper every
way as sufficient; otherwise what defects you shall find in your Horse, are
not to be attributed to him, but either to his Rider, or to the Groom.
Wherefore your care must be, that both Rider and Groom be known sufficient,
lest for want of true science, your Horse may eft-soones be brought to assume
such sinister conditions, from which he will not be weaned in a long time
after. Wherefore if your Rider be known to be an able man, and your Groom
sufficiently skillful; you must then expect that perfection from your horse,
you ever hoped. For my part thus much I aver, that this Noble Science (Noble, I
call it for that it is a faculty well beseeming a truely-Noble Gentleman) is an
art wherein I have been versed and traveled for more then forty years, as
well at home, as in parts abroad, in which I have most diligently consumed much
time, as well to the labor of my body and mind, as to my no small expense:
and it does not a little trouble me that in places where I come here in
England, I do find so few Horsemen, (considering it is an Island which does
abound in Horses, whereof no kingdom under heaven more) and yet so many
Braggadochies there be, who will so crack and boast of their skill in this
heroicke Science; and when I shall begin to discourse with them of
Horsemanship, they will talk so sillily, and so impertinently, as makes me
blush to hear them: insomuch as I have much trouble with my patience in
forbearing to let them know their absurd folly: and if I but ask them any
easy question concerning this mystery, they presently fall into strange and
preposterous discourses, venting many incredible wonders, as far from sense,
and as high above the Moon, as the Moon is above us: and they are as poor,
and as ignorant in the true nature and knowledge of the Art, as not to be able
to understand the very first grounds and principles in Horsemanship. Others
there be, who have attained to so much superficial speculative knowledge, by
reading the works of Master Blundevile, Master Markham, and others, getting
thereby some glimpse of speculation, but less true practice, (wherein is as
much difference as betwixt us and the Antipodes,) and therefore in what esteem
they either are or can be among Horsemen, is most easy to be imagined. Others
there are, who being so active and dexterous, as to be able to sit a rough
unridden Colt, a few plunges, by fast holding with both hands to the Mane and
Pummell, and by clinging with their legs close to the body of the horse, till
by striving and his violent disordered agitation, he has put himself from off
his wind; he will not stick presently to promise to himself, the true and
entire mystery of able Horsemanship. Others again I often meet with, who by
sometimes frequenting the Muze, and other places, where Riders use to menage;
who after have made no bones to cry themselves up for as good and as able
Horsemen, as any in England. Others I do very well know, who by reading, have
made some petty practice howsoever (God knows) to very small purpose (so far
forth as their diminitive skill was able to extend) upon such (not rightly bred
Geldings, and small Nags of their own) wherein they have assumed unto
themselves so much pretended knowledge, as that they have in their disjoynted
discourses, not spared to tax the famous Alexanders, and other eminent Riders
of this our kingdom for Novices, and mere ignorant Horsemen. Such (I say) is
the vanity and arrogance of these our days, in which ignorance dares to
adventure to traduce knowledge, and Vice lay an obloquy upon Virtue. For
unless a man do arrive unto the depth of profound knowledge, he shall be
derided but l^ke as he either has or has it not, he shall be ^ither commended
or scorned. For you shall not see one in a hundred of th^se pretenders of
knowledge, who does (not so much as) understand the terms of this generous
mystery; and therefore I may truly say of them; that, Not to know the terms
or principles, is to be ignorant of the Art it self: And yet I have known some
of these so impudently weak, as to take upon them to teach, whereat I have not
a little marvelled, it being a general received rule, viz. It is impossible
for any man to teach that which he never learned. And further a venerable
Author says, He that will be his own scholar, shall be sure to have a fool
to his master. For ^ssuredly, great folly and weakness is to be observed in
that man, who shall take upon him to be a master or teacher, who never knew
what it was to be a scholar.

But if you desire to have your Colts come to the height of perfection, let
then your care be to furnish your self of a good Rider, and such an one who is
well known and cried up to be an exquisite Horseman. He must not be of life
dissolute, or debaucht, nor of nature harsh, furious, choleric, or
hayre-braind: for the least of either of these vices, are unbeseeming a person
of this profession: but he must be of life sober, and in his function laborious
and diligent, of complexion Flegmatique, and patient, he must be master of his
passions; for A wise man knows how to conquer and overcome himself: for that
Rider that is choleric, rash, hasty, and soon provoked to impatience, can
never make a good Horseman, let him love the Art never so well, neither shall
he be able to make a horse so perfect as otherwise he might have done, were he
otherwise conditioned; but let him apply his best endeavors, yet that horse he
m^keth shall have defects, which his inconsiderate harshnesse has caused. For
if your young horse be rightly organized, and as well natured, as well mettled,
and as correspondent for marks and colors, he seldom proves ill in the
making, supposing his Rider be master of his Art, but if otherwise, by which
means he do fall into imperfections or vices: it is not much to be wondered
at, for those his evil conditions and faults are not so much to be imputed to
the horse, as to his teacher, and as touching curstness and correction to be,
used to young horses, we have a general rule in Horsemanship, which is, that
he is not cried up for a good Horseman, who wants knowledge how to bring his
horse to perfection by sweet and gentle means, rather then by correction and
severe chastisement: yet that correction must sometimes be used, no man but
knows, to be as necessary as his meat; nevertheless let correction be so
considerately applied, as not therein to exceed the limits and bounds of
moderation, Let it (I say) be done, to amendment, and not to destruction or
confusion, and utter marring of him: for discretion in a case of this nature is
a most precious jewel, and highly to be valued, and when his Rider shall at
any time correct him, let it be done in the very instant when he offends, and
does justly merit the same, and not otherwise, for else he will not know the
cause why he was chastised, whereby he becomes rather confounded than
amended: so on the other side, when the horse does well, let him be cherished
and much made of, which will the better encourage him in the same way of going
forward in well-doing.

What manner of person a Groom ought to be.
And as touching the Groom, he must be a man who must truly love his horse,
and so shape his course toward him, as that the horse may love and dote upon
his Keeper, otherwise the horse may soon get so many evil habits, which he
will not easily alter or forget. For as Aristotle learnedly says, Like as you
order him, so shall you find: For the horse by nature is the most loving
creature to man of all other bruit creatures, and none more obedient, none more
intelligible, none more desirous to please; wherefore if he be sweetly, mildly,
and plausibly dealt with, he will be also reciprocal: Otherwise if his Keeper
be harsh, furious, chollericke, and passionate, the horse will be put besides
his patience, stare and see boggards in his Keepers face, become rebellious,
fall to striking, biting, and other vices, to the often endangering as well of
the life and limbs of his Keeper, as of his Rider, and others: for the old
proverb is most true, Patience once wounded or wronged, is soon turned into
fury and rage. For the horse is not said to be Creatura animalis, a creature
endewed with a reasonable soul; but is, Creatura simpliciter animata, a
creature which has only life and sense, as learned Philosophers do teach: a
creature (I say) in whom is only life, sense, and memory, but discourse he
has not, and therefore must be governed by judgment and discretion. If
therefore your Groom be a man of a loose, evil, and debaucht life, or not
otherwise able to govern, or to master his passions, he is wholly unfit to
supply this place, and to take a charge of this nature upon him: yea he must be
a man of a boundless patience, he must be judicious and discreet, by which
means he may with the greater facility, and less difficulty, bring his horse
to be of the same identity, pa^ity, and essence with himself, their loves and
hearts truly united; so as he may at pleasure, mould and fashion him into what
form he desires: he must continually toy, dally, and play with him, and teach
him to play the wanton, be always talking and speaking pleasing words and
phrases unto him: he must lead him abroad morning and evening when the sun
shines warm, and then run, scope, and show him all the delight and contemment
he is able: he must duly curry, rub, and dress him, wipe, dust, pick, and
cleanse him, feed, pamper, and cherish him, keep him warm and sweet, be always
fidling and doing some thing about him, be often tampering with his heels and
legs, often taking up his feet, rapping him gently upon the soles, and
knocking him softly upon the coffins, until his Keeper has taught him to take
up any foot of himself at first bidding: his Keeper must have him always so
clean of his body, setting upon his coat so perfect a gloss, as that a man
may almost see his face upon it. His feet would be kept stopped, and the
coffins daily anointed, his heels free from scratches, and other such like
sorances: and his Keeper ought also to keep so continual a vigilant eye upon
him, and all his actions, as well in his feeding and drinking, as otherwise,
whereby no symptoms of sickness or infirmity (inward or outward) shall be
able so soon to show its head, but they may be as easily, and as soon cured
and amended, or else prevented: for to amend a fault in the beginning, is far
better and more easy, than when it has been long accustomed: for our old
Proverb is, Things are sooner prevented, than amended.

But I am loath to wade any further into this subject, for this is not that I
intended when I began: yet sithence I am thus far imbarqued in it, I will
give you a few rules which may be profitable both to the Master and the Groom,
which if they be well observed, you may undoubtedly keep your horse long in
very good estate and health. Rules f^^ be obs^^
First therefore before you put your horse to grass (I speak now of horses
which have been ridden and exercised) some four or five Diapente, mentioned in
lib. 2. chap. 7. 2. with good Sack, and let him after his drink be inured to
hardiness some days before his turning forth, by taking by degrees his
clothes from him, lest by doing things on a sudden, he fortune to take more
cold, than you can easily cure: neither would I have you put him forth till the
midst of May at the soonest, for till that time, grass will not have bit
enough for him to fill his belly, nor the season warm enough, (and let the day
wherein you turn him forth be a warm Sunshine day, and about the hour of
ten;) for Horses pampered in warm stables, and kept close, will be subject to
take cold; if a discreet order, and course be not taken with them. Secondly,
let him be taken up from Bartholomew, which is upon the 24. day of August, or
soon after, for then the season does begin to let fall cold dewes, which
betideth no good, but much harm to your horse, and then begins the heart of
grass to fail, so as the grass which then he seedeth upon, breeds no good
nutriment, but gross flegmaticke and cold humors, which putrifieth and
corrupts the blood. Let your horse (I say) be taken up about the day before
mentioned, but with all the quietness may be, for fear of heating him, by
reason his grease he gat at grass is tender, so as every little motion will
dissolve the same, whereby the blood may be inflamed, and so the Horse be
brought into eminent peril at least of sickness, if not of death. A day or
two after you have him in the Stable, or sooner, let him be shod, and let
blood, and drencht, as before is showed you; for this preventeth Yellowes,
Stavers; and such like diseases, which the Gaul, and Spleen occasioneth, which
the heart and strength of grass (through the ranknes of the blood) does
engender in his body; Then purg and cleanse him both outwardly and inwardly,
like as you are taught in lib. 2. chapter 2.

Thirdly, search your Horses mouth, both then and at other times Diapente, or
Diatesseron, and he shall do well again. name begin your journey, but for a
mile, two, or more, go fair and softly, for if you heat him too soon, he
will not digest his meat, but crudityes will arise in his stomach, which you
shall perceive by his scouring and purging, as he travaileth, whereby you may
either founder him in his body, or else cause a Calientura, burning Fever, or
some other worse infirmity to seize him: and as you do travel him, when you
are come some four or five miles from home, a light from him, and walk him,
sometimes standing still to see if you may provoke him to stale, for it is very
wholesome and good, which you may also do well to attempt when you dismount
and walk him down any hill: and some three miles before you come to your
journies end, Ride him into some River or other watering place, unto his belly,
but no deeper in any wise, and then let him drink, yet not so much at the
first, as he desires, but by degrees, first taking up his head to cause him to
wash his mouth, whereby to free it from filth and foam; Then let him drink
half his draught, and lastly, so much as in reason he will: Then observe upon
what pace you brought him to the water, with the same pace, (and neither
softlier nor faster) Ride him a mile or better, by which time he will have
warmed the water in his belly, without taking cold or harm. This watering him
thus, will very much refresh him, cause him to forget his wearisomenesse, and
when he shall come to eat, it will be with very good appetite, which otherwise
he would not have done. A mile at least before you come to your journies end,
slack your pace, and begin to go more softly, to the end he may not be too hot
when he shall be set up, have him without delay into the Stable warm, well
littered up to the belly; but take heed you suffer him not to be either walked,
or washed, for these two things are very pernicious, and most dangerous for
him, and the cause of more sickness, sorances, and death to Horses, then of
all other things besides. So soon as you have brought him into the Stable, the
first thing you do, off with your Coat, and tie him up to the empty Rack;
then litter him up to the belly, ungird him, take off his Saddle, rub his back
with speed, and put his cloth upon him, and upon that his Saddle again, and
gird him with his Sursingle, then make clean his stirrops, stirrop-leathers
and Girts, and rub him down, both Legs, Belly, Body, Breast, Head, Face,
and Neck, and so stuff him up with clean dry straw, and let him stand so upon
the Bit an hour, evermore looking upon him least he sweat a new, which if you
shall perceive, then to alay it, take away some of the straw wherewith he is
stuffed, and he will cool again; if you find him in good temper, unbridle
him, and wash his mouth with water and salt, and wash also his Bit, and so
bridle him up again, and give him some good Hay in his Rack to champ upon, for
half an hours space. After come to him again, and then unbridle him, put on
his Coller-halter, and so give him fresh Hay to eat: Then rub him all over,
and so let him stand till you have supped; then come to him, and give him
either a sweet mash or white water, which when he has drunk, let him eat
Hay for half an hour after, and then give him his Provender, but by degrees,
not too much together, for fear of cloying him, which so soon as he has
dispatched, unsaddle him, and rub his body all over, cloth him up warm, and
whisp him up round with small whisps: Which done, rub his legs dry, pick,
and stop his feet, and anoint the Coffins and Cronets of his Hoofes, giving
hin Hay for all night: and lastly shake up his litter about and under him, that
so he may ly soft, and warm: and thus doing, leave him to his rest.

The next morning, come to him early; and first observe whether or not he has
layne down; then look upon his Ordure, whether it be laxative or costive, or
if he has avoided any grease, which if he has, give him with his Oats, a
handful or two of Hemp Seed, and so order him as you are accustomed, or
otherwise as you in discretion do find to be most requisite. Many other
rudiments there are to be given, which for that they are so commonly known to
every Groom, are impertinent to rehearse: Only in a word for a close, I say,
that a good Groom ought to be a man of good life, and sober demeanor, no
Tipler, no haunter of Alehouses, or Tavernes, (like as too too many are) no
liar abroad from his Horse in the night, nor long from him in the day, and an
early riser; the Stable must be his Compting-house; he must not be so intimate
with any as with his Horse; have intercourse with none so much as with him he
must be his principal associate, and make him of his Cabbinet-councell: his
Horse must be his only Idaea, the only Mistress whom he must court, and serve:
and so soon as he does suspect but any the least inconvenience in him; let him
instantly impart it to the Ferrier, and look what the Ferrier does give in
directions, let his Keeper diligently observe, and execute accordingly; for it
is an argument of a proud and preposterus condition in a Groom, to swarve from
the instructions Tenthly, as touching the furniture and caparison which the
horse

THE EXPERT FERRIER. The Second Book.
CHAP. I. Of what points consists the office of the Ferrier: Handled
Dialogue-wise.
Hyppophylus. MAster Sergeant Ferrier, you are well encountered, I have been
often at your house and shop, with a desire to have spoken with you, but could
never have the good fortune to find you at home.


Hyppiatrus. Sir, it may well be, that you may come often to my house, and yet
miss of me, unless it be at certain set hours, for that I having many Cures
daily in my hand, and besides I am frequently sent for by many to look upon
sick horses; marvel not that you cannot so easily find me at home: but what
is your pleasure now that you have met me?


Hyppophy. You may remember (good Hyppiatrus) you promised me (upon our last
meeting) to assist me in the perfecting of my Cures, which so long since I
purposed to publish, and now I would gladly know what day and place you would
appoint for the final dispatch of the business.


Hyppiat. Truly Sir, the time now fits well, for I have dispatched all my
affairs for this day; wherefore sithence we are met so near my house, we
will enter, where we will be retired into a private chamber, prohibiting any
access unto us, my man Hypposerus only excepted, whom I will interrogate in
such points as shall concern the Ferriers Art or Science: and you sitting by,
making your self very attent to our discourse, and taking in writing the prime
heads of our discussion, when any thing passes whereof you may desire to be
better informed, propose the same, and we will give you a full solution.


Hyppophyl. Your motion likes me well, for it will be the best course you can
think of whereby to give me ample satisfaction.


A formal Examen of the Office of the Ferrier. Hyppiat. What is the Ferriers
Art?


Hyppos. It principally consists of four things, to wit; Science, Experience,
Knowledge, and Handiwork.


Hyppiat. Letting pass the first three, tell me what is Handy-worke?


Hyppos. Handy-worke is to heat the Iron well, to Sodder well, to Forge well,
to turn a Shoo well, to make and point a Nail well, to pare the hoof well, to
Cauterize well, to let blood well, to be light, and well-handed, bold, and
hardy in dressing of a Horse well, of such Accidents as may happen unto him.


Hyppiat. What are the principal members of the Creature?


Hyppos. They be three, viz. the Liver, the Heart, and the Brain: and if the
Creature be offended in any of these three, especially the Brain, which is in
the top of the head, then I say he will die.


Hyppophyl. I always took the principal members of any living creature to be
four.


Hyppiat. Therein (Sir) you were mistaken, for any of these former three being
hurt, there is evermore present death, especially the Heart, and the Brain:
but if any other member besides these three be hurt, yet may your Horse live,
and do well again. But which Member (I pray you Sir) do you hold to be one of
the four principal Members?


Hyppophyl. The Stones or Gignitors.


Hyppiat. How do you assoyle this Objection Hypposerus?


Hyppos. Most easily Sir, that the Gignitors cannot be any one of the
principal Members, reason teaches us: for you cannot so much as touch any of
these three, but you do either kill the Creature outright, or else desperately
endanger him. Now supposing the Stones may fortune to receive hurt or damage,
yet if I be in despair of healing or curing them, I can nevertheless cut, or
take them clean away from the body, or cause the^ to fall away by other good
means or by medicine, without peril of his life: he will only thereby loose
his natural heat, whereby he will be disenabled from having any disposition
to Coity, or power of Procreation.


Hyppiat. What is that which goes from the Head of the Horse, and diffuseth it
self through-out all the other Members?


Hyppos. They are two Sinnewes or Tendents which are white, and have a Ligature
beginning at the very end of the Nose, and extend themselves along the Neck,
and along the Back, and makes their extent to the four Legs, and takes
their Ligaments in the fore- Feet.


Hyppophyl, I was in good hope Hypposerus, you would likewise have spoken of
the number of the Sinnewes, and where every one is seated; for it is a thing
very material, and I do the rather desire it, for that I am not as yet
perfect in that point.


Hyppiat. That was but forgotten both by my self and him Sir, wherefore
Hypposerus make answer to the Gentleman's demand.


Hyppos. I shall do it most gladly, wherefore as touching the Sinnewes we say,
The number of the sinews
that there are in every Horse twenty nine or thirty, great and small. First,
the two great Sinnewes which I named before, Nose. Item Sinnewes that proceed
from the Brain, and runs down the Cheeks to the Teeth. Item there are from
Shoulders to the first joint of the Arms or fore-Legges downwards, Sinnewes.
Item from the Knees to the Pasterns are four great Sinnewes, with the same
number in the hinder part. Item Breast, and about it, as well within as
without, Sinnewes, some greater and some smaller. Item from the Raines of the
Back to the Stones are four great Sinnewes. Lastly, one Sinnew whith runs
along to the end of the Tail. So as the full number of the Sinnewes are twenty
nine or thirty, which are to be discerned.


Hyppiat. What is that which we do commonly call principal or vital Blood?


Hyppos. Those be Veins which are vessels of quick or running Blood, which
men do call Vital Blood.


Hyppiat. What is that which men do call Vital Blood?


Hyppos. It is that which when the Creature sleeps, his blood is in
continual agitation, and never cease.


Hyppiat. How many Veins has a Horse in his whole body?


Hyppos. To speak properly, a Horse has but only one Vein, which is that
which we call the Median or Lives Vein, which is in the Liver, being the true
Fountain, Source, and great Tun from whence the Canes Conduite-pipes, and
little Veins (as the smaller Rivers do separate themselves) which do run
thorough all the parts and members of the whole body.


Hyppiat. What call you Separation?


Hyppos. Separation is of two kinds, viz. ascendant, and descendant: those
which do ascend to the Head and body, are called Veins Ascendant; and those
which do run low, or to the Legs and lower members, are called Hollow, or
Descendant Veins.


Hyppophyl. I did ever think and believe till now, that a Horse had more
Veins than one; how then comes it to pass that we open Veins in so many
several parts of the body, being so different Veins the one from the other?


Hyppiat. I answer you Sir, if you be pleased to examine your paper, there
you shall find how that Hypposerus told you that a Horse has but only one
Vein, and it is a most infallible verity, for that all those other Canes which
you call Veins, are but the very same with that One, which evermore stands
full of Blood up to the top, conveyed into him, which said great Vein is
annexed unto the Liver; which Vein, does resemble a great Tun or Cestern,
which conveyeth the Blood into all the lesser Veins, by which means they
continually remain full, having no vacancy or want: Like as a Cestern (V. G.)
r^ceiveth its water from a Pump, and so conveyeth and bestows it into and
among the smaller Pipes, ofttimes storeth with plenty of water, a whole
Village, or Town, or at least a whole Family.


Hyppophyl. I understand you well; but now friend Hypposerus, tell me I pray
you, in how many Veins may a man take Blood from a Horse in case of necessity?


Hyppos. In many parts, to wit: In the Neck, in the weeping-Veines, The numb^
of ths vein^
under the Ears, and in six other places of and about the Head; as in the
Palate-Veines, in the Tongue, in the Flank-Veines in the Breast and
Spur-Veines: in the four members, to wit, the Legs, Thighs Pasterns and
Feet; also in sundry other places, according as necessity shall require it, and
in places which may the better kill the Malady or Disease of the said Horse.


Hyppophyl. But yet I was in good hope you would have delivered the reasons for
which you do open any Vein, as also which they be in particular.


Hyppos. The Veins which we do usually open are; First, The partic^lar veins.
the two Temple-Veines, which eases the pains in the Head coming of Colds,
Rheumes, Fevers, Yellows, and Stavers, drowsin^sse, Frenzy, the Slee^^-^vill.
Falling evil, or any grief in or about the Eyes or Brain. Secondly we op^n
the two Eye or weeping veins, being Eyes are subject; as watery or weeping
Eyes, Blood shotten, P^n and w^hhe h w, or the like. Pallet veins in the
Mouth, and thos^ do Cure the Lampas, and any inward sickness within the body;
as the Yellowes, Stavers, Anticor, Surfets, Drowsinesse, Tyrednesse, or
weariness of the body; or if the Horse have any M^lady in the Throat, as the
Strangles, Quincy, Kernells, Pustills, either within or without, it many times
helps Inflammations Glanders, or the like: for the eating or swallowing of his
own blood, is most wholesome and sovereign in such cases. Fourthly, we do
usually open the two Neck veins, which helps Farcins, Yellowes, Stavers,
Scabs, Mainges, Agues, Fevers, Colds, Surfets, Glanders, or any other M^lady,
which may be any way noxious to the inward parts of the body: And it also
preventeth sudden sickness, if you have any suspect thereof. Plate or Breast
Veins do help the Anticor, Sickness of the Heart, Morfounding, which is the
foundring in the body by over riding whereby the Grease of the Horse is molten;
it also preventeth diseases in the Liver, Lungs, and inward parts grieved; and
sometimes hurts in the Shoulder, which causes lamenesse Arm or Thigh Veins
before, which helps Foundring in the Fore-feet, Mallenders, splent, serewe,
Ring-bone, and such like infirmities in the Fore-feet, and such other Blood
from the four Shackle-veines before; and this is very good for the Crown-scab,
Ring-bone, Spur-veins, which cures the Farcin in the Sides, morfounding,
swelling under the Belly, which is a disease called the Feltrick, and the like.
Ninthly, we prick the two Toe-veines which do help Frettizing, Foundring,
Hoofbound, beating of the Horses Feet by riding upon hard and stony Thigh-veins
behind; and this does help the griefs of the Kidneys, Swellings in the
hinder-legs, Foundrings, Selenders, Scratches, Kybes, etc. and it helps also
diseases in and about the Belly, as pissing of Blood, pissing often after great
and extraordinary labor, and the weakness of the Reins, the Back, Belly,
Guts, or any other the inward parts, the Curb, Spaven, and Blood. Eleventhly,
we sometimes do open the four Shackle-veines behind; and this is very good
against foundrings and other pains in and about the feet. blood in the two
flank or hanch-veines, and this is most profitable for all kind of fevers,
the stones, poverty, and the felter-worme. Thirteenthly, we draw blood from the
two tayle-veynes, which tail, falling off the hair, or the itch in the tail.
Scown-scab.
And these are for the most part all the veins which are usually opened, or
that my self have ever known, or have seen my Master open, which are very
great means to help these diseases by me mentioned. So as the full sum or
number of veins which Ferriers use commonly to open, are thirty. Other veins
there are which are of a smaller proportion, and therefore not fit to be
opened. Nevertheless some Ferriers there are, who have fondly reported unto me
that they have let horses blood in many of those small veins, but I could never
learn for what purpose the same was done: let this therefore which I have here
set you down, suffice for this matter.


Hyppophyl. I have heard you Hypposerus attentively, but yet I would most
gladly understand one thing, which is, that whereas you say that the opening of
these veins does help and cure such diseases, I would gladly be satisfied
herein, for if by the opening of these veins the horse will be cured, then we
may spare much labor in applying drinks, purgations, clisters, and such other
things, which we usually make and give to horses.


Hyppos. Sir, I assure me you cannot be so ignorant as you speak; for this
opening of veins and bloodletting, does not always absolutely cure those
diseases which I have named; but it does sometimes assuage the malignancy of
the malady, sometimes it preventeth diseases, and sometimes again it prepares
the body the better to receive such physical drinks which do inwardly cure
them, and such Salves, Oils, and Unguents which do dry and heal up outward
infirmities; but that blood letting does absolutely cure them, I say it does
not, howsoever in some cases it may.


Hyppiat. What is that which departs from the head of the horse, and serves
him for his principal members?


Hyppos. I have showed you that already: they be sinews and nerves; these
sinews which depart and proceed from the head, give sense and feeling,
arriving in the body of the creature, and so diffuse and spread themselves
through all the principal members, which do descend from the head unto all
the other members, which make a conjunction of the bones, of the legs, of the
body, and of all the other members. Of the bo^



Hyppiat. How many bones has a horse, and how are they situated in the body?


Hyppos. There are in the body of every horse, two hundred fifty and seven
bones.


Hyppiat. Name them severally.


Hyppos. All the bones which every horse has whereby to make up an organall
body, are these: viz. he has in his head, thirty nine, and teeth: the bones
in his head do comprehend the Crocks and scull, albeit they be composed of
parts and parcels of certain other bones, also the two flat Handles, which form
the Palate; Forke or Throat has five, the chine fifty two, the breast one,
ribs thirty six, the fore-legges and fore feet have forty four,
hinder-legges and feet, forty. So as the whole structure bones, consists of
about 257. or 259. if they be rightly computed; Anatomy of the horse is laid
open.


Hyppiat. What natural composition has the head of the horse?


Hyppos. He has eyes to see, ears wherewith to hear, nostrils to smell or
scent; a mouth and tongue to taste and eat, and wherewith to nourish him.


Hyppiat. What natural composition has the whole body of the horse in
general?


Hyppos. The whole body has its heart, liver, lungs, spleen, stones, and
gignitors: all which are called the noble parts, and that most justly: for when
either the one or the other of any of these parts receive hurt, or damage, the
poor beast is in peril of his life, except in the gignitors, according as I
have declared.


Hyppiat. What maladies or diseases are most usually incident to the horse?


Hyppos. Sundry diseases, as namely Auynes and Gripings, called in French,
Tranchaisons, Foundrings, Farcins, Mainges, and very many more which severally
to recite, would spend much time: Nevertheless I will handle briefly their
natures, dividing them into two sorts, viz. Moist, and Dry; the moist do
proceed commonly from naughty blood, the dry comes of heat: as the Scab,
Mainge, and such like diseases proceeding from moystnes; some again are called
Leaprosies, or the Elephantique mallady, by reason that Elephants are much
troubled therewith; and every disease is known by its proper symptoms.


Hyppiat. What be the signs whereby to know the humid or moist disease?


Hyppos. The humid or moist malady is properly called the Glanders, which often
times proceeds from the liver and lights, when they be infected with
putrefaction and rottenness; or when they breed inflamed lumps, knots, or
kernels under the Chaule, which all do come of cold taken by immoderate riding
and labor, and want of care afterward, which begets evil humors in the
body, which when they shall begin to break from the horse, by his running and
purging at the nose, whereof other horses will have a desire to lick, and
thereby they do become infected.


Hippiat. Many horses there be which do run at the nose, who have not the
Glanders.


Hippos. It Is very true, but this disease of the Glanders may be known by its
knots, kernels, and pustils which arise under the Iaw. You may also know it by
the color of the corruption which the horse venteth: for, if that mattrative
stuff be green, and of a strong and offensive savor, or if it be white, and
stinketh, as also viscous and slimy; then be you confident it is the Glanders,
but if he shall cast forth corruption at his nose, which is white, and that by
bits and gobbets, which does not stink or have any evil savor or smell, then
it is not the Glanders, but some distemperature which comes of a cold lately
taken, which is easily cured, if it be not let run too long, for there is
great danger in delay.


Hippiat. What be the arid or dry diseases?


Hippos. They are an alteration of the body, which we do commonly call Surfets
and Pursivenesse, which is occasioned often by riding of a horse beyond his
strength or breath, especially presently after water, or by putting him to too
much labor, or too violent running and strayning, or by washing him when he is
very hot.


Hippiat. How comes a horse to have the Tranchaisons or Gripings?


Hippos. By suffering him to drink when he is too hot, or by overriding him;
they also come of bad wind which ingenders in him, and not by suffering him to
stale in his riding in convenient time, and of evil humors.


Hippiat. What signs have you of the scab or mainge?


Hippos. We may with good reason say that this disease we call the scab,
mainge, or itch in a horse, proceeds of too great abundance of ill blood,
which when it is once inflamed by over-hard riding, causes its leprosy to
come forth upon the skin, which comes to be an itch running over the whole
body, beginning betwixt the flesh and the skin, insomuch as it will cause the
hair to fall away, from whence ordinarily does proceed a dry scurfe or scab,
which is very contagious.


Hippiat. How comes the Farcin to the creature?


Hippos. No way so soon as by a bad Stable, whither Swine and Poultrey do
resort, for their doung is most pernicious: also by evil dressing, which may
be a great cause, and by too much rankness of blood, and by some wound, hurt,
or blow with a staff, especially if the staff, have knags or knots upon it,
sometimes by enter firing, and hewing, and lastly by spur-galling.


Hippiat. Which be the four maladies which do most appear when a horse
shows by his action that he is in danger of death, by the said diseases?


Hippos. That happens often by too much ventosity, or by eating too much raw
meat, or to have drunk being very hot: it comes also of the coldness of
urine, or having ridden him too hard too long together, not giving him leave to
piss.


Hippoph. I pray Hipposerus give me leave to demand of you, what you would do
in such a case, by your best endeavors, to save the life of the poor be^st?


Hippos. In a case of this nature, I would first take blood from him, if I
found just cause for it, and then should I administer a laxative clister, which
should be both comforting, and yet operative, which is inserted in lib. 2. chap
6. 8. clis. 2. Or else I would give him a drink of good operation, which you
shall find in lib. 2. chap. 7. 8. clis. 6. either of which, or both, are most
sovereign in this case. But if I shall find, that the malice of the mallady
does not continue in the body, but falls down into the four legs, as usually
it will do: then do I use to open the veins in those places, and in the neck
also, or in any other part I shall judge shall be most necessary, and of his
blood I will make a restrictive charge, adding thereunto Wheate-meale, Bole,
Sanguis-Draconis, Eggs, the strongest white wind Vinegar, and such like, which
I will more at large express in the place of Cures: this (I say) will I apply
to all the four legs, and over and against the kidneys, the breast, throat,
feet, and the like places, then would I cup the bottom of the soles, I will
also apply to the four legs, Garters, which I will tie hard above the knees
and hammes, and so govern my self in performing the Cure, according to the
strength, virtue, and greatness of the horse, and as my judgment shall
dictate unto me.


Hippiat. By how many ways may evil come to a horse?


Hippos. Two ways, viz. by nature and by accident against nature; as of those
diseases which fall down into the legs and feet of the horse, from whence do
come Scratches, Splents, Squibs, Mallenders, etc. with other kinds of humors
and accidents, as well in the body of the creature, as in the members: and
salvo aliorum judicio; these things appear unto me to comprehend in them the
aforesaid accidents, which do happen to the horse, even as soon by nature many
times, as by accident or against nature.


Hippoph. Hipposerus, I do not well understand this point: you say that these
things may happen as well by nature, as against nature, which are to my
understanding a plain contradiction. I pray explicate yet your self more
fully.


Hippos. Those things which are against nature, I told you are by by accident;
but when I say that certain diseases may as well come unto him by nature as by
accident, yea even in the selfsame disease, my meaning is, that if the
Stallion be troubled with the same disease at what time the Mare, who is the
damme of this Colt is covered, I say that then the Colt himself shall be
capable of the same malady. As if the Stallion or the Mare (parents to the same
Colt) have for example a Spaven, I say that the Colt will naturally have a
Spaven: and thus I have explicated my self, and assoyled your demand.


Hippiat. But what call you accident, or against nature?


Hyppos. As thus, verbi gratia: if walking your horse in your hand in the
fields, or elsewhere, and that he happen to be stricken with some cudgel,
leaver, or heavy bastinado, or with some sword, hatchet, Bill, or other
edge-toole, or that you should enforce him to do more than what nature or
strength were well able to compass; or leading him upon plain ground he might
wrinch any member, or sway his back, or break his leg, either by the stroke or
stripe of some other horse, or otherwise accidentally, or should by misfortune
fall down some steep precipice, whereby he may break or dislocate some limb
or member: all these disasters we usually do call Accidental, and all such
things of this nature.


Hippiat. Which be the elements which do give life and nutriment unto man, and
all other living creatures?


Hippos. They are four in number, that is to say: Fire, Air, Water, and
Earth; whose natures if you shall please, I will discuss elsewhere.


Hippiat. No, I pray let us have them both now and elsewhere: their natures,
conditions, and qualities.


Hippos. The nature of Fire is to be hot and dry; Air to be hot and moist,
Water to be cold and moist; and Earth to be cold and dry.


Hippiat. Do you know the twelve Signs of the Zodiac, and how they do
govern the body of man, and of all creatures?


Hippos. Yes, I do know them all perfectly; and thus are they called: Aries,
Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Vrgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricornus,
Aquarius, Pisces: These do all govern the twelve Months of the year, and are
placed above the Zodiac.


Hippiat. Do you know the names of the Planets, and their numbers?


Hippos. That I do very well, and they be seven in number; to wit: Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury, and Luna.


Hippiat. What parts do the twelve Signs before mentioned govern?


H^ppos. Aries governs the Head, Taurus the Neck, Gemini the Shoulders and
Arms, Cancer the Stomach and Breast, Leo the Heart, Virgo the Belly an^ Guts,
Libra the Reins and Buttocks, Scorpio the Privy parts, Sagittarius the Thighs,
Capricornus the Knees, Aquarius the Legs, and Pisces the Feet.


Hippiat. In what days is it best for a horse to be let blood?


Hippos. If there be no extraordinary cause, as in case of desperate sickness,
or so; then January the third, and the fifteen. Febru^ry the fourth, and
nineth. March the seventeene and eighteen. April the tenth, and sixteen. May
the first thirteen. June fifteen and twenty. But for July and August, by
reason that the Canicular-dayes be then predominate, bloodletting, is not so
good, but only in urgent case of necessity. In September the eleventh, and
twenty eight, October the eight, and twenty three. November the fifth, and
sixteen, December the fourteen, and twenty six. And these days do we hold
to be the very best, unless dangerous or sudaine sickness do cause us to
alter the same, for in cases of necessity, no days are to be regarded or
observed: For Qui retinente vita, et non sit mortis imago:
Si semper fuerit vivens, morietur et infra.



Hippiat. What medicine would you apply to a Horse, who may have any of the
four Maladyes?


Hippos. I would give him of the four Cordial waters, which I would make, of
Buglas, Savin, Succary, Aquavitae, Endife, and the like.


Hippiat. How would you make a comfortable drink?


Hippos. I would make it of certain Cordialls, to wit; of Sugar, Cinnamon,
Cloves, Nutmegs, Saffron, Licoris, Annyseeds; all these in fine powder, adding
thereto white wine, and all these infused in a clean earthen pot, and hereof
would I make a drink.


Hippiat. Whereof would you make an operative drink?


Hippos. I would take white Wine, Sallet-oyle, Aloes, Rubarb, Agarick, Duke, or
Duck-powder, Honey, Cordial-powder; and of all these things would I put such a
quantity as I should think requisite, and according to the strength and
corpulency of the Horse.


Hippiat. Whereof would you make a laxative Clister?


Hippos. Into a laxative Clister I will put either of Pellitory, Melelote or
Cammamile (but Pellitory is the best) and of this would I make a Decoction, and
to this Decoction would I put Sallet Oil, Honey, Aloes, and Verjuice of the
Crab.


Hippiat. What be the natures of your principal Drugs?


Hippiat. Agarick purges the Brain, Allos the Breast, and body, Rubarb
purges the evil water, and it opens the Liver, and helps obstructions,
and oppilations, Aristolochia-Rotunda mollifieth the Breast, Liver, and Lungs,
and Bacchalauri or Bay Berries, do mortify the peccant Humors which do
engender in the Breast, or Entrayles nere about the Heart: and Saffron (if it
be discreetly given) does marveylously comfort and enlighten the Heart.


CHAP. II. Of the causes of Sickness in general: and the causes of Health,
and long Life.
Hippiat. NOw that we have proceeded thus far, in a discussion of the Office
of the Ferrier; Let us approach yet nearer to entreat of the Cures, and that
we may go on Pedetentim, and Gradatim; Let us first discuss the causes of
Maladies; and therefore I demand of you, What are the true Causes of the
sickness of the Horse?


Hippos. Sir, that man which has a desire to become an Expert Ferrier, must
apply himself to understand the true nature of two things; viz. of Generation
and of Corruption, in which I could never find the least discord in the Primary
nature of Horses, albeit compounded of the contrary nature of the four
Elements. But I will proceed in Anatomizing unto you the verity hereof, more
particularly, whereby you may the better understand my meaning.


Hippophyl. But friend Hipposerus in my judgment, you begin to assume too high
a pitch for ordinary Fe^riers, who are in a manner all or the greater number
un-lettered persons; and therefore will never be able to understand what
Generation and Corruption means, for these are terms taken from the grounds
of Philosophy; and therefore above their Genius or Sphere.


Hippos. Sir, there be many things necessary to be duly known, and as
diligently to be observed in him, that desires to be a perfect and able
Ferrier, which whosoever shall be defective in, he may well be an
Empyreticall-Hors-Leach, but skillful Ferrier or Marshall he shall never be.
And for that you please to say, that I sore too high, because I began my
discourse with the terms of Generation and Corruption: if you had not
interrupted me; I should have explicated my self so clearly, as that a very
reasonable judgment might easily have apprehended me, for I hold it not a
thing fitting to pussell men's Brains, either with Chimeras which they are not
able to understand, or with overlong, and tedious discourses, of things merely
impertinent: but if you shall be pleased to hear me with patience, I will
touch upon this subject, to wit: What are the causes of Sickness in general,
as also of Health and long Life; and that Laconica brevitate, and so leave the
rest to your judgment, and practice: especially considering what other
Authors (my Masters) have so learnedly, and no less sufficiently entreated in
this very Art.

To begin therefore (and but to say, what I said before) with the causes of
sickness and death of Horses in general, in the true knowledge whereof,
consists their preservation; I do hold it a thing most needful that we do
perfectly know that thing which we do call Generation and Corruption, which
all Physicians and Philosophers have so much discussed both in their Schools
and Writings; and how the body of the Horse (like also to that of Man) is
compounded of the four Elements, viz. Fire, Air, Water, and Earth. Of the
for Elements Fire, Ay^^ Water, an^ Earth.
The natures of these four Elements are different: for Fire is hot and dry, but
it participates most of Heat. Air is hot and moist, but chiefly moist: Water
is moist and cold, but most cold: Earth is cold and dry, but most dry. Fire and
Air are both light Elements; and Water and Earth both heavy. Four Humors
also there are, Of the for Humors, Blood, Phl^gme, Choler, (...) Melancho^^
which be as it were four Children to these four Elements: and these are;
Blood, Phlegm, Choler and Melancholy. These four Humors are attendant upon
the four former Elements, without which a natural body cannot be made: for
Blood naturally (if it be perfect) is hot and moist, but takes most from heat,
and therefore is subordinate to Air. Phlegm is cold and moist, but the
principal quality thereof is coldness, and therefore has reference to
Water. Choler is hot and dry, but his chiefest nature is heat, and therefore
is governed by the Element of Fire. Melancholy is cold and dry, but his
chiefest condition is dryness, and therefore subjects it self unto the
element of earth. Now the fountain of the blood is the Liver, which dispersing
it self by the help of the veins into all the parts of the body, nourishes
and preserves the same. Flgme preoccupateth the brain, being a cold and
spungy substance, and the seat of the sensible soul. Choler inhabiteth the
Liver, which being hot and dry, makes a pleasing harmony with the blood.
Melancholy resideth in the spleen, which is the receptacle and discharge of
the excrements of the Liver. From whence we may collect that it has its proper
use and end: as for demonstration, Blood principally nourishes the body,
Phlegm occasioneth motion of the joints and members, Choler exciteth and
provokes the body to avoid it is excrements: and lastly, Melancholy disposes
the body to an appetite. Whereupon all the learned Philosophers do with one
unanimous assent agree in this, that in every natural body there are four
principal isntrumental members, The isntrumental members. The brain, the
heart, the liver, and the stones or gignitors.
from which all the parts of an organicall body is said to be framed, and these
are the brain, the heart, the liver, and the stones or gignitors; and each one
of these do perform its true function to all the particular members of the
body: for the sinews do receive their sustentation from the brain, and these
are called animal spirits; the arteries from the heart, which are vital
spirits, the veins from the liver, which are natural parts; and the
seed-vessels from the stones or gignitors, as the place of generation.

Now forasmuch as I have showed you the four elements with their true natures,
the four humors with their qualities, and the four isntrumental members
with their true conditions: It now remains that we entreat briefly of the
four natural faculties, which is in every body, together with their true
attributes: The four natural faculties. To eat, to retain, to concoct, and
to expel.
The first faculty is to eat, the second to retain, the third to concoct, and
the fourth to expel. And to answer to these four faculties, you must
understand that there are residing in the body, the aforementioned humors, that
is to say, Blood, Phlegm, Choler, and Melancholy, whereof nature makes use of
the service of but one of these only to work upon, which is an excrement which
we do justly call whey, or wheyish-bloud, whose engendring is wrought in the
liver, and so conveieth it self into the veins, at what time the four
humors do take from the body that form and substance it ought to assume: and
of this very liquor does nature serve it self, to resolve the meat, and so to
operate that the same may pass through the straight caves, conducts, pores,
and passages, carrying nourishment to all the parts of the body. You must
therefore understand that the veins are the receptacles for the blood, which
is mixed with the vital spirits, so as the said veins have their source or
origin from the liver, whereby their office is to exhaust from the liver unto
the veins the said wheish substance and to inject part thereof through the
passages into the bladder, and from thence again forth of the body: by which
means the body is freed from offense, and from sustaining damage: whereof two
of the veins conduct part of the said whey from the liver unto the coddes, and
so to the seed-vessels, where it remains with some small quantity of the
purest blood, by which means, the operation of the stones (whose quality are
hot and dry) do thereby effect a most perfect seed. Which two veins, nature
(who is the most exquisite Artist, and Quae nihil habet vitii) has planted one
in the reins on the right side, which ends in the right cod, and another
semblable in the left; both which take their issue from either of the coddes
accordingly; besides, nature has bestowed upon the right cod much heat and
dryness, so has she also given unto the left, as great a quantity of cold and
moisture, the right cod by means of its heat engendring the male, and the
left by reason of its cold engendring the female, and so likewise is it as well
of the female as of the male of every creature. But now to come to the heart
which is formed with the liver and brain, and maintained with the purest
blood, which is so excessively hot, as whilst the creature lives, if you put
but your finger into its hollow part, it is impossible to continue it there
long without burning or scalding the same, from whence it must necessarily
ensue, that the liver being the fountain of all the blood, must of necessity
have great and abundance of pure blood, wherewith to support and maintain the
structure of the whole body and the vital spirit of any creature is none other
thing than a corporeal fume or vapor, (to speak properly) very pure and
subtle; begun in the heart by the operation of the natural heat, spread by
the arteries and veins, to refresh and comfort the whole body; which agitative
or subtle Spirit proceeding from the heart, and vital spirits, being a
continual motion, by reason that motion and agitation is the true life thereof,
which continually remains in all living creatures. But the heart which may be
truly and rightly styled the fountain of life and heat, nature has assigned
it its proper place, which is to be situate in the center, that is the middle
part of the body: from whence proceeds life and heat into each organ of the
body, by which means they are preserved and enabled to perform their natural
and proper function. And as touching the cods, if the liver be not well stored,
nay full of pure and perfect blood, neither is the creature able to concoct and
digest its meat, nor can the cods be hot: so as if there be in those parts a
defect of heat, the seed of the beast cannot be perfectly concocted, by which
means the Horse becomes frigid and impotent, and without any power at all of
Procreation. And this is as much as need be said of this subject: wherein if I
have any way erred, or not delivered my self so clearly whereby to be
understood as I desire, the blame must light upon the great desire I promised
to brevity: howsoever I have endeavored what in me lies, to dilate and
explicate my self at full.

Now will I begin to show to you what means we have to preserve horses from
all inward diseases; which consists of four ways, viz. by Purging, Sweating,
Flebothomy, or Bloodletting, and Vomit. As touching the first, which is
Purging, it is twofold, to wit, Cleansing and purging Of outward Purging.
outward and inward. This outward purging is by cleansing the outward parts,
which must be done immediately at what time you take up your horse from grass,
which would be about Saint Bartholomewes day, for then the heart of grass does
begin to decline, and therefore after that day, the grass he then feeds upon,
breeds no good, but bad and corrupt blood, and so consequently sundry sorts
of maladies and infirmities in his body; besides the air begins then to
grow sharp, which is also very dangerous, yea and most contagious for him; and
if you suffer him to run after that time, his hair will grow long and rough,
so as he will not have for that winter any slicke or glittering coat. Of this
outward cleansing or purging your horse, you shall find taught you in lib. 2.
cap. 6. 6. and the manner how and when it would be done, viz, in a warm day in
the Sun, at what time every part and member of him would be soped, washed,
dried, and cleansed from all manner of sweat, scurfe, dust, dirt, and filth,
yea and that all his whole body over, especially his Maine, Tail, and Cods,
who being thus cleansed and made dry again, and his yard drawn, cleansed, and
anointed with tried hogs grease, let his ears, his Maine (just so far as
the top of the head-stall will cover, and no more) and under the Chaule, be
handsomely trimmed, then pull away by the roots all the smelling hairs about
and under his mouth and nose, and the long stubborn hayres under and about his
eyes: which done, cut away about a handful of the lower part of his tail even
and decently; then cause the Ferrier to shoe him up, but let him be careful
to pare him neatly, and to open the Heels and Frush. Then cloth him up warm,
and stopped with small wispes; this done, anoint all his hoof, with the
ointment (having first washed them clean, and made them dry again) prescribed
you in lib. 2. cap. 11. 9. Then let his feet be picked clean, and stop him
with Oxedoung.

Cleansing and purging inwardly.
Now as touching his inward purging, this ought to be done evermore before you
put him to any labor or exercise: and first let him be raked, by causing some
one who has a small hand and arm, to annoint them first with a little sweet
Butter, or Oil de Bay, but some do use Soap, which I do hold too sharp, and
so putting his hand into his fundament, let him bring forth all his doung, and
while he is in so doing, let him try to feel for Bots or worms, which may
stick fast unto the great Gut, and the place where the doung lies; which if
he find, let him pluck them away gently, and by degrees, and so bring them all
out: this done, give him the Clister mentioned in lib. 2. cap. 6. 8. Clist.
etc. 4. and so soon as the horse has received it Clister-wise, then presently
clap his tail close to his Tewell, and so cause him to keep it so long as you
can; and this would be done, three or four days before the Full or Change of
the Moon. The next day after, give him his first drink, inserted lib. 2. cap.
16. 14. Drink 1. Drink 2.
purg. 4. the next day following, give him his second drink, showed you in liq.
2. cap. 16. 14. Purg. 5. and so follow such directions showed you in those
Rules.

The next day following you have thus given him his two drinks, let him blood:
Let blood.
if you shall find the blood to be very bad, take the more from him, if
reasonable good, take the less, but if very good, then draw your cord, and so
do but give the vein vent, and no more, then afterward keep him with warm
Mashes, as is taught you elsewhere. The next day after blood letting, sweat
Sweat.
him like as is prescribed you in lib. 2. cap. 18. 28. S. And if you do
discover any cold in him by any symptoms, then give him the vomit Vomit.
prescribed you in lib. 2. cap. 20. 1. V. And to prevent any Obstructions in
the liver or lungs, or his heart any way oppressed, or otherwise to preserve
the blood pure and from corrupting; all which inconveniences may be a ready
means to bring your horse to his end; give him in his Provender, Powder^ be
put i^ his pro^der.
such powders and other Simples which you shall find in sundry places of this
Treatise: for this will refine his blood, and preserve his liver from
infection, and keep him in perfect health.

Thus far Sir, I have declared unto you what I understand of the Cause of
Sickness in general. It remains now for me to inculcate what are the causes
of health and long life, which to be brief are twelve in number: viz The first
is Nature, good digestion, 12. Can^ of healt^ long life.
and good Nutriment: the second is moderation in feeding and diet: the third
is, moderate labor: the fourth is, moderate use of sleeping and waking: the
fifth is, moderate spending upon Mares: the sixth is, moderate journeyes: the
seventh is, wholesome air: the eight is, not to be exercised too soon after
grass: the ninth is, to be kept from raw and green meats: the tenth is, not
to be suffered to eat or drink being hot: the eleventh is, not to be either
washed or walked at the end of his days journeyes: the twelfth is to give him
with his Provender, such powders and simples, as are prescribed you in all
those Chapters which are by me mentioned.


Hippiat. You have spoken well Hipposerus, but I would have you show me, how
long life is acquired by these causes, which as yet you have not done, for you
have but only delivered them in general heads and terms: Wherefore I would
gladly know what you can say of them in particular.


Hyppos. I will Sir: These twelve causes of long life do come to a horse
either inwardly or outwardly, which howsoever they must be helped either by
Art, by Industry, or else by judgment and discretion.

Wherefore you must know that whatsoever is natural must necessarily proceed
from good temperature, 1 What the do hinder nature, d^gestion a^ nutrimen^
and proportionate mixture of the four qualities of the body: so as the just
and adequate proportions of temperate mixture, are the true causes of long
life, by reason that all mixtures of superfluities are against these three
things, viz. Nature, good digestion, and sound Nutriment. For heat and
nutriment are then well proportioned, when neither the moisture with its too
great quantity is predominant, whereby it devoureth the heat; nor when
overmuch heat too suddenly consumes and destroys the moisture; howbeit
there must be a necessity that the heat must have a kind of regality and
dominion over the moisture, otherwise it will never be able to nourish the body
as it ought.

The second cause of long life, 2 Moderat^on in eati^^
is the moderation of their natural appetite of eating, it being availeable
either in excess to kill and destroy, or in moderation to save: whereby the
horse shall daily repair the decay of his humidity, by supply of moderate
nourishment, and never over-whelme or suppress his heat with too great
abundance of moisture, nor mix his Humidum Radicale with too much superfluous
impurities, for extremes are evermore perilous and ill, as well in excess as
in defect: For as too much eating (be the meat never so good and wholesome)
hinders good digestion, and ingendreth Crudities, together with an evil habit
of the Stomach; so likewise too spare a diet does as much weaken and decay
nature, by reason that the heat which, thereby will arise in the stomach, will
first over-charge, and afterward conquer the Radical moisture; both which are
friends to sickness and death.

3 Moderate labor
The third cause of long life is moderate labor, a matter very much effectual
to digestion, and therefore to long life, dilating and spreading nutriment into
every member of the body: for overmuch rest, breeds in the body
superabundance of bad humors, which cools the body: for want of which
moderate exercise, it is as it were cast into a sleep, and in a manner through
lumpishnesse besotted and benumbed: from whence does spring another mischief
equivalent to the former, to wit: a collection of excrementall superfluities,
occasioned through laziness and idleness, by reason that the horse for want
of moderate Exercise, is not able to digest his received nutriment: by which
means many maladies are engendered in his body, proceeding from corruption in
the blood, crudities in the stomach, and the like, because he has in his body
(as a man may properly say) a very sink or standing-pool of unnatural humors.
And therefore I give all men this caveat, viz. to be very careful they do not
put their horses to overmuch labor and travel, until such time as they have
well digested their meat, for that by their immoderate exercise, they over-clog
their stomach, and so they cannot have a true concoction, their stomachs being
full, and their bodies cloyed and overmuch stuffed with raw and cruded
humors, which through violent exercise are dispersed, first, into all the
Veins (corrupting the blood) and from thence into all the parts of the body,
which ingendreth so many noisome infirmities within the body, and so many
loathsome sorances without the body, as will not easily be cured: and therefore
it does greatly behove a man, that his horse (if he love him, and desire to
keep him long) his exercise be neither too intemperate, nor too little, but
ordered with judgment and discretion.

4 Moderate sleep.
The fourth cause of long life is moderate use of sleeping and waking, for these
are the mayntenance of health and long life, if they be had with moderation,
and both are very noxius otherwise beyond measure. For inordinate watching is a
mayn enemy to health, for it wastes and consumes the vital spirits, and it
decays the Humidum Radicale, causes maceration and sterility, it is an
impediment to the operation of the Brain and sense, it begets siccitie in
the Brain, and aridity in the Marrow, and works the like evil effects in the
Liver and Lungs. On the otherside, immoderate sleep hinders health, quenches
the natural heat, and consumes the moisture in the Body: for sleep is but a
vapor ascending from the Stomach to the Brain, What m^ner of the sleep is.
which stupifieth the Brain for a season, and during that time it makes the
body senseless; and the sooner it being provoked by overmuch feeding,
stuffing, and filling of the belly; and therefore it greatly stands a man upon
that he has a vigilant care to his horse his sleep, that it be moderately
taken, for as I said out now, as too much sleep is noxious, so also too little
is as prejudicial.

The fifth cause of health, 5 Modera^ in spend^ upon M^
and health and long life is that great care be had in keeping your horse from
excess in spending himself upon Mares for that is Death's Harbinger, by reason
it does after a most violent manner, consume the spirits, debilitateth the
stomach, dries up the brain and Marrow; and therefore the reason why a Gelding
(if he be kept free from surfets) is longer lived than the Stoned-horse: so
likewise the reason why a Mule, being a mixed creature, (howbeit a Monster in
nature) is longer lived than either of them; for that his justing (howsoever
without fruit) in that kind is but once only in the whole course of his life:
and therefore I could wish, that one Horse be not suffered to cover above three
Mares at the most through out the whole y^er, and that from the years of his
coming to six, until he has attained twelve, and no longer; for when a
horse has once seen twelve years of his age, nature will then begin to decay,
whereby he shall not be able to beget Colts which can prove so good and
serviceable, as those he begat in his young years. For besides (hard and
toylsome labor,) this act of coity with Mares, does more weaken and dull him;
for you cannot be ignorant of the old Proverb, which says; Omne animal post
coitum triste.

The sixth cause of long life is, moderate riding in long journies, 6 Modera^
journey (...)
for by intemperate driving his heat from the inward into the outward parts of
the body, is the cause that the fire of choler will be enkindled, which will be
so vehement as that it must needs prove an infinite horror unto nature, so
inflaming the blood, that if the Horse at the same instant be not very empty
and clean in his body the blood and humors being mixed together, will be
through the violence thereof, dispersed into all and every part and member of
the body, and then a sudden cold taken upon it (which rarely fails) does
instantly putrify and corrupt the blood, and congealeth it to the unavoydable
peril of the life of the Horse: especially if after this intemperate riding,
he be either suffered to drink, or ridden into the water, as many of your
surly and lazy Grooms are accustomed to do. My counsel therefore is, that when
you have any long journey in hand, let his travel be moderate, inhibit
walking, washing or giving him cold water; but so soon as you shall dismount
him, let his Keeper have him into the Stable well littered, and thoroughly
rubbed through all the p^rts of his body till he be through dry, let him be
clothed and stopped up warm, and at a reasonable time, let him have white
water. 7 Wholeso^ air.


The seventh cause of health and long life, is; wholesome air and soil, clean
keeping, painful and good dressing, the Stable kept neat, sweet, and warm; his
food old, sweet, clean, and dry, well fifted and shaken, and freed from dust
and filth; his litter sweet and dry, and all wet and old litter removed from
under his feet and manger, and let all evil savours be removed from about the
Stable.

8 Not to travel too soon after grass.
The eight cause of health and long life is, not to suffer your Horse to be
traveled or exercised too soon after you have taken him from grass, until
such time as he be thoroughly purged and cleansed from his superfluous and bad
humors, which he gat by being at grass in time of his rest, and full
feeding, which certainly are not a few; but hereof I have sufficiently spoken
before in this very Chapter, and therefore I pass it over.

9 Not to eat raw or green meat.
The ninth cause of health and long life is not to suffer him to eat any raw or
green meat whilst he shall be kept in the Stable, for that such diet does
beget many bad and humors oppugnant to nature; as Fevers, Surfets, Yellowes,
Stavers, Anticors, Morfounding, and the like; all which will debilitate Nature,
and endanger the breeding of many desperate diseases, to the peril as well of
the Horses life, as health, if extraordinary care be not had (by way of
prevention) in very good time, by the diligence of an Expert Ferrier.

10 Not to eat whilst he is heat.
The tenth cause of health and long life is, by keeping your Horse from meat
and drink whilst he is hot, for that does weaken the heart and spirits; it is
an enemy to the Appetite, and digestion, engenders Oppilations, and
Obstructions, corrupts and putrifieth the blood, breeds Fevers, and many
other maladies, and is very often the occasion of sudden death.

11 Not to be walked or washed.
The eleventh cause of health and long life is, to be very precise that you do
not permit your Horse to be walked or washed after labor, or travel, if in
his travel he has been heat, but presently after you dismount him, let him be
led into the Stable well littered, warm clothed, painefully rubbed and dried;
but hereof I have spoken sufficiently in the sixth cause, and else where.

12 To mix certain powders with his provender:
The twelfth and last cause of health and long life is, to use sometimes to put
and mix with his provender, certain powders, viz. the powder of Anniseeds and
of Licoris, or of Fenugrick, Tumerick, Bay Berries or Brimstone, white-Lilly
roots small chopped, Enulacampane roots, if green and newly gathered, otherwise
dried and beaten to fine powder, or the roots of Polipodium of the Oak or its
powder, Savin, Marsh-Mallowes, Rue, Isope, Hore-hound, or Colts-foote: these
either small chopped if you give them green, or else dried and given in powder,
which Simples will keep him sound and in perfect health, for their virtues are
to purify the blood, prevent Obstructions, open and resolve the Liver, cool
the Blood, and perserve the whole structure of the Body in excellent health.

Thus have I (as succinctly as I have been able) declared the reasons of
sickness in general together with the true causes of health and long life, the
contrarietyes whereof will engender in your Horse, infirmities and death: for
the sensitive Bodies as well of all other creatures as of Horses, are often
(upon the least cause given) disgusted and brought out of joint and temper, by
reason of the assidual warfare of the never-ceasing-iarring Elements, that it
not a little imports a Masters care to look very narrowly into the state of
his body. For put case that time and experience do approve the contrariety of
the before named inherent qualityes of Heat, Cold, Drynes, and Moisture, the
formal causes of all intrinsecall diseases, the continuance and unperceivable
lingering in them, together with the true cause of their sudden and untimely
death: Yet is there means as easily to be found, as well for the prevention of
all ensuing sickness (if we will but apply our care and diligence) before it
approaches, as for the able curing of them when they are come, and palpably
perceived; according to the opinion of famous Galen, who says: He that
preventeth the cause of sickness, preventeth the sickness it self: for, Take
away the cause, and the effect follows not.


Hippoph. You have spoken well Hipposerus upon this subject; but yet your last
Article is not without difficulty, in that you do advise to administer certain
powders, and other simples unto a horse in his provender, which should conserve
him in health, and prevent all inward diseases in him. I cannot certainly but
approve very much hereof, in that they be most sovereign in such cases you
speak of, but the manner of administering them, is the thing I much stand upon,
knowing right well that these simples (or the greater part of them) are of
strong and offensive scents and smells, and others are as far disgustfull and
unpleasant to his taste, whereby he may very easily be induced by disliking
those powders and simples, to loath and utterly forsake his provender.


Hyppos. Sir, you object well, nevertheless give me leave to tell you, that in
cases of this nature, Use (we say) makes perfectness: True it is, that horses
will have an aversion from these kind of drugs and simples, but what then?
have you no fear, for rather than he will not eat his Provender at all,
hunger will in time bring him to it, yea as well those powders, as his
provender: provided you do not offend him by putting in too great a quantity
at once, but by degrees, and that by a little at a time, till custom has made
him perfect; and most certain it is, that some horses are so coy, dainty, and
choice feeders, as that you can hardly provoke them to eat any provender at
all; whereas others there be who are so great feeders, as that they will make
no bones to devour what meat soever you shall lay before them; for it is very
homely viands, which a good stomach will refuse: nevertheless if you shall
find that your horse cannot be brought to take these things with his
provender, you may then sometimes administer of these powders and other
simples, with good Ale or Beer, giving it him as you give drinks, and it will
suffice: howbeit it will do him more good to be given in his provender.


Hippiat. What is the best thing to be given to a horse to preserve the liver
from infecting, and to refine the blood?


Hyppos. I have known many things administered in this case, but the very best
is, Liver to preserve.
to take the root of Polipodium of the Oak, to wash it, and to make it very
clean; then cut or chop it very small, then take Liver-wort, one handful,
small chopped also, and so much Rubarb as the weight of a tester, either cut
very small, or grated: give him this in his provender three or four mornings
together fasting, and give him no meat in three hours after, and let his
drink be white water for that day, and give him this monthly, and once in
half a year: make trial of his blood to see how pure or foul it is, and
administer accordingly.


Hippoph. I pray you Hipposerus, what is the true nature of Rubarb? whether is
it purgative or binding?


Hippos. Truly Sir, Rubarb has two contrary natures: for if you either
scrape, grate, or cut it; then is it a loosener; for it dissolveth and opens
the liver, and expels the obstructions thereof; it expulseth all bad humors
in and about the heart, liver, and spleen; it cleanses the body, and sends
away the peccant humors among the excrements, and all such things as may annoy
or offend the intrayles: but if you shall pound or beat Rubarb in a Mortar, or
otherwise, the spirit thereof being a subtle body, will Transire and fly away,
whereby the operation thereof will be to bind, and be no way profitable.


Hippoph. Let this suffice for the present, I have detained you too long from
your particular affairs; it now grows late, and therefore I will take leave
till our next meeting, which (God willing) shall be to morrow at the same
hour, at what time I shall not fail you; for that I desire a final end of
this business: wherefore for this present I will take leave, recommending you
both to God.


CHAP. III. Of such things which are of necessity to be known by every expert
Ferrier, before he does adventure to administer.
Hippophyl. HItherto Hippiatrus we have proceeded orderly, and your servant
Hipposerus has discoursed very accurately and pithily: Nevertheless some
things there be which yet he has not put home enough, whereby I have not
received that full satisfaction I desire.


Hyppiat. Sir, Sithence we are met here again to discuss such things whereof
you desire to inform your self; my will is to have you fully and
substantially satisfied (if it may be) in every point which might concern this
our subject; wherefore I entreat you to propose your doubts, and look in what
Hipposerus may fail, my self shall endeavor to supply to the utmost of our
best skill.


Hippophyl. Sir, I thank you, but withal one favor I must beg of you, and
that is, that for that my memory may peradventure fail me (it being none of
the best) if as things occur to my thoughts, I should ask any question out
of season and order, yet you will not take it ill that I should interrupt him
or you in your discourses.


Hippiat. No truly, Sir, will I not, and therefore begin to make your demand,
and Hipposerus shall give you answer.


Hyppoph. I thank you, then thus: As touching the composition of the body of
the horse, more I grant might have been spoken in words, but not more to
purpose; for a man to run into divisions and subdivisions, were but to beget
confusion in the unlearned Reader (such are your ordinary Smiths for the most
part, for whose instruction I do principally undergo these pains) and to
send him away worse satisfied in his judgment, than before. Whereas a plain
and succinct method does more edify and instruct him than the other can do.
I therefore demand of you Hypposerus, that forasmuch as you have spoken well of
the four Elements; to wit, Fire, Air, Water, and Earth, yet have you not
demonstrated their natures, or where they are placed. For true it is, my self
and all men do perfectly know, that these four elements are not these four
material and visible elements which we daily behold and make use of, as things
most useful for us toward the sustentation of our livelihood: being
creatures, without which we cannot live: but I would gladly have you show what
their true natures be, being things incorporate, and therefore concealed from
our eyes: I would also know in what parts they do reign, and have their
identity or being.


Hippos. Sir, as touching the natures of these four Elements, I have
sufficiently made appear unto you in Capitulo praecedenti, poene in initio,
but as touching the second part of your demand, I say, that these four
elements which be in nature so dissonant and distinct one from the other; as
that nothing can be more, no white can be more opposite to black;
nevertheless that you may know these Elements, I thus aver. The nature of
the 4. Elements.
The Fire is highest, being near neighbor or adjoining to the Moon, and
therefore naturally hot: Air is placed next unto it, and therefore naturally
light. The Water is annexed to the Air, and therefore naturally moist. And the
earth is situate next to the Water, but lowest, and out of that reason
naturally heavy. As touching their virtues all the learned do hold, 1 Fire.
that Fire by means of its heat, exciteth matter to Generation, and
occasioneth warmth in every living body, and it does ripen things raw and
undigested, in such excellent and subtle wise, as that the Air, which is of a
more gross nature, may the better enter into the body, making a commixture
with the Fire, whereby also it moderateth the heat of the Fire, the coldness
of the Water, and the dryness of the Earth, so as distemper may the less
oppress the Body. 2 Air.
The Air by reason of its moystnes makes the matter apt to receive its
natural shape, and through the instinct of the Fire its natural heat, causing
the mixed Bodies as well subtle as penetrable, as well Light and moving, whereby
they be neither too gross nor too heavy, and withal the Air cools and
abateth the extremity of the burning heat of the Heart, 3 Water.
Liver, etc: As touching the third Element which is Water, its nature is that
through the coldness thereof it congealeth, conglutinateth, and binds in mixed
Bodies both the parts and members together, to wit, Sinews, Bones, and Flesh;
so as the Water by means of its coldness does temper and assuage the violent
heat of the Fire, and the condensity of the Air, 4 Earth.
collecting those things together which they otherwise would have dissevered.
And as touching the Element of Earth, its nature is by means of its dryness
and Siccity, in mixed Bodies, so to harden and fasten them together, as that
having once assumed their Shaps, it causes them to retein and keep them, which
otherwise by the force of the other Elements would be so lax and loose, as not
to be able to hold together; wherein I could produce many familiar instances,
which for brevities sake I am enforced to omit. But the opinion of the best
Physicians is, that when any natural Body dies, the substance thereof
returns back again to those Elements from whence they came. Thus you may
plainly see, that Fire is naturally hot, and therefore separateth: Air moist,
and therefore gives Shape, Water cold, and therefore binds: and Earth dry,
and therefore naturally hardneth, and keeps its impression: Wherefore in any
Malady in a Horse, observe but this one Rule, viz. that when at any time an
Inflammation shall arise in the Body, be you confident it proceeds of Fire, and
therefore you must administer (if you will perform a right Cure) things
contrary to that Element: to wit; what may be agreeable to Air and Water,
whereby to moysten, cool, and allay the rage of the heat. If it be a Flux of
Blood, or the like proceeding from the abundance of moisture; which takes its
origin from the Element of Air, then must you apply Medicines which may
connive with the E^rth, whose dryness may harden such moisture. If it proceed
of Cold Rhumes, or the like, whereby the infirmity has its source from the
Element of Water; you must then administer Medicines cohering with the Element
of Fire and Air, which may be able through its heat and moisture to expel all
cold and gross humors. And lastly, if the grief be Maingenesse, or the like,
which comes from the Earth, which be dry and arid infectious diseases, then
must your applications be had from the Element of Fire, whose nature is to
dissolve all siccative humors: Wherefore (I say again) that heat being too
predominant is assuaged by the means of moystnesse and coldness: too great
moystnesse by heat and dryness, overmuch coldness by heat and drynes, and
too great a proportion of dryness by heat alone.


Hippophyl. But then tell me I pray you, be there no other Elements, or
beginnings in Living Bodies, more then these four before named?


Hippos. No Sir, not any other which have their beginnings: but there are two
other which the Learned do term proper Elements: viz. the Ingendring of Seed,
and Menstruall Blood; but these (I say) do assume their essence from the other
four Elements, whereby they become a Body, which otherwise they could not, and
therefore are subordinate to them, and they take their place after them.


Hippophil. Having spoken sufficiently of the Natures and Qualities of these
four Elements; What say you to the Humors?


Hippos. I say that the Humors are also four in number, The 4. first
Qualities.
which Physicians do style the first Qualities, according, as I have formerly
intimated: and these four are Blood, Phlegm, Choler, and Melancholy: Blood
being sweet in taste, Phlegm neither sweet, bitter, nor sour, and therefore of
no taste, or if of any (like to that of good Oil) rather sweet then otherwise:
Choler is bitter in taste: and Melancholy is sour in taste: So as by these tastes
you may distinguish them: and these Humors have reference or near affinity
unto the four Elements; for like as I have before agnized. Blood is of the
nature of the Air; Phlegm of the Water; Choler of the Fire, and Melancholy of
the Earth; and these Humors have their particular abode and residence in the
body, absolute and peculiar to themselves; as Blood has his abiding in and
about the Heart; Phlegm in the Brain, Choler in the Liver, and Melancholy in
the Spleen, whereby we may the better come to know what Complexion reigns in
every Horse, as also how he is naturally qualified and disposed: for the Horse
that is of a Sanguine Complexion is commonly a Bright Bay, who is of
disposition joviall, wanton, or merry, agile, and of motion temperate, neither
too fiery, nor too dull or melancholy: Your Milke-white is of Complexion
Phlegmatique, whose property commonly is to be lunt, heavy, and slow: your
Bright-Sorrell has commonly reference to Choler, and he is naturally for the
most part, fiery, hot, and ever-free-mettled, but yet of no great strength:
Your Mouse-Dunne and such like rusty and sut-colours are commonly of a
Melancholy Complexion, and they be ordinarily cowardly, faint-hearted, subject
to starting, flothfull, restife, stubborn, disobedient, revengefull, etc. but
if these Complexions be rightly symbolized, and do all meet in one and the
same Horse, according to each ones proper nature, they do perform their
functions as they ought in a perfect harmony, whereby the Horse remains sound
and healthy: but if there be discord or disagreement in the Elements and
Humors, there must be the like in the Complexions, and then does the poor
horse suffer for it to the danger both of Life and Health.


Hyppophyl. I ever understood that there are certain Spirits which do remain
in the body of every Horse: do you know them Hipposerus?


Hippos. Yes, I do, and they be said to be two in number, viz. The Spirit
Animal, Spirit Animal.
and the Spirit Vital; the Spirit Animal has its residence in the Brain, by
which means it gives motion, feeling, and power to the Horse, through the aid
of the Sinews: and the Spirit Vital Spirit Vital.
makes abode in the Heart, which is the only cause of the excessive heat
thereof, which disperseth the Blood into every part, and member of the Body.
For the Heart and the Brain are in equality absolutely different, the Heart
being most violently hot, (as I have before showed) and the Brain is as
extremely cold: and so hereof needs not any more be spoken in this place.


Hippophyl. But may not a man conjecture to what infirmities or diseases,
Horses may probably be subject by their Complections?


Hyppos. Yis Sir, very easily, yea and that with so great advantage and profit
to the Cure, if the Ferrier be expert and skillful in the making and applying
of his Medicines, The disease known by the Complexion
as that nothing can be more. For example, the horse that is of color either
bright-Bay or dark Bay, with a pleasant and cheerful countenance, or if he be
a white Flea-bitten, white-Lyard, or Black with a white-starre, or race down
the face, or white-foot; if he be of either of these colors, we hold him to
be of a Sanguine Complexion, and in Horses of this Complec^^on the Element of
Air is most predominant, Of the Sanguine Complexion.
and they be commonly of nature affable, well-metled, active, and of good
strength; but the Maladies whereunto they are most usually incident, are
Leaprosies, glanders, Consumptions, and the like, yet these Horses are
frequently of so able Constitutions; as that they have vigor enough to endure
good and strong Medicines: provided these Medicines be not too hot, but
cooling. The Horse which is Milk white, Yellow-dunne, Sanded, or Pie. bald; Of
the flegmatique complectio^
these take more from the Element of Water than from any of the other three,
and these we say are of a Flegmatique Complexion; and they are naturally slow,
dull, heavy, and nesh or wash of their flesh; and they be most inclined to
Poses, Rhumes, pains in the head, Stavers, Yellowes, and the like, and these
Horses can undergo good strong Medicines if there be cause to administer such:
provided these Medicines be not made of Ingredients, that be not over cold.

The Horse whose color is Mouse-Dunne, Chest-nut; Brown, or of a
soote-colour, or Iron Gray; Of the melancholy complexion
these are commonly of a Melancholy Complexion, participating more of the
Earth, then of any of the other Elements; by which means they are of Nature
dull, heavy, dogged, restife, faint-hearted, etc. and therefore most inclined
to Inflammations in the Spleen, Siccity, and Aridity in the Liver, to the
Dropsey, Frenzy, and the like; these Horses are better able to endure stronger
Medicines than any of the former: provided those Medicines be not siccatrizing
or drying, but such as are both cold and moist. The Horse whose color is
cole-Blacke without any white at all, a deep Iron-Grey, a Bright-Sorrell, or
the like, such colored Horses we say be of a Choleric Complexion, Of the
choleric complexion.
and they partake more of the Element of Fire, than of any other of the three
former, for that they are by nature Fiery, hot, too free, and hare-brained, and
therefore cannot be very strong of constitution; wherefore the Ferrier must be
very careful he do not administer any strong Medicine to such a Horse at any
time, for so he may soon destroy him.


Hippophyl. But yet Hipposerus, I would be glad to know of what Complexion
that Horse is, in whom all the four Complexions do jointly meet, as namely
in that Horse, that is either of a Browne-Bay, or a Dapple-Bay, Dapple-Grey, a
Black full of silver hairs, a Black-Rone, a Red-Rone, or the like.


Hyppos. Sir, Of the four^ complection^ me^ting in one horse, which is the best
and most perfect.
as I cannot give you more elements than these four before named, so I am not
able to give you more than four complections; but yet that one horse may
participate of them all, is a thing possible enough, and this is the very best
complexion of all other; yea and the most perfect: for horses in whom the
four complections do meet, cannot but be the best and most able of all other,
yea and the best for shape, for color, and for mettle, the soundest and most
healthy: for howsoever they may accidentally fall into infirmities,
nevertheless they are not naturally inclinable to any, and therefore when a
Ferrier shall at any time have occasion to administer unto them, he must be
very circumspect the physic be punctually administered according to the nature
of the disease, and he must examine both the cause and time of his first
languishing: as whether it be a sickness newly taken, or long before, whether
it proceeded of a Surfeit, Hard-riding, Evill-dyet, etc. by which means he may
administer his physic (whether Pills, Potions, or Clisters) the more securely:
for medicines given upon a first sickness, and before the horse be far spent
and weakened through the distemper of the malady, may be compounded the
stronger, and will work to more effect, but after a long sickness, when as the
spirits both vital and animal are enfeebled, the elements are in open
rebellion each one against the other, and the humors in a confused distemper;
then (I say) must the physical medicine be so tempered and ordered, so as that
nature must be assisted, but no way further perplexed or troubled, whereby the
evil humors must be sent away, the body cleansed and acquitted of the causes
of its distemper, and then it will not be long before the poor creature may
recover strength and sanity, and so repair daily the decay of his former state
of health.


Hippophyl. How do you hold the causes of sickness?


Hippos. The causes of sickness defined.
If you mean the causes of sickness simply, you must understand, that all
Maladies and Sickness of what nature soever they be, are affects and evil
dispositions (as learned Physicians do call them) unnatural, which do
proceed, and are as it were, the Precursors which do most violently hale and
pull sickness after them, and thus in a word do they define the causes of
sickness and not otherwise.


Hippoph. How many sorts of causes be there?


Hippos. Two causes of sickness.
Only two degrees, viz. Intrinsecall and Extrinsecall: the Intrinsecall are
those which are engendered within the body, and therefore cannot be made visible
to the eye, but are made known by their symptoms: the second are Extrinsecall,
and therefore are more easily discovered and known by outward object, wherefore
they need no further discourse.


Hippoph. How do you define sickness as it is in its own nature?


Hippoph. Sickness defined.
Aegritudo, or Infirmitas, is none other thing than that which is contrary to
nature. For all intrinsecall infirmities most commonly possess and seize upon
the whole body; and those are most frequently Fevers, Pestilence, Convulsions,
etc. Other infirmities again do attach, but only certain members or parts of
the body, as colds which do perplex the head, Surfets which do annoy the
stomach, and Splents, Spavens, Pearls, and Hawes in the eyes, and the like
extrinsecall sorances, but more sorts of infirmities and maladies I never knew,
every several of which may most easily and palpably be discovered as well by
their inward as outward signs.


Hippophyl. What is your opinion as touching the administering of Drinks,
Potions, and Clisters to a sick horse, to wit, whether it be better to apply
them very warm, or but indifferently?


Hippos. How to apply inward medicine.
Sir, even in this very point is a special heed and care fit to be had and
taken; for by giving Medicines or Clisters too warm, a Ferrier may easily
undo all, and utterly destroy the horse he would labor to cure; yea with as
great facility, as if he gave him in the place of a wholesome cordial, a
formal poison: for you must understand that a horse of all other living
creatures, can worse endure to receive inwardly hot things, by reason that he
is inwardly so extremely hot by nature, and therefore whatsoever thing is to
be administered to him, ought not to be more than blood warm at most, by any
means, for that nothing can be more noxious to him than the endangering the
scalding of his stomach and intrayles; besides let his drinks and inward
medicines be given him in the most leisurely manner you are able, for fear of
suffocating him; neither suffer any man, (as I have seen many use to do) to
pinch his gulle^ or windpipe, whereby he is provoked to cough most violently,
for it is a thing most dangerous both to his wind, and causes often times
fleshy stuff like to the garget to grow in his throat. Now for the
administering of Pills, Bals, and such like medicines, little advice is required
if they be not made too great, only if you take forth his tongue first, and
then put them up into his mouth, you cannot do amiss, but of this method no
man can be ignorant.


Hippophyl. What time is best wherein to administer your medicines to a sick
horse?


Hippos. Evermore in a morning fasting, The time when to a minister.
unless upon urgent occasion (as in case of sudden and dangerous sickness,
which may happen to fall out upon a sudden accident;) and the longer he be kept
fasting from meat and drink, as well before he takes his physic, is after,
it will be the better, for by that means his medicine will work the more kindly
in his body, for he ought to be kept from eating and drinking at least 3 hours
before and after.


Hippophil. Is it requisite he be exercised after the taking of his physical
medicines?


Hippos. Sir, What exe^cise is mos^ meet with physic.
a little moderate exercise is very necessary whereby his physic may work
the beter, and the sooner, as to trot him upon so easy a pace as you can
cause him to take, otherwise to walk him up and down out of the wind in the
warm Sun, by the space of a quarter of an hour, but then so soon as he
comes into the Stable, let his Stall be littered before hand well, then
presently cloth him up, and stop him warm, and keep the air from him,
neither let his Keeper go from him in three or four hours, but let him rivet
his eyes upon him continually, observing well his postures, and as occasion may
require, let him be at hand to help and supply the horse with all things
necessary.


Hippophil. May a man attain to any knowledge of the health or indisposition
of the horse by observing his Ordure or excrements?


Hippos. Yes may he Sir, and that very much, Of Excriments.
insomuch as I would advise all careful Ferriers who have a desire to attain
reputation by their Art, that before they do administer any inward medicine,
whether Purgations or Cordials; that they be careful first (if possible) to
see his Ordure: for I do find for the most part the Ordure is correspondent
to the food the horse eats, especially for the color; for if he run at
grass, or be soyled in the Stable, then will his doung be evermore green,
howbeit of a more bright, and sometimes again of a more dark color, and it
will be rather soluble than hard, but the indifferent color, and freer from
hardness is ever best, and does make appearance of the more sanity and health
of the beast, as also that he is thereby the less subject to costivenesse, and
therefore in better state of body. But if his Ordure be very bright and
laxative, it is an infallible sign that he has eaten some thing that is
against nature; as a Feather, or some naughty worm, some Spider or the like
unwholesome thing, otherwise he scowreth of some inward cold which has
formerly lurked in his stomach or body: but if his doung at grass or soil be
very hard and costive, which he puts forth with round and hard trattles,
then is it a great sign that he is very hot in his body and inward parts,
which may endanger the Stavers, or else does show that he has a surfeit which
he got (before his putting forth) through intemperate riding, washing, raw, or
evil food, or the like, whereby the horse is in danger to become morfounded,
to have the yellowes, or jaundise, or a fever, which will otherwise hardly
appear in him in it is effects until his coming into the Stable, at what time
due order must be taken for speedy prevention. But if your horse do feed upon
Straw, then will the color of his doung be yellow and somewhat hard, long, and
well compact, all which be tokens of a healthy and a sound body; but if it be
reddish, and exceeding dry, it is a sign of ensuing sickness, by means of a
great drought in the body, and so also if it be thin: but if it be blackish,
and does not smell strong, then is it a sign that the horse is in danger of
death. But if your horse do feed upon Hay and Oats, and that he be sound in
body, then will his Excrements be a brown yellow, moist, and well compact, but
if the brownesse be converted into reddishnesse, you may be then well assured
that he has some distemperature in his body, but when it converteth into
blackness, then if prevention be not speedily had, death ensues: and as
touching the smell, that falls out according to the quantity of the provender
you give him, for the more provender, the stronger will be the smell of his
Ordure, and Pease and Beans will cause his Ordure to smell stronger than Oats,
and bread more than any Grain or Pulse; and the more bread and Provender you
give him, the more perfect and sound shall you keep him in his body. But if his
doung be brown and slimy, and shine withal, then be you assured he has much
grease which lies in his body, which Physic must fetch away from him, for
then also is his blood putrified, corrupted, or enflamed. But if you do find
by his Excrements that he voydeth undigested stuff, which you may know by the
whole corns of Oats, Wheat, and other Grain he sends forth in his doung,
then persuade your self, that your horse has lately taken a formal surfeit,
which may right easily bring him to his end, if a discreet course be not
speedily taken: in a word, if his doung be black and has little or no smell,
then make you no question but that he is in danger of death, which wilful
soon after follow, if the greater care be not taken to hinder and prevent the
same.


Hippophyl. Have you made the like observations of the Urine or Water of the
horse?


Hippos. Yes indeed have I, whereby I have not a little profited my self, and
attained unto great experience, insomuch as I dare boldly aver, Of Urine.
that that Ferrier shall never come to be an expert Artist, who shall not be
very well versed therein, nor be able to administer his Medicines a right, who
shall not be very observant of the horses urine: for if he shall find his
water to be either pale, whitish, or yellow, not much unlike to the color of
whey, or fat Amber, or if it be not very clear, but smells somewhat strong;
let the Ferrier then be confident the Horse is not sick, but sound and healthy,
and in perfect state of body; but if his uiine be extreme clear and white,
and of the color of Rock-water, and withal slimy, then has he a tainte in
his Kidneies, Reins, or Back, or else he enclineth to the Stone, or else he
has some stoppage in his Kidneys. But if his Water be high-colored like to the
color of strong Beer, then is it a toke^ the blood of the horse is enflamed,
and that he is subject to a Fever, or to some strong Surfeit: but if it be red
and of the color almost of blood, then is the blood more inflamed, which came
of over hard Riding, which may prove very dangerous to his life. But if it be
of a pale greenish color thick, and viscous, then certainly his Back is
grown weak, and he is in danger of a Consumption of his Seed. But if it be
high colored and nebuled or mixed with small Clouds, with a kind of
blackness therein, then this does demonstrate ensuing sickness and death, if
it be not carefully prevented. But if the Nebulosity be dispersed into several
parts, and not combined as it were into one Mass or Body; this then argues,
that the malice of the disease begins to depart, whereby the Ferrier may
have great hope of the health of the Horse: And thus far I have by diligent
observation found to be most certain, Whereby I have brought many a desperate
Malady to it is wished Cure, which otherwise I could not so easily have effected.


CHAP. IIII. The manner of handling the particular Cures.
Hippiat. SIr, I doubt not but that we have proceeded far enough into this
subject, for I cannot see what can be spoken more; let us now come to the
particular Cures, handling each one in it is proper place.


Hippophil. With all my heart: but I pray let me desire you, that we may not
only handle the Cures themselves, but the several Diseases to which a Horse is
or may be subject: together with the causes of such diseases, the signs how to
know them, and the means and manner how to cure them.


Hippiat. All shall be done to your mind Sir: Wherefore I pray proceed.


Hippophil. I will: Nevertheless I hold the best and cleerest way will be to
handle the Cures by way of Alphabet; whereby whosoever does desire at any time
to inform himself of any Cure, he may the more readily turn thereunto,
without looking over the Index or Table.


Hippiat. I think not that to be amiss.


. 1. A.
Hippoph. THen thus: Tell me Hipposerus, do you know the Receipt which is
called Acopum? Do you also know it is Nature? Whether it is a Medicine to be
taken inwardly, or an Unguent to be applied outwardly?


Hippos. Sir, to make answer to two things in one, I say; first, it is
impossible for any man to become a perfect Ferrier, Two things to be observed
in every Cure.
who shall not first know unto what diseases a Horse is enclinable: secondly,
what be the causes of every disease in particular: thirdly, how, and by what
ways and means these diseases do accrue: fourthly, the signs how to know
and distinguish them: and lastly, the means and manner how to cure them.
Secondly as touching this your demand of Acopum, and it is true Nature; I
answer, that I do know it well, to be a most sovereign thing in some causes;
for I have occasion to make use thereof very often: It is both a medicine to
be taken inwardly, and an Ointment to be applied outwardly. Master Blundevile
was the first that ever brought the knowledge and Use thereof into our
Kingdom, who had it from the Italians when he lived in Naples, as himself
told me, where it is very much used; and he also affirmed that it was formerly
in much use and high esteem among the ancient Grecian Ferriers, who gave it
the name of Acopum. Master Markham has also in his Masterpiece the same
Receipt, but he would make it his own, for he gives it no name, but styles
it in his ninetininth Chapter of his Cures Physical, thus: A most famous
Receipt, which is both a singular Drench, and a singular Ointment: And in
reciting the Ingredients, he makes the quantities but the fourth part of what
Master Blundevile sets down, which is in effect one and the same thing: and
he relates likewise the same Virtues thereof, which Master Blundevile does;
only Master Markham says that four or five Spoonfulls hereof must be given
with a pint of Sack or Malmesey: as also that the lymbes of the Horse being
bathed therewith, it is good against weariness and tyrednesse; and lastly he
says that being given in Wine, it cures all kind of inward maladies; all
which particulars, Master Blundevile names not.


Hippophil. What is the reason that Master Markham does set down but aquarter
of the Ingredients in the making of this famous Receipt?


Hippos. His reason is good, Sir, and I will approve of his judgment therein:
for if any man should make so great a quantity together as Master Blundevile
does set down in his Receipt, it would not be spent whilst it were good, but
only by such a Ferrier as has daily use thereof, and such an one will be hardly
found; for the newer and oftener such like Receipts are made, the better they
be, and yeildeth more profit when they be administered.


Hippoph. Is this Receipt hot or cold in operation?


Hippos. It is hot in working, otherwise it could not hold good in cases of
Surfets, Tyrednesse and of Convulsions and the like, wherein consists it is
chiefest virtue, being administered outwardly; but being administered inwardly,
it is not altogether so hot, for then the ancient Ferriers would not have
prescribed to have it taken with Sack or Muskadine, both which are very hot;
for it helps all Fevers for the most part; but yet I would not have it
administered inwardly in so great a proportion as Master Markham advises, for
he (as I said before) allows four or five Spoonefulls to a pint of Sack or
Muskadine; unless it be to be given in very cold Causes, for the Wine it
self is very hot. But both my Master and my self do commonly administer two
Spoonefulls at the most at a time, in a pint of white Wine, or with a quart of
good Ale or Beer, which we hold to be much better and safer, and we have found
it evermore to work to our hearts desire: insomuch as we have both wrought
admirable Cures therewith, I do assure you.


Hippohyl. I pray deliver me this Receipt, just as Master Markham has it.


Hippos. I shall Sir, most willingly: but then you must understand that the
quantities will be more intricate to weigh forth, whereby to make it the more
punctually.

Acopum.
Take Euforbium, half an ounce, Castoreum, one ounce, Adraces half a quarter
of a pound, Bdelium, half an ounce, and half a quarter, Pepper one ounce,
Fox grease half an ounce, Opoponax one ounce, Lacerpitium three quarters of
an ounce, Amoniacum half a quarter of a pound, Pigeons dung as much, Galbanum
half an ounce, Nitrum one ounce and a quarter, Spuma nitri, three quarters of
an ounce, Ladanum a quarter of a pound, Perethrum and Bay Berries, of each
three quarters of an ounce, Cardanum, two ounces, seed of Rue half a quarter
of a pound. Seed of Agnus Castus, one ounce, Parsely-seed half an ounce, dried
roots of Ireos, or Flour de luce, one ounce and a quarter, Isope and Carpo
Balsamum, of each a quarter of a pound. Oil of Flower de luce a quarter of a
pound, and half a quarter, of Oil de Bay as much, Oil of Spikenard, three
quarters of a pound, Oleum Cyprinum, three quarters of a pound, and half a
quarter, the oldest oil Olive, a pound and a half, Piche a quarter of a
pound, and two ounces, Turpentine a quarter of a pound: melt of every of these
that will be molten severally by themselves, and then mingle them with the
residue of the ingredients being first beaten to fine powder, and after they
have boiled a little on the fire, take it off, and strain it into a clean
gally-pot, and so keep it for your use, and when you are to administer of it to
your horse, let it be given as before is showed, and if by long keeping it wax
hard, then soften it with the oil of Cypress, so that it may be good and
thick,.


Hippophil. What are the virtues of this Receipt, called Acopum?


Hippos. Acopum its virtues.
Master Blundevile and Master Markham do tell you, to wit: it helps
convulsions in the sinews and muskles, it draws forth all noisome humors,
and disburdeneth the head of all grief, being put up with a long Goose feather
anointed in it into the nostrils of the horse: it heals (I say) all manner
of convulsions, cramps, numnesse, and stringholts, colds, and rhumes: it
dissolveth the liver being troubled with oppilations and obstructions: it
helps Siccity and Aridity in the body: it banisheth all weariness and
tyrednesse, if his limbs be bathed with this medicine: and lastly, it cures
all sorts of inward diseases, if it be administered by way of Drench to a horse
in Wine, strong Beer, or good Ale.


2. A.
Hippoph. Do you know another Receipt, which is called Arman?


Hippos. Yea sir, it is a confection in great request in France among the
Ferriers there, and now we have it here in England: and it is a most sovereign
medicine to be given to a sick horse, and it is to be administered inwardly.


Hippoph. What be the principal virtues of the Arman?


Hyppos. It provokes a good appetite to meat, and causes good digestion; it
takes away all annoyances which do either clog or otherwise trouble the
stomach; it cools the inward heat in the body; it helps all Agues and
Fevers; it is most excellent against Surfets; it is an infallible remedy for
the Quinsie or Suinancy in the throat coming of cold taken; and very good
against the Tranchaisons or gripings in the belly or guts proceeding of wind
and such like inward infirmities.


Hippophil. How do you make this confection?


Hippos. Take honey of roses a pound and half, Arman. 1
the crumbs of the whitest manchet made into fine powder, quantum sufficient,
then take Nutmegs, cordial powder, and cinnamon, of each an ounce and half:
mix all these being made first into fine powder, then put it into a clean
glass or gally-pot, and moysten it with Rose vinegar, that it may be of a
thick substance like unto pap, all your Ingredients being very well
incorporate together, and so keep it to your use. And when you have occasion to
administer of this Arman, take some of it upon the end of a Bulls pizell, and
put it into his mouth, and let him champ thereon: but if you give it to a horse
that has a Quinsy, let him gulp down two horns full, as also to a horse that
has a Fever, and is much distempered therewith, and it will give him health,
in two or three times taking, and give him also an appetite to his meat. But
then you must remember that he take this in a morning fasting, and let him fast
three or four hours after, and his drink must be for some time either sweet
Mashes, or white water, and a spare diet, till he be somewhat recovered.


Hippoph. I pray what is that thing you call cordial powder, and whereof is it
made?


Hippos. Cordiall-powder has not its name for naught, for its nature jumps
right with its Epitheton: this we have also from the French, who use to give it
to their sick horses which are far spent and enfeebled with a consumption in
the flesh, liver, etc. for it is a most restaurative Cordial, comforting the
vital parts, and spirits animal, and restores it to Sanity: and thus it is
made.

Take Cinnamon and Sugar, of each, four ounces, Cordial Powder.
and of fine Bolearmonack two ounces: let all these be made into very fine
powder, and mix them well together: keep this powder from air made up close
till you have occasion to make use thereof. I do use of this powder in very
many of my Receipts, as you shall hereafter understand.


Hippoph. Have you any other sorts of Cordials besides this?


Hippos. Yes Sir, I have another powder which the French do call Duke, or
Duche-powder, which little differs from the former cordial powder, only it
wants the Bolearmonack. We have also another Cordial, which is an Electuary,
and is known by the name of Electuarium Theriacum, by reason it has much
treacle in it; and we do compound this Electuary thus.

Take syrrop of Violets, syrrop of Lemons, and syrrop of Roses, Electuarii
Theriacu^.
of each half an ounce, adding thereunto of your best London treacle, one
ounce, mingle them well together, and it is a most sovereign Cordial to be
administered unto Horses which are dangerously sick and weak.


Hippoph. Why do you rather choose London Treacle before Venice Treacle,
Treacle of Genoa, or our common Treacle.


Hippos. This London Treacle I do select for all medicines for horses, rather
then any other Treacle whatsoever, by reason it works the best with them of
any other, for that Venice Treacle, and that of Genoa are too hot; and your
common Treacle is nothing at all worth, it being made only of the dross and
excrements of Molasses, which is none other thing then the dross of the
refining of Sugar, for I have made trial of them all: but this London Treacle
I do find to be most agreeable to the nature of Horses: wherefore both my
self and my Master do use none other, unless in some particular causes,
wherein we administer sometimes the Treacle of Venice.


Hippoph. What mean you by your white water?


Hippos. White water White water
is none other thing then water made hot in a Wheat-bran, and sometimes
Barly-meale, which I commonly prescribe to sick Horses in physic, in stead
of Mashes, for that when Mashes are either not to be had, or that they are not
necessary for my purpose (as in some cases they be not) or to prevent giving of
cold water; I make use of this white water, which must evermore be given blood
warm, according as our ensuing discourse shall declare.


Hippoph. But now let us return to this confection you call your Arman: What
other virtues has it more than what you have already delivered?


Hippos. Truly Sir, I have showed you before in a manner all its virtues: and
to recite them again, I say, it is most sovereign for Horses that have taken a
cold, or have inflammations or Pustils under their Chaule, or thereby are
troubled with the Quinsye or Squinansye: These maladies this Confection will
help, if it be given good and thick with a horn, for having the Quinsye in the
throat, if in giving this Arman, it provokes him not to cough, then take some
of the confection upon the end of a Buls-Pizell, and put it a pretty way down
his throat, by which means he strayning to cough, may break the impost
humation in his throat, whereby the Horse may be in the less danger of his
life; and causing the Matterative stuff to vent out, the Horse will be in
short time perfectly cured.


Hippoph. Are there any other kinds of Arman besides this?


Hippos. Only one more Sir, which also the French have brought amongst us,
which is not altogether so operative as the former: and this it is, Arman. 2
viz. Take honey one pound, and warm it a little upon the fire, then take half a
pint of Vinegar, and a little Wheat flower, and one pennyworth of Pepper in
fine powder, mix all these, and administer it blood warm, as aforesaid.


Hippophil. With what manner of vinegar do you usually make up your medicines?


Hippos. When we speak in general terms of vinegar to be put into any
medicines to be given, either for inward or outward diseases; we always intend
it must the strongest and best white wine vinegar; Vinegar.
but if it be of any other kind of vinegar or verjuyce, we then do give it in
the Receipt, its proper name.


Hippophyl. As touching honey wherewith you make up your medicines, what manner
of honey must it be?


Hippos. That should be made of life-honey only, Honey.
and of none other, unless common honey, or course-honey, be in the Receipt
particularly named, as it many times is.


Hippophyl. Let us now go on to somewhat else: what hold you good for the
headache in a horse?


3. A.
Hippos. WE administer according to the nature of the Disease, for that the
pains in the head are several and distinct diseases, and therefore have
several cures.


Hippoph. Which be those several maladies, and how may a man know and
distinguish them each from other?


Hippos. A judicious and cautelous observation is it whereby we do know and
distinguish all sorts of maladies: for the Horse being a dumb creature without
reason and speech, Ach in the head.
is not able (like as man can) to tell you where his pain lies, and therefore
it must be the eye and judgment of the Ferrier, to be able to observe his true
symptoms whereby he may go right to accomplish the cure, otherwise he must of
necessity fail. Wherefore as the diseases of the head are of several natures,
every of which do beget his pain, even so are the medicines which we apply as
different. Now these pains in the head do proceed from the brain, or from
the panicles, by which means they do properly breed Megrims, the Nightmare,
Glanders, Rhumes, Cathars, Apoplexies, Convulsions, Palsies, Frenzies, the
Takings, Sleeping-evill, Madness, and the like: all which commonly do proceed
from the substance of the brain, or from the panicles; for that from the cells
and ventricles through which the spirits animal do give feeling and moving to
all the parts and members of the body, the diseases before mentioned do
engender.


Hippophyl. From what grounds has this headache its source or Organ?


Hippos. The grounds and causes are many Sir: some being inward, and some
outward, as by means of some choleric humor which may be predominant, by
which means it does often times breed in the panicles, or else of some heat
taken through violent labor, and sometimes by some blow given him in the Poule
or other place of the head; and some do hold it comes of some evil savor,
which I also do allow of; sometimes it comes of Crudityes and raw digestions
from the Stomach, by reason there is so great a sympathy betwixt the Stomach
and the Brain, whereby they do continually participate as well of their good
dispositions in health, as of their domages in the least of their infirmities
and sufferings.


Hippoph. But many there be who do hold stiffly that a Horse has no Brains at
all, but only a kind of windy liquid substance not unlike unto a kind of jelly?


Hippos. That opinion is most erroneous, for a horse has a most perfect brain,
Brains.
like as has any other living Creature, albeit indeed not in so great a
proportion as other Animals have. For natural reason does dictate that if a
Horse had not his Brain, it were impossible for him to have semblable diseases
in the Head, which both Man and all other living things have, who are (I say)
likewise subject to such Maladies; which could not proceed from any other
Causes but only from those before premised. Neither were it possible for a
Horse to endure so great labor and toil, or to undergo so great and so many
ways, such extreme violences as daily he does, if Nature had not endowed him
with his organal parts correspo^dent to his strength ableness, and activity of
body: neither could he have any memory at all, but appear a Lump of flesh and
bones without motion. But not to verberate the Air; I affirm that a Horse
has his Brains in as complete measure, albeit (as I have but now touched)
not in so great a quantity as other beasts have, but in as ample, solid, and
sufficient manner as any other living creature, together with the skin, which
Artists do call Pannicles, which does adhere to the bones conducted by the
Cells or Conducts by which the Vital Spirits do give some feeling, sense, and
motion to the body, from whence proceeds the causes of diseases and sickness.
And for your better satisfaction if you please I may be present when at any
time your Huntsman is to cut up a horse for your Hounds, I will let you see
most plainly both the Brain and the Pannicles.


Hippoph. How shall a man come to know when a Horse has any pain in his Head?


Hippos. The Symtomes are most evident, if you eye him well: for his eyes will
swell and become watery, and ofttimes Matterative; he will hang down his head,
as if he were sleepy; he will prick his ears upright, forsake his meat, and
his sight will be dim.


Hippoph. What cure have you for the Headache?


Hippos. Some use to perfume his head with the stalks of Garlic and
Frankincense, two or three several times, which will bring much liquid stuff
forth of his Nose, which indeed is very good, and I do practice it sometimes
as occasion is offered; but then withal after I have perfumed him, I use to let
him blood in the Palate vein, and in both the weeping veins: And when I do not
perfume him, I take the longest feather of a Goose, and moysten it well, in
Oil de bay, which I put up into his Nosthrills; and this does both open and
purge his head abundantly, and then keeping his Poule warm, together with
moderate diet, for three or four days after, I then take blood from the
Neckveine; and give him all the time of his Cure either good Mashes or
white-water, and undoubtedly he will do well. But sometimes if I find his
headache comes of cold taken, wherein he may be enclining to an Ague or
Fever, I then besides drawing blood, do both apply Acopum to his Nose, like as
I said for Oil de-Bay, and also give him thereof to drink, as I have formerly
prescribed. If he be Feverish: take a pint of Muskadine, the yolke of five
new-laid Eggs, and a head of Garlic picked, pilled, and bruised, Pepper,
Cinnamon, and Nutmegges, and so much as well I can take up upon a Tester or
six-penny piece: these all made into very fine powder; give him to drink blood
warm three days together, and let him fast six hours after..


. 4. A.
Hippoph. HOw do you make Aegiptiacum?


Hippos. We have two sorts of them; the first we do call Black-Aegyptiacum;
the second Red, both Corrosives; for their natures be to corrode and eat away
al manner of dead, proud, rotten, and naughty flesh out of any old Sore or
Ulcer, and they do also cleanse and prepare a Sore, make it apt to be healed
with carnifying or healing Salves. The first is thus made.

Take course English Honey two pound, Verdegrease, Diers-Gals, and Green
Coperas, of each four ounces: Aegypticum.
Let all these be made into powder and mixed together, and so put into an
earthen pot, and set upon the fire, keeping it with continual stirring; but so
soon as it Aegiptiacum besides what I have said before of it is virtues, is
also very good to dissolve the hooves of the Horse, if they be too dry or
hard: so as it will cause the corruption if any be in the Foot, to ascend
above at the Cronet where the hair is, and also to restore and repair the
hoof of the horse when the Sole is taken out: and in this nature you must use
this Unguent, but only at the third dressing after you have taken out the
sole,. Now the second Aegiptiacum is made thus.

Take course Honey two pounds, Verdegrease four ounces, Aegypti^cum.
green-Coperas two ounces, beat the Verdegrease and the Coperas very small to
powder, then put it into an earthen put, and put unto it a little


. 5. A.
Hippophil. What is your best cure for a Horse that is Accloyed?


Hippos. Sir, this Malady so called by the French, is the same we call pricked
with a Nail in the Shooing, and it is easily cured if the Ferrier be skillful,
and that it be also taken in time. And thus we work, viz. First, take out the
sole, and cut the hoof round about the place pricked that no corruption be
remaining behind, Accloy.
fill it up again with hurds steeped in whites of Eggs, dress him thus three
days together, then heal the sore up with salt made into fine powder mingled
with Vinegar, or else with Diers Galls, or with Myrtle, or Lentils, and anoint
the outside of the hoof with black Aegiptiacum.. Another.

Take a little cotton or bumbast and steep it in brown Sugarcandy molten, and
apply it with a hot Iron to the place. And if the foot be bruised with the
shoo, or that the femall horn be hurt or bruised, then cleanse and prepare the
place first, and then apply unto it a quick or live Spider with a hot Iron, and
so tack on the shoo, and let him not come into any wet till he be fully cured..
Another.

Take Salet Oil, Turpentine, and Rosinpitch, all molten together; put it very
hot into the hole where he is pricked, and so stop the hole with Hurdes..


. 6. A.
Hippophyl. WHat Receipts have you for all inward diseases?


Hippos. The Spaniards have one Medicine with which they Cure all Diseases; and
albeit I say they do cure all diseases with this one Receipt, yet my meaning
is, that look whatsoever the infirmity be, they administer none other thing
but that one, whether it cure or kill: and this they call a Cataplasme, of
which they make no small account, which they give as Pills.

Take wheat meal twelve pound, Annisseeds four ounces, in fine powder, All
diseases a Cataplasme.
Brimstone in powder three ounces, Fennugrick in powder three ounces et sem.
Comin in powder three ounces, Honey two et sem. of good Sack as much, or so
much as will suffice to make it into a Cataplasme or Paste. This Cataplasme
(say the Spaniards) or Medicine, is all of it to be put into a stone pot well
nealed, and so boiled until it be thick, so as when it is cold it may be made
up into Pills or Balls; whilst it is in boiling it must be kept with continual
stirring, otherwise it will burn too; and being thus made into pills, give him
of them every morning fasting, for four or five days together, or longer if
you shall see cause; for that (say they) it is most sovereign against many
Maladyes. It kills all sorts of worms within the body of the horse; it also
helps the diseases of the Lungs, and inward parts, and it is generally good
for any inward cause: and an excellent local plaster to be applied outwardly.
It is the Spaniards principal Physic for their Iennets, and Barbaryes. I have
made trial thereof sundry times, and I do find it to be most useful in all
cold Causes: and truly it is most Cordial, for it does bring a lean and poor
Horse into flesh and good state in a little time..

A second Receipt I also have, which cures all inward Diseases, which I had of
a Rural Smith, who was cried Up for a famous Ferrier all the Country about:
All diseas a Catapl^me.
So I having heard so great a report of his skill, addressed my self unto him,
and when I had conferred with him, putting him hard to it in the matter of his
Art; he at last ingenuously confessed unto me that he had but this one only
drink, which gat him all his knowledge and credit, which with much pressure I
wrested from him, under condition that I should never make him known, wherein
I have precisely kept my word. And the Cure and Drink is this: viz. Take
wheat meal six pound, or as much as will bring the Ingredients into a stiff
paste, Anniseeds two ounces, Comin two ounces, wild or bastard Saffron one
dram and half, white Wine four pints, Fennugreke one ounce and two drammes,
Brimstone one ounce and half; good Sallet Oil one pint and two ounces, English
honey one pound and half; powder and searce what is to be powdered and searced,
then compound them together, and make it into one body into a stiff paste, and
so keep it in a clean Gally-pot close covered for your use. And when you have
occasion to use it, make a Pill or Ball thereof, of the bigness of a man's
fist, and so lave and dissolve it into two Gallons of fair water; till it be
all molten into the water: Let your Horse drink hereof so long as you please
hoth morning and evening, and let him have none other water to drink, to the
end he may be the better compelled to drink of the Water, which in the end he
will do, and like it very well..

Of this cataplasme I have made often use, and I do find it to be a
sovereign Receipt for many infirmities; it also preventeth much inward
sickness; it raises and battleth a Horse much better than either Grass or
Provender; and it gives him Life, Spirit, and Stomach, and keeps him in
perfect health.

Our ordinary Country Smiths have yet another drink, which they administer
upon all inward causes, and truly it does often times hit right, especially in
cold causes, viz.

Take Fennugrick, Turmerick, Graynes, Anniseeds, Licoris, All Diseases.
Long-Pepper, Comin, of each half an ounce, and of Saffron one dram: and of
herbs, take Selendine, Rue, Pelamontine, Isop, Time and with a small fire;
then take it from the fire, and strain it, and put to the liquor the quantity
of an egg of sweet butter, and half an ounce of London Treacle, give this to
your Horse blood warm, and and ride him moderately after, and then set him up
warm and well littered, letting him fast four hours after, and let his drink
be either a sweet Mash or white water. This is very good against Fevers,
Colds, and the Yellowes..


7. A.
Hippoph. I Met not long since with a disease called S. Anthonies Fire, I pray
is there such a disease?


Hyppos. Yes Sir, there is such a disease, but it so seldom comes to a Horse,
as that few Ferriers have had occasion to cure the same; by reason very few
know it, and therefore marvel not in that they cannot cure the same. Saint
Anthonies Fire is that burns in the flesh most extremely, and has in it so
great malice, as that look what you do apply to the place (unless you hit the
cure right) it will do it no good, but more harm, much after the nature of a
Noli me tangere, or wildfire. This disease is also called by some the shingles
in a Horse, and like as the Disease it self is very rare, and seldom known in
a Horse, so also is the cure as uncouth and strange. For my part I will not
profess my self to be any whit more skillful then indeed I am: this disease I
never yet observed to be in any Horse: I only have heard some Ferriers talk
thereof, but yet I never heard but of one man, who was ever truly able to make
a Cure thereof; and this was a Knight of very good worship who taught it me, he
averring confidently unto me; how that he had cured three several Horses of
this very malady. I asked him whence this disease proceeds, and what are the
symptoms whereby to know the same; he answered me, that he could never rightly
come to be mathematically assured how it breeds, or occurreth to the Horse,
but by guess only, and that himself thought it came from some choleric
blood passing to his head into the brain and pannicles, which causes the
Horse to become stark mad, yea so truly mad, as to be deprived of his memory,
in not knowing his Keeper, or any other body else; yea his fury is so great, as
to resist stripes, to slight and contemn correction be it never so severe, he
will endeavor what in him lies to perpetrate what mischief he is able, by
biting, striking, and endangering whom or whatsoever thing comes into his
way, and when he cannot have his mind of living creatures whereupon to wreake
his malice, then will he do it partly upon dead creatures, by biting and
gnawing the Manger and Racke-staves, and by striking the posts and bars with
his heels, and partly upon himself by beating his head against the wall and
ground; S. Anthonies fire.
he will also forsake both his meat and sleep, or natural rest, until he
dies, if he be not in time cured, which is thus.

Take first help enough, and cast him, which done, take a worm which grows
in a Fullers Teasell, and put this worm alive, and without any hurt into a
quill: then slit the skin of the forehead of the horse under the fore-top, and
open the same round about with your cornet, making a concavity an inch round
every way and better, betwixt the skin and the bone: which done, blow the said
Worm out of the quill into the place which you made hollow as aforesaid; but
take heed you do not kill the Worm in stitching up the skin again, because
that the Worm may not get forth: and after twenty days the Worm will dye, and
in that time the Horse will be thoroughly cured. This cure was taught me by the
aforesaid Noble Knight, with which he affirmed to me, that he had cured 3 or 4
horses.


8. A.
Hippoph. What say you to an Anticor?


Hippos. Sir, I say it is a disease whereunto Horses are often times inclined,
and it comes sundry ways, to wit, sometimes with too much feeding without
exercise, sometimes of too hard and immoderate riding or other labor; both
which ways the blood of the creature becomes corrupted and inflamed, which
makes its residence in and about the heart, which if it should not have a way
to make its vent, it would quickly kill him, by which means many good Horses
dye suddenly, and the cause unknown. This Disease is apparent to the eye by a
swelling which will arise in the middle of the breast just against the heart
from whence it takes its name, which if it be not soon prevented, will ascend
to the throat, and then it is certain death. It comes likewise by surfets
taken by heats and colds, sometimes also by Fevers, which are malignant, and
sometimes again by feeding upon unwholesome meats. The signs to know this
disease before the swelling do appear are these: he will be sick and groan
many times when he is laid, he will hang down his head, and forsake his meat;
and then if he should desire to eat, what meat he loves best, whether Hay,
Grass, Provender, or Bread, lay it upon the ground before him, and if he has
a mind to eat thereof, albeit he make proffer to bring his mouth toward it,
yet he shall not be able to reach it, but will sooner famish: when you do
perceive the swelling to appear, first draw blood from both the Plate-veynes,
but if you cannot find them, then let him blood on both sides of the neck to
a good proportion; which done, you may give him the drink of Diapente with
Beer or Ale, putting thereinto one ounce of brown sugar candy, and half an
ounce of London Treacle, which will drive the sickness and grief from his
heart; which done, annoint the swelling with this Ointment.

Take Hogs grease, Bores grease, and Basilicon, Anticor.
of each three ounces, incorporate all these well into one body, and annoint
and rub the swelling therewith every day till it come to a softness, and then
open it, and let forth all the corrupted matter: then wash the Sore with your
Coperas water mentioned in lib. 2. cap. 10. 4. and then put in your green
Ointment prescribed you in capite ibidem, and it will be soon whole. Thus have
I cured many Horses of this Disease, and I never failed if the Horse had not
been swelled too high toward the throat or neck, before I took him in hand.
But Master Blundeviles and Master Markhams cure for an Anticor, is thus.

First they let him blood in the plate-veins, and then they give him this
drink. Take a quart of Malmesey, and put thereto half a quarterne of Sugar,
and of Cinnamon two ounces, and so give it him bloud-warme, and keep him warm
in the Stable, especially his breast, that no wind do offend him; and for his
drink, let it be warm Mashes, and such meat as he will eat. And if the
swelling do appear, then besides letting him blood, they do strike the
swelling in diverse places with their phlegm, that the corruption may go forth,
and annoint the place with warm Hogs grease, and that will cause it to wear
away, or else grow to a head if it be kept warm. Thus Master Blundevile, and
Master Markhams cure is in effect the very same. Master Markham also
prescribes Malmesey and Diapente, which is used also by others, and it is very
good: and he also says that some do administer Doctor Stephens water, whith he
affirms he has seen to have wrought in this kind strange effects. For my
part I submit, for that these Receipts seem very probable; howsoever I never
did experiment any but that only which I first inserted, which I had of a
famous Ferrier in France, and therefore I finding mine to be infallible, made
trial of none other.


9. A.
Hippos. Attaint upper.
What is that you do call an Upper Attaint?


Hyppos. It is none other thing but a swelling of the master or Back-sinew of
the fore-legge above the Pastern-joynt, and most commonly comes by an
overreach; that is, when the Horse in running either down a hill, or upon
deeps, or upon or over-thwart high furrows of plowed lands, or upon other
evil or uneven grounds, do strike the toe of his hinder-foot against the
great sinew of the fore-leg. This I say, we term an Upper Attaint.


Hippophyl. How may a man come to know assuredly that the grief lies in that
sinew?


Hippos. Your eye and hand (Sir) will show it you very palpably; for the sinew
will swell, and burn, and be sore, and the Horse will hault therewith.


Hippoph. What cure have you for it?


Hippos. We use to apply to the place a charge restringent which must be
siccative.


Hippoph. I should rather think that by applying suppling or mollifying Oils
or Unguents, you might cure it sooner and much better.


Hippos. Herein Sir, under your favor you are much mistaken: For all things
that are suppling are most noxious unto these kind of Maladies, by reason that
all Oils and unguents will cause the Sinew to swell much more than otherwise;
and therefore we do apply siccative and drying things. Some use Cauterizings,
which indeed will cure, and set the Horse upright again, but therein are two
inconveniences; to wit: First, albeit it takes away his pain so as he
desisteth from haulting, yet will the place be ever after swelled, which will be
a continual eyesore, during his life; Secondly, the marks and strokes where
the Iron went will be ever after seen, making the hair of a different color;
both which are great blemishes to the Horse.


Hippoph. Wherein then consists your best Cure in this case?


Hippos. I always use for a Sorance of this nature to apply this ensuing
Charge.

Take Cantharides two ounces, Masticke four penniworth, Attaint ^per or ba^
sinew spra^
Venice Turpentine two penniworth, Euforbium four drammes, Black-Rosin six
ounces, Aquafortis two drammes: beat the Cantharides and Euforbium into fine
powder; then first melt the Masticke and Black-Rosin, then put in your
Turpentine, which so soon as it is molten, put in your Cantharides and
Euforbium, and let all boil together, keeping them stirring, and have a
special care it boil not over; and when you have taken it from the fire, put
in your Aquafortis, and so stir them well together, and put it into a glass
or gally-pot, and so keep it for your use. And when you have occasion to use
the same, first wash and bath the grieved place well, then with your Splatter,
spread it upon the place being made warm, and clap flox upon it of the same
color, and give him rest, and he will do well. But he must have time, and
after a week that he has been thus charged, let him be put forth to grass
if it be not in Winter, or the Winter or cold weather approaching.. Another.

Take the whites of two new-layed Eggs, and the powder of Bole-Armonack, and
the best and strongest white Wine Vinegar, incorporate these very well together
with the powder of Sanguis draconis, and having shaven away the hair as
aforesaid, spread it good and thick upon the grieved place, adding still more
every three days for fifteen days together, and then put him forth to
grass, and let him run a whole March, and after so long as you shall think to
be sufficient, and he will be sound again.. This I have also made trial of,
and I have found it to be right good.

A French Marshall taught me a Medicine for an Attaint or Overreach, whereof I
did never make use; howbeit he protested unto me he thought it one of the best
cures that he could ever know, and I my self saw him dress a Horse therewith,
but how the Horse became cured I had not time to know, by reason I departed
from Orleans before the Cure was performed. And the Cure was this. Take one or
two handfuls of Saxafrage, and all the Sewet of a Loine of Mutton, and a pint
of white Wine; chop the Herb, and mince the Sewet very small; and so boil all
these together, which being thus well boiled, take a sufficient quantity of
Horse-dung newly made by a Horse that goes to grass, and putting it to the
other Ingredients, work it to a Salve, and apply it plaister-wise to the place
good hot, renewing it twice every day for so long time as you shall think to be
convenient.

Now Master Blundevile, and Master Markham do both agree in the Cure of an
Attaint which is thus: First, wash and bath the place with warm Water, and
shave the hair so far as the swelling goes; then scarrifie the sore place
with the point of a Razor, that the blood may issue forth: Then take
Cantharides and Euforbium, of each half an ounce, powdered, and mingle them
together with a quarterne of Soap, and with a shy spread some of the Ointment
over all the sore, suffering him to rest in the place where you dressed him for
one half hour after, and then you may take him into the Stable, there letting
him stand without Litter, and so tied that he may not touch the sore with his
Mouth, and then the next day use him in the same manner again; then the third
day anoint the place with fresh Butter; continuing so to do by the space of
nine days, and at nine days end, make him this bath.

Take Mallows three handfulls, a Rose-Cake, and Sage of each a handful: boil
them together in a sufficient quantity of fair water; and when the Mallows
are become soft, put in half a pound of Butter, and half a pint of Sallet
Oil, and then being somewhat warm; wash and bath the sore place therewith
every day once, till it be whole. This Medicine I confess I never tried, but I
think it very good. Master Blundevile has only this, but Master Markham has
sundry others: some of which, I will relate, to the end the Ferrier may make
his choice. Another.

Take Dialthea, Agrippa, and Oil, and mixing these together lay it to the
swelling. Another.

Take also Frankincense, Rosin, Tar, Euforbium, Turpentine, Fennugrick, of
each a quarter of an ounce, of Sewet one ounce, of Oil one ounce, of Wax three
ounces, and three quarters of an ounce of Myrrh; mix and melt all these
together, and plaister-wise lay it to the place till it be whole. Another.

Take also Sanguis-Draconis three quarters of an ounce, Bole-Armonack one
ounce, Oil as much, Mastick three ounces, Suet, as much, and as much Swines
grease: melt and mix all these together and lay it to the swelling, and it will
take it away.

Another Cure I found in an old Manuscript, with which I have cured many
horses, which have been much swelled, which is this: viz.

Take Turpentine, of Venice one ounce, and Aqua-vitae, three Spoonfulls: beat
them together in a Bladder, or some other convenient Vessel, until they come
to a perfect salve, then annoint the sore very well therewith, and heat it in
with a hot Brick, or a hot Iron: and thus doing four or five times, it will
set him upright.. This I have often tried and it is very good.


. 10. A.
Hippoph. What is that which you call a Nether Attaint?


Hippos. It is also an Overreach sometimes, and sometimes again it comes by
a Wrench, sometimes by a Strain, sometimes by treading upon a sharp stone or
stub, and sometimes it comes by a blow, and it is called properly a Nether
Attaint, Atta^^^ Neath^^
by reason it being commonly upon the fore-legge like as is the other; it is
nevertheless placed lower than the other is; for whereas the other is above
the Fet-lock Joint, this is under it, for it is commonly upon the Heel or
Frush, nor is it oftimes visible to the eye, howsoever it may be felt, as well
by the heat and glowing which will be upon the heel, as also by the softness,
for there will be a Bladder or blister of viscous corrupt matter like to Ielly,
which will grow in the place; and besides it will make the Horse to complain,
and it will be also somewhat swelled. I have cured sundry Horses which have had
this Malady, and they have done well again. The cure is thus,

Take a piece of Filliting and bind it above the Pastern-joynt a little good
and hard, which will cause the blister or swelling the better to appear more
visible to the eye; make incision with your Incision-knife, and crush out all
the corrupt Ielly, and congealed matter. Then heal it up by washing the sore
with Coperas water, declared in lib. 2. cap. 10.. 4. and after annoint it with
the Green Ointment mentioned in capite et. Ibid. and so in short time it will
be whole and sound again.. This is a very hard Cure for your ordinary Country
Smiths to take in hand to perform, if they be not well acquainted with the
nature of this Malady. Master Blundevile, and Master Markham, have both this
manner of Cure, only they differ from me in the healing Salve.


11. A.
Hippoph. What Cure have you for the Avives?


Hippos. This term Avives we have also gotten from the French, which our
Ferriers do call the Viues. It is a disease which grows under the Ears, and
secundum vulgus, Aviues.
it is called the Fives or Vives from the Ears it creeps down toward the
Throat, which when they begin to inflame will swell, and not only pain the
Horse very much, but also prove mortal, by stopping his Wind they will kill
him out right, if it be not in time cured; and I my self have seen and known
Horses die of this malady. It proceeds most commonly of Rankness of Blood: in
the cure, care must be taken that you do not touch the Graynes or Kernells
with your fingers The Avives or Vives are certain flat Kernells, much like
Bunches of Grapes which grow in a cluster, close knotted together in the place;
the most certain cure is to cut the Skin longest-wayes, and to lay the
Kernells or Grains open, and then with an Instrument made like to a pair of
Pliers to pinch forth the Graynes, then to apply unto the place either a
linen cloth, or a few hurds steeped well in whites of Eggs well beaten, and
so bound on, and renewing it daily, it will cure it: but you must heal up the
Skin with the Greene-Oyntment before spoken of in Cap. and. Ib.. But the common
cure is to draw down the sore with a hot Iron just in the midst, so far as
the swelling goes, and then under the root of the Ear, draw two other
strokes of the fashion of an arrows head, then open the skin, and with a small
pair of plyers, pull out the kernels, and so cut them off, but have a care of
the vein: that done, fill the place with Bay Salt made into fine powder, and
after heal up the sore with the aforesaid Ointment.. This have I also
practiced, and performed the Cure, but with greater difficulty than the former,
by reason of the Fire which I put to the place, and therefore I do hold my
former Cure the better, safer, and speedier..

Master Blundevile and Master Markham do say, that the Italians use to take a
sponge well dipped in strong wine vinegar, and bound to the Sore, renewing it
twice a day till the kernels do rot; then they open the nether most part of
the softness, and so let the corruption forth, and then fill the hole with
salt finely brayed: and the next day they wash away the filth with warm water,
and the next day after, they annoint the Sore with Honey and Fich flower
mingled together till it be whole. This Cure I never made trial of, but it
seems to me to be a very good and probable Cure. Another for the Avives.

Take Tar, tried Hogs grease, Bay Salt, and Frankincense powdered, of each
so much as will suffice, melt these on the fire all together, then with a clout
fastened to the end of a stick, boiling hot scald the places 4 or 5 mornings
one after another, until the enflamed places do become soft and ripe. Then
with your incision knife slit the skin, and let forth the corruption: then to
heal up the sorances, take tried Hogs grease and Verdigrease made into fine
powder, melt them upon a gentle fire, but suffer it not to boil more then a
waume or two at the most, then take it off, and put to it of ordinary
Turpentine, as much as will suffice, and so stir all together until it be
cold. And herewith anoint the sorances daily, till they be whole: This is very
good.

Master Markham in his Master piece, has a Cure for the Avives, which he
intituleth; A most rare and certain approved Medicine, which will cure the
Vives without either burning, melting, rotting, or any such like violent
exercise. But as yet I did never experiment the same. The cure is this.

Take a penniworth of pepper, beaten to fine powder, Swines grease a
spoonefull, the juice of Rue a handful, and of Vinegar two spoonfuls, mix all
well together, and convey it equally into both the ears of the Horse, and so
tie or stitch them up, then shake his ears that the medicine may sink
downwards: which done, you shall let him blood in the neck-veyne, and in the
temple-veine. And this (says he) is an infallible cure.


12. A.
Hippoph. What disease is that which we do call the Arraistes?


Hippos. Arraistes is also a French Epitheton, which is a disease we do
commonly call the Rat-tayles, engendring in the heels of a Horse, not much
unlike to the Scraches, but that it is much more venomous and malignant. It
comes of too much rest, and the Keepers want of care in the not rubbing and
dressing him, as also by reason that the Horse stands continually in the
Stable, his fore-feet being higher than his hinder-feet: for by reason of his
great rest and pampering, the blood corrupting in his body, falls down into
his hinder-legges, and breeds this disease, which now we do call the
Arraistes, Arraistes
or Rat-Tayles. Rat-tayle^
The best Cure for this Malady is, first, to let the Horse be ridden till he be
warm, whereby the veins will swell, and the better appear. Let him blood in
the fetlocke veins on both sides, making him to bleed well; and the next day
after, wash the sores with warm water, and then clip away all the hair from
about the Sores, then annoint the grieved places with this Ointment, viz.

Take green Coperas, and Verdegreace, of each two ounces, and of common honey
four ounces; beat your Coperas and Verde-greace very small, and so work them
with your honey to a perfect unguent, and herewith anoint the Sores daily till
they be whole.. And thus we do conclude this Chapter.


CHAP. V.
1. B.
Hippoph. What is your best way to break and heal the back of a Horse that
is swollen?


Hippos. We have many ways to cure a Malady of this nature: if the place be
swelled, and yet not ripe enough to be opened, then apply that remedy which you
shall find taught you hereafter, to resolve or ripen the same: and when it is
ripe, put your incision knife unto it, or a hot iron, and so open it in the
lowest part, so as the putrefaction may the more easily passeaway; then every
morning inject this Lotion with a Seringe; which is thus to be made, viz.

Back swelled.
Take Honey-suckle leaves, Plantine, Ribwort, Yarrow, Bursa-Pastoris,
Knot-grasse, and Cumphrey, of each half a handful, boil these in a quantity
of running water, till a moity be consumed, then strain the herbs from the
water, casting away the herbs, and then set the water upon the fire again, and
so soon as it begins to boil again, put into the said water honey of Roses,
one ounce, Alum and Alkenet, of each two drams, stir all these well
together, and let it boil till these latter ingredients be well dissolved,
then take it from the fire, and when it is cold, put it into a clean glass,
keeping it close stopped for your use. Use this water every day five or six
days together, and it will cure any Sorance in the back, or other part of the
body, provided that to skin the sore, you apply a rag made wet in the said
water. Another Receipt I have wherewith I have cured many galled backs, and
other sorances: which is as follows.

Take water and salt, and boil them well together, and first wash the sore
place therewith. Then take Pepper made into very fine powder, and strew it upon
the sore, and it will heal it in very short time.. A third I have much more
sovereign than the two former, which cures not only all galled backs, but
any other wound whatsoever.

Take Rosin, and common Pitch, of each six ounces, Masticke, and Incense, of
each one ounce, Turpentine, Galbanum, Bolearmonacke, of each three ounces,
melt, dissolve, and incorporate all these together upon a gentle fire, and as
they do begin to cool, make them up into rolls, and when you would use this
Salve, spread it upon a cloth or leather, somewhat thin; but if you be to use
it without either cloth or leather, to any outward part that is not yet
broken, then lay it on much thicker than you use to do plaister-wise; and
whilst it is warm, clap flocks of the same color upon it. This Emplastrum as
it cures any swelling, gall, wound, sore, or hurt; so it ripeneth, breaks,
and heals all impostumations, biles, and pustils. It is also a most excellent
defensative plaster for the staying and drying up of all evil humors, and
also very sovereign for asswaging of swellings..

Another Receipt I have taught me by a worthy Knight, but I never made use
thereof.

Take the leaves of Asmart, and wash them, and lay them all over the place; and
albeit you ride him every day, yet will he heal very fast. But if he do
remain in the Stable without exercise, if you put the water of the leaves upon
the place, it will heal him speedily.

Another Receipt I have which was taught me by a French Marishall, howbeit I
made no trial thereof, but he commended it to be tres-bonne; which is this,
viz. Take three parts of sheeps-dung, and one part of wheat or Rye-flower, and
dry the flower, and then knead them together, and bake it a little, and apply
it blood warm to the place.


2. B.
Hippoph. IS there a disease in a horse called the Barbes?


Hippos. Yea Sir, there is such a disease, and it grows in the mouth under
the tongue naturally, for every Horse has them, Barbes.
nevertheless there is no harm in them, until they do become inflamed, and
then they will swell with corrupt blood, proceeding from naughty humors, and
become raw, and so trouble and pain the Horse, so as he cannot feed without
much grief: for it comes by means of evil humors, and inflamed blood. I
never heard of more Cures than two for this malady, which is to take hold of
his tongue, and on either side under it of the jaw you shall see two teats or
paps; clip them away close, and then wash the place with a little water and
salt, and they are cured. The other Cure.

Take a pair of Sizers and clip them away from under the tongue, and let them
bleed, then prick him in the palate of the mouth with your Fleame, that he may
bleed the better, then wash the places with white wine vinegar, Bolearmonacke,
and Bay Salt, of each as much as will suffice, and for three or four days
after, let him see that no hay-dust stick upon the places so clipped, and he
will soon be well again.


. 3. B.
Hippoph. What good Receipt have you to dissolve and dry up all ill humors in
the body?


Hippos. The best thing that I could ever know, Bath for Humors to dry them up.
is a certain Bath which I make, wherewith I bath him, and I do find it to be
right good, which I make thus, viz. Take Sage and Rosemary, of each a handful,
of the bark of the root of Beech, three pound, and of the barks of young
Elmes, Oaks, and Ash, of each a handful, of Nep, Penny-Royall, and of
Chest-nuts, the rindes being taken away, of each a handful, three or four
white Onions clean pilled and cut into small pieces of slices, red wine three
pottles, strong white wine vinegar two pottles: boil all these together, and
cause your Horse to be walked a quarter of an hour before, a good pace, that
he may be only warm, then let him be presently bathed with this Bath good and
hot, and then set him up warm, and let his drink be either sweet Mashes or
white water: bath him thus three days together, and feed him with such meat as
is sweet and wholesome, and let him not be ridden into any water in eight or
ten days after, and this will dissolve and dry up all his bad humors.. This
I learned of an Italian Rider in Bruxels, whom I saw practice it very often
whilst I was there, and rode with him. And since I have my self administered it
to many good Horses here in England, with which I have done very much good.


Hippoph. Now that we speak of Bathes, I would gladly know what are their
virtues.


Hippos. Bathes have been much more in use in former times than now they are,
howbeit I and my Master do use them often, and we do find great profit by
them: for they are fomentations, which be the most comfortable things of any to
the joints and limbs of a Horse. Bathes dissolve all ill humors, and gives
heat and warmth unto all the members that are benumbed with cold, or for want
of blood; it comfort and strengthens them; and it gives very great ease
to the pained sinews. Besides, it asswageth swellings in or about any outward
parts of the body; for legs swelled, stiff or benumbed, or for any other
joint pained or grieved, Bath for st ffe legs.
or for any string hault, crampe, or convulsion. I commonly use a bath, which
does in short time cure all such like Maladies. And my bath is this.

leg, and let him stand so four and twenty hours: apply this five or six
times, and it will be a perfect Cure..

Another bath I have which is most sovereign to cure all gourdy, gowty, and
swollen legs, which comes either by farcin, scratches, or the like, wherewith
I have cured very many Horses. And thus it is made.

and of the leaves and Berryes of Missletow three or four good handfuls,
Sheep Tallow one pound, tried Hogges-grease half a pound, three or four
handfuls of Rye or Wheat Branne: boil all these together until all the
herbs and Missletow become soft: but be sure you have liquour enough, and a
little before you take it from the fire, put into it some Hay: With this, bathe
his Legs; first one, then the other, putting still that Leg which you are
to bathe into a broad Bowl or Payle, as is before showed; and when you have
bathed that Leg sufficiently, then take of the hay in the Bath, and making a
Thum-band thereof, roll it about the Leg above the uppermost or middle Joint,
and put off the herbs betwixt his Leg and the Thum-band and so use the
other Leg or Legs which are swelled and need bathing: Which done, power of
the liquour remaining upon the thum-bands: and thus let him be bathed herewith
every day once for so many days together as you shall think requisite, and it
will bring down the swelling quite, and make him sound..

Another Bath I have no less excellent, wherewith I have done many rarecures.
viz.

Take Smallage, Oxe-Eye, and Sheep Sewet, of each like much,

One other Bath I have whereof I never made use, taught me by Gentleman, who
was well versed in Horse-leech-craft. And his Receipt is this: viz.

Take Savine, and the Bark and Leaves of the Bay Tree, Pelletory, Rosemary,
Sage, Rue, of each three ounces, boil these in a Gallon of white Wine, until
half be consumed: herewith bathe your Horse as before is showed, and whether
the Grief be visible or not, use it and you will find it an approved
Medicine. After this manner has the Gentleman delivered me this Receipt, which
he protested to me to be most sovereign; which I can neither commend nor
dispraise by reason I never yet had experience thereof. And thus much of Baths,
now let us pass to other matters.


. 4. B.
Hippoph. I Pray you Hipposerus, can you show me what is good to cause a Horse
in the Stable to Belly well?


Hippos. That can I sir, for many horses by being kept long in the stable
(especially young horses) will seldom have good bellyes, for their bellies will
shrink up toward their Flanks, and they become as great as Running Horses
use to be, when they are dieted for a Course; which does betoken great
Costivenes in them, which proceeds of much unnatural heat in the body; and
such Horses never thrive or like well, for they be naturally tender, and wash,
or flew of their flesh: and therefore such a Horse I could wish you not to
keep, but to put away so soon as may be. For if he come once to hard labor,
you cannot possibly keep him sound, but be often sick and unhealthy. The best
cure which I have, Belly gaunt.
was taught me by a French Marshall, who told me that every horse has about
his Cods two small strings, which extend from his Cods to the bottom of his
Belly, to wit, of each side one; which said strings you must break with your
finger, a thing very easy to be done by those that have practiced it; and when
you have broken them, you must annoint that place every day with fresh Butter
and Vnguentum Populeon mixed together; this done, in short time he will come to
Belly well.

This I never my self tried, but he that taught it me did much practice it,
and he brake many of those strings of sundry horses in my sight.


. 5. B.
Hippoph. WHat means have you to help the pain in the Belly of a Horse?


Hyppos. This disease is that we call the Colic, which the Italians do call
Colon, Belly pain.
from whence our English Ferriers derive the word Colic: the French call it
Tranchaisons, which is a pain or griping in the Belly, coming sometimes of
cold and wind, and sometimes of gross Humors which ly in the small Guts;
sometimes by reason of abundance of Billions or sharp Humors; and sometimes by
inflammations in the Body caused by feeding upon raw and bad meats, which
occasioneth Crudities. But of this we shall have cause to speak more in its
proper place of the Colic: Only thus much, that whereas pains and Gripings
in the Belly do proceed ofttimes from the Liver, and the working of the
Spleen, which is most vento^ous. But I think it not amiss to give you one
Receipt wherewith to cure any Gripings or pains which may at any time proceed
either from the Liver, Spleen, or Milt. Neither have you any Signs whereby to
know this disease, but only the same for the Colic. And the cure is this.

Take Isope, Cowslips, Liver-wort, Lung-wort, of each like much, so as all when
they be together, they do not exceed half a handful. Then take Gentiana,
Aristolochia Rotunda, Fennugrick, Enula-Campana, dried long-Pepper, of each
half a spoonful, and one spoonefull of Honey: chop the herbs small, and make
the other simples into fine powder, and boil them in a quart of Ale or
Muskadine which is much better, and give it him blood warm, and ride him an
hour after; then set him up warm, and four or five hours after, give him
boiled barley, and for three or four days, let his drink be either Mashes or
white water. With this I have done many good cures.


6. B.
Hippoph. What is good to heal the tongue of a Horse, which is hurt with the
Bit or Haulter.


Hippos. If the tongue of your Horse be hurt or cut with his Bit or Haulter, or
by any other accident or mishap, Bit where with the tongue h^^
the best way to cure and heal it, is:

Take Mell-Rosarum, and annoint it therewith, with a linen rag fastened to the
end of a stick, let the Sore be so anointed three or four times a day, and
let him always after dressing stand upon the Trench one hour, and in short
time it will be whole. With this I have cured many Horses, some of which have
had their tongues cut more then half through. X. Another Cure I have, which a
Frenchman taught me, which is as follows.

Take red honey, the marrow of powdered porke, quicklime and pepper all made
into fine powder, of each like much, boil all these together, still stirring
it till it come to an Ointment, with which annoint the sore twice every day
till it be whole. With this Receipt I have cured sundry good Horses, and I do
know it to be very good..


. 7. B.
Hippop. HOw may a man stanch the bleeding at the nose, or when a vein is cut,
or a wound given, whereby a Horse is in danger to bleed to death.


Hippos. We have many ways wherewith to stanch bleeding, Bleeding stanch,
as well at the nose as elsewhere. As thus, Take the tender tops of Isop, and
stamp them to mash, and put them up into his nose, or lay and bind it to the
wound or vein cut or broken, and he will be suddenly stanched.. Another:

Take Bursa-Pastoris bruized, and apply it to the place, and this is very good.
Another:

Take the powder of the stone called Emachile, and blow it up into the nose, or
lay it to the vein or wound, and the blood will be stanched. Another.

Take his own blood, dry it, and make it into fine powder, and apply it as is
aforesaid, is very good.. Another:

Take the tops of the angriest and youngest red nettles, and stamp them very
well, and laid to the place, will stanch bleeding.. Another:

Take Hogs dung, and apply it as is aforesaid, is very good,.

Take also Bumbast-cotten, woollen cloth, silk, felt, all these burned, or
the herb called Clownes-all-heale, will do the like.. Al of these I have
often tried, and do find them right good.


8. B.
Hippoph. What is good against blindness?


Hippos. Blindness Blindness.
may come many ways, and therefore if it be that which comes of filmes or
thickness in the eyes, which of all other kinds of this nature is easiest to
be cured; I will remit them to their proper places. But for filmes only I will
give you one or two Receipts. But first it were fit you should understand how
this disease comes to a Horse. If he be subject to have a thickness or white
filmes in his eyes; it comes most commonly of a rhume which passes into his
eyes from his head, which you may soon perceive by his continual weeping, and
sending forth watery moisture which will run from his eyes upon his face: which
when you shall observe, let then his Keeper sundry times every day wash and
bath his eyes with cold water newly drawn from the Well; and this will prevent
his filmes, and cure that flux or rhume: but if the films do come before you
observe that he had any such rhume or running at the eyes: then

Take man's dung, and put it into a Fire-pan, and so burn it until it come to
be a cole, then beat it to fine powder, and put thereof into a Goose quill, and
blow it into his eyes twice a day; and this will clear his eyes again..

Take also the tops of the angriest young red nettles, a handful, and stamp
them very well, then put it into a fine linen cloth, and then dip it into
beer a little, and so strain forth the juice, which done, put a few graynes
of salt, bay or white to it, and when it is dissolved, drop of this liquor into
the grieved eye, one drop: and do thus morning and evening, and it will take
away not only a filme, and other such like thickness which may hinder his
sight, but it will also take away a Pearl. These two Receipts I have often
practiced, and I have found them very good.


Hippoph. I have heard some say that they can make a Horse suddenly blind and
yet after restore him to his perfect sight again: but I think they do boast
and crack of more then they be able to do, how think you Hipposerus?


Hippos. Why truly Sir, this is easily done, and I will briefly discover unto
you the secret, which is thus.

Take Saffron, and dry it, and make the same into very fine powder as much as
will suffice, and put of this powder into a quill, and so blow it into his
eyes, and when it has remained there by the space of half a quarter of an
hour, wipe this powder from his eyes so clean, as that it may not be
discerned, and this will make him stone blind. But if you be desirous to have
him to reassume his sight again, then.

Take Garlic, and chew it in your mouth, and then whilst it is still in your
mouth, breath into his eyes, and in five or six times thus doing, he will
again see very perfectly. But this latter must be administered within eight
days after the Saffron was blown into his eyes, otherwise his sight will
never be recovered.


. 9. B.
Hippoph. What is good against the biting of a mad dog?


Hippos. I have only three cures for it, whereof I never had occasion to make
trial; howbeit they were all recommended unto me for special good: the first
is.

Take the tendertops of Rue, Boxe-leaves, and Primrose-roots, Biting of mad Dog.
of each a handful, pound them together in a mortar, and put them into a quart
of new milk, with London Treacle one ounce, and so give it him blood warm.
This proportion will serve very well for two Horses. Another,

Take Hobgoblin, perewincle, and Box leaves, of each one handful, first mince
them small, and then stamp them very small in a stone mortar, and with milk
or beer administer it, both at the Change or Full of the Moon. A third cure I
also have, which is this:

Take the herb which grows in dry and barren hills, called The Star of the
earth; you must give it three days together; the first time you must gather
three of these herbs with all the whole roots, and wash them clean, and wipe
them clean, then pound them well, loosing no part of them; which done, give it
your Horse in Milk, Beer, Ale, or white Wine; but be careful the Horse take
all the herbs and roots: but if you will, you may make up these herbs and
roots in fresh or sweet butter which will do as well: the second day give your
Horse five of these herbs and roots, like as you gave him them the day before;
and the third day give him seven. Do this punctually as I have here
prescribed you, and be you well assured your Horse will be perfectly cured: for
albeit I my self have never tried this medicine, yet I do know the party of
whom I had this Cure, has cured much cattle of all sorts therewith, for it
cures all sorts of living creatures which shall be bitten by a mad Dog; I my
self can say thus much of this Receipt, that I knew it cure a whole kennell of
Hounds of a Gentleman's, one Beagle excepted which they did not suspect to be
bitten, which indeed was bitten, so he fell mad and dyed, but all the residue
escaped and did very well. Another time a Gentleman's son of my acquaintance
was unfortunately bitten by a mad Dog, who was cured by the party who taught me
this Receipt, and this young Gentleman (for he was then but a boy of ten years
old) was so far spent with the rancor of the disease, before this man took
him in hand, as that his head began to he addle, and he to talk very idly, yet
he cured him, so as he lived and did well, and is at this hour living, he
being now come to man's state, and a very handsome and proper man, whose Parents
whilst they lived, I very well knew, and with whom I was very intimately
acquainted.


10. B.
Hippoph. What remedy have you for a Spaven?


Hippos. We have two sorts of Spavens: the one we call a Through wet, Blood or
Bog-Spaven; the other a Dry, or Bone-Spaven: the first of these two is easily
cured; the second may be cured, but such a cure is not for every Ferrier to
take upon him to compass: for that it is a Cure of very great difficulty, and
of no less danger. To speak therefore first of the Blood Spaven, Bloud-Spaven.
it is a Disease which grows upon the hough, with a swelling which is full of
blood, which though it be greatest upon the inside, yet the swelling appears
also upon the outside, being fed and nourished by the great vein which runs
along the inside of the thigh, and so comes along the inside of the hough,
and so down the leg to the pasterne, and so from the pastern to the bottom
of the foot. This malady comes by means that the blood is corrupted through
hard riding, especially when the Horse is very young. Now the blood being
through over much heating too much stirred, it begets a fluxible humor,
which being mavelous thin, falls to running downwards toward its center,
but it is stopped in its passage in the hough, where it resideth, and by that
means swells, and so becomes a disease, which pestring that place, makes
the joint stiff, whereby he becomes stark lame, not being able to go, but
with great difficulty and pain. The sign is most easy, being most apparent
to the eye. The best way to cure it, is: first, to shave away the hair on both
sides the swelling, so far forth as the swelling goes: then take up the
thigh vein, and let it bleed well; which done, tie the vein above the
orefice, and let the vein bleed from below what it will; whereby the blood
which was assembled about the spaven place, which caused the former swelling,
is by this means sent away: then with your fleame or incision knife, make two
incisions in the lower part of the swelling, and after prick two or three holes
in each side of the hough where the Spaven is, that the medicine may take the
better effect, and when the blood and water has vented away so much, as it
will do, bind round about it, plaister-wise the whites of Eggs and
Bolearmonack very well beaten together, either upon hurds or linen cloth, and
make it fast about the hough, so keep on the plaster. The next day take it
off, and wash and bathe the sorance with this bath, viz. Bath for Bloud-Spaven.
Take M^llowes and the tops of nettles, and boil them in water till they be
soft, and therewith bath him. Then take Mallow-roots, Brancha Vrsina, Oil,
Wax, and white Wine, so much as will suffice, and boil them, bind this warm
to the sorance round about the hough, and sew a cloth about it, and so let it
remain three days more; and every morning stroke it downwards with both your
hands gently, to the end the bloody humor may issue forth. The fourth day
bathe and wash it very clean with the former Bath. That done, Take Carana, and
stone Pitch, of each one ounce, and of Brimstone a quarter of an ounce made
into very fine powder: melt these together on the fire, and when it is almost
ready to be taken off, put into it of Venice Turpentine half an ounce, and
make a plaster thereof, spreading it upon leather, and apply it to the place
warm, round about the hough, and so let it remain until it do fall away of
its own accord: or if it do come off sooner than you might think fitting,
then make another plaster of the like ingredients, and apply it as before.
This is the best cure that I could ever know for this malady, with which I have
cured many Bloud-Spavens. Another for a Bloud-Spaven.

When the swelling does appear upon the inward part of the hough, take up the
thigh vein, and let it bleed from the nether part of the leg, till it will
bleed no longer, and after give fire to the Spaven both longst-wayes and
crosse-wayes, and then apply a restringent charge to the place, and thus it
will be cured. This I never tried, but positively speaking, I hold it to be a
very good Cure.


11. B.
Hippoph. HOw do you cure the dry or Bone-Spaven?


Hippos. This malady is not easily cured but with great difficulty and danger:
it is a great hard crust, yea as hard as a bone if it be let run, sticking or
indeed growing to the bone, much closer than the bark of an Oak to the body,
and it is upon the inside of the hough under the joint near to the great vein
of which I spoke of before in the Cure of the bloud-spaven? by which means the
Horse that has such a Spaven, cannot choose but hault. This bone-spaven
Bone-Spaven.
comes two ways; the first, through hard riding, or other kind of
intemperate labor, whereby the blood dissolving, falls down and makes its
residence in the hough, which does in short time become dry and hard as any
bone, from whence the sorance takes its denomination. Secondly, the Horse may
have this malady by inheritance or kind either from the Sire or Damme, as I
have before specified in the second Chapter of the first Book, where I do
entreat of Breeding.

The Sign to know it, is evident enough; viz. by your Eye and hand, for it is
both visible and palpable enough, and as easy to be seen and felt as the
Leg it self. The best way to cure it, is first by taking up the thigh-veine,
which caused it, and fed and nourished it, and let him bleed will, and so put
him into the Stable, and do no more to him for that day; the next day, shave
away the hair from off the Spaven, and rub it hard with a Rowling-pin (having
first anointed the place with Petroleum and chafed it well in with your hand)
or some other round and smooth stick, morning and evening for four days
together, and at the fourth days end, slit down the skin with your
Incision-knife, the full length of the Spaven; but be very careful you do not
touch the great Artery or Vein, both which do ly very near; for if you do
never so little hurt the great Artery, you utterly maime the horse past all
recovery; having thus done, lay to the place the Herb called Flamula bruised,
and bind it on that it fall not off, for two days more; then for three days
after: Take Cantharides and Euforbium, and incorporate them well together,
(being before beaten into fine powder) with black Soap, and Bay salt, and lay
this to the place, and thus dress it every Morning: this will lay the Bone and
Crust bare. After take Fearne-roots, Hounds-tongu, and Bore-grease; incorporate
all these together, and lay it to the place, until you perceive the Crust to
be loose, and to be wasted; assay now and then to loosen the same with your
Cornet or other Instrument, and if you can with convenience take it off quite,
do so: Which done, heal up the wound with your green ointment prescribed you
in lib. 2. cap. 10.. 4. you may also apply to the Sorance after the aforesaid
Corasives, a Plaster of strong Aegiptiacum till it has fretted off the flesh
upon the Crust so bare as possibly may be, and so you may the better attempt
the taking away of the said Crust, or by rubbing it with a Rowling-pin, or a
Hasell-stick anointed with Petroleum till the Crust be converted into a
mattrative substance, or other thinner kind of corruption, which may very
easily be drawn away. And thus have I cured the Bone-Spaven several times:
Which disease I cannot easily commend to be cured by any, but those who have
before hand seen some other skillful Ferrier to do it before him, and the
Method he uses in the working, by reason that the Cure is so extremely
difficile, and over-dangerous.. But when at any time you do perceive a
swelling begin to be in the Spaven-place of your horse, whereby you may suspect
it may prove a Spaven; for prevention whereof.

Take Natural Balsome, and having first shaven away the hair, anoint the
place with the said Balsome, for two or three days: and after you shall
repress the Humors with this Charge.

Take Oil of Roses three ounces, Bole-Armonack one ounce, wheat flower half
an ounce, and the white of one Egg; make all these into one body, and every
day (having first anointed it with Balsome) lay on the said Charge..


Hippophyl. But let us look back again to the Eyes. What say you to
Bloud-shotten Eyes?

For a Bone or Dry-Spaven or Curb: First take up the vein that feeds it
(whether Spaven or Curb) as well below as above, then give it fire, then charge
the place with pitch made hot, and clap flax upon it, then four days after,
you must dulcifie the sorance with the Oil Pampileon and fresh Butter molten
together upon a gentle fire, and when the scarre shall be fallen away, you must
apply unto it a kind of stuff which is called Blauco or white, made I think
of Iessoe, and so continue it until it be whole.. This is very good.


12. B.
Hippos. I Say Sir, that Bloud-shotten Eyes may easily be helped, if a right
Cure be taken, and the Ferrier perite: for as touching Eyes, they are a tender
Member, soonest hurt and offended of any part about the body of any living
Creature; and therefore there ought the greater care to be taken in the Cure
thereof: and take this by the way for a point of good Counsel, and for a good
Rule, that in administering to the Eyes, you be very careful that your Medicine
be not too old, but often made and renewed; for by using old made Medicines,
either their Virtues do pass away, whereby the Member dressed receives no
good; or else, by being too old, the Medicines may most easily putrify and
corrupt, and so by that means do much more harm than good to the Member you
hoped to cure; insomuch as if you be not very cautelous in making and
compounding your Receipts for the Eyes aright, you may most easily endeavoring
to cure one Eye, not fail in putting out both. All diseases in the Eyes come
only of two Causes: viz. First, either inward, or outward; Secondly, by means
of some Blow, Stripe, Prick, Cut, Bruise, or some such like accident. The
Inward Causes do either proceed from evil Humors, which do make their resort
to the Eyes, Bloud-shoten Eyes.
or else by the means of some cold taken, which breaks forth at the Eyes
into some great Flux; or else by means of some hot, sharp, or salt Humors
which do make their resort to the Eyes; all which do and will engender
Bloud-shotten, weeping, or watery Eyes; and these do proceed from Inward
causes. Now these Maladies which have their source from outward Causes, are (as
I have before mentioned) either by a Blow, Stripe, Prick, bruise, or the like,
which will cause pain and anguish, and such like inconveniences, whereby the
Member being distempered through heat, burning, glowing, etc. will weep and
send forth much moisture, which will produce not only Bloud-shotten and
Weeping-Eyes; but also (if Art and Care be not added in time convenient)
Dimnesse of Sight, Filmes, Pearls, Pin and web, Dragons, Serpentines, and such
numberless Sorances, yea and ^irect Blindness it self, without special
providence and care used by way of prevention. Wherefore for Maladies of this
Nature, I will prescribe you a few Receipts, which shall be very good and
approved. First therefore, whereas the common cure in practice among our
ordinary Ferriers and Smiths is, to draw blood as well from the Temple-veines
as for the Neck veins; my Counsel is, which experience is taught me by my
Master here, and it has not a little profited and pleasured me) to be very
cautelous how you draw blood from weak and enfeebled Eyes, as bloud-shotten
and Rhumatique-eyes, must be (unless in cases of extreme necessity) for by so
doing, I have known Horses in like cases which before they had blood taken from
them were able to see a little, but after bloodletting they have become so
blind as a Beetle; nor were they ever able (no Art wanting) to see more, so as
they after became very notable strong, and able Millhorses. First therefore I
aver, that instead of opening a vein, I counsel you to lay unto the
Temple-veines a Charge, whereby to stay and hinder that Flux of noxious Humors
which were the cause of this Malady; and let this Charge be made thus.
Bloud-shotten Eyes: a Charge.
Take Pitch, Rosin, Mastick, of each like much; melt all these together, and
either apply it upon a Plaster made of Leather cut round, or of Velvet, of
that color or as nere to the color of the horse as may be, or else lay it
good and warm to the Temple-veines, with a cloth fastened to a stick, and
before it be cold, clap Flocks of the same color to the place, and let it so
remain on, till of it self, it fall away. Then dress the grieved Eyes with
these ensuing things.

Take the white of a new-layed Egg, Honey, Selandine, and red-Fennell of each
so much as will suffice: stamp them all well together, and so bind it unto the
grieved Eye.. But if you do find, that the sight waxes thick; and that you
observe dimnesse of sight in him, through his weeping: Take then Lapis
Calaminaris, and put it into the fire making it red-hot, which infuse or quench
in a pint of white Wine; which done, let the stone be made red-hot, and
quenched in the same Wine the second time, and so in like manner the third
time; and after the third quenching, when it is through cold, dry it; and beat
it into fine powder, and put the powder thereof into a glass Vial, and put
thereto your white Wine wherein your Stone was quenched, and after it has
stood and infused one whole night at the least; put one drop of the cleerest of
the Wine into the eye of the horse, and so into the other eye also twice a day,
till you have stayed the Rhume and quite cleared his Eyes.. Another.

Take the Juice of Selendine, Red-Fennell, Vervine, and Rue, of each a like
quantity, viz. one Branch, or Sprigge of either; stamp them together, and
strain it through a clean fine linen ragge into a little clear running
water; then put into it as much grated Ginger, and Bay Salt finely powdered, of
each so much as will lie upon a two penny piece, putting all these into a
glasse-viall, let it stand to settle, and when you do see it as clear as it
will be, drop a drop of this water into either eye, morning and evening
bloud-warme, etc. Another:

Take also Ale-hoofe (which is indeed your true Ground Ivy) and stamp it well
in a stone mortar, and if it be too dry, put thereinto a little white Rose
water, or the water of Eyebright distilled, then strain it into a glass, and
annoint, wash, bathe, and taint (if need be) the sorance therewith, and in
short time it will cure the eyes perfectly. The residue of Receipts I reserve to
their due places.


13. B.
Hippoph. What good cure have you for a bloud-running itch?


Hippos. This sorance comes to a Horse commonly by means of some extreme
heat given him in the body through over-violent exercise, whereby the blood is
enflamed, Bloud-r^ning itch.
some whereof gets betwixt the skin and the flesh, which running too and
fro, being salt and billions, it there does itch and smart, provoking the Horse
many times to rub, scrub, and bite himself: Which disease if it be let run
long, will come to be an Elephantique leprosy, or at least a terrible mainge:
by which means he will soon infect all the Horses which are in the Stable
where he stands, for it is a contagious malady and loathsome. The best way to
cure this itch before it proceed further, is, Take Chamberly newly made, two
quarts, Bay Salt a handful, unslaked Lime a handful, Enule-campana root dried
and finely powdered, a handful, but if not dried, then green, cut into thin
slices, Hens dung a handful; boil all these together a while; then with a
stick with a clout fastened to it, wash the Horse all over so hot as he may
well suffer the same: use this three or four mornings together, and it will
cure him, keeping him to a spare diet, and giving him white water.


14. B.
Hippophyl. What is good to prevent Blowing and Pursivenesse in a Horse?


Hippos. You must first understand Sir, the true nature of this grief, as also
how he came by it, whereby you may the more easily know how to cure the same,
for that there be sundry ways and means whereby a Horse may come to be
breathless and short of wind, and every one of them may be a several
disease, and so require a distinct remedy. But if you mean a shortness of
wind only, then know that many Horses are naturally thick winded, as being
cook-thr^pled, narrow Chawled, etc. Blowing (...) Pursivene^
Also shortness of wind may come unto him accidentally, as when being fat and
over-laden with flesh, or by being too rank of blood, or by too much glut and
foulness in the body, then is he subject to shortness of breath and
pursivenesse; so as upon any motion or exercise he will sweat, pant, blow, and
heave at the flanks; and this comes upon him by immoderate riding, eating,
drinking, and rest. And such like exercise causes the panch of the Horse (if
he be put to any sudden motion or exercise) to be so hard and strutted out, as
that he must so strain his longs, (the bellows of the body) as to cause a
dislocation in them, by means whereof they cannot execute their office or
function as they ought; and if care and remedy be not speedily had, he will in
short time be past all recovery; and then he is brought to that disease which
the vulgar do call broken-winded: wherefore to prevent it, administer unto him
this ensuing Cure.

Let all the hay he eats, (nor let him eat all he desires, for such Horses
are commonly great feeders) be sprinkled and moystened with water, which will
assuage his excess of drinking, and very much cool his blood, which cannot
but be inflamed. Then give him every morning for four or five days together,
two eggs steeped twenty four hours in the strongest white wine vinegar you
can get: give him (I say) these two eggs, and then the vinegar after, then
ride him softly an hour after: which done, set him up warm, and three hours
after, give him hay sprinkled with water, and at night when you do give him
his Oats, wet them in Beer or good Ale, and let his drink be white water. Do
this ten days together, so that about the beginning of May, and about
Michaelmas, he may be in breath: and so keep him to spare diet, but with
discretion. This medicine will both purge him, and scowre from him much phlegm
and filth as well at nose as mouth, and he will be both sounder and in better
health a long time after: provided he be also kept to moderate exercise. And if
after you have thus drenched and dyeted him, you do not perceive his blowing
and lifting at the ribs and flanks to cease, then be you confident your Horse
is past all cure, only still moysten his meat as before is inculcated, and he
will hold out the longer. Another Receipt I have for the same malady, which if
he be not past all cure, will infallibly do him much good, which is this, viz.

Take wheat meal, the powder of Lung-wort, alias Mullet, Gentiana, Anniseeds,
Comin-seeds, of each three drammes, make them into fine powder, and make paste
with them with honey, and fresh butter, of each like quantity, so much as will
suffice, and put to it the yolks of two new laid eggs; make this paste into
pills, and every morning fasting give him three or four of these pills rolled up
in the powder of Enulacampana, and the powder of Licoris, of each like much.
These pills preserve the wind of the Horse mervailously, and keeps him always
in breath, and therefore good they be often used.

Of these two Receipts I have had great experience, and a third I was taught,
whereof I had not often made trial, yet with that little experience I have had
of it, I do find it to be right good, being as follows.

Take the Excrements of a sucking child, and put unto it a pint of white wine;
let it boil till the one half be consumed, and so give it him blood-warme.
This will cause him to forsake his blowing for 15. days; so as when he
begins again to blow, give him the same medicine again, and so keep him
with this from time to time so often as you shall have cause, and by this means
you shall have his wind good. But then you must beware you put not into the
wine too large a proportion of the Excrements, for it will make him to be very
sick, and peradventure endanger him, for howsoever when at any time you do
administer it, it will make him very sick. Remember also to sprinkle his meat,
and to give him white water.


15. B.
Hyppoph. What is your opinion of Botts, Trunchions, and Worms, their
several sorts, and how do you kill them?


Hyppos. The general Opinion is, that there are but two sorts of these kind of
creeping Creatures, to wit, Botts, and Worms, for they hold that trunchions
and bots are both one and the same thing, but they are much mistaken; for bots
are of a different shape and color from trunchions, and of different natures,
Bots, and
for bots do breed and reside in the great gut adjoining to the fundament, but
trunchions do breed and make their abode in the maw only, and if they be
suffered to remain any time within the body of the Horse, they will make their
way through the aforesaid great gut, and the trunchions through the maw, both
which vermin do bring death to the Horse. Now I do aver, that there is a
third sort, Three s^ of verm^ which d^ engende^ the body the Ho^^
which have none other denomination than plain worms, unless you will add
the word maw-wormes, and so style them maw-wormes, which name indeed is most
proper to them, by reason that they select for their resting place the maw
only, from which they never depart, where they do eat small holes quite
through the maw, by means whereof the Horse dies.

The Bots are a kind of little worms with great heads and small tails, they
breed and live as I said before in the great gut, 1 Bots.
adjoining to the fundament, and they may be taken away most easily by putting
in your hand, and by picking them from the gut to which they are fastened.

Trunchions are in shape short and thick, and of a pretty bigness, 2 Trunch^
and they have black and hard heads, but they must be sent away by medicine.

Maw-wormes are long, red, and slender, 3 Worme^
much like unto earthwormes, most of them of the length of a man's finger, and
some are longer; these must also be taken away by medicine. All these three
sorts do engender in the body of the Horse, by means of evil, raw, and
flegmatique meats, which have turned to bad digestion, whereby putrified
matter has bred in the maw, and from thence these three sorts of evil
creatures have engendered. You may very easily know when your Horse is troubled
with them: for he will sweat with pain, stamp with his fore-feet, and strike
at his belly with his hinder-feet; he will also turn his head toward his
belly to look upon it, and forsake his meat, he will also groan, tumble, and
wallow; he will also rub his tail as if it were troubled with the itch. Now
how to kill these worms is very difficile, for fear of endangering the life
of your Horse: only medicines must be given which must cause them to distaste
the maw, and to feed upon such drinks being sweet, whereby he may void them
with his dung. I will here give you many Receipts, some of which I have very
much experimented; and the first is this, viz.

Take of Egremony one handful, chop and stamp it small, and put unto it a
quart of new milk, with brimstone made into very fine powder, half an ounce:
give this to your Horse fasting bloud-warm, and keep him upon the trench
fasting three hours at the least, and at night give him white water. Another.

Take the guts of a well-growne chicken, (all but the gizard) and roll it up
warm in the powder of brimstone, and bay salt, and put it down his throat,
and trot him up and down half an hour, doing as before. Another.

Take new milk, and the powder of brimstone, this does the like. Another.

Take Saven and Worme-wood chopped and stamped small, put to it a pint of
Muskadine, and give it him warm. Take also a quart of brine newly made, and
give it him to drink. Another:

Take as much Precipitate, alias Red-Mercury calcined as will lie upon a
two-penny piece of silver, and convey it into a piece of sweet butter the
bigness of an egg, in manner of a pill: give him this in a morning fasting,
the Horse having stood all night in his Mussell at the empty rack, unless
extremity do compel you, for in such a case you may administer it at any
other time. When you are to give it him, take forth his tongue, and make him
swallow the whole pill, then ride him a while up and down, and after set him
up warm, causing him to fast three hours after: and with this medicine you
may kill all manner of Bots, Trunchions, and worms, of what kind soever, yet
at the giving, you must be wondrous circumspect and careful; for this
Precipitate is a very strong poison, wherefore you must be very observant of
your proportion, wherein you ought not to exceed, except with good caution.
Again, if you mix your Precipitate before hand with a little sweet butter,
the quantity of a hasell-nut; and then afterward lap it up in the greater lump
of butter, it may be received by the Horse to his less danger, and it will
besides very much allay its evil quality. But this I leave to your own
discretion, assuring you that there is hardly any thing comparable to this, for
this disease. This Receipt I have administered unto three Horses only, whereof
the first and last I cured, but the second dyed under my hands: but I do
assure you not for any want of care. Another:

Take Sublimatum so much as can be taken upon a two penny piece of silver, and
made up in butter will kill the Bots Bots.
in a Horse, if it be administered as was the former Receipt. This I did never
try. Another.

Take a quart of good Ale, of Rue, and Saven, of each a quarter of a pound, of
Stone-Crop half a pound: bray all these in a mortar, and put them to the Ale,
and boil it well, then strain it, and give it him bloud-warme, and he will
void them. Another;

Take of new milk a quart, and a penny weight of brimstone in fine powder, and
twenty of the long hairs of his tail, cut them very short, and put it all
together into the milk, and give it him to drink, and then throw a handful of
bay salt into his mouth, and he is cured. Another.

Take a quart of strong Wort, and give it him to drink bloud-warme, and let
him fast eight hours after. Another;

T^ke the first day a quart of new milk, and put to it half a pint of honey,
and give it him warm: this will cause them to give over from gnawing and
feeding upon the maw for a season, by reason they will drink and suck the
milk and honey for a time: the next day, give him this drink:

Take a quart of sweet Wort, or of your strongest Ale, specially if it be new,
then take a quarter of a pound of Fern roots, of Saven half a pound, of
Stone-Crop half a pound; stamp them all together, and put to it of brimstone
and of soot, of each two spoonfuls, both well powdered, and let all these be
well steeped in Wort or Ale two hours, then strain it, and give him of this two
good horn-fuls, then bridle him, and let him stand upon the trench six hours,
but this will not kill them; the third day give him these purging pills. Take of
Lard one pound, let it be laid in water two hours, then take nothing but the
pure fat thereof only, beat it well in a stone mortar, and put thereto of
Anniseeds, Licoris, and Fennugrick, all made into fine powder, of each half an
ounce, Aloes powdered, two drams, and of Agaricke one ounce: make all these well
mixed into one body, and divide them equally into six Pills or Bals, then the
Horse having fasted over night, give him in the morning three of these Pills,
anointed first with honey, then cloth him up, and litter him well, and keep
the Stable warm, and at night give him a sweet Mash, and for three days
after, let him have none other drink then white water. These Bals will so
purge the bad humors that breed and nourish these vermin, that the Horse will
be perfectly clean and free from them, of what kind soever they are: and you
shall find them to come away in his Dounge, and the most of them to be living;
for no Medicine (but those two only of Precipitate and Sublimate before
remembered, in which is so great peril) can kill them.. This Receipt before any
other I have made most use of, and I find it to be the very best, and most
infallible of them all; and this will hardly leave one Bot Trunchion or Worm
in all his Body: I forbear to report unto you, what quantity of these Vermin,
a Horse has voyded at a time, for I love not to relate Wonders. Another
Receipt I will deliver you, howbeit not equivalent to the former, which is
this, viz.

Take the tender tops of green broom, and of Saven, of each half a handful,
chop them very small, and work them up into Pills with fresh or sweet Butter;
and having kept the Horse over night fasting, give to him three of these Pills
in the Morning early, then set him upon the Trench, and let him fast two hours
after, but give him no Water till night, and that white Water.. This also have
I experienced, and have found it to be very good, for it has caused the Horse
to void many of these bad Cattle. I will conclude with this: viz.

Take a quart of Milk warm from the Cow, and put to it of Honey half a pint,
and give it him the first day; the next day take Rue and Rosemary, of each
half a handful, stamp them well together, then let it infuse, together with
the powder of Brimstone, and Soute, so much as will suffice, four hours in
Wort or Ale a quart, then strain it, and give it him blood warm; then let him
be walked or gently ridden an hour or two, and so set him up warm, and give
him Hay an hour before you give him any drink, which let be white Water, and
you must not give him Hay in four or six hours after you have given him his
foresaid drink. And you must withal remember, that in all Medicines as well
for this kind of Malady, as for any other his drink must be either a sweet
Mash, or else white Water.. This also is a very good Receipt, and I have had
good experience of it, and it has evermore wrought well..


. 16. B.
Hippoph. WHat help have you for a Brittle Hoof?


Hyppos. This comes two ways, to wit, by nature, or by accident: it comes
naturally when the Stallion who begat him, or the Mare which did Fool him, was
subject to the same infirmity; and therefore I do advise all men to forbear
Breeding with such a Stallion or Mare, for all their Colts will be in danger
to partake thereof. Brittle hoof
If it come Accidentally, then must it fall out to come either by some Surfeit
that fell down into the Feet, which caused a siccity in the Hoofes, or else in
that he had been formerly Foundred or heat in the Feet, and not well cured. I
need not show the Signs whereby to know this Malady, being it is most
apparent. As touching the Cure, I will give you but only one Receipt for the
present; by reason I shall have occasion to handle it more largely when we come
to entreat of the Hoofes. And the Cure is this: viz.

Take a Rape, or a Drawing Iron, and with either of these make the Coffin of
the Hoof fine and thin, in all such places as you shall see cause, and pare
the Soles very thin also; then apply to the Feet, as well Soles as Coffins
this ensuing Charge. Take Ry-bran, or for default thereof, Wheate-bran, Oxen or
Cowes-dunge, of these so much as will suffice, then take Sheepes-Suet, and
Hog's Grease tried, Tar, and Turpentine of each half a pound, mince the
Sheep Suet very small, and melt it on the fire, then put to your Hog's Grease,
and when these be molten, put in your Ox or Cow Dung, stirring them well
together, then by degrees put in your Bran, continnually stirring them, and
lastly your Tar and Turpentine, and when you have kneaded al these so well
together as that they are become one body and like to paste: take them from the
fire and so keep them for your use, and being only warm, stop his Soles
therewith, but tack on his Shoes first: but for his Coffins make Bags of
course cloth, and first covering all his Coffins good and thick, fasten those
bags over his hoofes to his Pasterns, but take heed they be not too hard
tied, yet so as they may stay on; dress him thus every day once for fifteen
or twenty days together, and let him not in all that time touch any Water with
his Feet, and his Hoofes will become firm and tough again. After if you
turn him forth into moist ground it will be the better, if the season will
permit it. You must during the time of his cure give him continually white
Water.. This cure I have often tried, and it is very good..


. 17. B.
Hippoph. What do you hold good to be applied to the Heels and Feet of a
Horse, that is bruised and beaten with travel?


Hippos. Sir, I will give you only one Receipt for this cure, which I have
often used, and it is so truly a good one, as that it is equal can hardly be
found. And thus it is.

Take of the tender tops of the most angry, Bruised heels (...) feet.
and stinging Nettles you can get one handful, stamp them very well in a
Mortar, and when they be thoroughly beaten, put unto them of Turpentine and
tried Hog's Grease, so much as will suffice, to bring it to a formal Unguent:
Apply this to the Feet and Heels of your Horse, in bags or cloutes, and let
this be done the very next morning after you come where you may rest him,
renew this every day once, and in short time he will be sound, and well again..


18. B.
Hippoph. What is good to allay burning with Shot, Gunpowder, or Wilde-fire?


Hippos. For this malady I use evermore to take varnish, and to put it into
fair water, and to beat the water and varnish very well together, then I power
away the water from the varnish, and so with a feather I annoint the place
burned, Burning with shot.
and in few times dressing, it will kill the fire; which done, I heal the
sorance with carnifying and healing salves. This is very good.

But I will now give you two or three other unguents, which are most precious
against all sorts of burnings, which is this.

Take Hogs grease as much as will suffice, set it upon the fire, and let it
boil well, and as the skimme arises, take it away with a feather or such like
thing, until no more will arise; that done, and that it has boiled enough,
then put it forth into an earthen vessel, and set it forth into the open air
four or five nights, after which time you must wash it in a great quantity of
clear running or fountain water, to the end it may be free from salt or other
filth, and wash it so long in sundry waters in some great bowl, until it come
to be very white, Then melt only this ointment, and so keep it for your use,
wherewith annoint the places grieved, and in short time it will cure them. This
I had of a famous French Marishall, and I have often used it, and I ever found
it to be most sovereign for all sorts of burnings. But if Hogs grease may
not be had, then take the fat of Bacon, and wash it well, and it is mavelous
good. Another,

Take fresh butter, and the whites of eggs, of each as much as will suffice,
beat them well together, till you bring them to a formal unguent, and anoint
the places burned therewith, and it will speedily take away the fire and cure
them soundly. This is also special good. Another.

Take a stone of quicklime which must be well burned, (that which is best
burned, will be lightest) dissolve it in fair water, and when the water is
settled, so as all the Lime remains in the bottom, strain the cleerest of
the water through a fine clean linen cloth, then put unto this water either
the oil of Hemp Seed, or of the oil of Olive, of like quantity with the
water, and so beating them well together, you shall have an excellent unguent
most precious for all sorts of burnings. And the nature of these three unguents
be to leave no scarres. Wherefore we apply them for most sovereign remedies as
well for man as beast in cases of this nature. This also I have often tried,
and I have found them all to be most singular.


19. B.
Hippoph. HOw do you take away bunches, knots, warts, and wens, from a Horse?


Hippos. These kinds of sorances do come to a Horse, by means of much
rankness of bad blood, which is engendered of peccant humors, which humors
do proceed of naughty meat. Bunche^ Knots, (...)
They are so apparent to the eye, that any man may point at them with his
finger. The way to free your Horse of them, is first: take up such veins as
you may know to feed them; then shave away the hair from about the places, and
for four days together, lay Aegiptiacum to them; at four days end, wash and
bathe the places with strong wine vinegar made hot; then take wine vinegar one
pint, green coperas and Dyers gals, of each four ounces, cantharides two
ounces, bay salt one handful, make these into fine powder, and let them boil
on the fire with the vinegar a little, and so wash the sorances therewith
scalding hot, and every third day continue thus to do till you perceive them
to dry up. Let the scurfe fall away of its own accord at leisure, if any more
shall happen to grow forth afterward, apply the same medicine again, albeit
it was formerly cured by the same thing: yet I have not seen any Horse to fall
into the same malady again, and during the time you have him in cure, let him
not come in any water, but keep him in the stable warm. Another cure is this:
First (as before) shave away the hair, and take up the veins which feed those
sorances, then six days after, let him blood in the heels to draw away the
humors downwards: then wash and bathe him well with hot vinegar; which done,
take a quart of oil of Nuts, and Verdegreace powdered two ounces, and a quarter
of a pint of Ink; mix all these well together, and apply it cold to the
places, rubbing and bathing them well therewith, and if the knots and warts do
not begin to dry up at the first dressing, then must you begin again every
fourth day until such time as they be thoroughly cured. Another, Take course
honey one pound, Verdegreace in powder three ounces, mix these well together
with the finest wheat flower, and so bring it to an ointment, and after you
have cleansed the sorances as before is showed you, apply this ointment to the
place with a rowler: if there be any warts among the knots, cut them away
clean before you do apply the said ointment, and thus doing ten or twelve
days every other day, he will be perfectly cured. Another: Shave away the
hair, and take up the veins as aforesaid, then wash and bath the place well,
then take mutton sewet, mallows, and brimstone, make a decoction hereof, and
when you have very well bathed the sorances with the said decoction, take the
substance thereof, and putting it between two linen clothes, make it fast to
the place over night, and in the morning take it away, which done, apply unto
the place this unguent, viz.

Take vinegar and mutton suet, the gum of the Pine Tree, new wax, and rosin
of each like much: melt all these together (but put in your Gum last) and so
anoint the sorances with a feather twice every day till they be whole. Of this
Cure I never made trial, but it seems to be a good one. You must not forget
in every of these Cures to take up such veins which in your judgment you may
find to feed those sorances, and to shave away the hair from about them
clean. Now with this other Cure, I will conclude. Wash and bathe the places
with the decoction last before mentioned, and lay the substance to the sores.
Take then new Wax, Turpentine, and Gum Arabicke, of each like much: melt them
to an unguent, and herewith anoint the sorances; during which time, let him
come into no water, and the Poults of Mallows, etc. must be every night
applied till he be whole. Another:

Take (and to conclude) blew slate and brimstone, of each four ounces,
Verdigrease one ounce, made into fine powder, then take fresh butter four
pound, melt it in a small kettle or Posnet, and so soon as the butter is
molten, put into it all the former ingredients, and so let them boil well; and
when you have brought it to a perfect unguent, take it off, and keep it for
your use. And when you would use it, warm thereof upon a chafing dish and
coals, and annoint your Horse therewith upon the sorance, and that but once, and
it will suffice. But you must let him blood the day before you do anoint him
in the neck vein. And at the end of eight days, take a quantity of cold Lee,
and three ounces of black soap, and wash the sorance therewith. This quantity
of ointment will serve but only for two Horses. Of this Receipt I never had
occasion to make trial; but it was taught me by a famous Marishall of France,
who commended it unto me for an extraordinary good Receipt; and truly it seems
to me so to be.


CHAP. VI.
. 1. C.
Hippophylus. WHat is good to be applied to a Horse, that has cast himself
in his Halter?


Hippos. This commonly comes to a Horse which being tied down to the manger,
his ear or Poule itching, with his hinder Foot scratcheth the the place that
itcheth, so as when he takes away his Foot, the Halter catches into the
Pasterne Joint; which he feeling, falls to striving, whereby he casts
himself down, and by means of the hardness of the Cord, he is gauled even
to the very bone, and many times (if he be not opportunely rescued) the Halter
does strangle him, and he found starck dead. But if the Horse do escape with
life, he will be nevertheless terrible gauled, which will soon rankle and
swell, unless cure be presently administered. The sign whereby to know it, is
apparent enough. I will give you only two Receipts for this sorance, whereof
the first shall be this; viz.

Take the leaf of the herb called Saubsucus, Cast in a Halter.
stamp it and strayn it, and take only the juice thereof, and apply the said
juice to the sorance by washing it therewith, after take a linen cloth, white
and clean, and make it into three or four folds, steeping the cloth in the
said juice, and bind it on to the place grieved: but in Winter when the said
Leaf is not to be had, you must take the second rind thereof, and do
therewith as before; but then note, that before you wash and apply the said
juice to the wound, you must first wash the sorance with warm Water, and then
apply your said juice, and he shall be perfectly cured in short time. This I
never yet experienced, by reason I could never yet meet with the Herb. This
second I have often tried, and I have found it to be infallible, viz. Make a
Roll of fat Wool, and steep the same in Vinegar and Sheep Suet so much as
will suffice, boiled together till it comes to be very thick, and let the
Roll be full as long, or rather somewhat longer then the place gauled: apply
this to the sorance Plaister-wise, and bind upon it a clean Linen cloth,
changing it twice a day, and in short time it will be whole. This is right good..


2. C.
Hippoph. What Cure have you for a Canker?


Hippos. This is a very loathsome Sorance, which if it be suffered to run long
will so fester, and corrupt the place where it happens, that it will violently
eat, even to the bone: if it fall upon the Tongue, it will eat the very root
in sunder; if in the Nose, it will eat the very Gristle through; You may
easily know this Sorance, for that the places will be very raw, and bleed often,
and many times you shall perceive a white Scurfe to grow upon the place
grieved. For it is a most Cankerous Ulcer, which ofttimes is engendered of a
fretting humor. It comes two ways, that is, either of naughty, and corrupt
blood procured by means of unwholesome meat, or by some Bilious Humor which
came to the Horse by an extreme cold not long before taken, which will cause
his bteath to stink loathsomely. Canker.
I will deliver unto you sundry cures for this sorance, which my self have
experimented, and have found them to be very good.

Take white Wine half a pint, Roch Alome the quantity of a Wall-nut, Bay Salt
half a Spoonefull, English Honey one Spoonefull, Red-Sage, Rue, Ribwort,
Honey-Suckle Leaves, Yarrow, Plantine, Bramble-leaves, of each like much, but
of every one a little: boil all these in the white Wine so much as will
suffice, till a quarter be consumed, and then first inject of this Water into
the sorance; or else if the Canker be in the Mouth, wash the place with a clout
fastened to a sticks end, and so dress him therewith twice a day or oftener if
you shall see cause, till it be whole.. Another

Take green Coperas, and Alome, of each one pound, white Coperas four
drammes, boil these in a pottle of running Water until almost the one moiety
be consumed, then take it from the fire, and put into it of Honey half a
pound, then holding up his Head with a Drenching Staff (but yet not too high)
with a Pewter or Elder Sering or Squirt, inject it into his Nose (if the Canker
be there) blood warm; which done, give presently his head liberty, whereby he
may snuffle and blow forth the corruption, and fail not to inject him thus
three or four times one after the other at every dressing; and do thus Morning
and Evening till it be whole; which will not be long. But if it be only a sore
Mouth, and that it come to be a Canker, then.

Take of the strongest white Wine Vinegar, and make it thick with powdered
Alome, and so wash the sorance therewith two or three days together, for this
will kill and destroy the Ulcer; then heal up the Sorance thus; viz.

Take of fair Water a quart, Alome, and Honey, of each four ounces, Maudeline
leaves, red Sage, and Columbine leaves of each a handful: boil all these in
the Water till half be consumed and every day twice, that is, Morning and
Evening, wash his Mouth therewith bloud-warme, and it will heal him.. Another.

First make this strong Alome Water, viz. Take Alome half a pound, Honey half
a pint, red Sage, and Wood-bind-leaves, of each a handful: boil all these in
fair water, till half be consumed: with this Water and Herbs, wash and rub
the Sores till they become red and raw, then take white Wine Vinegar half a
pint, Alome powdered two ounces, Ginger powdered half an ounce, and of life
Honey half a pint, mix all these well together, and therewith annoint the sore
Morning and Evening, and it will cure him..

All these Receipts I have made trial of, and have found them to be right
good. Another.

Take the juice of the Root Asphodill seven ounces, Quicklime, and Arsnick of
each two ounces, beat and incorporate all these together, and put them into a
new pot close stopped, and let it boil till it come to ashes; these ashes you
shall apply to the Sorance twice a day, but the sore must be first washed with
strong Vinegar, as before is taught.


. 3. C.
Hippoph. HOw cure you that Horse who has cast his Hoof?


Hippos. This is a troublesome Sorance, yet with care it may be cured: it
comes either by means of some Foundring, or by an Accloy, Prick, Stub,
Graveling, Quitterbone, or other hurt within the Foot, which breaking out
above round about the Cronet, and in time the Hoof breaking, it falls from
the Foot. I need relate no Signs whereby to know the same. The Cure is thus.

Take Aquafortis the strongest you can get, Casting the hoof.
and first with a Rape or Drawing Iron, file or draw away the old hoof
somewhat near, then touch the hoof so prepared with your Aquafortis, three or
four several dressings and no more: This done, annoint the Foot with the
Unguent we do commonly make for Horses Feet: viz. Take Hog's Grease three
pound, Pach-grease two pound, Venice-Turpentine one pound, new Wax half a
pound, Sallet-Oyle one pound: Melt and mix all these upon the fire, and
herewith chafe, rub, and anoint the Coffin of the Hoof up to the very top;
and this will bring a new hoof.

Take also Turpentine half a pound, Tar half a pint, new Wax half a pound,
Sallet Oil one pint: Melt all these except the Turpentine together till they
be well mixed, and a little before you take it from the fire, put in your
Turpentine, and so stir it till it be cold; but before hand make him a Buskin
of Leather, with a thick sole, made fit for his hoof, but wide enough, that it
may be tied about his Pasterne, and dress his hoof with this medicine, laying
Tow or Hurds upon it, and so put on the said buskin, and fasten it to the
pasterne joint, or a little above, but so as that the buskin may no way offend
or trouble the foot, renewing your medicine every day once till it be whole.

This Receipt is also most sovereign for a Horse that is hoofe-bound: and as the
new hoof begins to come, it behooves you carefully to observe where it
grows either harder or thicker in one place more than in another, or
crumbleth, or goes out of order or fashion any where about the Hoof, which
when you shall perceive, file the place with your Rape, and so keep the hoof
in good fashion, by which means there will come a very perfect hoof again:
which being, put him out to grass into some moist Pasture or Meadow, for that
is the only way to cause the hoof to becomme tough.


Hippophyl. What is the reason that in all your medicines in which you use
Turpentine, you put that in last, and not when you put in your other
ingredients?


Hippos. Sir, I shall give you in a word a sufficient reason for this demand:
to wit, if the ingredients which I do put into any medicine be to be molten
upon the fire; as Gums, Pitch, Tar, Rosin, and the like; if I should put in
my Turpentine together at once with the residue before it could be sufficiently
molten or boiled, the Turpentine (being a drug so subtle) would consume it
self into vapor, and by that means leave the medicine imperfect, and that is
the cause why I do put in my Turpentine evermore a little before I take it
from the fire.


. 4. C.
Hippoph. IN what cases do you Cauterize, and what be its virtues?


Hippos. Cauterization or giving of fire is of two natures, viz. Actual and
Potentiall: your Cautery actual is made by hot burning instruments, with which
you sear and burn those places which be requisite for the perfecting of the
Cure you have in hand, which cannot be peradventure otherwise well cured, but
by giving of the fire: as in case of great impostumations, stanching of blood
in wounds, or in searing of veins, sinews, or the like: or else in case of
dismembring, if other means be not at hand, whereby to stay the flux of blood
without danger of bleeding to death, and so likewise in very many cases of this
nature, wherein I do advise all men that are not very perfect in giving the
fire, that they do not practice upon Horses of price, Cautery actual.
but first upon Iades, and low-prized Horses, to the end they may the better
come to know how to carry their hand, and to understand themselves in this Art
the better: as when they are to use the lighter, and when the heavier hand; as
also that they do make their circles round, and their lines straight and even,
and not crooked or waving. For this actual fire is a thing most necessary for
them that do truly know and understand the true use and virtue thereof, and
therefore it ought to be very carefully, judiciously, and moderately applied,
and never but upon good and very considerate grounds: which in so doing, you
shall find it to be a most sovereign remedy to hinder and stay all manner of
corruption whereunto any member may be inclined, provided that in the handling
of your instrument, you touch not Muscles, Arteries, Sinews, Ligaments, Cords,
or the like, for so you may utterly lame where you would set upright, and
destroy where you would cure, excepting only in cases needful. For by
applying this actual fire, you shall join and conglutinate parts and members
severed, dry up superfluous moisture, and sink members swelled: you shall
besides bring forth all evil and putrifactious matter congealed and gathered
into knots, as Wens, Biles, Pustils, Exulcerations, and the like: you shall
also assuage old griefs, and make perfect all such parts of the body as be any
way corrupted: neither shall you need fear the increase of any evil humors,
by reason that the skin being severed by means of the hot iron, it does ripen
and digest all manner of putrefaction and matrative stuff, whereby it venteth
and passes away much more easily, healing and qualifying all grief and pain,
causing the member which before was subject to festring and to gangrene, to
become the sounder, and by much the stronger, so as nothing of disadvantage
will be remaining, but the scar only, where the iron passed, and the worst
that can be made thereof, will be but a little eyesore. But then you must have
a very great regard unto your Instruments that they be made according to the
nature and quality of the place and member which is to be seared: for one
fashion will not serve in all causes; for as the places which are to be
cauterized are commonly different in shape and proportion, so also ought the
shapes and fashions of your instruments to be made accordingly. You are also to
have a special care to the heating of your instruments, which ought to be done
with a right good judgment; for as they must not be too cold, so ought they
not to be too hot, for by that means you may easily inflame the cauterized
places too much: Again, in giving the fire great care must be had to the
bearing of the hand, for therein consists very great cunning, and as I have
before admonished you to be careful that you touch not any sinew or ligament,
so no fire is to be given to the dislocation or fraction of any bone. And as
touching the mettle whereof your instruments are to be made: some commend and
prefer gold, silver, and brass, or copper before steel or iron: but I will
not control any man's knowledge confessing mine own to be the least; Only
thus much I may aver of that little I have (through Gods permission) that
having made trial of them all, yet I have ever in all my practice found iron
and steel to be the very best, and most certain to work with, of all the
other metals, and my reason is, because steel or iron will retain its once
received heat longer than any other mettle, whereby I cannot be so much
deceived in my work; for gold, silver, and brass, as they be sooner made hot
than iron or steel, so are they as soon cold: now steel and iron metals are
much more substantial and harder of nature then the other metals be, and
therefore as they are somewhat longer before they be hot, so they retain their
heat much longer, which during the time of their agitation, works more surely:
again, a man cannot tell when those other metals are hot enough, as also when
they be too hot, if you put never so little water to them whereby to allay
their overmuch heat, they suddenly turn and become so cold as not to be able
to make them work at all; the contrary whereof you shall find to be in the
nature of iron and steel. And let this suffice for cautery actual. Now I will
in a word handle cautery potentiall, Caute^y potentiall.
which as the cautery actual burns the flesh by the hot instrument; even so
does cautery potentiall burn the flesh by medicine, of which there are three
sorts or degrees, namely by corasive, by causticke, 1 C^rasive.
or by putrefaction. Corasive is when that is applied to the wound wherein is
dead or proud flesh to corrode or eat it away, by which means the wound is
prepared and made the more fit for Emplaisters, Waters, or Unguents which do
carnifie and make good flesh, by which means the wound which before was foul,
is now become clean, healed up, and made sound, and these corroding things are
commonly Precipitates, Sublimatum, Arsnick, Resalgar, Leads white and red,
Verdigrease, Allome, Coperas white and green, Vitreall, Saudaraclia
Chrysocollo, Origanum, Mercury, Aconitum, Capitellum, Roman Vitriall, Shavings
of Ox or Hearts-horne, Red-corall, Sponge of the Sea somewhat burned,
Vnguentum Apostolorum, Vnguentum Aegiptiacum, Vnguentum Caraccum, Magistra,
Sal-niter, Cantharides, Apium, Aquafortis, Ciclamine, Melanacardinum, and many
more, which I am enforced to leave out partly for want of memory, and partly
for want of time; all which do burn, eat, and corrode the flesh, putting the
poor beast to micle pain. A Causticke Caustic.
is a greater burner, for that being once put to the skin, will in short time
make a wound where none was before, for therewith we do use to make issues,
and where it is set to the flesh or skin, it makes its way in, whereby we may
in shorter space administer our Emplastrum, for Causticks are stronger and more
violent than either Putrifactives or Corasives; for whereas Corasives do work
only upon skin broken, and to corrode and eat out dead, proud, spungy and
naughty flesh: and Putrifactives do ripen, mollify, and prepare the wound for
the Causticke; so Caustickes do break skin and flesh and all; and therefore it
is more violent, and burns worse than any of the two former. Now your
Putrifactives Putrefactive.
are such medicines as we do commonly apply to Swellings, which we do make for
the most part of medicines compounded; as Poultesses, rosted-Sorrell, white
Lilly roots, and the like; for such things are drawers and ripeners, causing
swellings which be hard and fleshy, to become soft, and putrifactive, and to
prepare Sorances for the Causticks, whose nature is to break and open, what
before the Putrifactive had ripened, which otherwise must have been done by
Cautery Actual or by incision. And this I do hold sufficient to be handled
upon this subject; howsoever much more, and many other particulars may be
delivered, yet in this consists the substance of all, for by reason I aim at
brevity, I refer you to Master Blundeviles Offices, and to Master Markhams
Masterpiece, who have entreated hereof very accurately.


5. C.
Hippoph, What good Charge have you to be applied to the Feet, wherewith to
stop them, when the Horse is either Surbated or in danger of Foundring?


Hippos. This comes commonly to young Horses, which are sorely ridden before
their Hoofes and Feet be hardened, as also sometimes when Horses upon hard
riding and long travel are ill shod, this does not only cause them to be
Surbated, but also hazardeth their Foundring; which so soon as you do
perceive, the first thing you do, Charge for Surbating.
is, to cause his Feet to be clean picked, that no Gravel be remaining
betwixt the Web of the Shoo and the Sole, then wash the Feet with water and
salt, and about an hour after let his feet be thoroughly well stopped with
the Charge prescribed you in Chapter the tenth,. the sixteenth of this Book;
and he will be well in short time.


. 6. C.
Hippophil. What is the best way to Cleanse and Purge a Horse from all filth,
at his first taking up from grass?


Hippos. This I have showed you in the seventh Chapter of this Book; but yet
I will once again reiterate it unto you in few words. First therefore, he
having been had into the Stable, the next day, if it be a hot Sunne-shiny-day
let his Keeper take him out of the Stable into a place convenient, and there
let him hansomely trim him (a thing which every Groom and Keeper knows
well enough how to do;) then let him take ordinary soft washing Soap, Cleanse a
Horse.
and anoint his Head all-over therewith, taking a great care that none of the
soap or suds, get into his Eyes or Ears, then wash him with warm Water, and
so purge and wash all manner of filth from his Head and every part thereof;
that done, first wipe all his Head, Ears, Eyes, and Face with a warm linen
cloth; and then wipe and rub him dry with woollen clothes: then Soap his whole
body all over Capapee, leaving no part thereof free, especially his Maine and
Tail, then wash him very clean with Buck-lee, with a wispe or woollen cloth,
and when you have sufficiently cleansed him, let him be wiped, rubbed, and made
dry, as before you have done his Head, and when he is thoroughly dry, let him be
led into the Stable and so clothed up with a clean thin soft cloth, and shod
up at your pleasure. And by this kind of Purging, trimming, and cleansing of a
Hoof, I have in three or four hours space so altered a Horse, as that his
owner has not on the sudden known him.


. 7. C.
Hippoph. I Have known Horses troubled with sundry sorts of foul or sore
heels, all which carry the name of Scratches in general, some whereof have
Clifts cross, and overthwart, some Clifts with Cracks, and some long C^ifts,
etc. What do you say to these Maladies?


Hyppos. I say Sir, that every of these sorts are very foul Sorances, yet
soon cured, if the Ferrier be so well skilled as to take up the Veins,
before he apply his Medicines and Remedies. The Maladies do come by Surfets
taken by over-heats, by washing his Horse when he comes home hot, by naughty
meat, or by corrupt blood, the Peccant Humors falling downe-wards and
settling in those parts where the Sorances are, whereby they prove most
troublesome to the creature, and no less noisome to the beholders, for the
heels be very raw, and do run with loathsome water and matter which does
stink very offensively. Clif^s and ^^^cks in the Heels.
The signs need no description. The cure is, first to take up the
Thigh-veines, whereby to stop and hinder the falling down of these bad humors
which do feed them; then clip or shave away the hair close from about the
sores, then wash the places with broken Beer and Butter warm, and dry them
again, which done, apply this Plaster to the places grieved.

Take Sheepes-suet, or Deeres-suet which is much better, and being molten upon
the fire, let it cool till you may hold your finger therein; then put to it so
much Ry-bran; or (for want thereof) Wheate-bran as will bring it to a salve,
lay it to the place Plaister-wise upon Hurds or Tow, and bind a clean linen
cloth over the Plaster to keep it on, and so let it remain four or five
days without meddling with it, by which time the Sores will be thoroughly purged,
and the scurfe will easily come off; then take old Bores grease well rotted,
and melt it upon the fire, and when it is so cold as was the Sheep, or
Deere-sewet, put to it the yolks of Eggs so much as will suffice, and a
little Verdegrease in fine powder: incorporate all these well together,
bringing them to an Unguent, with which annoy at the sores every day once,
until they be thoroughly and perfectly whole.. Another.

Take Oil de Bay four ounces, Verdegrease, and Litarge of Gold both in fine
powder, of each two drammes, make all these into an unguent, and annoint the
sores therewith morning and evening, till they be whole. In every of these
Cures, let your Horse come into no water. Another:

Take Soot five ounces, Verdigrease in fine powder three ounces, Orpin one
ounce, beat all these together into fine powder, and then add thereto as much
common honey as of all the residue; boil all these together well, putting into
it as it boyleth quicklime, as much as will suffice, keeping it always
stirring till it be well boiled, and is become thick: with this ointment
annoint the Sores twice every day, until they be sufficiently cured. Another:

Take hot wood Ashes and Quicklime, and with common honey and white wine; make
it into one body to a perfect Unguent, and herewith anoint the Sores; and if
this malady have not been long upon the Horse, this ointment will certainly
cure him, but if they be old and have run long upon him, then give him the
fire, and then dress the Burning with the ointment prescribed you in the
former Cure. Another:

Take a round iron, and give the fire toward the extremities or ends of the
chops, and annoint them every day as before, and assure your self the clifts,
chops, and rifts, will not increase but diminish, and so in short time he will
be whole and sound. This is special good.


. 8. C.
Hippoph. I Would gladly know Hipposerus something of Clisters, and their true
natures.


Hippos. As touching Clisters, there be sundry kinds of Purgations, and
therefore to the end you shall the better understand them and their proper
virtues; I will first anatomize unto you the several degrees of Purgations:
and by reason I have been much, and that for a long time versed in this
subject, Of Clisters.
I am not ashamed to discover unto you from whence I had my first grounds and
principles; for every man (as the Proverb is) must have a beginning; to wit, he
must be a scholar before he can be Master: for as Seneca says very well, It
is great temerity in any man to take upon him to be a Master, who did never
know what it was to have been a Scholar. My first rudiments therefore I
received for Master Blundevile, and after somewhat I attained unto by the help
of Master Markham, both very well traveled in this Art, the rest I achieved
partly in my travels, and partly from my particular practice and experience.
Now Master Markham follows Master Blundevile in many things verbatim, in the
rest in substance, wherein Master Markham does more largely dilate and deliver
himself, making thereby often times many things more clear and apparent, yet
they both assent in what they say; Purgation defined.
viz. that Purgation is defined by the learned Physicians to be the emptying
and voyding of superfluous humors, which do cumber, pester, and disturb the
body with their peccant condition: affirming that such ill humors do breed
much bad nutriment, which the learned do call Cacochymia, which when it will
not be corrected or amended, either by fair means, or by the help of nature,
then must it be compelled, forced, and driven away by Purgation, Vomit,
Clister, or Suppository. And whereas Master Blundevile says, that Horses are
not used to be purged by Vomit, as men be; I in conference with him once asked
him the reason thereof; he answered me, for that the neck of the Horse was of
that length, as not to be able to purge by vomit, which for the present I took
for satisfaction; I then imagining the thing not to be known, until such time
as I traveling into remote parts, where I had frequent commerce with famous
Marishals and Ferriers, I at length fastened upon one eminent for his faculty,
who upon occasion offered, used to administer vomit to Horses as frequently as
he did either Purgation or Clyster: which thing when I well observed, I
demanded if a Horse could vomit, and to what purpose he did administer in that
kind; he answered me that a Horse could vomit, and that he often times
administered for the same end, and thereupon both gave me his Receipt, and did
administer in my presence, and made me an eyewitness to the working, not in
one Horse alone, but in sundry others. But now leaving this to its proper
place, I come to assoyle your demand as touching Clysters, their natures and
virtues. Clysters secundum vulgus are called Glisters, but the more learned
assume the name Clyster, borrowed from the latin word Clyster, from whence the
French has it Clystere. Now whereas all other kinds of Physic is r^ceived in
at the mouth, Clysters and Suppositaries are administered per Anum, whose
natures for the most part are to purge the guts, and to cause the Horse to
void, (and to throw forth of his belly such humors as do offend him in matter
of his health, to allay the sh^rpenesse of bad humors, to cleanse ulcers, to
assuage the griefs and pains in the belly caused by wind or otherwise, and
so likewise in many other cases. Now Clysters are not all of one and the same
nature, neither are they all laxatives (as many do imagine) or do serve to one
and the same end: for some must be made to give ease, some are restringent, and
do bind, some do loosen and purge, some are to cleanse ulcers, old and long
running sores, and some to prepare the body the better to receive its Physic,
whereby it may the better work, which otherwise cannot be administered without
much peril to the life of the sick creature. So that a Clyster is (I say)
commonly given for a Preparative or beginning to purgation. And a Clyster by
cleansing the guts, refreshes the vital parts, and prepares the way before.
Wherefore I do admonish every Ferrier, that when at any time they are to
administer Physic to a Horse, whether Purgative or otherwise, if the Horse be
not at the time soluble in body, that after bloodletting the next day he give
a Clyster, and then may he be the bolder to administer what he shall think
most requisite: lest otherwise by giving medicine, without further preparation,
he stir and provoke the peccant humors, which by reason they cannot find
present way forth, being hindered by oppilations in the guts, through
costivenesse and ventosity, and other impediments do attempt to make their
passage by a contrary way, which cannot be done, but with great hazard to the
life of the poor beast.


Hippoph. But of what ingredients do you make your Clysters, Hipposerus?


Hippos. We do usually make our Clysters of Decoctions, of Drugs, of Oils,
and sometimes we add salt.


Hippoph. What is a Decoction?


Hippos. A decoction is a broth made of certain herbs, as Mallows, A decoction
what it is.
Marsh-Mallowes, Palletory, Camomile, and sometimes of white Lilly roots, and
other such like things, which we do boil in water to a third part, and
sometimes we use in stead of herbs and water, to take the fat of beef broth,
or the broth of a Sheeps head, Milk, Whay, and some such kind of liquor.


Hippoph. What quantity of Broth or Decoction do you usually put in, whereof
to make your Clyster?


Hippos. That we do administer according to the age, strength, greatness, and
corpulency of the Horse; for if he be a Horse of a strong and able body, of
large growth, and stature, fat and lusty; we use to put into his Clyster of the
decoction three pintes, but if he be of a small growth, weak, sick, feeble,
or lean, then we do put in but a quart of the same at most: of oil we use to
put in half a pint, of salt two or three drams at most, and sometimes we put
in Verjuyce, sometimes Honey, as we shall find cause: drugs we use, as Seen,
Cassia, Agarick, Anniseeds, oil of Dill, oil of Camomile, oil of Violets,
Sugar Candy, etc.


Hippoph. What quantity of drugs is needful for one Clyster?


Hippos. You ought not to exceed the quantity of three ounces in one Clyster at
most, neither must you exceed of butter four ounces, and you must be very
careful your Clyster be not administered more than bloud-warme.


Hippoph. What time is fit for a Horse to keep or retain his Clyster?


Hippos. When you give it him, let him be somewhat empty, but before he do
receive it, let him be raked, and then having administered it, let him keep it
at least half an hour, to the end it may work in his belly, and so do him the
more good, and to cause him the better to keep the same; let his Keeper (so
soon as the Horse has received it) hold his tail close to his tuell for
half an hours space, or more, for the longer he keeps it, the more
effectual it will be unto him; the best instrument wherinto give it to a
Horse, is a Clister-pipe made of purpose, which ought to be 12 inches in the
shanke, which must also be put home, and when the Clyster is assumed, let the
giver draw away the pipe by degrees, and not all at once.


Hippoph. I pray set me down some good Receipts of Clysters.


Hippos. That shall I Sir most willingly: the first Clyster that I ever gave,
was to a small Nag of a Gentleman's, which being very costive in his body, and
refusing his meat, did droop, languish, and pine away; insomuch as the owner
fearing his Horses life, repaired unto me for counsel; when I had well
considered the nature of his infirmity, together with its symptoms, I held it
most requisite to administer a Clyster, 1 Clister.
which I did, and it was this: viz. Take the fat of beef broth one pint and
an half, of good English honey half a pint, adding thereto of white salt two
drams, mix all these well, and so administer it blood warm Clyster-wise, and
so soon as he has taken it, clap his tail close to his tuell, by the space
of half an hour together at least, and if then it do not work, as I am
confident it will, then let one take his back, and ride him up and down a
reasonable round trot some times, (but not so as to cause him to sweat) for
half an hour more, and set him up warm clothed and littered, and so let him
stand upon his trench four or five hours; during which time he will purge
kindly; then unbit him, and give him sweet hay, and an hour after he has
eaten, give him white water, nor let him drink any cold water in a day or two
after. And this you shall find to be the best remedy for this malady..

This I have administered saepe et saepius, and have done great good therewith:
for the nature of this Clyster is, to open and loosen the Body, to bring away
with it all offensive Humors, to remoove Obstructions engendered in the Body by
means of excessive heat; it cleanses the Guts, and slicketh away all slimy
substance which is residing in the Guts


Hippophyl. Why but Hiposerus I observe a contradiction in you, as touching the
quantity of your Decoction; for where as you did before affirm that you use to
put into your Clysters at the most but three pints, and at the least but a
quart; you say that you did administer to this Horse, but a pint and half
only, which is under quantity of what you did before prescribe?


Hippos. Sir, in answer hereunto you must understand that in cases of this
nature, Physic ought with judgment to be administered, and the reason why I
put into the Clyster of this broth so little; was for that the horse was
grown very weak, poor, and low of his flesh, and in good years, and was
besides a very small Nag, fetched out of Scotland from the mountains of
Galeway or Galwin, and therefore if I should have made his Clyster so strong,
and have added so great a quantity of Decoction to him, as I might peradventure
have put to a Clyster for a great, large, fat, healthy, or corpulent Horse, I
might have repented it; and therefore I made it as I told you, whereby it
wrought most kindly, and did him that good which I hoped, and desired: But
passing from this now, let us proceed to entreat yet farther of Clysters, and
of their several kinds. Another.

Take Pellitory two handfulls, 2 Clister Laxative.
or for want thereof Melelote two handfulls, or if that may not be had, then
Camomile two handfulls, but Pellitory is the best if it may be had; boil it to
a Decoction, and then add to it, of Sallet-oyle, and of Veriuice of the Crab,
of each half a pint, of Honey four ounces, of Cassia two ounces, mix all
these well together, and so apply it bloud-warme Clyster-wise.. This we do call
a Clycter Laxative, for this will open the Body and Guts of the Horse very
well, it will take from him all noxious and offensive humors; it will carry
away all spungy matter: it will allay the biliousnesse and sharpness of
humors; it will cleanse old Ulcers; it will refresh and comfort the Vital
parts, etc. But if you do find that by giving too great a quantity, your
Horse purges and scowreth longer and more violently than you would have had
him to have done, or for fear it should stir up in him upon the sudden more
bad humors than you may easily know how to allay, then give him this Clyster,
viz. Take the aforesaid Decoction one pint, 3 Clister Restringen^
adding thereto as much of Cowes milk, (as it comes warm from her) and put
also thereto the yolks of three new-layed Eggs well beaten and well mixed
with the said liquour: and so give it your Horse blood warm. This is called a
Clyster Restringent, for this is only to be applied to a Horse, that is very
Laxative, or that does empty himself too much, which is occasioned often times
through overmuch debility, and want of strength, or when nature is very much
offended: you may apply this so often as need shall require. Another: 4 Clister
for fat Horse.


Take Mallows three handfuls, marsh mallow roots cleansed and bruised, and
Violet leaves, of each two handfuls, Flax seed three spoonfuls, so many of the
cloves of white Lilly roots as you may easily hold in your hand: boil all
these in fair water from a gallon to a wine quart, then strain it, and put
thereto of Seen one ounce, which must be infused or steeped in the liquor three
hours standing upon the hot embers; then put thereto of Sallet oil half a
pint, and being blood warm, administer it Clyster-wise, causing him to keep
it at least half an hour or longer if you may: and the best time to give this
is three or four days before the Full and change of the Moon, howsoever it
may be given to very good profit (as occasion may profer it self) at any other
time. This Clister is to be given to a Ketty or fat Horse, which otherwise
cannot be kept clean, for it purges glut abundantly, and it is also
principally to be given to a Horse that is newly taken from grass. Another: 5
A Clister for melancholy,


Take of Whey a qu^^t, of Anniseeds in fine powder, two penniworth, of the
leaves of Mallows one handful; boil these till the Mallows be soft, then
strain it, then put to it of sweet Butter four ounces, which when the butter
is molten, administer it bloud-warm. This purges melancholy, it causes a good
appetite which before was wanting, it refreshes the spirits dulled, and
occasioneth good digestion if the Horse be kept warm, and well tended. Another:

6 Clister in case of desperate sick^esse
Take of the oil of Dill, of the oil of Camomile, of the oil of Violets, of
Cassia, of each half an ounce, and of brown sugar candy in powder, three
ounces, then take of Mallow-leaves half a handful: boil the Mallows first
to a Decoction in fair water, then strain it, and put to the broth all the
forenamed ingredients, administer this bloud-warme Clyster wise. This is a most
sovereign Clister to be given in case of desperate sickness; it helps all
Fevers; it is good against the Pestilence, and all languishing diseases, most
excellent against Surfets, either by Provender or otherwise, and it will
occasion great strength in short time, if it be rightly made, and carefully
given. Another:

7 Clister for the Pestilence.
Take the pulpe of Colliquintida, half an ounce, (I mean the seeds and skin
taken away) of Dragantium three quarters of an ounce, of Centuary, and of
Wormwood, of each half a handful, of Castoreum a quarter of an ounce, boil
all these in three quarts of water to a quart; then strain it, and dissolve
into the broth of Gerologundinum three ounces, and of white salt three drams,
of Sallet oil half a pint, and blood warm administer it Clister-wise..

This I have often proved, and do find it to be most excellent for the
Pestilence, and to help all Fevers. Another:

8 Clisters Lenitive.
Take the decoction of Mallows, and put to it either of fresh Butter four
ounces, or of Sallet oil half a pint, and give it him Clister-wise. This is
the gentlest Clister of any before prescribed; for it is both a Lenitive, and a
great cooler of the body, and does infinitely ease pain. It is the best thing
can be given to a Horse that is taken, or against Convulsions, or Cramps, and
most singular against Costivenesse proceeding from any sickness or surfeit by
Provender, foundring in the body, etc. Another:

9 Clister for the Colic.
Take salt water or new made brine 2 pints, dissolve therein a pretty quantity
of Soap, and so bloud-warm administer it Clister-wise. This I never did
experience, howsoever I have been often persuaded by many able Ferriers, who have
averred it to be the most excellent that may be had for the Colic, or any
sickness or gripings in the guts or belly. And let this suffice for Clisters:
only by way of advise I counsel you that before you administer any Clister,
you first rake him; that you put in the Pipe (being first anointed with sweet
Butter or oil Olive) gently and by degrees, and that you also draw it forth
very treatably; that you make him keep it at least half an hour; that you do
administer it but blood warm at most; that you squeeze and press between your
hands the bladder strongly; and lastly, that you let him not drink any cold
water in a day or two after, but let it be either a sweet Mash, or else white
water.


. 9. C.
Hyppoph. What is good to be applied to a Horse that is cloyed, pricked, or
has other hurt in the hoof?


Hippos. You must first with your Butter, Drawing iron, or Paring knife, lay
the wound bare as may be; then

Take wax, Hogs grease, and Turpentine, of each one ounce, Cloyed.
Verdigrease two ounces, boil these upon a gentle fire, your wax and Hogs
grease being first put in and molten, then put in your Turpentine, and lastly
your Verdigrease in fine powder, and being indifferently warm, dip Tow or
Hurds into the ointment, and so lay it to the Sore, then stop and splent it up,
and dress him twice a day, and this will make him whole and sound in short
time. But of this more in its due place.


10. C.
Hippophylus What say you to a Horse whose Cods and Stones are swelled?


Hippos. This infirmity proceeds from sundry causes, as sometimes by being
bitten with a Dog, or with another Horse, or by being stung with some venomous
or evil creature: The French do call it Enflure de Coullon's: Cods swelled.
It comes also by means of some evil humors and corrupt blood which do
fall down to the cods, sometimes after sickness, and sometimes of rankness of
blood and seed, for want of a Mare. If it come by rankness of seed or of
blood, then let him have a Mare, and cover her two or three days together, and
half an hour after, ride him into the water above the cods or stones, against
the stream, and he will do well. But if this disease come by other causes,
then

Take the Lees of Claret Wine, and Comen-seed, made into fine powder, and a
little Wheat or Bean flower; boil these together to an unguent, and so warm
as he may well endure it, anoint the cods therewith, which done, draw forth
his yard, and wash it, and his sheeth also with white wine vinegar; and three
or four hours after, ride him into the water above the cods, and let him also
stand in the water some short time, and sometimes ride him against the stream:
do this every day till the swelling be assuaged. This is a very good Cure.
Another:

Take the roots of wild Cucumbers, and white salt, so much as will suffice,
boil these in fair water to an ointment, and annoint the cods therewith
warm: and then apply this ointment.

Take Goats grease, or for default thereof, Deeres suet, the white of an Egg,
and Sallet oil: boil these over a gentle fire, and herewith annoint the cods,
but this must be applied after he has been ridden into the water and dry
again: do this every day once till he be well. This I have often tried, and
have found it to be right good. Another:

First, annoint and bathe the cods in the juice of Hemlock, and when it is
dried, then

Take Pigeons dung, and new Milk, and boil it till it be as thick like to a
Poultesse, and therewith anoint the cods every day once. Another:

First let him blood in both the spur or flanck veins; Then take oil of Roses
and vinegar, of each a pint, and of Bolearmonack in fine powder two ounces:
make all these into one body, and being lukewarm annoint the cods therewith,
and the next day ride him into the water up to the cods against the stream;
then bring him into the stable, and when he is through dry, annoint him again:
thus continuing to do, till he be well. But if the cods be swollen by means of
any hurt, bite, or stroke, then apply to them this following charge:

A charge for swelled cods.
Take Bolearmonack in powder, vinegar, and the whites of Eggs as much as will
suffice, well beaten, and wrought together, and annoint him therewith daily
till it be abated, and if it impostumate, where you find it to be soft, open
it either with a hot iron, or with your incision knife, if it break not of it
self, and so heal it up with the ointment taught you in lib 2. cap. 10. 4.
and it will soon be whole. This is very sovereign.


. 11. C.
Hippoph. What say you to the Colic?


Hippos. It is Sir, a disease which comes of wind, and therefore we
generally call it the wind collicke; the French call this disease the
Tranchaisons; Collicke.
it causes great gripings, and extreme pain in the belly of the Horse, so as
he will often times lie down and tumble; he will also strike at his belly with
his hinder feet, and stamp with his fore-feet; and the pain will be so great
as to cause him to forsake his meat: these signs I have often observed in
Horses perplexed with this malady; and albeit I have sundry Receipts for it, and
all or the most of them by me tried and approved good, yet one of Master
Blundeviles and Master Markhams, I hold inferior to none of mine, for I have
often tried it; and this is it.

Take a quart of Muskadine, or of sweet Sack, of Cloves, Pepper, Cinnamon, of
each half an ounce, Sugar two ounces, make all these into fine powder, and
give it him blood warm: then annoint his flanks with oil de Bay; (but I
often use to annoint them with the ointment of Acopum, I finding it to be much
better) then bridle him up, and trot him out a good round trot, or gallop him
softly sometimes the space of an hour until he do dung, but if he will not,
then rake him, or else put an Onyon pilled and jagged into his fundament: then
for three or four days, let his drink be either sweet Mashes, or white
water, and keep him warm, and he will do well again. Another: Keep him
fasting over night, and in the morning give him this drink.

Take of white Wine a quart, Fenugrick four ounces, Bay Berries, and Pepper,
of each four ounces, Grains, and Ginger, of each one ounce, Watercresses two
handfuls, Sage one handful, Sengrene one pound, Mints a handful, stamp the
herbs; and pound the spices, and put them into the wine, and let it boil a
little, then strain it, and put to it of life Honey two spoonfuls, and so give
it him bloud-warme. This I have also found to be very good: notwithstanding if
he be a stoned Horse, the best cure for him is to have a Mare, especially if he
be so troubled with the collicke, so as that he cannot piss; besides it
helps and preventeth sundry sorts of sicknesses and diseases, and
strengthens nature. Another:

Take of white Wine one pint, and three or four Cantharides: and make them
into very fine powder, and give this to the Horse (well brewed in wine)
bloud-warme. This I never tried, for that these flies being a strong corasive,
have deterred me, howsoever I have been often invited thereunto by many good
Ferriers, who have averred unto me, that they have often used it, and have
found it to be right good. Another:

Take Cloves, Pepper, Cinnamon, of each one ounce; all made into fine powder,
and well mixed, then put it into a quart of Muskadine, and let it boil a
while; then take it off, and put to it of Honey one spoonful; give it him
bloud-warme: which done, cloth him up, and litter him, and so let him stand
upon his trench four hours; then give him meat, and an hour after a sweet
Mash, or white water. This was taught me by a Noble Knight, who said he had
often used it. But if your Horse has the collicke and stone, then

Take of white wine one pint, of Burr-seeds eight ounces, Collicke and Stone.
made into fine powder, of Parsley-seed two ounces, in powder also, of Isope,
unset Leekes, and Watercresses, of each half a handful, of black Soap half
an ounce; stamp all the herbs in a mortar, and strain them with the Wine,
then put to that liquor, your Burre and Parsley seeds, and so give it him
bloud-warme; this will break the stone, and bring it from him with much ease,
and cure his Collicke. This I have often administered.


12. C.
Hippophyl. What Disease is that which is called the Colt Evil?


Hyppos. It is a disease in the yard, sheath, and cods of a Horse or Gelding,
and it comes to Horses by means of heat and rankness of seed; and to a
Gelding, by weakness and coldness of seed, to the Horse through too great
abundance of seed, which causes a stopping in the pipe or conduct of the yard,
Colt-Evill.
and to a gelding for want of heat and strength to send it forth, whereby the
yard and sheath swells very much. The best way to cure a Horse is to give him
a Mare, whereby he sends forth his seed freely, and then two or three hours
after swim him, or else ride him up to the flanks to and fro a pretty while
against the stream. This disease is known by the swelling of the yard and
sheath; I have cured many Horses and Geldings with this ensuing Receipt. First
swim him, but specially against the stream four or five days together,
then apply this Plaster.

Take Beane-meale, and Mallows, of each one handful, Hogs grease half a
pound, chop the Mallows small, then put to the Hogs grease, and so boil it
with a pint of white Wine, and when it is boiled, put it into a cloth, and
wrap his cods therein; and so order it as that it may gather like a purse, and
make it fast so, as it may neither fall off, nor hurt him: dress him herewith
every day till he be well. I have had great experience of this Receipt: but if
you be desirous to have variety, then look over Master Blundevile and Master
Markham, who are well stored.


13. C.
Hippoph. WHat is best to be given for a cold?


Hippos. There are so many and so good, as that I am to seek almost to know
how to begin, they be of so many, and sundry sorts of them, Cold.
for some are for colds newly taken, some for old colds, some for colds that
brings the Glanders, etc. Wherefore for colds newly taken at first, you must
understand (Sir) that a cold newly taken (a thing not to be prevented, by
reason it often times comes by means and ways unknown) you must observe
first, that if your Horse be propense to many bad humors, whereof some Horses
are more than others, you must first then labor to expel them by purging his
head, then search betwixt his jaws, and if there you do find any small
kernels, then be you assured he has a new-taken cold, but if he have great
kernels, then was not the cold so lately taken as you might have imagined; also
if he do rattle in the head, it is a sign his cold is newly taken, or if he
do void any thin matter forth of his nose or eyes, or if he hold his head
into the manger; or if when he drinks, the water comes out of his nostrils,
or that he cougheth often, and sometimes perhaps cheweth mattrative stuff
betwixt his teeth, etc. These and many others be certain signs of a Pose,
Catarre, and newly taken cold, wherein is no danger if it be taken in time,
otherwise it will come to a worse matter; I will now give you sundry good
Receipts, most of which I have often tried and found to be right good. First, I
hold moderate exercise, and seasonable ayering to be mavelous good without
further applying of medicines; but if you find that he is much stopped in the
head then,

Take a small quantity of fresh or sweet Butter, and of brimstone made into
fine powder; work them together til they be one entire body, and of a deep
yellow gold color, then take two long wing. Goose-feathers, and annoint them
herewith to the very quils on either si^^; which done, roll them in more of
the powder of Brimstone, and so put them up into either nostrill one, and at
the but end of the quils, put a strong packthred, which must be fastened over
his pole, like to the headstall of a Bridle: and then leap his back, and ride
him moderately up and down an hour or longer, and this will provoke him to
snort and snuffle forth of his nose and head much of the congealed filth which
is in his head, then tie him to the Rack for an hour after, and this will
purge his head very clean: then draw forth the feathers, and he will do well,
keeping him warm, and giving him Mashes or white water every day for four or
five days after. This Receipt was taught me for more than 30 years since by a
famous Marishall of France, which since I found in Master Markhams Masterpiece,
but I hold it one of the best things can be prescribed for this Malady. Another
very short, but as good.

Take of Time one handful, boil it in a quart of strong Ale, till it come to
a pint, then strain it, and add thereunto of ordinary Treacle two spoonfuls,
and give it him bloud-warme. Another.

An excellent drink to be given to a Horse for a new-taken cold, provided he
be young, that is, not above five years old.

Take of French Barley half a pound, put it into a posnet, and put thereto of
fair water one quart, and set it upon the fire, and let it boil a little,
then take it off, and draine the water from the Barley, and cast away the water,
then add the second time the like quantity of water, and boil it as much as
you did the first t me, and then draine it from the water, and cast away the
water again, then add once again the like quantity of a quart of water, as
you did twice before, and boil that also so long a time as you did the two
former waters, draine this also from the Barley, but cast it not away, but keep
it, and then add to the water of Anniseeds and Licoris, of each half an
ounce, make them into very fine powder, and searce them, and put the said
powder into the boiled water, and add to it of white sugar candy, four
ounces, then set it upon the fire in a clean skillet, and so boil it up
until a third part be consumed, then take it off and strain it, and give it
your Horse bloud-warme; drench him thus three mornings together, and it will
ripen his cold and cause it to come away. This is very good. Another:

Take of white wine vinegar the best and strongest, five spoonfuls, and put to
it of oil de Bay one spoonful, warm it upon the fire, stirring it well; this
must be made and given in the morning: but when you do administer it, you must
first put your drenching horn into fair water that is good and hot, to keep
the medicine from sticking to the horn, then taking it forth out of the hot
water, before the horn can be cold, and whilst it is yet moist with the water,
put the one half of your medicine into the same, and so as speedily as may be,
convey it into one of his nostrils, and after the other moity into his other
nostrill; this done, ride him for half an hour moderately, then set him up,
and cloth and litter him warm, and let him stand upon the trench three or
four hours before you give him any meat, and after do as is accustomed to be
done to sick Horses in Physic. This I do approve to be equivalent to either
of the two former. Another:

T^ke water and salt so much as will suffice, brew them well together, it then
being made bloud-warme, give it him, and do after as is usual. This for a new
taken cold I have often used, and I do find it to be singular good to be
given to a young Horse. Another:

Take of oil de Bay, of Anniseeds, and of Licoris, of each one half penny
worth, and of brown sugar candy a penny worth, make all these into fine
powder, and being well mixed, sew it up into a fine linen rag, and so fasten
it unto the Bit or Snaffle of the Horse, and so ride a journey, and travel
him, and in short space he will be cured, if it be a new-taken cold only. This
I have also proved, and I do find it good, for it will cure both cold and
cough if it be rightly applied, to wit, with riding and exercise. Another:

Take of white Wine one pint, Sallet oil a quarter of a pint, Rubarb and
Aloes, and Saffron, of each two drams, Nutmeg, Seen, Agarick, Bay Berries, Duke
or Dutch powder, and of Cordial powder, of each half an ounce: mix all these
together, and then add to it of Honey four ounces, warm them well in a
Pipkin, and give it him to drink bloud-warme, but let him stand upon the
trench at least three hours before, and three hours after, neither let him
for all that day eat any Oats, but in its stead, let him have Wheate-bran,
and let his drink be that day either a warm Mash, or white water, and no cold
water, but this white water for four or five days after, and put into his
Provender for some time Fennugrick made into gross powder. This is a most
sovereign drink to be given for a cold. But if you do find, that his head is
very much oppressed with a Pose or Catar, then give him this drink twice a
day, viz. Take Fenugrick one ounce, and boil it in a good quantity of water
till it burst, then mix with the decoction thereof wheat meal, as much as
will suffice, and give it him to drink. Another:

Take a quart of the best Ale, and warm it upon the fire, and put into it so
much Tobacco made into fine powder, as you can take up upon a shilling at
twice, and as much dried Rosemary in fine powder as you may take up upon a
shilling at once; give him this to drink bloud-warme in a morning fasting. This
drink is called Potio-Necotiana, but I did never make trial thereof, for that
I once saw it given by a Ferrier to a sick Horse, which so wrought with him,
as that with all his Lenitives and Cordials, the Ferrier had much labor to
save the life of the poor Horse; this potion was so violent, which
notwithstanding drove the Horse into a most dangerous Calentura. But the next
is better.

Take a Hens egg, and make a hole in the top thereof, no bigger than that you
may get forth the white and yolke: Then take Tar and sweet Butter, of each
like much, as much as will suffice, incorporate these well together into one
body, and so convey it into the egg shell, and give it your Horse three or
four mornings together, and either journey him gently, or else ride him three
or four hours after it; which done, bring him into the Stable and cloth him
up warm, and litter him well, and let him be well rubbed, and so keep him upon
the trench two hours after, and then give him Hay, and an hour after give him
either a warm Mash, or white water; and this will help a cold newly taken.
This will not make him sick, for I have often made trial of it. Another as
good as this.

Take the long white moss that grows upon an old dry Park pale, one
handful, chop it small, and put it into a pottle of good Ale or Beer, till
one half be consumed; then take it off, and strain and press it hard, and
put into the liquor of Anniseeds and Licoris, of each half a spoonful, and a
piece of sweet Butter, and so give it him three mornings together fasting, and
it will cure him. X Another, if he has taken a cold or poze in the head.

Take a quart of Muskadine, or sweet Sack, of Nutmegs, Pepper, Cominseed,
Grains, Bay Berries, of each three drams, all made into fine powder: boil
these a waume or two, then take it off, and put into it a piece of sweet
Butter, and give it your Horse three mornings together bloud-warme; let him all
those three days be kept warm, neither let him drink any cold water, but
either a sweet Mash, or white water, yea and that three or four days after;
and during these three days, let him fast three hours after the receipt of his
said medicine. Also three days after when you perceive the cold to begin to
break from him, and to rot, cause him to sneeze, by blowing into either
nostrils, either the powder of Tobacco, or of Pepper, or of Elebore. X Another
which will cure a longer-taken cold, yea though it be accompanied with a dry
cough and shortness of breath, or pursivenesse, which I had of Master Markham,
and I have often made trial thereof, and it has done cures which have been
held impossible to have been effected.

Take of the conserve of Elecampane three quarters of an ounce, and dissolve it
in a pint and a half of sweet Sack, and so give it your Horse with a horn
in a morning fasting, and ride him gently a little after: and thus do sundry
times until you do find the infirmity to decrease.


Hippoph. But Hipposerus, this Conserve of Elecampane I do suppose is hard to
come by, for surely every Country Apothecary has it not; how then may a Man
make this Confection you so much commend?


Hippos. Sir, this Conserve I make my self, and I will give you the receipt
hereof. You must understand that there be two kinds thereof, the one is called
particularly a Preserve, and the other an absolut^ Conserve. The first is
Simple, the other Compound, both very sovereign for this Infirmity, but the
Conserve is evermore to be esteemed the better, and I do counsel you never to
be without either of them: for they will keep the whole year through, if they
be reserved close stopped. Wherefore as touching the first which is the Simple,
you must preserve it like as you do all other green roots, and so keep them
in a Gally pot or Glass in a good quantity of its own Sirop, till you have
occasion to use the same; and when you are to use it, let it be beaten well in
a Mortar together with its Sirop and refined Sugar made first into very fine
powder. Now your Compound or Conserve is thus made: First, let your roots of
Elecamp^ne be neatly Candied, and made very dry and hard, and get the best and
youngest Roots can be had, which must be kept also in a Gally pot or Glass
close stopped, in a dry and warm place where they may not give again; and
when you would use them, take so much as will suffice, and beat it in a Mortar
with the Sirop of Colts soote, and the powder of refined Sugar, still working
it till you have brought it to be a perfect Conserve, and so given to your
horse in good sweet Sack or Muskadine. The first of these two, to wit, the
Simple, is of most excellent use, for it helps any ordinary cold or stopping,
it comfort the Lunges, enlarges his Wind, purges the Head from all filthy
matter, and dissolveth many other obstructions, as well in the Body, and Head.
But the Compound or Conserve works better effects in the Body of the Horse,
especially if the Malady be old and dangerous, or if there be any taint, in the
Lunges, Liver, or inward parts: This Conserve in time, by frequent use thereof
will cure all dry Coughs which are held to be incurable, it helps the heaving
of the Belly and Flanks, it causes the Horse to take his Wind kindly and
temperately, and freeth him of his dry Cough which before did greatly annoy
him; but if you have not these conserves, take this other Receipt little
inferior to the former for these Maladies.

Take of the sirop of Colts-foote, one ounce, of Elecampane roots dried,
Anniseeds, and Licoris, of each half an ounce, all made into fine powder,
brown Sugar Candy powdered one ounce, which must be divided into two parts,
then take sweet Butter so much as will suffice, and so make this into three
Pills good and stiff; which done, roll them in the other moyty of your
powdered Sugar Candy, and so give them your Horse fasting, then ride him gently
for half an hour, and after set him up warm, and let him fast three hours
after, causing him to be well rubbed: let him drink no cold water, unless it
be with exercise, and let his Hay be sprinkled with water, and his Oats wet in
strong Ale, or else with Beer.. Another very good.

Take the cankerous Moss of an old Pale, or of the lymbes of an old Oak two
handfulls, chop and shred it small, and boil it in a pottle of new Milk, and
with it a root of Alecompane, let these boil together till half be consumed,
then strain it, and press the Moss and Root very well; which done, put to
it of sweet Butter the quantity of a Ducke-Egge, and so give it him in a
morning fasting blood warm, and ride him moderately an hour after: then set
him up, cloth him and litter him warm, and order him as is accustomed with
Horses in Physic: Let him have this drink three mornings together, and it
will cure both his Cold and Cough wet or dry, or his Poze if he have it. But if
you find your Horse to be stopped in the Head, and that he voydeth filth, and
stinking matter out from his Nose, then shall you every morning administer this
fume.

Take of Auripigmentum and of Colts-foote made into powder, of each two
drammes, then with Venice Turpentine work them into a stiff paste, and make
them into small Cakes the breadth of a sixpence, and dry them a little, and
then put fire into a Chafing Dish with coals, and so put one of these Cakes
upon the coals, covered with a Tunnell, and so fume him, and this not only
during his Physic, but at other times after, and let his drink be either
sweet mashes or white water.. Another, if your Horse has a new taken cold,
then give him this Caudle, which I have often used and do find it to be very
good.

Take the yolks of four new laid Eggs, and beat them well together and
dissolve them with a quart of good Ale, then take three good Nutmegs with a
little Anniseeds and Licoras, made all into fine powder, and as much Pepper in
fine powder as you can take up upon a sixpence; put these into the Ale, with a
piece of sweet Butter so much as will suffice, and two spoonefulls of ordinary
Treacle, and of brown Sugar Candy four ounces, warm all these upon the fire
till the Treacle and Butter be molten, then give it him blood warm, four or
five mornings together; and this is an infallible cure.. Another very good.

Take a pottle of sweet Wort, three heads of Garlic pilled, of ordinary Honey
half a pound. boil these till one moiety be consumed, and give it your Horse
three mornings together: Then for three mornings together after, give him these
Pills. Take Box leaves and Hart's-tongue, of each so much as will suffice,
stamp them well together, and with sweet Butter make it into Pills; and so
every morning give him three of these Pills.. But if he has a cold which
breaks and runs from him, then must you be careful to keep his Head and
Pole warm, by putting on a double Hood, and every Morning fasting, ride him
with two long Goose-feathers put up into either Nostrill, well dipped before
hand in Oil de Bay, and with a strong Packthread from the ends of the quils
fastened over his head like a Headstall of a Bridle, so as the feathers may not
get forth, and fasten also to his Bit or Snaffle one Rooteor two of Polipodium;
having been all night before lain steeped in the oil of Spike, and every
time you ride him anoint the Bit thus before hand prepared with the said Oil,
and when he comes home, put upon his pole his double hood, and rub him
against the hair all over, especially his Neck and Pole, (for friction in this
case is most sovereign) then whilst he is yet warm perfume his Nose with
Frankincense, Storax, and Benjamin, of each like much; do this nine days
together, and let his drink be white water: for all Rhumes having had time to
work their malice will become dangerous, yea and many times curelesse.. Now if
your Horse has taken an extreme cold; then:

Take Cloves, Nutmegges, Ginger, Galls, or the fruit of the Oak and Cardimums,
of each like quantity so much as will suffice, and of Fennell-seeds more than
any one of the other Ingredients, make them into fine powder, and searce them,
then put two Spoonefulls of this powder to a quart of Sack or muskadine, and
strain these into two pennyworth of English Saffron, and the yelkes of two
new laid Eggs well beaten together, give this to your horse blood warm
fasting, and let him have none other drink than white water for three or four
days after, and let his Hay be sprinkled with water, and every day at noone
give him the blades of reed, or the leaves of Sallows to eat out of your hand,
for they be very good for him, and cooling for his body: do this diverse
mornings together, and it will not only cleanse his Cold, but also open his
Pipes, and set his wind at liberty. But if your horse have an inward cold,
which lies lurking in his Lunges or Stomach, then give him this Medicine.

Take Oil de Bay and good Tar, of each the quantity of three Wallnuts, half
as much Honey, brown Sugar Candy in fine powder half an ounce, mix these with
a quantity of powdered Brimstone so much as will suffice, and sew them into a
fine linen cloth, and ty it to his Bit or Snaffle, and so ride or journey him
moderately till all be dissolved into his body, then bring him into the stable,
and cloth and litter him warm, and three hours after give Hay, and after a
warm Mash; use him thus three mornings together and longer, if you shall see
cause.. Another.

Take blood from him, if you have ground for the same, otherwise not, Bran
prepared.
then instead of giving him Oats, you shall give him bran boiled in water
after this manner, viz. Set a Kettle over the fire almost full of water, and
when it begins to boil, put in your bran, and let it boil a full quarter
of an hour at least, then take it off, and let it stand till it be almost
cold, and about four or five a clock in the morning, give him this Bran so
hot as he can eat it; then for his drink, give him the same water, and at
night give him Oats and white water, and let him be covered and littered
warm; if it be in Summer, let not the Stable be too hot, for that will take
away his stomach, and make him faint and sweat too much; and at night give him
the quantity of what you can put into an Egge-shell among his Oats of this
powder following, to which you must keep him for eight days together or
longer, if you shall see cause. You must understand that the boiled Branne is
that which dries up all his gross and corrupt humors, which was the cause of
his cold. Now the powder is this, viz. Take of Comen-seed, Fenugrick,
Silleris-Montani ( alias Sisileos) Nutmegs, Cloves, Ginger, Linseed, of each
two ounces, Quick Brimstone six ounces, make all these into fine powder, and
let them be well mixed: this must be given with his Oats, as is before
inculcated; but he must first be watered; and then presently let him be well
rubbed, body, neck, pole, legs, breast and belly, and clothed and littered
warm, and an hour before you give him his Oats, put into his Rack a little
sweet wheat straw, and so (I say) let him eat thereof the space of one hour
or better, and then give him his Oats mixed with this powder, which having
eaten, give him Hay at your pleasure; and thus doing in short time you shall
perceive his Cold to be quite gone, and the sooner if he shall be moderately
ayered an hour after Sunrising, and an hour before Sunset, if the Sun do
shine. Now if this Cold bring with it a violent cough, as is often seen, then
give him the aforesaid Wheat Branne boiled, together with the said powder with
his Oats, but then not above three or four days, for that the said powder
disperseth the corrupt and gross humors that are in the body, which do
occasion the said cough, and when you do perceive that he has purged
sufficiently, keep him notwithstanding to his white water, but an hour before
you do water him;

Take a stick of the bigness of your thumb or better, of well nigh a foot
long, and wrap a linen clout about it four or five times, first dipped in oil
de Bay, and put it into his mouth, and with some piece of leather thong, or
other small cord fasten it to either end of the stick, and so fasten it over
his ears like the Headstall of a Bridle, like as Smiths use to do when they
burn a Horse for the Lampas, and let him drink with this stick in his mouth;
which done, let him stand with it thus in his mouth an hour after at the
least, to the end he may lick and suck up the said oil, and when he is to
eat his Oats, put among them this other powder following, viz.

Take Fennel seed four ounces, Fenugrick two ounces, Cardimums one ounce,
pound these grossly, otherwise he will blow them away in eating his Oats, and
with his Oats put every night of this powder one spoonefull, and keep him
warm, and so use him as before is prescribed. Another.

Take Ivy-berries and dry them, and make them into powder, and so give it to
your Horse in Ale or Beer. This I never tried, and this is only for a cough.
Another for a cough. Take of salt one pint, of Sallet oil half a pint, oil
of Anniseeds one ounce, brown sugar Candy, in powder three ounces, give this
with your horn to your Horse three mornings together, and it will rid him of
his cough, and heal any putrefaction in his lungs, or any other inward parts
whatsoever. This also I never tried, but it was highly commended to me. Another
Receipt for a cough, which I have found to be very good.

Take two new laid Eggs, and open the crowns, and get forth some of the
white, and then put into these Eggs so much of the powder of Brimstone as you
can take up upon a shilling into either Egg: give him this every morning for
some time, or till you see the cough to go from him. Another:

Take three new laid eggs, and put them into a pint pot, then put so much of
the best and strongest white wine vinegar into the pot as will very well cover
the Eggs, and let them lie in the Vinegar 24 hours at least, then beat the
Vinegar and Eggs together shells and all, and so give it your Horse cold, and
then ride or walk him an hour, and against his coming in, have this drink
in a readiness, and give it him, viz.

Take Isope, Anniseeds, Licoris, Grains, Long Pepper, Gentiana, Elecampane
dried, of each three drams, make all the spices into fine powder, and stamp the
Isope well, and so put all into good Sack one pint, and of good Ale also one
pint, and of Honey one spoonful, and so boil it, and give it your Horse
bloud-warme, and set him up, and cloth him, and litter him warm, causing him
to fast three hours after it, and give him no cold water, but sweet Mashes or
white water; and this will cure him, for it is an approved good receipt. Another
very good.

Take Wheat meal, Anniseeds, Licoris, Polipodium of the Oak dried,
Elecampane dried: make all these into powder, and mix them well: Take two
spoonfuls of this powder, with a head of Garlic pilled and bruized, mix all
these well together, and with your Wheat meal and honey as much as will
suffice, make pills thereof to the bigness of a great Walnut, and give your
Horse every morning three or four of these Pills, and so soon as he has taken
them, give him two new laid Eggs with their shells. X Another:

Take of life honey three spoonfuls, of the best and whitest refined loaf sugar
one spoonful and an half, made into fine powder, dried Elecampane root made
also into fine powder one spoonful, and of Ambergris two grains, mix all
these very well together, and put it into an Egge-shell, and give him hereof at
night late, and in the morning fasting, and so let him fast for three hours
after, and be the cough never so violent, it will both stay and cure the same.
X This is right good, for I have had very great proof thereof. Another:

Take Benjamin and Brimstone made into very fine powder, of each half an
ounce, give this your Horse with one pint of Muskadine, putting into it two
new laid Eggs shells and all, broken and well beaten together, let it be given
three mornings together. This was commended unto me for a special good Receipt,
but I never did make trial thereof. Another:

Take Nettle-seeds, Anniseeds, Reysins of the sun stoned, Elecampane in fine
powder, of each half an ounce, make all the spices and seeds into very fine
powder, and cut the Reysins very small, and so boil all these in Muskadine or
Sack a quart, with three spoonefuls of life Honey, then strain it, and give
it him three mornings together bloud-warme. This I never proved. Another:

Take of Rue one handful, chop or stamp it very small, and put to it a penny
worth of Anniseeds in very fine powder, make it up into Pills with sweet Butter,
and so give it your Horse. X This I have found to be most sovereign for a
Horse that has a cold whether newly or formerly taken, either wet or dry
cough; it is also most excellent for a Horse that has been over-ridden, or any
way wronged by labor. Now if his cough be so violent as that it may endanger
his wind; then,

Take Calamint, Gentiana, Comin-seed, Licoris, Elecampane, of each two drams,
make all these into fine powder, and confect them with life Honey and Butter
mingled together and molten; and when it is cold, make it up into Pills; then
roll them in the powder of Anniseeds, and give him of these Pills three or
four every morning, for two or three mornings together fasting, and after keep
him warm, and let his drink be Mashes or White-water.. But if he has a Cough
of the Lungs, give him these Pills. Take the Roots of Mallows newly gathered,
Elecampane Roots newly also gathered, of each one handful, slice them thin,
and boil them in fair water with Barley two handfuls, till the roots be soft,
then strain forth the liquor, and put into it a penny dish of sweet Butter, of
life Honey three spoonfuls, and as much Bean meal as will make all into a
paste; then make it into Pills, and roll them up in the powder of Anniseeds,
and give him three or four of them every morning fasting for three or four
mornings together, keep him temperately warm, and during the time he takes
these Pills, let his drink be either sweet Mashes or white water, and every day
about mid day, give him boiled Barley or Brewers grains. Another for a Horse
that has his wind broken.

Take the leaves of Mullet, alias Mullen, alias Horse-Lungwort, and dry them,
and make them into fine powder, and then make them up in Bals or Pills with
ordinary Honey so much as will suffice: let these Pills be made of the bigness
of an Egg, and give him of them three at a time, fourteen or fifteen days
together, or longer if you shall see cause, and let him not drink any cold
water, during the time, and for a while after the giving of his Pills, and let
his exercise be very moderate, and his Hay sprinkled with water, and his Oats
wet with good Ale or Beer, and in short time he will be well and sound again.
This is a most approved good Receipt, with which I have done cures held
impossible to have been effected. Another:

Take Comen half an ounce, Anniseeds and Licoris, of each two ounces, dried
roots of Elecampane three ounces, make them into fine powder, and then boil
them in a pottle of Ale or Beer to a quart, then strain it, and give the
liquor to your Horse in a morning fasting bloud-warme, and ride him moderately
upon it, two or three hours, then set him up warm, and use him ut supra. This
I never tried, but he that gave it me did highly commend the same unto me. Thus
have I given you many Receipts for a cold, and such diseases which are thereof
dependant, whereof many are to my knowledge right good, and by my self
experimented, with which I have done cures which have been held very strange,
and beyond expectation.


Hippoph. Truly Hipposerus as touching these maladies, something there is in
them, wherein I do earnestly desire to be yet better informed; and first I
would gladly know what be the diversities of the diseases which do proceed
from Colds; and how we may come to know one malady from another.


Hippos. Sir, in answer hereunto you must understand, that from a cold taken
does issue many infirmities, if the said cold be not speedily prevented; as
namely, first Coughs, as well wet as dry, Catars, Murs, Rhumes, Pose, Ratlings
in the head, Kernels, and inflammations under the Chaule, with Bunches, Knots,
Pustils, etc. It causes also Hide bound, Fevers, Headaches, Frenzy,
Sleeping-Evill, weeping-Eyes, Canker in the Nose, Strangles, Quinsey, to have
Gourded or swollen legs: It will cause the hair to stare, it will in time
cause the mourning of the Chine (if there be such a disease) shortness of
breath, pursivenesse, purtisick, broken wind, (also if there be such a
disease) Frelised, broken and rotten lungs, glanders incurable, if it be not in
time prevented, grief and pain in the breast, Antecor, it will also cause the
evil habit of the stomach, dropsy, loathing of meat, foundring both in the
body and feet, tyrednesse, putrefaction and inflammations in the blood; it will
also cause many diseases and inflammations in the liver, together with the
siccity and aridity thereof, obstructions, opilations, costivenesse and
stoppings both in the body and pores, a consumption in the liver, the
overflowing of the gall, the unnatural working of the spleen, the Yellowes,
Stavers, the Colic and gripings, belly bound, laxe and bloudy-fluxe. All
these and many more diseases and maladies do depend upon this one only
infirmity we call the cold, and therefore how needful a thing it is for a man
who is the true-lover of his Horse, to be careful what in him lies both to
keep his Horse from cold taking, as also to know how to cure the same so soon
as it shall appear, in performance whereof no small diligence and art is
required.


. 14. C.
Hippoph. YOu make question whether or not there be such a disease which is so
commonly called the Mourning of the Chine, why is there not such a disease?


Hippos. No truly, there is no such disease, for that which is called the
mourning of the Chine, is none other thing than a plain and rank Glanders,
which very few of our English Ferriers do know how to cure, which has its
first source and origin from a cold which being let run long, comes to be a
Glanders, which in time does waste the liver of the Horse, whereby he dies;
for if for your better understanding you shall be pleased to open Horses which
do dye of this disease, you shall evermore find the chine and pith of the
Horse to be sound and whole, but the liver perished, and his lungs putrified,
by reason whereof the Horse long before his death casts forth of his nose
much corrupt and stinking matter and filth; wherefore this malady cannot in
reason be styled the mourning of the Chine, but merely the Glaunders; and for
remedy thereof, you shall have sundry excellent Receipts when we shall come to
handle this disease, and therefore till then I forbear to speak any more
thereof.


Hippoph. You question also another disease called a broken wind, why this is
so general a malady as that no man but gives it that name, what do you call
it?


Hippos. Sir, as touching this infirmity, I say there is none such, for you
must understand that this disease so vulgarly called a broken wind, is truly a
shortness of breath, or a taint or defect in the wind, Pursivenesse, the
Asmat or Purtisick, as Artists do call it. Three causes there be of this
infirmity, two whereof proceed from a cold formerly taken, and the third from
another cause, as shall presently be demonstrated. The first is an exulceration
of the lungs, which does begin from a cold; the second by clinging and growing
together of the lights, whose origin came also of cold; and the third is a
dislocation of the lungs, and this last comes by means of some violent or
sudden act or motion of the body, or by some fall whereby the lungs were become
dislocated, displaced, or turned in the body of the Horse, every of which do
occasion shortness of breath, by reason the lungs have not power sufficient
(being the bellows of the body) to open, shut, and play at pleasure; and this
is the cause why the Horse heaveth at the ribs and flanks, fetches his breath
short and hot at the nose, wheeseth, and often times reeleth when he is put to
little that does strain his wind, and therefore so long as he is kept in the
stable at dry and hard meats, he heaveth more then when he is at grass, for if
you do wash his Provender in Ale or Beer, and sprinkle his Hay with water,
you shall perceive him to heave the less: but when he runs at grass, he
heaveth so little, as hardly to be seen, and the reason is, for that the Horse
having naturally a very moist body, the cold which he has taken does so
condense and make thick those humors which before were thin, which do
(whilst they were tenues) pass most easily through the pores, but now they are
become thick, viscous, and slimy, stopping the pores in such sort, as hardly to
be able to breath, but with great labor and no less pain, which does provoke
him to heave and lift, by reason that the lungs, pores, and pipes are so
stopped and oppressed, as not to be able to perform their function and natural
office, for which nature has created them, and besides those stoppings do
constrain him to cough and labor so extremely, as to endanger often times the
breaking of a vein, from whence ensue many more inconveniences then this one:
nevertheless you may have means to help his wind, but to recover him perfect
and sound again, I dare not absolutely promise you, and if you be solicitous
to understand more of this subject, to save both your own labor and mine, if
you will be pleased to peruse Master Blundevile and Master Markham, they are
able to give you ample satisfaction.


. 15. C.
Hippoph. What means have you to help a consumption?


Hippos. We have two kinds of consumptions, the first is called the dry
malady, the other the consumption of the flesh: as touching the first, which
commonly comes at the first of a cold taken, then it exulcerateth the lungs,
which in the beginning sends forth thin matter from the nose, but after
when it is grown more tough and viscous, it runs no more, but causes a
maceration and leanness through the whole body, whereby he droopeth and pineth
away, and albeit he eats and drinks, yet it is without appetite, his meat
doing him little good. The signs to know it are these; his belly will be
gaunt, Dry Malady.
and he will be Hide-bound, his flesh will consume almost to skin and bones,
if you strike him on the belly, it will sound hollow, his hair will stare,
neither will he cast it in due season, when other Horses which be sound will
do, he will cough hollow and faintly: the Horse that is troubled with this
disease, well may he be kept for some time alive, but long he cannot be, for
the malady is incurable, if it be too long let run, and therefore I leave him
to Dogs and Crows in his languishing plight. The other consumption is that of
the flesh, which also begins of a cold formerly taken, which for want of
remedy in time, occasioneth a general dislike and maceration throughout the
whole body: it comes from immoderate labor or travel by violent heat and
cold taken upon it: it comes also by riding him into the water after a great
heat given, and then set up presently negligently; as once it happened to a young
Nagge of good mettell and spirit, and of very great hope, the owner of which
Nagge delivered him to an Ambler to pace, who whilst he had him in agitation,
hearing Hounds abroad made in to them, who rod him hard all day to the death
of the Hare, then coming home hot and all in a sweat, near to the Amblers
House was a River with a Water-Mill, where he set him up to the skirts of the
Saddle, and then brought him into the Stable where was neither cloth, litter,
or other thing to keep him warm, or wherewith to rub him, at which time he
took so desperate a cold as never after to be cured: for in short time after,
he brought him to the Gentleman that did own him, when upon his coming home
the Nagge drooped, forsook his meat, and became very sick; the Gentleman
desired me to endeavor the best I might for his recovery, for that he loved
the Nagge well. I ignorant of the cause of his Malady, went as I thought
according to Art, I took blood from sundry veins, I gave him a Suppository,
and after certain Clysters, which I assured me were most needful for him,
Consum^^^on.
all that I did administer wrought very kindly and well, but yet nothing could
provoke in him an appetite, or be the means of any amendment, I then said him
then with frictions, and Cordialls, but all was cast away, ayring or ought else
would not prevail; then I persuaded the Gentleman to turn him to grass, it
being in the middle of May and a very seasonable time, for I found him to be
inwardly sound, he ran at grass about a month, but still grew weaker, and
every day more meager then other, and at length he grew to be so much enfeebled
by continual languishing as that being down, he was not able to rise, but
with help, in fine, shortly after the Nagge died: then for my better
experience I would needs have him opened, which being done; a sounder body in a
Horse could not be seen, but I discovered the cause of the disease and death
of this Nagge in his skin, for it being taken from him, you might most
evidently see the Fat which did ly next unto his belly, brisket, ribs, and
sides, to be so caked and hard, as that it, not being dissolved, the Nagge
could never after enjoy himself, which caused him to wast and dwindle of his
flesh, and languishing die, which so soon as I espied, I presently told the
Gentleman the owner of the Nag, that the Ambler had given him that Infirmity
(the Nagge being then very fat) and after in his heat put him into the water,
which the owner examining found to be most true, as well from the report of
honest neighbors who lived adjacent to the Ambler, as (after some small
pressure) from the ingenuous confession of the very Ambler himself. And this I
think fit to bring you for an instance, to the end you may be the more careful
in avoiding the like inconvenience, and be the better able to judge of a Malady
of this nature. But now as touching the best cure for a Consumption of the
flesh (albeit there be many) yet I can recommend but only this one, which both
Master Blundevile, and Master Markham have recorded, which is this, viz.

Consumption of the flesh.
Take a Sheepshead with the wool on, cleave it, wash it, very clean, and boil
it in a gallon of fair water, until the flesh come from the bones, then
strain the liquor from the flesh, and put into the broth of refined
loafe-Sugar half a pound, of Cinnamon, conserve of Roses, conserve of
Barberies, conserve of Cherries, of each three ounces, and give your Horse of
this broth a quart, every morning fasting blood warm, use this till four or
more Sheepsheads be spent, and after every of these drinks let him be walked
abroad, (if the weather be warm and not windy) otherwise walk him in some
barn, or warm place, and let him fast two or three hours after, and let him
not drink any cold water in fifteen days after at the least, but let his
drink be either sweet mashes, or white water, and for his Diet let that be what
himself best likes, and that given by little at once and often: and by this
means he may recover both Flesh and strength again in reasonable time,.
Nevertheless when he has gotten Flesh, depart with him so soon as may be,
least upon any hard travel he happen to relaps, as is most probable he may.
With this Receipt I have recovered three Horses, whereof one was a Horse of a
high price.


Hippoph. But tell me I pray you, were it amiss (for this disease) to take
blood from him before you drench him?


Hippos. Yea, that it were Sir very much amiss, for so to do, were certain
death, for in cases of Consumptions you must take no blood at all, but rather
labor to cherish the blood he has, for his debility and feebleness will be
such, as that he consuming so much in his Flesh, you must rather endeavor to
procure his strength then any way to hinder the same, which the loss of blood
may most easily do. Neither must you be too busy in administering unto him
Purges, but Cordialls, as Diapente, Diatesseron, Duke powder, Cordial powder
and such like restoratives, also by giving him good meat, as good strengthening
bread and hartning, well made and of purpose for him, if he will eat bread,
sometimes boiled Barley, and Oats, also boiled Beans, and such like hearty
meat, as will restore him, and to give him sometimes about midday a quart of
strong Ale or Beer, is very good, and will greatly comfort him. And thus
keeping him warm, feeding him, and ordering him well, you may in time recover
him again.. And this is the best Counsel I can give you for this Infirmity.


. 16. C.
Hippoph. Now what say you to a Convulsion? How do you cure that?


Hippos. A Crampe and Convulsion is one and the same Malady, which is a violent
contracting or drawing together of the Sinews, and Veins, and Muskles, as
well through the whole Body, as in any one member of the same: yet does it not
always apprehend or se^ze the whole body, but takes one member or other as,
sometimes it lays hold upon the Eye, sometimes upon the Tongue, the Jaws,
Lips, Legs, etc. which albeit it comes by several means, yet principally it
comes either through cold in the body, or else for want of blood, or lastly by
over much purging. The signs to know this disease are most easy, for that
horse that is therewith troubled, will have that member (for the time the fit
is upon it) so stiff, that a man with the utmost of his strength is not able
to stir the same, by reason that the Sinews and Muskles will be so much
contracted as not possibly to bring the limb to its pristine state but only by
rubbing and chafing, the limb or member with warm cloths, and after the fit
is over, it were very requisite to sweat him in the Stable in his clothes, for
two or three hours together, and if the Malady be in the lower parts, as in
the Legs, Convulsi^
then let that member which is taken be wisped up with thumb-bands of Hay made
wet first, and after when the member is thus wisped, to cast thereon cold
water, and after this his sweating, let his whole body (but especially the
member taken) be anointed with the ointment of Acopum before mentioned in the
second book cap. 14. 1. A. and to give him some of it inwardly with sweet
Sack, or Muskadine: and thus have I recovered sundry horses perplexed with this
disease, giving him two or three drinks after of Diapente and then to keep him
warm, and to continue him for some time with sweet mashes or white water, but
when you come to give him cold water again, let it be with exercise and
ayrings after Sun rising, and before Sun set, the Sun shining, and when
there is no wind, or other cold nipping weather. But if you have not of this
Acopum in a readiness, then apply this bathe or ointment to the greived place
or member, viz.

Take Pinpernell a good armefull, Primrose leaves, Camomile, Crow-foot,
Mallows, Fennel, Rosemary, of each six handfuls, and fine up-land Hay, cut
and made about Midsomer, when the strength and heart of grass is at the best,
a good quantity, put all these into a Lead or Chalderon, and fill up the
Chalderon with fair water, and so let it steep eight and forty hours, then
boil it until the herbs be soft, and bathe the the greived member therewith
four days together, morning and evening warmed, which done, apply some of
these herbs to the places or limbs greived and keep them on with a thumb-band
of Hay, wet in the said decoction, and every day about noone anoint the said
visited member with Petroleum, and Nervall, and Oil of Spike, mixed together,
and keep him warm, give him good meat and mashes or white water, not only
during the time of his cure, but a good time after, and let his ayrings be
temperate, and his exercise moderate, and take heed of washing him after
labor, for that probably was the cause of his Convulsion.. Another.

Take strong white Wine vinegar, and Patch-grease, alias Peece-grease, of each
like much, melt them upon a gentle fire, then with Wheat-flowre make it into a
Poultesse, and apply it to the grieved member good and warm, renewing it
morning and evening, but before you do administer this charge (by holding a
bar of iron, or a chafing dish of coals near) let him be anointed with
Petroleum, Nervall, and Patch-grease, and oil of Spike, of each like much)
very well, and after bind on the charge all over the grieved place, dress him
thus morning and evening, and give him moderate exercise and ayrings, and let
him have Mashes and white water to drink, and keep him warm. This is very good
Another:

First rake him, then give him the Clister prescribed in book 2. chap. 11. 8.
Clister 4. then let two men (on either side of the horse one) rub him well with
soft clothes all his body and limbs over, especially the diseased limb, then
cloth him up warm, and let him stand upon the trench four or five hours, to
the end the Clister may work the more kindly, after give him meat and white
water, and so feed him for that day. But I must tell you, that so soon as you
have given him this Clister, and before his friction, give him this drink
whereby to cleanse his body, viz.

Take of white wine one pint, Aloes half an ounce, Agarick half an ounce, all
beaten very small, and infused in the Wine, putting thereto of the purest
clarified Hog's Grease one spoonful, or for want thereof (and which is much
better) of sweet Butter six ounces, and give him this blood warm. The next
day prepare in a readiness this unguent.

Take of strong Ale two quarts, and of black Soap two pound, boil them
together till they look black like Tar, and herewith annoint, rub, and chafe
him all over that the unguent may sink in: that done, cloth him up, and
stuff him warm that he may sweat well, but stuff head, neck, and breast
well, let him sweat thus two hours, then cool him by degrees, taking now a
little from him, then a little, till he be brought to a good temper again,
then keep him so, and about one of the clock at afternoon, give him a warm
Mash, or white water, and then some Hay, and an hour after that Provender. Let
not this drink be given him above once during his whole Cure, but his Clisters,
Sweats, and Frictions till he be well; yet the Clisters not every day neither,
and let his drink be white water, wherein Mallows have been boiled, unless
sometimes you give him wherewith to comfort him a sweet Mash, but if he will
not drink his white water boiled with Mallows, then let him have it without,
and let his food be that which is sweet and very good. This did I never try,
but two several Ferriers who lived more then 100 miles distant the one from
the other, gave me this Receipt verbatim without scarce altring one word, and
they both protested unto me they have cured sundry Horses which have been
forely perplexed with this disease.


Hippoph. What mean you by moderate and temperate ayering of a Horse?


Hippos. I do mean by moderate ayering, Ayering.
that he be not forth in ayering too long, and by temperate ayering, that a
sick Horse if there be cause why he should be ayered, it be not done too late
in the evening, nor too early in the morning, for that such kind of ayerings
will take too much from a Horse that is feeble or sick, but in such cases, let
him be walked to his ayerings in a warm evening, an hour before sunne-set at
least, and in a morning an hour after the sun is up, especially if the wind
be not too high, or blow too cold, and that the sun shine warm: for by
ayering before sun rising, and after sun set (like as is to be used with
Running and Hunting Horses) will make a fat strong Horse both so poor and
lean, as not to have a Crow of flesh on his back, as the proverb is, and so
feeble as not to be able to arise being laid, and therefore give not such
kind of ayerings to a Horse that is infirm; but those which I do term the
temperate ayerings, will greatly comfort the spirits of your Horse, give him a
very good appetite to his meat, and increase his flesh and good liking, whereas
the late ayerings will be (as I said before) very noxious to sick, diseased,
or lean Horses.


17. C.
Hippoph. HOw do you help a Horse that grows costive or belly-bound?


Hippos. The nature of this disease is such, as that the Horse that is
therewith troubled, cannot discharge himself but with great pain and trouble,
his ordure coming from him both very dry and hard. Horses that are kept too
much to hard, dry, and hot meats, are most incident to this malady; sometimes
it comes by eating too much Provender, especially Beans, Pease, Tares, or
Wheat, which albeit these grains be more hearty then any other, yet they
siccicate and dry up the moisture, because they beget more heat and
costivenesse in the body, then other grains do, yea and wind too, and bad
humors causing obstructions: and sometimes this costivenesse comes to a
Horse by reason he has been kept to too spare a diet, as is usually seen in
Horses in diet; for this hot and dry food does suck up (like to a sponge) the
flegmaticke moisture of the body, giving way thereby that choler is become the
more predominant, so that the meat he eats cannot be so well digested. This
is a disease very perilous, and the origin of many maladies: and it is easily
known by its symptoms. And you may cure him after this manner, viz.

Take the decoction of Mallows one quart, Costivenesse or Belly-bound.
Sallet oil half a pint, or fresh Butter half a pound, Benedicte laxative,
one ounce, give him this bloud-warme clister-wise, and then clap his tail to
his tuell, and so cause him to keep it half an hour at least, being walked up
and down, then set him up warm, and it will work, whereby he will empty
himself, and in due time give him a sweet Mash, and after Hay, and so keep him
to Mashes or white water two or three ^ayes, but withal fail not to rake him
before you administer your Clister. This is a most excellent Receipt which you
shall find in lib. 2. chap. 6. 7. Clister i. c. There be many other good
suppositories, and Clisters, which I have already and will hereafter set you
down, which be very sovereign for this malady.


18. C.
Hippophyl. What disease is that we call the crowne-scab;


Hyppos. This sorance is a scab or crust which grows upon the cronet or top
of the hoof, next unto the hair; it is a filthy stinking and cankerous
disease, and not only troublesome, but painful to the beast, and it comes
commonly in the winter, whilst the Horse is in the Stable, like as does the
Scratches, and it is engendered first by reason the Horse from a Colt till he
came to be handled, was for the most part kept in moist, wet, and cold grounds,
for no Horses are inclinable unto this disease, but those that are bred up in
such like grounds. The signs to know this malady is, that the hair will stare
about the coronet, and become thin and brisly. The way to cure the same is,

Crown scab.
First to wash and bathe the place well so far as the scab or sorance goes,
which is commonly round about the coronet, then shave or clip away the hair
close; then

Take Turpentine, tried Hog's Grease, and honey, of each like much, a little of
the powder of Bolearmonacke, the yelkes of two Eggs, with as much wheat
flower as will thicken it by working it to a salve, and apply this
plaister-wise with a linen cloth to the sor^nce, renewing it every day once
till it be whole, but let him not come into any wet during his cure. This is a
very good one. Another:

Take old Chamberly, and set it upon the fire, and as the scumme arises, take
it off, then put to it of white salt as much as will suffice, and as the scumme
arises the second time, take it away; with this liquor wash and bathe the
sorance three or four times a day till it be whole. Another very good which I
have often used.

Take soft soap, tried Hog's Grease, of each half a pound, Bole-armonacke in
fine powder, as much as will suffice, Turpentine four ounces, make all these
into one body, and so plaister-wise apply it to the place, binding it on with a
clout that it come not off, renewing it daily till it do leave running, then
wash and bathe it in vinegar warmed, till the sorance be clean dried up.


. 19. C.
Hippoph. HOw do you take away a Curb?


Hippos. This is a swelling a little ^eneath the Elbow of the Hough upon the
great Sinew behind, and above the top of the horn, which caused the Horse to
halt especially when he begins to be hot, for by rest it payneth him the
less: it comes either by a strain, or by carrying of some heavy burden, or
else he takes it hereditarily from his Sire or Damme. The signs to know it
is, by the long swelling in the place before mentioned. The cure is.

First, shave away the hair, then with an Incle or Filliting bind the Hough
straight above the joint, then with a smallsticke beat, rub, and chafe the Curb
Curb.
like as you use to do in the cure of the Splent, then with a Fleame or Knife
pierce the skin through in two or three places, and so with your Thumb
thrust forth, and crush out the corrupt blood, and after convey so deep as you
can get into every hole the bigness of two barley-cornes, of Arsnick, and so
having bound up the place let it so remain by the space of four and twenty
hours, then open the place, and anoint it every day once with molten Butter,
till it be whole. Another.

Take Wine Lees one pint, a porrenger full of Wheate-flower, of Cummine in fine
powder half an ounce, mix all these well together, and being made warm upon
the fire, charge the place therewith, renewing it every day once, by the space
of three or four days together, and when you do perceive the swelling to be
almost gone, then draw it with your hot Iron, and charge the burning with Pitch
and Rosin molten together, which must be applied warm, to the end, the charge
may stick on the better, and then presently clap on Flocks, and let it so rest
till of it self it fall away, and let him come in no wett or water by the space
of twelve or fourteen days after, and he will be perfectly cured.. Another.

Take a Bar of Iron, heat it red hot, and hold it near to the place till it
become warm, then with your Fleame prick six or seven holes through the
Skin, and anoint the Sorance with Nervell, then take of salt a Spoonefull,
and of Verdegreace a penny weight in fine powder, with the white of an Egg,
let these be well incorporated together, then take a little Flax or Hurds, and
wet it in this Medicine, and bind it to the place, renewing it every day once,
and in short time it will be perfectly cured.. All these receipts I have used,
and I have found them to be right-good.


CHAP. VII.
. 1. D.
Hippophylus. WEll now that we have made an end of this Chapter, let us
proceed on to another: Tell me I pray, how may a Dangerous Sickness come to a
Horse?


Hippos. Sir, that which you call Dangerous Sickness is of diverse natures,
proceeding from sundry causes, Dangerous sickness how it comes.
having everyone its distinct symptoms, and therefore do require several
remedies; wherefore that you may the better know how and when any sickness
comes, observe I pray, but these four principles following, and you shall
never err. viz.

(v. g.) has his grease molten, the heart overchaged, the vital blood forced
from the inward parts, and the large Pores and Orifices of the heart so
obstructed, and stopped, that the spirits cannot return back to their proper
places, so as the Organs of the Body cannot rejoice, but by this means the
body must of necessity languish, founder, and mortify.

head perplexed, the eyes dulled, and pained, the roots of the tongue inflamed
and swelled, the lunges with rhumes tickled and offended, occasioning strong,
and laborious coughing, and the Nosthrills often distilling and pouring forth
filthy and corrupt matter.

Stomach, oppresses the Heart, and sends up those evil fumes into the Head
by which are engendered the Stavars, Frenzies, and other mortal diseases, the
second putrifies the blood, and converts all its nutriment into corruption,
from whence proceeds the Yellows, Farcin, Fevers, Mainges, and other such
like pestilent, leprous and loathsome diseases, which suffocating the heart,
and clogging the Stomach, dilates and spreads it self universally over the
whole body, leaving no member free, and confounds every faculty, and member
thereof.

Fourthly, and lastly, dangerous sickness comes also by accident, as when a
Horse (v. g) receives some deep or perilous wound or hurt, either in his body
or elsewhere in some vital or dangerous part, by means whereof nature is so
far offended, as that incontinently a general sickness seazeth upon the Horse,
which (not in opportune time prevented) death suddenly ensues; and these
infirmities are called by the more expert Ferriers, Accidental fevers: for if
you be pleased to observe well, you shall find the Horse sometimes trembling,
sometimes sweating, sometimes cold, sometimes burning, but never in good
temper. And thus much briefly of these four points or grounds, which be the
occasion of most dangerous sickness Accidental.


Hippoph. What means has a man to know the signs, whereby to distinguish
these several sickness the one from the other?


Hippos. Very easily Sir, for if sickness does proceed from the first of these
four principles, to wit from heats, then are the signs these, viz. The
heaviness of his countenance, swelling of his limbs, especially

If from the second, viz. cold, then the signs are, a dejected countenance,
eyes, Dangerous sickness how to know
Pustils or hard knots under the Chaule, yea and many times inflamed kernels
and swellings so high as to the very roots of the ears, a rotten or moist
inward hollow cough, he many times chewing betwivt his teeth, some loose,
filthy, and flegmaticke matter, immediately after his coughing, which in some
cases is not an evil sign by reason that thereby the cold rotteth and goes
away; whereas on the contrary side for a Horse to cough clear and dry, does
demonstrate a dry cough, which has long time lurked in his body, sorely
festring and tormenting him inwardly, which is very difficile to cure, but at
length discovers it self by reason the creatures languishing, and general
falling away of his flesh, for his belly will be shrunk up, and when he
drinks much of the same, water will issue forth of his nose, his eyes will be
either watery, or materative, and run continually through pain which he has
in his head, procured by means of this cold, and his hair will be rough and
staring, etc.

From the third, to wit from surfeit by meat, either natural or unnatural;
head, eyes, and countenance, yea and that in such a violent manner, so as the
Horse will be hardly able to lift up his head from the manger, a dull and dead
eye, and sunk into his head, his ears pricked upright, and the tops of them
cold, as also his upper lips and sheath, his pace reeling and staggering, and
(if the disease be far gone) he will be of a frenetike and mad comportment,
as by biting and gnawing the Rack and Manger, or whomsoever shall come within
his reach, and sometimes by biting of himself, and by beating his head against
the wall and floor, and other such frantic postures and passions: but if the
malady be not yet gotten into the brain, or do not occupy that place; but
that it has settled it self more intrinsecally in the body or heart, then you
shall perceive by the whites of the eyes, the lips and tongue, this disease to
be the plain yellowes, and if the disease be far gone, then will the
Yellowes be dispersed all over the whole skin, and the Horse sweat in the
morning when first you come to him, as if he had been sorely ridden, or had an
Arcticke fever, and have a desire rather to be lying then to stand, and when
he stands, it will be with his forelegs straddling the one from the other,
and he will also have a looseness or scowring, especially if the Horse has
taken his surfeit by eating too many Oats, or other provender, and by drinking
sudden-after, which you shall the better know, because the Horse will in his
ordure void some of his Oats or other grain whole, as not being disgested, by
reason that the cold water so suddenly taken, upon his overhasty eating (not
being all chewed) will cool his stomach, and make him to swell: besides the
Horse will have a general loathing and forsaking of his meat, which is
likewise the common symptom of every kind of surfeit, and almost every degree
of sickness.

accidental means, then are the signs, a perplexed and troubled body,
sometimes sweating at the roots of his ears, in the flanks, and behind the
shoulders, against the heart, sometimes he will be taken with a trembling all
his body over, and sometimes with a glowing and burning in his vital parts, as
in the temples of his head against his heart, on the inside of his forelegs
next to the body, and on the inside of the hinder-legs, also his mouth will be
dry and hot, his tongue will be subject to be enflamed and furred; in fine he
will have a loathing and aversion from meat; but only that he must eat, and a
great draught and thirst, and a great longing to drink cold water, and when he
has drunk what him likes, yet will he nevertheless desire to keep his mouth
continually in the water. Many other signs there be, whereby a man who is any
thing at all skillful and cautelous, may by observing, discover when his Horse
falls into any infirmity and sickness, as when you do perceive that his
countenance and postures do alter from their usual customs, then be you well
assured, your Horse does alter and decay in his health. Also you must observe
his feeding, and how he does eat, as whether with a good appetite, or with a
weak stomach, the first being good, the second unkindely and unhealthy, as
also how he does discharge or empty himself, and how his urine and the color
of his doung or ordure do alter, which if his doung or excrements be pale, and
full of grains, then is it good, but if blacklsh and dusky (according as I
have before in its due place handled) then be you confident, he has much heat
and dryness in his body, by which means probably ensues great and dangerous
sickness: very many other signs of sickness there are, as the not casting or
shedding of his hair, in its due and proper season, hide bound, costivenesse,
laxativenesse, the clinging up of his belly to the flanks, continual dislike,
drowsinesse, dullness and heaviness, when he has wanted due ordering and
feeding, etc. all which symptoms are so well known to every man, as that they
need not be handled further in this place.


Hippoph. But now Hipposerus, sithence you have thus far discoursed, what are
the causes and signs of dangerous sickness, I would gladly you would show me
how I may either prevent sickness before it comes, or cure the same at first
appearance?


Hippos. Sir, in this case two things are principally and diligently to
Dangerou^ sickness how to prevent.
the best way will be three or four days before you put forth your Horse to
grass, to take blood from him, and the next day to give him the drink of
Diapente half an ounce, with a pint and a half of sweet Sack, which you
shall find mentioned in lib. 2. sequent, and so by degrees to abate his
clothes if he have had any, and it is also very good that when you do take
blood from him, you do receive it in a basin or bowl, and therewith anoint
his back, loins, fillets, breast, and all such like places about him with the
said blood, for it is most wholesome, and does comfort the body very much,
cleanses the skin, and begets a general rejoicing throughout all the
vital parts of the Horse. But if you have no intent to put him forth to
grass, and yet would prevent inward sickness, then fail not (when you have
best means) to give him rest, take no blood from him at all, (unless you may
justly suspect his blood not to be very good) but give him only a drink of
Diapente or Diatesseron, for either of these are the greatest and best refiners
and purifiers of the blood of any thing can be administered, and do cause the
Horse to avoid all yellow- cholerick-matter, and all evil indigested humors,
which may any way putrify, inflame, or corrupt the blood. And observe
moreover, that in administering of these drinks, if Sack or Muskadine be not at
hand to be had, that then in the place of a pint and a half of either of
these (which is the proportion I limit to a Horse of a strong, able, and
corpulent body, but to a small or weak Horse one pint) you do take of good
Ale or Beer, one quart, and the same quantity of Diapente or Diatesseron
formerly prescribed: and if the Ale or Beer be made warm upon the fire, it
will be the better. And thus much as touching the first point, to wit, the
prevention of sickness before it come, that it may not offend your Horse at
all. Now I come to the second point, viz.

To take sickness at its first appearance, whereby to send it packing body of
the Horse, Dangerou^ sickness how to cu^^
so that it shall never come to danger of life or limb, then thus in a few
words. You must be very cautelous and vigilant in observing your Horse well,
and to pry into him so narrowly, as to discover the least symptom of
sickness, that may be able to peep out its head, which so soon as you shall
descry, then presently (if reason so require) let him blood, and three several
mornings together, give him the drink of Diapente, and let him be kept warm,
well rubbed, and have Mashes or white water during that time, and some days
after, which will be a very good means for him to remain in perfect health,
strength, and good estate of body; But if this Diapente or Diatesseron be not
to be had on a sudden, then

Take Selendine half a handful, as well the roots as the leaves, well washed
and picked, Wormwood and Rue of each half a handful, boil all these in
strong Ale or Beer, from a pottle to a quart, and then strain it well, and
put into the liquor of sweet Butter half a pound, and of ordinary Treacle two
spoonfuls, and so give it him blood warm. And this is most effectual to the
ends before recited.


. 2. D.
Hippoph. YOu speak very much of Diapente, giving it very great commendations,
I pray how do you make the same?


Hippos. The receipt of Diapente does merit many more Encomiums than I am able
to give it, for that it is so precious and sovereign a powder for Horses, and
it is compounded of five several simples if it be rightly made. It is (I say)
the most sovereign thing which can be given to a Horse by way of drench,
whereby to cure him of very many inward diseases. It is good against all
infectious maladies, as fevers of what nature soever, all sorts of
Pestilences, or contagious colds, Coughs, wet or dry, Glaunders, Surfets,
inflammations in the blood or liver, Frenzies, Yellowes, it purifieth, refineth,
and purges the blood from all infection and corruption, it eases the
overflowing or the gall, and the working of the spleen, and in a word it
cures whatsoever diseases the body of the Horse may be inwardly inclined unto;
And it is thus made, viz.

Diapente.
Take Aristolochia-Rotunda, Gentiana, Baccalani, Myrrha, Eboraci, of each alike
much, let these be first pounded severally and finely searsed, and after
weighed, so as the quantities may be just and even, not any one less, or more
then another, and after so well mixed as may be possibly, and so put into a
Gally-pot pressed as hard as may be done, and after so close stopped, as that
no air can get into it; and thus you must make it, and reserve it for your
use. This must be administered to a Horse in Muskadine, if you drench him for a
cold or Glanders. If for other maladies, then in sweet Sack, and the quantity
must be a pint and a half: but if Sack or Muskadine be not to be had, then
give it in strong Ale or Beer, and the quantity of this powder of Diapente
must be two or three spoonfuls, unless to a small, sick, or feeble Horse,
then the less quantity, according as in your own judgment and reason you
shall think to be most requisite. And thus is this so excellent powder of
Diapente made, and such are its virtues.


. 3. D.
Hippoph. HOw do you make also your Diatesseron?


Hippos. This confection I have heard some call Horse-Mithridate, and some
Horse-Treacle, by reason of the inward virtue thereof, whereby to expel all
poisonous and contagious annoyances, and to drive them, and all manner of
sickness from the heart. And thus it is made, viz.

Take first of the powder of Diapente two ounces, Diatesse.
and put it into a clean stone mortar, that is not overgreat, and put thereto
of life or clarified honey the like quantity, let the mortar be made hot
against the fire, before you do put in your powder or honey, and then with a
pestell of wood work it, till it come to a very Treacle, which when you shall
find to be sufficiently compounded, then take it forth, and put it into a
clean gally-pot or glass, and so keep it very close stopped for your use, and
when you have occasion to make use of it,

Take of this confection half an ounce, and dissolve it in Muskadine or sweet
Sack a pint and a half, and so give it your Horse bloudwarme, and as
occasion is proffered, add to it of London Treacle one ounce. This Diatesseron
is a confection so sovereign, being as I said before, an antidote against all
infectious diseases, it is a present cure for all sorts of Fevers, or any
other desperate or dangerous sickness, taking first blood from the Horse if
there be cause.


4. D.
Hippoph. IS there nothing good besides these in case of desperate and
dangerous sickness, supposing that neither Diapente or Diatesseron can be had?


Hippos. Yea Sir, if neither of these may be gotten, and that you are fearful
of the life of your Horse, then do I counsel you thus.

Take of the best Tar two ounces, of honey one ounce, Desperate and dangerous
sicknes^
black soap two drams, and bay salt a handful, incorporate all these well
together, then fill two egg shells, the crowns only being broken, so as you
may get forth the meat, and fill them up again with this medicine, and put
them down his throat, and walk or ride him gently up and down a quarter of an
hour or more warm clothed, that done, set him up warm, and litter him well,
and let his drink be either Mashes or white water for four or five days
after, but let him fast three hours after his medicine, and let his Hay and
Provender be sweet and good,. This I have often experimented.


. 5. D.
Hippoph. I Should think Hipposerus, that for change, Bread were good to be
given sometimes to a Horse; I pray you what is your opinion thereof?


Hippos. If you mean such ordinary Horse-bread, which our common Bakers used
to make for Horses, (which is now long since out of date and use) I say it
cannot be good for a Horse, by reason it was ill made, and the Materials
whereof it was compounded, nourish very little, nay it hurts a Horse much
more than it can do him good, for it breeds evil humors, and worse blood in
his body, it being made of bran and chisell for the most part with a little
course Rye meal, to make it stick together, and so made up and kneaded with
cold water, and after the outside of the loaves or roules are rolled in ground
or rather bruised pease, which can in no case be good or wholesome. But if you
have a desire to give your horse bread, whereby he may the better endure
labor, either in his travel or long journeys, or in Tilting, Hunting, or
otherwise, then if you please to give him this bread which I do here prescribe
you, it will give him strength of body, be very much helpful to his wind,
keep him from fainting in his labor and exercise, be it never so sore.

Horse bread
Take Wheat meal, Oate meal, and Beans, all ground very small, of each one
peck, Anniseeds four ounces, Gentiana, and Fenugrick, horse-bread, but not too
thick, and let them be well baked, but not burned, let not this bread be given
to your Horse too new, and when you do give it too him, let it be five or six
mornings together without other provender; and thus you shall have him well
winded, lusty, strong, hardy, and healthy, whereby to be able to hold out and
retain his mettle to the last. Also when he is to be used or employed:

mouth: this gives moisture to his mouth, and stomach, it expels inward
heat, and faintness from his body and heart, and causes him to forget his
labor and travel, for it does revive his vital spirits. Another kind of
bread I will give you not much unlike the former, but somewhat better and a
greater cooler.

Take Wheate-meale one peck, Rie-meale, Beans, and Oate meal,


Hippoph. What is the reason you choose of these grains, meal rather then
flower, wherewith you do make your bread?


Hippos. Sir, I prefer Meal far before Flower, by reason Flower is much more
hot, and binding, and therefore the courser the bread is, the better it is for
the Horse, and the more wholesome; and the reason, why I do put Rye into my
latter bread, is, because Rye is a loosener, and a cooler, and therefore it
will make him the more soluble.


. 6. D.
Hippoph. What is good to dissolve and mollify Tumors and hard swellings in
the Legs, or other parts and members of the Horse?


Hippos. Tumors and swellings sometimes comes by heats gotten with over hard
riding, whereby the creature being over much heat, the grease falls down,
and settling in the Legs and other parts, do grow dry and hard, this breeds
Splents, Spavens, Curbes, Ring-bones and the like Sorances, which in truth are
none other things then proper Tumors, besides it does occasion other knots and
swellings, which are to be cured after this manner, viz.

Take of the roots of Mallows, or of Holliocks of each two ounces, Dissolve
Tumors.
of Linseed, and of Fenugrick, of each six ounces, of the fat or grease of
Hens or Capons, or for want thereof, of Neats foot oil, a Wine quart, of
Wax six ounces, steep the roots and seeds being bruised, in a pottle of
white Wine, when it is scalding hot, for three days and three nights, and the
fourth day boil them in the same liquor, and add thereto when you begin to
set it upon the fire, your grease and wax, putting also thereunto of Rosin
three ounces, then let all these boil together a good while, and at the taking
it from the fire, put thereinto of Venice Turpentine two ounces, and so stir
them together, and thus it is made fitting for your use, which being well
reserved, will dissolve all hard swellings and Tumors, the Sorances being daily
anointed therewith,. This I have by much practice found to be very good.
Another.

Take white Lilly roots, Hemlock, Mallows, Beares-foote, Scabeous,
Cuccoe-pits, of each one handful, chop them small, and infuse them for twelve
days together in white Wine, and Sallet Oil, of each one pint, then take wax
four ounces, and Bean Flower, twelve Spoonefuls, and so boil it, and after
strain it, and bring it to an Unguent, and therewith anoint the Tumors and
swelled parts, which being done, apply this Plaster to the places. Another.

Take Darnell and red Docks, of each two handfuls, bruise them, and then boil
them in wine, and Salet Oil, of each one pint, and Bean Flower four
Spoonefuls, and put thereto of Asses or Oxes dung, so much as will suffice,
when it is boiled to a pultis, apply it Playster-wise and use this every day
once, till it be well,. This is also very good. Another.

Take Linseed and pound it in a Mortar, and of Fenugrick in powder, of each
four ounces, Pitch, and Rosin, of each three ounces, Damask Rose leaves
dried, two ounces, Pitch of Greece six ounces, boil all these together, and
when you are ready to take it from the fire, add thereto of Turpentine two
ounces, Honey six ounces, and Sallet Oil, so much as will suffice, and thus
applying this Salve Plaster wise to the place, it will mollify any hard
substance.. This I have often tried and have found it to be very good.


. 7. D.
Hippoph. But Hipposerus, is there any cure for a sick Horse? whose infirmity
is so desperate, and he so far spent, as to be generally judged to be almost
at the point of death?


Hippos. Truly Sir, both my Master and my self have done such cures upon
Horses, which have been so desperately sick as you speak of; insomuch as the
beholders have pronounced sentence of death upon them, and the owners would
have been well content to have been satisfied, and well appayed with their
skins and shoes, and I will show you what our cure is.

First open the neck vein, and let him bleed well, then two hours after his
bleeding,

Take of Diatesseron half an ounce, and give it him blood warm in Muskadine a
pint, Desperate sickness.
or Sack, for want thereof, or else if these be not on the sudden to be
gotten, then take good Ale or Beer, with the like quantity of Diatesseron,
then having given it, walk him half an hour (if he be able) in the warm
Sun, or if there be not Sunneshine, then in some warm Stable, or Barn, then
set him up warm clothed, and littered, and let him be rubbed all over, as
Head, Pole, Neck, and Legs, and especially twixt the Ears, for that greatly
eases the pain in the head, by reason it dissolveth and disperseth the
humors: at noone unbridle him, and offer him a little sweet Hay, sprinkled with
water, which if he shall refuse to eat, (as it is likely he will) then offer him
so much bread as the quantity of a penny loaf, and let him eat it all if he
will, but if he do refuse to eat thereof also, then give him one gallon of the
strongest Ale-wort you can get of the first runnings so soon as it is mashed,
but let it not be over-hot, and before barme be put unto it, give him this I
say blood warm, but if that cannot be gotten, then provide him in a readiness
against the same hour, a sweet Mash, which when he has taken, fume his head
with Olibanum, Storax, and Benjamin, and then let him be rubbed again as
before, and see him warm kept as is usual for sick Horses in physic: and
thus do for three days together in all points ( bloudletting excepted) for
that must be once only (unless extraordinary cause do require the same) and
assure your self your Horse will mend daily, and recover his health and
strength in short time, and at three days end, give him no more Mashes, but in
their stead, let him have white water only: if by means of this sickness he
has any Pustils or inflammations risen under his chaule, then clip away the
hair, and apply such things thereunto, as may ripen them and bring them to a
head; and after break them with Shoomakers wax, or other such like good
things, and so let them run and heal at pleasure. Also if you do find your
Horse to be costive by means of his sickness, as commonly horses will be
after Physic, then first rake him, and finding his doung to be hot, dry, and
hard, give him the suppository of a candle, showed you in chap. 18. 27. Suppos.
1. of this second Book. And this is the best Suppository can be given him in a
case of this nature. But if contrariwise you find him to have a strong and
violent laxe, or scowring upon him, whereby he purges overmuch, and so
continues, then be you assured that he has something in his body wherewith
nature is offended, which you must labor to remove, and for remedy thereof,

Take of new milk one quart, and put to it of Bean flower two spoonfuls, and
as much of the powder of Bolearmonack searsed, boil these until the milk
thicken, and so blood warm give it your Horse, and in a morning or two fasting
with a horn, and it will stay his looseness: but if this do it not, then
shall you

Take of red Wine one pint, or Tinto the like quantity, and put into it of
Bursa-Pastoris, one handful, and of Tanners Bark in fine powder, half a
handful, the outside being first taken away, then boil it till the herb do
begin to be soft, then strain it, and put thereto of Cinnamon powdered two
spoonfuls, and so give it him blood warm, one or two mornings, and this will
infallibly stay his flux: and if you cannot get Diapente or Diatesseron, then
give him this drink.

Take of Dragon-water one pint, London Treacle one ounce, warm it till the
Treacle be dissolved, and so give it him blood warm; give him this drink three
mornings together, and for his drink otherwise, let him have sweet Mashes three
mornings only, and after till he be well recovered, let him have no cold water
by any means, but only white water, and through Gods assistance he will be
soon restored to his former health. These things I have often practiced to
good purpose.


8. D.
Hippophyl. What is to be done to a Horse that droopeth, pineth, or
languisheth?


Hippos. This disease comes by a cold taken, or by some unnatural surfeit, by
reason of over-hard riding, or by being washed after an extreme heat; the
fignes to know it, is, he will feed, but with no appetite, neither will the
meat he eats, digest well with him, for, give him Oats and you shall find
many of them come forth whole in his ordure, besides, he will be lanke in the
belly and flanks, and his flesh will fall away. The cure for such a malady, is
first to

Drooping.
Take blood from him as well in the neck as spur veins, for that the blood
is most corrupt, and naught, the next day rake him, and administer unto him the
Clister prescribed you in lib. 2. chap. 6. and 7. Clist. 3. C. the next day
after he has taken his Clister, give him this drink.

Take of new milk warmed as much as will suffice, the yelkes of three new laid
Eggs, of pepper, made into very fine powder, a half penny worth of Anniseeds,
Myrra, Bay Berries, Turmaricke powdered also, of each half a dram, of ordinary
Treacle one penny worth and a little saffron powdered, pound all the simples
that are to be pounded, every one by it self, and mix them well with the
residue, and let them infuse in the milk a whole night, and the next morning
give it to the Horse blood warm, and after order him as you are accustomed to
do to sick Horses in Physic, but let him have this drink five mornings
together, and keep him to Mashes or white water, and if during that time you
do not find his appetite to come unto him better then before, then let him
rest four days, and at four days end give him this drink, viz.

Take Bay Berries, Iuniper-berries, Aristoloch. rot. Ivory, Myrra, of each two
ounces, make all these into fine powder, and searse them, and let them be well
mixed, boil of this powder two spoonfuls in strong Ale one quart, or Muskadine
or Sack one pint, which is much better, adding thereto when you take it from
the fire, so much Pepper finely beaten, as will lie on a six pence, and so
much grated Ginger as will lie upon a shilling, and so blood warm administer
it to your Horse, then so soon as he has taken this drink, trot him gently a
mile or two upon fair ground, and then set him up warm, and cause him to
sweat in the Stable an hour, but not too violently, and after cool him
discreetly, and by degrees, and give him this drink and sweats three times, to
wit, every other day, and after the taking of these three drinks, Take of
burnt Sack one pint, and put to it of Arement two good lumps made first into
fine powder, and give it your Horse two mornings, that is to say, having given
it him once, let him rest, and then give it him for the second drink four
days after. And thus have I cured sundry horses of this infirmity.


9. D.
Hippoph. What cure have you for a Dropsy?


Hyppos. This disease has an apparent ground more then conjecturall, for it
never comes to be known by any symptoms, but only when the horse falls
into dislike, and loses the true and perfect color of his hair and skin,
and when he loses his spirit, mettle, strength, cheerfulness, and stomach,
and therefore we see it comes principally for want of good nourishment and
digesture, which passes into melancholy, it proceeding either from the
spleen, or from the liver, or both, the blood being corrupted, and converted
into a thin and watery substance, and sometimes it comes of overmuch rest,
for want of moderate exercise, which I do judge to be the more probable. Some
Ferriers do affirm that there be three kinds of this disease, but I could
never observe more then one only, which has its origin either of melancholy
blood water, or wind, but chiefly of water, by reason that the belly and legs
of a horse will swell, and that a watery humor runs 'twixt the skin and the
flesh, and if you lay your finger hard upon the swollen places, when you shall
take it away, there will be in the place a pit for a small time after. The
signs to know it are, that he will be swelled both body and legs, he will be
also short-breathed, lose his stomach, have in his body a continual drought,
but yet when he comes to drink, he will not drink much, but pudder long
with his nose in the water, he will be as if he had a general consumption over
all his body, and in time he will pine and fall away to the very bones, and his
flanks and buttockes will be dry, and his hair will shed and pill off with
every rubbing, etc. The cure is, first let him blood, to take away the cold,
Dropsy.
thin watrish or wheyish blood, that better may come in its place, then cover
him warm, and give him a sweat in the Stable, but if he will not be brought to
sweat in the Stable (as many times it so falls out) then exercise him abroad
till he sweat, and bring him into the Stable again, and cloth and litter him
warm, and let him be well rubbed, and give him Sallow leaves, or the leaves of
the Elm tree green, Rye blades, Sedge, or Grass, to keep his body open, and
when you do give him Hay, let it be sprinkled with water; then give him this
drink:

Take of Ale one gallon, set it upon the fire, and scum off the froth as it
rises, then put into it of Wormwood, and of Rue the tender tops and leaves
without stalks carefully picked, of each a handful, and so boil the Ale to a
quart, then take it off, and strain it well, and dissolve into it of the best
London Treacle three ounces, and put also unto it of long-Pepper and Grains
both made into fine powder, of each one ounce, then brew all these well
together till it be but blood warm, and so give it him to drink, then bathe
and annoint the legs that be swelled with Trayne-oyle twice a day, till the
swelling go away; and give him Mashes or white water, and feed him with such
meat as he will best eat, changing his diet daily, and give it him by little
at once, and after some small time thus spent with him, if the weather be
seasonable, turn him to grass, and he shall do well and become sound again.
This is all the Dropsy I do know, howsoever many Ferriers do talk much of
another kind which they do call the Feltrick, which is not truly a Dropsy,
but a disease distinct from the Dropsy, unto which young Horses are
inclinable, that from Foles and Colts are bred in Fennes, Moors, Marshes,
moist and wet grounds, and Commons, by means whereof they will swell
exceedingly under the belly, and so soon as they do come to be handled and
backed, whereby they may be provoked to sweat, they will presently have
inflammations under the Chaule, run at nose, fall into an incurable Glanders,
and in a word become inwardly rotten, The cure is,

Feltrick.
First with your fleame strike him in sundry places under the belly, where the
swelling is most rank, and so let the corrupt blood and filth issue forth, by
the space of an hour or two, then wipe the places clean and dry, and then

Take of Buck-lye made very strong with chamber-lye, and the ashes of Ashen
wood, and dissolve into the lie of Vnguentum Populeon, and Dialthea, of each
one ounce, or as much as will suffice, according to the Lie you have, and being
made good and hot, wash, bathe, and annoint the swelling therewith morning and
evening till the swelling be quite gone, and after every dressing, trot him up
and down by the space of a quarter of an hour, which will be a very good
means to cause the humor to dissolve, and so to depart the sooner and the
better, and for two or three days, give him fasting a quart of good Ale, and
of Diapente two spoonfuls, which must be immediately before his trotting forth,
after his dressing, and so set him up warm, and give him white water. And thus
have I cured many Horses of the Feltrick.


10. D.
Hippoph. What is good to take dead flesh out of a sore?


Hippos. We use sundry sorts of corrosives wherewith to cleanse foul wounds,
and to eat away dead, proud, and naughty flesh out of sores to the end they
may heal and carnifie the better and more kindly: but yet omitting all sorts
of powders and other corrosives to corrode and eat away dead flesh, I will
teach you a most precious Unguent, which will take off any dead, proud, spungy,
or bad flesh, in the foot or any other part of the Body, be the wound never so
deep or ulcerated, and it will not only take away all proud, dead, and naughty
flesh, but it will also cleanse, and heal up the same very soundly in short
space, And this Unguent is thus made and compounded.

Take of common Honey two ounces, Roach-alume, Verde-grease and Vinegar, of each
one ounce, sublimat two drammes, Dead flesh
let all be made into fine powder, and boil it a few waumes, keeping it still
stirring, and then take it from the fire, and keep it in a gally pot stopped,
for your use. Apply this Unguent upon lint or fine hurds, to the Sorance once a
day, and it cures speedily, and soundly, but then observe that every day
before you dress the sore, you cleanse, wash, and inject into the wound the
water taught you in the next. which I will show you for a Puncture or deep
wound,. And this is an approved cure, and beyond all peradventure.


. 11. D.
Hippoph. Well show me then, what is good for a Puncture or deep wound?


Hippos. If it be in the foot, or any other part of the Body, if you can come
well unto it, or if it be an Impostumation unbroken, scald it first with the
medicine of red-Tarre, Hog's Grease, Bay Salt, and green Copporas, described in
lib. 2. cap. 16.. 10. for the Poll. evil, then wash the wound with this water.

Take red-Sage, Plantane, Ribwort, Yarrow, Bramble-leaves, Deep wounds.
Rosemary, Isope, and Honey-suckle-leaves, of each one half a handful, boil
them in white Wine one pint, and as much of Smithes, or coletrough-water, then
add thereunto in the boiling, of common Honey one Spoonefull, and as much
Alume, as a wall-nut, and a bright black piece of Sea-cole, the bigness of an
Egg unbroken, then let this boil till the one moiety be consumed, then
strain it hard, and wash the Sorance therewith, and if the wound be deep,
inject of this water with a siring or squirt every day: when you dress him,
and by thus doing you shall cleanse the wound, take away all dead and bad
flesh, and heal up the wound, both soundly and speedily.. This is a most
approved Receipt.


. 12. D.
Hippoph. What is best to be applied to a desperate Strain?


Hippos. If it be so desperate an old Strain as that it be holden incurable,
if it lies in the Shoulder, or other hidden and fleshy part of the Body, or
that the Horse have a Fistula, Poll-evill or other inflammation, or swelling,
then use but this one Medicine, and it will cure the same. viz.

Desperate strain.
Take a large earthen vessel, or crock of one, two, or three gallons or more,
and fill it almost to the top, with Asmart and Brookelime, of each like much,
and mix them well, then fill it up to the top with old chamber-lye as can be
gotten, so that all the herbs be quite covered and more, then stop it close
with a board or some such like thing, and so keep it for your use, for it never
can be too old; now when you have occasion to use this Medicine for any grief
aforesaid, then take an earthen Pipkin, and put thereinto as well of the liquor,
as of the herbs so much as shall suffice, for your present use, and boil it
well upon the fire. Then if it be for a strain in the shoulder, you shall take
an old boot, and cut of the foot, so as you may draw it over the Horse-foote
and bring it up above the knee, almost to the Elbow of the Shoulder, keeping
the nether part of the boot as close and straight to the leg as may be, but
the upper part which is to cover the shoulder must be wide and spacious; then
into this boot thrust all this mixture, so hot as the Horse can suffer it, and
lay it fast, and close about the shoulder, especially before and behind; then
drawing up the upper part of the boot, so fasten it to the Mane, and about his
Neck, as that it may not by any means slip down, but keep constant and firm;
and thus you must apply this Medicine to the place, till the grief depart;
this is the most violent of all medicines, and fit for no creature but a horse
to endure, yet in short time it will bring forth whatsoever evil matter lies
in the Ioints; and if you have occasion to apply this to a Fistula, Poll evil,
or any Impostumation, or swelling, then may you spare the boot, and only lay
on the medicine in manner of a Pultis, and it will be sufficient.. This is a
very approved Receipt.


13. D.
Hippoph. What means have you to dissolve Grease or Glut in a fat or ketty
Horse, after a strong heat or violent exercise?


Hippos. For a thing of this nature, I have seen this scowring administered,
viz.

Dissolve grease.
Take of sweet Sack one quart, and set it upon the fire, either in a Basin, or
open Skillet, and when it is scalding hot, put into it of Rosin one ounce, made
into very fine powder, then by degrees a little after a little, convey it into
the Sack, continually stirring it as you put it in, for fear of clotting, and
when the Sack and it is very well incorporate, take it from the fire, and put
into it of Sallet oil half a pint, and so stir them well together, and as
it cools, put also into it of brown Sugar Candy, made into fine powder one
ounce, and when it is only blood warm, give it to your Horse so soon as he
comes from his exercise, and then being set up, let him be well rubbed, and
clothed warm and well littered, and let him fast three hours after it, and
let the Groom remain continually with him during these three hours, till you
do give him meat, yea and an hour after, neither let your horse all that time
stand still long, nor sleep, but be kept stirring, and mooving, for that the
medicine will by that means work the more kindly, and when you shall give
this or any other scowring, be you sure that neither the same day, nor the
next, you give him any cold water, but either a sweet mash or white water. This
scowring I once did see made, and given by a Iocky to a strong, lusty, able
hunting Horse, which he had in agitation for a hunting match, but it wrought so
violently, and made him so extreme sick for more then twenty four hours
after the taking thereof, as that I never durst be so hardy, as to put the same
in ure, nevertheless the Creature did very well recover again, and won his
match.


. 14. D.
Hippoph. HOw may a man come to know, what are the diseases of the Liver?


Hippos. Assuredly Sir the diseases of the Liver are many, but yet the true and
certain grounds, how to discover them is beyond every Ferriers skill to
compass; nevertheless that there be many, and those several and distinct
Infirmities in the Liver, no man needs make doubt: for if the Liver be either
too hot, or too dry, too moist, or too cold, may easily be diseased, which must
needs occur to the Horse, either by intemperate riding or labor, or by evil
food, or by means of evil and corrupt humors, which do gather to the place,
or by the overflowing of the Gall, or when Choler is predominate, it being
chiefly engendered through heat, like as cold begets Phlegm, which causes
the sickness and ill disposition of the Liver, together with its pain and
anguish, whence proceed inflammations, and Impostumations, stoppings,
obstructions, knobs, yea and very pernicious Ulcers, every of which do cause
the general Consumption and disease thereof. If the disease of the Liver do
proceed from any hot cause, it is more easy to be discovered, then if it came
from any cold cause, for that it does discover it self by these apparent
signs viz. He will be lean and fall away of his flesh, he will loath his
meat, and that which he eats does him little or no good, for want of ready
digestion, his ordure will be very offensive, his thirst great, and he will be
verv much subject to a looseness: whereas on the other side, if the disease
arises from any cold cause, you cannot discern it bv any of these signs, for
that he will be in very good liking and state of body, eat his meat with a
good appetite, his excrements will have no evil savor when he discharges
himself, he will drink orderly and temperately, neither will he be loose or
costive; wherefore if it come of any cold cause, we must then endeavor to
find out its symptoms. Now if a Horse be diseased in his liver, the infirmity
must (I say) proceed from an inflammation and impostumation, or from an ulcer.
If it come from a cold cause, it cannot be an inflammation, nor an
impostumation, for that these two do both come from a hot cause, as all the
learned do know full well, and therefore of necessity it must be an ulcer
which proceeds from a cold cause, and the signs to know it is, continual
coldness of his body, his hair will stare, and he will be subject to great
feebleness, faintness and debility of body, and the reason is, for that the
exulcerated matter does diffuse throughout the whole body its evil vapors,
which corrupts and very much offends the heart in such wise, whereby to
occasion and hasten the death of the poor beast: if in time the malady be not
discovered, and skilfully and by Art cured. I have entreated sufficiently upon
this subject, to wit, of the nature of this infirmity, and the signs how to
know the same. And therefore I think it time we do go to the Cure.

Disease of the Liver.
So soon as you have discovered this disease: first let him blood on both sides
the neck the first day, and the next day let him blood in both the spur
veins, then give him this drink, viz.

Take Isope, Cowes-lip-leaves, Liver-wort, Lung-wort, alias Molin or
Molet-leaves, Hart's-tongue, of each a handful, then take Gentiana,
Aristolochia rotunda, Fenugrick, Enulacampana dried, and long-Pepper, of each
like much, so as when they be pounded and searsed, you may have of each a
spoonful; chop the herbs, and then mingle them with this powder, and put to
it of life honey one spoonful, then boil all these ingredients in a quart of
strong Ale, until a moiety be consumed, and strain it well, and so give it
him blood warm, and keep him warm, and having made him fast three or four
hours after this drink, give him Barley boiled, but if he shall refuse to eat
thereof, by reason the drink has made him dry and thirsty, then give him a
warm Mash, and after the boiled Barley again; but let him not have this drink,
but the day after he has been let blood in the spur veins, give him this
drink three times, but let him always rest three days betwixt every drench,
and give him white water for fifteen days after his last drink, and let him
every day be well rubbed, and this will cure him. I have often made trial of
this cure, and I have found it to be very good, and it is also singular for the
lungs; but if you do suspect the liver to be wasted, then give him this
drink, viz.

Take of strong wort, either of Ale or Beer, and give it him to drink in a
morning, having fasted all night from meat and drink, and three hours after
he has drunk his Wort, give him Oats baked in the Oven, and do thus for
three or four days together or longer, as you shall see cause, and he will be
sound again. But if you do suspect his liver not to be very sound, then

Take a good root or two of Polipodium of the Oak, made very clean, and of
Liverwort, alias Mullet one handful, cut them very small, then take of Rubarb
scraped or grated into fine powder, six penny weight, and three or four days
in a month give it him in his provender early in the morning two or three
hours before he drinks, and let his drink be white water during his cure,
and once in six months make trial of his blood by opening a vein, whether
it be pure or corrupt, so as you take it from him accordingly, that is, the
greater quantity if the same be bad, and the less if it be good, and
administer help as cause shall require it. This is also a most sovereign
receipt.


15. D.
Hippoph. YOu have formerly delivered me many good Receipts for colds, but yet
would I gladly have something which should be good for a Horse that runs at
the nose.


Hippos. Very well Sir, I will therefore give you that which shall be very
good, and which I have often my self proved. First then if you shall find
your Horse to have taken a cold, and therewith he runs at the nose, whereby
he may be in danger of a Glanders, let him bleed at the neck vein well, then

Take of Assefetida, the quantity of a hasle nut, Cold or running at the nose.
and dissolve it in a saucer full of white Wine vinegar, then take Lint or fine
Hurds, and dip it into the medicine, and so stop it into the ears of the
Horse, and with a needle and thread stitch up his ears, so as the medicine get
not forth: the next day, take the dry moss which grows upon an old pale of a
Park, or other pale, or upon the limbs of an old Oak, one handful or better,
chop it small, and boil it in a pottle of new milk, together with a green
root of Elecampane cut into thin and small slices, and so let it boil till
half the milk be consumed, then strain it and press it thoroughly, and
before it be cold, put into the milk a good piece of sweet Butter, and of
ordinary Treacle so much as will suffice, and so give it him blood warm. This
is also good for the headache, Frenzy, Stavers, Pose, Cold, Cough, wet or dry,
shortness of breath, rotten lungs, Glaunders, mourning of the Chine, Laxe,
Looseness, Bloudy-fluxe, of the like diseases.


. 16. D.
Hippoph. WHat may a man apply to a Horse to cause him to draw up his yard?


Hippos. This is a disease which comes of weakness in the back, Draw his
yard.
or kidneyes, either through over-riding, or some leap or strain; or by means
of a cold; and sometimes it comes by a terrible stripe given him upon the
loins against the kidneyes, or upon the yard it self, or by weariness or
tyrednesse; the signs to know it, is by the unseemely hanging of the member,
and the cure is thus:

First wash and bathe all the yard and sheath with white Wine made warm, and
after that annoint it with oil of Roses, and life honey mingled together, and
so put up the yard into the sheath, and with a soft boulster of Canvas, keep it
from falling down, and dress him thus every day once till he we well, and
let his back and fillets be kept warm, and anointed with Acopum, or if you
have not Acopum, then apply this charge unto his back and fillets.

Take Bolearmonacke, the whites of Eggs, Wheat meal, Sanguis Draconis, Venis
Turpentine, and strong white Wine vinegar, of each of these as much as will
suffice, mix them well, and charge his back therewith, his sheath and his
stones, and he shall be well. Another:

Take the ashes of Ashen wood, the whitest, finest, and best burned, and searse
them, one pound, or red-clay dried, and made into fine powder, half a pound,
Bolearmonacke half an ounce powdered, boil all these in as much Verjuyce of
the crab, as will make it liquid like pap, and with it, annoint his yard,
sheath, and stones morning and evening, and he shall be presently cured. This
is special good.


. 17. D.
Hippoph. What is good to draw a thorn, stub, iron, splinter, nail, or what
else out of the flesh of the horse?


Hippos. If the stub, thorn, or whatsoever else it be, that is gotten into the
flesh be so deep as that you cannot come to it to pluck it forth with your
fingers or plyers, then lay to the place a good quantity of black soap, Draw a
thorn.
and so let it lie all night, and in the morning it will make it to appear, so
as you may come to take hold of it with your Instrument: but if it be gotten
into the flesh so deep, as that the soap cannot do it, then must you open the
flesh by the way of incision, so deep till you may come to take hold thereof
with your Instrument, and so pluck it forth, which done, heal up the wound
with the ointment taught you in lib. 2. cap. 10. 4. G. and so heal it up, but
be you certain that you do heal it from the bottom, lest it break out
again. This is the most certain way for this cure that I do know.


. 18. D.
Hippoph. What good drink is to be given, whereby to preserve the lungs?


Hippos. If you have no great occasion to fear your horses lungs, then you may
administer to him in his Provender only such powders as you shall find
prescribed you already in lib. 2. cap. 2. 43. but if you have just cause to
suspect that his lungs may be rotten, fretized or broken, then to heal or make
them sound again, or at least to give him great ease, for you may know it by
these signs, Drink to preserve lungs.
viz. his flanks will beat when he cougheth, which he will often do, but
principally when you give him riding or exercise, and the slower they beat, the
older and more dangerous the disease is; he will also draw his wind short, he
will groan often, but most in lying down, and rising up, and be very fearful
and loath to cough. The cure is,

Take Tartar made of white Wine Lees, which you may have of the Apothecaries,
or if you please you may make it your self, (for it is none other thing then
the thickest of the Lees of white Wine well dried and made into powder.) Take
(I say) of this one ounce and a half, of Isope and of Colts foot, of each
half a handful, of Hore-hound one handful, of Elecampane in fine powder,
Anniseeds, and Licoris of each one ounce, of brown sugar candy four ounces,
boil all these together in good Ale one quart, and when it is half boiled,
put into it of Isope water, and of Coltsfoot water, both twice distilled, to
take off their crudities, of each one pint, and so boil all again together,
and then strain it, and give it your Horse blood warm. If your Horse have
been exercised, being foul, or having been in diet, then he has been
overmuch used to Clisters, Drinks, Rakings, Purgations, Sweats, Vomits, and
the like; give him this drink then, and you shall find it to be most
sovereign for him, and the cleaner he is within, the better is its operation,
and will work more kindly in his body; and at what times you are to Tilt,
Hunt, Travel, or exercise him, give him but one pint of this drink in the
morning fasting before his going forth, for it will so help his breath,
whereby (through moderate exercise) he will be much the better able to go
through with his work, then otherwise he could have done. And this drink I
have often proved. Also if you do find him to be either diseased, or sick in
his lungs, or that they be any way fretized, then give him this drink.

Take of tried Hogges-grease two ounces, and of Diapente three spoonfuls, put
these into a quart of water, wherein Barley has been boiled till it burst, and
warm it in the fire till the Hog-grease be dissolved, and so blood warm give
it your sick Horse, and three hours after, give him of the Barley warm to
eat, and either sweet mashes, or white water to drink,. This was taught me
by an Italian Rider in Paris, and I have often made use thereof, and have found
it to be special good, howbeit for the time it will cause him to be very
sick, but have no fear, for it is right good for this Malady. Another.

Take Muskadine or sweet Sack one pint, life-honey th^^e Spoonfuls, Myhrre,
Saffaron, Cascia, and Cinnamon, of each like much, make all these into fine
powder, and mix two Spoonefuls of this powder with your Muskadine and Honey,
and give it him warm with a Horn, give him this drink fifteen days
together, continuing to give him mashes and white water, and this is a most
certain Cure,. But if you do find that his Lungs be rotten and impostumated,
then

Take of the juice of Purslaine half a pint, and mix therewith of the Oil of
Roses so much as will suffice, and put thereto a little Tragantum steeped
before in Goats, Ewes, or Cowes milk, and give him thereof to drink seven
mornings together: but this drink will but only ripen and break the
Impostume, which you shall know to be done, by his exceeding stinking breath,
then shall you give him in fine powder Cassia three ounces, and seven Raisins
of the Sun stoned, boil these in Muskadine one pint, and blood warm give it
him, and it will heal up his Lungs again.. This is very good


. 19. D.
Hippoph. IS there no good thing to be given to a Horse, wherewith to prevent
diseases all the whole year?


Hippos. As touching the prevention of all diseases, I have spoken before, I
think, sufficiently, but yet I will teach you one thing, (for that you are
desirous to learn, and learning is no burden) which may be worthy your
notice, for I will keep no secret from you; Sithence it is my Masters
pleasure, I should dilate the utmost of my skill and Art.

First, therefore the spring of the year coming on, a time when new blood
begins to come, and that ere long grass will be able to take heart, whereby
the better to give nutriment to a Horse; The first day of April open a vein in
the Neck, to see the better how the blood is: if good, take the less, if bad
then the more: then from that day until the first of May, give him this which
I shall prescribe you, and let him have it every day without fail, Morning and
Evening during the whole month of April, from the first day to the last, which
is before his turning out to grass, or soyling, which should be about the
middle of May, and let him have the same also all the whole month of October
(like as you must do in April after you have taken him from grass, about
Bartholmewtide, and do as you before have bin taught in all points. That which
I prescribe is this.

Take a Bushel of old Rye, sweet and clean, well purged, Diseases (...)
prevent.
or sifted, from dust, stones, lome, feathers, cobwebs, or any such like filth,
and put it into a clean iron pot, dry, and without water, I mean such an iron
pot, in which usually flesh meat is boiled, for such a like vessel, is best
for this our purpose, it takes least harm, and is much more wholesome then
Brass, Copper, or any other metal: set this pot thus dry, and without water
over the fire, and put into it your Bushel of Rye (for a less quantity you
cannot well have) and as it begins to wax hot, keep the Rye with continual
stirring, even from the bottom, without any intermission, until you have so
parched the Rye, that it becomes black and hard, which to be so, will ask
good heat, and no less labor to stir it up and down in the pot, when you
do find that the Rye is sufficiently parched, which you shall know by its
blackness, dryness, and hardness, take it from the fire, and put it into some
other clean, and dry vessel, which so soon as it is cold, let the vessel be
kept close stopped, and so kept for your use. Now when you are to use of this
Rye, take two or three good handfuls of it, and let it be beaten to fine
powder and given to your Horse mingled with his Provender, at every watring,
morning and evening, or other times when you usually give him Oats; do this
these two entire months of April and October, for that all men do hold, that
in these two months the blood turns and alters, as we alter his diet from
hard and dry meat, to grass; and so likewise from grass to dry meat, for
this Rye thus parched and ordered, does refine the Blood, cool the Liver, and
purges the Spleen, so as the whole structure of the body is thereby the better
eased and freed, from all such bad and unnatural humors, which would otherwise
make the body inclinable to sundry Maladies and diseases, which this Rye
preventeth, and therefore if you be willing to keep your Horse sound, and
free from diseases, order him in these two months according as I have
prescribed you, and you shall be secure,. This I have often made use of, and it is
good.


. 20. D.
Hippoph. HAve you any comfortable drink to administer to a Horse that is very
sick?


Hippos. I have heretofore showed you diverse, but yet I will give you one more.

Take of good white Wine one pint, of white Sugar Candy, Drink comfortable.
and of Cinnamon, of each one ounce, of Cloves half an ounce, Saffron three
drammes, of Sugar refined three ounces, make all these into fine powder, then
take Mithridate two ounces, Honey of Roses four ounces, mix all these well
together, and put it to the Wine, and make it blood warm over the fire, and so
give it him, and now and then as he stands upon the trench, let him chew upon
the end of a Bulls pizell, some Arman, let him be clothed and littered warm,
and remain fasting upon the trench three hours, and after give him a sweet
Mash, or white water, and after order him as is usual for a sick horse. This
is one of the best preservative drinks that I know, and I have had great
proof thereof.


. 21. D.
Hippoph. What remedy have you for a dislocated joint?


Hippos. Let it be first put into its right place, then in the binding up apply
this plaster.

Dislocated joint.
Take Wheat Bran, and Hog's Grease, of each as much as will suffice, make them
into one body, and make thereof a Plaster of Hurds, and so apply it to the
place, and after bind and swathe it up, and the joint and member will be well
again having rest.


. 22. D.
Hippoph. WHat disease is that is called Tranchaisons?


Hippos. This term we have from the French, which is only a pain or griping
in the belly, caused partly of wind, and partly of cold, and eftsoons of
both, and our English term is, the Chollicke, which is a most grievous pain,
ingendring many infirmities, as I have before declared in its due place:
notwithstanding because you have given me the French term, I will give you
two or three French Receipts for the same disease, albeit I did never experiment
any of them, yet I do hold them to be good.

Disease of Tranchaisons or the chollicke.
Take of Arquequamis one ounce, make it into juice, and put to it of white wine
one pint, and so give it to the Horse, which done, annoint his privy members
with this unguent, Take of Garlic unpilled, as much as will suffice, and
stamp it well, and mix with it of Sallet oil as much as will suffice, and so
bring it to an unguent, and therewith annoint the yard, sheath, and cods, and
it will both give him ease, and cause him to stale suddenly, by which means he
will amend. Another:

Take Cinque-foyle half an handful or Pantaphillon, beat and stamp it well,
and moysten it with warm water, and so give it him to drink. Another:

Take of the powder of Siliris Montani, D'quare, and of Comin, of each an
ounce, and put them into white Wine one pint, and so give it him, then so
soon as he has taken this drink, trot him out for half an hour, a good
round trot, especially up the hill, and after bring him into the Stable, and
cloathe and litter him warm. Another:

Take of Fenugricke and of Comin, of each one ounce, make them into fine
powder, and with white Wine a pint, give it him blood warm, and trot him out
as before.


23. D.
Hippoph. HAve you no way to dry soars?


Hippos. Yea Sir, and I will give you some receipts for that purpose. ^ake egg
shells and burn them almost black: Dry up soars.
take also the upper leather of old shoes, and burn them to a cole: take also
a Char-cole, quick lime, and green coperas, burned in a well nealed earthen
pot, until it be red: Take of each of these a like quantity, and beat them
together to fine powder, and strew this powder upon the soar or galled place,
and every time you dress the soar herewith, wash it well with strong vinegar
or chamber-lye warmed. But if it be an old ulcer, or cankerous soar, then take
Masticke, Frankincense, Cloves, green Coperas, Brimstone, of each like much,
Myrra double as much as any of the former ingredients, beat all these by
themselves to fine powder, and mix them well, then take of this powder and
burn it upon a chafing dish and coals, Lint when with to he^ ulcers or o^
soars.
but be careful it flame not, then as the smoke or fume thereof arises, take
of fine lint a good handful or two, and hold it over the said smoke or
steame, so as it may receive all the said steame into the said lint, then when
it is thoroughly well perfumed, put the lint into a box, pot, or glass, and be
sure to stop it up so close, as that none the least air can possibly come into
it (for the least air will deprive the lint of its virtue) and so keep it for
your use; and when you have occasion to make use thereof, first wash the soar
with new made chamber-lye warm, either as it comes from the man, or else
warmed upon the fire, then dry the soar again, and lastly lay some of this
lint to the soar, and so make it up, and do this twice every day, and you
shall find it to be a speedy and perfect cure. But if you would dry up the
scratches in the heels of your Horse,

Take then chamber-lye which is old made, or stale, and rock or roch-Allum as
much as will suffice, boil them together, and reserve it thus well boiled in a
glass, or other clean vessel well stopped, then take of green nettles the
strongest, most angry and keen, two handfuls, and lay them thin upon some
plate, or other broad thing, and so dry them either before the fire, or in an
Oven, after housholdbread is drawn, then make it into powder very fine, this
done, take of Pepper, and make it also into very fine powder, being finely
searsed, so as it may be of like quantity with the powder of nettles, and so
mix them well together, then keep this powder in a dry glass, close stopped,
and when you may have occasion to use this powder, first wash the soar with
the said liquor of Allome and Chamber-lye made blood warm, and so having
purged, cleansed, and dried the sorance well with a clean linen cloth, strew
and lay on your powder, and thus do after travel or exercise every day once
during the time of his rest, and this will cure him thoroughly. This cure I have
often practiced.


. 24. D.
Hippoph. What disease is that which is called the Arraistes, and how is it
cured?


Hippos. Arraistes or Rats-tayles.
This is also a French Epitheton, which we call the Rats-tayles, being a kind
of scratches: of this disease I have spoken before in the letter A. and
therefore I will now leave entreating further thereof.


CHAP. VIII.
. 1. E.
Hippoph. WHat is to be given to a Horse that has eaten a Taynt?


Hippos. A Taynt is a kind of red worm which many Ferriers will say can do a
Horse no harm, but they are much mistaken, for I have known Horses to dye with
eating it; but if he have eaten a Taynt, the signs will be, that he will be
sick, and forsake his meat, and he will swell in all his body, also his eyes
will so swell that you would think they would fall out of his head, he will
draw in and out his breath very short, and his tongue and mouth will be very
dry and hot, and peradventure blistred, but he will be easily cured, for so
soon as you shall perceive him to forsake his meat, and that he does begin to
swell, then be you confident that he has eaten some unwholesome thing, for
this inconvenience seldom comes to any Horse but at grass only. The cure
is,

Eat a Taynt.
Take of the urine of man as it comes warm from him, one pint, and of
bay salt one handful, stir these well together, and give it him with a
horn, and after walk him up and down half an hour, and he is cured. This I
have sundry times tried, and it is a certain cure.


. 2. E.
Hippoph. What cure have you for a Horse that has eaten a Feather?


Hippos. This may be gotten as well in the Stable, as abroad at grass: in the
Stable through the negligence of the Keeper or Groom, in not dusting, shaking,
or picking, and searching his Hay and Provender well, and by not looking
narrowly, that no Feathers be among his Hay, Oats or Provender, when he
gives him his meat, either in the Rack or Manger, he may also get a Feather
at Grass, as he feeds in a Meadow or Pasture, where Swannes, Geese, Ducks,
Turkies, or other Poultry or Fowls do lie and feed, they in the Summer
season, mowting, and mewing their Feathers, whereby the Horse grafing and
feeding in those places, may easily and unwares eat a Feather, which being
taken into the Wesand, will stick fast there, which will so suffocate him, as
that it will provoke him to cough so vehemently, as if his Heart would break,
for it will stick so fast in his Throat or Wesand, as that he can neither
swallow it down into his Body nor cast it up at his Mouth. The cure is.

Put the cord of your Drenching Staff into his teeth, Eat a fe^ther*
and hold his head up on high, then take of Verjuyce of the crab one pint, and
two new laid Eggs, and beat them together, shells and all, with the Verjuice,
and so give it him with a Horn, and so soon as he has swallowed the same,
give him a few small branches of Savine, and this will carry away the feather
into his stomach,. This I have very ofttentimes done, and made him well again.


3. E.
Hippoph. But then what Cure have you for a Horse that has eaten a Spider?
which I take to be much more perilous to the life of the Horse?


Hippos. The signs to know this, is like to that of the Taint, but only that
he will swell much more, and this may befall him rather in Winter then in
Summer: for which give him this drink.

Take Urine of a Man newly made one quart, of Rue, Bittony, Eat a Spider.
Scabious, Pimpernell, Dragons, of each a like much, but in such a quantity, as
in the whole, all will amount but only to one handful, chop these herbs
together small, and let them boil together in the Urine a little, adding
thereto of Bay Salt, and Sallet-oyle of each one Spoonefull, and so give it him
blood warm,. Now if it be in Winter,

Take of Urine one quart, Arement one lump, Aristolochia rotunda, Mithridate,
of each one dram, English Saffaron, one scruple, Sallet-oyle one Spoonefull,
Bezar-stone three grains, let these be set on the fire and given him blood
warm, if it be in Summer, turn him to grass, and if need be rake him, and
then convey into his Tuell a ball of fresh Butter. But if it be in Winter let
him be also raked, and give him of the blades of Green Rye, to a good
quantity, and for his Provender, let it be for two or three meals, of scalded
bran and Hempseed, and let his drink for three or four days be white
water.. These are all approved medicines.


. 4. E.
Hippophyl. What is good for a blow on the Eye, whereby as well to save the
Eye, as to assuage the swelling thereof?


Hippos. This needs no study as well to find out the means how it comes, as
the signs how to know it, for both are apparent enough, there only remains
to treat of the Cure.

Shave off the hair from off and about the place swelled, having first well
bathed it in warm water. then

Eye a stroke
Take the tenderst tops of wormwood, Pellitory, and Branca-Vrsina, of each half
a handful, chop the herbs very small, and then beat them to an ointment with
old Boares-grease so much as will suffice, then put to it of life honey, and
Wheat flower, of each one Spoonefull, and of Lynseed-oyle three Spoonefull,
boil these over the fire very well, keeping it with continual stirring, and
when it is sufficiently well boiled, strain it into a gally pot, and keep it
stopped, and as occasion is offered, anoint the place swelled herewith.


. 5. E.
Hippoph. What remedy is to be had for the Eye that is charged with a Filme,
Pin and Web, or with Dragons, etc?


Hippos. These diseases in the Eye, do come sometimes by means of some pain
in the head, which causes a Rheum to fall into the Eyes, and sometimes by
means of Rheumes themselves, which causing the Eyes to water, do engender
these diseases, and sometimes again it is occasioned by means of a strip or
hay-dust, or some hame which may be gotten into the Eye. I need not deliver you
the signs whereby to know them, they are visible to your sight. The cure
therefore is thus. Eye Filme, Pin and web Dragons.


Take Camfire or Sol- Armoniacum, or for want of either of these,
white-Sugar-Candy: any of these three being made into very fine powder, and
blown into the Eye, three times a day, are most sovereign to cure these
diseases in the Eyes of a Horse, but Sol- Armoniacum is the very best of them
all.. But if a Filme or Pearl, without a Pin and Web, do grow in the Eye,
then, take up both the two weeping-veines first, which are under the Eyes, and
then give a Cauterize to either place, viz. to open the skin all along to the
very Eyes, and put in to each of them, a quill cut in the middle, then
oft-times cleanse them, and comfort the places Cauterized or roweled with
unguentum-Populeum, and wash the Eyes every day three times with Eyebright
water, mingled with the juice of Smallage, and about fifteen days after, take
away the quils, and after wash the Eyes with cold Fountaine-water. Another. But
if it be a Pin and Web, then

Take Cuttle bone, Tartar, Salt-Gemme, of each like much, Pin an^
make them all into pure fine powder, and with a quill blow of this fine powder
well mixed, into his Eye two or three times a day or oftener.. This have I
tried, and have found it to be special good. But if be a Pearl, that the
horse has in his Eye, then

Take the angriest tops of red-Nettles, and stamp them well, Pearl^ Filme.
and put them into a fine clean linen Rag, then dip the Nettles as they be in
the Rag, into Beer, but yet very slightly, and so wring forth the juice of the
said Nettles, into some clean thing, which done, put to it a little salt so
much as will suffice, made first into fine powder, and when the salt is
dissolved, convey one drop of the medicine into the grieved Eye, morning and
evening, and this will take away the Pearl, and the Eye will become as clear
as the other,. This I have often tried, and found it to do rare cures in this
kind. Now for a Pin and web, any of these ensuing will cure it.

Take the sword of a Gammon of Bacon and dry it, Pin an^
and make it into powder, and blow thereof into the grieved Eye.. This is good.
Another.

Take the juice of Ground Ivy, alias Ale-hoofe, Selendine, life-hony, and
woman's milk, of each of these so much as will suffice, mix all these well,
and put it into the Eye of the Horse, Another.

Take the powder of the bottom of a Brass pot, the outermost black being
first taken off, and the next powder let it be blown into the Eye of the Horse,
and it will help him. Another.

Take the powder of burnt Alume, or of a black-flint, or the powder of Ginger,
either of these made into fine powder and blown into the Eye of the Horse,
will help a Pin and web. Another.

Take ^^lt Arment, and make it into very fine powder, and put thereto of
life-honey and fresh butter, of each so much as will suffice, incorporate all
these well together, and so convey of this medicine into the Eye of the Horse,
and this will cure a Pin and web.. But if there be a Hawe Hawe.
in the Eye, this every Smith can take away; nevertheless whereas all other
Ferriers, that ever I saw work upon this disease, do use to take it away from
the outside of the Eye, I do take it away from that part which lies next of
all to the eye, and I do find my way to be much better, and a safer way, as
well whereby to preserve the sight of the eye, as also the wash, and so soon
as I have cut out the Haw, I do use to wash the eye with white Wine, and the
juice of selendine mingled together, of each a like much, for this heals the
sorance, and keeps the eye from rankling. Now I have often times seen the
French Marishals take up the wash of the eye with a Spanish needle, threeded
with a double brown thread, and to pluck forth the Haw so far as he well can,
then with a pair of sizers to clip off the Haw so close as he can: but I
cannot commend this manner of curing the Haw, for by that means he cutteth
away the wash of the eye, which indeed is the beauty of the eye, whereby the
Horse becomes bleare-eyed, which is in him a very great eyesore, he being
thereby very much disfigured. But if your Horse have gotten a canker in his
eye, then

Eye a Canker.
Take Ale-hoofe (which is indeed your true ground Ivy) and stamp it well in a
mortar, and if it be very dry, then moysten it with a little white Rose Water,
or the water of Eyebright distilled, as much as will suffice, and so strain
it into a clean glass, and therewith wash, bathe, annoint, and taint the
sorance therewith, and in short time it will cure it. This is very good to cure
a Canker, a Pin and Web, blood shotten eyes, or any such grief in or about the
eyes; and I have often made use of this medicine. Another much better.

Take of stone Coperas (a thing known to few, and therefore very hard to get)
but in the stead thereof you may use ordinary white Coperas, make it into fine
powder, as much as will suffice, (for I must leave the quantity to your own
discretion) and put it into a small Pipkin, and put thereto so much very fair,
clear running, or Well water as will fill up the Pipkin to the very top, then
set the Pipkin upon a few coals, and cause the water to boil, but so
treatibly, as it may but only simper, and as the scum does arise, take it away
with a feather, continuing so to do, till the scum do leave to arise any
more, and when you have sufficiently well boiled it, take it off, and let it
stand till it be through cold, then pour away the clear from the bottom,
which must be cast away, and the clear kept in a glass vial, very close
stopped and bound up for your use, which being thus carefully kept, the water
will remain in its perfection long, yea a whole year together or longer. This
water cures almost all diseases in the eyes, as Filmes, Pearls, weeping eyes,
Pin and Web, Dragons, Cataracts, dimnesse of sight, Blindness, Rheuma^icke,
watery, stroke, blow, or stripe of or in the eye, and so consequently in many
other cases of the like nature. And of this water I have had great experience.
Another:

Take Sal-Armoniack, Lapis-Tulia prepared, Sagina, called in Latin
Panicum-Indicum, and of Ginger, of each half an ounce, and of white
sugar candy two ounces, powder all these and searse them, and being well mixed,
put this powder into a clean and dry box very close stopped, and so keep it
that no air come to it for your use, and when you have occasion to use of this
powder, take a little thereof, and mix with it of the juice of ground Ivy,
alias Ale-hoofe, as much as will suffice, and so twice a day convey thereof
into his eye with a feather, till it be thoroughly whole. This is a principal
good receipt; I will give you another special good receipt, which will cure all
manner of sore eyes.

Take the leaves and roots of Vervine, ordinary honey, and Roman Vitrioll, of
each like much, beat, bruise, and mix these together, and put it into a
stillitory glass, and distill it by Balnea-Maria, with a gentle fire, and the
water you take into your Receptacle, put into a vial glass, and keep it very
close stopped, that no air get into it, and when you are to use of the same
water, pour of it a little into a silver spoone, and mix with it of the fat
of a Hen or Capon, a small quantity, and therewith annoint the sore eye twice
a day, and it will cure the same perfectly. I will give you another receipt
which will take the filme from off the eye albeit there be a very great and
thick skin grown.

Take the gall of a Hare, and life honey, of each like much, put them together
into a spoon, and hold the spoone over the fire, till the medicine be blood
warm, and with a feather convey part of this medicine into the eye of the
Horse, and thus dress him morning and evening, and in short time it will take
it quite away, so as the eye will become as bright and clear again as ever it
was before. This receipt I do hold no whit inferior to any of the former, for
I have often made use thereof. But if your Horse have gotten a stripe in the
eye, then let him blood in the neck, and in the weeping vein, on the same
side where the stripe is, then

Take white Rose Water, and the white of a new laid egg, beat them very well
together, then wash and bathe the eye well therewith, and lay round about it
with your splatter this charge restringent.

Take Masticke, Bolearmonacke, Sanguis Draconis, the white of a new laid egg,
and white wine vinegar of the strongest, Eye a charge.
beat first the hard simples to very fine powder, and then searse them, and
they must be beaten severally, then mix them all together with the white of
the egg, and the vinegar so well wrought, as that the medicine come to a
thick ointment, and with this charge the sorance round about the eye, and this
will keep off the humor, and when that you find that the eye does begin to
amend, then wash and bathe the eye twice or thrice a day, or oftener, with cold
fountain or Well water, so fresh as it is taken or drawn out of the Well or
Fountain, and if after you shall perceive that there does grow a filme or skin
over the eye, then take it away by blowing, or putting the powder of Camphire,
or Sol Armoniacum, or white Sugar Candy in fine powder, according as I have
before prescribed you. This is a most sovereign receipt. Also if your Horse in
his eye have gotten a stripe,

Take of fresh Butter wherein never came salt, the quantity of a Walnut, and
put it into his ear on that side where the stripe is, and it will help him.
Another:

Take Lentels or Gray-Pease, and champe or chew them in your mouth, and then
whilst they be in your mouth, blow and breath into your Horses eye, but not any
of the Pease by any means, do this every day often, and a little after wash
the sore eye with cold Fountain water till it be whole. But yet I will teach
you another receipt which will take off a Pin and Web, Filme, Thickness, or any
other foulness which may be in the eye whatsoever, whereof I have had great
experience, and have done many rare cures in this kind, viz.

Take the shells of seven or eight eggs, cleanse them from all manner of inward
slime, and dry them well within, then lay those shells between two new Tyles,
or old, so they be made very clean and free from Mortar, and then lay them in
the glowing embers, and cover them all over, and on every side with burning hot
embers, and so let them ly a good space, until the moist substance be quite
taken from them, then take them up, and beat the shells to very fine powder, and
searse the powder, then with a goose quill blow of this powder into your Horses
eye, do this twice every day, and it is a certain cure. But if you do find
the eye to be fed with any Rhumaticke humor, or that it be inflamed, or that
it has go^ten a bruise, stripe, or the like, then

Take of the purest and whitest refined loaf sugar, one spoonful and a half,
let it be made into fine powder and searsed, or else of the best white
Sugar Candy (which is much better) the like quantity, let it be finely powdered
and searsed, and mix with it so much May or sweet butter (wherein never came
salt) as a Walnut, and add also to it so much of the former powder of Egg
shells, as of Sugar Candy, make these into one body, and bring it to a salve,
and put thereof into the Horses eye, morning, evening, and noone, and this will
make the eye to be clear, sound, and whole again. This unguent does purge,
cleanse, cool, and comfort the eye of the Horse, and helps greatly his
sight; make use of this, for it is very good. But if the eyes be inflamed,
which you may easily know by the red strakes which will be in them, then

Take Thuris Masculi, the marrow of a Lamb, Saffaron, Cuttle-bone, of each one
ounce, of the oil of Roses one ounce, and the whites of ten new laid eggs,
beat and incorporate all these very well together, and then with a feather put
some of this medicine into his eyes once every day. This receipt is very good,
for I have had great trial thereof. Another:

Take of white Starch made of wheat, Frankincense, life-honey, of each as much
as will suffice, make all these into one body, and with a feather apply it to
the grieved eye. Another:

If the inflammation be great, let him blood in both the temple veins, and in
the weeping veins, and then wash his eyes with woman's milk and life honey
mingled together. Another for a wart or spungy excretion growing near to to
the eye of the Horse, which commonly does proceed from a condensed phlegm that
descends to the eye, which in time will cause the eye either to consume, or
to grow little, if it be not prevented, which must be done thus.

Take Roch Alum and burn it, Eye a W
and then add unto it so much white Coperas unburnt, grind them together to
very fine powder, then lay a little of this powder just upon the top of the
wart, but take heed none get into the eye, for it is a strong corrasive, and
will corrode; let the Wart be thus dressed once every day, and in short time it
will consume and eat it quite away never to come more. But as touching
Lunaticke eyes, Lunatic^ eyes.
this word Lunaticke is derived from the Latin word Luna, which signifies the
Moon, and the reason why this disease takes its denomination from thence, is,
for that at certain times of the Moon he will see well, and at other times a
little, but then at other times no whit at all; and therefore this disease is
called lunaticke, and this kind of blindness we do hold to be the very worst
of all other, but when he does see, you may know it by the color of his eyes,
for then they will be dim and yellowish, but when he sees nothing; then will
they look fiery and red. This disease comes sometimes naturally, taking it
hereditary, either from the Stallion his Sire, or from the Mare his Damme, by
whom he was begotten and foled: it comes also sometimes by means of evil
humors which descending from the head, make their residence in and about the
eyes, and these naughty humors are occasioned by the means of intemperate
riding, drawing, or other laborious exercise, in which the poor creature has
bin put to do more then nature was well able to perform; wherefore by one of
these ways, this malady comes; the cure is thus.

Take Pitch, Rosin, and Masticke, of each like much, melt them together, and
having before hand provided in a readiness two round plasters of leather, the
breadth of a 20 shilling piece of gold, lay and spread the medicine hot upon
these two plasters, and so hot as the Horse can suffer them, apply them to his
temples, causing them to stick fast to the skin, and let them there remain,
until they shall fall off of themselves, then rowell him on the face just
under his eyes with a very small French Rowell the breadth of a three pence at
the most, and let it be turned every day once, the space of 12 or 15 days,
then take forth the Rowell, and heal up the orifice with the green ointment
prescribed you in lil. 2. cap. 10. 4. G. and this will undoubtedly very much
help his sight. Another:

Shave away the hair the breadth of a shilling on either side of the head upon
the temple veins, and after apply to the place this charge.

Take Taca-Mahaca, and lay it upon those places which were shaven, and clap
upon them flocks of the same color, then make incision and put in two French
Rowels, as is showed in the cure going before, to bring down the peccant
humors, and let the eyes be washed twice every day with the medicine before
taught you, made of ground Ivy, Honey, Selendine, and woman's milk. X This is
very good for this disease, and this I can boldly commend unto you to be a very
good medicine, for I have often used. Now as touching sore eyes which must be
cured by medicine, you must understand that the eye is the most delicate part
of any one member in all the whole body, it is the Torch or Candle which does
give light to the whole body, it is the guide which does usher the body, and to
carry it from danger, so as it shall not at any time either stumble upon
rocks, or blocks, or fall into any precipice; wherefore great regard ought to
be had, how you do at any time tamper or meddle with this so choice a member,
lest in stead of endeavoring to cure one sore eye, you put out both, a thing
often seen and known, and therefore the medicines which you apply to the eyes
ought evermore to be new made, yea in a manner every day, for that when once
they begin to grow stale, they become sharp and asper, perplexing the poor
beast, much more then otherwise, neither are they so wholesome, nor so
powerful whereby to perform their office for which they were made and
compounded. If you have a Horse which is but weak of sight, the ^esse blood
you take from him, the better it will be for the continuance of his sight, for
by taking much blood from a Horse weakly sighted, will on a sudden cause him
to become stone blind, like as by experience I have often known and observed.
But now to conclude this Paragraph, because I have not yet handled one part
appertaining to a sore eye, viz. for an eye which by an unlucky stroke or
stripe is broken and beaten out of the head of the Horse. I will give you one
only receipt, which can never be parallelled: to wit,

Eye broken.
Take Alum, and first burn it in a fire-pan, and after when it is burned so,
put it upon the hot coals, and let it burn there till all the moisture be
quite consumed, that it becomes as light as a feather, and as white as snow,
and so brittle as that it will break with every touch, unless it be very
carefully handled, when it is so brittle as that it will run to ashes with
every small pressure, and that the taste of Alum remains little in the said
Alum, then is it sufficiently burned, then take of this powder as much as will
suffice, and mix it with life-honey, and stir them well together, as that
you do bring it to an unguent; put of this every day morning and evening into
his eye with a feather, and so hold your hand upon the eye a pretty while, that
the medicine cannot suddenly get forth, and by thus doing, in few days it will
be thoroughly cured, though the eye be utterly lost.


6. E.
Hippoph. What is good to take away a bony excretion, or a fleshy?


Hippos. This malady of a bony excretion comes most commonly by the means of
causticks and burning corrosives, which be laid to wounds that are near to the
bone, as when the wound is either in the leg, or about the pasterne, for that
the flesh being extremely burned and mortified by such causticks and
corrosives, it does cause an excretion to grow upon the bone, which through the
unskilfulnesse of the Ferrier, the wound is healed up, but the excretion does
remain still upon the bone, which becomes an eyesore, unless it be
afterward taken off, which occasioneth a new cure, and over and above it
enforces often times the Horse to hault: sometimes again an excretion comes
by the Horse being galled with a lock or fetters, having been long continued
upon the same foot, without changing or removing in time convenient. But
howsoever it comes, the cure is,

Take Elecampane root newly gathered, and cleanse it from its earth, Excreti^^
and wrap it up in a brown paper, then wet the paper, and so heal it in the
hot embers, and so roft it as you would do a Warden, when it is thoroughly well
roasted, that it be like to pap, so hot as your Horse can suffer it, (for it
must not scald him) after you have with a stick, (like as you do a splent)
rubbed, knocked, and chafed the excretion, bind this roasted root close unto
the place, and so let it remain on 24 hours before you do remove it, and in
two or three times thus dressing it, the excretion will rot and consume to
nothing, and this will also take away a splent. This is very good. Another:

Take the oil of Origanum, and every morning and evening, or oftener, take a
little upon the brawne of your thumb, and rub the place, and it will
therewith in time consume, and quite take it away. And this will also take away
a splent.


. 7. E.
Hippoph. What will cure an Impostume in the ears of a horse?


Hippos. This disease proceeds from sundry causes, as by means of some blow
with some staff or other such like thing, which he receives about the ears,
or poll, or else by means of some hurt he may get, by being wrung or galled
with a new or hard hempen halter, specially if a knot be near or upon the
place; sometimes it comes also of a cold taken in the head, and sometimes
again by means of bad and peccant humors, which residing in the head, do
make its passage by the ears; it is easily known by its much burning, glowing,
and swelling, and by the Horses unwillingnesse to be touched and handled about
that place; if it be an impostumation, then thus it must be cured.

Take Linseed and make it into fine powder, and Wheate-flower, of each half a
pint, Ears impostumated.
ordinary honey one pint, tried -- Hog's Grease one pound, mix all these well,
and warm them upon a fire, keeping them continually stirring: then take of
this ointment and spread it upon a linen cloth, or upon a plaster of
leather, the breadth of the swelling only, and apply it warm to the place, and
renew it once every four and twenty hours, till it either do break or be so
ripe, as that it may be opened; which must be so done downwards, that the
corruption may easily issue away, then heal it up with this salve.

Take Mel-Rosatum, Sallet-oyle, and ordinary Turpentine of each two ounces,
incorporate them well together, and make for the Horse a biggen, or nightcap
to keep on the medicine, taint the sore to the bottom dipped in this
ointment, and apply also a plaster of the said stuff upon the sore, renewing
it every day till it be whole and sound.. But if the Impostumation be broken of
its own accord before you do perceave it, then

Take oil of Roses, Venice Turpentine, and common Honey of each like much,
mix them well together, and so making it blood warm upon a few embers or
coals, dip some black wool in the medicine, and so stop up that Ear
therewith, which is grieved, renewing it once a day till it be whole.. But if
the Ears be only inflamed, then stop of this foresaid medicine into them, and
it will both ease him and take away the inflammation,. Another.

Take of pepper made into fine powder did. tried Hogges-greasse one
spoonefull, the Juice of Rue one handful, the strongest white Wine Vinegar two
spoonefull, beat all these very well together, and if the swelling,
Impostumation, or Inflammation, be either in the Ears, Face, Head or Throat of
the Horse, if you take either black-wooll, fine lint, Flax, or Hurds, and dip
it into this medicine, and so stop both his Ears therewith, and then stitch
them up, that it get not forth, renewing it once in two days, till the
swelling be clean gone, your Harse will be certainly cured. But if the
grief be in any other part of the Body, then with this Unguent, you shall
anoint the grieved or swollen place, once or twice a day, till it depart.. But
if the swelling be near or about the Cods, or privy parts, then

First Bathe the place well with cold water, and after being made dry again
with a cloth, anoint it with the said ointment, every day once or twice, and
you shall find it to be a present cure. This also cures the Ulcer and Canker
in the Nose, and it is a sure Cure for the Vives. I have often cured all these
maladies with this Receipt.


CHAP. 9.
. 1. F.
Hippophylus. WHat cure have you for the Farcin?


Hippos. Of all the diseases whereunto Horses are inclinable, this of the
Farcin is the most loathsome, the most stinking, and the most filthy, wherefore
for the same I shall set you down many cures, but first I intend to discourse
somewhat of it is Nature, and how it comes to a Horse; This disease we here in
England do for the most part call the Farcy, and (Secundum Vulgus) it is called
the Fashions, for so Master Markham does style it; But Master Blundevile, the
Italians, and the French do give it the name of Farcin, to which denomination I
do the rather incline, by reason we take the said name from the Italians and
the French, for that truly I do find that to be the proper name of the said
Infirmity, derived from the word Farcina, which is a disease most infectious,
poysnous, and dangerous, being never so little let alone, or neglected: It is a
kind of creeping Ulcer beginning with hard knots, and Pustils, and after
dilating and spreading it self into branches (like to a Vine or Ivy) does not
cease from running, until such time as it has visited every part and member
of the Body, for Quasi Cancer serpit, it commonly beginning either in a vein,
or near to some Master vein, which feeds and nourishes the disease, that
is the cause of it is diffusion. It is engendered sometimes of corrupt blood,
which heats and surfets have occasioned in the Body, sometimes by hurts and
wounds received, as also by some Cankerous and poysnous thing, as rusty
spurs, snaffles, bits, or the like, it is also taken from another horse,
which is fallen into the same disease, also by hewing one leg against another,
and being smitten with some staff, whereon are hard knots, and sundry such
like means and ways; it comes also to a Horse by surfets given him, which
finding no other way of avoidance, lais hold of this disease, whereby the blood,
being over much heat, his grease molten, and his taking a sudden cold, which
is most frequent after great heates, then growing in the body, and especially
in the blood, such obstructions, corruption, and putrefaction, not having any
means to vent it self, or to void, or evacuate, but by this way only, by
growing into knots, Pustils, Ulcers, or the like, which be so contagious and
infectious, so as if but any other horse, do but gnaw or lick with his teeth
or tongue, upon the place infected, he will be assuredly within a short time
after himself infected also, and when once a horse is stricken or infected
with this leprous malady, if he be not presently and skilfully cured, it is as
infallible death to him, as if he had either his throat cut, or his brains
beaten out, with a Butchers Axe; Farcin,
wherefore if in this case, your horse be visited with this sinistrous disease,
I could wish you would carefully observe two blood in or near to that Master
vein, which does most feed and nourish the Farcin, then so soon as you have
well bloudied him, give him this purge, viz.

Take of Aloes, made into fine power one ounce, and a quantity of London
Triacle so much as will suffice, and of life honey so much as will suffice, mix
these well together, and give it him in a morning fasting, and six hours
after, give him white water, neither needs this bloudying him, or Purgation,
any way hinder him from being dressed for his disease, for that bloodletting
does but only hinder it from running any farther for that time, and the Purge
sends the disease from the heart, to the end it may no way annoy that place,
wherefore for the perfecting of the cure.

Take of oil de-Bay two ounces of Euforbium made into fine powder one ounce,
incorporate both these so well together, that they may become but one body,
then fearch for the first origin, or spring, where the first knots did begin,
and so continue searching till you find out the last, clip away the hair from
off, and about all these knots, and annoint them very well with this ointment
once every three days; and after you have thus dressed him three times, if you
do not find the Farcins to be killed, and that the knots do not dry up, then
bathe the places three days together with the stale or urine of a Cow, or
Ox, and with the herb called Lions foot, in latin, Leontipodium, both
boiled together, and this will cure him.. This medicine I never made use of but
once only, and it cured the horse unto which I did administer the same..
Another.

Take nine leaves of the pot herb called Beetes, of the smallest but soundest
leaves, and nine grains of Bay Salt, beat these very well together to salve,
and in a morning before Sunrising, put this medicine into both his Ears by
equal portions, and put into them after it, a little wool, to keep in the
medicine, and so stitch up his ears, and let him stand so with meat and white
water 24 hours at the least, then take forth the wool and stuff, and he is
cured. With this receipt I have cured sundry horses. Another. If your Horse have
a farcin in any of the four quarters of his body, let him bleed well in the
neck vein fasting, then

Take of Arsenick two ounces, and put it into a piece of new cloth, and bind
it up with a piece of new Pack-threed, and fasten it unto the main of the
Horse, this is to be thus administered, if the farcin be only in the foreparts,
but if the disease be as well in the hinder-parts, as in the fore-parts, then
hang also the like quantity of Arsnick, made up in a cloth like as was the
former, and hang that also upon his tail, and the more you ride, work, or
travel, and exercise him, the better it will be for his disease, to qualify
and rid the same, and the more spare his diet be, the sooner is he cured,
provided you keep him warm in the stable, and for some time you must give him
white water. This cure I did never try, but it was taught me by a great
Marishall of Paris, one who had the repute of a very honest man, and a most
skillful Ferrier, who protested unto me that he had perfectly cured many Horses
with this receipt. Another:

Take white Bran prepared, like as you shall find prescribed you, lib. 2. cap.
2. 4. F. how to make fat a Horse, and give it him a day before he is to be
dressed, and let him eat it so hot as well he may: continue him to this diet
three mornings together, then let him bleed well in the necke-veyne, but give
him no Hay that day he bleedeth, but sweet wheat straw only, neither let him
either eat or drink in four hours after, and then let his drink be white
water. And two days after his bleeding, you shall begin to give him again his
wheat bran prepared as before, which shall continue for six days together,
during which time you shall give him every evening with his Oats, this powder
and these roots following, viz.

Take of Comin, of Linseed, of Fenugrick, Sileris. Montani, of each two ounces,
quick Brimstone, four ounces, let all these be powdered, and mix them well,
and give it at one time with his Oats, so much as you may put into an egg
shell, the meat being first taken out; let him be thus used daily, by the space
of six days. Those days being ended,

Take the root of Salerick, the root of Tassus-Barbatus, the root of Valerion,
and the root of Lappaizon, of each like much, chop them all very small, as
herbs to the pot, which being thus well mixed, give them to the Horse without
Oats if he will eat them, if not, then otherwise in Pills; and when you give
him the roots, do not give him the aforesaid powder, and so continue him with
these roots six days together, which six days ended, cause him to be
bloudied again on the other side of the neck, but then let him not bleed so
much as before, and order him as before after the first bleeding: nor shall you
give him either powder or roots, but let him be still kept warm, and have his
ordinary allowance of meat, as well of Hay as of Oats, and then for six days
after, every evening after he has drunk white water, give him one evening of
this powder with his Oats, and the next evening of these roots, and if you
find not the Farcin to dry up to your mind, continue then this powder and
these roots for six days more, and those days being past, give him good Hay
and good Oats, and not any longer the powder, or the roots: and thus
following these directions punctually, your Horse shall be perfectly cured, and
be brought into good state and health again, neither shall the relics of the
farcin remain in any part of his body, and if there be any knots remaining,
they shall break, purge, cleanse, heal, and dry up, the maine cause being
taken and purged away. Of this my self had never trial by reason that many of
the ingredients were not easily to be had. Another:

Take black Elebore, and add to the herb some of its juice, put unto it old
Boares-grease, and boil it until the juice be quite boiled into it, whereby
to bring it to a perfect unguent, with which you shall annoint and rub the
knots, or buttons of the farcin, but before you do apply this unguent, let the
hair be shaven or clipped away from and about the knots. With this receipt I
have cured only one Horse. Another:

Take five or six handfuls of four-leaved Plantane, with the roots, of Bay
salt one handful, and so much Comin as you may well take up, with your thumb
and two fingers, beat the Comin to fine powder, and then stamp the Plantane
and Salt well together with the Comin, and after they be well incorporate, let
it steep and infuse 24 hou^es, then strain and wring it hard, and give the
liquor thereof to your Horse in a morning fasting, but you must take blood from
him the day before, and he must stand upon the Trench six hours before you
give him the said drink, and you must also put into his ears the juice of
Rue, and then stitch up his ears, and so let them remain 24 hours, but if the
malady shall continue (which I think it will not do) then must you let him
blood again, and give him the aforesaid drink. This I never tried, but he that
taught me this, did assure me that there is no kind of farcin, but this receipt
will cure. Another:

Moly or Aqua-Plantique.
Take first the herb Moly, it grows in marish grounds, you must take
10.11.12. or 13. of the roots, (or according to the strength, greatness or
corpulency of your Horse) let your roots be in number or quantity. Take also of
white Wine one pint, then take of bay Salt one handful (which was never used)
and put it into the white Wine, then take of white Wine Vinegar half a pint
more or less, but first note, you must take the roots of the said Moly, and
let it be gathered a day before you are to use it; you must only take the
roots thereof, (and cast away the residue) for that they are most useful, and
after you have so done, take these great roots, and wash them clean, so as no
filth do remain upon the^, then take the said roots and bruise them, and steep
them in the Wine with the Salt and Vinegar, in an earthen Pipkin, and stop it
close, that no air get into it, and let it infuse so a whole night, then about
7 or 8 of the clock in the morning, strain it. and give it him to drink, and
after he has taken it, cover him up warm, and let him be walked four hours:
but above all things* you must not give him any Oats in four days after, but
in stead of Oats, give him wheat bran prepared, and let his drink be white
water, neither must you suffer him to go forth of the stable in three or four
days after at the soonest; and then after that, you may ride or work him at
your pleasure; neither must this drink be administered warm, but cold. This is
a known certain cure among the Marishals in France, but by reason I could never
find the herb Moly growing in England, I could never come to practice the
cure here, nevertheless I will give you the description of this said herb
Moly, and how it grows, together with its true effigies: It grows (as I
said before) Moly herb in marish and wet grounds, it resembles the herb
called Scolopendion, or Sorrel, only the leaf is bigger and broader, the
flower is like to the white Violet, but less, about the bigness of a purple
wild Violet, and it is as white as milk, it smells strong like Garlic; its
root is little and round, which is most sovereign to heal the overtures of
the matrix, being beaten with the ointment of Ireos, applied as a Pessure or
Plaster: Homer says that the god Mercury was the first inventor or finder out
of this plant, and the gods for the excellency thereof, named it Moly: see
Theophrastus, Paracelsus, and Dioscorides.

Albeit that all these receipts be very good for the farcin, yet are not all
Horses cured with one and the same medicine; and most certain it is, that the
most infallible way to cure the farcin, is to give him the fire: in the
practice not only of this cure, but of many others also, which are to be
administered inwardly, it is greatly behoofefull that the Ferrier be mindful to
observe the strength, age, quality, and ability of the Horse, to which he is to
administer, and accordingly to mix and apply his ingredients. Another:

First let him blood on both sides the neck and spurre-veynes, and let him
bleed a good quantity, then take Hemlocke, Cinque-foyle, or five leaved grass,
and Rue, of each like much, stamp them and strain them, and put the juice
thereof into his ears, and then stitch them up 24 hours, and it is a certain
cure. For with this I have cured sundry Horses. Another:

First let him bleed well at the neck vein, then take Trifora-Magna, and
Aloes Platice, of each two ounces, and as much Barley bran, mix all these, and
dissolve it in oyle-olive one pint, and put thereto of white wine one pint,
and then divide it into two parts or moyities, and so give it two mornings
together to your Horse fasting with a Horn, that is to say, either morning the
one moyity: this done, take as much black soap as a Walnut, half as much
Arsnick in fine powder, and work them into one body to a salve, then with the
point of a knife slit or open all the hard knots or pustils, and so put into
every of them the quantity of two Barley corns of this salve, which will eat
forth the cores, and kill the poisonous humors, then where you see the wounds,
and places red and fair, heal them up by annoynting them with fresh Butter
molten and made hot, and then strew upon them the powder of Bolearmonack. This
is a most approved good receipt, and by my self often practiced. Another:

Take the juice of Rue, and of Aqua-vitae, of each one spoonful and a half,
beat them well together, and by equal portions convey it into both his ears,
then stitch them up for 24 hours space, and he is infallibly cured. This is an
excellent cure, and by me often used. Another:

First wash all the places that be raw or swelled, with Chamberly, or white
Wine Vinegar warmed, take then of Salt one handful, of white Wine Vinegar one
pottle, of Alum dissolved in the Vinegar, one ounce, of Verde-grease and
green Copperas, both made into fine powder, of each one pound, melt all these
upon the fire, and every day wash the sores, and places swelled therewith
warm, twice a day, morning and evening. This I never did experience, but it
was commended unto me by a worthy Knight, who averred unto me, that he had
cured therewith very many horses, of the Farcin. He also said that he has
cured some with this receipt following, viz.

Take Tar, Tallow, and Horse-dunge of each so much as will suffice,
incorporate all these upon the fire, and annoint him therewith hot. Another.

Take Hempeseed one pound, and bruise it well, then take Rue, and salt, of each
one handful, of the leaves of Mallows two handfuls, boil all these in fair
water two quarts, unto a moiety, then strain it, and give it your horse blood
warm, give him of this two mornings, but not two mornings together, but let
him stay one morning betwixt, then take a good quantity of Chamberly and
Hem-lock so much as will suffice, and boil them well, and wash the sores till
they be quite whole, and dried up.. This is a very good receipt. Another.

Take the herb with the root called Digitalis, in English sope-glove, alias
Fox-glove, a good quantity, bind it up into a fine linen ragge, and if the
Farcin be in the forepart, of the horse, hang it upon the maine, but if in the
hinder part, then hang it upon the tail, and this will cure him. This I never
did experience; But now I will give you for a close the best and most certain
cure for this disease, that I ever yet knew: and with which I have perfected
more rare cures of this nature, then of all the residue before inculcated. And
thus it is. Another.

Take of Rue, the leaves and tender tops only, without any the least stalks, a
good handful, first chop them small, and then stamp them in a Mortar to a
very ointment, when they are so well pownded, put thereunto of the purest white
tried Hog's Grease one spoonful, and so work them together to a perfect salve,
or unguent, that done, stop into either Ear this whole quantity by equal
portions, and put a little wool upon the Medicine, to cause it to keep in the
better, and so stitch up his Ears, and let him remain in the Stable so four
and twenty hours at the least, and then unstitch his Ears, and take forth the
wool, and either put him forth to grass, or else if he be to be wrought, work
him, for the more his labor is, and the more spare his diet is, the sooner he
is cured.. This I commned to you for the best and most certain cure, that I
could ever meet with, for with this receipt only I assure you on my credit, I
have cured more then 100. horses, many of which were by other Ferriers, holden
for incurable, and sentenced to be food for Hounds. The French do also call the
disease, Mal de ver.


. 2. F.
Hippoph. I Have heard of another kind of Farcin, called the water-Farcin?


Hippos. Truly Sir, in answer to this, I by observation of this disease do
find, that there is but only one kind, albeit I will not deny, Wet Farcin.
but that some one may be more malignant then another, according to the
constitution of the Horse, who is visited therewith, by reason that choler may
be in that horse, more predominant then in an other horse, of any of the other
humors, for then it comes forth more dry, but if the horse be naturally
Rheumatick, then may it appear more watery and moist, and so of the residue,
but still it is but one, and the same infirmity, for more sorts I could never
find. But touching this watery Farcin, as you are pleased to term the same, the
French gives this name, viz. la Louppe, which is in English the Woulfe, and
they gave me the reason why they do so call it, to wit; because it festreth the
flesh, eating and corroding therein inwardly, and it begins most commonly in
the feet, rather then in any other member of the horse. And for this disease a
famous French Marishall of Paris gave me this ensuing cure, but I never yet
made trial thereof, viz.

First wash the place, and shave away the hair, and search the place well with
your finger, and let forth the corruption, but be sure you search it to the
very bottom.

Take then Horse-dung, or Goose-dung, Wine, Salt, and Vinegar of each so much
as will suffice, and make thereof a salve, and so Playster-wise apply it to the
sorance, binding it on, and the third day open it, and dress it up again as
before, and do this every third day till it be whole, but be sure you do
every time you dress him, examine the very bottom. This he assured me to be
a very perfect Cute.


. 3. F.
Hippoph. What is that disease is called the Flanks, and how is it cured?


Hippos. This is when a horse has gotten a wrinch, crick, stroke or other
grief in his back, which is called of the French Ferriers Flanks, the cure is
this.

Flanks.
First shave away the hair from the place grieved, then lay on this charge.

Take Bol-Armonack, Cumfry, alias Consolida-Major, Galbanum, Sol-Armoniack,
Sanguis Draconis, his own blood, Burgundy Pitch, Mastick, Olibanum, of each
like much, so much as will suffice, stamp and beat all these together, with
Wheat meal, Vinegar, and the whites of Eggs so much as will suffice, and so
make it into a charge, and therewith charge the place grieved, then clap upon
the top, all along the Chine, and Back of the Horse, a sheeps-skin, coming
hot from the sheep, and change it every day, and at three or four days end
he will be well, but let the charge lie upon the place, until such time, as
it do fall away of it self, and keep him warm.


. 4. F.
Hippophyl. HOw may a man bring in few days his Horse to be fat, or at least
in good liking supposing him to be sound?


Hippos. Sir over much riding and exercise, will bring the fattest Horse that
ever trod upon the Earth, to become poor, bare, and lean, and so will too
early, and too late ayerings, bad diet, evil keeping, lingering after Mares,
and spending upon them, lingering after grass, and the like: But if your horse
be poor, bare, lean, Fat horse.
and feeble, so that his stomach be good to meat, I will give you a Receipt,
which (if you do duly observe my rules, justly as I shall deliver them) you
shall get him up into flesh in twelve or fourteen days.

First therefore take blood from him, if you do find it gross, or Fl^gmatick,
for otherwise he cannot possibly mend, then insteade of Oats in the morning,
you shall give him Wheat branne, Bran prepared.
prepared after this manner. Set over the fire a clean Kettle, and fill it
almost full with fair water, and so soon as it boyleth put in your Wheat
branne, and so let it boil a quarter of an hour at the least, then take it
off, and let it stand to cool, and about four or five in the morning, give
him of this branne so hot as he can eat it, then for his drink give him of
the same water, and at night give him Oats and white water, and let him be
kept covered and littered warm: but if it be Summer, let not the Stable be
too hot, but temperate, and at night give him with his Oats also the quantity
of what you may co^vey into an Egge-shell of this powder following; with which
you must continue him the space of eight days, or according as you shall see
cause. You must understand that this branne thus prepared, is the only thing
which dries up his naughty, gross, and corrupt humors, and does the better
prepare the body to assume lust, courage, strength, and flesh, together with
the help of the powder, which is this.

Take of Commin, Fenugrick, Sileris-Montani, Nutmegs, Cloves, Ginger, Linseed,
of each two ounce, Quick-Brimstone six ounce, Fat a lean^ horse.
make all these into powder, of this powder give him every night, the quantity
of an Eg-shell full, with his Oats, as I have before prescribed, but he must
first be watered, with white water, which so soon as he has drunk, let his
whole body be rubbed, then clothed, and littered, which being done, then give
him a small sheafe of wheat straw, sweet, good, and well threshed into his
Rack, and let him eat thereof by the space of an hour, which done, give him
Oats mixed with his powder, which when he has eaten, give him Hay at your
pleasure, remembering to keep him warm, but so as with moderation; and let him
be also well rubbed, especially against the hair, and by this doing in short
time you shall perceive him to mend exceedingly, but you must put also into his
Oats together with its former powder, of Nettle-seed two handfuls every time,
for that is the thing which principally will cause him to battle: It will also
greatly avail to his amendment, if he be ayered every morning and evening an
hour after sun rising, and an hour before sun set, if the weather be
warm, and the sun do shine. And this I do assure you is the most exquisite
course can be taken, whereby to s^t up a lean Horse, and to make a poor Horse
fat in little time, and with small charge.


. 5. F.
Hippoph. What help have you for the falling of the Fundament?


Hippos. This malady comes to a Horse sometimes by cold, sometimes through
weakness and mere poverty, and sometimes by means of a laxativenesse and
flux of blood, when straining to expel, the Horse is not able, and by that
means the fundament comes out, the cure is,

Falling of the fundament.
Take white-Salt made into very fine powder, strew a little upon the gut, then
take a piece of Lard, and first having boiled Mallow-leaves till they be soft,
take of these leaves and beat them well with the Lard, and when it is
sufficiently beaten, make it up like to a suppository, and apply it to the
place every day once, till it be whole. This I have often tried,


. 6. F.
Hippoph. I Should be very glad to know what you can say of Fevers?


Hippos. Sir, as touching fevers in Horses, I say that they be as subject to
them, as man is, as also that these fevers are of several natures, which
cannot be denied, which may most easily be distinguished and known, if you
please diligently to observe. A fever comes many times, either by
intemperate riding or travel, or else through bad and unwholesome diet: and
all fevers for the most part have their sourse from these effects, if you add
thereunto evil air.


. 7. F.
Hippoph. Why Hipposerus, how do you define a Fever?


Hippos. I define it thus. ^
A Fever is an unnatural and intemperate heat which begins at the heart,
dilateth it self through all the arteries and veins of the whole body of the
Horse, hindering all his natural motions: howsoever some Ferriers are pleased
to make of them more sorts, then I will question their physical and learned
distinctions, for I could never conclude them but in a few, as quotidian,
tertian, quartan, and pestilent, and yet all these be of one nature, albeit
some more malignant then others be, only a Hectique fever is of a different
nature from the former, and so also a pestilent fever may be. Now as touching
fevers which come in the Spring, Summer, Autumn, or Winter, I cannot see why
they should be fevers different in nature from these other, for there are not
any of these, but may come to a Horse in any of these seasons.


. 8. F.
Hippoph. FRom whence do Fevers proceed then?


Hippos. First Sir you must understand that Fevers are of two sorts, that is
to say, Ordinary and Accidental, the ordinary fevers are those that come of
surfets, over-riding, and labor, unwholesome meat, as moist, raw, moldy, and
musty bread, corn, provender and hay, of what nature, sort, or condition
soever; but your fevers Accidental come of some ter^ible stroke or deep
wound, bringing therewith insufferable pain, dolor, and grief to the poor
beast, again, your ordinary Fevers come often times by the extreme violent
scorching of the Sun, but most commonly in the canicular days, as when your
Horse is abroad at grass, where is either want of water, or having such as is
neither good or wholesome, or else where is want of housing, shelter to go
into, or shady trees to be under, and such kind of Agues do prove for the
most part either Hectike, or Pestilent fevers, for by that means his blood
becomes inflamed, whereby the humor of choler is predominate. Now Sir, if
you be pleased to observe strictly and carefully, you shall also find that
fevers do come many times also from a quite contrary cause; as from cold
taken upon hard riding, or great labor, and by having at such times cold water
given him to drink, or by washing, or walking having sweat much, or by being
out too late in the gripse or shutting in of the evening, or upon day breaking,
especially near or among fenny, moorish, or marish grounds, by reason that
naughty vapors do arise from such kind of places: Fevers also do accrue to
Horses when upon hard riding, and great toil, you give your Horse cold water
drawn out of a Well, which being much colder then either River, or Pond water,
does more chill the Horse inwardly, whereby he is much more distempered,
causing him to quake, and to shake exceedingly after his drink, which
occasioneth crudities, and an evil habit in the stomach, which does beget and
engender an ague or fever, wherefore after sweating and great labor, I do
advise you that whatsoever is given him, be first set over the fire to take
away the chillness, whereby your Horse may take the less damage, for that
fevers taken of this nature, do commonly prove pestilent fevers, whose
nature is to infect all his fellows which are in the same stable or room with
him, if he be not either speedily removed from his consorts, or else suddenly
cured; and the reason hereof is most evident, for that when as a Horse has
been all the whole day traveled (especially in the winter) and brought into the
stable all hot and sweating, when in short time after his blood and pores begin
to be settled, and to return to his heart again, and to his intrals, then if you
give him cold water, you may instantly perceive him to fall into a formal
quivering and shaking for a time, which being once passed over, you shall see
him most palpably assume a most extreme and violent burning, and peradventure
after falls into a most desperate sweating, whereby is most easy to be found in
him a general distemperature throughout his whole body, together with a
formal and dangerous fever, wherefore if the Ferrier be not the more expert,
it may stick closer unto him, and remain longer by him then a bushel of Oats
will do. But a fever which does proceed elther from the corruption of the
blood, or from the contagion of the air, (according as I have before
intimated) that I say is most frequent, albeit not so well known to all
Ferriers, and I am able to affirm thus much of these kind of fevers out of
mine own long experience, that they are of that extreme violence, and so
malignant, and their poison of that infinite force, as that if through their
own violence, they be not able of themselves to bring the creature visited
therewith to his end, yet will these convert their malice into other mortal
maladies and diseases, which will in time prove as noxious, to wit, into the
Yellowes, Stavers, Glanders, Dropsy, Consumption, Farcin, etc. unto which a
pestilent fever is evermore the precursor: insomuch as if the Ferrier be not
very skillful and cautelous in observing and knowing the true symptoms of
these kind of diseases, he may easily in stead of laboring to effect a Cure,
through his misprision, miscarry therein.


. 9. F.
Hippoph. What be the true symptoms or signs whereby to know a Fever?


Hippos. If you do observe him well, Feave^ to kno^
you shall perceive him so soon as he begins to be feverish, and when the
fit first comes upon him to hang or hold down his head, and if at first
coming, it begins with a cold fit, then will he quake and tremble, and when
his cold fit is over, then will he glow and burn throughout his whole body, his
breath will be very hot, and he will fetch his wind thick, and his nostrils
will be very open, and his flanks will beat thick, he will forsake his meat,
and reele often times as he goes, his eyes will be swelled, they will water and
be matterative, he will fall away and consume in his flesh, his stones will
hang low, he will desire and offer often to lie down, and yet being laid he will
rise suddenly again, he will have great desire to drink, neither will he
drink much, and yet you would think that all the water in the Thames would not
be sufficient to quench his thirst, for he will covet evermore to keep his
mouth in the water, albeit he will drink very little, and his sleep will go
from him. And these are the best, most certain, and apparent symptoms that I
do know of a Fever.


10. F.
Hippoph. What are the best cures for these ordinary Fevers?


Hippos. If the fever be quotidian and daily, Fever Ordinar^
then

Take the yolks of three new laid eggs, and beat them well with seven
spoonfuls of the best Aqua vitae, and put unto it of ordinary Treacle, a
spoonful, and so making it blood warm over a few hot embers, give it him, and
then take his back and ride him, until he do begin to sweat, and then bring
him into the stable, and cloth, wispe, and litter him warm, so as he may
sweat an hour in the stable, but then cool him by degrees, and let him fast
three hours after, but let him blood before you drench him, in the neck and
mouth, and give him white water or Mashes. This drink would be given him one
hour before the fit comes. This is very good. Another:

Take white Wine one pint, of Aloes one ounce, made into fine powder, of
Agaricke half an ounce, Anniseeds and Licoris, of each one dram in fine
powder, and add thereto of life-honey one spoonful, let all these be made
warm upon the fire, and so give him blood warm: then take his back, and ride
him into a good sweat, and set him up, cloth him, litte^ him, and stop well
his body, head, and breast, and let him sweat so two hours, then by degrees
cool him, and when he is cold, let him be well rubbed and clothed up again
warm, but not to sweat any more, and let him stand upon the Trench three
hours after his sweating, then unbit him, and wash his tongue and mouth, with
Alume, Vinegar, Sage, and water boiled togather, that done give him a little
Wheat straw to eat, and an hour after a gallon of sweet, dry, and clean
Oats, well dressed and sifted, but lay not all at once before him, but three or
four handfuls at a time continuing thus to feed him, till he has eaten up
his whole gallon, and at night, give him a sweet Mash. And the next morning let
him bleed at the neck and mouth, the quantity of a quart or l^sse if the blood
be good, but if you do find the blood to be black, thick, hot, inflamed,
yellowish, frothy, or otherwise evil colored, take then from him two quarts,
after keep him warm, and let him purge, and for four or five days after,
give him either warm mashes, or white water.. This I have also known to be
very good. Another.

First let him Blood in the Neck and Mouth, then.

Take Germander, Sallet-oyle, and life-Honey of each four ounces, of Gum,
Draganet, dry red-Roses of each one ounce, put these pounded and chopped very
small into good Ale a quart, and warm it, and so give it him, then ride him
till he sweat, and order him as in the former cure. Of this I did never make
trial. Another.

Take of the tops of Time one handful, boil these in a quart of Beer, until
the Time do begin to wax tender, and soft, then strain it, and put to it, of
brown Sugar Candy, in powder two pennyworth, Anniseeds in fine powder one
pennyworth, and two pennyworth of ordinary Triacle, when all these are well
dissolved over the fire, give it your horse blood warm, but you must remember,
that you do let him blood, before you do give him this drink, in the Neck
and Mouth.. This I have often tried and found it right good. Another.

^ake of strong Ale one quart, and of Wormwood half a handful, long-Pepper,
Graynes, and the powder of dried Rue of each one ounce, London Triacle two
ounces, boil them to a third part, then take it off, and strain it, that
done, put into it of browne-sugar-Candy in powder half an ounce, and so give
it him blood warm.. This at twice giving will certainly cure his Fever.
Another.

Take Stone-Crop, of the juice thereof four Spoonefull, put this juice into
strong-Ale one quart, and so give it your horse, then let him be walked, (if
the wind be not too cold and sharp) an hour, then set him up and cover him
so as he may sweat an hour, then cool him by degrees, and let him drink no
cold water by any means, and let his provender be good, old, dry, and well
sifted Oats, but against the fit comes (whether the Fever be Quotidian,
Tertian, or Quartan) let him be kept fasting, for the longer he is fasting,
and more empty upon his sick days, the sooner will his Fever leave him.. This
is a well approved receipt, and let this suffice for ordinary Fevers, provided
that when his fits be gone from him, and that he appears more lightsome, and
well, it will be very good and wholesome for him if you cause him to be had
abroad, and walked warm covered, and so ayred in due time, in the warm Sun,
and that will greatly comfort him, and revive his spirits.


. 11. F.
Hippoph. What say you now to the Fever Hectique?


Hippos. I say Sir, it is a most dangerous and mortal Fever, and so
malignant, as that if a skillful Ferrier be not with him in time, it is
certain death, and first it begins with a Consumption in the flesh; it
proceeds of a hot humor engendered first in the stomach, which too much
Physic has occasioned, and by taking away of too much blood from him, in his
youth without necessity, wherefore it is a thing most perilous to take blood
from young horses upon very slight cause, and not to be over ready with
Physic, but only in case of great necessity. The signs to know this Fever
from any other, are to look into his mouth, and to draw forth his tongue, and
you shall find both his mouth and tongue raw, and mervailous hot, and having
little appetite to meat, his flesh will consume, and waste, and seen loose,
if you strike him with your hand upon the buttocks, the flesh thereof will
quiver and quake, and he will be continually subject to quaking and shaking all
his whole body over: besides he will be very much inclined to sweat as he
stands in the stable. The cure is. First to make this lotion for his mouth.

Take of running water or Well water two quarts, and put thereto of Sage, of
Yarrow, of Ribwort, of Plantane, of Bramble-leaves, Fever Hectique.
and of Hony-suckle-leaves of each one handful, with common Honey one
spoonefull, boil all these to the consumption of one moiety, and a little
before you take it from the fire, put to it the quantity of a wal-nut of Alume,
and two spoonefull, of Vinegar, when that is dissolved take it off, and drayne
the water from the herbs, or else slightly strayn it, which water you shall
keep for your use, and when you would wash his mouth therewith, fasten to a
stick a ragge, and so wash his mouth and tongue twice or thrice a day, and this
will make his mouth well again; or else if you do wash his mouth with the
surrop of Mulberries, it is very wholesome and good.. After give him this
drink.

Take of Aloes, one ounce powdered, of Garlic half an ounce, Anniseeeds, and
Licoris of each half an ounce, make first your Aloes, Anniseeds, and Licoris
into fine powder, and after bruise your Garlic a little, putting thereto, of
brown Sugar Candy three ounce, in powder, and add thereto of white Wine one
pint, warm this, and so give it your horse, then let him be ridden a little,
and so set him up warm, and let him be set upon the Trench three hours
before, and three hours after, and then either give him sweet Hay, or green
Corn, or the leaves of Sallowes, and toward night give him a sweet M^sh, and
give him this drink every other day, for three mornings, continuing him with
Mashes or white water, and let his Oats be very well sifted, and in short
time, he will do well again.. With this receipt I have cured sundry horses,
but then forget not to wash his mouth daily with the aforesaid lotion. But if
in all these several Fevers, you do find him either to be costiue, or very
hot in his body* then you may do well to administer that Clyster prescribed
you, in lib. 2. chap. 6.. 2. Clyster 2. letter C.


. 12. F.
Hippoph. What say you now (...) Fever Pestilent?


Hippos. It is a disease most contagious, for it is so malignant as that it
will infect so many horses as be in the stable where he stands, and it
proceeds from one of these two causes, viz. either from an infectious air,
or from the corruption of the blood, inflamed by means of intemperate riding,
and exercise. The signs are these, the horse will hang down his head in the
Manger, as if he slept, his eyes will water very much, and Inflammations will
arise at the roots of the Ears, as if he had the Vives.

The best cure I ever knew was this, with which I have cured many Horses
visited with a Pestilent Fever, Fever Pestilent.
first let him bleed well in the Neck vein, reserving the blood in a clean
basin, which when it is cold will be very bad, and ill colored, then wash his
mouth with the lotion, specified in the precedent. secondly apply to the
Temples this Plaster.

Take of Camamile, of Goates-milke, of the Juice of Sage, of Sallet-oyle, of
white Wine-vineger of each four spoonful, of red-rose-leaves dried one
handful, which must be either of a red-rose cake, or otherwise red-rose leaves
dried, beat them all in a Mortar, till they become of one body; and so thick,
as that you may spread it playster-wise, upon a linen cloth, then strew upon
the Plaster two or three Nut-megges made into fine powder, then make it good
and hot, putting the backside of the Plaster, into a Pewter dish, over a
chaffing dish and coals, and so administer it warm to the Horse, and for his
drink, let it be such water wherein have bin boiled violet leaves, Mallows,
and Sorrel, but if the fit do hold him violently, then.

Take of London Triacle three ounces, and dissolve it in Muskadine one pint,
and squeeze into it the juice of two or three good Lemons, and so administer it
with a horn: and this will presently put the fit from him, for the present.
The nature of this Fever is so malignant, and so contagiously hot, as that it
will furre the mouth exceedingly, and cause ulcers and sores to breed in the
mouth and throat: wherefore you shall do the more carefully, if every day you
do look into his mouth, and if you can perceive it to be furred, and clammy,
then fail you not to wash his mouth and tongue, either with the syrope of
Mulberries, or the lotion water taught you in the precedent Section: and if
through his too great heat, you do find your horses body to be costive, then
shall you administer this Clister.

Take of new milk, and of sallet oil, of each half a pint, and of the
decoction of Mallows, and of Violets, of each one pint, adding thereto of
Seen, one ounce, and of Century half an ounce, administer this clister blood
warm, and by thus ordering your Horse, you will infallibly cure him of his
fever pestilent; for I my self have cured many, and I never failed in any
one. Provided you do give him during the time of his physic, continually
morning and evening, either sweet Mashes, or white water, and be also dieted
and ordered as is fitting for a Horse that is in physic.


. 13. F.
Hippoph. What disease is that which of some is called the Flying-Worme?


Hippos. This malady is the same which the French Marishals do call
ver-volant, which we in England do call a Tetter or Ring worm, Ver vola^^
and by reason it runs up and down the body upon the skin, it is called by
the name of the Flying-worme. It comes by a heat in the blood, whereby is
engendered a billious, sh^rp, or hot humor which breeds to a Tetter or
Ring-worme, but most commonly it seazeth the rumpe of the horse, running down
all along the joints, till it get into the tail, where I have known it to
remain so long, until such time as it came to be a Canker: but yet sometimes
again, it will seize some fleshy part of the body of a horse, and so torment
him through its continual itching, as that the horse will (with frequent
rubbing himself against posts, pales, trees, and walls, etc. as also with his
teeth (if he can come to the place) bring away the hair, yea the skin and
flesh also. And this disease many ignorant Ferries have taken to be naught else
but the louse of a Hog, which to kill or destroy, they only apply a little
soap. But I have often known it to prove another thing, viz. a formal
Ring-worme or Tetter: it is easily known by the falling away of the hair, by
reason of the horses continual scrubbing when it is in the fleshy part, but if
it get into the joint, betwixt the top of the rump and the tail, then you
shall know it by a kind of scab, which you may with your finger feel, and if
you scrape or pick it away, then will issue forth by little and little, a kind
of thin water, which being let long to run, will in time run down into his
tail from joint to joint, and there become a Canker as I said before;
wherefore to prevent this inconvenience, if the Tetter be in the joint, then

Flying worm or T^tter.
Take of Precipitat two drams, and put it into a small vial glass, with fair
water, much more then will cover the powder, keeping it close stopped, and with
this water wash the place every day once, and it will infallibly cure it. And
always so soon as you have dressed the sorance with this water, and stopped
it up again close, then shake it together, and so let it remain until its
next dressing, which ought to be twice a day. But if the Tetter or Ring-worm be
in any fleshy part, it is killed by bathing the sorance with the juice of
Sothern-wood, Maudlin, and Ru^, of each like much, stamped together, and
strained, and so let the place be washed and bathed therewith every day once or
twice, till it be whole. I have thus cured many Tetters.


14. F.
Hippoph. What is good to keep a Horse that he be not tormented with Flies?


Hippos. These Flies are a vermin which are more bold then welcome to a Horse,
for what by their buzzing, their biting, and stinging, they do infinitely annoy
and afflict the poor beast, causing him many times to falter in his travel,
and lose his pace, and most commonly through his nodding and other evil
postures and gestures, provoked by these flies, they cause him so to fret, as
to loose his rain and comely carriage of hi^ body, whereby he has bin much
undervalued; besides in his travel these Flies do so cause him to fret and
fume, that he both overtoyleth himself in his way, causing him to sweat so
much, as that he losing his mettle, has many times thereby inflamed his blood,
and brought upon himself sickness, together with a cistemperature throughout
his whole body. So likewise being at grass, at what time the fly is too
busy, they do provoke him to run, and to scope about, by which means he being
many times very full, it causes crudities and raw digestions to arise in his
stomach, which breeds surfets, or other maladies, wherefore for prevention
thereof,

Take the leaves of Gourdes, Pumpions, or wild, or garden Cowcumbers, stamp
them, and strain them, and with the juice thereof wash your horse all over, and
the flies will not come nigh him. Of this I have made often trial. Another:

Take an Apple of Colliquintida, and slice or shred it into small pieces, and
boil it in ^yle de Bay, and so annoint your horse therewith, and the flies will
not approach him. This is also good. Another:

Take Mallows, stamp and strain them, and with the juice thereof wash your
horse, and it will keep away the flies. This is an approved good thing also.
Another:

Take Verdegreece made into very fine powder, and boil it in Vinegar, and wash
him therewith, being careful that none get into his eyes or ears. This is the
best and will last longest.


15. F.
Hippoph. WHat is good to mollify the foot of a Horse?


Hippos. If your horse has bin foundred, and that after being cured, his soles
and hoofes do wax dry and hard, they be either shrunk or in peril of
shrinking, then first take off his shoes, and let him be pared somewhat close,
but not too near, which done, with Bee-waxe molten annoint the soles with the
said molten wax, with a Goose-feather, and so set on his shoes again, then
three days after

Take tried Hog's Grease and Tar, of each four ounces, Feet to mollify.
of fat Pitch, and of Turpentine, of each two ounces, melt and mix all these
together, and first stop his feet therewith, and after annoint the coffin of
the hoofes good and thick with the same receipt. And this is the best mollifier
can be had in a cure of this nature. I have often used it.


16. F.
Hippoph. WHat remedy have you for the Fig in the foot of a Horse?


Hippos. This disease is so called by reason of that naughty flesh which
grows upon the frush or heel, which is in likeness and shape of a fig,
from whence this malady and sorance takes its denomination, and the French
also give it the very same Epitheton, viz. la Figne, which signifies a fig.
It comes by means of some hurt which the Horse has formerly received in his
foot (which was not well healed) by some nail, stub, thorn, bone, or stone, and
often times by some overreach, upon the heel or frush. It is apparent to the
eye, and therefore needs no other remonstrance. The cure is,

Cut away the hoof so as there may be a convenient space betwixt the sole and
the hoof, Fig in t^ foot.
to the end the fig may the more easily be cured, then put to the sorance a
piece of sponge which you must bind close upon the fig, which will eat it
off to the very root, then heal up the sore with the green ointment taught you
in lib. 2 chap. 10. 4. G. This I have found good. Another.

Cut away the fig close, either with your incision knife, or else burn it
off with a hot iron (which is the better way) and so lay unto it for two days
after tried Hogs grease to take away the fire.

Take then the tops of the most angry young nettles you can find, pound them
very small, and so lay them upon a linen cloth* just the bigness of the
fig, then take the powder of Verdegreece, and strew it upon the chopped
nettles, (which must be done before you lay it to the sorance) and so bind it
upon the sorance, renewing it every day once till the hoof have covered the
sore. This I do know to be a most certain cure, for it never did fail me.


17. F.
Hippoph. But now what say you to a Fistula? how do you cure that?


Hippos. A Fistula is a hollow ulcer which makes its way crooked, proceeding
often times from naughty and malignant humors; sometimes it is engendered from
some wound which has not bin well healed; sometimes it comes by means of a
stripe, which having been so strongly laid on, that it has bruised the flesh
to the bone, whereby it has putrified inwardly, and either brake forth of it
self, or was opened by the Ferrier, and thus it comes to be a Fistula:
sometimes it comes by a wrench or pinch, with a Collar in drawing, or by
being wrung by the tree of a bad saddle; and sometimes it ingendreth of its own
accord by the means of peccant and bilious humors, which has long lain
lurking in the body of the Horse. The signs how to know it are so manifest, as
that it needs not an Ecce. The way how to cure it, is to search to the
bottom either with a probe of lead, or else with some other thing which will
bend and yield which way soever the concavity of the sorance leads it: and
when you have found the bottom thereof, let it be opened downwards, if it may
possibly be done, to the end the corruption may the better issue from the
place, then taint it for two or three days with tried Hog's Grease, thereby to
cause the hole to be the wider, and then inject this water following:

Take of Sublimate, and of Precipi^at, of each so much as will lie upon a three
pence, of Alume, and of white Coperas, of each three ounces, burn all these in
an earthen pot, but first rub the bottom with a little oil, that it may not
burn there; this done, burn them all together, then take of fair clear
water, two quarts, boil this water first by it self, and scum it in the
boiling, then take it from the fire, and put in as much of this powder as will
lie upon a shilling at twice, and thus it is made. But if you be desirous to
make this water of more strength and efficacy, take then fair water, and
Coltrough or Smiths water, of each like much, and of white Wine Vinegar a third
part, and with the ashes of Ashen wood, make lie of them, with the water and
Vinegar, and so make your water with this powder and lie, and the former
ingredients, according as before is taught you. Inject this water with a
Syringe into the sorance, and in short time it will both kill the fistula,
Fistula.
and heal it up. This is a most approved and infallible cure. Another:

Take of the best honey one pint, of Verdigreece one ounce, make it into fine
powder, and so boil them together upon a soft fire three quarters of an hour,
that done, strain it into a gally pot, and so keep it for your use. This is a
most precious unguent wherewith to taint a fistula or poll evil, for it goes
down to the bottom, it eats away all dead and evil flesh, whereby to cause
that the carnifying flesh may heal the better. This I have often tried. I have
also another Aegiptiacum, which I make thus.

Take honey one pint, white Wine Vinegar, half a pint, Alum three ounces,
and Verdigreece finely powdered, one ounce and a half; boil all these
together, till it be thick: this is a good Aegyptiacum. But if you desire to
make it yet stronger, then put to these ingredients of Mercury sublimate in
fine powder one ounce, and of Arsnick three scruples powdered also, and so boil
them with the former ingredients. This last will kill any fistula or old ulcer
whatsoever being dressed therewith: but the other which is made only of
Vinegar, Alum, and Verdigreece, may be applied to a fistula in the mouth
without prejudice to the Horse. Of both these I have made often trial.


. 18. F.
Hippoph. HAve you not some good water beside, wherewith to wash a Fistula or
old sore?


Hippos. I can give you a most excellent water which is this:

Take white Wine Vinegar four pints, Fistula water.
of Camphire and of Mercury-Precipitate, of each half an ounce, green Treacle
three ounces, red Sage, Yarrow, and Rib wort, of each one handful, of Honey,
and of Hog's Grease, of each half a pound, boil all these together until the
one half be consumed, and then strain it, and so wash and cleanse the wound
with the liquor. X This is special good. Another no whit inferior to the
former.

Take of Coltrough water, four quarts, first boil it by it self a good while,
and scumme it so long as any scumme does arise, then strain it through a fine
cloth into a clean pot, and throw away the grounds, which will be black and
naught, then wash the Postnet clean wherein it was boiled, and put in your
water again. Then take of white Coperas, of Alum and of Verdegreece, of each
one pound, beat them all into fine powder, and put them into the water, and
boil them all together, and when it is boiled as much as will suffice, which
will soon be done, let it stand to settle a while, then pour the clear into a
glass, being first cold enough, and so keep it for your use. But the powder
which remains in the bottom, you may dry and keep in a box by it self, for
it will heal, and dry up any sore or ulcer. This water being injected with a
syringe of wood or pewter, will cure any fistula whatsoever, if it may come to
the bottom thereof. Of this water I have had great experience. But you must
understand that these several waters will only kill the cankerous humor of
the fistula, and therefore after the malice thereof is quelled, you must heal
up the sorance with the green ointment prescribed you in lib. 2* chap. 10. 4.
G. or else with some carnifying salve or unguent. Another:

Search the depth thereof with your Probe, as before is taught, you, but be
certain you find the bottom, then if the bottom be where you may boldly
make incision, do it, and that so wide, as that you may thrust in your finger,
to feel whether any bone or gristle be perished, or whether there be any
spungy, loose, dead, or proud flesh therein, which must first be gotten forth
either by incision, or by corrosive; then take of common honey four ounces,
and of Verdigreece one ounce, made into fine powder, boil these together,
keeping it always boiling, and stirring it, till it look red, then with a
taint of Hurds, taint it to the bottom, and make it so fast that it get not
forth, and renew the taint every day once, till it have done mattering, making
the taint every day shorter then other, and sprinckle upon it a little slaked
Lime. But if you cannot come to taint it to the bottom of the fistula, then
take strong Lie, Honey, Roch-Allum, white Mercury, of each as much as will
suffice, and boil them together, and inject it to the very bottom of the
fistula, and it will kill it. But if the fistula be in the head, then

Take the juice of Houseleeke, and dip a lock of black Wool into it, and put
the same into his ears, and so stitch them up, renewing it every day till it
be whole. This cure has been highly recommended unto me, but I never had
opportunity to make proof thereof. Another:

Take Roman Vitreall, Roch-Allum, and Rose Water, of each two ounces, boil all
these on a quick fire, till they come to be as hard as a stone, then beat it
to fine powder, and when you dress the sore, make a taint, which being dipped
in unguentum Aegyptiacum, roll then in this powder, and so convey the end of
your taint down to the very bottom of the fistula. This is the best way also
to cure a poll-evill, and this powder being laid upon an old sore, will both
heal and dry it up. This I only made twice proof of, the first time to a
fistula, and the second time to a poll-evill, both which cures I perfected. But
now you would gladly know how to ripen and break a fistula, wherefore

Take Brooke-lime, Mallows, Assmart, of each, like much, boil them in old
Chamberlye, till the herbs be very soft, and apply these herbs to the
swelling, neither do you renew it in two or three days, and then it will both
ripen and break any impostume. This I have often used, and found very good.
And let this suffice for this malady.


. 19. F.
Hippoph. NOw let us come to the Feet, how do you cure the Fetlock being hurt?


Hippos. If this sorance comes by any wound, by the biting of a Dog, or by
being cast in a Halter, then the best way to cure the same, is.

Take unslaked lime, and the yelke of an Egg of each like much, Fetlock hurt.
beat them together to a salve, or unguent, then mix therewith the juice of
one head of Garlic, and a little soot, and with this anoint the sore till it
be almost whole, then to skin the same,

Take Sallet oil, and oil of Roses of each one ounce, of Turpentine three
ounces, and of new wax one ounce, melt them altogether, and add to it a
fourth part of the powder Verdegrease, and herewith annoynting the sore, in few
days it will heal it, and skin it up very soundly.. This is a very well
approved Receipt. But if your horse have gotten a sore foot by means of any
cannell-nayle, or bruise, by treading upon a stone, which after rankleth
inwardly, or by other accident; then first rail the skin with your Cornet,
and lay upon sorance, Wheate-flower and Bores-grease well incorporate together,
and dress him therewith twice a day, for two days together, and at the second
days end,

Take the powder of Quick lime, Soap, and Tallow, and mix them well together
and for three days or more, apply it to the place, dressing it also twice a
day, then wash the wound with hot Vinegar, and put upon it Caprinell, till it
be whole. This I nev^r tried. Froathy o^ weeping hoof.
But if the hoof do weep, or froath by sending forth thin, watery, or
froathy stuff, then open the top thereof with your Cornet, so as the wound
may become hollow round about the extreamities thereof so far forth as that
you may come to the Master Keine to break it in sunder, which done, let it
bleed at pleasure, what it will, and when the Vein has stanched, fill up the
wound with Salt finely powdered, then take Hurds, and steep them in Vinegar,
and so stop the wound therewith, and bind thereto a cloth to keep the same
from falling away, and it will cure it.. But if the sole be hoof, and in
danger to fall away, draw it round twixt the sole and the hoof with your
drawing Iron, and so take out the so^e quite, and then suffer his foot to bleed
well, then apply to it this Plaster.

Take the whites of Eggs, and beat them a little, and so laying them upon
Hurds, apply it to the foot, and bind it on that it fall not off, and let it
remain on so by the space of two days, which ended open it, and wash the
foot with strong Vinegar warmed, and then fill the sole with the powder of
Salt and Tartar mixed together, and so bind it up with Hurds, steeped in strong
Vinegar, and thus dress it till it be whole. These two Receipts were taught me
by a famous Ferrier of Paris in France, but I never had occasion to make use of
it, howbeit I esteem them to be very good. But if your horse be foundred in
the feet, and that he has not bin foundred above four days, then with this
ensuing Receipt you may easily set him upright, and make him sound again in
four days more. The Cure is this.

Foundring in the feet.
First, let him blood in the Neck, Breast, and Spur veins, and take from him
of blood two quarts, which you must receive in a Basin, or other clean
vessel, with which make this Charge as follows.

Take the blood, and put into it eight new laid Eggs shells and all, beat them
well with the blood, put to it of Bole-armonacke in fine powder half a pound,
strong white Wine-Vineger one pint, Sanguis Draconis three ounces, in fine
powder, make this up with Wheat meal good and thick so much as will suffice,
with this, charge his Back, Reins, Breast Thighs, Fetlockes, and Soles, and
spread two clothes Plaister-wise, good and thick, and apply them to the Coffin
of his Hoofes, and bind the fore-legges above the knees good and straight, with
broad Filletting, or Listes, then Ride him two hours upon a hard way, which if
it be paved or pitched is the better, his feet having been pared reasonable
near before hand, and when you do bring him into the stable, let his feet be
stopped with this Charge.

Take Rye, or Wheate-branne, Ox or Cow-dunge, Sheepes-suet, Turpentine (which
must be put in last) let your Sheepes-Suet, be of the fat of the loyne of
Mutton, and minced very small, melt and heat all these upon the fire, and mix
them very well in the heating, and then put in your branne to make it into a
stiff paste, all which being through hot, then last of all put in your
Turpentine, and so incorporate all very well together, with this stop your
horse, who being thus three or four days charged, and stopped, ridden and
kept warm, and not suffered to drink cold water, but either Mashes, or white
water, he will be sound in four or six days. This is a most excellent
Receipt, for with it I have recovered many foundred horses. If it be a dry
Foundring, especially with too long standing in the Stable, then first pare him
somewhat near, and let him bleed well in the Toe-veines, then.

Take Eggs and roast them blew hard, raked up in the hot embers, and together
with the powder of Comin, stop his feet therewith so hot as they may be taken
out of the embers, and put over the sole a piece of leather, with splents
close, to keep the Eggs that they come not forth.

Take then a great Onion, pill and stamp it, and let it infuse or steep four
and twenty hours together before, in the strongest white Wine-Vineger, you can
get, so much as will suffice, so that it may be in a readiness, against you
have stopped your horse, which must be given him to drink with a horn
fasting, and after let him be warm covered, littered, let him stand upon the
Trench three hours, and after that you may give him meat, and white water..
This is a most approved good cure. If your horse have been long foundred, as a
month or better, to make a perfect cure, and to set him up sound again, it is
needful the soles of his feet be taken out, by which means new and better
will come in their room, wherefore when you do intend to take them off, have
in a readiness these things, viz.

Take the tender tops of Isope three handfuls, Foundre^ long.
pound them to mash in a Mortar, wherewith to stanch his bleeding, then have
also further in a readiness this receipt.

Take Snayles in the shells and break the shells, so much as will suffice, and
take forth the Snayles, and reserve them, then take Bay Salt one handful, and
of the tendrest tops of the angriest red-nettles you can find, two or three
good handful, beat them with your snailes and salt in a Mortar to a very
salve, then take out the sole, then presently stanch the bleeding with your
Isope, and so soon as the foot leaves bleeding, apply to the foot your
other Medicine, of Snayles, Salt and Nettles, and so bind up the foot with
clothes, and so let it remain four and twenty hours, then open it, and
heal up the sorance with your green ointment taught you in lib 2. chap. 10..
4. and within two days you shall see a new sole coming,. This is right good.

But if he be foundred both in feet and body at once, Foundred the feet a^
body.
and the same time, as falls out oftimes, through indiscreete and immoderate
Riding, by a most violent heat given him, whereby the blood is become inflamed,
and his grease molten, then first rake him, and give him the Clister prescribed
you in lib. 2. chap. 11.. 8. C. Clister 8. and the next day let him blood in
the neck vein to a good quantity, reserving the blood, and keeping it from
clotting, by continual stirring, till it be cold; reserve I say of this blood
half a pint, by it self, to put into his drink, and the residue keep
wherewith to make a charge; Now for his drink let it be thus made.

Take of good Sack one pint, of the blood you saved for his drink half a
pint, of London Triacle, and of Diapente, of each one spoonful, and of
mans-ordure warm as it comes from him, the quantity of a wall-nut, brew and
mix all these well together, and give it him to drink blood warm. This
drink thus given, Charge him with this Charge.

Take the residue of the blood you kept, and put unto it twelve new-laid Eggs
with their shells, and beat them together, then put thereunto of Bole-armoniack
in powder four ounces, Vinegar half a pint, Sanguis Draconis in powder three
ounces, and with Wheat meal, thicken it to a convenient Charge. Charge his
Back, Breast, Loins, Legs, and Feet herewith, both above and beneath the
knees, laying it on against the hair. This done, then

Take unslaked-lime, and Orpiment, of each like much, q.s. and dissolve them in
running water, and let it stand two good hours, and after it is thus prepared,
take as much Matrosetum as will bring it to a thick substance, which being
made good and hot, annoint the coffins of his hoofes therewith, especially
about the cronets, and stop also the soles of his feet with the same medicine,
and if you let him blood in the toe-veynes well, it will be the better, and he
will be the sooner, better, and sounder cured. This way I have cured two Horses
foundred in the body and feet, never having applied it but unto those two
only. But if your horse be hoofe-bound, then

Hoof bounden.
Take Turpentine and sheeps-suet, of each half a pound, Wax a little, as much
as will suffice, Sallet-oyle half a pint, boil all these together, but put
in your Turpentine last, and as these boil, keep them with continual
stirring, and herewith annoint his hoofes once a day well, or once in two
days, and he will do well. But if it be but an ordinary heat in the feet
newly taken, then

Take Wheat bran and Hogs grease, and make them to a Poultesse, and apply it
as well to the coffins, as the soles, and he will be well again. These two
latter receipts a worty Knight taught me, but as yet I never made use, but of
the former, which I have found to be very good.


. 20. F.
Hippoph But yet Hipposerus, you have not showed me how this malady comes.


Hippos. That was but forgotten Sir, I will now therefore do it. A foundring
in the feet comes evermore after great and over-violent labor, whereby the
whole body is become distempered, the peccant and malignant humors stirred,
the blood inflamed, and the grease molten, which falling down into his feet,
there setleth, and in short time after, to wit, in 24 hours, the poor creature
is hardly able to stand, or if he do, it is after a very feeble manner, holding
his four feet together, so as you may easily with your hand throw him to the
ground, besides he will stand trembling, quaking, and shaking, as if he had a
shaking ague, nor would he stand at all, unless he be enforced, for the soles
and coffins of his feet will be so sore, his joints and sinews so stiff and
benumbed, that he cannot stand but with very much anguish and pain: wherefore
if he may have his mind, he would always be lying, and his whole body will be
distempered, and so much abound with heat, as rather to desire cold water,
rather then meat, which if it be given him, then will he quake and quiver anew,
and be in such pangs for the time, as that you would think he would assuredly
dye. This disease comes also to a Horse by being watered when he is very fat,
and ridden till he do sweat, causing him to take sudden cold therewith: also
after a great heat taken, to be set up without exercise upon the cold Planks,
without litter, or to be washed, or walked after great labor, the Horse being
very hot and ketty, (for this infirmity falls most commonly upon fat Horses,
but very seldom upon lean) also to water your Horse in shallow places, or
waters where the water ascends not higher then his pasternes, by which means
through the sudden coldness of the water at his feet, causes the molten
grease descending unto the feet, to cake and congeale, which is the prime
ground of this malady. And this not only my self, but all the most perite
Ferriers do with an unanimous assent acknowledge. And therefore I do admonish
you and every man, who is the Horses friend,

First, to be very careful not to exercise his Horse too soon after his

Secondly, whilst he is very fat; that he do not over-travaile, over-labour,

Thirdly, that having traveled hard, and to prevent his foundring,

Fourthly, if one hour before you get to your lodging, you ride belly, (but
not deeper) then water him by degrees, still betwixt every draught, stirring
and removing him a little, it would not be amiss; but then so soon as you be
come forth of the water, it were very good you did continue him in the same
pace, going neither faster or slower, (like as I have before inculcated) it
will be the better also, and your Horse out of danger of foundring.

Fifthly, forbear evermore (especially if your Horse be heated) to

Sixthly, besides his being warm set up with litter enough, let him legs as
body, for it is a most wholesome thing, it dissolveth molten grease very much,
and it does dissiipate and send away bad humors.

Lastly, picking and stopping of his feet in time of journeying, and Horse,
howsoever many other ways there are, which I have touched, by reason they are
so vulgarly known to every man, and therefore your self cannot be ignorant of
them.


. 21. F.
Hippoph. HOw do you help the foundring in the body?


Hippos. This comes often times by eating too much Provender whilst the Horse
is yet very hot, suddenly given him after great labor, whereby his meat not
being well digested, (from whence) does occasion crudities, raw digestion, and
the evil habit in and about the stomach, whereby many ill humors are
engendered, which will soon be diffused throughout the whole body, by which
means the very vigor and strength of the Horse becomes to be much decayed,
and in a manner quite lost, enfeebling every joint and member in such wise, as
to lose almost the use of going, and being once laid not able to rise again
without help: nor can he either dung or stale, but with mickle pain;
foundring in the body comes also sometimes, when by traveling and the horse
very hot, you suffer him then to drink his fill of cold water, and after do
not give him exercise enough, which might warm the same in his belly, wherefore
it is most certain that the grease being molten, and the blood inflamed, the
humors being stirred and dissolved, will presently resort to its center, which
if they once settle in the body, it must be in and about the heart, if not,
they then must down lower; to wit, either to the legs or feet, and there
residing, engender these and such like maladies, whereof we have entreated,
wherefore by eating and drinking out of its due season, begets an evil
habit of the stomach, so as if often times present cure be not had, the Horse
becomes desperate sick, which sickness will mathematically usher in his
death. Now the signs whereby to know when a Horse is foundred in his body, be
these; the hair will stare, and he will be very chill, he will shiver and
shake after cold water, and whilst he is in drinking, the water some of it will
issue out of his nose, and after two or three days, his legs will swell,
especially his hinder legs, and after a while they will begin to pill, he
will begin to have a dry cough at first, but after it will be more moist, and
then his eyes will water, and his nose run with white flegmaticke stuff, and
he will forsake his meat, and his head will so much pain him, as that he will
not be able to hold it out of the manger, and seem as if he were always
sleeping, etc.


. 22. F.
Hippoph. FRom whence proceeds this word foundring?


Hippos. From the French word Fundu, which is melting, which word we many times
use in our language, and therefore when through extreme toil and labor of
riding or other exercise, the grease is dissolved, and falls to running, we say
then that the horses grease is molten, and that he is foundred, for whereas the
French calls foundring in the body, Morfundu, it is none other thing with us,
then plain foundring, or a surfeit given in the body of a Horse. As for the
Cure, the best way is and most agreeable to Art to purge him, but not in that
violent manner, as we use in case of other diseases, but first to rake him,
then to administer to him this Clister.

Take of Mallows three handfuls, and boil them in fair water two quarts, to
one quart, then strain it, and put to it of fresh or svveet butter, six
ounces, and of Sallet oil half a pint, and so administer it to him
Clister-wise blood warm, that done, walk him up and down in the vvarm sun,
or in some vvarm house, until he do begin to empty himself, then keep him
fasting three or four hours, keeping him vvarm, and to a stomach for three or
four days, but let him have but that one Clister only, and let all his Hay
be sprinkled with water, and let his drink be either sweet Mashes or white
water, which when he has drunk, give him the Malt or Bran to eat, and let his
Provender be very little for fourteen days after, especially if his disease
came through glut of Provender: Nevertheless the day after his Clister, give
him this cordial drink.

Take of Muskadine one quart, of Sugar two ounces, of life honey four ounces,
of Cinnamon half an ounce, Licoris and Anniseeds, of each one spoonful; all
these made into fine powder, put them into the Muskadine, and warm them on the
fire till they be dissolved, and then give it him blood warm, then walk him
in the Sun, or warm house an hour, then set him upon the trench warm
clothed and littered, and so let him stand three hours fasting, unless
sometimes you put a little Armen into his mouth, then give him Hay sprinkled
with water, and after an hour a sweet Mash, or white water, and then a few
Oats well sifted and dusted, and this by a little at once, remembering to take
blood from the neck vein, the same morning you give him this drink, and that
a little before he takes it, and prick him also in the mouth, and the next
day after this drink, perfume his head with Storax, Benjamin, and Frankincense,
and so order him according as you in your discretion shall think to be most
meet, only remember to air him every day abroad, if there be no wind, (for
wind is hurtful to him) and thus doing you may recover him, and make him a
sound Horse again. This is singular good. Another:

First give him this Clister, take the flowers of Melelote, Anniseeds and
Licoris, Linseeds, Silleris-Montani, of each half an ounce, Polipodium of the
Oak, two ounces and a half, Agnus-Castus one handful, the herb Mercury,
Mallows, Pellitory of the Well, Branca-ursina, of each three handfuls, make a
decoction of al these, lettiog it boil to a quart, then put to it of red wax
one ounce and a half, of Cassia newly drawn, three ounces, of Diafennicon, two
ounces of Benedicta, one ounce of oil of nuts, as much as will suffice, and of
all these make your Clister according to Art, which you shall give to your
horse so soon as you do suppose or suspect him to droope, and after this
Clister has done working, give him the drink prescribed in lib. 2. chap. 9.
10. F. which is very proper and good, provided that you do administer it so
soon as you do perceive your horse to be foundred in the body, and withal
adding to the drink the juice of three great Onions, well beaten and strained
into the white Wine, and that he be dressed, ayered, ridden, and ordered as is
fitting and usual for horses in physic. Of this I have made trial, and do
find it to be good. Another:

Take a head of Garlic, of Pepper, of Ginger, and of Grains, of each two
penny worth, make all these into fine powder, and put them into strong Ale one
quart, and so give it him to drink bloud-warm: give him this drink two or three
mornings, and order him as is before prescribed. And when you do find that he
has gotten strength, let him blood in the neck and spurre-veynes. This is
very good. All cordial drinks are good for this infirmity.


. 23. F.
Hippoph. What is your best cure for a false Quarter?


Hippos. A false Quarter is a very evil sorance, it is a rift, crack, or
chinke, which is most commonly upon the inside of the hoof, yet sometimes
(though rarely) it happens upon the out side, it is occasioned sometimes by
evil shooing, by evil paring, and sometimes by gravelling, or a prick with a
nail or stub: nevertheless which way soever it comes, it will cause the
Horse to halt, and watrish blood will many times issue out of the rift or
chinke; the signs are needless to recite, they be so manifest: the only way
to cure this malady and sorance is, first to take off the shoe, and to cut
away so much of the shoe on that side where the grief is, as that the shoe
being immediately set on again, the chinke may be wholly uncovered, False
quarter.
then open the chink to the quick with your drawing iron, and then fill up the
rift with a roll of hurds dipped in this unguent.

Take Turpentine, Wax, and Sheepes-suet, of each like much, melt them
together, and your roll of hurds being dipped therein, stop the rift
therewith, renewing it once a day till it be whole, and thus the rift or chinke
being with this ointment closed in the top, draw the place betwixt the hoof
and the hair with a hot iron overthwart that place, which will cause the hoof
to grow, and shoot all whole dovvnvvards, and when your Horse goes upright
and sound again, let him not be ridden with any other shoe until the hoof
be throughout hardened, neither let him be ridden upon any hard ground, till
his hoof is become very sound and perfect. Another.

For a false Quarter, and to cause the hoof to grow:

First prepare a flat piece of wood, making it an inch broad at the least, and
so slender, as that it will bend like to a hoop, which must be also so long, as
that it may come well nigh twice about the cronet of the hoof: then when you
are to bring it about the hoof, have in a readiness a piece of filliting,
which must be long enough, which you must cut into two pieces, then having
brought the hoope about the cronet, with one piece of the filliting, bind fast
the top of the hoope, which fastening must be behind against the heel, and
bound very straight and hard, and then the filliting so bound, must be twisted
three or four times, and so brought about upon the hoope, and the ends made
fast before upon the hoop: then take the other piece of filliting, and few it
upon the top of the first filliting, which you bound about the hoof, and then
let it be sewed as well upon the one side of the hoof as the other, so fast
sewed on, as that it cannot get off. Now you must understand that before you
do bind the foot of the Horse with the wooden hoop, and filliting, you must
prepare the sorance of the said false quarter, by drawing the place with yowr
drawing iron, so close and near, till you come almost to the very quick, and
then will issue out a kind of sweaty or deawy moisture, which you shall
perceive, then is it time to bind on the hoop and filliting, according as I
have before prescribed you: but yet before you do any thing at all unto the
foot, or false quarter, have your salve in a readiness which is to be applied
unto the chinkes of the false quarter, viz.

Take of the roots of Lingua-Bovis, green, and newly gathered, of the roots of
Consolida-Major, and the root of Mallows, all newly gathered, of each half a
pound, these must be washed and scraped very clean, and cut into small pieces;
let these roots be boiled in Aligant two quarts, until the ^ine be boiled
quite away, and that the roots become very soft, then pound them very well, and
strain them through a fine searser, and that it may strain the better,
reserve a little of the Wine as it boyleth, wherewith to moysten it in the
strayning.

Take then of Venice Turpentine, of new Wax, and of Burgundy Pitch, of each
half a pound, of black Pitch four ounces, of the oldest oil Olive one
quart, put these things with the former ingredients into a clean kettle or
Posnet, but yet after this manner, viz.

First the roots, then all the other things by themselves, the one after the
other, the Turpentine only excepted, which must be put in when all the other
ingredients be molten, you must let all these boil, until all the Wine be
consumed, and the ingredients be very well incorporate, and then put in the
Turpentine, and then when it has boiled one waume or two, take it from the
fire, and keep it with continual stirring, till it be cold, and so keep it in
some clean vessel for your use; you must also add unto these things (which I
had almost forgotten) of Frankincense four ounces, made into fine powder.

This salve is to soften and mollify the hoof whereby to make it to grow;
having thus prepared your salve, before you bind the hoof, with the hoope, and
Filleting as before is showed, annoint and rub very well, where the hoope and
filletting is to be placed, with the salve, and then bind on the hoope with
the said filletting, that don take hurds and roll it up into a roll, the full
length of the chinke of the quarter, and having first anointed the hurds very
well with the salve, lay it upon the chinke of the false quarter, and so bind
the hoof up with the two long pieces of the aforesaid Filletting, which were
sewed unto the other piece of the Filletting, which bound and made fast the
hoope: and let him not be dressed but once every three days, untying all,
as well the hoope as filletting; Continue him to this kind of dressing,
fiveteene or twenty days, or otherwise according as your discretion shall
think to be requisite.

Now when you shall find that the salve has brought up the hoof, and that now
you know not how to harden it, and make it solid and sound, to make an able
cure thereof, apply this ensuing salve.

Take of the strongest white Wine-Vineger one quart, Diers-gals, of
greene-Coperas both bruised, of each four ounce, boil these in the Vinegar to
the consumption of a moyity, then strain it, and put unto it of old
Sallet-oyle one pint, and so boil it again, until the Vinegar be all
consumed, which you shall know by stirring it with a little stick, and drawing
the stick forth let it drop into the fire, and if that which droppeth from the
stick into the fire, do not crackle, the^ let it boil yet longer, for then it
is not enough, but when it is sufficiently boiled, by dropping in a little of
the medicine, it will burn without crackling, then take lyturgy of Gold, and
lyturgy of Silver, of each half a pound, make them into very fine powder and
searse them. Take then the Skillet from the fire, and let the medicine stand
till it be almost cold, then mix well the lyturgys and put them in, for if
they should be put in whilst the liquour is hot, they would fly forth of the
Skillet again: t^en set the Skillet upon the coals again, and so let it
boil upon a gentle fire, otherwise you shall not now be able to keep in the
medicine, and so boil it up, keeping it continually stirring until it become
to be of a deep or dark gray, and do cleave unto the thing with which it is
stirred, and that it does rope like unto glue, then add unto it of new
Bee-waxe three ounces, which must be first molten by it self, and then put
also into the medicine of foot made into very fine powder, and which is made
of wood, and also of white lead in powder, of each three ounces, these I say
being made into very fine powder, must be put into the medicine, after it is
taken from the fire, and by continual stirring made half cold, and so set
upon the fire again, and kept by continual stirring until it be thoroughly
incorporate, and thus it is made; and when it does begin to be so cold, as that
it may be handled, then make it up into Rowles, and so keep it for your use.
And when you are to use the salve, take away the hoope Fillitting and all, and
all annoint the hoof with the salve, and so bind upon the hoof a linen
cloth to cause that the medicine may remain on, and let him be anointed
therewith, every day once till the hoof be so hard as that he may be able to
travel.. This receipt I do hold to be the most sovereign of any that ever was
yet known, which was taught me by a French man, who was so careful to give me
ample instructions therein, as that he bound on the hoop and Fillittings (which
are the most difficult parts of the Cure) in my presence, for he was very
desirous to have me fully instructed therein.


24. F.
^^ppoph. WHat disease is that which is called the Flanks?


Hippos. This disease called the Flanks is different from the former, neither
have we no proper name for it, unless we will name the same the Plurisie, for
the Epithete we have from the French, who style the same Mal-de-Flankes, it is
when your horse is troubled with over much abundance of blood, whereby he
either ingendreth a Mainge, or else falls dangerously sick thereby, who by
reason he has been oft-times let blood before, his body now will look for
it, whereof he missing, falls either into very dangerous, or no less
loathsome Maladies, the cure is.

First take blood from both sides the Neck, Flanke^ maldes^
and three days after in both the spur veins, in the Mouth, and in the
Temple-veines; then give him a drink of Diapente and sweet Sack, and he will
do well.. This is very good.


. 25. F.
Hippoph. What good Charge have you wherewith to stop the Feet?


Hippos. I think I have sufficiently showed you already, notwithstanding for
the residue, I do remit you to its proper place, when and where I will give you
store of good Receipts, and therefore I leave it for the present.


26. F.
Hippoph. What is good to stay a Flux.


Hippos. This comes of cold taken, sometimes by reason nature is offended
with some choleric humor proceeding from the Liver or Gall, into the Guts: it
comes eftsoons, when a horse drinks too much, presently after the eating a
great quantity of Provender, for by that means the water coming to the
Provender, causes the Provender to swell, whereby crudities are bred in the
stomach, and so conveyed down into the Guts, which occasioneth his Flux, also
it comes by traveling too soon after provender, it not being well digested
before: and it will come also to a Horse by drinking cold water when he is very
hot, and after (the water not being presently warmed in his belly) is the cause
of a Lax or Flux. It will also come by eating of a Feather, Hen-dung, Spider,
some venomous worm, or other troublesome creature; and therefore my counsel
is, not to stop a Flux too hastily, unless you do find that your horse do
purge too too violently, and then be you well assured, that nature is not a
little offended, for it will bring him in short time to great weakness, and
debility of body, give him therefore first the Clyster Laxative, Flux.
which you have taught you in lib. 2. chap. 6. 8. Clyster 21. letter C. and
that will carry away from him all that may any way offend him, and a day after
give him t^^^ drink.

Bean flower, and Bole-Armoniack powdered of each three ounces, mix them with
red Wine or Tinte one quart, give it him blood warm, and after keep him warm
in the stable, and let him have Hay and Oats, by a little at a time, and that
often, and either sweet Mashes or white water,. This is very good. Another.

Take of red Wine one quart, and Bay Salt one handful, and brew them well
together, and with a horn give it him, and this will stay his scowring,. This
is also an approved Cure. Another.

Take of wood Ashes finely searsed, and of Bole-Armoniack made into very fine
powder, of each like much, put them into the water that he is to drink, and
let him drink thereof, morning and evening, and this will stay his Flux,. But
if it be a violent scowring, proceeding from the eating of a Feather, or some
other naughty thing, so as this will not stay it, then

Take the entrals of a Pullet, or great Chicken, all but the Gizard, and mix
with them of Spike-nard one ounce, and make him swallow it, and this will
infallibly stay his scowring, yea if it be a bloody Flux.. This is special
good.


27. F.
Hippoph. What good Receipt have you to Mundifie, cleanse, and heal foul and
old Sores?


Hippos. I had thought Sir, you would not have fallen upon this till it had
come to its proper place, when and where we should have the particular matters
of Sores by themselves, together with their cures: but sithence you are pleased
to touch them in this place, I will give you one Receipt which cannot easily be
paralleld.

Take of green Coperas, and of Saltpeter, of each half a pound, Foul an old
sores ^ mundifie.
bay Salt, and Salt-Gemma, of each three ounces, Arsnick one ounce, put all
these finely powdered into a stillitory glass, the pot or bottom thereof well
nealed, and put also thereunto of the strongest white Wine Vinegar one pint,
set the pot on the fire, and put on the head, closing it with Cute of Hermes,
and being thus placed in the furnace, make under it a strong fire, by the space
of five or six hours, and with your Receptory take the first water that
comes, for that is the very strongest and best, and after an hour the fire
will be out of the warer, then stop up the glass very close, and so keep the
water for your use. The next water is also good, but not so strong as the
first, but reserve it also by it self, as you do the first. And when you are
to wash any sores therewith, be very careful that you lay none of this water
upon either sinews or veins, for that it will burn them in sunder, but where
Ulcers and fouler old sores be in the fleshy parts, this water will work
wonders if wounds be washed with it, and you careful in the application
thereof. Of this I have had great experience. Another I have taught me by an
expert Marishall of France, but by reason of the extreme violence thereof I
never durst use it, which is called the spirit of Tin, which will also
mundifie all sorts of old sores, and the French Marishals do use it much. And
this is the Receipt, viz.

Take Mercury one ounce, Spirit of Tin.
and put into an old clean pewter pottinger, and fill up the pottinger with
Plantane water, and with your finger stir the Mercury about the pottinger
till it be quite dissolved, and then the water will become white, then let it
stand an hour in the pottinger, then pour forth the water into a clean
glasse-viall, and then you shall see in the bottom of your pottenger, the
Tin run liquid like unto Quicksilver, or life as if it were melted, for
that is your spirit of Tin, and thus is it made.


28. F.
Hippoph. WHat is to be administered to a Horse that forsakes his meat?


Hippos. There be many causes that may make a Horse to forsake his meat, and
yet not be sick at all, and so also by occasion of sickness that either
coming upon him, or else which has already seized him. And first a Horse may
forsake his meat, and forbear to eat for some time, no whit sick, as when
he shall either linger after Mares, or after grass being weary of dry meat:
again, he may forbear his meat, and yet not be sick by means of some
accident or inconvenience bred in him, or befalne unto him, as by having the
Lamps, Barbs, Giggs, Blisters, bloudy-rifts, tongue hurt, pain in the teeth,
or some such like infirmity in or about his mouth,, these may be causes that
may induce him to forbear to eat, and yet the creature not sick, but
otherwise healthy and hungry, and feign would feed, but either cannot or dare
not. Also a Horse may forsake his meat, being through the inconsiderateness
of his keeper cloyed, whereby he does loath his meat, sometimes through
over-ayerings morning and evening, sometimes again by suffering him to eat
being very hot after great swearing, upon immoderate riding and toil, or after
water or washing being also very hot. These and many more may be the causes why
a Horse may forsake his meat, and yet not be sick. And he may also forsake his
meat by reason of sickness ensuing, as upon Colds, Rhumes, and Catarres newly
taken, and beginning to be felt upon him: so also he may forsake his meat, by
reason of sickness which has already seized him, as in cases of Glanders,
Fevers, Morfounding, Consumption, Dropsy, and the like, whereby it is made
most apparent that he feeds not because he is already sick. As touching the
first point, if you do perceive him to forsake his meat, and that you cannot
easily find the reason thereof, then the first thing you do, search his
mouth, lips, and tongue, and if you find any thing there amiss, let it be
presently amended, but if you cannot find any thing there amiss, then examine
his keeper, and if you may perceive that it came through his default or
negligence, either by the cloying him with Provender, or otherwise according as
I have heretofore touched, then give him a few branches of Savin, and let him
be ayered abroad, keeping him upon the Trench fasting to procure him a stomach,
and then feed him by degrees, and that by a little at once, so he will fall to
his meat again with good appetite, feed heartily, and do well again. But if
you do find that his forsaking of meat comes by means of any sickness
which has already seized him, then give him this drink, viz.

Forsaking meat.
Take of white Wine one quart, Polipodium of Oak, a red Cole-wort-leafe,
Hore-hound, Mints, she-Holly, Iuniper-berries, Ginger, Parsley-seeds,
Fennell-seeds, of each three ounces, beat into fine powder what is to be
powdered, and chop and stamp the herbs small, and so put all into the Wine, and
boil them a pretty while, then strain it, and give it your horse blood warm,
then leap his back, and trot him softly upon fair ground an hour, but not to
sweat by any means, then so soon as he comes into the stable, cloth, and
litter him warm, and wash his mouth with water and salt, and set him upon the
Trench, and put over his nostrils a fine linen ragge steeped in sour leven,
infused first in the best and strongest white Wine Vinegar, and the juice of
Sorrel, and let him stand so three hours at the least, then unbit him, and
bring him meat, but by little at once, for fear of cloying his weak stomach,
neither let him have any Mashes, or cold water, but white water only, until
such time as he has found his stomach again. This I have often made trial
of, and have found it to be right good. Another:

Take Rue and Pepper, of each like much, stamp them together to a thick salve,
then take a good lump thereof, and put it up a good way into his mouth, and let
him champ and chew it a good while, and so soon as you do suffer him to open
his mouth, he will put it out, and fall to feeding heartily. This is not
inferior to the former. Another:

Take the leaves of Briony, and give him them to eat, and it will bring him to
a good stomach suddenly. This was taught me by a very good Ferrier, who avowed
it to me to be special good, but I never made trial thereof.


29. F.
Hippoph. HOw do you cure a running Frush?


Hippos. This is a naughty sorance, which I have heard rural Smiths to call
the Frog, by reason that it breeds in that spungy part of the heel, which
they call the Frog. This sorance comes sometimes when the Smith inconsiderately
as he pareth that part, does go to the quick, whereby it bleedeth, which
after becomes sore, and comes to the running Frush, for that the horse
being traveled, whilst it is raw, and so the gravel getting into it, does
cause the place to rankle and impostumate, and it will come in short time to be
a running sore, which will so stink, as not well to be endured: sometimes
again it comes by reason of evil humors which do fall down into the legs,
and makes its way out at the Frush, it being the softest and tendrest part of
all the foot. And sometimes it comes by a bruise which the horse may easily
take by treading upon some stone, which inwardly corrupting, putrifieth, and so
is engendered a running Frush. The signs to know it is, the horse will go
lame, either upon hard or durty ways, whereby the gravel does get in, and
fret and pain him at the quick, and you shall perceive that when he rests,
the Frush will weep, sending forth watery stuff from the Frush. The way to
cure it is,

Take stale Chamberlye, Frush running.
and boil it with a good quantity of Alum, and keep it in a glass close
stopped by it self for your use. Then take of red Nettles two handfuls, the
strongest and keenest, dry them that they may be made into fine powder, then
look what quantity of this powder you have, add also unto it the like quantity
of Pepper, made also into very fine powder, and mix them very well together,
and keep it either in some dry bladder, or box for your use also: and when you
have occasion to use this water, and powder for this sorance, first take off
the shoe, and open the Frush, so that you may come unto the very bottom, then
wash the sorance very clean and well with this water made warm, then put on
the shoe again, but first let it be hollowed, that it hurt not the Frush, and
let the heels of the shoe be wide enough, then the sorance being thus clean
washed and purged from all gravel and mattrative stuff, and the shoe set on
as aforesaid, fill the wound full with this powder, and stop it with Hurds, and
splent it that the Hurds may keep in the powder, and that nothing get to the
sore, and thus wash and renew the powder to the place grieved every day once,
and in a week or little more it will be perfectly sound and whole again,
provided you suffer not any dung to come to the grief, and that he tread not
in any wet during the time of the Cure, neither should he go forth of the
Stable. And thus have I cured many horses of this malady. Another,

Take of Soot and Bay Salt, of each one handful, and pound them very well
together, (having opened and washed the sorance as before is showed) and put
unto your Soot and Salt, the whites of three new laid Eggs, and so temper and
beat all well together, till you bring it to one entire body, then dip some
hurds therein, and so stop not only the place it self, being opened and made
raw, but all the sole besides, and so stop up the Frush, splenting it in such
sort, whereby the medicine may be kept in, and thus let him be dressed once a
day, and ordered as before is premonished, and he soon will be whole and
sound. This I have often proved, and cured many sorances of this nature.


. 30. F.
Hippoph. What is best to cure a Fret?


Hippos. This disease you call the Fret, is only gripings and pain in the
belly, which comes of sundry causes. The French do call it Tranchaisons,
which do signify gripings, it is the plain Collicke, caused of wind,
sometimes of bilious and sharp humors, which descending from the stomach, go
down into the guts, and there torment him, and sometimes it comes by reason
of Worms, Bots, or Truncheons, which do engender in the stomach or guts of
the Horse, which do feed and gnaw upon the paunch and guts, putting him to
mickle pain and perplexity. The signs are, he will forsake his meat, lie down
often, and tumble, and when he stands, he will eft soones strike at his belly
with his hinder legs, he will also stamp with his fore-feet, and turn his head
toward his belly, and look upon it, and he will many times sweat at the
flanks, and seldom any where else, and if the malady be of wind, then shall
you perceive his belly to swell, especially toward the flanks: the cure is,

Fret.
Take of good Ale two quarts, of Fenugrick four ounces, of Bay Berries seven
ounces, of long Pepper four ounces, of Ginger one one ounce, Watercresses two
handfuls, Sage and Nettles, of each one handful, beat to powder the Spices,
and chop the herbs small, and boil them in the Ale till one moyity be
consumed, then strain it, and so give it him blood warm, and then cover and
litter him warm, and let him stand upon the Trench six hours after. But yet
so soon as he has his drink, rope up all his legs to the body, not
suffering him to lie down, and cover him so as that he may sweat for one hour
only, and then cool him by degrees, and let his drink be either sweet Mashes
or white water, and he being thus ordered two or three days he will be well.
This I have often used. Another:

Take the entrals of a great Chicken, casting away the gizzard, roll them up
in Bay Salt and the powder of Brimstone, and so give it him down his throat,
then presently let him be gently ridden, or walked, till he does dung, and at
night give him a Mash, or white water, and he is cured. This is also very good.
But if you have cause to suspect that he has the Bots, then rake him, and in
his raking search for Bots, which if you do find any sticking upon the great
gut, pluck them all (or so many as you can find) away, whereby you may be
confident that the Bots is cause of his grief, wherefore apply such remedies
and medicines which I have formerly prescribed you for Bots, Truncheons, and
Worms, in lib. 2. cap. 5. 15. where you shall find such receipts as will cure
him. But if you do perceive this grief of his comes of wind, then make use
of such receipts which you shall find by me before inculcated for the Collicke,
in lib. 2. cap. 6. 11. lit. C. where be very good remedies for this Malady.


CHAP. 10.
. 1. G.
Hippophylus. WHat is best to be done to cure a galled back?


Hippos. There be so many ways which does occasion it, as that it would be an
endless labor to deliver every particular thereof. But because you do motion
the galled back only, I will first speak something thereof. A galled back
comes commonly either with the Saddle, the Pannell, Pack-Saddle or
Male-pillion, which through evil stopping, or defect of stopping, may very
easily gall the Horse, so also may the fault be in the tree, which may be so
badly made, so as that let the Saddler be never so sufficient, skillful, or
careful, yet shall it both gall and hurt him; so also may the tree of the
Saddle be either broken or cracked, if it at any time happen, be you then
confident, that it can never be so amended or repaired, but that do what you
can it shall hurt the back of the Horse, and these be the most frequent and
ordinary ways, whereby to gall the back of your horse, howbeit I pass over
Male-pillions, Cloake-bags, Port-mantues, Trusses, and the like. The signs to
know a galled back are easy, for either the back will be apparently swelled,
or the hair fretted off, the skin either broken or raw, or the back either
inflamed or impostumated, every of which is easily to be determined by the eye,
or if his back be wrung with the Saddle, and yet not come to be visible to the
eye, yet may you come to the knowledge thereof, if taking off the Saddle,
stroking your hand all along the back, you shall perceive him either to shake
his head, or to winch with his tail, to rouse, or shake, to stamp or strike
with his feet, to offer to bite, or the like, whereby you may come to know it,
and very easily to find out the place grieved. Now if the back be swelled, and
before it be impostumated, so soon as you shall take off the Saddle, and find
the same, clap upon the swelling a little of his wet litter, and so set on the
Saddle again, and let him remain with his Saddle on all night, and in the
morning the swelling will be abated, and the place it self become whole and
sound again. Now if the hair be but galled off, so that it does not
impostumate, annoint the place but with a little Butter and Salt melted
together, and in twice dressing the place will be whole; but if the back be so
galled, as that it is become raw, then the cure is thus, viz.

Take three parts of sheepes-dunge newly made, Gaelled (...)
and one part of Rye, or Wheat flower, and dry the flower, and then mix it
well with the sheepes-dung, kneading it as into paste, and making it into the
fashion of a Cake, and after bake it a little, and apply the powder thereof
warm unto the place,. This will heal him very well. But I may very well spare
the labor, in reciting any more receipts for this matter, considering, I have
sufficiently already handled them in lib. 2. chap. 5.. 1. letter, B.


. 2. G.
Hippoph. What say you to a Galde that comes by the Shackell?


Hippos. T^a^ kind of Gallings being so frequent, as to be known to every one
both in the manner how it comes, and in the signs how to know them, needs
not much disscussion, nevertheless I will give you an experiment or two of
mine own, and so leave it to its more proper place.

Take new milk three quarts, Plantane one handful, Galled wi^ the Shack^
boil these together till one part of the milk be consumed, then take of
Alum six ounces, and of white Sugar Candy one ounce, beat them both to fine
powder, and so put it to the milk, and add also unto it of white Wine-Vineger
six spoonfuls, then boil it a little till there do come upon the top a tough
curd, then strain it, and keep the whay, A whay.
casting away the curd, and with this whay first made warm bathe, and wash the
sore, the hair being first clipped close away, and having thus washed the
sorance, and wiped it dry then apply your green ointment mentioned in the
fourth. of this Chapter, but in case where the Galde is not yet broken, yet
likely to break, there you shall only apply the medicine taught you in lib 2.
chap. 16.. 10. L. for the Poll-evill,. This whay is also good to cure the
bloody Riftes, Bladders, Canker in the mouth, Barbs, Pappes, and all Fevers,
and Maladies in the Mouth. Another.

Take life-hony seven spoonfuls, and Verde-grease half an ounce, and boil
them till the honey be half consumed, and that it is become red, then put it
into some clean pot, and annoint the sorance therewith, made warm, twice
every day, and when you have thus anointed it, cast upon the place Hurds cut
very short to keep on the ointment, and this will in short time heal it up
very sound.. This is most sovereign for any shackle-galde, which comes either
by lock, cord, or shackle, but if your Horse be desperately galled in any part
of his body, as by the girt or otherwise, then.

Take of Verjuyce of the Crab two quarts, of green Copperas, two pennyworth,
and boil them together to one pint and a half: and wash the sorance therewith
very well, and after fill up the hole (if any be) with the powder of red-leade,
and so let it remain three days untoucht, then wash it as before, and fill it
with your red ointment again, and thus in two or three times dressing, it will
heal up, be the galling never so dangerous,. This have I often used.


. 3. G.
Hippoph. What is best to be done to a Horse that is Gravelled?


Hippos. This malady comes when a horse in his travel has gotten gravel
betwixt the sole and the hoof which setleth at the quick, and there fretteth
and festreth, you shall soon know it by his halting, and complaining upon the
same foot, which so soon as you do perceive, take up the foot and you shall
feel it warm^t in that place, then in any other part of the foot, and if you
make trial with your Pinsors, Gravelling.
you shall perceive him to shrink, and to yield when you nip him against that
place: Take off the shoe and with your drawing iron draw the place, till you
come unto the quick, pick forth all the gravel, and crush forth the matter
and blood clean, then wash the sore clean with your Copperas water, taught
you in the next ensuing Paragraph, then pour upon the sore sheeps-Tallow, and
Bay Salt molten together, of each so much as will suffice, and let it be
poured into the wound scalding hot, then stop up the hole with hurds, and set
on the shoe again, and at two or three times dressing it will be whole, but
till he be through well do not travel him, neither let his foot come into any
wet. This is a certain cure. Another.

Search and draw the place as before, and get forth all the gravel, then stop
the place with Hog's Grease, and Turpentine molten together, pouring it into the
wound scalding hot, and stop it up with hurds, and tack on the shoe, and keep
his foot from wet, and he will soon be whole; This is also very good.
Another.

Be you certain that you have gotten forth all the gravel and corruption,
then.

Take Virgin-waxe one ounce, Rosin, and Deeres-suet, of each two ounces,
Bores-grease half an ounce, and of Sea-greene, alias House-leeke, one head,
incorporate all these together in a Mortar, then melt them over a very gentle
fire, and so apply it hot to the sorance, and stop it up with hurds and tack on
the shoe, and in few dressings it will cure it,. This is a special good cure.


4. G.
Hippoph. HOw do you make your green ointment, you do so much commend?


Hippos. Sir, this Unguent which I do so much commend unto you, is the most
rare, and sovereign thing that I ever yet saw, or knew, for the cure of any
sores, whether old or green, Ulcers, Fistulas, Poll evils, or what else, for
where this ointment comes, no proud or dead flesh will grow, no flies will
adventure near the place where this ointment is laid, and for a Horse or
Mare-Filly that is cut, gelt, or spla, annnoynt but the place, and they will
neither swell or fester, whereby the creature is the further of from danger,
for this Unguent does not only heal soundly and well, but speedily also;
provided you lay nothing upon the wound or sorance, where the ointment is
administered, as neither hurds, lint, plasters, or the like, unless you may
have occasion to Taint a wound which is extraordinary deep, neither that for
any long time, or too often, and besides the seldomer the wound is dressed, as
once a day, or once in two days, it will heal the better and faster,
especially if it be brought into good forwardness of healing. And together
with this Unguent, you may do well to wash the sorance, with the water I call
the Copperas water, which by reason it is always first to be used, I will set
it down first, and the Greene-oyntment shall assume the second place.

Take fair water two quarts, and put it into a clean Postnet, and put thereto
of green Copperas half a pound, Copperas ^ter.
and of salt one handful, and of ordinary Honey one spoonefull, and a branch
or two of Rosemary, boil all these till one half of the water be consumed,
and a little before you take it from the fire, put to it the quantity of a
Doves egg of Alume, then take it from the fire, and when it is cold put the
water into a glass, and stop it up close, and keep it for your use; and when
you are to dress any sore, first wash it clean with this water, and if the
wound be deep, iniect it with a seringe.. This water of it self will cure any
reasonable sore, or wound (but the green ointment being applied after it is
washed) will heal any old Ulcer, or Fistula whatsoever, if they come to the
bottom of them, and for green wounds, they have not their fellow; the
Greene-oyntment is thus made.

Take a clean Skillet or Postnet, Greene-oy^ment.
and first put into it of Rosin the quantity of a wall-nut, which being molten,
put to it the like quantity of wax, and when that is also molten, put to them
of tryed-Hogs-grease half a pound, and so soon as that is molten, put into
the rest of common English Honey one spoonful, when all these are molten and
well stirred together, then put in of ordinary Turpentine half a pound, and so
soon as it is dissolved, take it from the fire, and put into the Skillet of
Verdegrease made into very fine powder one ounce, and so stir it well al
together, but be careful it run not over, for that the Verde-grease will
cause it to arise, then set it again upon the fire, till it do begin a
little to simper, then take it off, for if you suffer it to boil it will turn
red, and lose its virtue of healing, and become a Corasive, then strain it
through a cloth into some earthen Pot, or Pipken, and keep it for your use,
laying something upon the mouth of the vessel, that dust get not into it, and
if it be not strained, then the grounds in the bottom will corasive a sore,
and not heal it.. This is the most sovereign Ointment that I could ever know,
for with it I have done so many great cures, as have made me admired by
Ferriers themselves, who have courted me not a little for this Receipt, yea
they have proffered me ten pounds to teach it them; This cleanses a wound, be
it never so foul, or infected with dead, proud, spungy or naughty flesh, it
carnifieth, and heals abundantly, and with all so soundly, and firmly, as
that it does never more break forth, it draws forth thorns, splinters,
nails, and all such things in the flesh, and in a word it cures al sorts of
sores and wounds.


5. G.
Hippoph. WHat is good to be administered to a Horse whose grease is molten?


Hippos. As touching this infirmity I have sufficiently showed you before how
it comes, the signs how to know it, and how to cure the same, and therefore
I may now forbear to spend any more time in the declaration thereof, only I
will give you one singular Receipt more, and this it is.

Grease molten.
First, take blood from the neck-veine, to a reasonable good proportion, to the
end all his inflamed blood may be let forth, then give him to eat either
branne prepared as you are showed in lib. 2. chap. 9.. 4. F. or dry branne
whether he will eat best, but if he will eat neither, and that he does empty
himself over much, then give him the Clyster Restringent prescribed you in
lib. 2. chap. 6.. 8. Clyster 3. letter C. or else if you please, you may give
him the 8. Clyster in the same. either of these two so often as need shall
require you may give. And if his appetite be not good, give him Arman
prescribed you in lib. 2. chap. 2.. 2. letter A. and two days after let him
blood in both the Flank-veines, and if you cannot easily find them, then in
the spurre-veines, and the next day after that give him to drink, two quarts
of water warmed, and put into it of white-Wine-Vineger one pint, for this will
very much refresh his body, and then the next day give him this drink.

Take of Tisan three pints, of lofe Sugar finely powdered three ounces, of
Cordial powder one ounce, of life honey four ounces, give him this to drink
blood warm. In maladies of this nature you must forbear to administer such
drugs as be hot, for by such means more horses dye then do recover and live:
for such kind of drinks as this is being wholly cordial, are best for this
infirmity. This cure I do assure you I have often administered, and have done
very much good, and made many great and desperate cures therewith.


. 6. G.
Hippoph. Well now let us come to the Glanders.


Hippos. With all my heart Sir. As touching this disease which we do call the
Glanders, it is of all others the worst, noisome, and most infectious, insomuch
as that horse that has it, if he be not removed and separated from his
fellows, will infect so many as shall be with him in the same Stable and
room. To find out the depth, root, and true nature of this disease, I have
greatly labored, as also how to cure the same. I have also had much conference
with many the most famous and exquisite Marishals and Ferriers abroad, and I
have seen very much of their practice therein, so also have I had very serious
discourses with a number of our best Ferriers and Smiths at home, but I find
not one in twenty can speak truly to any purpose of the nature of this
disease, and therefore I do not wonder that they cannot cure a disease whereof
they are so much to seek. Nevertheless what I do understand of this disease, I
will ingenuously deliver unto you. The Glanders is an infirmity which
proceeds first of cold taken, which being neglected, will in time come to be
the Glanders; you shall first perceive it by the inflamed kernels and knots
which may be felt under the chaule of the horse, and as they do grow in
bigness, so do the Glanders grow and increase within the body of the Horse,
which first beginning with a thin Rhume, ascends up to the head, and settleth
near to the brain, and so venteth it self at the nose, which yet may be easily
cured, as I have before inculcated, where I entreated of Colds, afterward it
grows thicker, and then it is worse to cure, but yet faisable enough, in
longer time it comes yet to a thicker substance, and its color is yellowish,
much like unto Butter, and then it is more hard to cure, but yet curable,
albeit that now it is come to be a perfect Glanders: but when it comes to be
of a viscous, and of a tough and slimy substance, and of a green color, and to
stink terribly, and that it has now run some months, or peradventure half
a year or better, as also having some small specks of a reddish color in it,
then is not every Ferriers work or Art to cure the same, for in a case of this
nature, the ablest Ferrier may receive the foil, and the Horse dye under his
hands and cure, as I have often by experience been an eye witness, albeit
there has been no defect in the Ferrier, either in Art, industry, care or
diligence. I do therefore aver that I would not have any man (be he never so
expert an Artist) to promise to himself the cure of every Horse he shall take
in hand, by the reason that the Glanders it self is the thing he must cure,
but in taking upon him o cure that malady, he must before he can have perfected
his cure, cure him also of many other diseases, which the Glanders will bring
along with it, as (v. g.) the consumption of the flesh and lungs, griefs and
aches in the head and brain, inflammations under the chaule, diseases in the
liver, pursivenesse, hide-bound, dropsy, swelled legs, and many other
infirmities too prolixe to repeat, all which (I say) are inherent to the
Glanders, and its origin that it is of cold past all peradventure, howsoever
it sometimes comes of Surfets, sometimes of Morfounding, sometimes by
infection, all which (the last only excepted) takes its first source from
cold, and when it runs (as before I said) greenish with reddish specks,
accompanied also with an offensive or stinking breath, then are his lungs
ulcerated, by means whereof the cure is the more desperate and difficile. I do
therefore advise all Ferriers my brethren, who shall at any time take upon them
this cure, that they do first prepare the body of the Horse with such
preparatives and Physic, as are meet to expel his peccant humors, which
must be also very carefully administered, yea and that according to the strength
and ability of the Horse: for the Horse cannot choose but be feeble and weak,
having of a long time before visited with a sickness of this nature, yea
peradventure a whole year or two before together, during which time he has
continually wasted and languished, wherefore he cannot be strong, but a very
weak Horse, and therefore his physic must be very gentle, yet such also
which may have operation whereby to work, otherwise physic is but cast away.
The signs how to know this disease need no further description, and therefore
I will proceed to the cure, for the which I will deliver you many receipts, some
whereof I have well experienced, to which I will give my particular mark, like
as I have formerly done. And I do the rather insert the more receipts, because
(as I have before remembered) that receipt which will not cure one, will cure
another.

Glanders.
The first therefore that is to be done in this case, is, to prepare his body by
giving him for four or five days together, in stead of his Oats and
Provender, wheat Bran prepared, like as I have before showed you in the cases
of sick Horses, especially in lib. 2. cap. 9. 4. F. to qualify and dry up his
moist and bad humors abounding in him, then let him blood in the neck, and the
next day rake him, and give him this Clister. Make a decoction of Mallows one
pint and a half, and put unto it of fresh Butter, four ounces, and of Sallet
oil a quarter of a pint, and administer it blood warm, and then with a
strappe of leather tie it to his tail, and then fasten the other end of the
said strap to his Sursingle, so straight, that his tail must be close to his
tuell, that he cannot purge till it be loosened, then mount his back, and let
him be gently ridden, sometimes a foot pace, and sometimes an easy trot for
half an hour, then set him up warm clothed and littered, and let him stand
upon the Trench three hours, during which time he will purge kindly, then give
him white water and Hay, and at night a few Oats, for he must be kept to a
spare diet. The next day annoint two long Goose-feathers with the powder of
Brimstone and fresh Butter, being first well wrought together, till it be
brought to the color of gold, put them into either nostrill, and fasten them
to his headstall, as is before taught you, and so ride him an hour or two, for
this will purge his head, and cause him to send forth mattrative stuff which
abides in his head and lungs, then bring him in and take them forth, and an
hour after give him Hay and white water, and Bran prepared, which also he
should have given him before his riding abroad. The next day give him his
Clister again, and so let him rest for that day, but ordered in all things as
before. The next day give him his Goose feathers again, anointed as before,
and ordered in the like manner as you did before, and all this is, but to
prepare him for his after drink, but remember to keep him always warm, and
let him be evermore fasting and empty, when he is to have any kind of Physic
administered unto him, and let him be ayered morning and evening, if the sun
shine, or that it be otherwise warm and calm weather. And having thus begun
with him, three days after give him this drink.

Take of Aqua vitae half a pint, and of white wine one pint,
Aristolochia-Rotunda, Agarick, Gentian, Bay Berries, Myrrha, Ivory, Aloes, of
each three drams, make all these into fine powder each one by it self, then
mix them very well, and put them into a clean Posnet with the Wine and Aqua
vitae, and so warm it upon the fire, then being well brewed, give it him blood
warm. This drink must be given thrice, to wit, every third day, and he made to
fast three hours after, and after ordered as is accustomed with horses in
Physic, during which time, and some time after, let him drink no cold water,
but most commonly white water, which once or twice in a week may be changed
into a sweet Mash, and let him eat the Bran and Malt, and diet and feed him
so, as that he may be kept to a stomach, but be careful you neither cloy, nor
pine him. Instead of the Oats which you should give him, let them sometimes be
changed into bread if he will eat it: and sometimes you may give him in stead
of Oats, some Wheat either in the ears, which is best, or else Wheat threshed
and cleared ready for the Mill. Truly with this cure as I have set it you
down, I have recovered many horses. But you must understand that this malady as
it has run along upon the horse, before it come to that height, as to be so
rank a Glanders, to be termed the mourning of the chine, so will it ask a long
time to cure, and therefore you must not think that it can be cured with this
one only course of Physic, but you must let him rest a few days, whereby he
may the better gather strength, and then to him again and again, but take no
more blood from him, and as you do perceive him to gather flesh, and get
strength, so let his exercise be increased, but withal, so as not to
over-labour him, or to cause him to sweat violently, nor yet strain his wind
too much. Another:

If you do find that together with his Glanders, he has the Strangles, that
is that he be oppressed with inflammations under the chaule, clip away the hair
from about the place, and clap a piece of sheeps skin newly killed, over all
the place, which must be daily renewed, and you must keep warm, not only that
place, but his Poll also, then,

Take Basilicon, old Bores grease and Dialthea, of each four ounces, and of
oil de Bay one ounce, beat all these very well together, then annoint the
place enflamed, once every day at the least, and then put to the sheeps skin,
and so keep it on till it be ripe enough, then open it, and put into the
orifice a taint of Basilicon for three or four days, then heal up the wound
with taints of Aegyptiacum, prescribed you in lib. 2. cap. 4. 4. lit. A. and
during the time of his cure, give him Wheat Bran, as well dry as prepared, and
for his drink, let it be white water, unless sometimes a Mash; keep him warm,
and after five or six days, ride him abroad with the Goose feather in his
nose, anointed as is before advised you, and if he do run at nose very much,
then take a stick, and wrap a fine linen rag about it, and annoint it very
well with black soap, and put it into his nostrils a good way, but not so as to
cause him to bleed, and do this three or four times a day: or else

Take the seed of Pordo accenta, and bruise it* made up in sweet Butter, so
much of the seed as you may take up betwixt your thumb and two fingers at a
time. This is very good. Another:

Take the ointment of the oil de Bay, and unguentum Agrippa, of each like
much, rub the inflammation places every night with this unguent well mixed, then
apply unto the place a piece of a sheeps skin with the wool on: but this
medicine is much better in Winter then in Summer, by reason that this unguent
of it self is very hot, wherefore in the Summer season, in stead of such hot
unguents, take two ounces of those that be cooler, with three roots of white
Lillies roasted or boiled, or Rie-leaven six ounces, of old Hog's Grease as much
as will suffice, and of the tender tops of Isope half an ounce, mix all these
together, and make thereof an unguent, with which rub and annoint the place
well, and after apply it to the place plaster wise, this done, cover the place
with a piece of sheeps skin the wool being on, and continue to do this till it
be ripe and ready to be opened, blow also into his nose of Euforbium, and black
Elebore pulverized, of each like much, to the bigness of a hasle nut of
either, then put into each nostrill a long Goose feather, first dipped in oil
de Bay, which powder and oil will cause him to cast forth much of his
Glanders, and of his bad humors which do feed them. This medicine if it be
rightly applied, will cure him. Another:

If your horse together with his Glanders be troubled with inflamed kernels
under his chaule, then give him this drink.

Take of Elecampane dried, Anniseeds, Fennel seeds, Commen, Pepper, Grains,
Licoris, of each three drams, all pulverized, and add thereto two heads of
Garlic pilled and bruised, boil all these in strong Ale two quarts, to a
moyity, then strain it and set it over the fire again, and put unto this liquor
the quantity of a Tennis ball of tried Hogs grease, and let it remain no longer
over the fire, but until the Hogs grease be molten, and so administer it blood
warm with a horn, this done, leap his back, and trot him gently a mile upon
fair ground, and so home again, then set him up warm clothed and littered,
causing him to sweat in his clothes two hours, then by little and little, slake
his clothes, cooling him by degrees, till you have brought him to his former
coolness, and as he does begin to leave off sweating, let him be well rubbed
till he be dry, then two hours after this, give him a sweet Mash, and use this
drink and sweating sundry times, every second day for a week. The next week

Take Wheat meal, Hore-hound, Anniseeds and Licoris made into very fine
powder, of eaeh as much as will suffice, make a paste thereof with ordinary
Honey and Sallet oil, of each as much as will suffice, then every morning make
three Pills the bigness of a great Wal-nut a piece, and give them to the horse
three mornings together, keep him all this time warm, and let his drink be
white water, and his manger meat be either Wheat Bran prepared, or dried Bran,
but if he have kernels under his chaule, then either ripen them, as you were
taught before, or else burn them with the flame of a Candle, and open the skin
with an incision knife, and then put into the orifice the root of a red Dock,
giving it a slit or two, and it will draw his cold quite away from under his
chaule. But first you must understand that the drink last before mentioned,
ought to be applied before you apply any other medicines, and my counsel is
withal that you do purge him before you give him this drink, or any other
medicines, for purging does the better prepare the body of the horse, whereby
to cause his physic of what nature soever to work more kindly. This receipt I
have often tried, and I have perfected very great cures therewith. Another very
sovereign after your horse has taken the drink next above prescribed.

Take Gumma-Guiacum, Amber, Coral, of each half an ounce, make all these into
very fine powder, and infuse it into red Wine one quart, with a good quantity
of Cinnamon and Arkanet powdered, and give it to your horse two mornings together
blood warm, and so order him as is usual with other drinks. This is also very
good. Another:

First give him this drink following, but first purge him two days before:
take of Tanners Owes new made, wherein never came Hides, one pint, of
Sallet-oyle four spoonefuls, two heads of Garlic, pilled and bruised,
Feather-few, and Selandine, of each one handful choped very small, Anniseeds
and Licoris, and Bay Berries, all finely puluerized of each one spoonefull,
boil all these a little and so give it your Horse bloud-warme twice a week
fasting, and he being thus four times drenched, will be perfectly cured. This
I never tried, but I have bin assured by able Ferriers that it will cure the
Glaunders be it never so old. Another.

Take strong Ale one quart, Tar a quarter of a pint, two heads of garlic,
pilled, and bruised, and give it your Horse fasting, warm once in four days,
till he be thoroughly cured. This I never tried. Another.

Take of the newest and strongest Tanners Owes one pint, Venice Turpentine
washed one ounce, Bayberries in fine powder one spoonful, Saffaron powdered one
pennyworth, Aristolochia rotunda one ounce, Guiacum two ounces, both in fine
powder, incorporate all these upon the fire, till the Turpentine be dissolved,
then give it your Horse blood warm two mornings in a week, resting three days
still betwixt till he be cured, which will be in four or five times giving.
Another.

Make Pills of Venice-Turpentine with paste of Barley flower, and give them to
your Horse, and they will Cure him. Another.

Take Baked Barley flower two parts, the dust of Oaken-barke, and Bay Berries
in five powder of each one part, make a paste thereof with new Tanners Owes,
and so make them into Pills, with the powder of Cinnamon three parts, and
Saffaron one pennyworth, and so give them to your Horse. Another for the
Glaunders and Consumption of the Lungs, which must be given after you have
made trial of the drink before prescribed, which begins thus (take
Elecampane, Anniseedes, Fennel-seedes etc. and finding that your Horse is not
therewith cured, give him these Pills following.

Take Barley flower baked in an Oven, Cumfrey roots, Bursa-Pastoris,
Bramble-leaves, or the red and unripe Berries growing upon Brambles, which we
do commonly call Black-berries, these unripe berries are much better then the
Bramble-leaves, of each one handful, of Alkenet one dram, boil all but the
Barley flower in Tanners Owes newly made, so much as will suffice, and when it
is thoroughly boiled, strain the liquor from the other simples, reserving only
the liquor, and so make a paste thereof with your Barley-flower, adding thereto
of the dust of Oaken bark one handful or two, then make this paste up into
Pills the bigness of a good wall-nut, give him four of these at a time, rolled
up in the powder of Cinnamon two parts, and one part in the powder of Saffaron,
and use this till he be well, not administering these Pills every day, but every
two or three days, till you do find him well.. This I do recommend unto you
for a special good receipt, for that herewith I have affected many great cures
in this kind, but then withal let his drink be white water, and sometimes a
sweet Mash, as in all other cures for this infirmity, and withal put into his
white water Bramble-leaves, and knot-grasse bruised, and be you very careful
that he take no cold, but be kept warm during his cure, and air him morning
and evening in the warm Sun, if there be no wind, and every time you lead
him forth to be ayred, at his going forth or the Stable spirt into his
Nostrils the juice of wild Daysie roots, mingled with the strongest white
Wine-Vineger, which will purge his head exceedingly, and cause the Glanders to
run forth abundantly. Another being an excellent Pill for the Glanders, which
I have often used, and that to great good purpose.

Take Venice-Turpentine washed half a dram, incorporate it with the powder of
Brimstone, Alkenet, and Oake-barke dust, of each like much, so much as will
suffice, to make up into Pills, give him every morning two of these Pills,
fasting as big as a good wall-nut every one, till he be well.. Another which
is a very good drink, wherewith to dissolve the Glanders and cold, after other
drinks have rotted and ripned them.

Take of Muskadine one quart, of Figs cut and sliced small, a quarter of a
pound, life honey one spoonefull, Saffaron puluerized one pennyworth, Ginger
and Alecampane of each one dram, in powder, Pepper in fine powder so much as
will ly upon a sixpence, fresh or sweet Butter the quantity of an Egg, boil
all these together a pretty while, then strain it, and blood warm administer
it, only adding to the drink the yolks of two new-layed Eggs well beaten
into the said drink, and after walk or ride him moderately a little space,
and then set him up warm, and order him as in other Physical drinks.. This I
have often tried, and do approve it for special good: for this opneth the
pipes, causing him to void much filth, and it begets a good stomach to
meat. Another most excellent.

First before you do administer any drinks or medicines, give him this purge.

Take of the best and strongest white Wine-Vineger one pint, and put it into a
pot, and put to it two new-laid Eggs, and so let them steep in the said
Vinegar four and twenty hours at least, and then give them to the Horse four
mornings together, and so soon as he has taken them let him be ridden a
while gently, and then set up warm, and set upon the Trench till one or two of
the clock, then give him white water, and sometimes a sweet Mash, and let his
Provender be moistened with Ale or Beer, and his Hay sprinkled with water, and
this will cause him to purge and scowre from him much Phlegm and filth: three
or four days after you have purged him thus, give him the drink prescribed
you before which begins thus, viz. (take of Tanners Owes new made wherein
never came Hides, one pint, of Sallet oil four spoonefuls, two heads of
Garlic, etc.) which being administered as is in the said cure prescribed, and
he ordered as is convenient for Horses in Physic will assuredly cure him.
This I never made use of, but it was recommended unto me for a special good
one. Another.

Give him the last mentioned purge of Eggs steeped in Vinegar, and keep him to
it four or five mornings together, then for four days together after, give
him a new-laid-Egge, shell and all, with as much powder of Brimstone as will
lie upon a shilling, then for six mornings after, give him every morning a
Pill of washed Venice-Turpentine, made up with the powder of the root of
Alkenet, and let every of these Pills be of the bigness of a good wall-nut,
let him take this Medicine evermore in the morning fasting, and fast after it
till noone, and after order him as in other Physical drinks: and withal you
must know that until such time as he be perfectly cured he must not be put to
any hard labor either by riding or otherwise, for that will rend a new, and
break open again, the Ulcer being newly healed, which as yet be but green
and tender. And this is a very good receipt. Another for a Glanders or any cold
newly taken.

Take the long Moss growing upon the lymbes of old Timber-oakes, but not that
which grows upon the maine Body or Trunk of the Tree, gather thereof a good
quantity, dry it and make it into powder, and give it your Horse four mornings
together, in clear new Tanners Owes, one pint, mixing with the said Owes and
powder, old red-Wine one pint, let this drink be given him with a horn
bloud-warme, and for four days after cover and litter him warm, and set him
upon the Trench, and let him there remain fasting during those four hours,
and for the time he takes this drink, let his Manger meat be dry hard
bread, well baked, and his Rack meat old dry Hay, but no Oats, and mix with
his bread some of this dried powder, being the Moss of the Oak, together with
Feather-few, water-Germander, and Cordium, all dried and made into powder, and
let his drink be fresh Tanners Owes, wherein came never Leather or Hides, and
give it him with a horn, if otherwise he shall refuse to take it, but
howsoever let him not drink or take it but blood warm only. This was taught
me by a worthy Knight, who affirmed that he has often used the same, and that
he has done very great cures therewith, but I having many other approved
Recipts, did never make trial thereof, nevertheless it seems probably good.
Another which I have often used.

Take six heads of Garlic, pill the cloves, and stamp them well, then put
unto it of life-hony six spoonefull, and of Wheat meal, so much as will
suffice, to make it into a paste, making thereof Pills every one of the
bigness of a good Wall-nut, and so give him of these Pills three or four at a
time, and after them three new laid Eggs, and after them cast into his mouth of
Bay Salt one handful, this must be given fasting and before drink at six or
seven a clock in the morning, then let him be ridden until he do begin to
sweat, then bring him into the Stable and clothe him warm, and litter him, and
so let him sweat an hour, then cool him by degrees, and after he has fasted
six hours, give him meat, but no drink until six a clock in the evening,
which let either be a sweet Mash or white water, and if need so require, let
him have these Pills three mornings, resting every one day betwixt, and thus
ordering him, he will be perfectly cured. This I have often proved, and have
cured many horses of colds and Glanders. Another very good.

Take of Bay berries one ounce, of Licoris two drams, of brown Sugar Candy,
Nutmegs, and Ginger, of each a penniworth, of Garlic a half penny worth, let
all these be beaten and mixed, then take of Chamberlye that is four days old,
one quart, and boil it by it self to a pint, and put to it of sweet Butter a
half penny worth, and with it the residue of the ingredients, and so give it
him blood warm, etc. Another most sovereign receipt for the Glanders; and
whereof I have had very great experience.

First clear his head by pricking him in the mouth, and rub the place with
salt whereby to cause it to bleed the more, then take two long feathers of a
Goose wing, well anointed with oil de Bay, thrust it up and down his
nostrils, which will open and purge his head, also perfume his head with the
stalks of Garlic broken into small pieces, with a Tunnell, or with a thick
cloth cast over his head, the better to receive the smoke into his nostrils,
and do this morning and evening, keeping him to a spare diet and moderate
exercise, whereby the better to cleanse his head and stomach, and to empty him,
by which means the brain will be the better quieted. To perfume him also with
Frankincense, Storax, and Benjamin, of each like much well mixed together, is
very sovereign; but two or three days after, let him blood in the neck, after
this let him be walked aabroad, or gently ridden, (if the horse be of
sufficient strength) to get him breath, then administer unto him this drink.

Take of Muskadine one pint, of London Treacle an ounce and a half, sweet
Butter three ounces, give him this blood warm, take then tried Hogs grease, and
rub and chafe him under the chaule very well therewith, and leave him anointed
thick therewith, then make him this Poultesse.

Take of Mallows two handfuls, of Wormwood, Smalage and Rue, all small shred
and stamped, of each one handful, of Wheat Bran, and of tried Hogs grease, of
each one quart; boil all these together, continually stirring them until the
Hogs grease be almost consumed, and bind it under his chaule so hot as he can
well suffer the same, and keep his head (especially his poll) very warm,
leaving only air for his mouth and nose, and light for his eyes. Then perfume
him with Frankincense, and keep him warm in the Stable, and so let him rest
with this Poultesse four and twenty hours. The next morning give him early of
the best new Ale, one quart, with Anniseeds and Licoris, made together into
very fine powder, one spoonful, and a good piece of sweet Butter, give him
this with a horn blood warm, then put into either nostrill a long Goose feather
well dipped in oil de Bay and fresh Butter well mixed together, then remove
the Poultesse, and if you do find that the kernels and inflammations too ripe,
open them, and let forth the matter, and taint the orifice with Turpentine and
Hogs grease molten together, then warm some of the Poultesse you left, but not
so hot as before, and lay it to the place, and let it so remain until the
next day, his head being still kept warm, let his manger meat be old clean
Oats, well sifted and moystened in new Ale and Muskadine, if he will eat them
so, if not, then Ale alone, and let his Rack meat be Wheat Straw well threshed,
and let his drink be white water for ten days after, and then let him not have
afterward any cold water, but with exercise, and let him sometimes in stead of
white water, a sweet Mash, keeping him to a spare diet, and let him be every
day ayered, either by riding or walking, if he be able to be brought out of the
Stable, but then evermore keep him warm after it, and let him either by
exercise in moderate riding, or in his clothes in the Stable, sweat a little
every day once, and after let him be rubbed dry, neither let him sweat in his
clothes. Put also into his provender the roots of Elecampane, white Lillies,
and Polipodium of the Oak newly gathered, made clean and chopped very small,
to the quantity of two spoonfuls, every time, and give him no Provender but
when he is very hungry, and fail not to continue this course of physic and
diet by the space of ten or twelve days together, and when these days be
ended, give him this purging drink.

Glanders a purging drink.
Take of white wine one quart, or where Wine may not easily be acquired, then
the like quantity of good new Ale, Aloes an ounce and a half, made into fine
powder, of Agarick half an ounce, the powder of Elecampane two spoonfuls, of
life honey three spoonfuls, brew all these well together, and give it him blood
warm, and keep him warm, six days after let him blood in the neck, and if
the blood be good, then take not above a quart at most from him, but if it be
naught, take then a pottle from him, after this, order him both in feeding and
exercise very moderately, and by this means you shall recover him, and bring
him to his pristine health again. Another receipt for the Glanders, very
precious, which I have often tried.

Take life honey as much as will suffice, and mingle it with his Oats, rubbing
the Oats and honey together betwixt your hands, so as the honey may be very
well mixed with the Oats, let him eat his Oats thus mingled with the honey
until such time as he be perfectly cured, which will be when you shall
perceive him wholly to have left running at the nose. I had this cure from one
of the ablest Ferriers I ever knew in England, and I have cured many horses
therewith. Another:

Take of Sallet oil, and white Wine Vinegar, of each three spoonfuls, beat
them well together, and put it into one of his nostrils three mornings
together, and so likewise convey into his other nostrill, the like quantity of
oil and Vinegar three mornings together, remembering that evermore when you do
administer this medicine, you do presently put up into the same nostrill a long
Goose feather dipped first in oil de Bay, stirring the feather up and down in
his nostrill, which will cause him to sneeze and snuff forth the viscous
corruption which remains in his head. Keep him all the time warm, and let his
drink be either sweet Mashes, or white water. Of this I have often times made
trial, and it is special good, as well for Glanders, as for any cold, if the
horse run at the nose. Another right good.

Take of Diapente and clarified honey, of each one ounce, and with good Sack
one pint, give it him blood warm, being first well brewed together, drench him
herewith eight mornings together, and so soon as you have given him this drink,
inject into his nostrils this receipt following.

Take the powder of Aristolochia-rotunda, as much as will suffice, and mix
with it White or Claret Wine in such a proportion as may make it liquid, and
inject or squirt it into his nose. Or else

Take the juice of Selendine mingled with fair water, and inject that into his
nose. Or else

Take Roch-Allum and Salt dissolved in white Wine, and inject that up into his
nose. Either of all these are very good to cause him to cast such naughty
corruption forth of his nose and head, that does much oppress him, which
lotions are to be administered evermore after the aforesaid drink. Another also
very good drink.

Take Tanners Owes new made, and new milk, of each one pint, Sallet oil half
a pint, one head of Garlic pilled and bruised, a little Turmerick in fine
powder, boil all these together, as much as will suffice, then take it off and
put in your Sallet oil, and so give it him blood warm; give him this drink
three times in fifteen days, that is to say, once every five days, and every
time you do administer it unto him, convey half a hornfull into each nostrill,
and let him stand upon the Trench 3. hours after warm clothed and littered, and
then give him a sweet Mash, and such meat as is dry, sweet, and wholesome, but
during the time of his cure, let his drink be white water. This is very good.
Another very good.

Take of fair water two quarts, of Comin made into fine powder and searsed two
ounces, and of the inward rind of Elder six handfuls, boil this to a moiety,
then take it off, and when it is half cold, strain it and put into the
liquor, half a pint of Sallet-oyle, and give him thereof at his mouth three
hornefuls, and at either nosthrill half a hornefull, then leap his back, and
ride him moderately till he be warm, so set him up warm clothed and
littered, and three or four hours after give him a warm Mashe, but let him
eat some Hay first.. This I can aver to be very good, both for Glanders and
cold. Another.

Take Oyle-de-Bay, and sweet Butter, of each half a pound, Rose-mary shred
very well and small half a handful, Garlic one pound, beat the Garlic
unpilled in a stone Mortar, with a wooden Pestell very well, then put to it
your Oil, Butter, and Rose-mary, and so make it into one body, then with
Wheate-flower so much as will suffice, make it up into pills, and give him three
or four of these, every day for ten days together, and order him ut supra. Of
this I did never make trial, but it was recommended unto me for a special
good Receipt. Another.

Take Cloves, long-Pepper, Browne-Sugar-Candy, and London Treacle, of each two
ounces, beat the Sugar Candy and spices to very fine powder, and put to them
your Treacle, and after add to these Ingredients, of good Sack or Muskadine
one pint, and first warm it upon the fire, and when it is almost cold enough
to be given him, put to it of Sallet-oyle three pennyworth, and so
bloud-warme give it him, and in the giving convey into either Nosthrill half a
hornefull of this drink, and then order him ut supra. Another.

Take of new-milke one quart, warm from the Cow, two heads of Garlic pilled
and bruised, boil these together, keeping them with continual stirring, then
take it off, and let it cool, and a little before it be cold enough to give
him, put to it of life-hony two spoonfuls, and of Sallet-oyle half a pint,
give it him bloud-warme, reserving for either Nosthrill, half a hornefull,
then order him ut supra. These latter cures I never made trial off, but I
think them to be very good. Another.

Take Isope, sweet Margerome, Lavander-Cotton, the roots and crops of
Elecampane, of each one handful, chop and shred all these together very small,
and boil them in good Ale or Beer, so much as will suffice, then strain it,
and when the liquor is almost cold, break into it two new-laid Eggs, and
stir all well together, and so give it him bloud-warme, give him this drink
three times, that is every third day. This has been recommended unto me for a
very good Receipt, whereby to cure not only the Glanders, but the mourning of
the Chine, but I never made use thereof.

But now sithence I am come almost to the end of my Receipts for this
Infirmity, I will give you two Receipts, the one for the Glanders, the other
for the mourning of the chine, which are Master Markhams, which he styles
thus. Two most certain and newly found out Medicines, which will without fail
cure any Glanders, though our Ferriers hold it impossible. The cure. If your
Horse his cold be come to the worst Glanders, which is a continual running at
the nose, and has so run by the space of diverse months, so that the
Ferriers can do no good, then shall you take better then two handfuls of the
white cankerous Moss which grows upon an old Oaken pale, and boil it in
Milk two quarts, till one part be almost consumed, then strain it and
squeeze the moss well, which done give it your Horse lukewarm to drink. Then
take two Geese-Feathers, and take sweet Butter, as a big Wall-nut, and with
the powder of Brimstone, finely beaten and searsed, work them together with
your knife or splatter, till the Butter be brought to a high gold color, then
take two clean feathers the longest in all the Goose-wing, and first at the
quilles ends with a needle fasten two long threads, then with your salve annoint
the feathers all over, which done in the dry powder of Brimstone, roll them
over and over, then putting the feathers ends foremost, open the Horse
Nosthrils, and thrust them up into his head, then take the threads which are at
the quils ends, and fasten them on the top of the Horses head, which done ride
him abroad for an hour or two, ayring him in this manner morning and evening,
and when you bring him into the Stable, after he has stood tied up a pretty
season, unty the threads and draw out the feathers, and wiping them very dry,
lay them up, till you have next occasion to use them, and keep his body warm.
This disease you must understand, comes not suddenly, but grows out of
long process of time; so likewise the cure must not be expected to be done in
a moment, but with much leisure: therefore you must continue your Medicine, as
your leisure will serve, either every day, or at the least thrice a week, if
it be for four or five months together, and be sure it will in the end
yield your desire.

Now the second and well assured, and certain Medicine is to take
Elecampane-roots, and boil them in milk till they be soft, that you may
bring them to pap, then with a home give them to the horse, together with the
milk lukewarm, being no more then will make the roots liquid, then having
anointed your Goose-feathers put them into his Nosthrils, and ride him forth
as before is showed. The other receipt for the mourning of the Chine, he
intituleth thus.

A most rare and approved Medicine, to cure any high running Glanders, called
the mourning of the Chine, held of all men incurable. This disease to my
knowledge, there is not any Smith or Ferrier in this Kingdom can tell how to
cure: for it comes not to the extremity, till the Horse has run at the
Nose, a year or more, and have at the roots of his tongue a hard lung
gathered, which will not be dissolved. Now for mine own part it is well known,
that I have cured many with this Medicine only.

Perfume.
Take of Agri-pigmentum, and of Tussilaginis, beaten into fine powder, of each
four drammes, then beating them with fine Turpentine bring them into a paste,
then make of it little cakes or trotches, as broad as a groat, and dry them.
This done lay about two or three of them on a Chafing Dish of coals, and cover
them with a Funnell, so that the smoke may come out only at the end thereof,
and so without any loss ascend up into the Horses head through his nostrils,
then ride the Horse till he begin to sweat; this do once every morning,
before water till the running be stopped, which will be in very short space,
considering the greatness of this disease.

These be Master Markhams two great cures, which by reason he has so great
Eecomions of their virtues, and also what great cures he has wrought and
perfected with them, I think it not amiss to insert them in this place. Thus
I have delivered unto you a great number of Receipts for this one disease, many
of which I have tried, and have found them very good, some I could never have
means or occasion to prove, and therefore I must expect prompt opportunities,
in the interim I do remit them to my brethren to practice. But I will now
conclude this Chapter, with one only Receipt more, which I do esteem my
Masterpiece for this Malady, having had much experience thereof, nor did it
ever fail me upon often trial made. This cure is called, The black drink
for the Glanders. The Cure. First prepare his body with branne prepared, and
after with a Clyster, and your Goose-feathers, as before has bin taught you.
This done,

The black drink for the glanders.
Take new made Chamberly, and of the best and strongest white-Wine-Vineger, of
each half a pint, then take of Mustardseede, two or three spoonfuls, and make
Mustard thereof with Vinegar, and let it be very well ground, that done, put
your Vinegar and Chamberly to the Mustard, and so stir them well together.
Then take of Tar and bay Salt, of each like much, so much as will suffice,
incorporate them well together, and convey so much thereof, as three
Egges-shels will hold, the meat first taken forth, and having first prepared
these things, let the Horse be taken forth of the stable (being kept that night
to a very spare diet) and ride him first till he begin to sweat, then give him
the three Egges-shels filled with the said Tar and Salt, and so soon as he
has taken that, give him with a horn the fore-named-drinke made of Chamberly,
Vinegar, and Mustard, all at the mouth, excepting only two small or half
hornefuls, which let be conveyed into his Nosthrils, which so soon as he has
taken, let him be ridden again, so much as before you did, then bring him
into the Stable, cloth him up warm and litter him well, and so let him stand
upon the Trench until three or four of the clock, then unbit him and give
him a warm Mash, and order him in all things as is usual for Horses in
Physic. Give him this Medicine or drink every other or third day, three or
four times, and it is an infallible cure.. This cure I gat from a Noble
Knight, who had done many great Cures therewith, who was very precise in
teaching it, and since I came to know thereof, I have perfected many great
Cures therewith, upon horses far spent with the Glanders, insomuch as if it be
rightly and carefully administered, it will cure the rankest Glanders that is.
And with this Cure I conclude this Chapter.


CHAP. 11.
. 1. H.
Hippophylus. WEll Hipposerus, sithence we have finished this Chapter, let us
go to the next; and tell me, what means have you to help the falling away of
the hair from the Main and Tail of a Horse?


Hippos. Sir, this disease comes sometimes by a heat which the horse has
taken, which has engendered a dry Mainge in the main and tail, which is the
occasion of the shedding of the hair from those parts, and sometimes it
comes by a surfeit, causing evil humors to resort to those parts, which is
the cause of the falling away of the hair and I have also known a Horse to
shed the hair, both of main and tail after he has been violently and
dangerously visited with the Stavers: The signs are evident. And the Cure is.

First take blood from the neck vein if it be only in the main, Hair fr^
the May^ and Tayl^ falling a^
but if in both main and tail, and then after you have opened the neck
vein, and taken from thence a reasonable quantity of blood, then slit the skin
of the inward part of the tail, next to the tuell from the buttocks to the
fourth joint, and there with your Cornet you shall find a hard gristle which
the French Marishals do call Barivole, raise it up with your Cornet and take it
forth: that done, fill up the clift with salt finely beaten, and then with a
hot iron steep it in Buck-lye; burn the tail in sundry places, and then
annoint the places so burned with Hogs grease, till it be whole. This cure I
gat in France among the Marishals there, whom I saw cure sundry Horses of this
malady, and I my self have cured four or five after the same method. If it be
both in the main and tail, and that you be fearful to experiment this cure by
reason you never saw the manner of it, then search both main and tail well
with your finger as aforesaid, and annoint the places with this unguent. Take
Quicksilver, and tried Hogs grease (the Quicksilver being first mortified
with fasting spittle) incorporate them very well together till the Hogs grease
be of a perfect Ash Color, and annoint the sorance therewith every day once,
holding a hot bar of iron near, to cause the ointment to sink in, and in three
or four days thus dressing him, he will be well, This is a very good receipt,
and I have often used it.


2. H.
Hippoph. But then what is good to cause the hair to grow again?


Hiposp. Take the dung of a Goat newly made, ordinary Honey, Hair to grow.
Alum, and the blood of a Hog, the Alum being first made into fine powder:
boil all these together, and rub and annoint the places therewith every day,
and it will cause the hair to come again apace. This is special good.


Hippoph. What is good for the Headache?


Hippos. First let him blood in the mouth, and rub it with Salt to cause it to
bleed the more, then take two long feathers of a Goose wing well anointed in
oil de Bay, thrust them up and down his nostrils, whereby to open and purge
his head, and then perfume his head with the stalks of Garlic broken into
small pieces, as is before showed, keeping him to a spare diet, and moderate
exercise, the better to cleanse his head and stomach, and to empty himself, by
means whereof the head and brain will be the better quieted. Headache.
It were very good also to perfume him with Frankincense, Storax, and Benjamin,
grossly beaten and well mixed, of each like much as will suffice, but two or
three days after, let him blood, and give him white water for eight days
after, during which time, you may do well to give him sometimes a sweet Mash.
This is very good.


3. H.
Hippoph. What is good to help the heels that be scabbed?


Hippos. You shall many times have small dry Scabs upon your Horse heels,
which will not be greatly noxious to him, and thereupon the best cure for his
Keeper daily to annoint them thoroughly with the ointment made of Elbow grease.
But if there be any running humor issuing from the heels of the Horse, Heels
scabbed.
then let him stand every day morning and evening up to the belly in water,
till the scabs do dontract, then make a convenient Cautherize near to the
joints as well cross as thwart wise, then heal it up as you use to do kibed
heels. This is very good.


4. H.
Hippoph. WHat is good for heels that be kibed?


Hippos. This disease the French do call Iavarrs, which is a kind of
Scratches, and the cure is to Cautherize the middle of the swelling along, both
long and crosse-wise; that done, Heels kibed.
take Ox dung reeking hot, mix it upon the fire with Sallet oil, and apply
it to the sorance, once and no more, then do afterward as is prescribed you in
a cure for a Splent, in lib. 2. cap. 18. 17. S. This I never tried.


. 5. H.
Hippoph. WHat cure have you for heels that are troubled with the Mellet?


Hippos. This sorance we call the mellet, is a dry scab that grows upon the
heel, sometimes on the one, and sometimes on the other heel; sometimes it
comes of corrupt blood, sometimes of a blow given by the toe with the hinder
foot, for the mellet grows commonly upon the heel of the fore-foot) and
sometimes for want of good rubbing and dressing after travel; it will also
have a dry chop without any moisture at all. The signs to know it, is easy,
to wit, it will soon be felt with your hand. Heel Mellet.
To cure it I have before showed you in precedenti. But yet I will give you one
receipt more for the same cure, whereof I have made often trial, and it is very
good.

Take of ordinary Honey half a pint, black Soap a quarter of a pound, mix
these together, and put thereto four or five spoonfuls of Vinegar, and as much
Alum finely beaten as a Hens egg unburned, and of Rye-flowre two spoonfuls,
mix and incorporate all these well together, and having first clipped or
shaven away the hair, apply this medicine plaister-wise to the sorance, just
so far as the sorance goes, and let it so remain five days, and then take
it away, and wash all the leg, foot, and sorance with powdered beef broth,
and after rope up his legs with thumbands of soft Hay wet, and he will be sound.
But then you must understand, that when at any time you do dress the sorance,
you do not fail to take off the dry scab, or whatever crusty thing shall be
upon or about the place, and by washing and cleansing the sore that you do make
it mavelous clean. This is a very good receipt.


. 6. H
Hippoph. What is good to help a Horse that is Hide-bound?


Hippos. This malady is when the skin of the horse does cleave to the flesh, as
you cannot with your hand pull up the skin from the ribs; sometimes it comes
through extreme poverty and maceration; and sometimes through the indiscretion
of the Groom for want of good tending; sometimes of a surfeit taken by
over-riding, and violent heats given him, and then washed, or negligently
suffered to stand long in the cold, or in the rain; and sometimes again it
comes of corrupt choleric blood siccicating the flesh, which wanting its
natural course, causes the skin to shrink and cling together, and to cleave
to the bones and flesh; it also makes him sick, and to have a gaunt belly
shrunk up to his flanks, and his hair will stare, and his legs will swell:
and by these signs you may know the disease it is so conspicuous. It causes
also siccity and aridity in the liver and lungs, causing great torment
throughout all the whole body, and his dung will be very hard and dry, and of a
naughty savor, for his body will be very costive, and if he have not help in
reasonable time, if death it self ensue not, yet will at the last other
desperate maladies attach him, whereof the least will be the mainge, which will
not easily or suddenly be cured. The cure is to let him blood either on both
sides the neck, or on both the spur-veines, then cloth and litter him warm,
and do no more unto him that day, more then to give him good meat and white
water, for cold water he must not drink till he be thoroughly well again. The
next day give him this drink.

Hide-bound.
Take of white wine one pint, of Sallet oil one pound, of Venice Turpentine
one ounce, of Methridate, of loaf Sugar, and of Cassia prepared, of each two
ounces, of the milk of sweet Almonds half a pint, and of Verjuyce of the Crab
one penny worth, mix all these well together, and warming it upon the fire,
give it to the sick horse, let him have this drink six or seven mornings
together, always having a special care to the strength of the Horse, as well
in this, as in all other your cures. This is a cure I have used very often, and
have found it to be special good. Another singular good receipt. First, annoint
his body all over with Acopum and Sack warmed together, or else with this Bath.

Take fair water, Mallows, Smalage, Rosemary, and Bay leaves; boil all these
in the water till they shall become soft, and so bath his whole body therewith
warm, and when you have dried him again, anoint him with this unguent.

Take of Hogs grease tried one pound, Camomile, Mallows, Grunsell, Smallage,
of each one handful, chop the herbs very small, and boil them with the Hogs
grease a good while with a soft fire, then strain it and wring forth the oil
that comes of the herbs, and with this Unguent annoint his body all over,
for it will both supple and loosen his skin: the next day give him this drink.

Take of Muskadine and of strong Ale, of each one pint, Grunsell, Rue,
Smalage, Rosemary, and Betony, of each like much: all together amounting to a
handful. Then take Gum-Dragamant one ounce, two heads of Garlic pilled and
bruised: let all these boil in the Muskadine and Ale, to the consummation of
one pint, then put to it of sweet Butter, a penny worth, and when it is molten,
take it from the fire, and strain it very hard, and so give it him blood warm.
Let this drink be divided into three parts, whereof give him one part the first
morning, the other second parts, the second and third mornings following, for
you must understand that when I said that this drink must be boiled to the
consummation of one pint; my meaning is, that it must boil till one part be
consumed, and not otherwise; and in the interim you must keep your Horse very
warm, and let his drink be either sweet Mashes or white water, and four days
after he has been thrice thus drenched, give him this other drink. Take
Anniseeds, Licoris, Fennel-seeds, Bay Berries, Elecampane dried, Fenugrick,
Turmerick, of each like much, all made into very fine powder, and searsed; let
two spoonfuls of this powder (being well mixed) be infused in good Ale one
quart, with Sallet oil two spoonfuls, give him this drink four mornings
together, wherein you are to observe that the first time you are to administer
this drink to your horse, you are to put into the Ale two spoonfuls of this
powder, and the other three mornings, but one spoonful: keep him warm, and
order him as is behoovefull for a sick Horse that is in physic, and he is
certainly cured. This is a special good Receipt. Another:

Let him blood in both the flank veins, then take of good white Wine one
quart, and put thereto of Sallet oil, three ounces, of Comin one dram,
Anniseeds and Licoris, of each two ounces, make all these into very fine
powder, and searse them, and give it him blood warm, then set him up, and let
him be thoroughly rubbed against the hair, and along the back and ribs, and
nape of the neck, half an hour together, then cover all his back with a
Sack made thoroughly well soaked in a tub of water, and when it has drained a
while, lay it upon him, and upon that, two housing clothes at the least, and
gird them close unto him well wipsed, which will bring him into a sweat, which
truly will be the prime cause whereby to restore him to his pristine sanity,
but let him not sweat above one hour at most, and cool him by degrees, taking
away the Sack first, and keep him to sweet Mashes or white water during the
time of his physic, and longer; let him be thus drenched, sweated, and
ordered, seven days together, and give him in stead of his Oats, Barley
boiled, and dry Beans bruised in a Mill, and good old sweet Hay, well shaken
and dusted, and sometimes green Malt from off the floor; and after eight
days let him blood in both the breast veins, but take not above a pint of
blood from him in all, and that day you bloody him, give him of good Sack one
pint, and put to it of Sallet oil a quarter of a pint, and of London Treacle
one ounce, warm this upon the fire, and brew them well together, and so
administer it blood warm, then leap his back, and ride him till he sweat, then
set him up warm clothed and littered, and at night give him a sweet Mash,
putting into it the powder of Brimstone two spoonfuls, and he will be well
again. This is very good. Another:

Take Hogs grease two drams, and of the juice of Dragon-wort one ounce, of
Incense half a dram, of Sirrop of Roses three ounces, dissolve all these in
Tison one pint and a half, set it upon the fire till all be dissolved, and so
give it him blood warm, and exercise him moderately upon it till he do begin
to sweat, then set him up warm, and let him fast three hours after, and this
will scowre from him all his infection, loosen his skin, and procure a good
appetite to meat, provided you take blood from him the day before, and (if as
well in this receipt as in all the former) you do give your Horse a suppository
the day before you drench him, you will much better and sooner perfect your
cure, especially if you find him costive, otherwise a gentle Clister will not
be amiss. This is a well approved cure, and I have often used it.


7. H.
Hippoph. HOw do you cure a Horse that is Hip-shot?


Hippos. Sir, this comes sundry ways, that is to say, either by a stroke
with another Horse, or by a wrench, by which means the bone may be slipped
out, and then it must be put in again, or by a strain, which may cause him to
halt, or by means of some thorn which he may get by leaping or running among
bushes, which must first be gotten out, otherwise the place will fester, and he
go lame. The cure is, first let him blood in the thigh vein, on that side
whereon the grief is, then charge him with the charge we call a honey-charge,
prescribed you in the next. and so put upon the other foot a Pattent-shooe, and
let him not lie down in ten days (if that the bone have been out) after bathe
the place well with that bath which is already taught you in lib. 2. cap. 5.
lit. B. and the receipt begins thus, (take Smalage, Oxe-eye, and Sheeps suet,
etc.) and put into the Bath some of the said honey charge, and if this do not
cure him (as it is most probable it will) then apply to the place this Ceroene
(as the French do term it) which is a Searcloth very hot, and this Ceroene is
thus made.

Take of black Pitch half a pound, of Masticke two ounces, of Galbanum four
ounces, of fat Pitch and of Turpentine, of each half a pound: melt these in a
pot together, and when it is half cold, charge the place up to the hanch, and
so overthwart the reins of the back, and if he be not cured at the end of
eight or ten days more with this Ceroene, or Searcloth, then take it off and
apply to the place grieved this unguent.

Take of oil de Bay, Althea, tried Hogs grease, of each half a pound,
incorporate all these together to an unguent, and therewith anoint, rub, and
chafe the place grieved, and he shall do well. This is a very good receipt, and
I have made great use thereof.


. 8. H.
Hippoph. HOw do you make this Honey-Charge Hipposerus?


Hippos. I will show you Sir, Take of Wheat meal two pound, and put a little
Wine to it, as much as will suffice, put it into a kettle, as if you were to
make a Poultesse, and when it is well mixed add to it of Bolearmoniack in fine
powder, half a pound, of common English Honey, one pound, then set it upon the
fire, Honey-charge.
and boil it, keeping it continually stirring, and put to it in the boiling,
of black Pitch, half a pound, still stirring it till it be boiled, so much as
will suffice, and when it is almost enough, put to it of ordinary Turpentine
half a pound, of oil de Bay, Comin, Althea, Sanguis Draconis, Bay berries,
Fenugrick, and of Linseed-meale, of each two drams, boil all these together
again, still stirring them till they be well incorporate, and herewith charge
the grieved members of the horse. This is the very best charge that I do know
for ordinary griefs of this nature; but if you be to apply this to many
horses, then must you double your ingredients according to the number of your
horses. This charge is singular good for any slip or wrench in the sholder,
hip, or other member, for all sorts of scratches, and for stiffness of sinews,
or for sinews hurt or any way offended, as also for a hip-shot or dislocation,
or for a horse that is over-wearied with travel, as also to draw away all bad
humors to assuage swellings and tumors, and it will serve in the place of a
white plaster. And this I have often tried.


9. H.
Hippoph. Well now let us come to treat of the hoof; what have you good to
mollify, the hoof, and to cause it to grow?


Hippos. I gave you a very good receipt in lib. 2. cap. 6. 3. lit. C. but now I
will give you more which shall be very good. Take of Elder leaves, and of
Wal-wort, of each like much; stamp and strain them till you have gotten of
the juice one quart, or better, Hoof to grow.
then take of Mutton or Deers suet clarified, three pound, Turpentine, Honey,
and Sallet oil, of each one pound: boil these till all the juice be consumed
into the other ingredients; then when it is cold, reserve it, and when you have
occasion to use it, annoint the hoof therewith. This is very precious. Another
as good to cause the hoof to grow. You must observe this rule, viz. you must
at what time you would have him shod, cause his hoof to be pared well and
even, and to open the heels and frush well, and so let him be shod up; which
must be done when the Moon is three days in the increase after the change, by
which means the hoof will grow more in eight days then (if he had been pared
and shod in any other time of the Moon) in fifteen days, both faster and
better, then to supple the hoof, and to cause it to grow the more, Take Goats
grease, Turpentine, Sallet oil, and new wax, of each two ounces, melt them
together, then whilst they be hot, add to it of ordinary Honey three ounces,
of Sanguis-Draconis one dram, in fine powder: incorporate all these together,
and bring them to an unguent, with which annoint and rub the hoofes of the
horse daily, which may well be done by using to each the quantity of a hasle
nut of this ointment, which will cause the hoof to grow more in fifteen days,
then without it in three months, and if you add to the former ingredients, of
the juice of the herb called Hepatica, six ounces, and of the root called
Hosmanderigalis two ounces, it will be much better. For if you do find that
the aforesaid Unguent do not make the hoof to come away to your mind, then
will this addition assuredly do it. This is a very good receipt. Another:

Take Salet oil four ounces, new Wax and Turpentine, of each one ounce,
Goats grease three ounces, melt all these together, and being all molten, take
it from the fire, and put into it of Horse-grease, Agrippa, and of Morciaton,
of each one ounce, beat and incorporate all these together with the other
ingredients, till it be through cold; with this ointment, rub and annoint the
coffins of the hoofes especially about the cronet at the hair, every day once,
and it will grow very much. This is singular good. Another very good.

Take of Hogges-grease three pound, of patch or peece-grease two pound,
Turpentine one pound, new Wax half a pound, and of Sallet-oyle one pound,
melt, and mix all these together, bringing it to an Ointment, and herewith rub
and annoint the Coffins of the Horse, especially about the Cronets, near to
the hair.. But if your Horse be pricked in shooing, or otherwise accidently
hurt in or about the Sole, draw forth the Nail first, or whatsoever was cause
of his harm, then take a few of the longest hayres from his Tail, and wrap
them about the point of the said Nail, and cast the said Nail (thus wrapped
up in the Hair) into the fire, and he will go sound, and upright again:
provided you do not suffer any other Nail to be driven in the place of the
former.. This many have supposed to be a Charm, but I for my part do not
think it to be any such matter, I have often used the same, and have ever more
found it to make a perfect Cure.

Now as touching hurts and bruises in the feet, most certain is it that a
Horse will many times have a sore foot, which will run with water and matter
about the Frush and Heel, which many will ignorantly imagine to be a disease in
the Foot, not knowing how it might come, when as it is naught else but a very
bruise, gotten by treading upon a stone or stub, and I have cured many Horses
in this wise, viz. Take a wild or garden Colewort, and beat it with old
Bores-grease to an Unguent, and apply it unto the Sorance, then leap his back,
and and ride him an easy Trot upon swarde-ground, to the end the Medicine may
the better enter into the sore, and thus dressing him once a day he will soon
be well.. This is very good. But if your Horse have a weeping Hoof, or small
Cliftes, Hoof ping.
which disease the French do call la Corn que Escume, the Coffin which frotheth
or wheeseth; Then the cure is; First to open the place with your Drawing-iron
or Cornet, I mean the outward part thereof only, till you come unto the
Master-Veine, which you must break with your Cornet and suffer it to bleed so
long as it will, then fill up the wound with the powder of Salt, and hurds
steeped in Vinegar, and bind them so on that they fall not off, and thus by
dressing it every day once, and in short time it will be well. This cure I
never tried my self, but I have been present sundry times in France, where I
have seen this cure fully perfected by Marishalls there.

But if the Hoof be loose, then: take Bettony, Rosemary, Rue, Hoof ^
red-Mints, Tansie, Sotheron-wood, of each like much: bray all these herbs
with Tar, so much as will suffice, and the powder of Bole-Armoniack, so much
as will suffice, and apply it to the hoof, till you find that it be fast
again.. This also is very good. Another. Take Tar, Brimstone in fine powder,
Wheate-branne, and the Urine of a Man-child: boil all these to a Pultis, and
apply it hot to the hoof, and this will fasten it.. This is singular good. But
if the Vein lie bare in the sole of the Foot causing the Horse to halt, then
to make the hoof to grow over it, whereby it becomes sound again, make this
Plaster, and apply it to the Sorance.

Take Stone Pitch, and Rosin, of each two ounces, Hoofe^
Brimstone in fine powder one ounce; melt all these together till they be well
incorporate, then when you take it from the fire, add thereto of Turpentine
one ounce, and so stir them all together, and as it cools, make it up into
Rowles, and when you would use it, pour the same into the Orifice by the help
of a red hot iron, and so all about the Sorance, then clap Hurds upon it, and
over that a piece of Leather, cut and shaped for the purpose, and so splent it
to keep it fast on. Use thus to dress him twice or thrice, and he will be
cured.. This is very good. But if the foot have taken any harm by an over
reach, stub, prick, or gravel, then making the wound very clean, and laying
it bare.

Take Soap, and Salt of each like much, so much as will suffice, make them to
an Unguent, then first wash the Sore with Chamberly and Salt, or Beer and
Salt, and dry it again with a linen ragge, then bind on the Medicine, and let
it so remain four and twenty hours; and do thus if the wound be great three
or four days together: then having with this Medicine exhausted all the
Venom (which it will soon do;) take of Traine-Oyle one spoonefull or two, and
as much Ceruse that is, white lead in fine powder, and so work them to a thick
salve; then apply that to the sorance plaister-wise, till it be whole; which
will not be long, for nothing does dry up sooner, or is more kindly, or
Natural for the breeding of a new Hoof then this. Another most sovereign for
a Hoof bound.

Hoof bound
First pluck off the Shoes, and shoe him up again with half Moon or
lunet-shooes, then ease with your drawing Iron or Rape the quarters of the
Hoofes on both sides of the Feet, from the Cronet, down to the end or bottom
of the hoofes, so deep till you perceive as it were a dew to come forth, and if
you make two Rases it will be the better, and enlarge the Hoofes the more, that
done, annoint the Hoofes above next to the Hair, about the Cronet with this
ointment.

Take of Turpentine one pound, of Wax, and of Sheep or Deeres Suet, of each
half a pound, of Tar, and of Sallet-oyle, of each half a pint; melt all but
the Turpentine together, and when it is almost ready to be taken off from the
fire, put in your Turpentine, and so stir it well together till it be cold.
Let his Hoofes be anointed herewith once a day till you do perceive he
mendeth, and then let him be ridden upon soft, moyst-swardy-ground, an hour or
two every day once, for the space of a Month, and if he do not go well at the
Months end, (as I am confident he will) then take off the lunet-shooes, and
pare his Soles, Frushes, and Heels, so thin, till you may see a dew to come
forth, and the blood ready to start, then tack on his whole Shoes, and stop
all his Feet as well within as without, with this Charge.

Take of Cow or Oxe-dung, and of Wheate-branne, of each, so much as will
suffice, Hoof bound a Charge.
of tried Hogges-grease, and of the kidney of a Loyne of Mutton, of each one
pound, of Turpentine, and Tar, of each half a pound, melt all these together
(the Turpentine excepted) which must be put in when it is almost ready to be
taken from the fire, continually stirring it, to the end the ingredients may be
the better mixed. Let this Charge be laid on good and hot, renewing it every
day once by the space of nine days, to the end the sole may arise: but if this
will not do it, then take out the soles clean, and after you have stanched the
bleeding, with the tender tops of Isope well stamped in a stone Mortar, then
apply the medicine of Snayles, Bay Salt, and red Nettles showed you in lib. 2.
chap. 9.. 18. F. renewing it once a day for three days, and after you may
heal up the feet, and bring a new and perfect sole with your green Ointment
so often recommended unto you, in many other of my Cures; and thus you shall
rectify the hoofes, and make him sound, but then he must be shod with lavels
again, and turned forth to grass.. But if he has stood in the Stable with
little exercise, whereby he may be in danger of a dry foundring.

Take of Turpentine, of Sheeps suet, and of Wax, Hoof b^
of each one pound, of Sallet-Oyle one pint, of Tar half a pint; melt all
these upon a soft fire, and stir them in the melting until they be all well
incorporate, but put in your Turpentine last, which being well molten put it up
in a clean Vessel, and keep it for your use, and herewith annoint the hoofes
of your Horse daily, they having been first washed very clean, and wiped dry,
and this will conserve his hooves supple and moist, keep them cool, and make
them very tough and sound.. This I have often used. But if the hooves be
somewhat straight, and yet the Horse not hoofe-bound, then administer this
Medicine to his feet.

Take the fat of Bacon, the sward cut away half a pound, Hoof straigh^
of white Soap three ounces, Balm one handful, and five or six sprigges of
the tender tops of Rue, chop, and stamp all these together very well in a
Mortar, and then fry them, Hoof ^
and lay them to the hooves reasonable hot, and keep him from coming in any
wet till he be well, and being thus dressed every day once, his hooves will in
short time be sound, well, and easy to him again.. This Receipt is very good.
But let us discourse of a loose hoof yet a little more. Take of Tar three
spoonefuls, of Rosin three ounces, of Tansy, Rue, Mints, and Sotheren-wood of
each one handful, pound all these very well, adding to it of sweet Butter
half a pound, of Virgin Wax half an ounce, and so try them all together till
it come to be a thick salve, and apply it Plaister-wise warm to the hooves,
seven or eight days together, and this will cure him, and fasten the hooves
again.. This is very good. But if his hoof be otherwise hurt, either by some
other Horse treading upon his Hoof, or by any other accident; then

Take an Egg, and Soot so much as will suffice, Hoof t^den upon hurt.
to be beaten with the said Egg till it be stiff like a salve; then add to
it of Sallet-oyle and Harts-horne made into powder, of each two or three
spoonfuls, boil this to a thick salve, continually stirring it in the boiling,
and apply it to the hooves Plaister-wise, daily dressing them till they be
whole. This I never made trial off, howbeit it was commended to me to be a
special good Receipt. Another very good to make a brittle or pomized hoof
tough.

Take fresh Butter one pound, Hoof b^tle to m^ tough.
Wax and Turpentine of each half a pound, melt first the Wax, then put to it
your Butter, and when that is molten put in your Turpentine, and so stirring
them well together, reserve it to your use, and when you do use it, apply it
thus: Make a Buskin of leather, so as it may be buckled or tied above or upon
the pasterne joint, and then lay on so much of the medicine as will cover the
hoof all over very thick, and then put on the Buskin and fasten it to his
leg or pasterne, and let him stand so night and day till you have occasion to
ride or exercise him, dressing him thus once a day, and the longer you use this
medicine, the better will be his hoof. Hoof to grow.
I have often made trial of this receipt, and I have found it to be very good.
But if your horse has his hoof broken, and that you have a desire it should
grow, then

Take Garlic pilled seven ounces, Rue three handfuls, Alum powdered and
searsed seven ounces, old Bores grease two pound, beat all these together with
Asses dung one handful, and then boil it, and so reserve it, and annoint his
hoofes therewith, and they will grow very fast. This is very good. If he be hurt
by being cast in his halter, Hal^er cast.
then

Take of Wax and Turpentine, of each one ounce, melt them together in a pot:
take then of Verdigrece and Hogs grease, of each one ounce, and incorporate
them well together raw, viz. without boiling, the Verdigrece being first made
into very fine powder, and put into another pot by it self: then when you have
occasion to use it whereby to dress a sore: take first of that you made of
Turpentine and Wax two parts, and then of that other which was not boiled made
of Verdigrece and Hogs grease a third part, and mixing them well together in
the palm of your hand, annoint the sorance therewith; thus doting every day
once or twice, it will be whole, remembering to clip away the hair first from
about the place. And this is a most excellent receipt. I have often proved it.


. 10. H.
Hippoph. WHat may a man best apply to the Hough of a Horse that is swelled, as
if he were in danger to breed a Blood or Bogg-Spaven?


Hippos. This comes sometimes to young horses when they be too hard ridden and
journeyed in their youth, which is the cause they swell in that place; by
reason the blood falling down there setleth, which if it be not speedily
removed, will assuredly beget a wet Spaven. The cure is, annoint the place
swollen four or five days together with natural Balsome, and after repress
the humors with this charge, having first given fire to the place lightly:

Hough swelled.
Take oil of Roses two ounces, Bolearmoniack in powder one ounce, Wheat flower
half an ounce, and the white of an Egg, beat and incorporate all these
together, and after you have ended to annoint the place swelled with Balsome:
charge every day for four or five days after, the place herewith, and he will
be well. This is very good.


. 11. H.
Hippoph. What is good to dry up humors?


Hippos. This kind of drying up of humors, is but only to restrain them for
working too much upon wounds, whereby the better to cure them. The way
therefore is this;

First bath the sorance well with hot molten fresh Butter, and then strew upon
it the powder of Rosin for a day or two; Hun dry (...)
then take of the thickest Cream, and of Soot, of each as much as will
suffice, and work them to a thick paste, and so apply it to the sorance
plaister-wise, and it will both dry up the humor which possesses it, and
heal up, and skin the sore in a short space. This I have often used, and it is
right good.


12. H.
Hippoph. What is best to cure the hurt in the Shoulder, or other member?


Hippos. There are many things good for a malady of this nature, and when I
come to treat of Spraines, Sores, and Wounds, I shall deliver them unto you,
and therefore I will now refer them to its proper place, only I will give you
one for the present.

Take oil de Bay, Dialthea, fresh Butter, oil of Turpentine, Hur^der.
of each two ounces, boil and mix them well together, and when they be well
incorporate, annoint the place grieved therewith so hot as the Horse can well
suffer it without scalding, and let him be thus anointed twice or thrice a
day, and give the Horse moderate exercise by walking him a foot pace gently up
and down. And this is a certain and an approved remedy. This I never tried,
but a great Ferrier who is cried up for famous, taught it me, and wished me to
make use thereof.


13. H.
Hippoph. What do you hold good wherewith to cure old Hurts?


Hippos. The only best way to cure and dry up old hurts and sores, is this;
Take old shoes and burn them to coals, Hurt^ to cu^
and then beat them to fine powder, then add to it unslaked Lime and ordinary
Honey, as much as will suffice, to bring it to a stiff paste, which done,
knead them all together unto a paste, and so make it into a Cake, and then lay
it upon a fire pan, and so let it be well baked; which done, make it into fine
powder, and every day once, put of this powder into the wound, and it will
heal it up, nothing sooner. This I have often used, and it is very good, and
herewith we do conclude this Chapter.


CHAP. XII.
1. I.
Hippoph. WHat is good to help any imperfection in the feet?


Hippos. First pare the feet very thin, open the heels and make the shoes
wide, large, and hollow: if the imperfection come by foundring, then

Imperfection in the feet.
Take a good quantity of Ox or Cow dung, Tar, and Hogs grease, of each half
as much, and of Soot the like quantity, as of either Tar or Hogs grease:
boil all these very well together, and herewith stop the horse feet very hot,
and continue thus to do daily, and it will not only take away any anguish, but
also strengthen the hoofes, and make them so perfect as that they will be able
to endure labor; but when you travel your horse (for exercise is very good
for him) let him be stopped herewith hot; but if cold, add then thereto the
whites of Eggs as much as will suffice, for that will cool his feet very
well, and it will comfort the Frush very much, but if the hoof be naturally
brittle, and by foundring become dry and straightened, then to enlarge the same,
and to make it the more tough, and to grow the better also. Take of Hogs
grease, Turpentine, and Masticke, of each, like much, and half so much Lard as
of either of them: melt all these but the Turpentine on the fire, and when it
is well dissolved, take it off, and then put in your Turpentine, stirring it
well till it be thoroughly incorporate; then keep it in a stone pot by it self;
and when it is through cold, be sure to stop the pot very close, and so reserve
it for your use. With this Salve annoint the coffines (but especially the
Cronets) every day twice at the least, and it will cause the hoof to grow very
much, and become tough and sound. This I have often used, and it is very good.


2. I.
Hippoph. What is good to ripen an Impostumation?


Hippos. To ripen any swelling which does impostumate, you shall know by the
heat, for if you lay you hand thereon, it will be hot and burn; wherefore to
prepare and make it ready to be opened;

Impostumation to ripen.
Take Mallow roots, and white Lilly roots, of each like much, bruise them, and
put to them Hogs grease and Linseed meal, of each so much as will suffice, and
boil them till they be soft, and so plaister-wise apply it to the grief.


3. I.
Hippoph. What is good for any inward sickness in a Horse?


Hippos. I have showed you that sufficiently before in lib. 2. cap. 3. 6. A.
where I give you three excellent receipts together; nevertheless if you do
find that your horse do not thrive, but droop and impair, I will here give
you one receipt more which I do know to be most singular, and will do him much
good, and whereof I have had very long and great good experience. First
therefore if you do see cause, take blood from him, but not otherwise, and if he
be subject to costivenesse, then administer unto him either a Clister or a
Suppository, and the day following give him this drink.

Take Aristolochia Rotunda, Bay berries, Gentiam, Anniseeds, Inward sickness^
Ginger, and of Trifora-Magna, of each one ounce: beat all the simples to very
fine powder, and mix them well together; then take of white Wine one quart, or
of Sack the like proportion, which is better, then put of this powder, and of
your Trifora-Magna one spoonful, into the Wine. Salet oil half a pint, and
of Mithridate two drams, warm these upon the fire, and so administer it blood
warm, and let him be exercised as well before as after his drink, but not so
far as to sweat by any means, neither let him drink any cold water in four
or five days after, but either warm Mashes, or else white water. This is most
sovereign for any inward sickness, droopings, forsaking of meat, Fevers,
Colds, Coughs, or the like.


3. I.
Hippoph. YOu speak hereof administering a Suppository, but what Suppository
were best to be given in a case of this nature?


Hippos. I will show you Sir: if your Horse be so ficke whereby you fear to
give him any strong medicine, and that he be costive withal, then give him
this Suppository following.

Take of Honey six ounces, of Sal^niter, one ounce and a half, Inward
sickness^ Supposi^
of Wheat flower and of Anniseeds in fine powder, of each, one ounce, boil all
these to a hard thickness, and then make it into Suppositories; and first
annoint your hand with Sallet oil or sweet Butter, and the Suppository also
which he is to take, and so convey it into his fundament a pretty way, and
after tie his tail betwixt his legs, as I have elsewhere showed you: or else
hold it close to his body with your hand, by the space of a quarter of an hour
at the least, till it be thoroughly dissolved, and this will cause him to purge
kindly, and it will very much cool and loosen his guts: then you may be the
more bold to administer what Drinks, Cordials, or other things which you may
think most requisite for his recovery.


. 4. I.
Hippoph. What is good to ripen inflammations, Pustils; and Kernels, which do
grow under the chaule of the Horse?


Hippos. This comes to a horse that has either Cold or Glanders, which must
be dissolved, otherwise the Horse can never be cured: Jnflamations.
wherefore take Wheat Bran two handfuls, and so much Wine, Ale, or Beer, as
one quart, with which to thicken it, put to it of Hogs grease half a pound,
boil these together till the liquor be quite consumed, and so apply it to the
place so hot as the horse may well suffer it, renewing it every day once, till
it do of it self break, or be so soft to be opened, then let forth the
corruption, and taint it with a taint of flax dipped in this Salve. Take of
Turpentine and of Hogs grease of each like much, and of Rosin and Wax a much
greater quantity; melt all these together, and with the said taynt dipped in
this medicine, put it into the wound, renewing it every day once till it be
whole. This is an approved receipt. But if it be an inflammation impostumating in
any other part of the body, take then the grounds of a Beere-Barrell, four
quarts, of Smalage, Penny-royall, Winter-Savory, Cumfrey, Rue, and of the
leaves and berries of the Missell-tow, of each two handfuls, chop all these
very small, and put them to the said grounds, and put to it of Sheeps or Dear
Suet tried, one pound, and three or four handfuls of Rye or Wheat Bran, so
much indeed as will serve to boil this to a Poultesse, and when it is boiled
as much as will suffice, apply it to the place, and if the swelling be very
much impostumated, it will break it, or at the least so soften it, that it may
be opened; if it be hard at what time you put your Poultesse thereunto, it will
send it back again without more to do. This I have very much experimented,
and have found it to be right good. But if he be troubled with the Strangles,
and that he is very much inflamed under the chaule, then cure them thus: take
Basilicon, old Bores grease, and Dialthea, of each four ounces, of oil de
Bay, one ounce, incorporate all these well together, and first clipping away
the hair from under the chaule, annoint the swelling and inflamed place
therewith very well; this done, bind upon it a piece of Sheeps skin, with the
Wool next to the inflammation, that the warmth thereof may the better help to
ripen the Pustils, which being ripened, open them, and let forth the
corruption, that done, taynt it first for three or four days with Basilicon
only, but after heal up the sorance with your black Aegyptiacum, taught you
in lib. 2. chap. 4. 4. A. and during the time of this cure, let him eat good
sweet Hay, and Bran, in stead of Oats, aad let his drink be only white
Water.. This is a most excellent Receipt.


5. I.
Hippoph. What is good for a Joint that has in it any Ach, Numnesse,
Weakness, or Swellings which comes of a cold cause.


Hippos. This comes sometimes of a Streyne and sometimes of a Cold, taken
after a great and violent riding or labor. The signs are apparent, and the
Cure is;

Take Acopum, and mixing it with sweet Sack, all to rub and chafe the Joint
greived Joint g^ved.
therewith. And if it come of cold, it will at four or five times thus doing,
cure it.. This is singular good. Another.

Take Aqua-vitae, and warm it upon the fire, and therewith bathe and rub the
greived Member therewith very well, and hold a hot bar of iron before it, to
cause it to sink in the better; take then a rag, and wet it in the same
Aqua-vitae, and lastly, take Pepper finely powdered and searced, an^ strew it
good and thick upon the said wet rag, and so bind it to the place greived; take
then a dry Rowler of linen, and swathe the place therewith, and so let them
remain, and thus do every day once, and in short time it will recover him.. Of
this I have made often trial.


. 6. I.
Hippoph. What is good to increase the Hoof of a Horse?


Hippos. I have given you sundry good Receipts before, but I will add one
more, which the most Famous Marishall of all Paris gave me, which he
recommended unto me for tresbonne, but I never had yet a good occasion to make
trial thereof. The receipt is this.

Take of the Oil of Hempe-seed, of Wax, of Venice Turpentine, Increas^ Hoof.
Rosin, Pitch, Bay-seeds dried and powdered of each half a pound, Roch Allume
two ounces, mix all these together, and let them boil softly upon a gentle
fire, then strain it through a hayre-cloath, and keep it for your use. With
this annoint every day the hoofes of your Horse, and this will cause them to
grow very much. This is probably a good Receipt.


CHAP. 12.
. 1. L.
Hippophylus. HOw do you cure the Lampas Hipposerus?


Hippos. This is a Malady that every common Smith can easily cure, by putting
into the Mouth of the Horse a good big Bat of wood, where unto two long pieces
of the Head-stall of an old bridle is nailed at either end, which will cause
him to keep open his Mouth, and then holding up his Lip with your left hand,
burn away the rank flesh, with a hot Iron made of purpose, and after rubbing
the place with Salt, and giving him Bran for Oats three or four days at the
most, he will be whole.. This disease is a Swelling proceeding from rankness
of blood, which grows in the Mouth adjoining to the fore teeth, which said
Swelling is an impediment to his feeding; it is apparent enough to be seen,
and therefore needs no further remonstrance.. Nevertheless I will show you how
the Marishals in France do use to cure the Lampas, from whom I had the Cure,
and wherewith I my self have cured many horses.

Take a roasted Onion, and very hot put it upon a clout, or upon hurds, and with
it rub the Lampas Lampas.
very hard, and do this two or three times a day till it be whole.. But many
times they burn away the Lampas, like as do our Smithes with an iron
instrument, which they do call a Bistory, which is the very same that our
Smithes use here in England.


2. L.
Hippoph. HOw do you stop a Lax or Looseness, when it comes to be violent?


Hippos. Very easily Sir, but I had thought I had handled that point
sufficiently before, in letter F. where you made your demand touching the Flux
in a Horse, notwithstanding I will give you other very good Receipts by me
almost forgotten. To illustrate the manner of it is coming, Laxe to stop
and the signs how to know the same, I hold unfitting for this place, by
reason I have sufficiently already performed it. Take of Allome one pennyworth
powdered, Bole-Armoniack poudred, one ounce, put these into Milk one quart,
continually stirring it till the Milk does become all of a Curd, give him this
with a horn, and it will stay his Laxe be it never so violent.. This I have
used. Another.

Take Bean flower, and Bole-Armoniack in fine powder, of each four ounces,
put them into red Wine one quart, and give him this with a horn blood warm.
Let his drink be white water, only instead of Wheate-bran, put in Bean-flower,
and that for three or four days after; then let him blood in the Temple
veins, and give him warm Mashs, made of ground Malt and Beane-flower, and
having drunk up the Wort, let him eat up the residue, but if this do not
stay him within two days, then put in each Nosthrill, Sallet-oyle, and that
will do it.. This is special good.


. 3. L.
Hippoph. What means have you to raise a lean Horse, and to cause him in
short time to hecome very fat?


Hippos. I have showed you this before, but yet I will give you Rereipt which
you yet have not.

Take Elecampane dried, Comin, Turmerick, Anniseeds, Lean^ to man
of each two ounces, Grunsell half a handful boil all these very well with
three heads of Garlic picked, a little bruised in strong Ale four quarts,
then strain it well, and give unto your Horse of this drink one quart, in a
morning fasting blood warm, and then ride him upon it till he do begin to be
warm, but not to sweat, and thus do for four mornings together, and within
some short time after, turn him to grass if the time of the year be
seasonable, and he will feed wonderfully and fatten suddenly: but if the time
of the year do not serve for grass, then shall you keep him in the Stable,
and besides his former drink, you shall give him in his Oats, this powder,
viz. Take the powder of Elecampane dry, and of Comin, both pulverized and
searced of each like much: mix them well together, and every time you give your
Horse this Provender, take of this powder half an ounce, and strew it by little
and little among his Provender for fear of offending him, till he has eaten
up all clean, and do thus but fourteen days together, and you shall
perceive your Horse to thrive, mend, and prosper after a strange manner:
provided that you do give him seasonable ayring, moderate exercise, and Mashes
or white water.. This is marvelous good.


. 4. L.
Hippoph. What is to be done to a Horse whose Legs do swell?


Hippos. If this Swelling be only in his fore Legs and not behind, then it is
a sign that this his Swelling came by over-violent labor, when the Horse was
very fat, (especially inwardly) by reason that the grease that was molten fell
down into his fore-Legges, which if it had staid in his Body, must of
necessity have engendered either an Anticor, Fever, or a Surfeit to the great
peril of his life; The signs are known by the swelling, L^gs swelled
and therefore to annoint them with Acopum were very good. But the best cure
is, first to take up the thigh veins, then with your Fleame to prick the
places most swelled, and hottest, in sundry places, especially be low, to the
end that the corrupt blood may issue forth; then

Take of white Wine-lees one pint, of Comin bruised one ounce, boil then
together to a pultis with Wheat flower, three handfuls; then with a cloth
apply it to the place good and warm, renewing it every day once, and if in two
or three days it does draw it to a head (as it is very probable it will do)
then lanch it and heal it up either with Shooe-makers wax, laid on upon a
Plaster of leather, or also with a salve made of the yolke of an Egg, Whete
flower, and common honey well wrought together to a salve, which you must also
apply Plaister-wise. But if it do not come to a head, and yet the swelling
continue; then

Take of Pitch, and of Virgin-wax, of each three ounces, Rosin half a pound, of
the juice of Isop, and of Galbanum, of each half an ounce and of
Mirrah-secondary half a pound, of Bdellium-Arabicum, Populeon, and of the drops
of Storax, of each half an ounce, and of Deeres-suet half a pound; boil all
these together in an earthen Pot, and when it is cold; take of Bitumen half a
pound, Bole-Armoniack, and of Costus, of each one ounce and half: make all
these into fine powder, and then incorporate them well with the other, and so
boil them all over again very well; that done, pour this whole mixture or
Medicine into cold water, and so make it up into rowles like a salve for
Playsters: and when you are to use it, spread thereof upon Playsters of
Leather, which must be so large as to cover the Legs full so far as the
swellings are, which (if any thing can do it) this will assuage the swelling,
and give very much strength and comfort the Sinews and Nerves: neither is this
Plaster to be removed so long as it will remain on.. This I have applied to
many Horses very much annoyed with swolne-Legges, and brought them to their
former smallness, when as Ferriers have spent much time upon the Cure, and
given it over at last. But if the Swelling do fall into the hinder-Legs, or
into all foure-Legs together (being but a bad Sorance) causing them to burn
and swell exceedingly, and the hair to stare, the cause whereof coming, (as I
have before said) from immoderate Riding, heat, and labor, whereby the grease
melting falls down into the Legs, by reason the Horse cannot void it in
his Excrements, or else being over-hot, he is washed or negligently, set up
without sufficient store of litter and rubbing, so as the taking cold, the
blood with the grease setleth in the Legs, and there congealeth, and so
causes them to swell. This sorance also comes by having his feet beaten
(especially in the Summer) with being ridden and galloped upon hard ground,
which first occasioneth wind-gals, and those also causes the legs to swell,
which truly is the worst kind of swelling of all other, by reason that
lamenesse does immediately follow it, unless great Art and diligence be
speedily applied for prevention thereof. Wherefore the signs being so
apparent, needs no remonstrance, and therefore I will pass on to the Cure,
which is thus.

Take Populeum, Nervell, Hogs grease, of each one ounce, Legs ^led.
incorporate them very well together cold, and annoint the sorance therewith
morning and evening four days together, and at four days end, take of
Claret Wine lees one quart, boil it upon the fire with so much Bran as will
bring it to a Poultesse, apply this to the place grieved plaister-wise with a
cloth good and hot for four or five days more, renewing it every day once,
and in short time he will be sound again. This is a most excellent receipt which
I have often experimented. Another. The swelling of the legs may be easily
cured, if in the beginning, they be often times in the day laved and bathed in
cold water, unless the malady come of too great a surfeit, wherefore if this of
cold water will not do it, then

Take of common honey one pound, Turpentine, common Gum, meal of Linseed,
meal of Fenugrick, of each four ounces, Bay berries made into very fine
powder, and seraced, three ounces, mix and boil all these together well, and
when you take it from the fire, put unto it of white Wine one pint, and then
boil it over again till it do become thick, spread this upon a cloth
reasonable hot, and wrap it about the members swelled, and do not renew it
above once in a week, and it will cure them. This is a certain and most
approved Cure. Another. If you take up the veins, and make them to bleed below
and not above, and then rope up the legs with thumbands of soft Hay wet in
cold water, and then cast more water upon them, in short time he will be sound
and well again. This is also very good.


5. L.
Hippoph. What is good to cure the Leprosy?


Hippos. This is a moist mainge, very infectious, which comes by means of
great surfets, taken by over-riding, which is very easy to be seen and known,
and therefore needs no further description. The cure therefore is: first, let
him bleed well in the neck, then scrape away the scurfe with an old
Curry-combe, Oyster-shell, Hayre-cloth, or some such like thing, till the
sorance do look raw, and that it be ready to bleed, then annoint the raw
places with this ointment. Lepros^ elepha^ malady


Take Arsnick, or Resalgar, and tried Hogs grease, (the Arsnick or Resalgar
being first beaten unto very fine powder) incorporate these well together to
make them into a perfect ointment; then tie up the head of your Horse so high
to the Rack, as that he may not be able to bite, rub, or lick himself, and so
annoint the places therewith, and cause the ointment to sink the better in by
himself, and so annoint the places therewith, and cause the ointment to sink
the better in by holding a hot bar of iron near to the place as you anoint
him, and let him stand so tied three hours, and then wash away the Unguent
with the strongest Chamber-lye you can get, and wash him so thoroughly, that you
may be assured you leave none of the ointment upon the Horse, and then untye
him, and give him meat: and thus dress him once every day till the sores be
quite dried up. This is also good for Scratches, and Kibed-heeles.


. 6. L.
Hippoph. What is good to kill Lice in a Horse?


Hippos. Lice commonly comes to a horse when he is very poor, especially
when he runs abroad in the Winter time in some Wood, Coppice, or places
where are many high trees, for that the dropping of the trees falling upon the
Horse, together with his poverty, does cause them to engender, and albeit they
may be at first but a few, yet will they in short time multiply abundantly:
sometimes also a Horse will catch them by standing near to another horse that
be lousy, and so long as he be visited with them, he can never prosper, but
remain very meager and lean. You may easily know when he is annoyed with this
kind of vermin, for that he will often scrub and rub himself against Walls,
Posts, and Doors, with his mouth and hinder feet. The way to destroy them is,

Lice.
Take Staves-Acre, and boil it in running water, and wash him all over with
that water warm, and it will kill them. Another,

Take Quicksilver two ounces, and first kill it with fasting Spittle, and when
it is thoroughly mortified, take Hogs grease tried, and so work them together
till it become of an Ash Color, and annoint him therewith, and it will in
twice or thrice dressing, kill them all. Another:

Take Tobacco as much as will suffice, and shred it very small, and put it into
small Beer, and put to it of Alum powdered, as much as will suffice, and when
the Alum is dissolved, wash him therewith, and it will kill them. X All these
I have often tried, and have found them to be very good.


. 7. L.
Hippoph. HOw do you make your powder of Lime and Honey, Lime (...) Hone^
with which you do heal and dry up Sores?


Hippos, Take of English Honey, and of quicklime newly taken from the Kill,
unslaked, of each like much as will suffice, beat your Lime into fine powder,
and with your Honey and your Lime knead it to a paste, and when it is thoroughly
wrought, make it into a thin Cake, then lay it upon a clean fire-pan, and set
it upon the fire, and so let it bake, and as it is baking, take the soles of
two old shoes and cast them into the fire, and let them burn until they have
done flaming, and that they do come to be fire coal; then take them forth, and
when the Cake is baked sufficiently and cold, beat the Cake together with the
burnt shoes soles to very fine powder, and so keep this powder in a bladder or
dry box for your use. X This will heal and dry up any wound or old sore, and
I have often and long used this powder.


8. L.
Hippoph. What disease is that we call the Low-worme?


Hippos. This is that disease which I cannot distinguish from Saint Anthonies
fire, or the Shingles, for that it has the self same symptoms, and this I
have cured. This is a Worm that breeds in the back, betwixt the skin and the
bone, and runs along the breast to the brain, and when it comes to touch
the pannicle of the brain, it makes the Horse stark mad. You shall first
discover it by these signs, viz. presently after a long and tedious journey,
the Horse will be sick and forsake his meat, and stand out of length with his
feet, bending down his back, and he will often make offer to piss, but
cannot, and if he do, yet will it be but very little at a time, and that in
the sheath, and in time he will fall mad, gnaw the Walls, Rackstaves, and
Manger, and bite and strike at every man that comes within his reach or
danger: and these be the most pregnant and apparent signs: and this disease
does deceive many a good Ferrier. For albeit that this infirmity may be many
times among horses, yet Ferriers being ignorant thereof by mistaking it merely
for the Stavers, and applying remedies only for that cure, do thereby lose
many a good horse through their misprision. But now to come unto the Cure it
self, I will give you two receipts; the former of which I learned of a Farmer
in Buffolke, who was cried up for a very expert man in this faculty, (as indeed
he was) and has perfected in my presence many a great cure. Then thus,

Take of Acrement a quarter of a pound, Loe-^^
six heads of Garlic clean pilled, of Rue and Turmentile that bears the
yellow flower, of each one pound, stamp all these in a stone mortar, and put to
it so much white Wine, as that when it is strained, there may be of the juice
and Wine two quarts, when you have of this liquor in a readiness, let your
horse blood under the tail a good quantity, then stanch him, and dividing this
pottle of liquor into six parts, give it him six mornings together, that is
to say, every morning one part or portion, till he has taken it all, and by
that time he will he perfectly cured.

The second receipt was taught me in France by a famous Marishall of Burbon, who
has cured very many horses of the self same malady, but in a quite contrary
way. For whereas the first Cure was wrought by medicine, this second is
perfected by giving of fire. Take an iron with a Button at one end, and make it
red hot, then burn him therewith upon the top of his forehead, and a little
under his foretop, and another in the fore-top, and four other in the neck,
clean through upon the crest, whereof two of the holes must be upon the one
side of the crest, and two on the other side, and to take away and kill the
fire, put into every hole Vnguentum Rosarum, and then let him blood in the
neck vein, and he is cured. This is also an approved Cure. The French do call
this malady ver-coquin, and the Italians do name Vermiforme, but they both
have but one manner of Cure for the fame. This Ver-coquin, or Low-worme is a
living worm which breeds upon the back bone running along the neck, and so
by degrees comes to the head of the horse, where with its hard beak, it
first pierces the panicle, and then works it self to the very brain of the
creature, where it lies biting, gnawing, and feeding, causes the horse to
become enraged, and to dye mad, if otherwise he be not cured in time, and
therefore the French Marishals do affirm, that the prime remedy wherewith to
kill and destroy this Worm, is, by fire, and they hold that it cannot be
destroyed any other way.


. 9. L.
Hippoph. What remedy have you to help the disease of the Lungs?


Hippos. This disease of the Lungs is a malady which is first engendered of cold
taken, and let run till the horse be either frettized or putrified in the
lungs, at what time they become infl^med, and to come at last to rottenness
and corruption: the means how to come to the knowledge of this infirmity is,
that by careful observance you may perceive his flanks to beat, and his
ribs to work, but most chiefly when he cougheth, and then the more slowly
they do beat and heave, the more old and dangerous is the disease; he will
also draw his breath at his nose short, and yet weakly, and he will groan
often, and principally when he lies down and rises up, and when at any time
he cougheth, he will seem to chew some thing betwixt his teeth, and from his
nose will issue much corruption. The Cure is,

Take of horse Lung-wort, alias Mullet, it grows in every place with broad
hoary soft leaves which do feel like velvet; shred it, Lungs (...) disease.
stamp it and strain it, then take of Fenugricke a good spoonful, and of
Madder as much, make them into fine powder, and give this to your horse in
Muskadine one pint, or else in good Ale one quart, and administer this unto
him every other day for twelve or fourteen days, and sprinckle his Hay with
water, and let his Oats be washed in good Ale, and let his drink be white
water, and sometimes sweet Mashes. This is very good. Another:

Take a Snake, and cut off the head and tail, and flea it, and after cut the
same into pieces the length of your finger, and roast it as you would an Eele
upon a Spit, but do not baste it with any thing, for it will baste it self,
reserve carefully the oil that drippeth from it, and herewith annoint the
breast and the fore-short ribs of the Horse which be against the Lungs, but
clip away the hair first from about the place where you are to annoint him,
otherwise the hair will take up much of the said Oil; and thus doing often
for some time you shall recover his lungs again, and make him perfectly sound.
This was taught me by a great Marishall of Tours, but I never could come to
make trial thereof.


CHAP. XIII.
1. M.
Hippoph. NOw Hipposerus that we have ended this Chapter, let us proceed to
another; and tell me what is good to cure a Malander?


Hippos. This is a noisome sorance which grows upon the inward part of the
forelegs in the bending of the leg over against the knee: it is a Scab hard
and dry, which has a chop or chink upon it, and it has hard and stubborn
staring hayres growing in and about it, not much unlike to Hogs bristles, by
which means it cankereth and corrupts the flesh, which will cause the Horse
to go stiff, and to halt at first setting forth till he be warm, like as does
the Scratches. It comes either through the negligence of the Groom for
default of rubbing, and due and orderly dressing, or else from the corruption
of the blood through hard and immoderate riding; and those horses are most
especially subject thereunto, which have long hair growing all along the
legs from the pasterne up to the top of the thigh as most commonly have your
Flanders and Freeze-land horses, by reason that the hair in that place, being
thick, long, and shaggy, does gather sand, dirt, and other filth, which not
being continually taken off by the industry of his Keeper, will scald, burn,
and fret into the joint, and so breed this kind of sorance. I have already
showed you the signs how to know it, now I will also give you very many
receipts wherewith to cure it, many of which are special good. First therefore
(whatsoever you have to apply unto this sorance) fail not to wash and shave
away the hair from off and about the sorances; first then

Malender.
Take black Soap, Vnguentum Populeon, and fresh Butter, of each like much as
will suffice: mix them well together, and so bring them to a formal Unguent,
and apply it to the sorance every other day till it be whole. But you must
withal understand that unless you do pick away and rub off the dry crust
or scurfe, as well as wash and shave away the hair which does annoy the
sorance, you do nothing in the perfecting of the Cure, for be you confident
unless you do this, the Malender will not be taken away, nor any medicine
that you shall apply to it, be able to heal it up. Another:

Take black soap, and allay it with Buck-lye, and wash the place well
therewith: this done, apply unto the sorance a plaster of Goose-dung, and
renew it twice a day till it be whole. Another:

Take quicksilver, and kill it in Orpiment, then take Buck-lye, and mix
ordinary dirt which lies in the street (wherein must be neither stones nor
gravel) with the Buck-lye, Quicksilver, and Orpiment, and herewith annoint
the sorance twice a day if need be, and when the ointment is well rubbed in,
then clap a plaster of the same medicine to the grief every time you do
annoint it. This is very good. Another:

Take of the strongest white Wine Vinegar, and boil it, and so boiling hot,
rub the Malender therewith twice every day till it do bleed, that done, put
upon it the powder of Verdigrece good and thick, and so bind it on with a
clout, and let it so remain till a crust come thereon, and when you shall
find the crust to be dry, and withal to chop, annoint the grieved place with
tried Hogs grease, and that will cause the crust to fall off, and the sore to
heal up. This is is a most excellent Cure, and it did never fail me. Another:

Rub the sore with the oil of Hemp Seed, or with the oil of Nuts, or with
sharp Mustard, but the oil of Hemp Seed is the very best if it may be had.
This was taught me by a French Marishall, but I never made trial thereof.
Another:

First rub off the outward scurfe till it bleed, then bind upon the place this
medicine; take of black Soap, and of Quicksilver mortified with fasting
spittle as much as will suffice, and so work them to a salve, and
plaister-wise bind it to the sorance, renewing it every day once till it be
killed, and after heal up the sore with fresh or sweet Butter. Another:

Take Glovers shreds which he cutteth from his white leather, and hoyle them in
Vinegar of the best and strongest till they be soft, bind this to the malender
very hot, and it will perfectly cure the same. I did never make trial thereof,
but it was given me for very good. Another:

Take the fat or lard of Bacon one pound, red Lead, Verdegrece and Lethurge of
gold, of each two ounces, make them all into fine powder, and boil them well
together with the said fat of Bacon, keeping them in the boiling continually
stirring; then having very well cleansed the sore, and made it raw, annoint it
with this medicine morning and evening till it be clean dried up. This is very
good. Another which is only to annoint the sorance with the oil of
Turpentine, and it will heal it up, and make it mavelous sound. And this
will likewise cure Scratches, Sores, Hurts, or the like maladies in a horse.
Another:

Take a salt barrelled Herring out of the pickle, which has a soft row, and
cut off the head and tail, and cast them away, then mince all the Herring very
small, and put it in a stone mortar, and put thereto of black Soap two
spoonfuls, and of Alum powdered half an ounce, stamp all these things
together till you have made them to be of one body, and plaister-wise apply it
to the Malender, renewing it once a day for three days: And this will kill the
humor that feeds it; which once done, annoint the place with the oil of
Roses, and that will cause the Crust to fall away, then wash it once every day
with Chamber-ly, and strew upon it the powder of Oyster-shels, and it is made
whole and sound again.. This I dare promise to be a very good Receipt.


2. M.
Hippoph. Well what saey you now to the Mainge?


Hippos. This of all other is the worst, vildest, and most filthy, and it will
cause the Horse to be ever more rubbing, scrubbing, and scratching. It is a
formal Leprosy, and the French do call it the Elephantick Malady, by reason
that Elephants are very much subject thereunto. The hair will stare and in
many places pill and fall away, and a loathsome Scurfe will be upon the places
touched therewith, and he will infect all other horses which reside in the same
stable, with him: Wherefore so soon as the Malady may be espied, let him be
separated from his fellows whether in the Stable, or abroad at Grass. This
disease comes of corrupt and melancholy blood, by means of it is
over-heating, and sometimes by feeding upon naughty and unwholesome meat. It
is so easy to be discovered, as that it needs no other description, then what
has been already showed: and I will give you many good Receipts for this
Malady.

Mainge.
Take Spurge, Selendine, Brimstone, all in fine powder, of each three ounces,
Hogge-grease tried, new-Wax, Sheeps-suet, and Quicksilver well mortified with
fasting-spitle, of each two ounces, melt and incorporate all these together,
and so bring them to an ointment, then first wash and make raw the places
infected with stale Urine and green Copperas boiled together, the infected
places being scraped, and made raw with a Curry-combe or some such like thing,
and then annoint him with this Unguent, but first of all you must take blood
from the Neck-veine, the day before you dress him with this Unguent.. This is
one of the best Recepts for a Mainge that I have, and with it I have done very
many rare Cures.

Take the roots of Elecampane newly gathered, and the roots of red Dockes, of
each like much, slice and cut them thin, and put unto unto them of Chamber-ly
three quarts, and of Bay Salt, one handful: boil these till one quart be
comsumed, then take it off, and with a rag fastened to the end of a stick, wash
the places infected very hot, you having first made the places raw, with an old
Curry-combe, Oyster-shell, etc. Use this four or five mornings together, then
some three mornings after annoint the places greived with this Ointment.

Take Quicksilver one ounce, let it be well mortified in fasting spittle, and
mix with it so much Hog's Grease as a Hens Eg, or better: then take powder of
Brimstone, so much as will suffice, and incorporate all these very well
together, and annoint all the Maingy places therewith till they be perfectly
whole.. This is very good. Another.

Take of the Oil of Pilchards, and of Chamber-ly of each one quart, Guinny
powder, and the powder of Brimstone, of each three ounces, white Wine-Vinegar
one pint, boil all these together till they be thick, make the places raw,
and annoint them therewith three times in nine days, that is to say, every
three days once, and this will cure him.. This is very good, but you must not
forget evermore for this Malady, to take store af blood from your Horse a day
or two before you do administer any thing unto him, for until such time as the
Melancholy and corrupt-bloud be first let out, he will not easily be cured.
Another for a Mainge, Itch, or Running Scab, etc.

Take as much Auripigmentum finely powdered, and mixed with Hogges-grease as
will bring it to be yellowish, but not too yellow a color, annoint the places
infected therewith, and it will kill it in three or four dressings: This
Vuguent will take away both the Scab and hair together: but have you no fear,
for it will not be long ere new hair will come in it is place.. With this
receipt I have cured very many horses, who have not been a little overrun
with this disease. Another,

The first day let him blood on the left side of the Neck, then two days after
open the other Vein, and three days after that let him blood on both the
Spurre-Veines, and lastly, two days after that under the Tail, and let him
bleed in every of these Veins, then scarrifie all the places and wash them
with new Brine made very salt: that done annoint the places with this Vuguent.

Take of Quicksilver one ounce, tried Hog's Grease one pound, Brimstone made
into fine powder four ounces, Rape-oyle one pint. First kill the quicksilver
with fasting-spittle, and then incorporate them together thoroughly with all the
other Ingredients, and having anointed all the raw places with this Ointment,
cause it the better to sink in by holding a bar of hot iron near to the
places, and then touch him no more in three days after, and evermore when you
dress him, forget not first to rub and scarrifie the places infected till they
do begin to bleed; but if all this will not avayle, then burn the rankest
places of the Mainge with an iron, having a button on the end thereof, but then
take heed you enter not the flesh, but bear your hand light upon the skin
only, and let each hole be well-nigh a span from the other. This I have often
used. Another.

Take of Chamber-ly four quarts, Bay Salt four handfuls, boil them well
together, and wash the Horse therewith, so hot as he can well suffer it, and
when he is well washed; take Neats-foote oil and put it into water, and beat
them well together, and therewith annoint the raw places, and in four or five
times thus doing, he will be well. This seems to a good cure, but I do not
remember that I ever did use it. Another.

Take Mother of Saltpeter, the best and strongest, and wash the sores
therewith so hot as the Horse is able to suffer it, and in three or four times
dressing it, will cure him. This I never tried, but the party that taught it
me, averred that it would not only kill any Mainge, but all Scratches, Pains,
Rats-tayles, etc. Another.

Take Sopers-lees, and first make the Maingy places raw, and after wash them
with the said Sopers-le^s, and in once or twice dressing, he will be well..
This was taught me by the most able Ferrier, I do now know living in England
and I have often used it, and I have done with it very many great Cures. It
cures the Mainge both in Horses and Dogs, provided they get not to it with
their mouth and teeth. Another.

Take Hogges-grease half a pound, Oil de Bay one ounce and half,
Crude-Mercury, and white Elebore, of each one ounce, incorporate these well
together, and first make the places raw, and then annoint them with the said
Ointment.. This is very good, for I have often tried it. Another.

Take of Hempe-seed, and of Mutton-suet, of each one pound, bray the Hempe-seed
merveylous well in a Mortar, then take of old Bores-grease one pound,
Verdegrease, Quicksilver, Elebore, Gunpowder, Tartar, of each four drams, and
of Brimstone three ounces, make all into very fine powder, that is to be
powdered, and mix them well, making them into one body, and then dissolve them
upon a gentle fi^e, keeping them alwaaies stirring till it be enough, and
sufficiently dissolved, and when it is cold, put it into a clean Pot, and keep
it for your Use, and when you have occasion to make use thereof, first scarrify
the places, and then annoyt them, holding a hot Bar of iron near, and in
three or four times thus dressing, he will be well.. This is a most sovereign
receipt for this malady, for I have had great proof thereof. Another whereby
to cure the Mainge in the Maine or Tail.

Make Ashes of the herb called Abscinthus, so much as will suffice,
quicklime, and Soot, of each so much as will suffice: mingle all these
together, and with warm water make a Ly thereof, with which you shall wash the
Maine and Tail in the places infected, and this Ly will not only cure this
Malady, but also cause the hair to grow again very fast. This was taught me
by a very good Marishall of France, but I cold never make use thereof, by
reason the herb Abscinthus was hard to get here. Another.

Take a little Brimstone, Masculine-Frankinsence, Niter of Tartar, of the Bark
of Ashen-trees, Vitreall, Verdegrece, Black-Helebore, Aristolochia Rotunda, of
each as much as will suffice, powder all your simples, and mix them well
together with the yolks of Eggs and Sallet oil, of each as much as will
suffice, and so boil it, and annoint the place well therewith warm. This seems
to be good, but I never tried it.

Another for the tail: Take Mulberries which be not ripe, with the bark of the
roots of the Mulberry tree, and Barley, of each as much as will suffice, boil
all these in fair water, and wash the places grieved therewith, and if the
sorance do open of it self, then take Sanguis Draconis, the juice of Leeks,
Salt, Pitch, Sallet oil, and old Bores grease, of each as much as will
suffice, and make thereof a salve, and apply it plaster wise, but this I never
tried. Another:

Take of Orpin one pound, Brimstone and Euforbium, of each one ounce,
Cantharides twenty five, make all these into fine powder, and with Hogs grease
make it into an Unguent, and apply it to the sorance, rubbing it in all along
the places visited, and four or five days after, to the end the corruption
may the more easily pass away, anoint him again with Hogs grease only, and
when the scurfe is fallen off, wash the neck of the horse with Buck-lye made
bloud-warme, and he will do well. This is a very good receipt. Another:

You must first scrape the leprous places till they do bleed; then take of
Vinegar one pint, white Elebore, Cantharides, Euforbium, of each one ounce,
make all these into fine powder, and boil them all well together, and apply it
very hot to the place grieved, then when the scurfe or crust is fallen away,
wash the sorance with Buck-lye mixed with black Soap, and it will be well. This
is a special good receipt. Another:

Take of the oil of Hempseed, half a pint, Brimstone in fine powder, one
ounce, Gunpowder finely pulverized, and Quicksilver, of each half an ounce,
and a little Vinegar, then beat them all together a long time, and so apply it
cold to the place, and as you do annoint him, let one stand by with a hot bar
of iron, whereby to cause it the better to sink in, and this will cure him in
few times dressing, but suffer the crust to fall away of its own accord. This
is a most precious receipt. Another:

Take of Vinegar one pint and a half, Euforbium half an ounce, made into
fine powder, boil them well together, and boiling hot, wash the sorance
therewith, and it will heal it; neither need you to clip away the hair,
unless you please. This I have often used. Another:

Take of black or blew Slat, and make it into fine powder, and mingle it with
fresh Butter, of each like much: mix them well together to a perfect Unguent,
and annoint the place therewith, and it will cure him, but this I never tried.
Another:

Take of the herb called in French, Ouraige, one handful, boil it in
Vinegar, two quarts, then take of green Coperas half a pound, and of Salt two
handfuls, rub the place therewith so hot as he may well suffer it, and in few
times dressing him thus, it will cure him. This I had of a French Marishall,
but because I could never find the herb Ouraige, I did never make trial
thereof. Another:

Take of white Wine Vinegar half a pint, Cantharides in fine powder, one
ounce, boil them together, and boiling hot apply it to the sorance, and your
Horse will sooner be cured. This I have often tried, and it is very good.

Thus I have delivered you many receipts for this one malady, which we call the
mainge, most of them I have tried, and can promise them to be special good,
whereof many will not only cure the mainge in the body it self, but in the
main and tail also if you please to make use of them.

Another most excellent receipt for the mainge?

Take Lithurgie of gold, two pound, beat it to very fine powder, and searce it
through a fine searcer, and put it into a glass which will hold a potttle;
then put thereto of the strongest and best white Wine Vinegar that can be
gotten, three pintes or better, and for four and twenty hours after, shake it
together ever and anon, but the first time it must be beaten or shaken a good
time together, to wit, a quarter of an hour at the least without intermission,
and then let it settle, and so keep it in the same glass close stopped for
your use. Now when you would use the medicine, you must make it into a salve
after this manner: Take of the oil of Roses two ounces, and of the cleerest of
the said Vinegar in the glass (which must not have any of the Lithurgie in it)
two ounces also; beat these together with a wodden splatter, until you have
brought it into a thick salve: Take then of Quicksilver the weight of a
shilling, and first mortify it very well in a little of the sirrup of Damask
Roses, the quantity of six or eight drops, and about three or four drops of
the spirit or oil of Turpentine; with the sirrup and oil, mingle and work
these things well until the Quicksilver be very well mortified, then mix it
well with the former salve, and then put it up into a clean gally-pot, and so
keep it; and first making the places raw, annoint them with these Unguents, and
it will kill any mainge in the body, main, or tail. This is very good.
Another very good.

Take of Tar a gallon, of tried Hogs grease, and Bolearmoniack of each two
pound, of Pepper one pound, beat the Pepper and Bole-armoniacke to very fine
powder, and then mix all the ingredients together, making them into one body,
then first scrape the sorance, so as you do raise the scurfe and dry crusty
stuff, but not to make it raw, or to bleed much, and then anoint all the
places infected, rubbing and chafing it in very well, as if it be in winter,
let one hold a bar of hot iron near to the places as you anoint and chafe it
in; but if in Summer, the sun will do it much better as he runs at grass;
and thus dress him every three days so long as the unguent lasts, and he
will be cured. This is an approved cure.

Another. To perform this cure, the best way is, to give the fire to the place
after this manner: the iron being hot, first draw it along either side of the
chinke, then draw it upon the top of the chink, then draw three strakes (if
need so require) overthwart, and in short time the hoof will grow again, so as
the chink will be closed, and remain sound and whole. And over and above, you
may exercise him that very next day after you have thus given him the fire,
provided his exercise be not upon hard, but upon soft or sandy ground. X This
is a very able cure taught me by a singular Marishall of Bruxels, and I have
practiced the same upon sundry good horses here in England.


. 3. M.
Hippoph. What is good to cure a sore Mouth?


Hippos. This is a disease that sometimes comes by much corrupt blood, and
sometimes by cold: for this malady most commonly begins in the palate of the
mouth, which will cause it to look red, and be enflamed, and from the palate it
will fall into his chaps, whereby he will not be able to shut them, as if he
had there a convulsion. The cure is, if it be but yet in the palate, then let
him blood there, and let him bleed well, then: Take of life Honey four ounces,
Mouth s^
Chibbals or young Onions, half a handful, and tosted Cheese as much as will
suffice, boil these in fair water very well, and blood warm wash the palate,
tongue, and all other places in and about the mouth, well with this liquor four
or five times, and he will do well. This is very good. Another:

After you have let forth the corrupt blood, then take Verjuyce of the Crab,
and Bay Salt as much as will suffice, and warm it upon the fire, and blood warm
with a rag wash well every part of the mouth and tongue twice or thrice a day
till it be well. This is also very good; but if it be come into his chaps,
which you may easily know by observing his wide yawning and gaping, whereby his
chaps will be so fallen, as that he will not be able to bring them together to
shut close again, wherefore so soon as you do perceive him in that posture,
Take Verjuyce of the Crab only, and make it warm, and then fastening a rag
upon a stick, wash his mouth very well therewith; the Verjuyce being blood
warm, and then with your hand help him to close up his mouth, and doing thus
two or three times, he will be perfectly cured. these be special good receipts.


. 4. M.
Hippoph. What is good to cure the Mellet Mellet.
in the heels?


Hippos. I have showed you that cure before, lib. 2. cap. 4. 9. lit. A. But yet
I will give you one receipt more,

Take of Honey one pint, and of Soap three ounces, and of white Wine Vinegar
five or six spoonfuls, and as much Alum as an Egg, and of Bean flower two
spoonfuls, mix all these together, and apply it to the sorance so far as the
mellet goes, and let it lie on five days, and then take it away: that done,
wash the leg, foot, and sorance with warm beef broth, and so keep his
legs roped up, well moystened in the beef broth two or three days after,
and he will be well. This I have often used, and it is a most rare cure.


. 5. M.
Hippoph. What is best to mollify humors? Mollify humors.



Hippos. This I have also formerly handled, yet take with you this only one
receipt more.

Take of Rosin three ounces, of fresh Butter five ounces, of new Wax one
ounce, melt all these upon the fire, and so bring them to an Unguent, and
herewith annoint the humors four or five days together, and this will
mollify them very well. This is most precious for this cause.


6. M.
Hippoph. What shall a man do to a Horse that is morfounded? Morfounded



Hippos. Morfounding is but the French word: signifying melting of grease or
foundring in the body, whereof I have before sufficiently entreated;
nevertheless I will give you for this malady two singular receipts, the one I
had of an Italian rider in Brussels, and the other of a French Marishall in
Avinion, a man esteemed most famous, and of both those receipts I have made
often use, and I have perfected them for most rare cures. That which the
Italian taught me is this; first open the neck vein, and draw away the
inflamed and corrupt blood, then take of white Wine one pint, Sallet oil
half a pint, of Rhubarb and of Aloes, of each two drams, of Senae half an
ounce, of Agarick three drams, Bay berries half an ounce, Saffaron two drams,
Duck or Duke powder, and of cordial powder, of each two drams, make what is to
be powdered into very fine powder, and mix them well together, adding thereunto
of life Honey four ounces, all which being made warm upon the fire, and well
brewed together, give it your horse blood warm, but you must withal
understand that the same day you shall administer this drink unto him, he do
stand fasting upon the Trench three or four hours before, and as many after;
neither must you the same day give him any Oats, and let his drink be either a
sweet Mash, or white water, and keep him warm, and with white water five or
six days after, and then give him Oats, but in tthe interim in stead of
Oats, let him have either bread made for him of purpose, or else Bran
prepared; and when you do give him Oats, put in amongst them Fenugrick
bruised. X This is I do assure you a most excellent receipt, with which I saved
the life, and brought to perfect sanity a horse of price, which was visited
with this infirmity; the second receipt which I had of the Marishall of Avinion
is this; (viz) so soon as you do perceive or suspect him to be morfounded,

Take of Salt one handful, and put to it of fair water one pint, and give it
him to drink, and ride him moderately upon it till he sweat, and this will
cure him if it be administered so soon as you may suspect the malady, but if you
stay three or four days, or longer, before you do give him this water and
salt, then take of the powder of Hellebore one spoonful, and of Saffaron one
penny worth, of Assafaetida, and of Soap of Venice, of each two drams, of Bacca
alias the seeds of Bays, a farthing worth made also into fine powder, mix and
pound all these together well, putting to them of Vinegar one pint, and give
it him blood warm, then cover him with a wet cloth, and clothe him warm, and
set him upon the Trench, that he may neither lie down, nor vomit, but let him
sweat an hour after, and then cool and dry him by degrees, and let him be well
rubbed, and he will do well again. X This is also a very good receipt.


CHAP. XIIII.
1. N.
Hippoph. WEll now Hipposerus, let us go on, what will cure the running at the
Nose? Nose running.



Hippos. I have showed you that before, but yet I will give you two or three
receipts more;

Take Orpin and Brimstone, as much as will suffice, and cast them upon burning
coals, and so perfume his head and nose therewith, and that will dissolve the
humors congealed in the head and brain. This is very good. Another:

Take Auripigmentum, and Tussilago, of each two drams, make them into fine
powder, and with good Venice Turpentine washed, make it into a stiff paste,
and thereof make small cakes the breadth of your thumb nail, and dry them a
little, and therewith perfume your horse over a Chafing Dish and coals every
day; but before you do perfume him, give him the drink prescribed you in lib.
2. cap.

which begins thus (first let him bleed in the neck vein well, then take
Assafaetida as much as a hasle nut, etc.) and this is very good.


2. N.
Hippoph. What is good to cure a Navell gald? Navell galled.



Hippos. This is a naughty sorance coming by means of a Saddle behind, which
being let run a while, will be long in curing. It is called a Navell galled, by
reason that the hurt is upon the top of the back, right over against the
Navell, the signs are so demonstrative, as that they need no description; the
cure therefore is,

Take oil de Bay, Costus, Fox grease, oil of Savine, of each one ounce, then
take great garden Worms a hundred, and scowre them well in white Wine and
Salt, then put all the ingredients together into an earthen pot very well
stopped, and boil it well, then add thereto of Sallet oil one ounce and a
half, and boil it over again till it come to a perfect ointment, then strain
it into a Galley pot or glass, and so keep it close stopped for your use, and
when you are to use it, only warm it, and so dress the sorance therewith;
with Lint or Hurds, and it will soon be whole. This by proof I do know to be
very good.


3. N.
Hippoph. What help have you for a Horse, that is troubled with a disease
commonly called the Nightmare? Night-^



Hippos. This disease is so called indeed, but yet all able and skillful
Ferriers do laugh at those that give it the same Epiphrase, for it is none
other thing but a Malancholly-bloud, wherewith the creature is oppressed, for
it does perplex the Heart more then any other member or part of the Body,
causing him in the night time to sweat more then in the day, bereaving him of
his sleep and natural rest, and the best signs to know this disease, is by
observing well the Horse when you come unto him in the morning, you shall
perceive him to have sweat as well in the Flanks, as Neck, and Short-ribs next
to the place where the heart lies. The Cure for the Malady is:

Take of Salt one handful, Sallet-oyle half a pint, and of brown-Sugar-Candy
made into fine powder, four ounces, mix all these very well, then warm them
upon the fire, and so give it him with a horn blood warm, give him this two
mornings together, and it will cure him: But the day before you drench him,
first open the two Spur-veines, and let him bleed there very well:.

I have known many who have taken a good great stone, which has had an hole
in it, and they have taken a with and put it through the hole of the said
stone, and so hung it upon the top of the Rack, just over the Horse, whereby
he has been perfectly cured.


CHAP. 15.
. 1. O.
Hippophylus. WHat good Receipt have you, wherewith to Cure old Sores. Old
sores.



Hippos. Sir I have many, and the most of them be very good, whereof I will
give you only one, and leave the residue to their proper places:

Take of Roch-allome a good quantity, and burn it in a hot fire Pan, then take
so much Bay Salt, and burn that also; beat these together to very fine powder.
then Take of common Honey and of sweet Butter, of each like much, so much as
will suffice, and so incorporate all these ingredients together; neither must
it be warmed upon the fire, but only thus brought to a Salve, and so keep it
for your use: which must be applied either Plaister-wise, or Taint-wise, or
both, according as you shall see cause, and this will heal any Sores very
soundly; neither will it permit any dead or proud flesh to remain in the
place.. This I have often tried.


2. O.
Hippoph. What is best to be applied to an overreach upon the Heel? Over
reach in the heel.



Hippos. I have handled this Malady before, in lib. 2. chap. 4.. 10. let. A.
notwithstanding I will give you one or two Receipts more. First, cut out the
overreach with your incision Knife, making it plain as may be, then wash it
with Beer and Salt, and apply this Plaster unto it.

Take Oate-meale and Butter, so much as will suffice, to bring it to a Salve,
pound them together in a Mortar, working them into one body, and apply this
Plaister-wise to the Sorance, renewing it every day once till it be whole..
This is very good Another.

Mollify the heels of the Horse with suppling things, whereof I have given
you store, then open the sole of the Foot round about, and dress the Heel to
enlarge it, then when you have made the Sole firm again, keep his Feet moist
with Vnguentum Rosatum, or some such like suppling thing, and he will be
whole and sound again, This I never tried. Another.

If the malady does proceed from a disease which the French do call
Encastelure, then take out the sole of the Foot where the Sorance is, open it
close to the hair, then take up the vein in the ball of the Foot, and give
him the fire all a long the hair, upon the said Sorance, and lay unto it
black-Sope upon the Hurds, and when the scurfe falls off, dress it with
black Aegiptiacum, until such time as it has produced a circle of a new
horn, and keep the Hoof always supple with Vnguentum-rosarun, and the
grief will heal up, and wear away in short time, This is very good.


. 3. O.
Hippoph: HOw do you make Oil of Oats, and what is it virtue?


Hippos. To deal ingeniously with you, neither my Master nor my self did ever
know the nature of this Oil, or how to make it, until such time as we met
with Master Markhams Masterpiece, from whence since we have made very good use
thereof, and do find it to be a most singular receipt: I will give it you just
as we have it from him.

Take of Milk eight quarts, and warming it upon the fire put thereunto of
burnt Allome four ounces, which will cause it to run into a Curd like to a
Posset; take of the Curd and cast it away, and strain the Whey through a
course cloth into a clean vessel: then take of Oats a quarter of a Peck, dry
and clean husked, that were never dried, and put them into the Whey, and so
set the Whey upon the fire, and let them boil until the Oats do burst, and
be soft; then take them off, and put them into a Cullender, so that the Whey
may go gently from them without any pressing: (for you must keep the Oats as
moist as may be) this done, put the Oats into a frying-Panne, and set them
over the fire, stirring them continually, till you see the vapor or smoke of
them, not to ascend upwards: But as it were to run about the Pan; then suddenly
take them off: and putting them into a Press, press them most exceedingly,
and look what comes from them is only their Oil, which you must reserve in a
close glass and so stop it well.

Now there are others more artificial and curious ways whereby to distill and
extract this Oil, yet this above them all, is both the easiest, surest, and
least troublesome way, and the very best for every mean capacity. This Oil
of Oats is of all medicines whatsoever the most excellent, and sovereign for
the Body of the Horse, as being abstracted from the most natural, wholesome,
and best nourishing food, which does belong to the sustentation and livelihood
of the Horse, this Oil being given by four or five spoonfuls in sweet Wine,
one pint, or strong Ale one quart, and some of the Whey poured into his
nosthrils, does cure the Glanders before all other Medicines. It is also (given
in the same manner) the best of all Purgations, for it purges away all those
venomous and Peccant-humors that feeds the most incurable Farcin whatsoever;
and for my own part at what time I can conveniently come by this oil of
Oats, I will never use any other Oil or unctious matter in any medicine
whatsoever, to be administered inwardly but this only: I having found by good
experience, that it is the most Sovereign of all simples of that kind, and
thus I have showed you what Master Markhams opinion (which is the same both
with my Master and my Self) is, both of this Oil and it is virtues, and so I
remit you to the use and practice thereof..


CHAP. XVI.
. 1. P.
Hippophilus. WHat is that Receipt which I have oftentimes heard so highly
commended among Ferriers, called Pastons, and to what use does it serve?


Hippos. This thing which is called Pastons is none other then a plain
Plaster; only some of of our verbal Ferriers have gotten hold of the French
word Paston, which does signify a Plaster, and that they deliver and vent
among ignorant people, whereby to cry themselves up for learned, and skillful
Doctors in Horse-leechcraft; now forasmuch as maladies and diseases, are of
sundry sorts and different natures: so ought the Pastons, Plasters, and
Medicines be discrepant each from other, but since you were pleased to
understand the true nature of this word Paston, I have in a word delivered the
same unto you, and now I will give you the Receipt of one of the Pastons which
will be well worth your acceptance, It being the most sovereign remedy of any
that ever I could come to know, which is as good to dissolve and take away
evil humors, which shall at any time fall down into the Legs of your Horse,
as any other Medicine you can use, And this it is.

Take of common Honey one pound, of Turpentine half a pound, of Mastick in fine
powder two ounces, of Frankincense and Bole-armoniack both made into fine
powder, of each four ounces, of Sanguis, Draconis, three ounces, of new laid
Eggs six, of the strongest white Wine Vinegar one pint, of the flower of
Rice seven ounces, mix all these together, and hereof make a plaster, and lap
the legs of the horse from the feet to the upper joints, and do this but
four or five times, and you shall see it will perform a most strange and rare
cure.


2. P.
Hippoph. What is good to help a strain in the p^sterne joint?


Hippos. If it be only a strain in or upon the pasterne joint, Pastern joint
str^ned.
and not upon the back sinew:

Take then of Chamber-lye one quart, and boil it until the scum do arise,
then strain it, and put unto it of Tansey and of Mallows, of each one
handful, and of ordinary Honey two spoonfuls, and of Sheeps tallow four
ounces, chop the herbs small, and then mingle all these ingredients together,
and so boil them until the herbs be well sodden, and so apply the medicine
to the place with a linen cloth bound up, and stitched close with a needle and
thread, that it may not remove, renewing this plaster every day once, for
three or four days, and he will be sound and go upright again. This is
special good. Another:

Take of Brine one quart, and boil it till it arises, and then strain it, and
put to it of Tansey and Mallows, of each one handful, of Honey two spoonfuls,
and of Sheeps tallow four ounces; chop all these together, and then pound them
well: and set them upon the fire, and so boil them, as much as will suffice,
apply this warm to the place with a cloth plaister-wise, sewing it fast on,
and so let it remain five days, and if this do not cure him, then wash the
place with warm water, and shave away the hair, and scarifie the joint, and
then apply the medicine of Cantharides and Euforbium, etc. as you are showed in
the cure for an upper attaint in lib. 2. cap. 4 9. lit. A. and so he will be
cured, this is very good.


3. P.
Hippoph. I Would gladly Hipposerus, learn a good pill for the Glanders. Pill
for (...) Glander^



Hippos. I have delivered you m^^y already, but since you are pleased to renew
this cure again, I will give you two pills, which shall be of most singular
virtue, which shall cure any violent cold or Glanders; prevent heart-sicknesse,
purge away all molten grease, recover a lost stomach, keep the heart from
fainting in and after hard travel, and violent riding and exercise, and these
pills will raise a lean Horse, and make him fat suddenly.

Take Anniseeds, Comin, dried Elecampane, Canthamus, of each two ounces, make
all these into very fine powder, and searce them; then add unto them of the
powder of Brimstone, and of the juice of Licoris, of each one ounce, which said
juice of Licoris must be dissolved in white Wine one pint, then take of the
oil of Anniseeds, and of the Sirrop of Colts foot, of each one ounce, of
Sallet oil and life Honey, of each half a pint; mix all these with the
former ingredients, and with as much fine wheat flower as will knead it into a
stiff paste, and so make it up into pills somewhat bigger then a French Walnut,
and so keep them close stopped in a glass or galley pot, for they will last
good the whole year, and when you shall have occasion to use them, take forth
one, and annoint it all over with sweet Butter, and so give it your horse, and
continue thus to do every morning one for some time, and ride him a little
after the taking thereof gently, if the weather be temperate, and let him stand
upon the Snaffle or trench three hours after, then feed him, and at night you
may either give him a Mash, or white water. and thus do (if it be to prevent
sickness) three or four mornings together, but if it be to take away any
infirmity, as Cold, Glanders, or the like, then administer it eight or ten
days together at the least, but if it be to cleanse his body from molten
grease, or to take away foulness, then give it him either in his heat, or
presently after; but if it be to make him fat, being meager, poor, and lean,
then use it fifteen days at the least. If you shall find any difficulty in
the giving of this pill, you may then at your pleasure dissolve it, either in
sweet Wine, or else in good Ale or Beer, and so give it him with a horn
drench-wise. The other pill is,

Take of Wheat flower one pound, or so much as shall suffice to make a stiff
paste, then take of Anniseeds, Fenugricke, Brimstone, of each two ounces,
Sallet oil one pint, common Honey one pound and a half, white Wine two
quarts; make the hard simples into fine powder, and searce them, then with the
residue make a stiff paste, and of this paste make a pill the bigness of a
man's fist, and dissolve it into two or three gallons of fair water, by washing
and laving the said paste therein within your hands, and so let your horse drink
the same at his ordinary watering times, or at any other time, when he is
willing to drink, for he cannot drink too much of this water, then ride him to
warm it in his belly, but not otherwise, and when the water is spent, do not
cast away the bottom, but filling again the vessel wherein he drinks, w^^h
fresh water, the next time he drinks, dissolve another ball therein, and thus
do for fifteen days together at least, and you shall see some wonderful
effects thereof. This water scowreth, cleanses, and feeds after an admriable
manner, and the former lesser pills do purge the stomach and entrals from all
foulness, it voydeth and carries away in his ordure molten and dissolved
grease, and fortifieth nature so powerfully, as that it leaves no evil
humors in the body. This was taught me by a Scotch man who was Groom in
Prince Henry his Stable under Monsieur Saint Anthony, and a singular good
Groom he was. I have often times made proof and use thereof, and have found
it to be right good, and for that reason I do rather commend it unto you.


4. P.
Hippoph. What good Antidote or preservative have you for the Pestilence?


Hippos. This disease which we call the Pestilence or Plague, has also sundry
other names, for some do call it the murraine, others the garget, others the
gargill, and the French do call it mal de montaine; the montaine evil: it is
a most contagious, and infectious disease, it is sometimes engendered of a
surfeit by riding, when the horse afterward takes cold, and sometimes it
comes of the contagiousnesse of the air; as when a horse comes upon a
sudden into fenny or marish places, where he never was before, having been ever
bred and kept in pure, sweet, and wholesome air, as one happened to a young
Gelding of my own, when I coming into the hundreds in Essex, and traveling
late, I came to my Inn, where my Horse the very next day fell into a pestilent
Fever, whereof he had doubtless dyed, had I not administered help instantly,
wherefore whenever you do suspect your horse to be never so little touched
with this mallady, remove him presently, lest he should infect so many horses
as be in the same Stable with him. This comes also to a horse many times by
means of corrupt blood and bad humors, which do lie lurking in his body,
which washing, drinking being hot, and surfets, do often cause, but let it come
as it may, it brings with it a pestilent Fever, which is seconded by ensuing
death, if speedy prevention be not at hand.

The signs be these; after that he has drooped and languished two, three, or
four days at most, he will begin to swell under the roots of his ears, as if
he had the vines, and under the chaule, and so this swelling will run up his
cheeks through the malignancy of the disease, and become very hard, he will
hang down his head and face, and seem always to sleep and forsake his meat,
and his eyes will be yellowish, he will draw his breath short, which will be
also very hot and offensive, and sometimes he will put forth Carbuncles, and
swellings in his groine, bigger then a man's fist, and his stones will hang, but
this not always, and this I have known in Horses more then in one or two. The
cure is,

Take of white Wine one quart, and the herb called in French, Pestile^
Mairelle, which we in English do term Nighte-shade: stamp it, and take the
juice thereof, and boil it in the Wine, and when it is boiled as much as will
suffice, take then Linseed meal, and Barley meal, and sift out the bran,
taking only the flower of them both as much as will suffice, and put it into
the liquor, and so boil them again to a Poultesse, and make plasters
thereof, and apply it to the swellings, but before you lay on the plaster,
strew upon them the powder of burnt Egg shells, and thus renewing the plasters
every day once, you shall either ripen or break them, or they will drive the
swellings back again without further trouble, but if the swellings do break,
then heal them with your green ointment so often showed you, but then to drive
away the malignancy of the infection from the heart, and to send it forth,
first let him blood in the neck and weeping veins, and then give him of
Diapent two sponfuls, with white Wine one pint, and of London Treacle one
ounce, and this will recover him. And for your other Horses which you may have
just cause to suspect to be infected, to prevent their danger, give him this
preparative. Pre^arative


Take two Walnuts, the kernels only, and (the older the Nuts be, the better:)
take also two Figs, and twenty leaves of Rue, stamp them all well together, and
let every Horse have his proportion three or four mornings together fasting,
being made up and given in pills, and let them fast three hours after, and this
will both preserve and free them. These things I have often used, and found
them to be special good.


5. P.
Hippoph. What good purging pills have you?


Hippos. I have already showed you many in lib. 2. cap. But yet I will give you
one or two more.

Take fresh Butter one pound, Aloes and Fenugrick, of each one ounce, life
Honey, and white refined Sugar powdered, of each four ounces, Agarick half an
ounce, make all these into fine powder, and being well incorporated with the
Butter and Honey, make pills thereof and give them to your Horse, and if he be a
small or weak Horse, then you must give him but two parts of three, but if
your horse have a strong cold, and a cough withal, then

Take of fresh Butter, and of Mel-Rosarum, of each four ounces, of Aloes and
Seen, of each one ounce, Rubarb and Bay berries, of each three ounces,
Colloquintida and Saffaron, of each two drams, cordial powder one ounce, Ducke
or Dutch powder four ounces, make all these into fine powder, and mix them
well with Mithridate two ounces, and with your Butter and Mel Rosarum, beat and
pound them well together, and so make them into pills, and give them your Horse;
this receipt will purge him very well, albeit it may heat him for some time; and
as touching the ordering him in his diet, or otherwise, let all things be done
as in other physical cures of the like nature: if it be a small horse, then
give unto him two parts in three, and proportion the pills according to the
strength, greatness, and corpulency of your horse. This is very good.


6. P.
Hippoph. What is good to cure the pains in the Heels of a Horse?


Hippos. This is a noisome Sorance, coming to a Horse, either by ill humors,
and corrupt blood, by means of Surfets, proceeding from great heats, by
intemperat ridings, as I have sufficiently declared, before or else through the
negligence of his Groom, or Keeper, for want of good rubbing, clensing and
picking, this does grow between the Fetlock-ioynt, and the heel, in the very
Pasterne, which will cause the place to swell, and to have chops, from whence
will issue a thin and stinking water, and those horses which have shaggy, and
long hair upon their Fet-locks, are most subject to this Malady; the signs
be easily known, by reason that the chops may be soon felt, for they will
cause the Legs of the horse to swell, and much filthy matter will come from
the place greived, being of that hot nature, as that it will scald the very
hair from about the sorance, and this will cause the horse to go very stiff,
and lame, at first setting forth: The cure is.

Take of the Lees of red Wine one pint, of Wheat-branne one handful of
House-leeke one head, of common Honey, two spoonefuls, of the dust of Tanners
bark, Allome, and tried Hogges-grease, of each one pound, and of Verveine half
a handful, bray all these well in a Mortar, and add unto them of the lean of
of Martlemas or dried Beef, burned, and made unto fine powder, half a pound,
and so work them to a kind of salve, and apply it unto the Sorance, so hot as
the horse can suffer it: But before you do apply this medicine, you must draw
the skin with a hot iron, a little above the houghes, or knees, or else take up
the veins (which I altogether use to do) then take of Tar, and of sweet
Butter, and of Honey, of each two spoonfuls, and warm them upon the fire, and
either annoint the places seared, or else the vein, so taken up with this
Unguent, once every day, till his Ointment be all spent, and by that time, your
horse will be perfectly cured, especially if you continue this former
Emplayster daily to the sorance, having first clipped, and shaven away the
hair; from about the place greived,, With this I have cured many horse.
Another.

Take of Turpentine, Hogges-grease, and Honey, of each like much, Pastons.
so much as will suffice, a little Bole-armoniack in fine powder, and yolks of
two Eggs: with so much Wheat Flour, as will thicken all the other
ingredients: incorporate all these well together, and so bring it to a salve,
and Plaister-wise apply it to the Sorance, and so bind it up, renewing it every
day, and let him not come out of the Stable, or come into any wet, and he will
be soon cured.. This is also very good. Another.

Take of tried Hogges-grease one pound, Verdegrease one pennyworth, of strong
Mustard two ounces, Nervall four ounces, of oil de Bay, of Honey and Wax, of
each half a pound, Arsenick one ounce, Red-lead two ounces, and of
white-Wine-Vinegar half a pint, powder your Verdegrease, and then boil all
together, and the hair first clipped away, which must always be done in any of
these Cures) apply this Medicine hot to the place, and renew it daily, and it
will not only cure the pains, but all manner of scratches, scabbed, and kibed
Heels; to wash also the Sorance, with Vinegar and Gunpowder is very good to
help the pains, and scratches.. This I have often used.


. 7. P.
Hippoph. Do you not use to purge a Horse that is Pursive and Short winded?


Hippos. Yea Sir, and I do it after this manner.

Pursivenes a pill.
Take of the fat of a Boar three pound, mince it very small, and lay it in
fair Water four and twenty hours, to the end the salt (if any be in it) may
soake out of it, then: Take of Agarick, Pulverized two ounces, of Colloquintida
in powder half an ounce, mel rosarum six ounces, in corporrate all these well
together, and work it to a paste; which you must make into Pills, the bigness
of an ordinary tennis Ball, one of which you most give him at a time rolled up
within the powder of Lycoris, but the night before you do administer it, you
must give him no Oats at all, but a little Hay and wheat-Branne prepared only,
then the next morning about six or seven of the clock, give him one of these
Pills, and then cover him up warm; and ride or walk him two hours space; then
bring him in, and let him stand upon the Trench two hours more, then unbridle
him, and give him a little Hay sprinkled with water, and eight or nine hours
after the taking of his Pill (which will be about three of the clock, give him
white Water to drink, and let him eat of the Branne, then at night when you
are to go to bed, put a muzell upon his mouth, und let him remain so all night
fasting, and let him be warm covered, and the next morning unmusell him, and
give him Hay sprinkled with water to eat, and continue to let his drink be
white Water, only, the third day give him another of these Pills, after which
you may begin to give him Oats, but a little at once; but then the days he do
not take his Pills, you must remember ever more an hour after you give him his
white Water, to give him of Agarick, and of Rubarb in powder, of each one
ounce, which he must take in fresh or sweet Butter made up like to a Pill: This
Purgation may be given to any Horse, but especially to that Horse you shall
fear is in danger, to become either pursive of Glandery, and if perhaps the
Malady to have been longer upon him, give him then of Antimony thirty grains,
drams more or less, according to the strength and age of the horse, and also
according to the nature and quality of the disease; and if after the
application of this medicine your horse will not feed (as it may be very
probably) you may cherish him with milk mingled with the yolks of Eggs and
Sugar, well beaten and brewed together. This I applied to a horse of more then
twelve years old, who in seven days eat not one bit of any thing but only
the said Milk, Eggs, and Sugar, and yet in fourteen days after, I cured him,
and made him perfectly healthy and sound.


. 8. P.
Hippoph. What remedy have you for a horse that pisseth blood?


Hippos. This disease comes sometimes being troubled with the stone, like as we
have it often times among men; sometimes it comes to a horse, that being very
fat, is put to more then his strength is well able to perform, like as I once
saw a very proper Gelding (a young Gentleman being upon his back in hunting)
who coming to a great leap, and the horse being ridden off from his wind, his
Rider inconsiderately forcing him to take that leap, which the Gelding with
much difficulty took, but withal fell, and was not able to arise but with the
help of men, and coming home the same night he pissed blood, whereof he dyed
four days after, maugre the endeavors of three very able Ferriers, and being
opened, they found two veins broken near to the kidneys, and much black
blood found in the place. This malady may also come by bearing too great a
weight, as also when a horse is too hard ridden, he will piss water like to
blood: your eye shows you the disease, and therefore it needs no further
remonstrance. The cure is:

Take of Ambrosio, Sanguinario, alias Bloud-wort, and Bursa Pastoris, Pissing
of blood.
of each three ounces, stamp them well, and boil them in fair water very
well, and so give the liquor thereof being strained, to the horse blood warm.
Give him this five mornings together, and it will help him. Another:

Take Barley, and boil it in the juice of Gumfolly, and give him the Barley to
eat, and the liquor to drink, and this will cure him. This is also very good.
Another:

First cleanse his yard from all filth, and his sheath also with broken Beer
and Butter, then let him blood in the neck and mouth, then take the juice of
Leeks or green Onyons, to wit, the water wherein they have been steeped twelve
or sixteen hours at the least, the vessel wherein they be steeped being kept
close stopped.

Take of this liquor, and of white Wine, of each one pint, and stir and jumble
them together till they become slimy, then give it him to drink, and do this
six or seven mornings together, and it will stay his flux of blood, and bring
his urine to its natural and ordinary color. This is a very good medicine,
and I have often tried it.

Another no whit inferior to the former.

Take Bean flower finely sifted, and add unto it the Suet of a Stagge as much
as will suffice, and give it him three mornings together warm, with a horn,
with a sufficient quantity of red Wine, and during that time, let his drink be
either sweet Mashes, or white wat^r, made with Bean meal. This is an approved
good receipt.


. 9. P.
Hippoph. What good receipt have you for a horse that has taken a surfeit by
Provender?


Hippos. This comes commonly to such horses as are insatiable feeders, and
therefore it is requisite that they be dyeted, especially if they have too much
rest, and too little exercise; for such horses if they can either break, or
steal to a Bing of Provender, and drink presently after, will undoubtedly
surfeit upon them, for drinking after Oats, Pease, or Beans, does cause the
Provender to swell in their belly and stomach, and so clogge the stomach, as
that crudities will arise, and so cause him to be very sick, yea and perhaps
to no little danger, that you shall see him to stand with his four legs
asunder, the one far from the other, and he will scow^e and cast forth of his
fundament, corn which will go forth as whole and entire, as he did greedily
swallow them without chewing, or grinding them. The cure is, first open a vein
in the neck to keep the blood from inflaming, then draw his yard, and wash it
with broken Beer, and Butter, then anoint it with soft grease, and put into
the pipe of his yard a small piece of a clove of Garlic, whereby to provoke
him to stale, then rack him, and give him the Clister prescribed in lib. 2.
cap. 6. Sect. 8. Clister 8. C. and it is called a Clister lenative, then keep
him warm, and to a spare diet, for four or five days after, and let his drink
be white water during that time. with this receipt I have cured many a horse,
but one horse amongst the rest of very great price, who otherwise had
infallibly dyed.


10. P.
Hippoph. HOw do you cure the Poll-evill?


Hippos. This mallady we do term the Poll-evill, because it breeds in the
top of the Poll behind the ears of the horse, but let it assume what name it
shall, yet it is none other thing then a Fistula in grain, that is a formal
Fistula which does begin like all other Fistulaes with a great inflammation and
imposthume in the nape of the neck: sometimes it comes by means of his unruly
striving, the halter being new, and therefore hard, which does so pinch and
gall him, that the harm thereof by reason that the flesh is bruised, does
fester and inflame, and from thence is engendered this most loathsome sorance,
and sometimes it comes again of bilious and evil humors, which do make their
approach to that place: sometimes it comes again by the means of a stroke or
blow given by some cudgel by his Keeper or Rider, betwixt his ears, whereby
it festereth inwardly, and inflaming breeds an impostumation, so as if it be
not in time taken, it will grow to a very foul Fistula, not easy to be cured;
for the poll of the horse is so tender a member, as to be soon offended, and
therefore easily damnified; I need not to deliver you the signs, for the
swelling will be so apparent, as that it cannot be mistaken, albeit it will
putrify much more inwardly then outwardly; and therefore you ought to apply
your diligence to open it, before it do break of it self. The cure is,

First to lay unto the place swollen, such things as will ripen it, Poll-evill.
and to prepare it ready to be opened: and as touching the ripening thereof,

Take the loame of a mud wall which had never any Lime in it, but much Straw or
Litter; and the elder this Loame or mud wall is, the better; boil so much as
you shall please thereof in the strongest white Wine Vinegar, and let it boil
till it come to be a very Poultesse, then being very hot, lay it to the
swelling, renewing it morning and evening till it be ripe enough to be opened,
then open it with a red hot iron made sharp at the end, and let the iron be
the bigness of a nail rod, but you must begin below, thrusting your
instruments upwards, clean through, that it may come forth in the softest
place, and when it is thus opened, so as the corruption may issue forth at
ease; anoint the orifices with tried Hogs grease two or three days together,
to get out the fire, but howsoever fail not to dress it twice every day with
the said Poultesse, taynts being dipped in the Poultesse, and put down to the
bottom, as well to carnifie and heal the Fistula at the bottom, as to keep
open the orifices, and this Poultesse will cure him. But withal you must
remember to make him a hood or nightcap to keep warm the nape of his neck, and
to keep in the taints also: this also cures the Botch in the groine, hurts in
the withers, navell-galles, galled-back, or Sit-fasts, etc. Another:

First ripen it as before, or else with tried Hogs grease scalding hot, making
him a Biggin wherewith to keep his poll very warm, and renew this Emplaister
every day, and it will ripen it the sooner; then when you find it to be
softest, and most likely to break, open it with a hot iron two inches beneath
the soft place, carrying your hand upward into the soft and most matterative
place, to draw forth the corruption downwards, then taint it with Flax or
Hurds dipped into molten Hogs grease, and lay also a plaster of Hogs grease
upon it, renewing it for four or five days once every day, to get forth the
fire: after this, take of Turpentine of Venice, half a pound thrice washed,
and dried from the water, the yolks of two Eggs, and of Saffaron one penny
worth in powder; incorporate all these together very well, then with a probat
search the depth of the sorance, and taint it with a sponge full as big as
the hole of the wound, and as long, and convey the taint down to the very
bottom, well anointed with the said medicine: but this must be done with the
help of your instrument, and then cover it with a plaster of Hogs grease,
renewing it twice a day, but when the swelling is alaid, then use no plaster,
and in short time it will be perfectly whole and sound. X This is a very good
cure. Another:

First ripen and open it as before is taught you, and apply Hogs grease to
fetch forth the fire, then heal it thus.

Take Roman Vitreall, Alum and Rose water, of each two ounces, boil all these
together on a quick fire till they do come to be as hard as a stone, and then
beat it into a very fine powder, and when you are to dress the sore, first
dippe a taint into Vnguentum Egiptiacum, and so roll it in the said powder,
and convey the taint with the help of your instrument, to the very bottom, and
it will in short time make it perfectly whole and sound. This powder being
strewed upon any old sore or ulcer, will both heat and dry it up. Another:

Powder for old sores.
Take of Quicksilver one ounce, let it be well mortified with fasting spittle,
and mix with it tried Hogs grease the quantity of a Hens Egg, and Brimstone
pulverised; incorporate these very well together, and anoint the swelling very
well with this unguent; having thus done, take presently of red Tar one penny
worth, of the reddest and best, of Hogs grease half a pound, and of green
Copperas and bay Salt of each one handful, both made into fine powder; boil
all these on the fire exceeding well, and then boiling hot (even as it comes
from the fire) with a clout fastened upon the end of a stick; apply this
medicine upon the place (being so lately anointed with the Quicksilver, Hogs
grease, and Brimstone) and thus by scalding it three or four mornings
together, you shall after those mornings but only warm the Tar medicine
upon the fire, so that it be but molten, and apply it, and it will be cured;
for this scalding of the place does so kill the malice of the Fistula, that it
can never break to annoy the Horse any further. And thus with this medicine I
have not only cured many poll-evils, but sundry other Fistulaes; it cures all
impostumations and foul Ulcers, being thus applied.


11. P.
Hippoph. What is good in case of Pursivenesse or shortness of Breath?


Hippos. This disease comes by two means: the first natural, the second
accidental; natural, as when a horse is (as we do usually say)
cock-thropled, for that his throppell or winde-pipe being too long, and so
becomes crooked as his wind is thereby so straightned or stopped, as that he
is not able to draw it in and put it forth with that ease and pleasure that
other horses do that are loose thropled, for that the winde-pipe is (I say)
straightned, which does convey his breath into his lungs, and vent it forth
again. In like manner, a horse becomes pursive and short-winded, when the
pipe is too much filled, with fat or other phlegmatic stuff, whereby he is
very much suffocated, which causes his lungs to labor the more, and therefore
if you shall be pleased to follow my counsel, never breed with that horse that
is cock-thropled.

This disease comes secondly by accident, when a horse shall be too hard
strained upon his water, like as many of your ignorant Ioctries use to do,
when morning and evening they do make them watering courses (as they are
frequently so termed) so also this infirmity comes by riding, gallopping, or
straining a horse upon a full stomach, before he has either digested his
meat, or emptied himself; for by this means phlegmatic humors do distill
out of the head into the winde-pipe, and so fall upon the lungs, where they do
rest, and there congeale, hindering the drawing of his breath: it comes also by
Colds, Glanders, and the like; the signs are so apparent, as that they need no
description, only this inconvenience (besides many more) it brings with it,
as to be heavy, sad, and dull in travel, be mavelous subject to sweats, and
be ready to fall down if he be but a little strained. A right skillful Ferrier
not long since told me of a strange cure in this kind, which a Gentleman's
Groom relatd to him of a Gelding which the Groom had in his said keeping, who
was so pursive (or as we plainly say) broken-winded, as that he became almost
unusefull, and his cure was after this manner; he suffered his Gelding to eat
what he would, as well his fill (viz.) of good Hay, as of Provender, but
debarred him of all drink for the space of two or three days together, then
leaping his back, he rode him upon a foot pace to the water, at which time he
suffered him to drink his fill, then coming forth of the water, he clapped
spurs suddenly to him, and ran him with a loose hand upon the top of his
speed so long, until for want of breath he fell with him, and for some time
lay as if he were dead, but recovering breath, he arose, and being well
recovered of his wind, he rode him into the water the second time, where he
also drank, and being come out of the water, he did as before, and so being
again ridden from off his wind, he fell like as at first, having thus the
second time recovered breath, he gave him water the third time, and then rode
him as formerly, but now this third time being fallen, when he began to get
breath again he coughed most vehemently, at what time through the violence of
his coughing, the Gelding cast forth of his mouth, and that out of his wind
pipe a hard lump of congealed Phlegmatic stuff of a good bigness, which by
this means brought up, the Gelding was ever after freed from the malady, and
made sound, and from that hour, had the use of his wind, as ably, and as well
as ever before, and this was the story which one of the ablest Ferriers I do
know in England delivered unto me (as he affirmed, and I do believe him, for
that I do know him to be a right honest man) from the mouth of the Groom, who
with many vehement asseverations affirmed the thing to be most true,
nevertheless albeit I do Mathematically believe that the Groom delivered this
history to the Ferrier, I must say with the French man Ie croy en Dieu: But
leaving this famous Groom to his rare cure, let us proceed to cures that are
more probable, and now of such cures as I have met with for this disease. You
shall participate.

Take of new Milk one pint, and of Sallet oil half a pint, give him this
blood warm, which done, put down his throat two new laid Eggs, Pu^sivenes
or shortness of breath.
do thus three or four mornings together, and then you shall perceive
amendment, but for his Hay, let it be spinkled with water, and his Oats well
wet in good Ale or Beer, and let his drink be altogether white water.. This
is very good Another.

Keep your horse three or four days to a spare Diet, before you do
administer to him; then give him this drink: Take Fenugreecke three ounces, of
Bay Berries one ounce and a half, of the inner rind of Elder half a pound,
the whites of six new laid Eggs, of browne-Sugar-Candy, water-Cressets,
Prim-rose leaves, if they may be had, red Mints, red Fennel, white or
Hawethorne leaves, of each one pound, bray all these together in a Mortar, (the
Spices before beaten by themselves) and when they be well powdered, put to the
Ingredients Ale one quart, and so boil it, and after strain it, and so give
the liquor thereof to your Horse to drink blood warm, and set him upon the
Trench, and let him fast six hours after, then give him meat, and an hour
after that, give him a warm Mash, or white Water, and let him be kept to a
strickt Diet, and let his drink be Mashes or white Water, nine days together
after, and his Hay sprinkled with Water, and his Provender wet in Ale or Beer;
and thus you may cure him,. With this medicine I have don very great cures.
Another.

Take the guts of a Hedge-hogge, and hang them in an Oven till they be dry,
then make them into powder, then take three or four spoonefuls of the powder,
and put it into sweet Wine, Ale, or Beer, and so give it him to drink, and
the residue of the powder mix with the powder of Anniseeds and Lycoris, and
with sweet Butter make it into Pills, and give him two or three of the Pills
presently after his drench, and keep him fasting three or four hours after,
then you may give him Hay first sprinkled with water, and after Provender or
Bread wet or moistened in good Ale or Beer, putting also thereunto of this
powder, and if you have not enough of this powder to serve, then; Take of
Comin, Lycoris, Centaury, and Anniseedes, of each like much, make these into
fine powder, and give him thereof two spoonfuls with his provender, and put
also into his Mashes and bread of the powder of Fennell-seede, mixed with the
powder of brimston; this is very good for this malady, for I have seen a horse
for a month together, to eat no other Provender but what has been mixed with
this powder, and also his Mashes and white water, so made and compounded, and I
have also brought him to drink new Milk mingled with the powder of Brimstone,
by means whereof he has been the sooner recovered, and made perfectly sound:
X. and this is very good. Another.

First let him blood, then take of sweet Wine one pint, and of the juice of
Hore-hound half a pound, of the Oil of Frankincense half an ounce, of the
powder of Anniseed, Lycoris, and browne-Sugar-Candy of each half an ounce, let
all these be made into fine powder, incorporated well together, and give it him
once or twice in the week, for a while, and ride him not at all that day you
drench him, but keep him warm clothed, and well littered, and let him stand
upon the Trench four hours after fasting, then give him meat, and three
hours after a sweet Mash: Putting thereinto of the powder of Lycoris, and
Anni-seeds, of this I never made trial, but it has been highly commended
unto me for right good. Another.

Take of Barley, two gallons, steep it in water two days, and shift the water
every day, then take it clean from the water wherein it was last steeped, and
boil it in three gallons of fair clear water till it burst, putting thereto
of Anniseeds, and Lycoris, and of Raisins of the Sun stoned of each one
pound; and so let it boil one hour, then take it from the fire, and strain it
very dry, and put unto the liquor of honey one pint, and of Sugar Candy in
powder six ounces, then put the liquor into a clean earthen Pot, or bottle
keeping it close stopped, and thereof give your horse blood warm, four
mornings together, the quantity of an Ale pint at a time, and let him eat the
Barley if he will, howsoever put it not away; but heat some of it every day: and
being hot, put it into a bag, and therewith perfume his head.. This is very
good, for I have often used it. Another.

First you must keep him to a very space Diet and inure him, five or six days
to eat his Oats steeped in Chamber-ly, and after that.

Horse, make all these into powder, then take one part horse blood warm:
Physic, for his drink let it be white water made of Barley meal, but not
with Wheat bran, and let him stand upon the Trench, at least two hours before
his drench, and two hours after, then after that give him that which follows.

Horse, then give him of white Wine half a pint, whereby the better to cause
him to swallow Pills, the fifth day let him rest, and keep him always warm
covered, and well littered, and if you do percive him to be loose in his body,
and that he has purged well, let him rest three or four days quiet, without
doing any thing unto him, but if he has not purged after one days rest only,
then give him this drink.

Take Mithridate, Diacartami, Senae of each two ounces, and of good white Wine
one pint, mix and brew all these together, and so give it him to drink, and
let him rest three days, giving him every one of these three days about noone
of fresh Butter only, half a pound, made into the manner of Pills, these three
days being ended, you must administer unto him as follows, and continue it
weekly till he be perfectly cured.

Take of Agarick, Alloes, and of Diacartami of each one ounce, of Saffaron,
Mirrh half an ounce, make all these into fine powder, and so make them into
Pills with fresh Butter four ounces, and give it to your Horse, and then
presently after give him of white Wine one pint, to wash down the Pills.. This
is a most excellent cure, and by me often practiced. Another.

Take of white Wine one pint, of Sallet-oyle three quarts, of Alloes, and
Lycoris, of each one ounce, of Colloquintida, of Agarick, and Mirrh, of each
half an ounce, of Aristolochia-rotunda three drams, of Nightshade one ounce,
of Bay Berries three drammes, make all these into fine powder, then take of
Venice Turpentine two drams, of mel rosarum three ounces, mix all these
together, and make it blood warm, and so give it your Horse to drink with a
horn, but give him no Oats in fifeteene days, and let his drink be white
water, it will not be good to give him much Hay, but Wheat flower, which
should not be much beaten or threshed, and instead of his Oats give him Wheat
bran, or Barley meal, and keep him warm six days after let him blood, in the
Neck.. Let him have this drink twice to wit, after the first drink let him
rest one day, and then drench him again, as you did before. Another. First
give him this purgation.

Take of fresh Butter half a pound, of Seen, and of Agarick, of each half an
ounce, made into fine powder, of Alloes, and of loaf Sugar, both powdered of
each one ounce, of Cordial powder half an ounce, make all these into fine
powder; then

Take common-hony four ounces, mix and beat all these together, and so make
them into Pills, and give them to your Horse, but before you do, administer
these Pills, he must stand upon the Trench two hours, and so likewise two
hours after; that day give him no Oats, and let his drink be white water,
and for your other directions you may give him his allowance of Oats all the
other days, but you must then wet them either in strong Ale or good Beer, and
you may travel or give him exercise, but with moderation all those other
days, and three times every day you shall give him three or four handfuls of
Wheat bran prepared, as before is showed you in lib. 2. Chap. 9.. 4. F. and
thus continue him to this diet at your pleasure.. I have made trial of this
cure, and I do know it to be right good, for in a month or six weeks I have
brought a Gaunt and Pursive Horse to have a belly as round, fresh, and as
clear, as that of a sucking Colt, nor is this cure very chargable or costly;
you must give him Wheat straw instead of Hay, only in the night you may give
him Hay, provided it be sprinkled with water.


. 12. P.
Hippoph. What cure have you for a Horse that is Pricked?


Hippos. This Sorance has many names; It is called Accloyed, Cloyd, Retraite,
Pricked, etc. All which names, we for the most part do fetch from the French,
and all is but only plain Pricked, which occurreth to the horse either through
the unskilfulnes or negligence of the Ferrier, in the driving of his Nails, or
in the weak-nesse of the Nails of their evil pointing, or if a Nail should
fortune to break in the quick, and not be immediately drawn f^rth, it will in
short time fester in the flesh, and soon after impostunate, and so in time
beget a foul Sore, which may ask much Art to Cure. The signs be, that he
will complain when he treads upon stony or hard ground specially, which so
soon as you perceive, you have then just cause to suspect him to be Pricked
if he were lately shod, wherefore the better to make trial, your way must be
to search the foot whereof he complains, and you shall no sooner put your
Pinsors, to the place, but that he will presently shrink in his foot by
reason that the nipping of the Pinsons does pain him in the quick, or if you
do but cast water upon the foot whereon he halteth, in short time you shall
perceive the hoof to be sooner dry against the nail or place which grieveth
him, before any other part of the hoof. Again, if you shall with your hammer
knock upon the top of the clenches, when you do come to that nail which
grieveth him, he will lift up his foot; so likewise there be many other such
like signs, whereby to discover the place pricked, Pricked.
which be familiar to every common Smith, and therefore I shall not need to
speak any more thereof. But let us now pass to the Cure.

First therefore after you have made trial with your Pinsons, or otherwise, as
before is inculcated; pluck off the shoe, and either with your drawing iron,
or your Butter, search the place to the very bottom, and if you can see or
feel any stub of any nail therein, leave not till you have got it away; and
if the place be festered or matterative, wipe or wash the wound very well, so
as you may leave no part thereof behind; then take of the tender tops of red
Nettles, a little handful, and stamp them in a mortar, of Badgers grease two
ounces, of red Wine Vinegar, and of black Soap, of each two spoonfuls, or for
want of Badgers grease, take the like quantity of the fat of Bacon, which is
salt: Beat all these together in a mortar to an Unguent, and stop the wound
well therewith, and after cover it with Hurds, and so tack on the shoe again,
and do not remove it in two days, and when you dress it the second time with
the said Unguent, you may shoe him up, but drive no nail at that place, and
so you may travel him, for he will be whole and sound. This is an excellent
Cure, and I have often used the same. Another:

Open the sorance well as before is showed you, and wash it clean with Vinegar
and Salt, and then lay unto it the tender tops of Elder buds beaten to a very
Unguent, if it be in Summer that those buds or leaves may be had, if not, then
in Winter, take inward rind of Elder so pounded and brayed, and upon that,
melt into the wound hard Tallow with a hot iron, and then lay upon it to keep
it close stopped, some Hurds, and so tack on the shoe, and in few times
dressing, he will be whole. With these two receipts I have done many (whereof
some have been very great) Cures. Another.

First open the place, cleanse the sore well as before; then take red Nettles,
and Bay Salt, of each like much: beat them unto a salve, then fill up the hole
of the wound therewith; that done, lay upon it bolster-wise Hurds, and melt
upon the Hurds hard Tallow to keep wet, dirt, and gravel from it, which would
annoy the sorance; then tack on the shoe, causing the foot to be well pared,
and drive no nail near the place, and after twice or thrice dressing, you may
ride him, for then the more exercise he has, the sooner will he be whole. This
is special good. Another:

Take off the shoe, and cause him to be well pared and searched as before,
then take of Turpentine, brown Sugar Candy powdered, and white Ginger in powder
also, of each the quantity of a Garden-Beane, then melt them all together in an
iron spoon, and so pour it into the wound hot, and lay Hurds upon it, and
after do as you are directed in the former Cures. This also is very good.
Another:

Search the place as before is showed, then take Roch-Allum, and burn it, and
make it into fine powder, and so fill the hole therewith, and lay a boulster of
Hurds upon it, and after do as before you are taught. And this is very good.
Another:

Search the place as before is showed, then take of Goats grease, or for want
thereof, Deers-suet, or Sheeps-suet, of Turpentine, Sallet oil, and new wax,
of each two ounces, melt them all together, and whilst it is upon the fire,
add thereunto of ordinary Honey, three ounces, and of Sanguis Draconis one
dram made into fine powder, incorporate all these together upon a gentle fire,
and bring it to an ointment, and of this you must pour a sufficient quantity
into the wound warm, then put on Hurds, and do as before is prescribed you, and
let the foot be very well stopped, and let him come in no wet if you can
prevent the same, neither let any nail be driven near the grieved place. This
is one of the best Receipts of this kind. Another:

Search the place as before, and cleanse it with Salt and Vinegar. Then take
Salt, and make it into fine powder, then take four times so much Turpentine,
and boil them together, and so pour it hot into the wound, and then put upon
it the powder of Brimstone dissolved in white Wine, and lay upon it Hurds, and
then do as before is declared. Very good. Another most singular receipt which
the French do call a Retoire. First search and wash as before. Then

Take of oil de Bay four ounces, of Orpin, of Cantharides, and of Euforbium,
of each two ounces, make them all into fine powder, and set it upon a gentle
fire, stirring it, till you have brought it to an Unguent, with which dress
him as before is taught you.


13. P.
Hippoph. What hold you good wherewith to perfume a Horse?


Hippos. Perfumes are very necessary to be applied to horses in some cases,
viz. in Colds, Glanders, Rhumes, Murs, Pozes, Catars, etc. for the better
expiation of which maladies, Perfumes are admirable helps, for sometimes they
break a cold, sometimes they dissipate congealed humors, which do annoy the
head, brain, and stomach of the horse, sometimes they expel and cause the
horse to vent, and to send away at his nose and mouth, much filth and
corruption, which does stop, clog, and pester his head and body, and sometimes
they do ficcicate and dry up many bad humors, which are engendered in the head
and brain, and so likewise many virtues Perfumes have whereof very many of our
Ferriers here in England are most ignorant: for did they truly know the nature
of Perfumes, and how rightly to apply them in their proper places, they might
easily do cures for which they should be not a little admired. The ingredients
and simples wherewith we usually perfume sick horses, are many, as
Frankincense, Storax, Benjamin, Brimstone, Olibanum, etc. sometimes Herbs,
Roots, Grain or Corn, and such like things, which are very much behoofefull
for the cures of such diseases, for which they are frequently administered, as
you shall find in many of my Cures set you down at large: yet I will for
example sake set you down two or three for your better satisfaction.

Horse, take all these, so well mixed, and putting thereof upon a Chafing Dish
and coals, cover the coals with a Tunnell, and so apply the small end to one
nostrill at once, and after to the other, to the end he may receive the smoke
or fume up into his head, and let him be thus perfumed a quarter of an hour
together. Another:

nose with a linen clowt rolled up in the fashion of a great Taynt, and this
will bring forth much bad matter. Another:

head of the horse, whereby he may receive the fume up into his head. And thus
you may perfume him at pleasure, and as you shall see cause. The residue of
perfumes, and the manner how to apply them, you shall find among my Cures, and
therefore it will be superfluous for me to entreat any further of them.


. 14. P.
Hippoph. What is the best manner of administering Purgations to a Horse?


Hippos. As touching Purgations, I have spoken before very largely, as well for
inward purging, as for outward, and therefore what I shall say more, is in
effect but one and the same thing: nevertheless for your further satisfaction,
I will briefly deliver unto you, what can be said of Purgations. Five ways we
have whereby to purge a horse, viz. by Pills, Potions, Clisters, Suppositories,
and Grass. Pills for the most part do purge and cleanse the head and brain, by
drawing the peccant humors down into the body, and so sending them forth
excrements. Potions do free the stomach, belly and guts, from such naughty
humors which Glanders, Colds, and Surfets have engendered in the body. Clisters
are of sundry, and those of different natures, humors, some to bind, and some
to loosen, and some to heal as in case of Ulcers and old Sores within the body
principally, and those do also cleanse the guts, refresh the inward parts and
spirits vital, and prepare the body before hand for the receiving of purging
pills or potions. Suppositories help the diseases in the guts, being of nature
and condition more gentle then Clisters are, and may be applied when Clisters
cannot. It therefore remains that the skill of the Ferrier be such, as to be
able judiciously to understand the several natures of every of these things,
to know how to make choice of his ingredients and simples aptly, to understand
how to compound them punctually and artificially, to discern rightly before he
do administer what be the humors and maladies wherewith the creature is
annoyed and visited, as whether (V. G.) it be Choler, Melancholy, Phlegm, or
Rhume, as also in what part of the body the humor offensive, is most
predominant, and what simples will purge or remove those evil humors, for it
is requisite he be able to know right well, and ad unguem, the nature and
property of every one of them in particular, by reason that some are much more
asperous and violent then others be, yea many simples are strong poisons if
they be not well prepared and corrected, and yet their qualities well weighed
and compounded by true Art, and great good judgment, will work wonderful
effects. Those simples which be strong, are Colloquintida, Scamony, Elebore,
etc. the more gentle are Manna, Cassia, Whey, Prunes, etc. But those that be of
the mean, or indifferent working, are Rubarb, Agarick, Aloes, Seen, etc. and
this I am bold to intimate unto you, to the end you may the better understand
their natures, virtues, and qualities, and come to know the more securely how
to work when occasion shall be offered. The fifth and last way of purging is by
grass, especially if the horse be surfetted, and has been over-toyled the
Winter before, for this must be done in the Summer time, when grass is in its
best heart; but that grass which will scour and purge most, is a new mown
meadow, for that will rake his guts very well, nor will he in such a place
gather flesh; I do therefore counsel you not to suffer him to remain in such
grounds above fourteen or fifteen days, and then take him forth, and put him
into some other pasture, where the grass has not been touched with the Sith,
for then he will belly well, and in short time recover much flesh, and become
fat and lusty. This manner of scowring will cause him to empty himself well,
to purge, and send away all his bad humors and surfets, ease his limbs
marvellously well, do his legs and feet very much good, refine his corrupt
blood, and make him agill and full of spirit. To mow green Rye before it be
eared, is also most wholesome, for it scowreth, cleanses, and cools the body
very much; so does the leaves of Sallowes, and of the Elm: but as touching the
administering of Scowrings and Purgations in the Stable, you must understand
that some skillful Ferriers who have been far traveled in this Mystery, have
very diligently and studiously set you down many very good rudiments and
instructions, wherewith to work with all security, whose observations I do
advise you punctually to observe: as first the seasons of the year are to be
pondred: (V. G.) in winter, if his body be to be purged, it must be first
prepared by Phlebothomy or Bloodletting, together with artificial diet,
therefore you shall administer either Suppository, Clyster, Potion, or Pill,
etc. You must keep him a day or two from hay, straw, or such like hard-meats of
digestion, for that those things will be a great impediment to the working of
physic or medicine, and he must also be kept for a time from meat, because
emptiness is a great help to physical operation, otherwise it may happen (as
it does oftentimes) that more danger then good may accrue to the Horse.
Wherefore two or three days before you do intend to purge him, let his meat
be either Wheat or Rye-bran prepared, like as before is taught you, and give
him also either good bread made of purpose with Beans, Pease, and some Rye in
it, or else Oats well sifted which must be dry and sweet, and let his drink
be white water only, and that morning you intend to give him a purge, let him
befasting from either meat or drink, but about six or seven a clock in the
morning, give him this or some other purge, which I have already taught you, or
shall hereafter, which must be correspondent unto the malady, for which you are
to purge him, for one Purgation will not sort to every infirmity, but this
purge is most profitable for the causes which I shall presently deliver unto
you: And this it is, viz.

peccant humors, which Surfets have engended; half an hour after he has
had his Mash, give him Bread or else a few Oats mingled with wheat bran, and
that little and often for fear of cloying his stomach, and at night give him
white water, and so give him bread and hay sprinkled with water for all night..
This is an excellent Purge. Another.

body, and clears it from all Flegmatique and Rhumatique humors: as for his
bloodletting, let that be according as your judgment shall dictate unto you,
and you may use this so long as you may see cause. If you do perceive your
Horse to be sick, Surfetted, full of colds, or otherwise ill disposed,
whether in Summer or in Winter, after you have opened a Vein, give him this
Purge.

Take of Alloes, Siccatrina, made into fine powder two ounces, pills with fresh
or sweet Butter, and give it to your Horse over night, he having been kept
fasting the whole day before, and prepared also with the Diet before
prescribed; and after he has taken those pills, give him either a sweet Mash,
or white water the next morning early, for that will cause his pills to work the
more kindly, that day, and so let him fast till night, during which time he
will purge freely; then at night (he having stood upon the Trench all day,)
give him white water, and after Oats and Branne, and then give him Hay
sprinkled with water for all night, nevertheless he may not the first day
purge, by reason that some horses are of so strong a Constitution, as that
Physic will not easily or soddenly work, but then be you confident it will
the next day: you must therefore be careful how you do order him. After his
purging keep him still warm clothed and well littered, take him from the
Trench, and put on his Coller-halter, give him sweet Mash or white water, and
after feed him well, but by discretion, both with Hay, Oats, and Bran, and
keep him to white water two or three days after, or longer, if you shall so
please, and when you give him cold water, let it be with exercise.. This I
have often tried. Another.

If your horse be newly taken from Grass, and that you hold it needful his
body be cleansed, and to free him of his many bad humous, which either his
Grass or former Surfets might bring: Then first Rake him, and administer unto
him the Clyster prescribed you in lib. 2. cap. 6.. 8. letter C. Clyster 4. and
the next day after give him this drink.

Take of the strongest Ale-wort one quart, of ordinary Honey a

Take of White Wind one pint, and put thereto of Seen one ounce, Horse
bloud-warme; then walk or ride him gently a quarter of an hour, and so set
him up warm clothed and littered, nor let any cold air come unto him, neither
let him eat or drink in six hours after, and at night give him a sweet Mash,
or white water, and let his Rack-meat be sweet Wheat straw, and Oats with
Bran. The next day (if the sign be good) open a vein in the neck, and prick
him in the mouth, and if the blood be bad, take from him two quarts, but if
good, then not fully one quart; keep him warm, and let his drink be either
sweet Mashes, or white water, and put into his drink, either the powder of
Brimstone, or of Fenugrick, of Turmerick, or of Elecampane, one or more
together, according as he will be brought to like and take them, which being
well mixed, put thereof into his drink, one spoonful at once. These are very
sovereign purgative receipts, whereby to cool the body, purge choler, and other
peccant humors, and to purify and refine the blood: but besides, this is not
only good for horses newly taken from grass, but for other sick, surfetted,
and diseased Horses. Another:

potion will do him much good: let him fast upon it four or five hours at
least, then give him a warm Mash, or white water, and the next day give him
this receipt.

Take of Life-Honey, or for default thereof, ordinary Honey, and mingle it with
his Oats that he is to eat, which must be mixed by rubbing the Oats and
Honey betwixt your hands, so that the Honey may be very well mixed, let him
eat his Oats thus mingled, until you do find him to be quite cured, which
will be when he has quite done running at the nose. This is one of the best,
and most certain cordials that I know, neither have I made use of any so much
as of this, for the time I have known the same, for this disperseth all phlegm
and choler; it also purges the head and brain; it purifieth the blood, it
venteth the evil humors; it causes good digestion, and freeth a Horse from
Glanders, Colds, Catars, Rhumes, Running at the nose, and the like.


CHAP. XVII.
1. Q.
Hippoph. WHat cure have you for the quick or running Scab?


Hippos. This is a noisome disease and infectious, a very formal mainge, and
mere neighbor to the leprosy, or Elephantique disease. It comes by surfeit
taken by over-riding, when the blood is over-hot; it does putrify and corrupt
the blood, and consequently the flesh, and at the last, breaks forth into
this malady, which we call the Quick-scab. Quick s^
And the reason why we do give it this name is, for that it runs from one
member of the horse to the other, sometimes it will be in the neck, and at
other times in the breast of the horse, now in the maine, and then in the
tail, etc. The cure is,

First sh^ve o^ clip away the hair from that place visited, so close as may
be, and take off the scurfe and scabs with some old Curry-Comb, Oyster-shell,
or some such like thing. Then

Take fair cold water, with a linen cloth, wash and bathe the places very
well, and lay the linen cloth well wet upon the place, and so touch it no more
in ten days, and if in that time the quick-scab do not heal, then dress it
as before, and so a third time, or a fourth, or so often as necessity requires,
till it be thoroughly healed. But remember that the day before you thus dress
the sorance after this manner, you take (to a reasonable quantity) of blood
from the neck-vein. This is an approved cure. Another as good as the former.

First let him blood, and then shave or clip away the hair close, as in the
former cure. Then take Mallows, and Marsh-Mallowes, of each like much, and
boil them in fair water as much as will suffice, till the herbs be soft, and
with the herbs and decoction, bathe and wash the sorance two or three days
together warm; then take of common Honey one pint, Coperas, Alum of glass,
and Verdigrece, all made into fine powder, of each four ounces, Turpentine and
Quicksilver mortified, of each two ounces; boil all these together with the
Honey unto an Unguent, and herewith dress him every day till he be whole. This
I say is very good.


2. Q.
Hippoph. HOw do you cure a Quitter-bone?


Hippos. This comes to a horse by some hurt he has taken in the foot, either
by a prick with a nail in shooing, or by graveling, or by a stub, or the
like, when it was not so well healed, that it impostumated, and so brake out
above the cronet, which bred the malady; or else being neglected, it brake out
above the hoof before it was perceived. It is bred also sometimes by a hurt
upon the hoof, by a blow, or by striking one foot upon the other; and
sometimes it comes by evil humors which fall down into that place, and it
grows most usually upon the inside of the foot, where when it begins, it
causes a hard round swelling upon the cronet of the hoof, betwixt the heel
and the quarter of the long talent, it begets an Ulcer at what time it does
begin to impostumate, and it breaks out above the Cronet, like as I said
before. The signs I have already given you, for the place will be swelled the
bigness of a hasle nut, and the horse will hault right down. The cure is, so
soon as it is espied, to open it above; if it do begin to be soft, then

Take Auripigmentum made into fine powder, and infuse it in the strongest white
Wine Vinegar can be gotten, forty eight hours, and then apply it to the sore,
and it will so eat about the Quitter-bone, Quitter-bone.
as that you may pluck it away with your finger or pliers, which so soon as the
bone or gristle is taken forth, you may heal up the wound with your Coperas
water, and green ointment prescribed in lib. 2. cap. 10. 4. G. till it be
whole, but he must not come into any wet during the time of the cure. This is
very good. Another:

First cut the hoof to the quick, then

Take a Snake the greatest you can get, and cut off his head and tail, and
flea it, and so boil it in water till the flesh come from the bone, and then
you may bring the flesh to be a very ointment; put of this into the sorance
down to the bottom, and this will kill the Quitter-bone, and dry up and heal
it; but you must not suffer him to come into any wet, dirt, or gravel, during
the time you have him in cure. With this medicine I cured one horse only, for
that I had no cause to use it to any other since. Another:

Take of Arsenick the quantity of a small bean, make it into powder, and put
it into the hole of the Sorance, conveying it down unto the bottom with your
instrument, and then stop the mouth of the wound with Hurds, and bind it on
with a cloth, and a rowler, that the Horse may not bit it away; and so let it
remain four and twenty hours: then open it, and if you shall perceive the
wound to look black within, it is a token that the Arsenick did its office in
well working, then to allay the fire, and to restore the flesh that is thereby
become mortified, taynt the hole with Turpentine and Hog's Grease molten
together. Then take Pitch, Rosin, and Wax, of each like much, and of
Turpentine as much as of all the other three, and melt them and so make a
Plaster of Leather, with which you must cover the top of the Sorance, but
first be sure to convey the aforesaid taint to the bottom, and then lay on
your Plaster, and thus dress him daily till you have gotten forth the Core,
or sharp Gristle, if the Arsenick have not eaten it out before, for if the
Gristle be in the bottom of the wound and uncovered, you may raise it with
your Fingers or Instrument, and so pluck it quite away, for till that be out,
the Sorance will not heal; that done, heal it up with your green ointment, or
else with this Unguent.

Take of common-Hony, and of Verdegrece in fine powder, of each so much as will
suffice, boil this till it be red, and therewith Taint the wound till it be
whole, keeping evermore the mouth of the wound open, least it heal up above
before it be well healed at the bottom, neither let your Horse come into any
wet, or go forth of the Stable until he be thoroughly cured.. Thus I have cured
many Quitter-bones. Another.

Cut the place to the quick, then take Virgin-wax, Pitch of Greece, Galbanum,
Mastick, Sagapenum, Olibanum, and Sallet-oyle, of each one ounce, and of Dear
or Sheeps-suet half a pound, melt these upon a soft fire, and incorporate them
well together, and therewith Taint and dress the same till it be whole.. This
is also very good.


CHAP. XVIII.
. 1. R.
Hippophilus. WHat is good to cure the Red-water?


Hippos. This Red-water is that which issues out of old incurable Ulcers, and
Sores, which when you shall see it to come forth of any wound, then be you
assured that it is very hardly or seldom cured, till that Water be gotten
away; for it is a sign that the wound is poisoned with the said Red-water: nor
could I ever find any cure for the Red water, Red waeter.
but only one which a Marishall of France taught me, which is this, viz.

Take of the root of the herb called Emanuell, alias Bonus-Henricus, or good
King-Henry, or All-good: boil the Roots thereof in water, and give it him
drench-wise with a horn bloud-warme, and this will take away the Red-water and
you may then cure the wound with your other Salves or Unguents.

This I had never cause to make trial off in England; but I have been an Eye
witness to two or three cures in this kind, which the Marishall of whom I had
the Receipt did very sufficiently perfect. The French calls this Malady, La
Eu Rouse.


2. R.
Hippoph. HOw do you make a Restringent charge?


Hippos. This Restringent charge Restringent charge.
is to be applied to broken bones, or to bones dislocated or out of joint,
being first set, as also take moist humors from weeping wounds, and so dry up
bad humors which do preoccupate the body. I will commend unto you one only
receipt which shall be special good.

Take of oil de Bay, four ounces, Orpin, Cantharides, and Euphorbium, of each
two ounces, make all these into fine powder and mix them with your oil de Bay
very well, and therewith Charge the place greived.. This is also very good to
Charge the swelling of a Back-sinew spraine.


3. R.
Hippoph. What cure have you for a Ring-bone?


Hippos. A Ring-bone comes two ways, to wit, either by Nature, or by
Accident; by Nature, when as either the Stallion or Mare have it, from whom the
Colt is engendered, whereby he takes it as hereditary from them, and therefore
(as I have formerly admonished) I will dissuade you from breeding upon any such
Horse or Mare that either had or have this malady. It comes also accidentally
by some knock or blow given either by some other Horse, or by his Keeper or
other person, and sometimes by some evil humor, which through over-heats do
fall down into the legs, and makes its residence upon the top of the cronet.
It begins first with a slimy humor, which in time grows to a hard
gristle; you shall know it, for that there will be a swelling round about the
cronet of the hoof, adjoining unto the lower part of the pasterne, and the
hair will stare, and be bristly, and it will cause the Horse to hault. The
cure is: first wash the pla^^, and shave away the hair, then

Take quick or unslaked Lime, newly taken from the Kill, Ring-^
which must be well burned, the best burned you may know by its lightness,
make your lime into fine powder, and lay it upon the place swelled all along of
a good thickness, and bind upon it a linen cloth made fast about the foot,
and so put the horse into the water, and let him stand in the water a pretty
while, then take him forth, and unbinde the foot, and he is infallibly cured,
for the burning of the Lime does kill the Ring-bone, even unto the very root
thereof. With this receipt I have cured not so few as a hundred horses at the
least, but when you are thus to dress your horse, let him be brought close to
the water whereinto he is to be ridden, that so soon as you have applied your
Lime unto the sorance, you may presently put him into the water. Another.
First, shave away the hair as before is advised, then scarifie the place.

Take then Cantharides half an ounce, Euphorbium, and oil de Bay of each one
ounce, your Cantharides and Euphorbium must be made into fine powder, and then
boiled with your oil de Bay, stirring it continually, that it run not over,
then with two or three feathers lay it boyling-hot upon the sorance good and
thick, let him be dressed in the same place where usually he stands in the
Stable, and let him have no litter near him, but tie up his head so as he may
not reach the medicine with his mouth; but when the hair do begin to grow
again, give the fire to the sorance, to wit, three or four straight lines right
downwards, drawing the swelling quite cross, and let the edge of the iron be
no thicker then the back of an ordinary knife, neither must you burn him any
deeper then that the skin may look yellow. that done, apply to the place this
charge.

Take of Pitch and Rosin, of each like much, let them be molten together, and
whilst it is hot, apply it to the place all along, from the one end of the
swelling to the other, and before it be cold, clap Flocks upon it, and about
three days after, lay on more of the said charge, and new Flocks again upon
that charge, and so let it remain until the Flokcs and charge fall off of its
own accord. This is also very good. Another. First wash and shave, and
scarrifie, as before, then

Excretion to cure.
Take gray-Sope, and Arsnick pulverized, of each the quantity of a Wall-nut,
which being very well mixed, spread it upon the sorance so far as the Ring-bone
goes, and having thus spread it, apply upon it a few Hurds, and bind a clean
linen cloth upon it to keep it on, neither let it be removed in four and
twenty hours, then take it away, and stir not the asker or scab, but only
anoint it with fresh Butter, till it do fall away of it self, and so heal
it up with some healing salve, whereof I have given you plenty. This I have
tried, and have found to be very good. This medicine will cure a bone-Spaven,
Splint, Curb, or any other bony excretion.


. 4. R.
Hippoph. HAve you any way to recover and make sound a Horse that is rotten?


Hippos. Truly Sir, for any man to promise that, were great precipitation,
only thus far he may wade therein, as to give ease and help to a horse that
has the rot, for it is one thing for a Horse to be rotten, and another thing
for him to have the rot. For a horse to be rotten, is to have his inward parts
wasted and consumed, or at least so rotten, as never possibly to be recovered,
to wit, his Liver, Lights, etc. But for a horse to have the disease called the
rot, I do find the same to be either a formal aropsie, or else a disease so
allied nearly thereunto, as not to be distinguished easily: as we say, a Sheep
is rotten, when his Liver is become foul and tainted; nevertheless men do
eat the carkas, and do aver it to be good meat, wherefore the Sheep is not
rotten, but has the disease called the rot. This malady comes often times to
horses unhandled, to wit, in their youth, whilst they be yet Colts, which be
bred, and do feed in Fenny-Marsh, and wet grounds, and sometimes it comes to
them after they have bin backed and ridden, when they have too hard and violent
riding, being yet but young, whereby the blood is first enflamed, and after
putrified and corrupted, begetting obstructions in the Liver, and those do
cause putrefaction, and so knots and pustils do engender in the Liver, which
breeds either a Dropsy, a Feltricke, or a rot. The signs how to know this
infirmity, are these: After his journeyes his hair will stare his legs swell
and burn, and when you shall press the places swollen with your finger, upon
taking your finger away, there will remain a pit or dint, he will forbear
his meat very much, and when he does eat, it will be without any stomach or
appetite, he will pant much, lift and beat in the flanks many times, he will
swell under the belly, neither will he cast his coat in seasonable time, when
other Horses that be sound do, and he will be so faint of body, as that he will
become lunt, and utterly to have lost his mettle. These and such like be the
symptoms of this malady. Now come I to the cure.

Let him first bleed well under the tail, then

Take of Mares-milke two quarts, if the same may be had, if not, Rot.
the like quantity of the milk of a red Cow, then take a lump of Arement, then
take a young horse of or about the age of four years, and of color black,
if it may be, if not, then of some other color, run and chafe him about that
he may sweat much, then with a spoone, or with some other such like
instrument, rake the sweat from his head, neck, breast, back, sides, ribs,
buttocks, legs, and in a word, from each part or member of the said horse,
and get off the sweat so much as you can possibly, and so put your Arement and
your sweat into the milk, which all being well mixed, give him this by equal
portions three mornings together, till he has taken it all, and let him drink
none other drink after it in six or seven hours, but immediately after his
drink, let him be led forth into some pasture where other horses be, the better
to cause him to neese, stale, dung, and empty himself; for it is very
wholesome for him so to do, before he either eat or drink. Having thus done,
set him up warm and well littered, and if the season do serve, give him of the
green blades of Rye, if not, give him Barley steeped in milk three days, but
renewed every day once. Then after every of these drinks, if you feel him cold
in the pasterne joints, or that he trippeth or stumbleth as you lead him in
your hand, meddle no further with him, for that he is past cure, otherwise for
nine days together, after morning and evening give him white water only,
unless now and then a sweet Mash, and sometimes give him milk with his white
water, if the Horse be not above nine years old, and so you may cure him: but
if he be elder, this may prolong his life, whereby he may do the more service.
This I never did experience, but a Noble Knight, and a very friend told me,
that he has thus recovered sundry Horses which have been visited with this
disease.


CHAP. XVIII.
. 1. S.
Hippophilus. WHat good Salves have you wherewith to heal up sores and wounds?


Hippos. Sir, I have many, according as I have before showed you, but yet I
will give you many more, the greatest number of which I have tried, and I am
able to commend them unto you for very good, and those not Salves Salve.
only, but Unguents, Powders, and Waters, which be most sovereign.

Take of Perosen, and of hard Rosin, of each one pound, of Frankincense,
Virgin-Wax, or for want thereof new Wax and Sheeps suet, of each half a
pound, of old tried Hogs grease one pound and a quarter, boil the Gummes and
Wax in white Wine half a pint, and then put unto it your Sheeps tallow and
Hogs grease, and when all is well molten and incorporated, strain it, and
whilst it is yet hot, put in of Venice Turpentine one ounce, and so work all
well together, and when it is cold, pour in the liquor from the salve, which
put up into a clean galley pot, or other clean vessel for your use. This is
a most sovereign Treat or Salve wherewith to heal any wound (that is not come
to an Ulcer) and so dry it up. Another most excellent powder. Powder.


Take unslaked Lime, the dry dust of Tanners Oken Bark and old shoe soles
burned to a cole, of each like much, make these into fine powder, and mix them
well, and keep it in a clean box or glass for your use. This powder heals
the buds or knots of the Farcin, after they be broken, and it skinneth them,
and if they be first washed with the juice of Vervine and strong Vinegar
mingled together, and then this powder being cast upon them, will (I say) heal
and skin them. It also heals and skinneth all other sores. Another:

Ointment.
Take tried Hogs grease half a pound, Verdigrece in fine powder one penny
worth, boil these upon the fire two or three walms, then take it off, and put
unto it of Venice Turpentine half an ounce, and stir it well together till
it be cold. This Unguent will heal any wound or sore in a Horse. Another:

Ointment.
Take of Roch-Allum a good quantity, and burn it, and as much bay Salt, and burn
that also, make both these together into fine powder, then take of common
Honey, and of sweet Butter, of each like much as will suffice, incorporate the
Alum and Salt with the Honey and Butter by melting them over a gentle fire,
and with a taint or plaster apply it. And this cures any foul sore. This I
have often tried. Another:

Take of fair water Water.
one pint, and put into it of green Coperas, and of bay Salt, of each the
quantity of a good hasle nut, both made into very fine powder; let these boil
a little upon the fire. With this wash any sore before you do apply your
Salves, Unguents, or Powders. This is a right good water. Another:

Take of common Honey two ounces, Roch-Allum, Verdigrece, and Vinegar, of each
one ounce, make your Alum and Verdigrece into very fine powder, then take of
Sublimate finely powdered, two ounces, boil all these a walme or two on the
fire; this laid on a Spatula plaister-wise once a day, or if the wounds be
deep, with a taint, cures both speedily and soundly; but before you dress him
with this Salve, let the Sore be well washed and injected with the water last
above mentioned, made of fair water, Coperas, and bay Salt. This is a most
approved cure, and good beyond all peradventure, for it cures not only sores
and wounds in any part in the body of the Horse, but in the foot which way
soever it may happen, and it cleanses any wound from dead or proud flesh.
Another:

Take the buds or tendrest tops of the leaves of Elder, one handful, and first
shred, and after pound them very well, till you bring them to a perfect Salve,
Salve.
and apply this to the sore, binding a cloth upon it to keep it from falling
off. This will cure any old or new sore whatsoever in any part of the body, as
galled backs, Spurregals, gravelling, pricked, or accloyed, the wound being
dressed herewith every day once, it will cure any Fistula if the juice thereof
be injected to the bottom. With this one thing alone I have done cures which
very good Ferriers could not cure. Another:

Take common Honey and Verdigrece finely pulverized, Aegyptiacum.
of each as much as will suffice, boil them together till the medicine wax
red, and this will heal up any old or green sore in short space. This is also
very good. Another:

Take the white of a new laid Egg, Ointment.
and Sallet oil as much as will suffice, and beat them well together, and
before you do apply it unto the wound, pour into the wound burnt Butter, and
then lay on your medicine with Hurds plaister-wise, and this will cure any
green wound. This is very good. And thus much for sores.


. 2. S.
Hippoph. What is good for a Horse that has gotten wrench in his shoulder?
Shoulder wrench.



Hippos. If you do find that the grief be in the shoulder, and that you do
know it to be a wrench, make this charge, and charge the grieved shoulder
therewith.

Take Wheate-meale two pound, and allay it with red Wine in a Pipkin or
Postnet, as if you would make thereof a paste, then take of Bolearmoniack made
into fine powder half a pound, of ordinary Honey one pound, boil all these
together, and add thereunto in the boiling, of Pitch half a pound, and so
keep it continually stirring until your Pitch be thoroughly molten, but before
you take it from the fire, put into it of ordinary Turpentine half a pound, of
Comin, oil de Bay, Dialthea, Sanguis Draconis, Bay Berries, Fenugrick, Linseed
flower, of each, two ounces, make all these into fine powder, then take of the
oil of Aspick one ounce, boil and mix all these very well together, that
done, charge Charge.
the grieved shoulder all over very well, even down the knees. This charge is
most sovereign for any wrench or strain in the shoulder, knees, or hips; it
also cures Kibes, Scratches, and all such like sorances, it is also most
excellent to comfort the sinews offended or hurt; it is very good for a
back-sinew-spraine, it draws away all bad humors, and abateth swellings. X I
have often made use of this receipt, but if it be a shoulder-pight, or
joynt-dislocated, then thus he is to be cured, viz.

Shoulders dislocated.
First cast him and lay him upon that side which is not hurt, then fasten with a
cord the foot of the same leg all along a board, and so fasten the foot to
some tree or post which must be some two or three paces distant from the horse,
and near to the ground, and let one stand at the middle of the board with a
stick to turn it easily and by degrees in the middle thereof, and whilst that
is in doing, let another with a paile of cold water, rub, wash, and bathe the
grieved place with his hand or foot, and that very hard, and in so doing, he
must take up the member grieved, which he must chafe from the very top to the
farther end of the leg, and by thus doing you shall put in the bone which was
out, into its right place, and after this is done, you must raise him as gently
as may be, and when he is up, let him blood in the breast-veine on that side
the grief lies, putting a Patten-shooe upon the contrary foot, and let his
forefeet be tramelled fifteen days after at the least, to hinder him from
lying down, and charge the grieved shoulder daily with a restringent charge,
and look upon the grieved member every two or three days, by the space of
fifteen days; after that you have thus set the same, neither let him be
removed out of his place during that time, and after swim him, and apply bathes
unto the shoulder made of good herbs, such as I have prescribed you in the
Section of bathes, and lastly anoint him with this Unguent:

Take oil de Bay, the oil de Petra, oil de Spike, and Nervall, of each like
much: and thus ordering him, he will be sound and well again. I have proved
this upon six horses, and cured them all. Another:

If the shoulder be either strained or dislocated, it were uery good to swim
him, then take blood from the breast vein on that side the grief lies, then
tramell his fore-feet that he do not lie down, and so let him remain three
weeks, then anoint the member grieved with Sallet oil only, and the first
time you shall take but of Sallet oil half a pound, which you must rub in
against the hair very hard, both upon the shoulder and the breast, by the
space of half an hour, the next day after you shall likewise rub and chafe
the shoulder and breast, by the space of half an hour more; Shoulders
strained.
without applying any thing unto them, and so continue rubbing and chafing him
for the space of eight or ten days together; as for the Sallet oil, you must
take four ounces thereof every third day, wherewith to chafe, rub, and anoint
the shoulder, and the other two days betwixt, you must not rub and chafe it
with any oil at all, and at the end of eight or ten days, his shoulder will
be swelled down to the very knee, then take off the oil, and apply a
restringent charge to the part grieved and swelled, and add to it of ordinary
Turpentine half a pound, to cause the charge to remain on the better, and the
next day, and all other days after in stead of this restringent charge,

Take Vinegar and bathe the shoulder therewith upon the said charge, and by
degrees the hair will fall away, and when the swelling is assuaged, send your
horse in the beginning to the water, upon a foot pace, and he will be cured;
this receipt certainly is very good, and not costly; but I did never make trial
thereof, albeit it was highly recommended unto me by a famous French Marishall,
who averred that he has recovered very many horses therewith, but for a horse
that has gotten a wrench or slip, the only remedy is to put in a French
rowell, and then to blow him, and put on a Patten shoe, and let his Keeper
turn the rowell every day once, as well to cause the putrefaction the better
to issue forth from growing to the flesh, and after twenty days you may take
it forth at your pleasure. This is good for a new strain.


3. S.
Hippoph. Were it not much better Hipposerus, that after you have thus
rowelled and blown him, and set a Patten-shooe upon the contrary foot, that he
were turned forth to grass, for that the horse keeping himself in continual
agitation and motion, as he feeds in the pasture, the humor may the better
descend, and so issue forth, whereby he may sooner be cured?


Hippos. Sir, I answer negatively to your assertion, for by his being abroad,
the wind will take the wound, and cause him to swell, and thereby do the
horse more harm then you are aware of: secondly I say, if when he is abroad
there might happen to fall rain, that the place rowelled might take wet and
cold, Shoulder rowelled.
it might thereby endanger a Gangrene, and therewith endanger the life of your
Horse, for the like I my self have done; but having rowelled your horse, and
that you be to blow him, if you use to take Tobacco, then forbear to blow him
your self, but let some other who takes not any, to blow him, for the very
scent and steame of Tobacco will cause your Horse to swell both in the
shoulder, and all along under his belly, even to the sheath and stones most
violently, and the effect thereof I have very often seen. With rowelling I have
cured very many horses, if the strain be newly taken, but if the horse have
gotten hurt on his shoulder, that the skin be broken, Shoulder the skin broken.
then first cut away all the dead and bad flesh if there be any, then

Take the white of an Egg, and beat it, and lay it upon a few Hurds
plaister-wise, but first wash the wound with a little white Wine made blood
warm, and then apply your plaster to the sorance, and then anoint the
shoulder round about the sorance with sweet Butter: do this every day once, and
it will be whole. This I have often tried. Another:

Take your lancet or fleame, and make a little hole in the skin upon the pitch
of the shoulder, and blow the place with a quill, that the skin may arise from
the flesh, then

Take of stale Urine two quarts, and boil it to a moiety, then strain it, and
put thereto of sweet Butter, and of tried Hogs grease, of each half a pound,
then take of Mallows, Tansey, Vervine, red Nettles, Sothernwood, and of the
tender tops of broom, of each half a handful, chop all these together, and
boil them in the Urine till they be soft, and then first bathe the shoulder
with the decoction or Urine, and after anoint the shoulder with the herbs,
being first m^de into an Unguent, using thus to do every day once or twice
till it be well; but during this cure, the horse must be kept within doors,
and in a few days he will go sound again. This is very good, for I have
often tried it. Another:

If your horse have any grief in his shoulder, first put into it a French
rowell, and blow it, and put a patten-shooe upon the contrary foot, then apply
this charge unto the place: take of Pitch and Rosin, of each one pound, and of
Tar half a pint, melt them upon the fire, and before it be cold, charge the
shoulder therewith, and clap Flax upon it, and let the charge lie on till it
fall away of it self, and once a day turn the rowell for fifteen days
together at least, then take out the rowell, and heal up the wound, (then if
the season be fit for it) turn him to grass with his patten-shooe on, and let
him run three or four months, and he will go upright again. This is very
good, Another,

First swim him, (as you may do well to do for any grief in the shoulder
or hips) and before you do rowell him, apply unto the grieved member this bathe
and unguent.

Take Pimpernell an arm full, Bay berries, Primrose leaves, Camomil,
Crow-foot, Mallows, Fennel, Rosemary, and fine upland Hay (which was cut
about Midsummer) of each like much, and of each a good quantity, put all these
into a Lead or Cauldron, and there let it steep in fair water two days and
two nights, then boil it until the herbs be soft, and bathe your Horse
therewith every day once good and warm, and bind of these herbs with the Hay
to the shoulder or place grieved, in what place or joint soever it be, use this
bathe four days, and at the expiration of four days, let him blood in the
breast, on that side the grief lies, if the grief be in the shoulder, but if
in the knee or fetlock joint, then let him blood in the pastern vein, and so
likewise if the pain be behind, and let him bleed well, but if you have not
skill or knowledge enough to open any of these veins, then pare the foot very
close, and open the toe vein, and there let him bleed well; after this his
four days bathing, when he is dry again, anoint the grieved member with this
Unguent.

Take Petroleum, Nervall, Patch or piece grease, and oil of Worms, of each
like much, and anoint him herewith by the space of half an hour, and then for
half an hour after, trot him in your hand in a fair soft ground, then bring
him into the Stable, and observe if any of the said ointment be come forth, or
does stick to his hair, which if it do, let it be rubbed and chafed in
again; also bathe him morning and evening, and at noon anoint him, and trot
him as before is advised, but at night only bind or rope on the herbs, and
this is the cure. Use this but four days only, for fear of making his
joints too supple and weak (and if this help not, as I do believe it will)
then rowell him, this I never tried, but my opininn is that it is a very good
receipt. Another.

If your Horse be shoulder splat, Shoulder splat.
then put upon him a pair of short pasternes upon his fore-feet, then take of
Dialthea one ounce, of Sallet oil one pint, of oil de Bay half a pint, of
fresh Butter half a pound, melt all these together in a Pipkin, and anoint the
grieved place round about (viz.) as well all over the shoulder, as the breast,
and betwixt the forelegs, upon and about the brisket, and in two or three
hours after, all the shoulder will be swelled, then with your fleame strike
the swelling in very many places, that the corruption may issue forth, and
continue to anoint him with the said ointment, and if it gather to a head (as
it is likely it will) when it is ripe enough, open it, where you do find it
to be softest, and then heal it up with your green ointment so often commended
unto you, and thus your horse will go sound again. This I have often tried,
and let this suffice for this malady.


4. S.
Hippoph. YOu have delivered your self very well, but yet Hipposerus (but yet)
I am to seek to know and understand when I see a horse does hault or
complain, where the grief lies, being a thing most needful for a Gentleman
to be very perfect in, but more especially for him that is a Ferrier, who is to
cure and set upright the Horse that is lame.


Hippos. You speak pure truth Sir, and therefore I will give you such assured
rudiments, whereby you shall not at any time fail in the discovery of the
least lamenesse that shall proffer it self to your eye, if you will be pleased
diligently to observe my documents, you must therefore first understand, Rules
how to know where a horse halteth either before or behind.
that if he do hault before, his grief must of necessity be, either in the
shoulder, or in the knee, or in the shanke, or in the pasterne, or in the foot;
if it be in the shoulder, it must be either toward the withers, or in the
pitch of the shoulder, or in the elbow; if in any of these places of the
shoulder, you may know it, in that he will a little draw his leg after him,
and not handle it so nimbly and dexterously as he does the other; if he cast
his leg more outward then he does the other, it is a manifest sign that he
is lame, and that the grief lies in his shoulder, and for the better trial
thereof, let your man but turn him short on either hand, and in that shoulder
where the lamenesse is, you shall perceive him to complain, and to yield, for
he will either favor that leg, or trip in the turning: you may also find
his lamenesse by his standing in the stable, for there he will hold forwards
his lame leg more then the other, but yet you come not to understand in what
part of the shoulder the grief lies; wherefore take for an infallible rule,
that if he do complain more when a man is upon his back, then otherwise,
when he is from his back, then be you confident that the grief lies in the
withers, and gripe him hard, and you shall perceive him to shrink, and perhaps
offer to bite if the Horse do tread thick and short before, then is the
grief upon the pitch of the shoulder close to the breast, which you may easily
find by setting your thumb hard to the place, and by thrusting him with it as
if you would have him to go back, whereat he will shrink, and put back his
leg; foot, and body; if the grief be in the elbow, you shall discover it by
pinching him with your forefinger and thumb, good and hard upon that place, at
the doing whereof you shall perceive him to shrink and hold up his leg, and
to offer to bite; and these be all the griefs which do lie in the shoulders
of the Horse, which not being visible, you shall thus discover them, as
touching those griefs which lie lower, they must be either in the knee, in the
shin, in the pasterne, or in the foot. If it be in the knee, When in t^ knee.
you shall find it by his stiff going, for he will not bend it so actively as
he does the other; if it be in the shanke or shin-bone, you may both see and
feel the same, it being then a back sinew spraine, splent, When in the shanke.
or some such like sorance or anoyance, so likewise if it be in the bending of
the knee, then it is a malender, which is also most easily descryed; if it be
in the pastern or joint, When in the pasterne.
then may you know it by his not bending it so well as the other; besides if
you put your hand upon the place, you shall find it to be very hot, and to
burn much: first if it be in the foot, it must then be either in the cronet, or
in the sole; if in the cronet, it is then probable it came by some strain or
wrench, if in the heel, then it came by some overreach, or else by some
disease in or about the Frush; if in the sole, then it came by some prick,
accloy, retoire, cannel nail, stub, stone, or gravel. And thus have I
discovered unto you all the several sorts which causes a Horse to hault
before, and how to know and distinguish the places grieved, together with the
occasion of every particular grief. It follows that we discuss yet further
the means how to distinguish an old grief, from a new taken strain or hurt,
which without an exact scrutiny, cannot easily be discovered, for often times a
horse has gotten a strain, for which he is presently turned to grass, where
peradventure he runs the whole Summer, and so by that means seems to go
upright, till he be heated and strained anew, and then will it appear again,
howbeit upon his first riding it may not appear: you have therefore three
ways whereby to find our his lamenesse, Three ways to find out lamenesse.
in what joint, limb, or member of the body soever it lies. 1 The first way is
to take him out of the Stable, and to cause him to be turned at the halters end
on either hand suddenly and swiftly upon as hard a way as you can pick out, and
if he have any ache, wrench, or grief in his fore-parts, it will appear, for
that when he shall turn upon that hand in which the grief is, you shall
perceive him to favor that leg, and so likewise run both toward you and
from you, especially down a little yielding hill, and if he have any
^^perfection, he will soon show it, for that he will favor that leg ^herein
the grief resideth; but if you be not able to find out his lamenesse this
way. 2 Then your second way must be for you to take his back, and to ride him
out a good round trot or pace a full hour, or so long until such time as you
have thoroughly heat him, then set him up, and let him stand quiet two or three
hours, and then either take his back again, or else turn him at the halters
end as before, and by thus doing, you may discover the least grief that may be
in him, especially when you thus stir him, if it be done upon stony or hard
ground, for then he can neither will or choose, but either to favor the member
grieved, or else to hault right down. 3 A third way we have, and that is, to
know whether the grief does proceed from a hot or cold cause, for if it
proceed from a hot cause, then will the Horse hault most, when he is hot, and
in the midst of his travel; but if it be of a cold cause, then will he hault
least whilst he is hot and most ridden and traveled, and most at his first
setting forth, whilst he is cold; and thus much for lamenesse and halting
before.

Now you perceiving your horse to hault, and that you be assured that his
lamenesse is not before, then may you be confident it must be behind, which
being so, the grief must of necessity be either in the foot, or in the nether
joint, in the pasterne, or in the leg, in the hamme, or in the hough, in the
stifling place, or joint, or in the hip. If the grief be either in the leg,
pasterne, or foot, if you do observe him well, you shall understand it by the
very same signs which I have inculcated already in the legs, pasternes, or
feet, for that the signs be the very same; if it be in the bending of the
hamme, you may then easily know it to be a plain Selander. If it be in the
hough, then is it either a bone or bloud-Spaven, which is easily enough to be
discerned, or else it must come of some blow, wrench, or strain, neither then
will the swelling easily appear, but you shall perceive it either by the
stiffness of the joint, or else you shall find the place to be hot and burning
if the pain shall lie in the stifling place, it is manifestly discovered by
his gate, for then you may perceive him in his going, to cast the stifle joint
outward, and you may plainly see the bone on the inside to be bigger then the
other, besides, his toe will hardly touch the ground. If it be in the Hip,
which is upon the side of the buttock, and if the hurt or wrench be newly
taken, you shall easily know it, in that the Horse will go side-long like a
Crab, not being able so well to follow with the grieved leg as he can do
with the other. Notwithstanding if it be a hurt taken, long before, you shall
perceive the Hip to be fallen lower then the other, and the flesh to shrink,
you may also perceive it the better, as by going up a hill, or upon yielding
ground, by reason he cannot go with so great ease, as when he goes upon even
or plain ground. But the better to discover in what part behind the grief
lies, let his Keeper take him out of the Stable in a long rain or
coller-haulter, and let him run him in his hand the full length of the rain,
for that in which leg soever the grief is, you shall perceive him to favor
it, but if you find him to go upright, without favoring any leg, then let
your man take his back, and ride him out a good trot or hand gallop, till he
be warmed, then set him up, and let him stand an hour or two till he be cold,
then take him forth again, and let your man trot him in his hand at the end of
the Rain as he did before, and thus you shall perceive him to hault and
complain, and well observing him and his gate or going, you may easily find
the place grieved. And if any lamenesse whether before or behind, do proceed
from any hot cause, then you shall best know it, for that the more you travel
or exercise him, and the warmer he is, the more he will hault. But if his
grief shall proceed from any cold cause, then will he halt most, being cold
after he has been traveled and set up warm.


. 5. S.
Hippoph. YOu have spoken well of lamenesse in general terms, but yet would I
gladly understand from you somewhat more in particular, as (V. G.) I would know
how to distinguish between a pinch in the shoulder, and a wrench in the
shoulder, as also betwixt a shoulder splat, and of the shoulder pight, and so
of the other members?


Hippos. In answer to this demand, I say that if you be cautelous in observing
duly and justly the postures and gestures of your Horse, may very easily come
to know in what member, joint, or limb the grief lies, and from whence it
proceeds; for you must understand that when a horse is pinched in the shoulder,
it must come either by carrying too heavy burdens, or by being put to draw,
and be over-laboured too young, his joints and limbs not being knit, and this
you may easily find, in that the horse will appear to your eye to be very
narrow brested, and to consume and waste in his flesh from those parts where
grief remains, and you may also perceive it, in that the shoulder bone will
stick out further then the other, and thus you may find it; but if he has
gotten a wrench in the shoulder, it comes commonly by means of some slip, or
by causing him to make too sudden a stop upon false ground, or by some fall
upon yielding or slippery ground, or by too short or sudden turning him upon
false grounds, or upon the planks in a Stable, or by some rash going out of a
door, or other narrow place, or by some stroke given by another horse, you
shall know it (like as before I told you) by his not well lifting and handling
his leg with that dexterity he does the other, as also by taking him upon the
pitch of the shoulder bone, and as touching a shoulder splat, Shoulder-splat.
which also comes by a slide or slip, especially upon some side or yeeld^^g
ground, where one leg does slide from the other; whereby he teareth the flesh
which is in the inside near the brisket, which causes a bauke to be
underneath the body, which will after be swelled, and the horse will thereupon
hault right down, and he will draw his leg after him; but if he be
shoulder-pight, Shoulder-pight.
this comes by some brush, strain, or fall, which the Horse receives by
some leap, skip, stroke, or bruise against some door, tree, or the like:
insomuch that often times the joint is dislocated, and this will also cause him
to hault down right: wherefore your cures for each of these mischiefs and
mishaps, must be handled accordingly, and if the pain do lie in any of the
nether joints, it comes most commonly by means of some wrench, as by putting
his foot into some cart root of rough uneven ground, or by going upon loose
stones, and many times by turning him too short in places that may be dangerous
for his limbs, for by such like causes do occur lamenesse to a Horse, which
when it shall happen, you shall thus know them, and know also in what joint or
member the grief has its abode, and the manner of curing each of these
several griefs, I have already sufficiently showed you, and therefore now let
us pass to other matters.


6. S.
Hippoph. Well then tell me what is good to cure the Scratches?


Hippos. Of this malady we have sundry sorts and degrees, unto which albeit we
do give several names, nevertheless they be all in effect but one and the
same disease, as Mules, Kibes, Rats tails, Crepanches, pains, etc. every of
which are none other thing but the very Scratches, being certain scabs which
engender betwixt the heel and the pasterne joint, and so goes many times
above the pasterne, even up to the hough, and albeit you may have this sorance
sometimes upon all four legs, yet not ordinary, for that it breeds most
commonly in the hinder legs, this is a noisome sorance, and comes sometimes
through the negligence of the Groom, in that he does not daily anoint the
horse heels with store of elbow grease, (as we term it) especially after
journeyes and hard travel; or when he brings his horse in from water, and then
does not rub his legs and heels dry, for that the sand and dirt does burn
and fret his heels, which do occasion swellings, and such like swellings do
occasion the Scratches. It is therefore requisite that the Groom do clip away
the long shag hair from about the pasternes (if he have any) and fetlocks: as
also from the inside of his legs, unto the bending of the knee, by means
whereof he may the better keep the legs of his horse from this disease;
sometimes it also comes from the corruption of the blood after great heats and
surfets taken, sometimes again for that the horse has been bred in marrish,
fenny, and watery grounds, sometimes it is ingendered from melancholy humors
which do fall down to the legs, and sometimes by standing continually upon
his own dung, which will through the heat and steame thereof, breed the
Scratches without other help, and sometimes again, the Scratches will fall down
into the heels of the horse, and there make its way forth after a desperate
sickness taken by a surfeit; and lastly it comes by reason the grease of the
horse had been moulten by over-riding or labor, whereby the grease falls
down and rests in the pasterne and fetlocks, and so causes the Scratches to
be ingendered. It begins first with a dry scab, and after it sends forth
fretting, watrish, and matterative stuff, which will stink and be most
noisome, and his pasternes and fetlocke joints will be full of chaps and
chinkes, sometimes all along, sometimes right down, and sometimes overthwart,
and the places will swell, and the cracks or chinkes will cause the legs to be
very gourdy, and to run with much noisome and offensive matter, and the horse
will be many times so lame, as not to be well able at first setting forth to
go, but with much trouble, and no less pain, and by these very signs you
shall know this malady: neither shall you want store of receipts wherewith to
cure it; the French do call this disease grappes, grapes, and Iavars, and
Arraistes, as also such other like terms and epithetons, all which (as before
is touched) makes but only one and the same disease: the first thing which is
to be done toward the cure, is to bathe and wash the places all about, and
then either to shave or clip away the hair very close, otherwise you can
hardly make a perfect cure thereof; then

Take the spawne of Toads, Scratches.
which in the beginning of March you shall find in pooles, ponds, ditches, and
standing water; and first draine the water from the said spawn, and then
distill it, and keep the water in a glass close stopped to serve you for the
whole year, and herewith wash and bathe the places every day warm, and in
short space it will cure them: this I have often used. Another:

Take Honey and Pepper made into very fine powder, of each as much as will
suffice, and boil them together and anoint the sorance therewith, and they
will soon heal and dry up; this I did never try, but a famous Ferrier of
France taught it me. Another.

Take Lime and Salt, and make them both into fine powder, which being well
mixed, apply it to the places grieved good and thick, then take Hurds, and cut
them very small, and clap them upon it, and so bind up the place with a linen
cloth, that it does not remove, and so let it remain two whole days and
nights, and this will cause the sorance to purge, and after heal it up very
kindly: This I did never try. Another:

Take Verdigrece and the fat of Bacon, and pound them to a formal Salve, and
so plaisterwise apply it to the sore, and it will heal up the scratches in
short time. This is very good. Another.

Take old Bores grease and common Honey, of each as much as will suffice, and
work it to an Unguent, anoint the sorance therewith, four or five days, and
no longer, and it will cure the Scratches.. This is very good. Another.

Take Verdigrece in fine powder, Gals, Brimstone, and Bolearmoniack, of each
one ounce, make all into fine powder, and mix them with Bores grease as much
as will suffice, and so bring it to an Unguent, and anoint the sorance
therewith, and this will both heal and dry them up. This I have often tried.
Another.

First cauterize five strakes on either side, and your iron must be somewhat
broad and you must go but only one crosse-wise, and after heal it up as it is
usual in Cures in your Cures of Cauterize this I never did practice. Another.

Take Pepper, Garlic, Cole-wort-leaves, and old Boares-grease, of each so much
as will suffice, pound them together to an Unguent, and herewith anoint the
Sorance, and in few days it will ripen the Scratches, and kill the malice of
the disease, and heal it up. X. of this Receipt I have made often use, and it
is good; you must not fail always before you dress any horse that has the
Scratches, first to wash and bathe the place well with warm water, and then to
shaw or clip away the hair very close, also every time you are to dress any
horse of this malady, wash the place with Chamberly and green Copperas boiled
together, and after dress him up with your other Salves, Unguent, etc. Another.

Take Hog's Grease and strong Mustard, and anoint the Sorance therewith, and in
short time he will be whole,. This is very good. Another.

Take first of white-Wine-Vineger one pint, and put unto it of the strongest
Tobacco in the Roll you can get one ounce, open the leaves, and shread the
Tobacco small, and boil it until the Vinegar do begin to consume, then take
it from the fire, and strain it wringing it hard, then take White Wind one
pint, of Roach Allome the quantity of a Walnut, of Bay Salt, and of common
Honey, of each one Spoonefull, red Sage, Rue, Hony-suckle-leaves. Yarrow,
Plantaine, Rib-wort, Bramble-leaves, of each like much, half a handful in the
whole; boil all these in the Wine till one quart be consumed, then strain
this water also, and mix them both together, and set it upon the fire till it
begin to boil, then take it off, and when it is through cold, put it up into a
glass, and so keep it close stopped, that no air come unto it, and when you
would use it for the Scratches, wash the Sorance, and then put upon it the
powder of burnt Allome; and this will cure the Scratches.. This I have often
tried, and it is singular good. Another.

Take Verdegrease and make it into fine powder, and then take common honey, and
work them together to an Unguent, and therewith anoint the sorance, and in
short time it will infallibly cure him.. With this Receipt I have cured very
many Horses. Another.

Take tried Hog's Grease, and Gunpowder, of each so much as will suffice, first
beat your Gunpowder to very fine powder, and incorporate them very well
together, and anoint the places greived once a day therewith, and it will soon
cure the Scratches.. This is a special good receipt. Another.

Take Train oil, white-lead, made into very fine powder, and the Ielly which
you shall find upon the ground, which many do report to be the falling of a
Star in the night where it shoots, of each like much, incorporate these well
together, and anoint the sore twice every day therewith, but if you cannot get
of this Ielly then add to the former ingredients a little Arsenick pulverised,
and in ten or twelve days this will heal him. X. This also is very good.
Another.

Take the tender tops of Elder buds, and the berries of the bramble while they
be red, and before they be rip, of each one handful, boil them in Wort two
quarts, and put unto it of Allome the quantity of an Egg, and therewith wash
and bathe the Sorance good and hot twice every day, and this water will cure
him, X. This is also very good. Another.

Take of Hemlocke a good quantity, shread it very small, then take of Cream
one quart, and boil it with the Hemlock till the Cream do turn into an oil,
which done take it from the fire, and strain it into a clean galley pot, and
keep it for your use: with this anoint the Sorance and it will soon heal it;
of this I never had trial. Another.

Take Brimstone, and make it into fine powder, and mix with it of sweet Butter,
so much as will suffice, to bring it to an Unguent, which will be of the color
of Gold, herewith anoint the sores and it will cure them. This I never tried.
Another.

Take unslaked Lime, Salt, and Soot, of each like much, all made into very fine
powder: boil this in the strongest white Wine Vinegar you can get so much as
will suffice, till it become as thick as a Pultis: then soften it with tried
Hog's Grease, and so work it to an Unguent, and herewith anoint the places
greived till they be perfectly cured.. This is very good; but to prevent all
sorts of Scratches, Kibes, Rat-tayles, etc. take up the Thigh-veynes, and your
Horse shall never have any of these Maladies, or if he have them, yet by so
doing, they will of themselves be cured.. This I have often experienced.


7. S.
Hippoph. HOw do you cure a Sit-fast?


Hippos. This Malady the French do call Mal de la Corn; it is an hard knob
which has been formerly a Saddle-gald, but by reason that the Owner of the
Horse was unwilling to spare his work till it was fully cured; it is converted
into a Sit-fast, Sit-fast.
which is oftimes troublesome to the Horse, by reason it is grown to a dry
knob so hard as a horn. The cure is.

Take the green outward leaves of a Cabbadge, and stamp them with old
Boares-grease, or tried Hog's Grease, and work them to an Ointment; and then
mount his Back, and then set the Saddle, to the end that the Ointment may the
better enter, or sink into his Back, and in a few days it will Cure him.
This is a very good cure.


. 8. S.
Hippoph. THere be yet certain Scabbes which do grow upon Horse-heeles, which
Ferriers do deny to be the Scratches, but they will have it to be a disease
wholly different. How do you cure them?


Hippos. Sir, men may say what they shall please, but I do assure you, these
are also plain Scratches. But yet I will give a few Receipts for them.

Scabs and Scratches.
Take of Salet-oyle three ounces, Red-wax-gummed one ounce, common Honey two
ounces, mix and melt all these together, and make them into an Vuguent, with
which you must often anoint the Sores, and this will cure them.. I have often
used it. Another.

Take ordinary Turpentine two ounces, new Wax, oil de Bay, Quick-Brimstone, of
each three ounces, common Honey one ounce, Allome and Zacacon, of each half an
ounce, mix, melt, and incorporate all those well together, and every evening
anoint the places grieved therewith, having first cleansed the Sorances, as
before is taught you. This I did never try, but I hold it to be very good.
Another.

Take the strongest white-Wine-Vineger, Mustard, and Soote, of each so much as
will suffice, and mix them well, them add to them the yolks of two Eggs, and
of Hog's Grease one ounce, Rape-oyle, and new Wax, of each two ounces,
quick-Brimstone in fine powder half an ounce, melt all these, and make it into
an Unguent, and therewith, anoint the grieved Sorances.. This I have often
tried, and I know it to be very good.


9. S.
Hippoph. What is good for a Horse that can neither Stale or Dunge?


Hippos. This accident oftimes happens to a Horse that is suddenly traveled,
being newly taken from Grass, or that has been long time kept and pampered
in the Stable without any execise at all, for as those who be too hard Riders
do soon surfeit their Horses, so likewise do these terribly wrong their Horses
who be too indulgent, and tender of them, and therefore the golden mean is
evermore the best. The signs to know this Malady is plain, for that his pain
will be so great as that it will cause him often to lie down and tumble, as if
he had the Bots. I will give you one only Receipt which a famous French
Marishall gave me, with which I cured one Horse, for that I had never occasion
to practice it upon any since, but I do hold it to be most sovereign in a case
of this nature.

Take the root of Male-Brake or Fearne, and put a piece thereof upon his
tongue, and it will cause him both to stale and dung, Stale or dung.
and so he will be cured. The male of Fearne is to be known by the root, from
the female, for if you take a Fearne-root, and cut it in two pieces, you shall
see the perfect figure of an Eagle, and thereby you may know it to be the male,
which is for your turn. And the female root will bear other effigies
different from the male, which wants its virtue to perfect this cure. This (I
say) I have once tried.


10. S.
Hippoph. What is to be done to a Horse that falls sick in his journey or
travel? Sick in travel.



Hippos. This also happens as the former does, but yet oftener and sooner,
especially if he be very fat and pursive, and wanting breath, as also if he be
traveled being fat and heavy, the Sun shining and scorching much, for such a
horse is in danger either to tire, or to fall desperately sick, which may also
endanger his life, as I have frequently known. The cure must be.

Take Muskadine or sweet Sack one pint, Aqua vitae a quarter of a pint, of
London Treacle two ounces, and of the best Sallet oil a quarter of a pint:
warm all these upon the fire, and brew it well, and give him one hornfull
thereof, then take his tongue in your hand, and put down his throat a new laid
Egg, breaking it with your fingers as you put it forth of your hand; then give
him a second horn full, and then another Egg, and after all the residue of
the drink, and so after that a third Egg, then let him blood in the palate,
and rub it well with white Salt, then set him upon the Trench, cloth, stop,
and litter him again warm, and let him fast an hour or two after it, and then
feed him by degrees, both with Hay and Oats, giving him either a sweet Mash or
white water, and he will do well again. This drink refreshes all the
spirits, being over-laied through heat and labor, and causes a good appetite
to meat. With this drink I have cured many sick horses, as well of mine own,
as of my friends, which have fallen away very desperately sick upon the way in
travel; but if I do find that his blood is inflamed, as many times it will
be, I then use to open a vein in the neck.


. 11. S.
Hippoph. But what is to be given to a Horse that falls suddenly sick? Sudden
sickness.



Hippos. First let him blood in both breast veins, or if you have not skill
sufficient to open these veins, then let him blood in both sides the neck,
and let him bleed well nigh two quarts, then give him this comfortable drink.

Take of sweet Sack one quart, and burn it with Grains, Cloves, and Cinnamon,
of each like much, being all beaten gross, put to it of Sugar three ounces,
and when it is burnt, add unto it of Sallet oil half a pint, and of London
Treacle two ounces, warm all these, and brew them well together, and so give it
to your horse blood warm, then ride him gently until he do begin to sweat,
and so set him up warm clothed and littered, but be sure to keep his head and
heart warm, neither must you stuff and cloth him too hot; for this drink will
cause him to sweat sufficiently of it self, yet litter him well, keeping the
Stable close, and so let him fast six hours after, against which time, let him
be rubbed very dry, and give him to eat sweet Wheat straw, and after give him
either a sweet Mash or white water, and boil therein of Mallows and
Watercresses, of each one handful, of Fennell-seed, and of Persley-seed, of
each one ounce, if he will drink the same. After that morning and evening (your
horse being fasting) ride him a mile or two, to the end he may take the air,
which is very wholesome for him, if the weather be temperate, and let his meat
be sweet straw, old clean dry Oats, and some Wheat, and Pease mixed therewith:
give him a little at once, and often, until you do perceive his stomach to
come well unto him, and let him be daily well rubbed, and warm clothed, to
provoke him to sweat, and let him be also well littered, and his drink either
sweet Mashes, or white water: and by this manner of keeping and ordering of
him, in short time he will recover his pristine sanity. This I have often
tried, and it is very good.


12. S.
Hippoph. What cure have you for a Selender?


Hippos. This disease is the very same with the Melander, but the sole
difference is, in that the malander breeds upon the bending of the knee, or
the leg before, and the Selender engenders of the bending of the hough in
the leg behind: but it comes just as does the Malander, and the cure is
the very same with it: but yet I will give you one good receipt which will cure
both: first, wash and shave away the hair, and rub the sorance with a wispe or
hair cloth till it be raw: (...).
then take the shreds of white leather untanned, which Glovers do make, and
boil them in Vinegar till they be soft, and bind of this hot to the place,
but if you do not find that by once or twice dressing, takes not away the
scurfe or scab, renew it daily until it does, for by this means the roots of
the bristly hair which grows in and about the sorance, is the only thing
that feeds the Malander, wherefore the roots of the hair being taken off
(which this medicine will do) the sorance will soon be cured; and to heal up
the rawnesse thereof,

Take fresh or sweet Butter, bay Salt, and Frankincense, both made into fine
powder, of each as much as will suffice, and boil them all together on the
fire, and with a ragge upon a stick apply this medicine to the place scalding
hot two mornings together, and after heal it up, and cause the hair to come
again, being daily anointed with Mallows and sweet Butter made into an
Unguent. This is a very good cure.


. 13. S.
Hippoph. What is to be given to a Horse sick, surfetted, Sick or surfetted.
and his grease molten?


Hippos. The only way is first to take blood from him, if there be just cause,
and after to scowre his guts with this purge.

Take Cassia one ounce, Filonio-persio, or Persico, and Trifora magna, of each
half an ounce, sirrop of Violets two ounces, dissolve these in mel Rosarum
four ounces, and give it him with a horn in a morning fasting, and after
either ride him gently, or else walk him up and down an hour or better, and
for an hour after at the least let him stand upon the Trench, then give him a
sweet Mash, which when he has dispatched, give him old dry Oats clean and
well sifted, and after sweet Hay, neither let him have any cold water in eight
days after, nor after that time, but with exercise. And this is a special
good cure.


. 14. S.
Hippoph. NOw let us come to the sinews, what say you to a sinew spraine?


Hippos. I have already handled this point sufficiently in lib. 2. cap. 4. 9.
A. for an Attaint upper, nevertheless I will give you more receipts for a sinew
spraine, albeit it be the same malady: the first shall be for a sinew sprung,
Sinew sprung.
or when the sinew is broken, and severed from the flesh, as many times it
falls out, then

Take Tartar, and the lees of Claret or red Wine, of each three ounces, Wheat
Bran one handful, boil these with the juice of Smalledge, two handfuls or
better, and when you take it from the fire, put into it of Turpentine one
ounce, bind this to the sinew grieved, so hot as he may well suffer it, and
using this medicine four or five days, he will be sound again. This is very
good: Another, if the sinew or artery be broken with Corasives, or other
accident, to cause it to soder or join again.

Take the leaves and roots of Solomon's seat, and of great Cumfrey, of each
like much, pound them small, and infuse it in white Wine four and twenty
hours, bathe the sorance herewith warm (you having first boiled it) and after
you have bathed the place well, bind the herbs and roots to the place
grieved, dressing him every day once, until he be perfectly consolidate. And
if the flesh be still broken, when you do find the sinew to be knit, strew
thereon the powder of Lime and Honey, which will heal and skin it in short
time. This is good, for I have often tried it. Another for a sinew grieved.
Sinew grieved.


If the sinew be so far grieved, whereby to cause the horse to complain, and
to hault,

Take then of Mallows a good quantity, and boil them in fair water, until
they shall become tender, then draine the water from the herbs, and so stamp
them to mash, and apply them to the member grieved hot over night, and the next
morning he will be upright again, but then he must have eight or ten days
rest at the least after. But if it be a sinew spraine, then clip away the hair
close, or shave it, then

Take of the oil of Sulphur, and of the oil of Turpentine, of each one ounce,
take first the one half thereof being well mixed, and chafe and rub it into
the sinew well, and so let him be tied up to the Rack, that he may not come
unto it with his mouth, for that it will greatly perplexe him for four or five
hours after his dressing, and the next day anoint him, as you did the day
before, and he will be cured, but the place will be raw, and therefore heal him
up with sweet Butter, or Hogs grease, and when the place heals, the skin will
peele, and yet the hair will come again, but he must either run at grass,
or else be kept in the Stable without any exercise at all by the space of a
month at least. If the sinew be cut, Sinew cut.
then

Take new Wax, and Gumme-Arabick, of each two ounces, of the marrow of an Ox
or Cow, four ounces, of the oil of Roses three ounces, melt and incorporate
all these on the fire, and so keep it for your use, and when you are to use it,
warm it, and so apply it either unguent wise, or taint wise, or plaster wise,
according as you shall see cause, and it will cure any sorance of this nature.
This I have often tried. Another.

If your Horse have a sinew sprained Sinew sprain
by an overreach, stroke, or otherwise weakened, the better to strengthen the
same,

Take tried Hogs grease, Horse grease, May or fresh Butter, Sallet oil, of
each six ounces: take also of the ointment called Agrippa, two drams, or new
Wax, two ounces and a half, and of Camphier a third part to all the rest,
melt them all together upon the fire, and so work it to an unguent, and good
and warm, anoint the swelled or grieved part therewith morning and evening,
and what remains of this medicine, let it be reserved in a galley pot for
other times, for it will keep a whole year. This is very good. Another, if it
be a sinew spraine only, then

Take Goats, Kids, or Deeres suet, and Rosin, of each one pound, Fig dust half
a pound, Verdigrece in fine powder, half a pound, melt and mix all these
well, and therewith anoint the sinew grieved every day, and chafe it into the
sinew by holding a hot bar of iron near it. This will both comfort and
strengthen the sinew, but I did never make trial thereof.


. 15. S.
Hippoph. But Hipposerus, is it needful that by applying your Unguents, you
do evermore work them in with a hot bar of iron?


Hippos. Truly Sir, those that are for Strains, Aches, Mainges, Farcins, and
such like maladies and sorances, the further they do sink into the skin and
flesh, the sooner and better will the cure be performed, and therefore albeit I
do not always put you in mind of the hot bar of iron in every of my receipts,
yet it is needful to be used. But to proceed with another receipt for a sinew
spraine. Sinew sprain.


Take ordinary Soap, and Aqua vitae, of each as much as will suffice, boil
them, and in the boiling, keep it by continual stirring, then take it off, and
(so hot as he can well suffer it) bathe and chafe in the ointment, and he will
be sound again. This was commended unto me for most sovereign, but I never
made trial thereof. Another for a strain taken in travel.

Take so much of the best gray Soap as will serve to anoint the sinew strained,
but before you do anoint him, having caused his leg to be cleansed from dirt,
sand, or gravel, and made dry again, anoint him therewith, and then swathe the
leg with a thumband of Hay, and so let him stand all night, and the next
morning he will be sound again, so that you may securely travel him again,
without fear. This I have often used, and it is very good. Another if it be a
strain newly taken. Strain newly taken.


Take then of the strongest white Wine Vinegar you can get, one pint, and May
or fresh Butter half an ounce, then put to it of Wheat bran as much as will
suffice, which by boiling will bring it to a Poultesse, and apply it so hot as
he can suffer it; do this morning and evening, until the swelling be
assuaged. This is very good. Another, but if it be an old taken strain, then

Take Mallows and Chickweed, of each like much, boil them either in the
grounds of Ale or Beer, or else in old Chamberlye, and apply it to the place.
This is a special good cure. Another for an old strain which is thought to be
incurable, insomuch as the sinew being swelled, is become very hard and knotty.

St aine old.
Take Patch-grease, alias Peer or Peece-grease, as much as will suffice, melt
it upon the fire, and anoint the strain therewith very hot, and chafe and heat
it very well, then rope the place as before is showed you, but before you rope
him up, wrap a rowler of linen upon the place, and do thus daily, and it will
dissolve the hardness, and make him sound again. This is most excellent.
Another for a spraine of the same nature.

Take Nervall, Bolearmoniack, Bores grease, black Soap, of each like much, melt
them together, but first pulverize your Bolearmoniack, and anoint the sorance
herewith, chafing and heating in very well; continue thus to do twice a day
till it be well. This is also very sovereign.


16. S.
Hippoph. What is good for a Horse that has a stinking Breath? Stinking
breath.



Hippos. This comes by means of corrupted and infected lungs, the signs how
to know it is by the smell only, the cure is,

Take Cinnamon, Cloves, Galingall, Comine and Coriander seeds, of each three
ounces, Fenugrick eight ounces, make all these into fine powder, and searce and
mix them well with Wheat flower two pound, and put thereto so much white Wine
as will bring it to a stiff paste, and make a cake thereof and bake it in an
Oven till it be as dry and as hard as biscuit, and when it is cold, beat it to
fine powder, and give him every morning an hour at least before his water, of
this powder four spoonfuls in white Wine or strong Ale, of each one pint. This
will take away all the corrupt and evil savours of his breath, for this powder
heals all his inward parts that be putrified, from whence his bad breath
takes its origin. This is very good and approved, and a better remedy you
shall find none.


17. S.
Hippoph. What is the best way to cure or take off a Splent?


Hippos. This is to be done many ways, but because we are come to treat of
this cure, I hold it not amiss to make you understand what a splent is, by
what means it comes, how to know it, and which way to cure the same, and to
take it clean away. A splent is in the beginning, a very gristle, howbeit if
it be long let alone, it will come to be a hard bone or excresion, and then it
will not be so easily cured. It comes to a Horse by means of too hard
travel and sore riding, whilst he is very young, or by bearing in his youth too
heavy burdens, by both which means the grease being molten, falls down into
his legs, and so breeds this sorance, you shall have it bigger or lesser,
according as the cause of its coming was; it takes its residence for the most
part upon the inside of the shanke about the middle thereof, but sometimes
again higher even adjoining to the knee, which if it be there, then it is more
difficile to cure. It will many times cause the Horse to hault, but howsoever
it will make him often to stumble, and to trip, and many times to fall in his
travel. Sometimes it comes to a horse hereditarily, like as does the spaven,
and other sorances and maladies: as if either the Stalion or Mare be visited
therewith, as I have formerly intimated. The signs how to know it are most
facile, viz. either by the sight or feeling, for that you may both see and
feel its swelling. Now to the cure, for which I shall give you very many
receipts.

First wash the place with warm water, and shave away the hair, then with
your incision knife slit a hole clean through the skin, more then the length
of a Barley corn, and then convey into the said hole so much Arsnicke as the
fourth part of a hasle Nut, which must be bound on with a boulster and rowler
of linen, and made fast with a needle and thread, and so let remain untouched
three whole days and nights, in which time the Arsnicke will eat and corrode
clean away the splent, Splent.
then to kill the fire, anoint the place (having first taken off the rowler and
boulster, and washed clean the sorance) with sweet or fresh Butter molten,
eight or ten days after, and it will be whole. With this I have done very many
cures of this kind. Another:

First, anoint the place with ordinary soft washing Soap, then tie a red
woollen cloth about the leg, just upon the splent, that done, heat a Brick
glowing hot, and lay it upon the cloth against the place where the splent is,
and hold it so close unto it a pretty space, then so soon as you do take that
away, have another as hot in a readiness, and clap that too also, doing as
before, and so a third, or so many as shall be needful, till you do find
that the splent is dissolved and taken away, which commonly will be in applying
two or three hot Bricks. With this I have taken off very many splents. Another:

First wash and shave away the hair, then knock, rub, and prick it with
your blood staff and fleame, and after you have so done, rub and knock it
again, then

Take Vervine and Salt, of each one handful, pound them together to an
Unguent, and apply it to the place, and bind it up with a rowler stitched on
fast with a needle and thread, and so let it remain four and twenty hours,
and then unbinde it, and it is cured without any more to do. This is very
good. Another:

Wash and shave as before, and rub and knock as before also, then with your
incision knife lay open the place a little, then knock and rub again with a
little Salt, then apply unto it this ointment which the French do term a
Retoyre.

Take of oil de Bay four ounces, Cantharides, Euforbium, and Orpin, of each
one ounce, all these being made into fine power, let them be well incorporate
into the said oil, and wrought to an Unguent, lay of this to the splent, and
bind it up with a Bowlster and Rowler, and sew it up fast, and let him stand so
by the space of three hours upon the Trench, so tied up as that he bite not
off the rowler and Medicine ^at three hours end, unrowle the place, and put
unto it again the said Retore or Ointment, being made warm, and let the Horse
stand trameled four days, and at four days end send him to the water a
foot pace, where every day he must be ridden up and down, to the belly: If
you do love the horse, and have a desire to have him perfectly cured, let him
not be ridden more then a foot pace to the water in a month after, for
indangering the growing of it again, for nothing can be more sovereign for
him then rest.. This Retore is a special good thing for this Malady, and I
have often used it, and it did never fail me. I had this in France of a famous
Marishall who cured many horses therewith in my presence. Another.

After you have washed and shaven, knocked, rubbed, and laid it open, as before
is taught you, take a head of Garlic, picked and pilled, three or four drops
of the best white Wine Vinegar, a penny weight of green Coppras, all well
beaten together, apply it to the splent, and then bind and stich it up, and let
it lie on four and twenty hours, then open it, and if the splent be not taken
quite away, make more of the same Medicine, and administer it again, binding
it up as before, and after other four and twenty hours take of the medicine,
and then you shall need do nothing more unto him, but only what you are
prescribed in the precedent cure. This I did never try. Another. First burn
away the hair with a hot tyle, then shave it close with your Rasor, that done
have in a readiness a piece of Leather, the breadth of the Sorance, and bind
it hard upon it, and let it so remain by the space of an hour, then take him
off, and lead to the water, without doing any more unto him, and he is cured.
This cure I never tried. Another.

Take Mustard seed, and beat it, and let it steep a little in fair water, and
after make a Plaster thereof, and lay it to the place, and three days after
take it away, but have a care your horse come not unto it with his teeth, the
hair also being shaven away before you do apply your Plaster, and this will
cure him. This also I never proved. Another. First wash and shave away the
hair, then take of the tender tops of Wormwood, Smalage, Pellitory, and of
Brauca-vrsina, of each like much, and beat them together with old Bores-grease,
so much as will suffice, and apply it to the place: neither did I try this.
Another. First wash and shave as before, and knock, beat, and rub the splent
three or four times, then take marsh mallow roots, boiled with the skin on,
and laid to the place, and it will take away the Splent: This I never made use
of, but a very good Ferrier taught it me, who avowed it to be right good.
Another.

Take Mustard-seede, Mallow roots, and Ox dung, all stamped and boiled
together, and plaister-wise apply it to the place three or four times. This I
never used. Another.

Take Auripigmentum made into fine powder, and lay it upon the Splent, and it
will take it off; but beware that this powder do touch neither vein nor
sinew, for it is a very coroding thing,. Another.

Take two heads of Garlic and pill them, and cut them small, but do neither
stamp or bruise them: then take of Salt the like quantity, and mix them with
your Garlic, and divide them into two equal parts, and so put them into two
fine linen cloutes, and bind them upon the ends of two sticks, of a foot in
length a piece of the fashion of two short wooden foyles but nothing so long,
being not above twelve inches a piece. Take then your blood stick, and rub,
knock, and beat, the Splent therewith very well to soften it, then prick it
through the skin with your blood staff and Fleame; then take of the oil of
Nuts one pint, and put it into a small Pipkin, and set it upon the fire in a
Chafingdish with coals, and make it boiling hot, and when it is ready to boil,
put into it your short sticks or foyles which has the Garlic and Salt
fastened unto them, and first with the one foil, and then with the other (I
mean by turns) apply them hot unto the Splent, and between whiles, rub and
stroke the Splent downwards, with your thumb, whereby to bring forth the
blood, till having with the foyles very well mollefied the said Splent, you may
the more easily crush forth the blood whereof the Splent is engendered, and
formed; it being indeed compact of bad and corrupt blood: and thus is the
Splent cured, only you must remember to anoint the place two or three times
after with sweet or fresh Butter,. This of all the cures I have is the best,
for this Malady, howbeit it may seem intricate; I gate it of a French Rider to
a Noble Knight in England, and I have herewith taken off more then one hundred
Splents, I have used this more then thirty years since. Another.

Take up the contrary Leg, and beat the Splent with your bloud-staffe till it
do begin to be soft, then with your Fleame prick it in sundry places that the
blood may issue forth. Take then the greatest red Onion, and cut off the top,
and pick out the core, and put into it so much of the powder of Verdegrease as
the end of your thumb, then put on the top again, and wrap it up in a wet
brown paper, and so roast it in the hot embers, as you do a Warden, till it be
as soft as pap, then take it out of the Embers, and put away the paper and all
that is burnt from about it, and stamp it, and being yet very hot apply it unto
the Splent, and lay a Bowlster upon it, and then swathe it up with a linen
Rowler, stitching it fast, and so let it remain five or six days, and then
open it, and after anoint the place every day once, with sweet Butter till it
be whole. This is a very good cure. Another.

Take a great Onyon, and pick out the core, and put into it of the powder of
unslaked Lime, and of the powder of Verdigrece, of each as much as will
suffice, but so much as will fill it up, then roast it, as before is showed you,
and stamp it in a mortar well, then slit the skin a little, that the medicine
may come unto it, to eat away the splent, and shave not away the hair, but
lay on the medicine and boulster, and bind it up fast, and so let it remain on
three days, without stirring it, then unbind it and wash it clean, and anoint
it every day with sweet Butter, till it be whole. This is very good. Another.

Take an Elecampane root, and make it clean, and wrap it up in a brown paper,
and roast it in the embers as you did the Onions, and being soft like pap, apply
it to the splent, you having first rubbed, knocked, and pricked it as before is
taught you, the hair also being washed and shaven off, it must be laid on so
hot as he is able to suffer it, and let it lie on two days and two nights,
then take off that, and lay on a second, and after a third, till the splent be
quite consumed, and then anoint the place with fresh butter only every day
till it be whole. This is special good. Another.

Take of the oil of Exeter, and taking every day once or twice a little
thereof upon the brawn of your thumb, rub and anoint the place therewith, and
thus doing, it will take it quite away, but this will ask long time to do.
This I have tried. Thus have I given you very many receipts for this malady,
most of which I know to be good from my own experience: the residue which I
never tried, were cried up unto me by very skillful Ferriers and Marishals, for
very good. The French do call this malady Surots, and Epineles, or Espinuls.


. 18. S.
Hippoph. What help have you for stumbling? Stumbling.



Hippos. This inconvenience comes many ways, sometimes it comes naturally,
and sometimes accidentally, it comes naturally by reason the sinews of the
forelegs are somewhat straight, so that the horse is not able to handle his
legs with that dexterity and agility he should, and the only remedy to cure
him of this defect is, to cut him of the Cords (as we term it) viz. by cuting
a slit upon the very top of his nose, and with your cornet to take up the two
great sinews which you shall there find, and so cut them in sunder, and after
to heal it up again with some healing Salve, and this will do him no harm,
but good, for by this doing, it will give him the use of his legs so
perfectly, as that he will seldom or never after trip any more, and this can
every ordinary Smith do. And my counsel is, that when at any time you shall
either breed or buy a young horse, before, or presently after you shall back
him, let him be thus cut of the cords, and you will find great profit thereby.
The second cause that makes a horse to stumble, is accidental, and this
comes either by means of the putting forth of a splent, or a ridge bone, or
about wind gals, or by some detriment taken in the foot, as by being hot,
foundred, pricked, stubd, graveld, or the like, or by some sinew spraine, or
some hurt or wrench in the shoulder, or by some pinch in the withers; and it
comes also by over-riding, and then negligently set up, which causes him to
go stiff, and then the cure must be done with bathes and unguents, whereby to
stretch, supple, mollify, and to comfort the stiff members, for remedy and
ease whereof, I have given you very many good receipts before prescribed you, as
well of bathes as of unguents. But yet I will give you one more which I have
often made use of, and have done much good therewith for stiff legs, Stiff
leg
viz.

Take of Hogs grease one pound, of fresh Butter, Altheae, and of oil de Bay,
of each half a pound, mix and incorporate all these well together, and
therewith anoint, rub, and chafe the legs and sinews of the horse, every
third day three times a day, and let his shoes be made wide enough, especially
at the heels, and let him be pared thin; the sinews being well suppled, it is
needful he be also cut of the cords, which will prevent his stumbling the
better. Stumbling comes also by means of carrying heavy burdens, and when
the rider is a man of an extraordinary weight, especially if the Horse be
young. This is a very good cure.


. 19. S.
Hippoph. What is to be given to a Horse that cannot Stale or Piss? Stale or
piss.



Hippos. This infirmity comes either of the collicke, or by means of too
much hard riding: the cure is,

Take Grummell seed, Saxafrage-seed, and the roots, of each half an ounce,
make them into fine powder, boil them a walme or two in white Wine one quart,
and give it him warm. This is very good. Another.

Take the tops of green Broom, and burn a good quantity of them, so as you may
have so many of the ashes as will come to be a pretty handful, searce them,
and put them into white Wine a pint, and after it has infused an hour, give
him the Wine, but not the ashes. This is very good. Another.

Take black buds of the Ashen tree, and burn them, then take the ashes
cleansed, and as before is showed you of the Broom ashes, and administer it to
the Horse just as you did the other. X This is a most approved cure.


20. S.
Hippoph. What good cure have you for the Stavers?


Hippos. This disease is secundum vulgus, called the Staggers, Of melancholy.
but the true name thereof is the Stavers, it is a dizzinesse in the head,
nearly allied unto the frenzy when it seazeth the brain. It is engendered
sometimes of corrupt blood, and heavy and bad humors, which do intoxicate and
oppress the brain. It is a disease incident to almost every horse, yea and
that most dangerous if it be not soon espied. Sometimes it comes by feeding
and grazing, at what time the Horse is hard ridden, that he be hot and
sweateth, for by his feeding and holding down his head so low as to graze upon
the ground, the peccant humors do fall down to the head, and there settle,
and in short time seazeth the brain, which brings this mortal disease.
Sometimes it comes by what was occasioned by hard and over-violent riding,
whereby the whole body became distempered, and the blood inflamed and
putrified: and sometimes it comes by eating overmuch, Corrupt blood.
for thereby is the stomach so overcharged with meat, as not to be able to
digest and convert it all as it ought into good blood and nutriment, and
therefore must necessarily breed evil humors, which attaching the head and
brain, it is in conclusion the cause of this disease. The symptoms whereby to
discover it, is, in that his sight will fail him, and he will hardly be able
to see a white Wall, he will slaver at the mouth, and his eyes will be swelled,
and run with much water and other filth, and his gate will be reeling and
stagge^ing, he will often lie down and beat his head against the planks, floor,
and walls, and when he is laid, his body will quiver and shake, and he will
forsake his meat; and these be most certain signs which I have ever observed
to be in horses oppressed and exercised with this infirmity.

But now to come to the cure: I will give you first a cure which a French
Marishal taught me, which by reason it sounded to be so much improbable, I
would never make trial thereof, but such as it is you shall have it. Fasten
unto the end of a stick a linen ragge, and anoint it well with Barbary Soap,
and put it up into his nose gently, and by degrees, and so draw it out again as
treatably. Another.

If you do perceive your horse in his travel to fall sick suddenly of the
Stavers, Stavers.
and that you be in such a place, where for the present you can get no help,
then thrust up the greater end of your riding rod into either nostrill good and
hard, causing him thereby to bleed well, and this will preserve him for the
time, till you come where you may meet with better remedy: then take a piece of
Wheaten leaven, bay Salt, Rue, Aqua vitae, and strong white Wine Vinegar, of
each as much as will suffice, bray all these in a stone mortar very well, then
put this medicine into two thin fine linen clothes or rags, by equal
portions, and then moisten it well in the liquor, and so convey those clouts
into either of his ears one, and then stitch them up close, that he get not
the medicine forth, but that the substance thereof may be diffused into his
head, and let the medicine remain so four and twenty hours, then take forth
the rags, and this will make him a sound and whole horse. But before you apply
this medicine to his ears, run him through the gristle of the nose with a long
iron Bodkin, and the next day after let him blood in the neck and mouth, and
then give him this drink, which will keep off the Yellowes for coming too fast
upon him; then take Turmerick, Mirrha, Ivory, or Harts-horne, of each one
ounce, of Saffaron one penny worth, pound all these by themselves to very fine
powder, then take Seladine a good handful, stamp it and strain it, and put
the juice thereof to the other ingredients, then put unto it of Muskadine or
sweet Sack, one pint, or for want thereof, of strong Ale one quart, adding
unto it of London Treacle one ounce, set these upon the fire, and let it boil
one walme or two, and in the taking off, put unto it of sweet Butter the
quantity of an Egg, and so having well brewed the same, give it him blood
warm, and for three or four days, give him either sweet Mashes, or white
water. This is very good. Another.

First take blood from him in the neck and mouth, and let him chew and swallow
down his own blood, being most wholesome for him; and whilst he is thus
bleeding, thrust an iron Bodkin through the gristle of his nose, skin and all,
then

Take Assafetida, the quantity of a hasle nut, and dissolve it into a sawcer
full of white Wine Vinegar, then take Lint or fine Flax, and dip it into the
liquor, and so stop both your Horse ears therewith, and so stitch them up, and
at the end of four and twenty hours, unstitch them, and he is cured. This is
very good. Another.

First let him blood in both the weeping veins, and in the mouth, then

Take of bitter Almonds one ounce and a half, of the gall of an Ox two drams,
of black Ellebore made into fine powder, a half penny worth, of Graynes,
Castoreum, Vinegar, and of Varnish, of each five drams, boil all these
together, until the Vinegar be all consumed, then strain it, and put it into
his ears, and do as before. This is very good. Another. Bloody him as before,
then with your incision knife, make a slit down his forehead an inch long and
better, and with your cornet loosen the skin round about, but most toward the
foretop, then put into the place the root of a red great Dock, cut thin, and
let it remain there fourteen or fifteen days, and once in two days at
furmost, crush out the mattrative stuff, and then take forth the Dock roots,
and heal up the place with your healing Salve, and give him during these
fourteen days, white water only, and he will do well. This I assure you is
very good. Another Bloody, etc. Then take Aqua-vitae, and Garlic, of each so
much as will suffice, stamp them together, and convey it into his ears doing
vt supra,. This is singular good. Another. Let him bleed well in the neck and
mouth (for the abundance of bad blood is the cause of this disease) then with
your Incision knife slit the forehead of the Horse, and with your Cronet raise
the skin especially upwards, and put in three or four cloves of Garlic
pilled, and put upon it a little lint or fine Flax to keep away the Wind (for
that is dangerous) and then give the Orifice a stitch to keep in the Medicine
the better. Then.

Take the seeds of Cresses, of Poppy, of Smallage, of Parsley, of Dill (I say
the seeds only of these herbs) and take also pepper, and Saffaron, of each two
drammes, make them all into fine powder, and put unto them of Barley water two
quarts, as it comes boiling from the fire, and let it infuse therein three
hours, and then strain it, and give him one quart thereof, if it may be in
the morning fasting bloud-warme, and walk him up and down an hour and
better, and then set him up warm, and give him Hay sprinkled with water, and
the next day give him the other quart fasting, and then do as before, neither
let him drink any cold water in four or five days after, but only white
water, unless sometimes a sweet Mash: And thus doing he will be cured. X. This
is a most excellent Receipt, and I have often used it.


. 21. S.
Hippoph. What remedy have you for a Horse that has Swelled-Legges?


Hippos. This Malady of swelled or Gourdy-Legs comes eft-soones by long
standing in the Stable, when as the upper parts of the plancks at his
fore-feete, are much higher then that at the hinder feet, as I have before
observed in lib. 1. cap. 4. for by that means the Horse not standing even, and
therefore not at his case, the blood setleth in the hinder-Legges, which
causes them to swell. Sometimes they do come by reason the Horse being hard
ridden, was brought into the Stable too hot, and carelessly set up, who taking
cold, the blood, grease, and humors do fall down into the Legs, and so
cause them to swell. Sometimes it comes by over-riding, whereby the Horse
has his blood stirred, and his grease melted, which falls down, and rests
in the hinder-Legges, causing them to swell. Sometimes by being ridden and
gallopping upon hard ways in the Heates, and by that means the blood and
grease falls down into his Legs, congealeth there, whereby they do become
gowty and gourdy. And sometimes gourdy-Legges comes by sickness and surfets
taken, which after remedy had, yet the faeces or dregs thereof still
remaining in the body of the horse, falls down, and causes the legs to
swell, as I have frequently seen. And these be the primme causes and reasons
which we have observed for this Malady. Swelled-Legges.
The signs your eye does demonstrate, and you may without teaching point to it
with your finger, and therefore we may say nothing thereof. Wherefore now we
will to the cure. If the swelling come by ordinary means, then take up the
Thigh-veines, and then you need do no more, for that alone will cure him, and
after open the heele-veines, and lay a Retoyre to the Legs, or else give him
the fire which will siccicate and dry up the bad humors, which must be given
gently, and lightly, neither would I have you give him the fire, unless you
might think or find it in your judgment to be very requisite. But my meaning
is not that this remedy of the fire be applied, but only to an old grief,
otherwise not at all.. This is good. But if besides his swelled-Legges, they
also be stiff, coming to him after much labor and travel; therefore.

Take of Violet-leaves, Primrose-leaves, and Strawberry-leaves, of each a
handful, boil all these in new-Milke till they become very soft, and then
take it from the fire, and put to it of the oil of Nervall, of Petroleum, and
of Pamphilion, of each one ounce, and so stir all together until it becomes
bloud-warme, and therewith chafe, rub, and anoint the Legs, Nerves, Sinews,
and Joints, holding a hot bar of Iron near to the place, to cause the
Unguent to sink the better in: Anoint him thus with this Unguent, five or six
days together, and it will help him.. This I have often used. Another.

Take Traine-oyle, and warm it upon the fire, and therewith bathe his legs
morning and evening, and in short time he will be well.. This is very good;
also to ride your Horse into the water morning and evening up to the belly,
does take away the swelling of his legs. X. This is mervelous good.


22. S.
Hippoph. What is good to assuage the swelling of the Cods in a Horse?


Hippos. This Malady comes many ways, to wit, by violent riding and heats,
when there was not sufficient care had of him, but was neglected in the setting
up; also it comes by washing, walking, and cold taken after immoderate
labor, and sometimes by feeding to intemperately upon Provender, and sometimes
by feeding upon unwholesome meat. The signs to know it, are, his stomach may
be peradventure good to his meat, but yet it will do him little good, for he
will be always meagre and lean, his hair will stare, neither will he cast
his coat at usual times like as other Horses do, he will loose his mettle,
and become very lunt, and his eyes will run with water and matter, and his
stones will swell; in a word, he will be out of joint, that is, out of good
temper throughout every part and member of his Body. Other causes there be of
this Malady whereof I have entreated before in lib. 2. cap. 6.. 9. let. C. to
which place I do refer you; nevertheless I will give you a Receipt or two
which I have often used, and do know them to be right good.

Swelled cods
Take Turmerick and long-Pepper, of each a pennyworth, Anniseeds, and
Fenugrick, of each a half pennyworth, sweet Butter so much as will suffice,
boil all these (being first powdered) in Ale three pints, till one pint be
consumed, and then take it from the fire, and strain it, and dissolve into it
in London Treacle one ounce, and so well brewed, give it your Horse
bloud-warme, let him have this drink sundry times, and let otherwise his
drink be white water, and sometimes a sweet Mash till he be well.. This is
very good. Another.

Take of the best Tar two spoonefuls, life-honey one spoonefull, black-sope
the quantity of a Nutmegge, Diapente one ounce, and of Bay Salt two spoonefuls,
mix all these well together, and convey it into two or three Egges-shels, the
tops being so opened as that you may but get forth the meat, then fill up the
shells with this Medicine, and so put them down his throat in a morning
fasting, and give him presently after it two or three hornefuls of Ale or Beer
to send down the Medicine the better, but the surplusage of what remains of
the Medicine, let it be spread upon the roof of his mouth, do thus every
morning for eight days together, and when he has taken his Medicine, let him
be ridden gently an hour or two, and then set him up warm clothed and
littered, and set him upon the Trench three hours, and let his drink be
white water, and sometimes a sweet Mash, both then and for sometime after..
This is also very good.


23. S.
Hippoph. HOw do you take off a Spongy-Wart?


Hippos. A Spongy-Wart, Spongy-wart.
is that very thing which our Ferriers call an Anberry, which is kind of wen,
which swells sometimes to a great bigness, sometimes again it will be but
small, but then commonly they are many, and do grow into clusters, this comes
by means of peccant humors caused of bad blood, and that horse that is
inclined to Warts, will seldom be ever free of them, for take them off in one
place, and he will put forth more in other parts of his body, but to breed of
either Horse or Mare inclined to them I will diswade you: for most commonly he
will put them forth about the eyes, yea, and oft-times so near to the eye it
self as to endanger the sight thereof; They be easily known by reason they be
so apparently seen, and therefore need no further description. The cure is. It
were good first to purge him, and to take blood from that Master-veine which
you do find does most feed them, as well to divert as to stop the malice of
that bad humor which does occasion the malady. If the Wart or Anberry be far
enough extant from the skin, then tie two of his strongest hayres taken from
his tail, hard about the sorance so fast as you possibly can, and so as that
it may not loosen, and in few days it will fret and eat it clean off, which
done, strew upon it the powder of Verdegrece to kill it at the root, and after
heal it up again with your green salve. But if you cannot come to tie it
either with hair or thread, then either with your incision knife cut it away
close to the skin, or else burn off with an hot iron, and then first kill the
fire with Turpentine and Hogs grease molten together, and after heal it up as
before is prescribed you. This is very good.


23. S.
Hippoph. What is good to be applied to a Horse that is Surbated?


Hippos. Two ways a horse does surbate; the first is when a horse is newly
backed and weighed, upon his first shooing, and when the owner of the horse will
not have patience with hoofes and feet being yet but tender to what they will
be afterward, and so the horse must needs surbate. The second way is, when a
horse has of himself bad feet, and is also either ill shod, or else his
shoes horse will surbate; you shall find it by the handling of his feet,
especially the next day after a long journey, by reason he will not stand still
long upon his feet without hitching them up, and removing them, for that they
will be so sore; as that he will not surbated, by reason that after a journey
he will lie much, standing being painful unto him, and in his lying you shall
see him covet to lie and stretch himself all along upon one side, and if you
feel the coffins of his hoofes, you shall find them to burn very hot, and
his hoofes to be very dry. The cure is very facile.

Take two new laid Eggs, Surbated feet.
and after you have well picked his fore-feet, break them raw into the soles,
and then stop them up with Ox or Cow dung, and he will be well by the next
morning. This is an approved good cure.


24. S.
Hippoph. HOw do you cure a Horse that is stifled?


Hippos. This mischief comes accidentally, to wit, either by a strain in
leaping, or by a slip in travel, or by the stroke of some other horse, and
thus the bone is either out of its place, or else the joint is very much
strained or hurt. The signs to know it is; if the bone be out, you may see it
plainly, for besides his halting, the bone dislocated will so stick out, as
that the horse can do no more then touch the ground with his toe, til it be put
in again, and the way to put it in is thus. First tie down his head to the
Manger, then take a cord and fasten it to the pasterne of the stifled Stifled.
leg, and draw his leg forwards, and so the bone will come right by helping
it with your hand, which being in, your care then must be to keep it in with
your hand, and then tie the other end of the cord to the Rack, so as he may not
put back his leg to dislocate the bone any more for an hour or two after
till it be settled and dressed. Wherefore let his Keeper stand by him all the
time, lest the horse should lie down, or be unruly. This done, take pitch which
you must have molten in a pot, in a readiness, and with a clout upon a stick
anoint the stifling three or four inches broad at the least, and ten inches
long, and presently before the pitch can cool, have a strong piece of new
Canvas cut fit for the purpose, which being made very warm by a fire, clap it
upon the place so neatly, that the bone cannot go forth again. This plaster
must not lie toward the flank and foot longst-wayes, but crosse-wayes upon
the joint, as it were about the thigh, otherwise it cannot hold in the bone.
Having thus done, anoint the plaster on the outside all over with the said
molten pitch, and whilst it is warm, clap flocks of the horses color all over
upon the outside of the Canvas, and let the plaster remain on until it fall
away of it self, and after that you may apply such good Unguents as you may
think to be most expedient for the malady. But if the bone be not out, then
put in a French Rowell a little beneath the stifling-place, and let the Rowell
remain in fifteen days, turning it once every day, and at fifteen days end
take it forth, and heal up the orifice, like as before you have been taught.
This is special good.


. 25. S.
Hippoph. What remedy may be had for a Horse that is troubled with the Stone?


Hippos. This is a very troublesome disease, and it comes of gross and bad
humors, gotten principally by violent exercise, and intemperate riding, and it
comes from the Liver and Spleen, which falling down into the kidneyes and
bladder, settleth there, whereby there grows in the mouth of the conduct
certain inflamed hard knots which stops his urine, whereby he is not able
to piss, but with great difficulty, by reason the sinews and the pores about
the neck of the bladder are benumbed, which takes away the sense and feeling
of the bladder. And sometimes this infirmity comes by reason that in his
travel, the horse is kept so long in agitation, as not to suffer him to stale
and piss, for the water being made hot by exercise, does conglutinate, and
becomes viscous and thick, so as it cannot pass away from him, as nature
requires it should do, whereby there is made too great a retention of the
Urine, by means of the obstructions he has in his kidneyes, which engenders
gravel, sometimes red, and sometimes gray, which falling down into the
conducts, ingendreth phlegmatic and gross humors, which occasioneth
conglutination, and so becomes to be the stone, waxing so hard, and thereby
stopping the current of his water, so as he will not be able to piss or stale.
And you may come easily to know it, by reason that he can neither draw his
yard, nor piss, but with great pain and difficulty in his sheath, and that
many times drop by drop.

The cure is, take Saxafrage, Nettle-roots, Parsley-roots, Stone.
Fennell-roots, Sperage-roots, and of Dodder, of each one handful, bruise all
these things, and boil them on a gentle fire with white Wine, until a third
part be consumed, then put unto it of Salt one handful, of Sallet oil, and of
the Lard of a Goat, of each three ounces, Honey half a pound; when all this is
boiled, strain it, and wring it very hard, and of this give your Horse one
pint every morning fasting, made blood warm, and if in the boiling or by
standing, it happen to become thick, dissolve it again with white Wine, and
after the first boiling it must be but only warmed. And give to him this
drink every morning so long as it will last. This is very good, for I have
often tried it. Another as good as the former.

Take of strong Ale one quart, and put it into a pottle pot, then take so many
of the reddest Radish roots, clean washed and sliced into small pieces as will
fill up the pot, then stop up the pot so close, as that the air cannot get in,
and let it remain four and twenty hours, then strain the roots from the Ale
very hard into some other clean pot, and so give it him in a morning fasting
with a horn, then ride him a while upon it, and so set him up warm covered
and well littered, and in a little while you shall see him piss, give him this
drink sundry mornings together; and during this cure, let him have but only
white water to drink. This is special good.


. 26. S.
Hippoph. What cure have you for a String-hault? String-hault.



Hippos. This is a malady which for the most part the best mettled horses be
many times troubled with; it comes merely of cold, as by taking cold suddenly
after hard riding, especially when by being washed, for the blood and sinews
being by that means stupefied and benumbed, is the cause of the disease by
reason the sense and feeling of the member is taken from him; you may easily
know it by the manner of the unsightly lifting, and sudden snatching up of his
leg much higher then the other, and it commonly comes into the hinder
leg, rather then into the fore-legge. The cure is, first to take up the vein
in the thigh, and after to anoint all the leg and the thigh from the body
down unto the very foot a long time together, one holding a red hot Bar of
iron near to the place, and let him be anointed with this ointment.

Take of the oil of Petroleum, of the oil of Worms, of the oil of Nervall,
of Patch or Piece grease, of the oil of Spike, of each one ounce, of London
Treacle two ounces, and of Hogs grease one pound, melt all these upon the fire,
and then take it off, and keep it with continual stirring til it be thorough
cold, and with this anoint the visited member every day once, and then wispe
him up with a soft thumb band of Hay from the pasterne to the top of the hoof,
and thus do for ten days together, rubbing and chafing in the ointment very
well a long time together, holding (as before I have advised) a hot bar of
iron near to it, to cause this Unguent the better to sink into the sinews,
nerves, and joints. But after you have done anointing him, you must keep him
warm and well littered, and let the thumb band be daily made lesser and
lesser, and shorter and shorter, till you perceive him to handle both legs
alike, and your Horse to be recovered; but you must not ride him that he may
sweat much in a month after, and so soon as warm weather comes, turn him
to grass into some dry pasture where is water, and take him up again about
Bartholomew Tide, or before the cold comes, and whilst he does remain in the
Stable, keep him warm, and so he will be free of his String-hault, and be a
sound horse again. To anoint him also with Acopum is very good. Thus I have
recovered sundry horses of this malady.


27. S.
Hippoph. What is the nature of Suppositories?


Hippos. The nature of Suppositories are to help a horse that cannot well
empty himself; for a Suppository causes him to discharge himself of many
superfluous and evil humors which do disturb, annoy, and distemper his body
with their peccant qualities and conditions, for they breed bad nutriment,
which often times good diet cannot amend, and therefore must be sent away by
purgation, that is to say, by Suppository, or Clister, or Potion; I have spoken
already sufficiently, and therefore I will now entreat of Suppositories only,
which of all other ways is the gentlest, wherewith to purge and cleanse the
guts: for a Suppository is but a preparative to a Clister or Potion, whereby to
loosen the guts, which may be bound and clogged with dry, hot, and hard
excrements, which a Suppository rather then a Clister can loosen; and as I have
already given you receipts for Clisters, so now will I give you for
Suppositories, whereof you may make use according as occasion and necessity
shall require.

Take a great Candle of four in the pound, and cut off three inches fundament,
then with your hand hold his tail to his tuell a good half hour, or else tie
his tail with a strap to his girt or Sursingle, by which time the Suppository
will be dissolved, then let loose his tail, and then presently leap his back
and trot him up and down till he do begin to empty and purge himself, for by
this means it will work the better and more kindly. This is the most gentle
of all Suppositories can be given. This dissolveth all hard, dry, and hot
excrements, and sends them forth, and besides it suppleth the guts. Another,
If you do find your horse to be so exceeding weak, as that you dare not
without peril of his life, administer unto him any Potion or purging medicine,
then give him this Suppository.

Take of common Honey six ounces, of Salt-Niter one ounce and suppositories,
then take one of them and anoint it all over with Sallet oil, and your hand
also, and so put it up into his fundament the length of your hand, then tie his
tail betwixt his legs, as before is showed, and let it remain so half an
hour, by which time the suppository will be dissolved, then ride and order him
as before. This is also very good, especially in case of surfets or inward
sickness. Another.

Take a piece of Castle-Sope, and paring it bring it into the fashion
suppository, and apply it, and order him as before is taught you. This is
special good to purge phlegm, and it is very gentle. Another.

Suppositories and administer one of them, like as you are before showed, and
order him so likewise.. This purges Choler. Another.

Melancholy. Another.

Suppositories as it cools, and administer it, and order him as before is
prescribed you., This purges evil humors, it cools and comfort the body
very much, and causes a good appetite to meat. All these I have often used
and I do know them to be very good. But you must take with you some
instructions fit to be Suppositories* Clysters, Potions, you must do it in a
morning fasting Suppository, Clyster, or Potion, Horse be raked. And fourthly
that he be after kept warm.


. 28. S.
Hippoph. What benefit comes to a Horse by Sweating?


Hippos. Truly Sir very much, for by moderat and judicious giving of Sweates,
as well in his clothes in the Stable, as abroad in his exercise, you may cure
him of many Maladies and prevent, many infirmities which otherwise might accrue
unto him. For Sweating does open the pores, and sends forth those peccant and
malignant humors which do annoy, oppress, and vex him. But as touching this
manner of sweating by you proposed, it has relation unto what I have already
handled in lib. 2. cap. 2. where I entreating of what is to be done to a Horse,
newly taken from grass, I there took occasion to advise sweating, and there I
referred you to this place, and therefore I will here illustrate it. Wherefore
if you be in the way of ensayning your Horse having already purged, bloudied
and cleansed him, and prepared his body fit for sweating Sweating.
(if need shall require) Then if the weather be fair and warm, ride him a
mile upon his trot, and then home again, then presently litter him very well,
and cloth him up so warm as that he may sweat, but not yet so violently as
to stir the humors in his body too much, neither let him sweat above an
hour, and then cool him again by degrees, and that with great care and
moderation; and thus ride and sweat him for three days together; then for
six days together keep him warm, but not to sweat any more, and during the
time of his sweating, and six or eight days after, let him have no cold
drink, but white water, and sometimes a sweet Mash. And thus briefly of
sweating.. This manner of giving sweates I have often used, and with great
commodity to the Horse. But let us pass on to another Chapter.


CHAP. XIX.
. 1. T.
Hippophilus. WHat cure have you for a Horse whose Tongue is hurt? Tongue hurt



Hippos. This Malady comes by accident, as with with a Bit, Halter, or the
like.

Take therefore of Arman half an ounce, and roast it in the embers till it be
red-hot, then take it up and beat it to very fine powder: then take of
life-hony a Sawcer-full, and of white Wine one pint mix and steep these with
the powder together, and so let it boil over the fire, stirring it
continually, then take it off, and let it cool, and so wash his tongue
therewith morning and evening, or as you shall please till it be whole.. This
is very good. Another.

Take the juice of Salendine, and wash the hurt-tongue therewith nine days
together, and it will cure it, albeit it be half cut in sunder, for the juice
of Salendine well conglutinat and sodder the tongue together being cut or
wounded.. This also is very good.


. 2. T.
Hippoph. HOw do you help a Horse that has an Itch in his Tail? Tail an
itch.



Hippos. This comes of rankness of blood, and therefore it is requisite that
first he be let blood in the Tail, and that he bleed well. After.

Take Buck-lye, and with a Ragge or Hurds in the Lie wash the place infected
every day often, or as many times as it shall be dry, and continue thus doing
four or five days, and this will cure it.. This is very good. Another. But if
the hair do fall away with the Mainge, or Itch, then slit the skin from within
two inches of the Tuell to the fourth joint, and with your Cornet take out a
certain bone or gristle, which the French do call Bariuole, then fill up the
clift with Salt made into fine powder, and with a hot iron burn the tail in
sundry places, and wash it with Buck-lye, as before; But your Lie must be made
very strong. This cure I never practiced, but I once saw a Marishall of Paris
dress, and so cured a Horse in this manner of this malady, of whom I had the
cure.


3. T.
Hippoph. HOw do you make your Vnguentum Theriacum?


Hippos. This Vnguentum Theriacum Theriacum Vnguentum.
is most sovereign for any Ach in any of the Joints; it is also special good
for Horses that do fall lame, if the grief be in the Hip, Stifling-place,
legs, shoulders, Pasternes, or any other part of the legs, a
back-sinew-sprain only excepted. And thus I do make it.

Take of Nervell, of Oil of Pamphilion, and of black-Sope, of each two ounces,
and of tryed-hogs-grease half a pound, melt all these upon a gentle fire, and
being molten put into it of ordinary Treacle two pennyworth, then take it from
the fire, then with a Splatter or Spoone, keep it by continual stirring till
it be through cold, then will it be of a dun-colour, keep this in a gally-pot
for your use. And when you shall have occasion to use the same, anoint the
grieved place therewith, rubbing, and chafing it in very well, and let one hold
a bar of hot iron near, as you do anoint the grief. And thus is it made..
This is most excellent to raise the vein from the sinew at what time you are
to take up the vein, I have tried it saepe et saepius.


. 4. T.
Hippoph. HOw do you destroy a Tetter?


Hippos. This Malady or Sorance the French do call Vervolant, the Flying
Worm, which is a Tetter or Ring-worme, Tetter or Ring-worme
and the cure is this.

Take the roots of Elicampane, and the roots of the red-Dock, of each like
much, slice them thin, and put them into urine three quarts with Bay Salt,
two handfuls, let it boil until one quart be consumed, then take it off, and
with a clout fastened to a stick wash the Sorance very hot. Use this four or
five mornings together, and it will kill it.. This is very good.


. 5. T.
Hippoph. What is to be done to a horse that tyreth in travel, and falls
sick?


Hippos. For a Horse to tire upon the way, the causes are many: ensaimed;
thirdly, in that he has been long kept rider, Horse might have some secret
infirmity whereof his master might be ignorant. Wherefore if your Horse may
happen in his travel to tire or faint, have patience with him, and do not
force him beyond what he may be able to perform, either by spurring or beating
him, like as many choleric and passionate people do usually, but get to some
house or Inn so soon as conveniently you may, when first you see him begin to
sink or to faint under you, set him presently up warm clothed, and well
littered, that he take no cold, and let his Keeper or the Ostler of the Inn
rub and chafe him all over with fresh dry straw, but especially let him rub
him against the hair, and let him have no meat till two hours or more after
you have given him this drink.

Take of the best sweet Sack one pint, but if that cannot be had, Tyring in
travel.
then take the same quantity of White or Claret Wine, and put thereto of
Cinnamon, Ginger, Nutmegs, Grains, Cloves, Anniseeds, and Fennell-seds, of each
one ounce, all made into fine powder: then take red Sage, Rosemary-tops, Mints,
Camomill, and wild Thyme, of each like much, so that in all they amount to
half a handful, chop the herbs very small, and then put all these Herbs and
Spices into the Wine, and then boil them a pretty while, then take it from the
fire, and strain it hard, and unbit your horse, and give him this drink blood
warm; this done, Bit him up again, and with a switch stir him up and down as
he stands in his place tied to the Rack, then cool him, and two hours after
his drink, give him first some Hay, and half an hour after that, give him
either a sweet Mash, or white water, and after feed him at your pleasure, but
be you considerate in giving him his Provender by little at once and often, and
howsoever feed him well, and thus ordering him, by morning he will be well
recovered, and able to travel again. This is an excellent drink, and of great
virtue for any Horse that tyreth or falls sick upon the way. It is also very
requisite that with a Syringe you do inject of this drink into his nostrils.
Another. If you do fear that your horse may tire in his journey, for
prevention, carry with you a box of powder of dried Elecampane roots, and let
the powder be also searced, and when you do come unto your Inn, let him not be
walked, but set up warm in the Stable clothed and littered, his legs, body,
head, and neck, be by the Groom or Ostler well rubbed, but chiefly his Poll
betwixt his ears. Then take of strong Ale one quart, or of sweet Sack one
pint, which is much better, and put into it of your Elecampane half an ounce,
brew them well together, and give it him with a horn, then bridle him, and tie
him to the Rack, but not too high, so as he may put down his nose, and let him
stand so an hour, then unbridle him, and give him Hay, and an hour or better
after that, give him either a sweet Mash or white water, and then Provender
sufficient, but with discretion and by degrees, and so also in the morning,
give him both Oats and Bread, whether he will eat best, feeding him by little
and little so long as he will eat, and in the morning when you are ready to
take his back, give him the same drink again, and you shall find him to
travel with spirit and mettle; and if you tie a branch of Penny-royall upon
his Bit, it will greatly comfort him. But yet for all that which has been
said, if he happen to tire, then

Take Arsmart, and rub his bare back where the Saddle rests, and lay also
some of the leaves upon his back under the Saddle, and so clap on the Saddle,
and this will cause him the better to hold out. This is good. Another.

Take the best Spanish Tobacco you can get, shred it small, and dry it, and
make it into fine powder, and mix therewith the powder of Cockle shells of the
like quantity, which must be searced, and put this powder into a glass,
keeping it close stopped, and so keep it to your use. And when you are to use
it, take of this powder, and mix therewith of the oil of Dill, and of the
oil of Cloves such a quantity as will make this powder into a stiff paste,
and so make it into pills, every Pill the bigness of a Walnut, which must be
dried in the shade (these Pills must be made in the Canicular or Dog days
only) then keep them close stopped in some glass or gally pot, that no air
can get into it, and when you have cause to use any of them, give him one of
them at what time you shall perceive your horse to faint or tire, or that you
do perceive him to have taken a cold or surfeit, which may very well be the
cause of his debility, give him (I say) one of these Pills when you do come unto
your Inn. But if he has taken a cold or surfeit, then give him a Pill in the
morning fasting, and let him be well rubbed, clothed warm, and well littered,
and suffer him not to drink any cold water, but either a sweet Mash or white
water, for there is not any thing more noxious then to give a horse in this
case cold water, and let his travel be moderate and with great discretion, and
he will both hold out his journey, and get strength and flesh also in his
travel. And this I have often tried both upon my own horses and others in
whose company I have traveled, as well in England as in parts abroad.


CHAP. XX.
1. V.
Hippoph. HOw do you prescribe a Vomit to a Horse?


Hippos. Of this I have spoken a little already, where I did remit you to this
place. We do usually give vomits unto horses newly taken up from grass, by
reason they are thereby full of very gross and phlegmatic humors, which do
abound in the stomach and head, which if they be not fetched from the horse in
its due time, will be a means to impair greatly the health of the horse,
which must often times be necessarily expulsed by vomit, and you shall have a
receipt of a vomit which I had in France from a special Ferrier there, who (as
I have before touched) has in my presence administered to sundry horses, which
did work very kindly upon them, and I my self have administered the same to
sundry Horses here in England to very great profit unto them. The receipt is
this.

Take two of the greatest roots of Polipodium you can get from the Oak, wash
and scrape them very clean, and tie it to his Snaffle, Vomiting.
Trench, or Bit, then let it be steeped in the oil of Spike a whole night, and
in the morning fasting put on his bridle with the said roots, and ride him with
it in his mouth an hour or better fair and softly, and if he be troubled with
any rhumaticke or phlegmatic humor, or with any cold or other filthy matter
which may any way pester, clogge, or annoy his stomach; this thing will force
him to vent them at his mouth and nose, and it will cause him to cough and
neeze, whereby he will send forth a great abundance of filth and evil slimy
stuff from off his stomach and head, as that in short time he will become
very clean in his body, for this will both refine his blood, and exhaust all
his watery humors, in such sort as by temperate ordering him, and doing as I
have here prescribed you, you may be confident to keep him a long sound,
perfect, and serviceable horse. And this is not to be applied only to a horse
newly taken from grass, but to any other horse that has taken a cold, or to
any ketty, foul, foggy, or pursive horse whatsoever. This may seem strange
here amongst us, but let any man make trial, and he shall find it to be most
admirable.


2. V.
Hippoph. What is to be given to a Horse that has a violent Cough?


Hippos. If this great and very violent Cough Violent Cough.
proceed from a cold (as commonly all Coughs do) then give him first Wheat
Bran prepared, as sundry times before is prescribed you, and take blood from
the neck vein, then with his Oats give him this powder following, viz.

Take of Comen, Fenugrick, Sileris-Montani, alias Sisileos, Nutmegs, Cloves,
Ginger, Linseed, of each two ounces, Quick-Brimstone six ounces, make all
these into fine powder, and of this powder give him every night with his Oats
one spoonful. But because this powder disperseth the corrupt, gross, and
phlegmatic humors which are predominant in the body of the horse, which do
occasion the said violent Cough, so soon as you shall perceive that with this
powder he has purged sufficiently, use it then no longer, but fail not to
continue his white water, but before you give him his water, take a stick
about the bigness of your thumb at least, and well-nigh a foot long, and wrap
a fine ragge about it four or five times steeped before hand in oil de Bay,
and so put it into his mouth, like as you would do a Snaffle, and with straps
made fast to the ends of the stick, fastened then over his Poll, like as Smiths
use to do when they burn horses for the Lampas, and let him drink with it in
his mouth, that done, let him stand with it in his mouth one hour after at the
least, to the end he may lick and suck up the said oil upon the ragge or
cloth, and when you do give him his Oats, mix them with this powder
following, viz.

Take of Fennell-seeds four ounces, of Fenugrick two ounces, of Cardamom one
ounce, beat all together but grossly, otherwise he will blow it away as he
eats his Oats, and keep him warm as before is advised you. This is very
good, for I have often used it.


3. V.
Hippoph. FOr what causes do you take up Veins?


Hippos. As touching taking up of veins, you shall understand that it is a
thing in many cases so much behoofefull, as that many times the most exquisite
Ferrier living, shall not be able to perfect this cure but by that way and
means, for unless such veins be either taken up, or some ways stopped,
which are noxious to the cure, by feeding the malady with its peccant humors,
the Ferrier can never work by true Art. Again, veins well taken up, do
prevent many maladies whereunto many horses are much more propense then others
are. And lastly, the taking up of veins, cures some diseases, which could
otherwise never be cured. For by taking up of the thigh-veines, sends away
Spavens, Splents, Curbs, Kibed-heeles, Swelled-legges, Scratches, Malenders,
Faricion in the legs and the like sorances; besides it eases all pains,
aches, strains, stiffnesse in the limbs, etc. Take up the Shackle-veynes,
Voynes to take up.
and it preventeth the Quitter-bone, Ring-bone, swellings in the lower-joynts,
foundrings, etc. Wherefore forasmuch as ignorant people, whatsoever opinion
they may have of their superabundant skill, yet are they very much to seek in
that they do so much exclaim against taking up of veyns, absurdly affirming
it to be a great means of laming of Horses: but let them not mistake
themselves, for assuredly it is the best and only remedy against these and
many more maladies, and when they shall have made trial, they will not be of
so prejudicate opinions.


CHAP. XXI.
1. W.
Hippoph. WHat good thing have you wherewith to preserve the wind Wind to
preserve.
of a Horse?


Hippos. Sir, for this infirmity I make a Cataplasme which is this.

Take Wheat flower four pound, Elecampane and Gentian, of each one ounce,
Anniseeds, Fenugrick, Common, Brimstone, and Licoris, of each half a pound, let
all these be made into very fine powder and searced, then put unto it of common
English Honey half a pound, and so much white Wine as will make all these
things into a Cataplasme, boil all these sufficiently, till it be so thick
that you may make it into Pills, and give your horse of them three or four at a
time for six or eight mornings together. Use this often, for it will conserve
a horse in health, and keeps him sound of his body, wind, and courage. This
is most excellent. But if you do perceive a taint in his wind, then

Take a close earthen Pot or Pipkin, and put thereinto of the strongest white
Wine Vinegar three pints, and four new laid Eggs unbroken, and four heads of
Garlic clean pilled and bruised, then cover the pot very close, and bury it
in a Mixen or Dunghill twelve hours, then take it up, and take forth the
Eggs, but break them not, then strain the Vinegar and Garlic through a fine
linen cloth, putting unto the liquor of life-honey four ounces, and of brown
Sugar Candy, Anniseedes and Licoris, all made into very fine powder, of each
two ounces, and your horse having fasted all night till morning, give him one
of the steeped Eggs, and then one hornefull of this liquor or drink, and then
another Egg, and after that another hornefull, and so a third Egg, and then
an hornefull, and lastly a fourth Egg, and so the residue of the liquor,
remembering to give him into either nosethrill half a hornefull of his drink,
and it must be administered bloud-warme, then set him upon the Trench, cloth,
stop, and litter him warm, and let him stand so four hours, then unbit him,
and if it be in Winter time give him sweet Wheate-straw, but no Hay, and if it
be in Summer, give him grass, greene-corne, or the leaves of Sallowes, and for
nine days give him either sweet Mashes, or white water, putting therein some
Salet-oyle, and be you assured he will do well again.. This is also very
good. Another.

Take a Hedge-hogge alive, and Bake him in the Oven in an earthen-pot, close
stopped until he do become so dry as that you may make him into powder: give
him also this powder one spoonefull, in a quart of good Ale every other day,
and this will infinitely help and preserve his wind.. This is also special
good.


2. W.
Hippoph. IS there such a disease which is called the Wilde-Fire? Wildfire.



Hippos. Yea Sir, there is, and it is a disease most dangerous and very
difficult to cure, but by a Receipt of a powder which once I obtained of a
skillful Surgeon, which said powder is not fit to be applied to any living
creature, but to a horse only it is so terrible. And thus it is to be made, viz.

Take of living Toades four, the greatest and blackest can be found, living
Moles or Ants three, and of old Shoo-soles six, and heads of Garlic unpilled,
and with their beards or roots remaining upon them forty, then take of the
leanest and saltest Martlemas-beefe three pounds, cut it into thin and swall
pieces and slices, such Martlemas-beefe I mean which has longest hanged in
the smoke: take also of Oats eight pints, and of old woollen-ragges the
couser the better two pounds; take also of Swallowes-dung a good quantity, and
four or five living Swallows, put all these things into an Earthen-pot new,
and well nailed, and let it be big enough to be able to hold all the
Ingredients, and put also all those living-creatures among them alive, and then
make a Cake of Clay, and therewith lute up the Pot so close, as that neither
smoke nor air can either get in or out; having so done carry your Pot into
some Orchard or other Close, or Backside, from Housing or Straw, and there
place it, and so make a great fire both round about it, and upon it, and so
keep the fire unto the Pot, till it be as red-hot as the very fiery-coles
themselves, and let the fire continue so great after the pot is red-hot by the
space of half an hour at the least: then let the fire remain untouched until
it be all consumed to ashes, and so go forth of it self, without either
quenching the same, or taking away any of the fire about it, and so let it
stand till it be through cold, which will hardly be done the same day, so when
the Pot is through cold, take it from the place, and opening it, take forth the
stuff, and put it into some Trough or great Mortar made for the purpose, which
must stand in some out or open place where no wind can come, the Trough or
Mortar being covered with a cloth, that the powder may not fly away, there
pound and stamp these things together into fine powder, and in the stamping,
add thereunto of unslacked-Lime one pound. Let him that stampeth it be close
muffled, and his eyes covered with a glasse-case made for the purpose for fear
of hurting them; and when it is thoroughly powdered, searse the powder through a
course Haire-cloth, and so keep the very finest of the powder for your use, in
some clean glass or gally-pot. This powder kills all Wilde-fires
whatsoever, and all running Sorances and Ulcers, provided it be applied to
fleshy-places, and not to places where veins or sinews be, for that it will
burn them in sunder. X. This I have made sundry times, and often used it, and
to cure and dry up old sores and Ulcers (this powder being discreetly used and
rightly applied) a better thing then this truly I know not, especially if the
cure be either desperate or dangerous.


3. W.
Hippoph. What good Plaster have you to lay upon a Wound, whereby to keep in
the Taint or Salve?


Hippos. Take Pitch, Rosin, Mastick, Turpentine, Hogge-grease, of each so much
as will suffice, melt all these together, and so keep it: and when you would
use it, spread what will serve upon a plaster of Leather, and so cover the
wound Wounds.
therewith.. This salve does infinitely comfort a wound green or old, be the
same Fistula or otherwise. Very good.


. 4. W.
Hippoph. HOw do you take away a Wen, or other excretion arising in the Flesh?


Hippos. A Wenne is a hard rising out of the flesh, which comes sometimes by
bad-humours, but most commonly by some Hurt, Stroke, Bruise, Blow, or with a
stone thrown at that place, it is outwardly fleshie, but toward the root it
is matterative, you need no signs whereby to know it, for it will betray it
self by its swelling, The cure is.

If you cannot come to tie a double thread about it whereby to eat it off, Wen
or excretion.
as I have formerly showed you in the cure of a Spongy-Wart: then with your
Incisionknife cut it a cross into four equal parts or quarters to the very
bottom, but beware you touch not either veins or sinews, then with Mercury
eat away the four quarters, or else burn them off with your hot-iron; then
heal the place with your healing salve.. This is very good.


. 5. W.
Hippoph. What is good to take away Wind-gaules?


Hippos. Wind gauls are terrible Sorances, which do breed in the legs of a
Horse, as well on the outside as on the inside, a little above the Fet-locke
joint, and by their swelling are plainly discovered, and made visible to the
Eye, for they be bladders, wherein lies a Ielly, which being let forth is
thick, and of the color of the yolke of an Egg, whereof some will be bigger,
and some lesser. It comes most commoly to Horses in the Summertime, by
reason they are ridden upon hard ground, and the Horse being over-heat by too
hard riding, his grease falls down into his legs, and setleth there, and
by that means breeds this Malady, we call Wind-gaules, Wind-galles
and they will be so painful unto him, as to cause him many times to halt.
The signs to know them are by the swellings in that place before named, which
be most easy to be seen and felt. The cure is either to stricke with your
Fleame or to open them with your Incision-knife, and to let and crush out all
the congealed stuff which is therein, opening the place no further then
through the skin, and you must be careful of the sinew, which lies close to
that place: then.

Take the white of an Egg, and Oyle-de Bay so much as will suffice,
incorporate them together, and apply it with Hurds Plaister-wise, and in three
or four days thus dressing it, he will be cured.. Thus have I cured many
Horses. Another. After you have let forth the Ielly.

Take Pitch, Rosin, and Masticke, of each like much, boil or but melt them
together, and as it cools, make it up into rowles bigger or lesser at your
pleasure, and being thorough cold, apply it with a hot iron to the orifice, and
so round about the place of the sorance on either side of the leg, and so
soon as you have laid on this charge, and before it can be cold, clap on
Flocks, and this will dry up the Wind-gaules, and heal them. This is special
good. But during not only these two cures, but all other for this malady, you
must not suffer your horse to come into any Well by any means. Another. First
shave away the hair as you must do in all these kind of cures, then open the
sorance as before is taught you, and crush forth the jelly and filth, then

Take Tacha-Mahacha, Masticke, Parrosin, of each to the quantity of a hasle
nut, and of Stone-Pitch to the quantity of a Wall-nut, with a little Brimstone
powdered, melt all these together, and when it is molten, put in so much
Turpentine as a Wall-nut, and so stir them together, and when it is cold,
make a plaster thereof upon leather, and apply it warm to the place upon the
outside only upon the orifice, which ought evermore to be made on the
outside, then put on the plaster it self, and round about it with the same
Salve, and clap Flocks upon it, and so let him rest in the Stable, and by
keeping him from wet till he be whole, and let the plaster remain on until
it shall fall away of it self This is a most excellent cure, and I have often
made good use thereof. Another.

Take the oil of Vinegar, and dip your thumb therein, and rub the sorance
therewith every day till the hair do fall off, which will cause the
Wind-gaules to break, run, and bleed, then heal and cure the Wind-gaules well
and soundly. This is as good as the former. Another. Wash and shave as formerly
is showed you, then give fire to the place, that done, open the Wind-gaules
just in the middle line or stroke, half an inch at least, and so crush forth
the jelly with your thumb, then

Take Pitch, Rosin, and Mastick, of each like much, and therewith charge the
place as before is taught you. This is very good. Another. First wash and
shave, and open the place with your fleame, etc. then take of oil de Bay, and
of Turpentine, of each one spoonful, Verdigrece in fine powder, one penny
worth, the white of an Egg, and of red Lead two ounces in powder, boil all
these to a Salve, and administer it to the place plaister-wise. This is one of
the best cures for Wind-gaules that I do know.


. 6. W.
Hippoph. What is good for a Horse that is wrung or hurt in the Withers?


Hippos. This is a thing that I have handled before, yet I will give you a few
more receipts. Having traveled him, and coming home, or to your Inn, when you
take off the saddle, and that you do find the horse to be wrung in the
withers, and his back or withers thereby to be swelled, immediately clap on
the Saddle again, and lay upon the swollen place some wet litter, and so let
the Saddle abide on again; Wither-wrung.
then cut up a thin Turfe of grass and earth together, that done, put the
Turfe upon the fire, and let it there remain till it becomes red hot, and
being well burned, take it from the fire, and moisten the grassy side very well
with white Wine Vinegar, then take off the wet litter, and lay the Turfe very
hot with the grassy-side next to the place, and so put on the Saddle again,
and let it so remain for all night, and this presently helps any swellings
in the withers, or any other part of the back, as also any swellings by
Spur-gaules or Navell-gaules. This is very good. Another. If the skin be broken
or ulcerated, then

Take sweet Butter, Bay Salt, and powder of Frankincense, of each as much as
will suffice, boil all these upon the fire, and with a clowt fastened to the
end of a stick, even as it comes boiling from the fire, scald it two or
three times, but if it be full of corruption, then make incision on both sides
from beneath, that the matterative stuff may the more easily void away
downwards, and after use none other thing wherewith to heal it up, but only
your usual powder of Lime and Honey, which will heal that, or dry other such
like hurts. This is most excellent, I have often experimented the same.
Another. But if it be a wrinckle either in the shoulder, or in any other joint
or member, then

Take of white Wine one pint, half a porringer full of Wheat flower, of
common Honey one pint, of Syzes three ounces, boil all these together to an
Unguent, and anoint the places grieved therewith. And this also is very
sovereign for Cones, Cracks, and Chops in the heels of the horse. This I
often using have found it to be very good. Another.

Take three great Onyons, pick forth the cores, making a concavity or
hollownesse in them, then fill them up with the powder of Frankincense, then
wrap them up in three or four handfuls of Hurds or Tow, then wet the Hurds, and
so cover and heal them up in the hot embers, and lay upon the top of the
embers a good Shovell-full of hot burning coals, and so let it remain until
the Onions be thoroughly roasted, then take them forth, and separate the Hurds
and burned part from the other, and the soft and pappy part you shall apply to
the sorance very hot, and let it remain three days before it be removed, and
do thus so often as need shall require, until it be through whole; but unless
the hurt or bruise be very great, it will be cured at first dressing. This is
very good. Another. But if the place grieved be broken,

Take then of the oil of Worms, of Turpentine, and common Honey, of each two
ounces, incorporate all these together very well till you have brought them to
be one body, and either by Taint or Plaster dress the sorance therewith, and
it will heal it up sound. And this also is very good. Another. If your Horse
has taken a wre^ch in the shoulder, or in the hippe, knee, or hoof; then
first swim him, then after for thirteen or fourteen days together, annoint the
member grieved all over, and a good way about with this unguent.

Take of the oil de Bay, of Nervall, of Dialthea, of tried Hogs grease, of
each two ounces, melt all these together, and stir them well till they be
well incorporated, and herewith anoint him against the hair, with a hot bar of
iron to be holden before you as you anoint him. and after let him be rowelled
with a French Rowell, and let a Patten-shooe be put upon the contrary foot, and
let him be kept in the house, and the Rowell turned daily, and the corruption
put forth, and then let him be either gently ridden or walked every day half
an hour, and let the Rowell remain in the Horse fourteen days at the least,
then take it out, and heal up the orifice with your green Ointment, and so
soon as he is whole, with your cauterizing-iron draw cross lines eight or nine
inches long over against the joint that was pained, so as the rowelled place
may be in the middle, but yet burn him no deeper then that the skin may look
yellow, and then charge all that place with this charge.

Take Pitch one pound, Rosin half a pound, and Tar half a pint, melt these
together, and whilst it is warm, charge the place therewith, and clap Flocks
upon the charge, and then if the season of the year will serve, let him be
turned to grass, and so let him run three months at the least. This is very
good.


7. W.
Hippoph. WHat is good to cure worms Worms.
of what sort soever in a Horse?


Hippos. Of this malady I have entreated sufficiently before in the of Bots,
where I have given you many good receipts. Nevertheless I will give you one or
two more for worms only, and so leave you to practice.

Take the entrails of a great Chick, and with the powder of Brimstone and
Bay Salt rolled in the said entrails, give it him down his throat, and cause
him to swallow them so warm as they come out of the belly of the Chicken, but
cast away the Gizard, give him this three mornings together, and every time
ride or walk him till he dungeth, and keep him warm, and give him white water,
and at three days end, give him Rice boiled in water, and after dried in the
Sun, and give him also to eat the leaves of Sallowes, and it will cause him to
void the Worms with his ordure, but if you shall rake him first, it will be the
better. This is very good. Another.

Take the tender tops of Broom and Saven, of each half a handful, chop them
very small, and work them into Pills with sweet Butter, and having kept your
Horse fasting over night, give him them in the morning, to wit, three of those
Pills at a time, and then set him upon the Trench for two or three hours after,
and then give him meat, but no drink at all till night by any means, and then
let him have warm, but no white water. This I have often experienced, and do
know it to be a most excellent receipt.


CHAP. XXII.
1. Y.
Hippoph. WHat is your best cure for the Yellowes?


Hippos. This disease of the Yellowes in a Horse is the very same that
Physicians do call the Iaundise in a man; and as there be two sorts of Iaundise
in a man, so also are there the like in a Horse, viz. the Yellow and the Black,
the yellow being moist, the black dry; the yellow proceeding from the
overflowing of the gall, occasioned of choler, and the black coming from the
over-working of the Spleen, by means of overmuch malancholy, both bad
infirmities, but the black worst, more dangerous and most mortal, the yellow
is more easily discovered by reason of its color, for it colors the whites
of the eyes, the tongue, the lips, and the inward parts of the nostrils, which
the black Iaundise does not apparently, albeit by due and strict observation,
you may come to know when your Horse has a black Iaundise, for then you shall
perceive the whites of his eyes, lips, tongue, and mouth to be of a thick and
duskish color, and not so clear and sanguine as before when he was not
visited with any such infirmity, both which are so mortal (especially the
latter) as that if very great care be not taken whereby to pry into its
symptoms, the Horse may fall down upon a sudden (as I have often seen and
known) even as he travelleth, and dye, or else he appearing to be sound and
healthy, and to eat his meat like as he was accustomed over night when you
left him, coming again unto him in the morning, you may find him dead,
stiff, and cold. And the origin of this malady comes principally of
unkindely and unnatural heats given him by most violent and intemperate
riding, whereby the Liver becomes inflamed; the Liver, the Blood, Gall, and
the Spleen, which causes choler to have sovereignty and dominion over the
other humors, and so engenders this perilous disease, which seldom brings
a lingering or languishing death, but that which ends him suddenly, and
therefore it is most requisite that the greater eye and care be had unto it.
The best symptoms how to know it is thus. Your Horse will be dry in his body,
mouth, and nostrils, being mavelous hot through the abundance of choler that
reigns in him, and he will be very gaunt in his belly toward the flanks, he
will be also very faint, and not only sweat upon every the least motion, but
also as he stands in the Stable: his eyes, the insides of his lips, mouth,
and tongue, will be yellow as Saffron, and he will seldom lie down, and being
laid, he will sometimes groan. The cure. First let him blood in the neck and
mouth, and let him bleed well, then give him this drink.

Take of Turmerick and long Pepper, of each one penniworth, Yellowes.
Anniseeds and Licoris in fine powder and searced, of each half a spoonful,
Selendine, the leaves and roots one handful chop, stamp, and strain the
Selendine, and so put all these together into strong Ale one quart, warm this
upon the fire, and in the warming add unto it of London Treacle one ounce, and
of sweet Butter the quantity of an Egg, and give it him blood warm, and after
keep him warm, and give him white water, and he will do well. This is very
good. Another. First bloody him as before, and then

Take Turmerick, Myrrah, Ivory or Hartshorn, of each half an ounce, Saffron
one penny worth, make all these into fine powder, and searce them, and put unto
it of the juice of Selendine a good quantity, put all these into Muskadine one
pint, Sack or Ale, and let it boil upon the fire a walm or two, then put unto
it of sweet Butter as much as will suffice, and of London Treacle one ounce,
and so give it him blood warm, but let him first be raked. This is very good.
Another. First bloody him as before, then

Take of white wine one quart, of Saffron two drams, and of Turmerick half an
ounce, and a good quantity of the juice of Selendine; give him this blood warm,
and keep him warm, and give him white water. This is very good. Another. First
let him blood as you are prescribed before. Then

Take of sweet Wine one pint, of strong Ale and Beer one quart, and put
unto it of the juice of Salendine six spoonefuls, and of the juice of Rue two
spoonefuls, and let all these boil upon the fire a little, then strain into
it of English Saffaron half an ounce, and put into it of life honey three
ounces, and so give it him bloud-warme, then leap his back, and so ride or
else walk him a foot-pace a quarter of an hour, then set him up warm,
letting him to fast three hours after, and after give him meat, and a sweet
Mash, or white-water.. This is very good. Another. Bloody him as before. Then

Take of the best life honey half a pound, of Saffaron made into fine powder,
and of the powder of Fenugrick of each so much as will suffice, incorporate
these with your Honey to a stiff paste, and so make thereof three Pills, and
dipping them into Salet-oyle give them to your Horse, which after he has
taken, ride or walk him gently an hour, then set him up warm, and order him
as before.. This is a particular good Pill. Another. First let him blood as
before; Then

Take of White Wind one quart or Ale to the same quantity, and put therein of
Saffaron one ounce, and Turmerick one ounce, both made into fine powder, with
the juice of Salendine so much as will suffice, and give him this bloud-warme,
and order him as before.. This is also very good.


. 2. Y.
Hippoph. What cure have you for the mattering of the Yard?


Hippos. This disease comes commonly in Covering time by overmuch spending
upon Mares, for that the heat of the Mares, and the Horse his own heat and
Coity, does burn the Horse giving him the running of the reins, as we may
truly term it: And the signs to know it, is, you shall perceive the end of
the Yard to be swelled, and when he pisseth you may observe him to do it with
much pain, and you may also see at other times the Yard to drop with yellow
matter. The cure. Give him first a purge prescribed you in lib. 2. cap. 16..
14. let P. and it is the first purgation which will ease his pain in pissing;
then the next day,

Take Roch-Allome one ounce, and White Wind one pint, boil them till the
Allome be dissolved, then bloud-warme iniect this Lotion with a Syringe,
putting it up into his Yard, so far as may be, four or five times a day till
he be well.. This is a perfect cure, nor shall you need any other.


FINIS.
Imprimatur,

THOMAS VVYKES.

A Table of the Contents.
The First Book. The Contents of all the Chapters contained in the first Book.
THE Introduction, Chap. 1. page 1 Of the best manner of breeding, Chap. 2.
page 4 How to make and order your Stable, Chap. 3. page 10 Of the marks,
colors, and shapes of Horses, Chap. 4. page 15 Of the office of the Groom and
Rider, Chap. 5. page 25
The Second Book. The Contents of all the Chapters contained in the second
Book.
OF what points consists the office of the Ferrier, handled Dialogue-wise: as
also a formal examine of the Ferrier, chap. 1. p. 34 Of the causes of
sickness in general, and the causes of health and long life, chap. 2. page 46
Of such things which are of necessity to be known by every expert Ferrier
before he do adventure to administer, chap. 3. page 55 The manner of handling
the particular cures, chap. 4. page 64 The Index. Chap. 4. A. ACopum and its
virtues page 66 Arman 1. page 67 Arman 2. page 68 Ach in the head page 69
Aegyptiacum 1. page 71 Aegyptiacum 2. ibid. Accloy page 72 All diseases a
Cataplasme 1 ibid. All diseases a Cataplasme 2. page 73 All diseases 3. ibid.
S. Anthonies fire page 74 Anticor page 75 Attaint upper page 76 Attaint upper
or back sinew sprain page 77 Attaint Nether page 79 Avives ibid. Arraistes or
Rat-tayles page 81 Ayering page 139
Chap. 5. B. BAck swelled page 82 Barbs page 83 Bath for Humors to dry them up
ibid. Bath for stiff legs page 84 Bath 1 ibid. Bath 2 ibid. Bath 3 page 85
Bath 4 ibid. Belly gaunt page 86 Belly pain ibid. Bit wherewith the tongue is
hurt page 87 Bleeding to stanch page 87 Blindness page 88 Biting of a mad Dog
page 89 Blood Spaven page 90 Bath for a bloud-Spaven page 91 Bone-Spaven ibid.
Bloud-shotten eyes page 93 Bloud-shotten eyes: a charge page 94 Bloud-running
itch page 95 Blowing and Pursivenesse ibid. Bots, etc. page 97 Bots 1. ibid.
Bots page 99 Brittle hoof page 100 Bruised heels and feet page 101 Burning
with shot page 102 Bunches, knots, etc. page 103 Bran prepared page 185 Black
drink for the Glanders page 234
Chap. 6. C. CAst in a Halter page 105 Canker page 106 Casting the hoof page
107 Cordial powder page 67 Cautery actual page 108 Cautery potentiall page
110 Corasive 1 ibid. Caustic ibid. Charge for surbating page 111 Cleanse a
Horse ibid. Clifts and cracks in the heels page 112 Clisters page 113 Clister
1. page 116 Clister laxative 2. page 117 Clister restringent 3. ibid. Clister
for a fat Horse 4. ibid. Clister for melancholy 5 ibid. Clister in case of
desperate sickness 6. page 118 Clister for the Pestilence 7. ibid. Clister
lenitive 8. ibid. Clister for the Collicke 9. ibid. Cloyed page 119 Cods
swelled ibid. Cods swelled a charge page 120 Collicke ibid. Collicke and stone
page 121 Colt-Evill page 122 Cold ibid. Consumption page 135 Consumption of the
flesh page 136 Convulsion page 137 Costivenesse or belly-bound page 139
Crown-scab page 140 Curb page 141 Cold or running at the nose page 159 Coperas
water page 219 Charge page 306 Corrupt blood page 330
Chap. 7. D. DAngerous sickness how it comes page 142 Dangerous sickness
how to know page 143 Dangerous sickness how to prevent page 145 Dangerous
sickness how to cure ib. Diapente page 146 Diatesseron page 147 Desperate and
dangerous sickness ibid. Dissolve tumors page 149 Desperate sickness page 150
Drooping page 152 Dropsy page 153 Dead flesh page 155 Deep wounds ibid.
Desperate strain page 156 Dissolve grease ibid. Disease of the Liver page 158
Draw his yard page 160 Draw a thorn ibid. Drink to preserve lungs page 161
Diseases to prevent page 163 Drink comfortable ibid. Dislocated joint page 164
Disease of tranchaisons or the chollicke ibid. Dry up sores page 165
Chap. 8. E. Eat a taynt page 166 Eat a feather page 167 Eat a Spider ibid.
Eye a stroke page 168 Eye Filme, Pin and Web Dragons ibid. Eye a canker. page
170 Eye a charge page 171 Electuarium Theriacum page 67 Excresion to cure page
302 Eye a Wart page 173 Eye broken page 174 Excretion page 175 Ears
impostumated page 176
Chap. 9. F. FArcin page 178 Farcin wet page 184 Flanks ibid. Fat Horse page
185 Fat a lean horse ibid. Falling of the fundament page 186 Fever defined
page 187 Fever how to know page 189 Fever ordinary ibid. Fever Hectique page
191 Fever pestilent page 192 Flying worm or tetter page 194 Feet to mollify
page 195 Fig in the foot ibid. Fistula page 196 Fistula water page 197
Fetlock hurt page 199 Froathy or weeping hoof ibid. Foundring in the feet page
200 Foundred long page 201 Foundred in the feet and body ibid. False quarter
page 206 Flanks or maldeflanks page 209 Flux page 210 Foul and old sores to
mundifie page 211 Forsaking meat page 212 Frush running page 213 Feltrick page
154 Fret page 214
Chap. 10. G. GAlled back page 217 Galled with the shackle ibid. Gravelling
page 218 Green oynt-ment page 219 Grease molten page 220 Glanders page 222
Glanders a purging drink page 230
Chap. 11. H. Hair from the main and tail falling away page 235 Hair to
grow page 236 Headache ibid. Heels scabbed ibid. Heels kibed page 237 Heel
Mellet ibid. Hide-bound page 238 Honey-charge page 241 Hoof to grow ibid.
Hoof weeping page 243 Hoof loose ibid. Hoof hurt ibid. Hoof bound page 244
Hoof bound a charge ibid. Hoof brittle page 245 Hoof straight ibid. Hrofe
loose ibid. Hoof trodden upon or hurt ibid. Hoof brittle to make tough ibid.
Hoof to grow page 246 Halter cast ibid. Hough swelled ibid. Humors to dry up
page 247 Hurt shoulder ib d. Hurts old to cure ibid. Honey page 69 Horse-bread
page 148 Haw page 169
Chap. 12. I. IMperfections in the feet page 248 Impostumation to ripen. ibid.
Inward sickness page 249 Inward sickness a suppository ibid. Inflammations
page 250 Joint grieved page 251 Increase the hoof ibid
Chap. 12. L. LAmpas page 252 Lax to stop ibid. Lean horse to make fat page
253 Legs swelled page 254 Legs swelled page 255 Leprosy or elephantick malady
ibid. Lice page 256 Lime and Honey page 257 Loe-worme ib. Lungs a disease page
259 Lint wherewith to heal ulcers or old sores page 165 Lunatic eyes page 173
Lamenesse to find out, three ways page 311
Chap. 13. M. MAlender page 260 Mainge page 262 Mouth sore page 267 Mellet page
268 Mollify humors ib. Morfounded ib. Melancholy page 330
Chap. 14. N. NOse running page 270 Navell galled ib. Nightmare page 271
Chap. 15. O. OLd sores page 272 Overreach in the heel ib. Ointment page 304
Ointment ib. Ointment page 305
Chap. 16. P. PAstern joint strained page 275 Pill for the Glanders ib.
Pestilence page 277 Preparative page 278 Pastons page 279 Pursivenesse a pill
page 280 Pissing of blood page 281 Poll-evill page 283 Powder for old sores
page 284 Pursivenesse or shortness of breath, page 286 Pricked page 290 Perfume
1 page 292 Perfume 2 ib. Perfume 3 ib. Purgation 1 page 294 Purgation 2 ib.
Purgation 3 page 295 Purgation 4 ib. Purgation 5 ib. Purgation 6 page 296
Putrefactive page 110 Purgation defined page 113 Pin and Web page 169 Pearl or
filme ib. Perfume page 234 Powder page 304
Chap. 17. Q. QVick seab page 297 Quitter-bone page 298
Chap. 18. R. REd water page 300 Restringent charge ib. Ring bone page 301
Excretion to cure page 302 Rot page 303 Rules to know where a Horse halteth
either before or behind page 310
Chap. 18. S. SAlve page 304 Salve page 305 Shoulder wrench page 306 Shoulders
dislocated ibid. Shoulders strained page 307 Shoulder rowelled page 308
Shoulder the skin broken ibid. Shoulder splat page 309 Shoulder spl^t page 313
Shoulder pight ibid. Scratches page 315 Sit fast page 317 Scabs and Scratches
page 318 Stale or dung page 319 Sick in travel ibid. Sudden sickness page
320 Selender ibid. Sick or surfetted page 321 Sinew sprung ib. Sinew grieved
page 322 Sinew cut ib. Sinew sprain ib. Sinew sprain page 323 Strain newly
taken ib. Strain old page 324 Stinking breath ib. Splent. page 315 Stumbling
page 328 Stiff legs page 329 Stale or piss ib. Stavers page 330 Swelled
l^gs page 333 Swelled cods page 334 Spongy wart ib. Surbated feet page 335
Stifled page 336 Stone page 337 String hault page 338 Suppository 1 page 339
Suppository 2 ib. Suppository 3 ib. Suppository 4 page 340 Suppository 5 ib.
Suppository 6 ib. Sweating ib. Spirit of Tin page 211
Chap. 19. T. TOngue-hurt page 341 Tail an itch ib. Theraicum unguentum page
342 Tetter or Ring worm ib. Tyring in travel page 343 Trunchions page 97 Two
things to be observed in every cure page 64 Three sorts of vermin which do
engender in the body of the Horse page 97
Chap. 20. V. VOmiting page 345 Violent cough page 346 Vinegar page 69 Ver
volant page 193 Veins to take up page 347
Chap. 21. W. VVInde to preserve page 347 Wildfire page 348 Wounds page 349
Wen or excretion page 350 Wind galls page 350 Wither-wrung page 352 Worms
page 354 White water page 68 Water page 305 When in the knee page 311 When in
the shanke ib. When in the pastern ib.
Chap. 22. Y. YEllowes page 355 Yard mattering page 356


FINIS.

