A REFVTATION of the Apology for ACTORS.

Divided into three brief Treatises.

Wherein is confuted and opposed all the chief Grounds and Arguments alleged
in defense of Plays: And withal in each-Treatise is deciphered Actors, 1.
Heathenish and Diabolical institution. 2. Their ancient and modern
indignity. 3. The wonderful abuse of their impious quality.


By I. G.

Cicero Officiorum lib. 1. Non ita a natura generati sumus, vt ad ludum e^
Iocum facti esse videamur; sed ad seueritatem potius,
Et ad quoedam studia grauiora atque maiora.
Imprinted at London by W. White, and are to be sold by Thomas Langley in Iuie
lane. 1615.

A Refutation of the Apology for Actors
And first, touching their Heathenish and Diabolical institution.
Impiety is then grown to its full height, when it once presumes to boast of
it self. Plays have ever been condemned by godly Christians; but now the
impiety of Players is grown to such excess, that they take upon them to
defend their quality: And that which Wise and Good men have ever repudiated
for evil, they would have us receive and imprace for commodious good.
Whereupon one of them (amongst the whole crew) has published An Apology for
Actors: Which no sooner it had presented it self unto my view, but in derision
thereof I bought it, wondering in my mind, what M. Actor could say for
himself, to maintain his idle Profession. But when I had perused it, and read
it over, I considered, that thereby too too many credilous people might be
seduced, and therefore a matter (in some sort) worth the answering; and yet I
perceived such slender assertions to be alleged in defense thereof, that I
deemed it not worth the answering by any grave Senior, or learned Clarke, but
rather by some single witted, and illiterat Pupil, that the victory being
gotten, might be the more glorious; and the overthrow given, the more shameful
and infamous. Wherefore I, although ranged amongst the company of such
unlearned Nouices, and sitting lag-tayle in the lowest Form of their Shoole,
have notwithstanding undertaken to oppose and refute this Apology, because it
does not require a better Ingene then mine own, to batter all the Bulwarks and
Fortresses therein raised to oppugn the truth, ever hitherto delivered and
preached against these Stagerites, and profane spectacles presented in the
Theaters, to the as profane sights of all that go to be spectators of them.
Nor in thus doing, have I entreated any to be a Patron and Protector of these
unripe Fruits of my weak understanding, against any the callumniations of
those that undoubtedly I expect to resist my good intention (being such only
as wallow in worldly pleasure; or have their minds strictly bound thereto)
because I know all good men, rightly religiously and sinceerely disposed, and
all such as with Reason shall weigh in the balance of their sound judgment,
what I have written in this Book will with emulation strive, and if need be,
contend who shall first patronize my work.

And although M. Actor with all his accomplices and abettors, may condemn me
for an unlearned Punie; and withal say, that I have but Shot my Fools Bolt at
him: Yet I am persuaded I shall not shoot in vain, but at leastwise wound,
though I do not kill: I mean, give his Apology such a Blurre, that it shall
not be able after never so much washing, to show a clean face again. But in
case he shall vpbraide me for my barbarism and unpolished Phrases void of all
elegancie and commendable style, which throughout my whole Treatise I shall
perforce use, being I was never schooled in the arts of Humanity, nor
practiced in Rhethoricke and Eloquence, it skills not; For I trust not on him,
but depend on others for the equity of the cause I undertake, knowing, that
Tructh the more naked it appears, the more comely it presents it self to all
men, except her Adversaries.

And now to use no longer, or more tedious prolocutions, I will set down the
Method, I meaue to follow in my succeding Discourse: Which is, First to refute
and oppose such assertions wherewith M. Actor seems to defend himself: And
afterward, to advance the truth I take in hand; yea'uen in the same tripartit
division, as himself has used in his Apology. And so (ad remaggrediar) to
the purpose.

A Iehoue principium.

GOD, who in the beginning, Created all things for his own Glory; and next
himself, for the service of Mankind, among other things has Created many for
the Recreation of man's wearied spiritcs, that after some refection, he might
the more dilengently and earnestly apply himself to the honest labors of his
Calling. This benign grace of the Almighty, men not content thankefully to
accept of, nor moderatly to use, they have unthankfully perverted and abused;
turning the grace of God into wantonness: and in continuance of time by little
and little, through Satan's means, have devised many unlawful artificial
Pleasures, whereby they might pass away (as their name Pastimes signify) the
most precious time of their life (which The Apostle exhorts Warily to redeem,)
idly and fruitless, without any profit to the Church, or Commonwealth
wherein they live, or to their own souls, which they ought heedfully to
regard: But to the corruption of their Manners, drowning all Virtues in them,
and choking up of the good Seed of the Word, which should dwell plentifully in
their hearts, and in stead thereof, sowing the Tares reaped from ungodly and
obscaene Stage Plays, the most impious and pernicious of all other unlawful
artificial Pleasures. To the beholding of which, very many (more is the
pitrie) quasi vi and impetu coguntur, are by the prauitie of their nature,
(addicted wholly to Pleasures) carried as it were with force and violence. Yea
many of them in their hearts willing to consume many Patrimonies, yearly
spending many pounds on these vain representations. By which means, the
actors of them find such sweet gains to maintain their idle life, that they
give their whole industry to various and mimicall inventions, that they might
become Men-pleasors, and those most of the prophanest condition; and so
consequently displeasers of GOD. For noue can serve these two Masters
together, GOD and Belial. And now at last, by giving two hours vain Babbling
for as many hours gathering of Money, some of them become rich in the
Commonwealth; and withal, proud to publish unsavory Apologies, for their
impious Seminaries of evil Manners, (their Plays I mean, which breed such
evil effects, as hereafter every wheare shall be showed) and withal
exhibiting them to the patronage of most Honorable peers, thereby doubly to
deceive them whom they have already seduced; That if such a one protect it, Oh
it is a worthy subject, and to be embraced (of them that hate goodness) and who
then dare contradict it? Yes assuredly many thousands, especially of grave and
reverend Preachers of the Word, that hate their Plays for as bad Poison to the
Mind, as the biting of a Viper to the Flesh. Whom M. Actor in the second line
of his Apology most rudely calls Seditious sectists, having neither regard to
the unity which by application of the divine Word they procure twixt man and
man, and by their administrie betwixt God and man and his own Conscience,
contrary to all sedition in the world: Whom also afterward, he gives forth to
be too Sower for Food, and too rank for Fodder. Happily because he, nor any
of his fellows can digest their good instructions and sacred doctrines either
as Food for men, or as Fodder for such Beasts. But this first fault of his,
may be pardoned, quia consuetudo est altera natura because that custom of
Railing and Backbiting upon the Stage with his tongue, has brought him to use
the same scurrility with his Pen.

Afterward follows, that the Princes of this Land amongst other things have
tolerated certain Theaters. Which is not to be denied: but the Reason why, is
to be enquired. For in like cafe is Usury, Dicing, Why Plays are tolerated.
Sortilegie, etc. tolerated; yet none approved and allowed. Any why then are
Theaters tolerated? It is answered by Christ himself upon the like occasion,
in the Gospel of S. Matthew; where being demanded of the Pharisees, Why Moses
did command a man to give a Bill of Diuorcement, Matthew, 19.7.8.
and put away his Wife? He answered: Moses because of the hardness of your
hearts, suffered you to put away your Wives. And so Princes in these times,
suffer (not allow) such enormities, for the hardness of their subjects
hearts; and for no other causes.

Next ensues his feigned dream of the Muse Melpomine; where by tooth and nay
le he labors to show what good the Muse usually effects. Which because it
touches the quality of Plays, I refer to convince, till I enter upon
battering the Third part of his Treatise, because I will not weary the Reader
with too often repetitions, which I shall sometimes be constrained unto. Yet
somethings therein hereafter not to be touched, may not be past over in
silence. For after the Muse had recounted all her worth, and pristine honor
wherewith she had been graced: Then peruersely does she exclaim.

But now is the Iron age, and Blackmouth'd Curres
Bark at the virtues of the former world.
Why this is the Iron age.
This age, is the Iron age indeed: and why? Because the Magistrates throughout
almost every City in the Land, by their authority (represented in the Iron
Sword borne before them Parcere subiectis, and debellare superbos) do
prohibit them from entering their precincts to exercise their crafts. Whom if
they admit, it is unwillingly through the great suit made unto them. Whereby the
hardness of the peoples hearts the more appears, in that they strive freely
to give access for sin to enter in and take possession of them. Besides, the
honorable City of London has spued them out from within her Walls, and
rejected them to take up their standing in the Remotest places of the Suburbs,
or no where else within her Jurisdiction.

Next, has the Muse, or rather M. Actor, again incurred his former
lycentiousnesse, impiously belching forth blasphemous words, calling reverend
Preachers, Blackmouth'd Curres: Because, They tax the Vices of these present
times,
Seek to reclaim men's minds i'gon astray,
Mis-spending precious time, to see a Play.
Next. Some, whom for their baseness hist and scornd,
The Stage as loathsome has long since spued out.


And how comes this to pass? But even thus; Sin leaves them: Why? because
they leave Sin. And so Plays leave them, because they leave Plays. For
further answer to which, I will recite this example. That the wise Cato once
went into the Theater at Rome, and presently departed forth again: Cato.
and being demanded why he did so; answered. He went into the Theater only
that he might be seen and known to go out of it. Now let all men judge by
this answer, whether the Theater rejected him, or he the Theater.

Next, Seneca.
does M. Actor for his Muse cry out, Oh Seneca! whom none sooner would oppose
himself against Christian piety. And yet I much doubt of it: For in his
Epistles he wrote; It is very dangerous to be present at such shows. And in
his first Epistle of the third Book, he declares the dissolutnesse, disorders,
and inconvenience that have ensued thereby.

Next does M. Actor derive his original of acting Plays from the first
Olympiad. When in the presence of Hercules there was personated the worthy
exploits of his Father Jupiter: Which wrought such impression in his mind,
that in emulation of his fathers valor, he performed his twelve Lobours. Him
Theseus followed, and Achilles Thescus, etc. To prove this false, be it
manifested that there were many Hercules: For the Author of Zenophons
aequiuoca, says; That the most ancient Kings of Noble families, were still
called Saturnes, their eldest Sons Jupiters, and their hardiest Grandchidren
Hercules. Tully recounteth six of them: 6. Hercules.
1. Son of the eldest Jove and Liscitus. 2. An Aegiptian son to Nilus. 3.
One deified amongst the Idaeans. 4. Son to Astery Latona's Daughter. 5. The
Indian Belus. 6. The third Jupiters Son by Alemena. Varro reckons 44. 44.
Hercules.

Siculus has but three of them: 1. An Aegiptian the worthiest, 3. Hercules.
made General of the Army by Osyris: for strength and valor, he trauayled
most part of the World, and erected a Pillar in Lybia: He lived before the
second Hercules Alcmena's son above 1000. years. And this second Hercules,
emulated him, (not his father Jupiter) and therefore was called Alcaeus. The
third was Hercules of Crete; a famous Soldier, institutor of the Olympian
Games. This Pausanias calls Idaeus, which is the third amongst the six
numbered before by Tully. And this was that Hercules which triumphed as victor
on Mount Olympus: the other, lived a whole Generation before his time; to whom
the ambitious, and fabulous Greeks ascribe the labors of the rest. And
therefore, as he ordained not the Olympian Games, so neither was he victor of
them; for we never read of two Hercules on the Mount at once: Nor in the first
Olympiad did he behold his Fathers warlike deeds personated before him.
Wherefore this M. Actors Original of Plays, is to be held disprooued; and
that his Hercules by probable conjecture, never beheld Play at all. And so as
the Proposition is overthrown, the Assumption of others that should imitate
him, is disanuld; and consequently the Conclusion clean convinced: and further
yet for unsoundness, to be confounded. For where he says, It may be imagined
had Achilles never lived, Alexander had never conquored the World; He is
condemned even by Alexanders own words: For when he went against Jerusalem,
and that Iaddus the High Priest and the Levites met with him in their Priestly
roabes, showing him the Vision of God by Daniel concerning the Greekish
Monarchy over the world: It is recorded that he answered. And this great God
by a Vision in my sleep encouraged me to undertake this weighty enterprise.
Alexanders Vision.
So that not the life of Achilles acted before him, but the Divine Vision
pricked him forwards to the performance of his atchiuements. Other things
follow, which belonging to the quality of Plays, I transfer to handle till
the latter part of my Treatise, where with other matters together they are to
be confuted. But the next proof of Antiquity for Stage Plays by M Actor
alleged, is out of Ouids works. That Plays were first instituted in Rome by
Romulus; which to be such as Stage Plays are, can never be affirmed, but to
the contrary. For the Apologist himself does allege, that the pattern of
the first Theater in Rome was brought from Athens, which Act was after the
expulsion of their Kings.

To show then to others (for M Actor himself knows it) what Plays they
were, Romulus his scircensian Plays.
They were Circensian Plays, such as were kept upon Olympus Mount, to prove
the warlike actiuenesse of their Youth, in running, leaping, sword-playing, and
the like. And Circenses they were called, because the place was encompassed
with swords, of Circa and Ensis, as says Seruius. For the Antiquity having not
yet ordained fit places wherein to exercise their Youth, practiced them betwixt
a river side and a rank of swords, that the Idle might see danger on both
sides. Afterward Tarquinius Priscus appointed a Ring for them, that the people
might stand round, (as we make a ring for Wrastlers in More-fields) which was
called Circus maximus. And every year once, says Liuy, were these Games
celebrated, being diversely named, as Magni and Romani, and Circenses. Next does
M. Actor ground himself upon his very probable and important argument (as he
terms it. Viz. That in the time when Theaters most flourished at Rome, Christ
and his Apostles soiourned on the earth: yet neither in their Sermons, Books,
Acts or Documents, have they so much as named or touched them, but were content
to pass them over. Manifestly false; For it is a point to be held, and known
it is for a truth, that some sins there are which never were mentioned in
holy write in specie: and shall we say then such are no sins? Nay, some
sins are in the Scriptures unspoken of, which many most learned men are of
opinion, that they ought not to be publicly handled: That the rather being
unknown, the hardness of men's hearts should not move them to the committing
of such enormities, if known they were. This were enough to convince and
refute M. Actors important argument, but it shall not suffice; For it is even
poynted at with the finger both in the old and in the new Testament. In the
old, Moses sets down an everlasting moral Law, both for the present and
future times, Deuteronomy 18.9. where he warns the Israelites, Prooses of Scipture
against Plays.
that they should not learn to do after the abomination of the Gentiles. And
what abomination was afterward more rife among the Nations, then Plays
presented in honor of their Idols. And in the new Testament, S. Paul 1. Cor
chap 8. commands the Corinthians, that they should abstain from feasting in
Idols Temples, and from things consecrate to Idols. And Acts 15.20. Write unto
them, that they abstain themselves from filthiness of Idols. And Verse. 29.
That they abstain themselves from things offered to Idols. Now what was
offered and consecrated to the honor of the Idol Gods or Devils, more then
Plays? And what filthiness of Idols should they more avoid then Plays, which
the more obscene and scurrilous they were presented, the better pleased they
the Devils which commanded such solemnities to be kept, as shall be declared
hereafter: wherein maybe espied the Devils drift in instituting of them, that
through their obscenity he might corrupt the Gentiles manners.

Next does M. Actor object, that GOD has created sundry things for delight: as
Jewels, Dainties, and Delicates to be moderately used, the Hare to be hunted,
the Stagge to be chased, etc. All this I deny not. Yet shall he never make me
believe that GOD did ever allow of Iuglers and Sortilegers, often spoken
against by Moses, nor of Iesters, Vices, and Players, which are all of a crew.

Next does M. Actor affirm, he could never yet read any History of any
Commonwealth which did not thrive and prosper whilst these public
solemnities were had in odoration. Here does he seek to blindfolde the
world, and lead us hoodwinckt in a most palpable error. As though partly
Plays vpheld the slate of a Commonweal, and not rather Virtue clean
opposite against them. But although the Apologist has produced no example to
confirm his allegation, yet will I recite worthy memorials to the contrary.
Rome's Commonwealth which in glory surpassed all other, in those times when
Theaters most flourished, then was most pitteously rent and torn. For a while
after the institution of Stage Plays, ensued those most lamentable civil
wars that were the overthrow of the Cities state, as I will now declare

The fall of Romes Common wealth.
L. Sylla, and Marius, two mighty Citizens, through their ambition envied each
other so maliciously, that their private hatred grew into public factions.
And at last their discord was so great, that they fought a set battle at
Port Esquiline. Where Marius being put to the worst, fled into Africa. Marius
thus overcome, Sylla going to war upon Mithridates, left Cinna, and Octauius
Consulles in the City. But Cinna desirous of innouasion, severed himself
from his fellow, and was chased out of the City by him, and his faction.
Which injury Cinna endeavoring to revenge, called back Marius out of Africa.
And he now makes bloody wars upon his Country, and entering it with his
angry forces, and mighty powers, butchered up numbers in every corner of the
City, charging his Soldiers, that to whom so ever he returned not the
salute, they should immediately dispatch him: by which means an innumerable
company, noble and ignoble were slaughtered. And then in his seventh
consulship he died. Soon after came Sylla out of Asia, and rooted out Marius
his son, and all the whole faction of them utterly. And then took he upon
him the perpetual Dictator-ship: wherein he proscribed many thousands of the
Roman Citizens with outrageous cruelty, that they all thought Marius a meek
Lamb, in respect of him, though during his superiority, he tyranized with
insufferable cruelty and insolence. So that between both, the whole City,
Streets, Marketplaces, Temples, and Theaters themselves, were filled with
dead carcasses. These men's factions, afterward Pompey and Caesar took up a
fresh. Pompey could endure no equal; and Caesar no superior. So that most
cruel and deadly wars arose between them. And at length, Caesar getting the
upper hand, creates himself perpetual Dictator, brings the whole Empire
under his own subjection, and reduces the Commonwealth into a Monarchy. And
thus whiles Theaters flourished, and Stage plays were presented in greatest
pomp, is the most flourishing estate of the Roman Commonwealth brought into
a Monarchy. To this ensample many more might be added, and yet M. Actor could
never read of any such History. One more I will exhibit and so cease.

The fall of Caesar's Monarchy.
Agrippina the mother of Nero, and Seneca his Tutor, both ambitious of
government, persuaded Nero in the minority of his age, to take his pleasures,
and leave unto them the charge and pain of the public affairs of the
Empire, thinking that the fury of his youth would ware away with fond delights,
and that wisdom would increase with age, in mean time, that they would
better govern then he. Of his opinion was Burrus a singular person, and next
to Seneca in the weighty causes of government. Now therefore Nero gives
himself to all licentiousness: now magnificent Theaters are erected, and
Stage Plays instituted: now the Poets pens are set on work, Tragedians and
Comedians are busily occupied: now all these flourish more then before, or
afterward they ever did. Now Nero becomes a Sword-player, and chaser of
wild beasts upon the Theater, and thereby comes to be butcherous and
bloody minded; afterward a murderer and a manqueller. Now Nero acts cruel
Tragedies and scurrilous Comedies in his own person; and thereby learneth to
act all dissoluteness, and perform whatsoever mischief could be devised:
For, Quo semel est imbutarecens seruabit odorem -- Testa.

Here had so seasoned himself in those former evils, and therewith was drawn
to such a marvelous corruption, that now he gaddeth about the streets in the
euenings; he and his flattering companions sets upon many Innocents he meets
withal, and outragiously perpetrateth horrible facts, beastliness, and
detestable murders. In the mean time, for the space of five years, Seneca
and Agrippina governed the Empire indifferently. Howbeit, because Agrippina
took upon her to rule all alone after her own appetite, these two, Seneca and
Burrus, took order out of hand, that the Emperor should withdraw the
government from her, and assume it to himself. But as wise as they were, yet
were they greatly deceived, in that they thought Nero would become wise in age,
by passing his youth in folly; for it happened clean contrary, and he became a
most wicked and cruel Tyrant: So that at last, having done innumerable
mischiefs against one or other, great and small, as his fancieled him, Seneca
began to doubt least the like might happen to himself. And it came to pass,
that Nero's cruelties, and oppressions, so won him the evil will of all his
Subjects, as they one after another revolted from his obeisance. Whereupon
Burrus, Ruffus, Sulpitius, and Flauius his greatest minions, entering into the
like fear, conspired against him; but they were discovered and condemned. Yet
before they were executed, Nero would needs confer with Sulpitius and
Flauius. And after he had demanded of Sulpitius, wherefore he had broken his
oath, and conspired against him, he asked the like of Flauius also; who
answered, I have loved, and hated thee Nero, above any man in the world:
Conspiracy against Nero, and why.
Loved thee, as long as there was any hope thou would become a good Prince:
but when I saw thee become a Manqueller, a Murderer, a Tragedian, a Player of
Enterludes, a Fencer, and a Towne-burner, I could not but hate thee extremely.

Here is evidently to be seen the effects of these Theaters, how it made Nero
to be hated of his dearest friends. Whose answers though they astonished him to
hear, yet in steed of amendment, he addicted himself to far worse
enormities then before. So that behold Vindex his Lieutenant general in Gaul,
revolted from him: Wherewith though the loss were not small, yet was not Nero
much troubled. But when he understood that his old Captain Galba President
of Spain, was revolted, then too late he feared his own ruin. And now began
the Empire suddenly to be rent in sunder, for almost every Governor ceased
their Provinces into their own hands. Then does Galba hasten unto Rome to
dispatch the Tyrant: who in the end, being abandoned of every one, even those
of his own guard, fled and hid himself within a little Lodge in the Fields;
where fearing to be taken alive, he killed himself. And after this sort was the
blood of the Caesar's extinguished, and no more Emperors by lawful succession.
For the pretorian cohorts became so dissolute in Nero's reign, that both they
and the other Soldiers took upon them to create Emperors at their pleasure:
Whereby the Empire oftentimes was miserably dismembered by sundry Tyrants at
once by them arected. And thus to conclude, whiles Plays were had in greatest
honor, by the corruption of manners that proceeded from them, was the Roman
Commonwealth changed into a Monarchy, and the Monarchy afterward into
Tyrannical government.

Next, does M. Actor with great contumely scandalize the good Emperor Marcus
Aurilius, calling him Cynick, and unfit for government. In mean while,
condemning the use of Comedies, which so cynically (as him self would have it)
bark at al follies: And likewise obnubilating his worthiness, for whose love,
who banished Players, the people made them all Statues in his memorial; which
they vouchsafed for no other Emperor, no not for Augustus him self, whom the
Apologist affirms to be greatest patron of Poets and Players in his time. Nor
did that good Emperor interdict the use of Theaters, because the wanton Dames
of Rome made a Play of him; but because of the great folly they wrought, and
the corruption of goodness which they brought into Rome, as shall further
hereaster appear in a Letter of his, written to Lambertus Governor of
Hellespont, when he sent him three Ships of Iesters and Players, wishing to
have but one Bark of Wise men in return of his adventure. Nor did he banish
Sword-players for other cause, then the pestilence of mind wherewith the
people by bloody spectacls might be infected, to the perpetrating of any
butcherous attempt: not that himself was a coward; for he twice triumphed:
once when he overcame the Parthians; and once when h conquered the Argonauts,
and died in conquering the Realm of Hungary.

Next, does M. Actor look back from Italy into Greece, declaring that the
Princes and Sages thereof, being those which were the first understanders,
trained up their youthful Nobility to be Actors, debarring the Mechanics
such employment. In which, is diverse things to be noted, and refuted: First,
that not all Greece is to be understood, for Sparta is to be exempted as
rejecting such abuses. Secondly, how does he derogate from the glory of the
Hebrews, when heriportes that the Grecians were the first Understanders,
whereas it is evident by all History, the Grecians not the first wise men.
the Grecians received their knowledge from the Aegiptians, and Chaldocans, and
they from the Hebrews. But if erecting of Plays were such an act, that it
were worthy the first understanders to perform, how then chanced it the
Hebrews did it not? among whom we never read Stage Plays to be solemnized,
and therefore never spoken of, nor taxed in specie by the Prophets in their
books. Thirdly it may be demanded why the Grecians prohibited the baser sort
from such employment. Surely I know not, except their mechanics were, and they
also desired they should be, of honester life and behavior then their
nobility. According to that speech of Aemilius probus treating of the Greekish
fashions, In those Countries (says he) its no disgrace for any man (here M.
Actor is found tripping for debarring mechanics) to come upon the Stage, to
set himself as aspectacle to the people: which we hold for partly infamous,
and partly base and unworthy of an honest man.

Next does M. Actor show why the Grecians admitted Plays. Which because it
touches the use of Plays I will leave, perticulerly to handle it in my Third
treatise.

Next follows that through Poets and Actors the Grecians excelled in Civility
and government, so that other nations borrowed their laws of them. The Romans
indeed sent to take a pattern of the Athenian laws, and withal a while after
erected a Theater, after the pattern of the Atherian: and a while after this
again; the laws of Athens furthered them not to Civility so much, as by the
induction of Plays they fell into dissoluteness. Through which all things
ran into disorder, and Civility laid aside, inhumanitie sprang up instead
thereof. For then presently followed the wars they had against their own
slaves, and sword-players, Then ensued, as I said before, the Factions of Sylla
and Marius, and after that between Caesar and Pompey, the end whereof was the
utter subversion of their common wealth. And now, if through Stage Plays the
Grecians learned Civility, and good government, how could it otherwise be, but
that the Romans having both their laws and theaters, should also excel in
Civility, (for from the same causes proceed the same efiects.) and not that a
while after through the Grecian institutions, they should learn instead of
good manners, corruption; instead of concord, faction; and all kind of
disorder, Plays profited not the Grecians to civility.
instead of reformation. Therefore as Plays did not benefit the Romans, so
neither could they profit the Grecians. Whereby we may perceive how M. Actor
to blind his readers mind, would feign impose more upon the worth of theaters,
then possibly could be intended. And yet does he confess, that those times of
the Grecians was but the childhood and infancy of the world, very fitly; For
indeed it was but their foolish thought, and childish opinion, that Plays was
the readiest way to plant understanding in the ignorant, whereas in the riper,
and now old age of the world, most men have received a true intellect, to the
contrary, except such only as remain children still.

Next M. Actor would feign seem to shorten the extent of the Text and express
commandment of God in Deuteronomic. 22.5. The woman shall not wear that which
appertains to the man; neither shall a man put on woman's raiment. Where
although the Law is indifferently to be understood of both Sexes, yet more
strictly concerning the man, that he should not so much as put on woman's
raiment. A very impudent and common abuse in plays it is, though M. Actor
would willingly dawbe over the meaning of the Scripture, as though that
consisted in the like figurative sense, as the words of sacramental
consecration elsewhere do. Whereas there is as much difference between that
trope and these plain words, as between a Rope and a Player. And although
Plays are not immediately meant in the Text, because in that time there was
none in Israel, nay nor during the whole time, wherein the Church of GOD was
planted among the Hebrews, was such vanities known among them: yet does it
immediately point at this abuse of wearing women's apparel, (used in Plays,)
flatly forbidding it.

Next M. Actor affirms, that the Universities sometime institute Stage Plays:
more is the pity, that the most famous lights of learning in the world should
be branded with infamy, through the means of some phantasticals which are in
them. Wherefore admit they do: Who make and act plays in the Universities.
who them most commonly do compose their Plays? Idle brains, that affect not
their better studies. Who are the Actors? Gentle-bloods, and lusty
swash-bucklers, such as prefer an ounce of vainglory, ostentation, and
strutting on the Stage, before a pound of learning; and are sent to the
Universities, not so much to obtain knowledge, as to keep them from the
common riot of Gentlemen in these days: like little children whom their
parents sent to school, the rather to keep them from under horses feet in the
streets, which careful mothers do so greatly fear. And who are the
spectators? but such like as both Poets and Actors are, even such as reckon no
more of their studies, then spend-all Gentlemen of their cast suits.

But what follows in the Apology? These Plays embolden the Junior scholars
against they come to read the pub-like Lecture of Dialect, Ethick, Mathematick,
Physic and Metaphisick. And why not among these the Divinity Lecture? because
certainly no such profane, and light headed persons may be admitted to it,
and because according to the saying of Pope Panl 2. and Adrian 6. they are to
be held as enemies to true Religion.

For Plays as says the Apologyst makes a bold Sophister, that is plainly, a
too cunning, or false reasoner, to knit preposterous and intertangled
syllogismes, obscure Sorites, Aenig maticall Crocodilites, and forke-horned
Dilemma's to ensnare and obnubilate the truth: as now M. Actor himself feign
would do.

Next follows Plays especial use for Rhetoric. Rhetorica est ars bone
dicendi. Rhetoric is an Art of speaking well. And Plays in the Apology
instruct to speak well. Plays use for Rhetoric consuted.
Surely M. Actor would be esteemed for a Rhetorician, and have Plays become
one of the seven liberal Arts: but his drift is not driven home enough. For
vltra posse, non est esse. Who ever of the ancient Orators, Greeks, or Latins,
learned to speak well from a Play? Did Demosthenes learn his Science from a
Stage? Did Cicero learn his Oratory from a Theater? Why do not our Divine
Orators school themselves by Plays, thereby to learn Rhetoric, so necessary
in their Sennons? But they know well, that Plays are a fictiue Art, and not a
liberal Science: they know well that Rhetoric graceth Plays by the
instruction it gives, for breathing spaces, distinctions, and good delivery of
words, and not that poesy and Plays ever gave that faculty to Rhetoric. For
the first arts give light unto the arts succeeding. And Rhetoric was long
found out before possie. For no sooner had God given to men language in the
beginning, but that presently expetience taught them, how aptly to apply their
words, how to persuade, and diswade, how to exhort, discourage, animate, praise
or dispraise, defend, confute, extenuate and aggrauate any matter, and
consequently how to rise and fall with the voice, to stop, to breath,
distinguish, interrogate, and to observe all other elegancie of speech.

Next, and last of all does M. Actor even as in the very beginning, so in the
later ending of his first Book, callumniate those worthy and Reverend
Preachers, that in their godly Sermons, out of conscience are studious to
suppress these obscaene and filthy Stage Plays. And I, as in the beginning,
must reprehend and reprove him therefore. That out of the custom of malicious
Comedian detrectation on the Stage, and not of conscience and reason he does
so revile them.

Now have I run over the chief points and arguments, of the first Treatise
of M. Actors Apology, confuting some things, and disprouing other: wherein
this one thing yet is to be noted; That the very subject of Actors Antiquity,
both for their Original and first Induction into Rome, Antiquitas ^^n veritate
est antiquus error.
is yet more narrowly to be inuestigated. For neither Hercules at the first
Olympiad beheld his Father Jupiters Acts personated before him, for that, that
Hercules, which ordained the Olympian games, was not Jupiters Son, and two
Hercules we never read to have been present at these games at once: neither
did Romulus first institute Stage-plaies at Rome, but as I said before,
Circensian games, even such as were used in the Olympiads, to exercise their
youth withal: as running, riding, leaping, tourncying, sword-playing, coursing
with Chariots, and the like. Wherefore to do M. Actor an overthwart kindness,
I will out of sundry Authors declare both their Original, and when, and by
what means, and by whose, they first came into Rome. After which, with some
few notes and observations, I will finish this first part of my Discourse.

The Original of Plays.
The old Husbandmen of Greece, using every year to sacrifice to Bacchus for
their fruits: First used in stead of Prayers, to sing something at putting the
fire to the Altars. And then to please his Deity the better, they sung over all
his victories, wars, conquests, and captiuation of Kings. For reward of which
their pains, a Goat was first appointed, or the skin of a Goat full of Wine.
But because the Kings that Bacchus had conquered; affoorded not matter enough
for their yearly songs, they fell in hand with the calamities of other Kings,
and sung much of them. And this song was called a Tragedy: either of (...), a
Goat, which they offered to Bacchus as an enemy to the Vines, or which was the
reward of the singers; or of the Wine leese with which they besmeared their
faces, (before that Aeschilus devised vizors for them) called in Greek (...).
Some will have the Comedy to have had the Original from these Sacrifices
also. Others from the solemnities of Apollo Nomius, the Guardian of Shepherds
and Villages. Some say, that both these Sacrifices were celebrated at once.
Following which, the most common opinion is thus. When the Athenians lived as
yet in dispersed Cotages ( Theseus having not yet reduced them to City) the
Husbandmen used after their Sacrifices, to break jests upon such as were
present, and such as travailed by chance that way: and by these mirthfull
scoffs delighted all the company. Now, after that the City was builded, the
Husbandmen at the time appointed for the solemnities, came into the Town in
Carts, and iested one while at their Fellows, and another while at the
Citizens, cheefely such as had offended them. And this was called a Comedy:
either of (...) a village, because they lived in such, or of (...) a way, and
(...) to be saucy, or to revel, because they were profuse, and spared no man
in the way with their petulant quips. And this is rather the true deriuation;
for as Lod. Viues says, the Athenians as then did not call their Villages
(...), but (...). This custom pleased the Citizens, and made them animate
these of the prompter wit, to write more exactly in this kind of verse. Now the
City Poets at first taxed the vices of the Citizens with bitterness, but
afterward when they began to follow their own affects, and their friends,
excercising their grudges with sharpnes, and using their pens for their
weapons, they would sometime traduce Princes that never had deserved any such
matter, and even name them. Which trick when Eupolis had played with
Alcibiades, in his Comedy called Baptis, he caused him to be taken and
thrown into the Sea, saying these words: Thou have often drowned me upon the
Stage, Eupolis, I will once drown thee in the Sea. By which example the rest
of the Poets were so terrified, that Alcibiades got a law past, that none
should dare to name any man upon the Stage. So that kind of Comedy called
(...), that is, the old Comedy was abolished. Then came in the second kind;
wherein many were girded at privy suppressing of Names under colors. And this
the Nobility fell in dislike withal, least their facts should be glanced at
underhand. So that was taken quite away, and a new kind invented; which
treated of meaner persons under change of names, wherein was more moderation in
their taxation. These kinds were all in Greece.

But for the time of Stage Plays first entrance into Rome, by what means, and
by whom they were first induced, it follows thus. In the 400 year, or
thereabout, of Romes foundation, there was such a sore plague in the City,
that they determined not to number the thousands which were dead, but the few
that remained yet alive. And then their Gods (which the holy Scriptures shows
to be Devils) for the asswaging of the Pestilence, Plays first instituted in
Rome by the command of Devils.
that seized on their bodies, and for the augmentation of their Religion;
commanded an institution of Stage Plays presently to be effected in their
Honors, and annexed to the celebration of their Sacrifices. And yet that bodily
Pestilence did not cease, because that delicate vanity of Stage Plays entered
into the cares of the people, which were then wholly given to wars, and
accustomed only to the Circensian games. For Liuce in his seventh Book,
says: This first institution of Plays for augmentation of Religion, did
neither augment Religion in their minds, nor diminish the Pestilence in their
bodies. But the wily Devils knowing by natural reason, that the plague should
once have an end, and being not satisfied that they had already infected
Greece, but they would also corrupt Rome, and by her, afterward all the world:
by this means took occasion to thrust a far worse plague, not into their
bodies, but into their manners, says Saint Augustine, in corrupting of which
lies all their joy. And surely the Devil would never have instituted Plays,
but that he knew they were, and would be beneficial to his Kingdom.

One example or authority more I will produce to confirm this, that the
Celebration of Plays was by commandment to pacify their Gods. Tully (in
Verrem, Acti^ 6.) being made Aedile, cries out in the cares of the City; I
must needs present the most sacred Plays and Ceremonial solemnities unto
Ceres, Liber, and Proserpina: then I must reconcile Mother Flora unto the City
and people of Rome, with the celebration of her enterludes. By this its
evident, that these vanities were not first brought up in Rome by the
corruptions of men, but by the direct commandment of Idoldeuils And then arose
the Comedy wherein they cast forth fluttish Phrases, and bitter Quips. And
this they did interchangeably in verses, called Fescenini, of such a City in
Hetruria, from whence they had their first Players, and named them Histriones
in the language of that Country. In their taxations they never durst name any;
for that was expressly forbidden in their Law of the twelve Tables. But these
Fescenine uses wore out of the Plays by little and little: and being it was
not allowable to traduce any man by name upon the State, there sprang up diverse
sorts of these playing Fables in Italy, even as there did in Greece; as the New
Comedy and the Satyr: not that which taxes Vices, and is bound to that one
kind of Verse used by Horace, Persius, and Iuuenal, but that wherein the
Satyrs were brought in, in a sluttish and opprobrious manner; as in hairy
Coats, heavy paced, and altogether vnbandsome and slouenly. The first true
Comedy in Lattine Verse (as M. Actor alleges) was written by La^ius
Andronicus, Solinater's freed Servant, after Rome was buildediust 540. years,
the first Carthagenian war being ended some few years before, as Atticus
does account the time.

But to conclude this Discourse, there were four chief sorts of Stage Plays
among the Romans. Comedies, Tragedies, Satyrs, and Mimick's, otherwise called
Pla^ipeder or plaine-feete, wearing neither shoes nor buskins, but coming
bare-foote upon the Stage. The Satyrs notwithstanding and the Mimicks, are both
included under the Comedy. The Tragedy discourses of lamentable fortunes,
extreme affects, horrible villainies, rapines, murders, spoils, tyrannies, and
the like. The Comedy treats of Fables, dishonesties, all kind of knaueries
and tricks of wanton Love, (the impious subjects of these plays would make
one hate them) being brought into it by Menander, to please the Macedonians
that stood affected in such passages.

The Satyr contains the looser Faunes and Siluanes, whose Rusticall Jests
delight much. But as they were uncleanly and slouenly, so were their speeches
very foul and dishonest to hear. The Mimicks forbear no beastlines, but used
extreme licentiousness; And yet were these more tolerable then other things
acted in the solemnities of Bacchus, which after for their incredible villainy
and filthiness, were expelled out of Italy by a decree of the Senate. The
Saturnalia and Floralia were two other kind of Plays celebrated by common
Strumpets, and the most raskally sort of all men. The Actors of the Floralia
though they reverenced not their own Gods, yet when Cato came, they would not
for shame act any thing in his presence.

I fear me I have been too tedious; yet have I continued my discourse, that I
might declare concerning Plays and their original somewhat to the full. Out
of which precedent discourse some things are yet to be noted, and lightly
touched at again.

First concerning their Original, that they were first instituted amongst the
fabulous Heathen Greeks (the peruerters of all Divine knowledge) in honor of
their Diuell-Gods. And that the Comedies took their matter and subject from
envious jesting and scoffing (practiced now in our enterludes) strictly
forbidden by the Apostle. Ephesians. 5.4. and 4.31.

Secondly, that their first induction into Rome was by the commandment of
these Diuell-Gods. For which cause it self, as things the Devil most
delighted in, all professing the name of Christians should detest.

Lastly that the Actors and Poets were driven to post from one kind of Play to
another, because they were ever in dislike and because their licentiousness
ever grew to be such and so great, (as theirs among us now is) that it was not
tolerable.

Nec parcit cuiquam vestrae petulantia linguae,
Quid mirum si vos eadem quoque, fulmina tangunt?
The end of the First Book.
A Refutation of the Apology for Actors, and of their ancient and modern
indignity.
THE SECOND BOOK.
NOw I have ended my first Treatise, it follows that I proceed in confutation
of M. Actors second Book, Of Actors ancient Dignity. Wherein, after I have
refuted some particulers, I will declare how the Antiquity esteemed of them,
and what base account for the most part they made of them. To be brief
therefore, the first thing that M. Actor offers to his Reader is an Apothegme
of Cicero and Caesar. Wherein is evident how unnecessary in a common weallth
Caesar at first esteemed Players for to be, in that therevppon he pretended a
Cavil against them. But admit that Cicero's opinion of Plays, viz. That many
heads were busied with them which otherwise would be inquisitiue after his
greatness, took place in Caesar's head, so that (as M. Actor would pretend) he
gave many privileges to men of that quality. But both Caesar and Cicero were
deceived in their Counsels, for it polited Caesar not one lot. For all the
while Plays then flourished, Brutus and Cassius with 60. Senators more, were
busied in Conspiracy against him, and at last trecherously killed him with
daggers in Pompeys Court. Belike they among others were not busied with the
Plays: nay; be it more likely that from Plays (which are stuffed full of
such matters) they learned the cleanely conueyance of their treachery, and how,
in what sort, with what secrecy, and by what means to effect their treason.

Next does M. Actor show sundry examples of stately and sumptuous theaters,
erected for Stagerits, and of one in spetiall made by Julius Caesar, wherein
was figured the perpetual motion of the celestial Spheres. But in his
description he has acted the Play-poet so exceeding well, or rather declared
such hyperbolicall impossibilities, M. Actor his forgery.
that any having ever but tasted of the Mathematick arts, will smell out his
forgery, whereby he seeks to dignifie his profession. But I must needs
confess too sumptuous theaters were built by the great Princes of the world.
But who were they more then mecre Heathen men and very Athiests, most of them
unthrifts and profuse spenders? of whom, some for their own vainglory and
ostentation erected Theaters: others in honor of their Diuell-Gods which
commanded it, and others to show their magnificence, and what they were out of
superfluity able to perform. As Traian the Emperor built a bridge over the
river Danubius, even where it was narrowest, by reason whereof it became more
difficult: For there the spacious stream being curbd in, made the torrent more
swift then otherwhere. Which again Adrian his successor ruinated, because it
was a work of cost so vainly spent. And are not these Princes, with their
reasons, for what end they built Theaters, worthy examples for Christian
Potentates to imitate? If they are, surely none but such as Machianel will
contend to prove it.

After this again does M. Actor recount sundry Theaters in diverse Provinces
and Emporiall Cities, some ruinated (as things repudiated) some built by
Heathen Ethnicks, some by Popish Catholics, some for the hardness of peoples
hearts, tolerated in the reformed Churches, and amongst others, one of
especial note by Popish King Francis. Anno 1539. wherein for 30. days
together were represented the Acts of the Apostles. Concerning this let all
true Christians give their censure, whether this act of King Francis was not
most impious and sacrilegious, that he should profane the holy Scripture on a
stage. Yet does M. Actor approve him for it: for he traduceth him as a great
dignifier of Stagerits. If this be true then let not M. Actor be adjudged for
a true Christian, until he sing a Palinode, in recantation of his Apology.

Next does M. Actor spend many words in repetition of a whole crew of Poets and
Actors, ancient and modern, and amongst them he extolls one of especial note
and fame in Rome, by name Roscius. Of him thus says D. Anthony de Gueuara in
his Dial of Princes. We find (says he) some fragments of an Oration which
Cicero made in the Senate, greatly reproving the Senators, and all the people
because they so willingly gave ear to this iester which raised sedition among
the commons, his name was Roscio; who was so highly esteemed in Rome, that the
Romans more willingly heard his jests, then that which Cicero spoke in good
earnest. This Iester Roscio and Cicero striued which of them both were the
better. Roscio for presenting a thing with diverse jests, or Cicero for
pronouncing weighty matters in earnest. When I read (says he) in Julius
Capitolinus that which I have spoken, I confess that I could not refrain my
self from laughter, to see that Roscio being Prince of folly, presumed to
contend with Cicero, which was father of Eloquence.

Next M. Actor shows what kind of men he would Players should be: such, that
although they cannot speak well, yet know how, or such that have volubility
(their tongue to run before their wit) and can speak well, though they
understand not what. See see his absurdity herein. He would in his first Book
feign make acting an Art Rhetorical, instructing to speak well, and yet the
tutors in it to be disable for their functions. All Arts consist of two
parts: method and practice. Now for the first sort such as cannot speak well
cannot teach the part practick of the Art: and the second sort, such as
understand not what they speak, cannot teach the part methodicall. And so
consequently no perfection by Players is to be attained in Rhetoric, or the
art of speaking well, if to be an Art it were admitted. Concerning which read
again Page 17.18.

Next M. Actor could wish (but he will not) that such as are condemned for
their licentiousness, were excluded their society. And wish long enough he
may without redress, himself among others never seeking for it. For exempt
their licentiousness only out of Plays, too too small alas will be their
gettings to maintain their idle life; that being the thing which most pleases
the multitude, who chiefly run flocking to the Playhouse, that they might make
mirth of such folly and laugh at it, and that they might tell it to others when
they come home, to make more fools laugh for company. And therefore in vain
afterward does M. Actor entreat for excuse; not to misdeeme all for the
misdeeds of some; being it is the general carriage of them all. It is a rule
in Divinity to know a man's conditions and what he is, by the company he does
usually keep. Now if the best of them were not licentious, why do they live,
and Jove, accompany, and play together with them which are. Were it not
madness for a man to be his companion which is his daily reproach? But Players
all of them are licencious: for, the proverb is, Birds of a feather fly
together. And therefore if they were not they would never associate them which
are, whon the Synteresis of their own conscience, and the conscience of all
men wills to avoid.

Next does M. Actor recite a memorable example of Julius Caesar, that slew his
own servant whiles he acted Hercules furens on the Stage. Which example indeed
greatly does make against their Plays. For it is not unlikely but a Player
might do the like now, Facyfull sights likely to happen et Plays.
as often they have done. And then what a lamentable project would there be for
the Spectators to behold: As many times it happens when their supposed nocent
persons are falsely hanged, and diverse of them ready to be strangld, or
altogether. As for the other Emperors which were Actors by the apologist
recorded: as Caligula, Nero, Vitellius, Domitianus, and Commodus, all History
shows they were the most bloody, merciless, and cruel Villains breathed;
Fit to make Actors, though fit for nothing else.

Next does M. Actor prosecute his matter with example from the Papists, though
he would excuse himself for it with haec breter me at the end thereof. But
how impious it is to profane holy Scripture as they do, all true Christians
can determine, as I have said before. And for such profaneness, Players many
times have received their due deserts: as may appear by the most fearful
accident that happened to the Jesuits of late years at Lions in France, when
they would needs Act a Play of Christ's coming to Judgment at the last day.
And Eusebius in his Book De preapar. Euangelica, ^b. ^. cap. 1.
sets down an History of a Poet that suddenly lost his Natural sight, for
having lewdly applied a piece of Scripture to a Fable.

Next does M. Actor show out of Virgil, that Theaters were erected immediately
after the Ruin of Troy. But surely M. Actor is not acquainted with Virgil
though he be a Poet. If he were, then verily he is not ignorant, how Virgil
does apply ancient Monuments and memorials to his time. As when he faineth a
prophecy, that from Iulus should proceed another of like name, which should
govern the state of Rome, meaning Julius Caesar.

Nascetur pulcra Troianus origin Caesar,
Imperium Oceano, famam qui terminent astris, Virg. Aened ^

Julius, a magno demissum nomen Iulo,
Likewise elsewhere does Virgil feign Dido to prophecy of the Roman and
Carthaginean continual hatred, because in long time after there chanced such
continual wars between them.

Tum vos o Tyrijstirpem,
Exercete odijs, cinerique, haec mittue nostro Aeneid. l. 4.

Munera: nullus amor populis nec foedera sunto.
Next M. Actor says, That he has discourst of Theaters even till the Reign
of Julius Caesar, and how they continued in their glory (he forgets that
Tyberius (witness Corn: Tacitus annalum lib. 4.) drove them out of Italy) till
the time of Marc. Aurelius, (who banished them into Hellespont:) And from him
even to these times. Ho there, stay a little good Sir. To skip above a thousand
years is nothing with M. Actor. For from the time of Constantine the Great,
who suppressed Plays as did Aurelius, till the time of Richard 2. of England,
Anno 1390. and Edward 4. Anno 1490. and Francis the French King Anno 1539, he
has nothing to say for himself. But he must now needs confess that when
Christianity began publicly to flourish, As Christians encreised so P^^y^^
were more and more abolished.
then Paganism daily more and more was abolished, and at the last utterly
extinct in Christendom: till of late years first Papisticall Friars and
Jesuits raised it up a-fresh.

Next does M. Actor allege authority from Cicero, to prove that Plays were
both in Athens and Lacedemon. In Athens indeed they were, but never in
Lacedemonia. Happily there might be Theaters, or places of prospect to behold
their active youth show their martial feats, and warlike prowess, at
certain times of the year, as the Romans in their Circensian Plays, and
ludis secularibus, secular games. But it was never read that Hystriones,
Actors, Tragedians or Comedians were in Lacedemon. For Plutarch in his
Apothegmes says, that the Lacedaemonians never permitted any such in their
commonwealth. And that when an Ambassador of Rhodes demanded a Lacedemonian
what was the occasion of their laws against such, since that the Iesters and
Players showed pleasure to the people, and the people lost nothing, but laughed
at their folly. The Lacedemonian answered. Lycurgus saw, felt, heard, or read
some great damage that Iesters and Players might do in the commonwealth,
since against them he established so straight a Law. But that which I know is;
we Greeks are better weeping with our Sages, then are the Romans laughing at
their Fools.

Next does M. Actor declare, that Cicero calls Plautus, our Plautus, as it
were noting thereby a name of excellency. Truth; he calls him our Plautus in
his works de Republica by the mouth of Scipio. Concerning which, thus says
Lodouicus Viues. He calls him our Plautus, not that he ever knew him, but
because he was a Latin Poet, and he had spoken of the Greeks before.

Lastly M. Actor makes Cicero to commend unto his son Marcus some Poets, as
Statius, Naeuius and Plautus for their writings. This is a thing hardly to be
credited. For in the third of his Tusculane Questions, speaking of the causes
corrupting the seeds of virtue, he adds Poets. Hereunto (says he) also
may Poets be added, who pretending (what is not in them) a great deal of
doctrine and wisdom, are learnd, read, herd, and borne away in the mind of
every man. Now have I sufficiently confuted the particulars of M. Actors second
treatise of Actors ancient dignity. Therefore I will now proceed in opposition
thereof, to declare their ancient indignity, and how base both Theaters,
Play-Poets, Stage-Iesters, and Actors were esteemed of the cheese antiquity,
which by any means could never well endure them. But me thinks I see how
resolutely past reason M. Actor, his mates and all adherents stand yet upon
their rermes of ancient dignity. Wherefore with Saint Augustine I say; Aug. de
Ciuit. Dei.
O that Scipto Nassica were now alive, he whose face perhaps ye durst not to
behold! he would shame you for this gross impudence of yours; For, what cause
is there for you to ^^claine at the prosperity of Christian faith in these
times, which condemns the use of Plays, but only that you would follow your
luxury uncontrolled, and having removed the impediments of troublesome
opposition, swim on in your dishonest and unhallowed dissolution in seeking out
infinite variety of vain pleasures, so to give birth unto these exorbitances,
which will heap thousands of mischiefs upon you in the end? Hence it was, and
out of his most circumspect zeal unto his country, that the said Scipio, who
was then chosen by the Senate of those times for the best man, without any
difference of voices, (a thing worthy often repetition, when the Senate had
given order for a Theater to be built, wherein the Roman people might sit and
see plays, Scipio would have no Theaters in Rome.
diswaded their vain resolution, and in a grave oration persuaded them, not to
suffer the luxury of the Greeks to creep into their old conditions: nor to
consent unto the entry of foreign corruption, to the subversion and
extirpation of their native Roman perfection: working so much by his own only
Authority, that the whole bench of the judicious Senate being moved by his
reasons, expressly prohibited the use of those seats which the Romans began then
to have in the beholding of Plays.

This History Valerius Maximus does record. And how Nassica so labored with
the Senate, that Theaters was held a thing unfit, as prejudicial to the
manners of the people: so that by a decree of the Senate all the preparation
for the Theater was laid aside. And it was ordained that noe man should place
any seats, or sit to behold any Plays, within the City, or within a mile of
the walls. How ernest would Scipio have been to have cleansed Rome of the
Plays themselves, durst ye have opposed their authority whom he held for Gods
being ignorant that they were malicious Devils? or if he knew it, then it
seems he held (Oh hellish ignorance) that they were rather to be pleased,
then despised, being he was high Priest unto them. For as yet that heavenly
doctrine was not delivered to the world, which purifying the heart by says,
changes the affect, and in Christ freeth men absolutely, from the slavery of
these proud and ungracious Devils. Who as I have before said, even by command
and constraint forced the stayed Romans, which knew nothing but of arms
before, to present them with such things: nay (not only to present them but to
dedicate and consecrate them) says Saint Augustine with all solemnity unto
their honors.

There are many things in this History of especial note. First that it was
the chosen best man in Rome, which diswaded the Senate from their enterprise,
and that the wise Senate condiscended to him. Also that they held the Greekish
corruption an enemy to the native Roman perfection: which afterward proved true
when they had given entrance to it. The last thing is that they banished
Theaters out of their City, and without a mile of their walls: which was ever
after observed until the sack of Corinth, when Lucius Memmius set up a Theater
for the Plays at his triumph, which stood no longer neither then the triumphs
lasted, nor any after it till Pompeius time. For as long as merely some Atoms
of Roman perfection did remain, standing Theaters by no means might be
erected.

Caligula, that famous, or rather infamous villain, what impudent shifts he
made to maintain his riot, all Histories of him do record. Among other things
he shamefully exacted toll and custom from Baudes, Harlots, and strumpets
which use may seem was ever after retained till Alexander Seuerus was Emperor.
For he, says Lampridius; did forbid that it should be brought into the
common treasure, but assigned it to the reparations of the Theaters. By which
it is evident how basely he esteemed them, that the most base of all gains,
and what he thought dishonest for him to receive, he assigned to the Theaters,
which so many Baudes, Varlets and Harlots both then and now did haunt.

Concerning Poets, Polidorus Virgill says. That a little aster Ennius his
time, Poetry was so debased and held in such despite, that if any one had
professed himself to be a Poet, he was taken for a murderer or a Ruffian,
What the Romans held concerning Poesy and Commedians, Cicero records in his
book of the common wealth where Scipio is brought in saying thus. If that the
privilege of an old custom had not allowed them, Comedians could never have
given such proofs of their vileness upon Theaters. He proceeds further and
shows what Laws were made against them in the twelve tables, and that our
lives should not be censured by Poets, but by lawful Magistrates, and in the
end concludes, that the ancient Romans disliked, that any man's life should be
praised or dispraised upon the stage: and would by no means have their manners
to be liable to the quips and censures of Poets, but inflicted a Capital
punishment upon such as durst offend in that kind. And so the Poets ^eauing to
tax the vices of the City, turned their pens to worser matters, (as Saint
Augustine affirms) to declare and publish the filthiness, obscoenity and
villainies of the Gods. In another place of that Book Cicero says, They held
the art of stage-playing so base and unmanly, No Players capable of honor in
Rome, not so much as their freedom thereof.
that therefore they did not only detains all the honors of the City from such
hind of men, but appointed the Censors in their viewes to remove them from
being any part of any tribe, and would not vouchsafe them to be counted as
members of the City. Then it must of force be granted that the Players were
the most pernicious men of conditions that could be, and the vildest in their
villainies, because they could not be allowed for Citizens in that City,
which harbord so many thousands of wicked and ungracious fellows, all as
Citizens; in so much that by the ancient fathers; Rome was called Babylon in
the west. That Players were excluded from being of any tribe, Liuy and Valerius
do both testify: unless authority made them such, for that seems as a
constraint. As befell to Decimus Laberius, whom Nero requested to act a mimick
of his upon the Stage: and yet he nevertheless was after that a Gentleman of
Rome. For he that is forced to offend the Law, is held not to offend. But a
right worthy decree, and well beseeming the Roman wisdom was this. That none
which would choose of a Roman Citizen to become a Player, should only be
secluded all honors, but by the Censors censure be made utterly incapable of
^uing as a member of his proper tribe. But why were their Players so debased,
by whom their Gods were so pleased? This was the Controversy between the
Greeks and the Romans. The Greeks thought good reason to honor those
Players, seeing they must honor them which did require those Plays: but the
Romans disabled their Players to bear honor in their City.

The Greeks mad a Law that the Comedians might speak what they list of any
man: The Romans made a law for the abridgement of such licentious liberty; and
gave them leave to say what they would of their Diuell-Gods. The Greeks seeing
they had such Gods to serve as required Plays, thought it not fit to take away
any liberty from the Poets in using these Stage-mocks and shames. And this they
did for fear least there Gods should be provoked to anger against them, in
case they went about to make themselves into more honest moulds then they were,
and so seem to prefer themselves before them, which delighted in the
Poetical fictions of their vicious facts: or else for desire to be made like
their Gods, even in their greatest enormities. And from this immagined
conuenience came it, that they held the very actors of those Plays worthy of
their cities honors. As weread that Eschines of Athens (whom Demosthenes in
his oration de Corona calls an apish Tragedian) having been an actor of
Tragedies in his youth, is said to have borne office in the common wealth. Yet
Aeschines himself in an Epistle he wrote to the Athenians, seems to affirm,
that he had given over his stage-playing before he bare any place in the
City. But on the other side the Romans were so far from gracing them, that
they would not allow them in place in a Plebeyan tribe: much less in the Court
or Senate, but held them disgraceful to all callings. Plato disputing of the
true perfection of a City, would have Poets banished from that society, as
enemies to the Cities full perfection being well ordered. Yet in his 10. Book
de Repub. Socrates having spoken much against them, concludes all in this:
that he holds that Poetry fit to be excluded, which gives life to unmanly
affections: and that to be allowed, which is manly and honest. For all Poetry
is not to be condemned: they are called by some a divine kind of men, namely
when they sing hymns to the Deity: as David in his Psalms, Solomon in his
Canticles, and the Prophets in their pleasant Psalmodies. And if they exceed
not in looseness, yield not to rancor, consent not to flattery, byte not with
taunts, scoffs, quips, and jests, set not abroch fables, fictions, lies,
wanton toys, amorous conceits, nor in their Poesies sow any seeds of
corruption, such Poets are profitable members in Plato's Commonwealth. But
such good Poets, Play-Poets in these days are not: and if they will be
Play-poets, then to please their hearers such they cannot be. And therefore are
they unnecessary in a commonwealth. Archilochus the Poet as soon as he came
into Sparta, was presently thrust out again, because he had written falsehood
in his Poems: and ever after, the Lacedaemonians forbad all fabulous Poesy. And
hence grew the common proverbs. Poets are liars. And Poets and Painters may lie
by authority. And it was written of Socrates, that he was but ill or slenderly
brought up in Poesy, because he loved the truth. And a man might say, that
this moved Caligula to condemn Virgils and Homers Books, because of their
profane fables. The City of Marseles has been marueilously praised in
ancient time, for that she always rejected stage-Poets and Players. And the
Emperors Tiberius, Anthony, Aurelius, Frederick the first, and Henry the third
caused them to be driven out of their Empire, and the Tribunes banished one
Naeuius out of Rome. Augustus likewise banished Ovid, and Domitian Iuuenal,
Archilochus fell into confusion by his own detractions. Plato compared the
disputes in Poetry to the banquets of the ignorant, that use music instead of
good discouse. Pythagoras said that their souls hanged in Hell upon a tree,
still pulled on every side by serpents for their damnable inventions. Suetonius
Tranquillius in the life of Augustus declares, that in Rome there was a very
pleasant iesting-Plaier called Epifanius, who to show the Emperor pleasure,
and hoping to have a good reward, went to the Palace at one time in the attire
of a Page, and at another time in the habit of a Roman matron: and so truly
counterfeited every thing, that it seemed to be the very persons whom he
acted. But the Emperor was so highly displeased with what the Actor had done,
that forthwith he commanded him to be whipped about the Theater three times. And
when he complained, that the Emperor commanded vagabonds to be whipped but once,
and he thrice. Augustus answered; Thou art worse then a Vagabond; once they
shall whip thee for the injury thou have don to the persons thou did
represent, the second time for the presumption thou had to act thy folly in
my presence, and thirdly for the time thou have lost, and made others to loose
in beholding and hearing. Don Antony de Gueuara in his dial of Princes has
this History. That in Rome their iesters and Comedians became so dissolute,
that they were occasion of slander among the people. Which scene and
considered, and withal that they lived as loyterers and fools: the Senate of
Rome determined amongst themselves to banish them all out of the commonwealth.
On this execution of these loyterers, sprung diverse dissentions among the
people. For the Princes which were good cast them out, and those which were
evil called them in. So that one of the tokens to know a virtuous or vicious
Prince in Rome, was to see whether he maintained these Players among the
people. Cornelius Tacitus annalium lib. 1. Records that in the Reign of
Tiberius there was a very great sedition in Rome, by reason of the Players
licentiousness. And after he has showed the Riot which by their means was
committed, he says. Actum est de easeditione apud Patres, dicebanturque
sententiae, vt Praetoribus ius virgarum in Histriones esset. It was debated
among the Senators concerning that sedition, and their sentence of it was: That
there was a law for the praetors, to make the Players taste of the whipping
post. By this we may see that the Roman Histrions or players, were not only
excluded all honors, even the least that might be in the City, as is before
declared: but they were also counted for Rogues, upon any offense subject to
the lash of the whip. Like unto which by the laws of this Realm of England
also they were mustred in the Catalogue of the several kinds of Rogues and
Vagabonds, and ought so to be punished, wheresoever they be taken, if they had
their deserts: such as travel the countries with plays and enterludes, making
a trade of it: As oftentimes our London Players when the infection is in the
City make an occupation in traveling the Countries and ranging from Fair to
Fair and from City to City. And what difference is there between the one
sort and the other, but even none at all? For both alike excheat money from the
communaltie, and for round sums of silver give them nothing but multitudes of
vain and foolish words. Thus have I sufficiently proved out of good History
the indignity wherewith Play-Poets, Players, and Theaters were branded by the
wisest men, and greatest Princes of the world.

Quipergit quae vult dicere, audret quae non vuli? The end of the Second Book.
A Refutation of the Apology for Actors: And of the wonderful abuse of their
impious quality.
THE THIRD BOOK.
HItherto have I proceeded in Refutation and opposition of Master Actors
Apology: Omitting nothing worthy of notice, which I have not touched, or shall
not touch in this my last treatise. And now that I have declared the
abominable original, with Ancient and present indignity of Players; I come
lastly to handle the use of their quality: wherein according to my former
method, after I have convinced M. Actors Arguments and affirmations, with
Reasons and negations: I will set down the most abominable abuse, and impious
quality of them.

Tragedies and Comedies says he, out of Donatus, had their beginning a Rebus
Diuinis, from Divine sacrifices. It Is true; they were first instituted of
Devils and for Devils, and therefore as things first consecrated to Devils,
ought to be abandoned.

Next M. Actor sets down his definition of a Comedy: for which he should
have alleged his Author, because he says it is according to the Latins. But
suppose it were of his own brain gathered from Ciceroes saying (I know not
where) which he afterward alleges thus: A Comedy is the Image of truth. Well
then; to disprooue his definition I must confute Cicero: And that thus.

Whatsoever is the Image of truth, is like unto truth. For Images are said to
be like unto what they represent.

But a Comedieis not like unto truth:

Ergo: It is not the Image of Truth.

My Assumption I confirm thus. A Comedy is not like unto truth, because it is
wholly composed of Fables and Vanities: and Fables and Vanities, are lies and
deceipts: and lies and deceipts are clean contrary to truth, and altogether
unlike it, even as virtue is unlike to vice. Wherefore my Assumption being true
my conclusion is also firm. But beside this refutation of his Definition, I
will lay down another in opposition of it, gathered out of the works of
Atheneiu: Thus Plays are the fruit of vintage and drunkenness, consisting of
sundry impieties, Definition of Plays.
comprehending evil and damnable things, wherein is taught how in our lives
and manners we may follow all kind of vice with Art. For they are full of
filthy words and gestures, The riches of Plays,
such as would not become very lacques and Courtezans: and have sundry
inventions which infect the spirit, and replenish it with unchaste, whoorish,
cosening, deceitful, wanton and mischievous passions: besides which
inconveniences Stage Players do oftentimes envy, and gnaw at the honor of an
other, and to please the vulgar people, set before them lies, and teach much
dissolution and deceitfulnes: by this means turning vpside down all
discipline and good manners. Hereupon Tully complains all in vain, who being
to speak of Comedians and Poets, when he came to them says: The clamer and
approbation of the people, when it is joined with these Poetical fictions, as
the testimony of some great and learned matter, oh what darkness does it
inuolue a man in? what fears it inflicts, what lust it inflames? Thus S.
Augustine alleges the sentence. But the whole sentence I take it is out of
the third of Cicero's Tusculane Questions where speaking of the causes which
corrupt the seeds of virtue naturally sown in us, he says. Hereunto also
Poets may be added, who pretending a great deal of doctrine and wisdom, are
learned, read, heard and borne away in the mind of every man. But when that
great master the multitude is added also, and the whole company swarming on
every side unto vices, then chiefly are we infected with depraved opinion, and
drawn from our very express nature.

Next M. Actor recites a verse against them which condemn Plays.

Oderunt hilarem tristes, tristemque iocosi. It is true; for gravity and
leuity, two contraries cannot consist in one. But what said the Lacedemonian
concerning this. I know we Greeks are better weeping with our Sages: then are
the Romans laughing at their fools.

After this he will seem to answer an objection, which because it is but a
piece of an objection, extorted, both it and his answer I will omit. The
objection is, that the Romans in their time, and some in these days have
abused Plays: but they hauenot only abused them, for they are abuse it self,
(as I shall instance further hereafter) and ever were.

After this again he says.

Plays are in use as they are understood:
Spectators eyes may make them bad or good.
O right excellently well said! In what a doubtful case would the use of
plays then stand, if none but fools (as commonly they all are) or none but
blindmen were their auditors? the one kind could not understand, the other
could not see, and consequently neither give right judgment of them: For the
one could not understand what vice to avoid, the other could not see acted to
the life what magnanimious virtue for to follow.

But to leave this forked argument, and with more plain reasons to touch his
meaning. I Deny his maxim. For allthough this Axiom. Omne accipitur secundum
modum accipientis be true, every thing is received according to the capacity
of that which receaueth: yet it extends it self not so far as M. Actors
intention. For then according to the discretion of fools and blind men, if
Plays were evil, (as they are not to be thought otherwise) by their good
accepting of them they were good; which how absurd a reason it is let all men
judge. Besides which if their were any good in Plays, yet for the evil, which
is greater, they are not tolerable. And we are taught not to do good if any
evil may ensue thereby. For good when it is the occasion of evil, cease any
longer to be good, but is turned into sin: For evil, and the occasion of
evil are under the same predicament of sin.

Next M. Actor infers many vocations and institutions of life wherein men
live, amongst which there has been some bad: and thereupon demands,
whether the general shall be condemned for the particulars sake. I answer no;
But the Genus of plays comes not under the protection of this reason, because
they are wholly evil, as more at large I will show toward the end of my
discourse. Next M. Actor proceeds in the use of Plays, and shows first that
they are an Ornament to the City. But I think the saying of Valerius Maximus
of more authority then this: who says, Plays were never brought up Sine Regni
rubore, without shame to the Kingdom. Secondly, he shows (and to the
disgrace of his mother tongue) that our English was the rudest language in the
world, a Gallymafry of Dutch, French, Irish, Saxon, Scotch, and Welsh, but by
Play-Poets it has been refined. But does he not forget, that whiles they add
Greek, Lattine, and Italian, they make a great mingle-mangle. Nay, before the
Conquest by Bastard William that the French came in, our English tongue was
most perfect, able to express any Hebruisme, which is the trial of perfection
in Languages, and now it will very hardly expound a Greek Lecture. For after
that the French had once corrupted it, it was but of late years that it could
recover a common Dialect again. Since which again it has indeed been more
refined, but thereby it is become more obscure, and used amongst few, for the
simple vulgar people cannot understand it: And a plain man can scarce utter
his mind, for want of Phrases, (as I may say) according to the fashion. But
what refinednesse is in our language, it is not from Poets, but from other
learned men's writings, from whom they borrow all the refined words they have.

Thirdly, he affirms that Plays have taught the ignorant knowledge of many
famous Histories. They have indeed made many to know of those Histories they
never did, by reason they would never take the pains to read them. But these
that know the Histories before they see them acted, are ever ashamed, when they
have heard what lies the Players insert amongst them, and how greatly they
deprave them. If they be too long for a Play, they make them curtals; if too
short, they enlarge them with many Fables, and whither too long or too short,
they corrupt them with a Fool and his Bables: whereby they make them like
Leaden rules, which men will fit to their work, and not frame their work to
them. So that the ignorant instead of true History shall bear away nothing but
fabulous lies.

Next M. Actor has striued wonderfully, in showing the particular uses of
plays, which I will reserve to condemn, with all their qualities, toward the
latter end of this book, And proceed next to show the absurdities of M. Actor
in his 3. Histories of strange accidents that have happened at plays: which
make more against him then for him, if they were well considered, according to
Gods just judgment, and not M. Actor's vain application. The first and last
History concerning treacherous murders committed by untrusty wives upon their
husbands, he applies to plays, because at plays their first discoueries
were intimated.

But it was far otherwise, for these bloody-minded wines lay long in their
sins without repentance, God for a great while using mercy and patience
toward them: But when he saw them to persist in their inflexible
stubburnnesse, that in stead of suing to him for grace and remission of their
sins, they provoked him to greater anger, and in stead of coming to the
temple there to pray, to haunt Satan's Sinagogue there to see sport and seed
their pleasures: he even took them napping in the Devils Sanctuary: that
where they thought to conceive much mirth from vanity, there they might be
pricked in conscience, and receive the beginning of their sorrow, at last to
bring them to repentance, that God might save their souls, though in his
justice he brought their bodies to destruction. The other History of the
flight of some rouing Spaniards from a town in Cornwall, upon striking up of
an alarm at night by the Players on the stage, he applies likewise unto
plays. But far rather it is to be attributed to Gods mercy, who carefully
kept watch for the town and not the Players. He I say, while they were secure
at their pleasures, and feared least when they had greatest cause, turned their
present interlude to a good use, being evil of it self (as sometimes he
uses the Devils themselves for his instruments) thereby to teach them to be
more wary another time, and not to entertain again the cause of like
security: and sparing the town, for the good that were absent, and not
ruinating it for the vicious minded that were present at these Players
trumperies.

Now have I opposed and confuted the grand Arguments of M. Actors third book,
such as concern some, though not the more particular use of Plays, which now
I come generally to handle. Before which yet even as M. Actor has done, so
will I declare two authentic Histories of fearful accidents that have
happened at the Theaters. The first is recorded in the book entitled, The
Anotomy of Abuses. made by M. Phillip Stubbes, that when a great multitude were
assembled at the Theater, the Lord sent a mighty earthquake as though all would
have fallen about their ears.

Whereat the people sore amazed, fomeleapt down to the ground from the tops of
turrets and galleries where they sat: whereof some had their legs broke,
some their arms, some their backs, some hurt one where, and some another, and
many sore crushed and bruised, but not any which went not away sore afraid, and
wounded in conscience.

The Second history I have both read and heard. Read, if I be not deceived in
Vines commentaries upon Saint Augustine: Another more fearful accident at a
Play.
and heard some five years since at Bristoll, from the mouth of a Reverend
Preacher, recited there in a set Sermon against the abuse of Plays. And it was
thus. In the times of the primative Church, a Christian woman went into the
Theater to behold the plays. She entered in well and sound, but she returned
and came forth possessed of the Devil. Whereupon certain Godly brethren
demanded Satan how he durst be so bold, as to enter into her a Christian.
Whereto he answered, that he found her in his own house, and therefore took
possession of her as his own. A fearful example this is indeed, able to
affrighten and deter any from entering into Theaters, least they incur the like
danger as this woman did. But now I am come to entreat of the qualities of
Plays and Players, I will hear add some historical Apothegmes and sayings
concerning them, unto the former recited and alleged in my second treatise,
and so withal I will proceed in my discourse. Saint Augustine in his book of
the City of God, speaking of some vices in the Romans which their Cities
ruin, by the Barbarian Goths, did not reform, exclaymeth thus. O you
senseless men! how are you bewitched not with error but furor? That when all
the nations in the East (as we hear) bewail your Cities ruin, and all the
most remote regions bewail your misery, and public sorrow, you your selves
run headlong unto the Theaters: seeking them, filling them, and playing far
madder parts now then ever you did before. This your plague of mind, this your
wrack of honesty, was that which Scipio so feared when he would not have any
Theaters built for you.

Dio, in the Life of Tyaian reports concerning an active Player thus, That
when they entreated the good Emperor that he would please to hear him; he
answered. It is not for the majesty of a grave and virtuous Prince, that in his
presence any such vain thing should be showed. For in such a cafe himself
should be no less noted of lightness, then the other accused of folly. And
further he said. Before Princes a man should not be so hardy to speak
dishonest words, nor show light representations. And in such a case as much
pain deserve they which move him thereto, as those which do represent them,
for none ought to put before Princes things that might allure them to vices,
but such as might move them to virtues. Marcus Aurelius wrote a letter to
Lambertus his friend, certifying him that he had banished from Rome, all
Iesters, Fools, and Loytering Players, and declaring how he had found the
Sepulchers of many learned Philosophers in Hellespont, whereunto he had sent
them.

Marcus Aurelius his letter.
Some fragments of this letter I will hear repeat. After salutation says he.
To declare the chief cause that I write unto thee at this present, it is. I
send thee three ships laden with Iesters, Fools, Players, and Vagabunds. And
yet I do not send unto thee all the Vagabunds which are in Rome, for then I
should em-people thine I Will with strangers. The offices that they bare was, that
some of them were Railing iesters, some Singers of Mallicious and filthy songs,
others played common plays, and enterludes, and entertained the Romans with
foolish fables and tales, others set forth vain and light books of Poesy.
And yet I swear unto thee these Loyterers wanted no Fools to hear them. I
let thee weet my friend Lambert, that these loyterers are such, and their
scholars in number so many, that though the masters may be in three ships
carried, yet the scholars in an hundred could not be transported. One thing
there is at which I much wonder: that the Earthquakes overthrow the houses,
great inundations carry away the bridges, the frost perish the vines, and the
contagious air infecteth Wisemen: But yet there is no plague that consumes
these Fools. O Rome how unhappy do thou present thy self to him that does
diligently search thee. For in thee wants valliant Captains, honest
Senators, just Censors, faithful Officers, virtuous Princes, and only thou
aboundest with Fools, Iesters, Players, Loyterers, and Vagabonds. O Lambert,
what service should thou do to God, and Profit to our Mother Rome, if for
three ships of Fools thou did return us one only Bark of Wisemen.

After this he writes of those that hear these Fools, thus. A Fool has a
semblance of the Sage when he accompanies with a Sage: But the Sage shows
himself a Fool when he accompanies with a Fool. If we communicate with
Liars we shallbe Liars, and if we desire the Foolish we shall be Fools: for
accordying to the Masters and Doctrines we have, such shall be the Sciences we
learn, and the works we shall follow. Dionisus the Scicilian tyrant demanded
of Diogenes, with what persons we should divide our goods: who answered, with
aged persons that should counsel us, good servants which should obey us,
friends that should comfort us, and the poor that should pray for us. By this
answer we may see, that it is not just to give to cate to Iesters, Players,
Loyterers, and Fools. And it seems to me, a man ought not to think that
Players can give good instruction by their lies and mockeries. Also it should
be great folly to use such men as Sages, which of their own will have made
themselves Fools. And again it seems to me vain to think, that such
Iesters should serve as servants. For they to fly travail have only taken
upon them this so slanderous an office. Thirdly, it seems to me a thing of
great inconvenience, that a noble or Sage man should accept any such Iester as
his friend: For they cannot be counted amongst true friends, since they love us
not for the virtue we possess, but for the goods which we have. Fourthly it
seems unto me vninst that under the color of poverty it should be lawful
to give meat to such loyterers: For we cannot say they are pore because they
want riches but because they abound in folly. Since therefore they are not
honest poor, true friends, faithful servants, wise Sages, therefore it is
folly for any man to spend his goods upon them, and thereby become defamed.

By this Centurion thou shall know all things that are chanced among the
prisoners. For if I should write unto thee the whole matter as it was done, it
would be much pain to me to write it and to thee very tedious to read. It
suffices presently to say, that the day of the great solemnity of the mother
Berecinth, a great slander arose in Rome by reason of these iesters, players
and loyterers. And by the faith of a good man I swear unto thee, that the
bloodshed throughout all places, surmounted the wine which was drunk at the
feast. And as thou know the Citizens are come to so great impudency, that
he which on that day drank most, was esteemed to have offered the greatest
sacrifice. I am yet afraid to remember the cruelties which that day I beheld
with my own eyes, but I am much more ashamed of that which they talk of us in
strange Realms. Then saw I Rome, invincible to the valiant men, that day
overcome with loyterers. Rome, which could never be won by the Carthaginians,
is now won by Iesters, Players and Vagabonds: Rome, which triumphed over all
the Realms is now vanquished by such idle persons: Finally I saw Rome, which
in times past gave laws to the Barbarians, now become the slave of fools. In
this case I have been so troubled that I cannot tell what to say, and less
what to write to thee. One thing comfort me, that since Rome and her Romans
do not rejoice themselves but with fools, that she and her children be not
punished but by the hands of fools. I think not in this case that the Gods do
any wrong, if Rome, which laughed at the jests of Plays do weep one day with
the loyterers in good earnest. Thou might demand of me Lambert, since we
Princes are bound to maiutaine equal justice to all, wherefore we dissemble
the offenses of others performed in earnest, and yet we will not pardon these
loyterers, since all their inventions was but in jest for mirth and pastime. I
promise thee though their offenses were great indeed, yet do I not banish them
so much for the blood they have shed, as for the good orders they have
perverted. And once again I protest unto thee that I have not banished them so
much because they were occasion of murders, as because they were teachers of
lies. Without comparison greater is the offense to God and greater the damage
to the common wealth, to take away as these loyterers have done, the senses of
wise men, then that which the murderers have done in bereaning their
adversaries of life. The end of these iesters, players, idle men and vagabonds,
is always to persuade men that they speak and treat continually in mockeries,
to rid them of melancholy and sorrow, and give them recreation: and all this
is but to deceive them of their goods. In which case I wish it would so please
God, that they did but spoil us only of our goods, without depriving us of
our wise-dome.

When Scipio Affricanus had ended the wars of Afric, he went through Rome,
accompanied, not with valiant Captains, but with Players: Which when a
Philosopher espied, he said unto him these words. O Scipio according to the
much I have heard of thee, and the little I see in thee, it were better thou
had dyed in Afric then have come to Rome. For thy worthy and thy honorable
acts in thy absence did astonish us, but thy leuity in our presence does offend
us. To thee it is great infamy, and a shame unto the sacred Senate, that thou
having conquered so many mighty Princes in Afric, should go accompanied
with fools and madmen in Rome. O Scipio, thy life had not then so much peril
among thine enemies, as thine honor has at this present among fools. After
that these loyterers and vaga bonds shall land in thine lle, thou shall deprive
them of none of their goods, but thou shall not suffer them to be so hardy to
exercise their crafts: which if they presume to do they shall put them to
death. We that are Sages call them fools: yet are they subtle fools which
by craft live upon the sweat of others.

And with greater reason should they mock our works, then we laugh at their
words: for they profit more of our goods then we can of their folly.

Afterward speaking of the plague when plays were first induced, he
imprecateth thus. Would to the immortal Gods that the plague had ended those
few which remained, before this cursed generation had brought such abominable
customs into Rome. Much better had it been for our Mother Rome she had been
dispeopled, then such rascals had been her inhabitants.

Since the time I was borne, I never saw any thing less profitable in the
common wealth, nor more vain, nor worse inventions, nor coulder recreations
then these are, which these iesters and players do invent. What thing can be
more monstrous then to see the mockery of a fool draw many wise men beside
their wits? what greater folly then to esteem the jests of a fool worth the
laster of the Sage? what greater cruelty in Rome, then that rich men give more
to a Player for one hours babbling, then to a servant for his whole years
travail? What greater theft then this, that the Garrisons in Hiria want, but
Players iestars and loyterers in Rome have too much? what greater shame to Rome
then this: that Players have won more by their enterludes and mockeries, then
diverse Captains with their weapons and triumphs?

Afterward he shows to how great abundance of wealth some Players have
come: whereupon he says thus. Behold Lambert how they are neglected of the
Gods and favored of Fortune: and in how little estimation the goods of this
life ought to be, since some by counterfeiting leave behind them as great
memory of their folly, as others in truth do by their wisdom. One thing
only there is of these loyterers that pleases me. That with their presence at
Rome, they made every man laugh at their fooleries: and now they are banished
all remain sad for the money they carried away. It is a just judgment of God,
that those which have taken vain pleasure together, do weep afterward for
their loss severally, etc.

Plutarch tells of a Lacedemonian who when he was demanded what he thought
of Tirteus the Poet answered; He was very good to infect young men's wits. And
Hieron of Syracusa condemned the Poet Epicarinus in a great fine, because in
his wives presence he had repeated lascivious verses. If this should be
observed in these times, Poets would verily make too true the common saying
which calls them Threadbare. Viues also writes, that Ovid was most justly
banished as an instrument of wantonness, for making love books, enterludes,
and such amorous trumpery. Tertullian, an ancient Doctor of the Church, called
Poets and certain Philosophers the Patriarchs of Heretics. And in his book
De Speculo says, that Plays were consecrate to the Idol Bacchus, because he
found out and invented strong drink, which Palingenius touches at in these
verses concerning Poets.

Hi furijs agitantur Iacobi, and Apolinis aestro,
Quorum ego iudicium falsum, and damnabile duco.
Blondus in his book de Roma triumphante says, that the Romans gave laws
to their Iesters and Players, even as they did discipline to their mattiall
Cheeftaines. And among other Laws he repeateth these three of especial note.
First they permitted none to use such feats unless he had some other Craft to
live by: But our Players are altogether idle. Secondly they prohibited any vice
to be so bold in his ostentations as to speak malliciously: but this is the
chief subject of our Commedies now. Lastly they ordained that for no pastime
showed, or other thing spoken, they should be so bold to take any money; and to
that end allowed them a small pension out of the treasury. If our Players and
Iesters should be enjoined to this rule, I am persuaded their gains would be
no eyesore to them at the years end: For the country loves them not so well
as to give them yearly pensions, except a Noble man or so, have some as
reteyners to them. But they may here remember the saying of Bias. To be
accounted a noble man's iester, is to be esteemed a mercinary Fool.

Aristotle in the end of his eight book of Politicques, debarreth all youth
access to plays, least in seeking to quench the thirst of Venus, they quench
it with a pottle of fire. Lactantius, a learned father, says, Histrionu
impudissimi gestus nihil aliud nisi libidinem mouent. The shameless gestures
of Players serve to nothing so much as to move the flesh to lust and
uncleanness. Saint Chrysostom calls plays fesia Sathanae, feasts of the
Devil. And in his Seventeen homily upon Saint Matthew he says. There is no
perrill upon the sea so dangerous, as are the Theaters and places of Comedies
and Plays, and declares at large what dissolutnesse, disorder, factions,
mischiefs and inconveniences have ensued thereby. Saint Augustine de Ciuit.
Dei has written his whole second book against them, and says, Pecunias
histrionibus dare, vitium est inane, non virtus. To give money unto Plaiers is
nor virtue, but a heinous vice. The Lacedaemonians would never permit such
Plays and acts, for fear least somewhat might be imprinted in the peoples
breast, contray to the laws of truth. For as the Apostle writes, Euillwords
corrupt good manners. And this caused the good King Saint Louis to banish them
out of his Court. And in Cassiodorus, King Theodorick writes a long letter to
his Provost that he should hinder al such spectacles, as corrupted manners and
honesty, raising nothing but quarrels and contention. The which moved
Aristotle in his Politics, to exhort all magistrates to forbid such Plays,
and banish all vile words out of their City. And Saint Paul exhorts the
Ephesians, that no corrupt communication proceed out of their mouth: and
adds; Green not the holy spirit of God, by whom you are sealed unto the day
of redemption. Constantinus the Emperor ordained that no Player should be
admitted to the Table of the Lord. For how can they be partakers of Christ's
table and of the table of Devils. And in the third Counsel of Carthage, Chap.
11. And in the Synod of Laodicea, it was decreed that no Christian Man or
Woman, should resort to Plays and Enterluds. Wherefore it would be wished that
Theaters might be defaced, and no occasion given for such plagues to enter
within Cities and houses, according to the opinion of Saluianus Bishop of
Marseilles: esteeming all such spectacles to be very Apostasy, and leaving of
the faith of Sacraments, and Christian Religion: and therefore as the occasion
of so great mischief they ought to be shunned. Infinite are the sayings to be
alleged both from Divine and profane writers against Plays and Enterludes,
but I will rest contented with those few of many that I have collected. And
will now proceed to condemn the use of Plays, by declaring their gross abuse
and unchristian impiety.

First therefore they are full of idle and vain words: of which our Savior
says, Scriptures against sundry vices in Plays.
Matthew 12.26. I say unto you, of every idle word that men shall speak, they
shall give account thereof at the day of judgment. They are full of obscaene
speeches, which Saint Paul forbids, Ephesians. 4.29. Let no corrupt communication
proceed out of your mouth.

They are full of lies and profane fables: concerning which, 1 Timothy 1.4. Paul
commands Timothy, to teach that they give not heed to fables. And again, 1 Timothy 4.7. Cast away profane, and old Wives fables: and exercise thy self unto
Godliness: as if such fables were enemies to Godliness. Again, 1 Timothy 6.4. O
Timotheus keep that which is commanded unto thee, and avoid profane and vain
babbling. Three times in one Epistle is the same repeated, to show the
ernestnesse of Paul in his dehortation. Which least it should not take effect,
he again puts Timothy in mind of it in his second Epistle, 2 Chap. 16.
verse. Stay profane and vain bablings, for they shall increase to more
ungodliness:

They are full of oaths, and blasphemies, cursing, and tearing God and Christ
into as many pieces, as they suppose there are members in a Man. Against which
Exodus 20. there is the whole third commandment forbidding it.

They are full of all obscaenity, acts of Fornication, and practizes of
Strumpets and Coseners, and full of Scurrility, Fooleries, Mocks and Mowes,
spoken against by Saint Paul Ephesians. 5.3. But fornication, and all uncleanness
or covetousness let it not once be named among you as becomes Saints:
neither filthiness, neither foolish talking, neither jesting, which are things
uncomely.

They are full of railing, reuiling, backbyting, quipping, taunts, and evil
speaking, which is forbidden in the ninth commandment. Thou shall not bare
false witness. And Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 6.10. writes that Raylers shall not
inherit the kingdom of God, and Ephesians. 4.31. he exhorts. Let all
bitterness, and anger, and wrath, crying, and evil speaking be put away from
you, with all malliciousnesse. This evil tongue Danid calls a sharp Razor,
and hot burning Coals. Whereupon Solomon in his Proverbs says. He which
keeps his tongue, keeps his life. And hereupon all kind of mockery, (with
which Plays are enricht,) ought to be shunned, which is a reproach covered with
some fault, and which accustometh the mocker to Rail and Lie: and moves more
then an injury, when it proceeds from a will to outrage, and a malice without
necessity: which has moved some to term it an artificial injury. Paul 1 Cor.
5.11. Wills us not so much as to Eat and Drink with Raylers, and Solomon
writes in his Proverbs, That God does abhor all Mockers. For this cause we
are to resemble the Physicians which Hypocrates made to swear, that they
should not bewray the secret and hidden falts and evils: or rather follow the
counsel of saint Peter, 1 Pet. 2.1. That laying a side all malliciousnesse,
and all guile, and dissimulation, and envy, and all evil speaking, as newborn
babes we desire the sincere milk of the word, that we may grow thereby. But
now to examine plays according to the four general causes, the Efficient,
Material, Formal, and Fynall cause of all things, all men shall see the
goodness that they contain in them: or much rather the great evil wherewith
they abound.

The Efficient cause of Plays.
The Efficient cause of Plays I have already showed in sundry places of this
work to be the Devil, chiefly by his own command, and secondarily
heretofore by his heathenish agents, first the Idolatrous Greeks, and after
the pagane Romans, and at present by his Ministers, the almost-heathenish
Poets. Wherefore I will insist no longer herein.

The Material cause of Plays.
The Material cause or matter of Plays is their Subject whereupon they speak
and entreat, and that is two fould, either Divine or Profane. If Plays be of
Divine matter, then are they most intolerable, or rather Sacrilegious: for that
the sacred Word of god is to be handled reverently, gravely, and sagely, with
veneration to the glorious majesty of God: and not with scoffs and iybes, or
with the jests of a Fool, as it is in enterludes without any worship or
reverence to the same. The word of our salvation, the price of Christ's blood,
the merrits of his life and passion, the holy Scriptures, were not given to be
abusiuely acted on a Stage, but to be Preached by his Godly Ministers; it was
not given to be mixed and interlaced with scurrilous and uncomely gestures,
laughters, and vain locutions, but to be gravely handled, and with veneration
expounded in Gods assembly. In Deuteronomy. 4.2. it is commanded to ad nothing, nor
take away ought from Gods word: to the doers of which in the end of John's
Revelation there is added a grievous curse. Wherefore whosoever abuses the
word of God on Stages in Plays and Entertludes, abuses the Majesty of God
which shines in the same, and makes a mocking stock of him, and thereby
purchases judgment to himself. And no marvel, for the sacred word of God and
God himself, is never to be thought on, or once named, but in Fear and
Reverence to the same. All the whole company of Heaven, Angels, Archangells,
Cherubin, Seraphin, Thrones, Dominations, Virtues, Principallities, Potestates,
and all powers whatsoever, yea the Devils themselves do tremble and quake at
the naming of God, and at his presence: And do these mockers and flouters of
his Majesty, these dissembling Hypocrites, think to escape unpunished. Beware
therefore you Players, warning to Players.
Hypocrites, and like good coumptists cast up your accounts before hand, what
will be your reward in the end. Abuse God no more, corrupt his people no longer
with your dregs, and entermingle not his blessed Word with your profane
vanities.

For in noe wise is it lawful to mix Scurrility with Divinity, nor Divinity
with Scurrility. Theopompus mingled Moses Law with his writings and was
therefore stricken Mad. Theodictes began the like practice, and the Lord strocke
him Blind. And many others attempting the like devises were all confounded,
and died miserably: besides which, what is their judgment in the other world,
the Lord only knows.

On the other side, if the matter of plays be profane, then tend they to the
dishonor of God, and nourishing of vice, both which are damnable. So that
whether they be divine or profane, they are quite contrary to the word of
grace, and sucked out of the Diuils teates to nourish us in Idolatry,
heathenry, and sin. To discribe the matter of prophaine plays, we are to
consider the general kinds of Plays, which is the Tragedy, and the Comedy.
The matter of Tragedies is haughtiness, arrogance, ambition, pride, injury,
anger, wrath, envy, hatred, contention, war, murder, cruelty, rapine,
incest, rouings, depredations, piracyes, spoils, roberies, rebellions,
treasons, killing, hewing, stabbing, dagger-drawing, fighting, butchery,
treachery, villainy etc. and all kind of heroyick cuils whatsoever. Of Comedies
the matter is love, lust, lechery, baudry, scortation, adultery, uncleanness,
pollution, wantonness, chambring, courting, ieasting, mocking, flouting,
foolery, venery drabbery, knavery, cosenage, cheating, hipocrisy, flattery, and
the like. And as complements and appendants to both kinds of plays is
swearing, cursing, oaths, and blasphemies, etc.

Hence arises the formal cause, or form of plays, which consists in the
action, and in the Actors. The formal cause of Plays.
The action is two-fould, in word, and in deed. The action in word is
lascivious speches, idle and vain scoffing, ieasting, and foolery, and
cosenage, knavery, flattery, and what soever else, set forth in their coullors,
phrases, and terms, and with the grace, elegancy, and luster of the tongue.
The action in deed is the setting forth of all enormities, and exorbitances,
with the personating of the doers of them; with false representations, lying
shows, killing, stabbing, hanging, and fighting; active demonstration of
cosenage, whorish enticeing, all kind of villainy, and hypocrisy; with
embracing, clipping, culling, dandling kissing; all manner wanton gestures, and
the like. The form that consists in the Actors, is the parts they play: And
these are jointly both in Tragedies and Comedies. Tiranous Kings and Queens;
ambitious Potentates, Nobles, Peers; unjust Judges, Magistrates, Officers,
covetous Citizens, spend-all Gentlemen, Gods, Goddesses, Fiendes, Furies,
Devils, Hagges, Ghosts, Witches, Magitians, Sorcerers, Trechers, Murderers,
Swaggerers, Knaves, Drabs, Queans, Whores, Baudes, Courtezans, Rogues,
Villains. Vagsbonds, Thieves, Rouers, Pirates, Cosoners, Cheaters, Brokers,
Banckrupts, Hyppocrites, Sycophants, Parasites, Flatterers, Talecarriers,
Makebates, Lecherous old men, Amarous young men, Wanton maids, Lascivious
dames, Dishonest wives; Rebels, Traitors, proud, hauty, arrogant, incestuous
wicked persons; Whoremasters, Gluttons, Drunkards, Spend-thrifts, Fools,
Madmen, Iesters, Iybers, Flouters, Mockers; and finally contemners of God, his
laws, and the Kings, and blasphemers of his holy name; with such like of
infinite variety. That if there were nothing else but this, it were sufficient
to withdraw a good Christian from beholding of them. For as often as they go
to Theaters to see Plays, they enter into Venus Palace and Satan's Synagogue,
to betray and ensnare their own souses. And therefore these Players, through
the parts they act carrying the note and brand of all kind of cursed people on
their backs, wheresoever they go, are to be hissed out of all Christian
Kingdoms, if they will have truth and not vanity, Christ and not the Devil to
dwell among them. The final cause or end of Plays particulerly touches their
use and qualities, wherein I am to answer three maine objections. The Final
cause of Plays The first objection.


The first objection is, that they instruct men what vices to avoid, what
ordinances to observe, what enormities to abandon, and what virtues to embrace.
Which M. Actor pretends to be the final cause why the Greeks admitted
Plays in their commonwealth, and which I promised in my first Book
particulerly to answer and refute. Therefore let him know that God only gave
authority of public instruction and correction but to two sorts of men: to
his Ecclestasticall Ministers, and temporal Magistrates: he never instituted a
third authority of Players, or ordained that they should serve in his Ministry:
and therefore are they to be rejected with their use and quality. As
concerning their Ministerial use, God requires no such thing at their hands,
that they should take it upon them: But it is the Devils craft who sometimes
will change himself into an Angel of Light, that is will colourably seem to
induce to good, when his intention is to seduce, ensnare, and intrappe sily
souls in inexplicable evils. But what God does not require them to do is
performed according to the prauity of their own nature, and not his will. And
it is a horrible abomination for those (whom Christ has not put into his
Vineyard) to presume to be laborers therein. For Christ will have none, but
whom himself through his holy spirit shall sanctify for that end. And
therefore Luke 10.2. he teaches us to pray the Lord of the harnest (which is
himself) to send forth laborers into his harvest. Shall we then pray him to
send forth Players: no they belong no to his public ministry. God gave
authority to instruct and preach, to correct and anathematize, which is the
keys of heaven, only to the Apostles and their successors, and not to
Players; For it is unlawful to cast pearls before Swine. The Ministers of
Christ must take the word of God in their mouths, and therewith improve,
rebuke, and exhort; and may Players do so? no it were most impious, as I have
showed before, to mix Divinity with scurrility on the stage. As concerning
public Magistracy, Players have no authority in their enterludes: they have
no law to cause men to fly that which is evil, and to follow that which is
good. Magistrates are sent of God, 1. Pet. 2.14. for the punishment of evil
doers, and for the praise of them that do well. And as the Ministry is, so is
the Magistracy the ordinance of God; to which he has added the good laws for
instruction and the sword for correction. But has God instituted any such
authority and liberty to Players? no; for Romans 13.1. There is no power but of
God, and the powers that be ordained of God. But Plays were ordained by, and
dedicated to the Devil, which is enemy to God and al goodness. And full sorry
would he be that any (as never yet any did) should benefit by a Play: for if he
could have but thought so, he would never at first hau e instituted them.

And so to conclude Players assume an unlawful office to themselves of
instruction and correction: and therefore it becomes sin unto them, because
God never ordained them unto it, which is the reason that never any profited in
goodness but in wickedness by them. This is sufficient to refute the first
objection. But because this opinion of the use of plays was but the
supposition of the heathen Greeks I will further convince it with the authority
and reasons of an heathen man, Affricanus in Ciceronem de republica.
, speaking of the licentious liberty of Poets and Players tongues, says thus:
Whom did not the Poet touch, nay whom did he not vex, whom spared he? Perhaps
says one, he quipt a sort of wicked, vulgar, seditious fellows, as were
Cleo, Clitophon and Hyperbolus: but it were fitter for such faults to be taxed
by the Censor, then by the Poet. And it was no more decent that Pericles should
be snuffed at, having many years governed the City so well, both in peace and
war, then for our Plautus or Naeuius to deride Publius or Cneius Scipio, or
for Caecilius to mock Marcus Cato. Here he shows that not only the evil,
but the good also are subject to the bitter malice of Comedians, worthy
therefore to be rejected. And again a little after says he. Our 12. Tables
having ordained but a very few things upon pain of death, yet thought it
good to establish this for one of those few; that none should write or act any
verse derogatiue to the good name of any one, or prejudicial unto manners.
Excellently well; For our lives ought not to be the subjects for Poets to play
upon, but for lawful Magistracy, and thoroughly informed justice to judge
upon. He proceeds further in his discourse, and in fine concludes thus,
That the ancient Romans disliked that any should be either praised or
dispraised upon the stage. This now is wholly enough to confound the first, and
grand chief objection. For first it shows the licenciousnesse of Poets
pens, and Players tongues in nipping at men both good and bad; And that such
faults as are reprehended on the stage, were better to be taxed by the
Censor; And that the ancient Romans capitis diminutione made a law to repress
the leudnes of Poets and stagerits: because the law it self were sufficient by
the power of Magistracy to plant virtue, and justice it self of sufficient
force to root out vice.

The second Objection.
The second objection is the vulgar opinion of Actors, and the most part of
their profane auditors, some whereof I have even heard with mine own cares to
pronounce and affirm: Plays to be as good, or may do as much good, as
Sermons are, Jf Plays do so much good, why are they not suffered on the
Sabbath, a day select wherein to do good.
or may do. Oh blasphemy intolerable! Are obscaene Plays, and filthy
Enterludes comparable to the word of God, the food of life, and life it self?
It is all one as if they had said, Baudry, Heathenry, Paganism, Scurrility,
and Diuelry, it self is equal with Gods Word: Or that Satan is equipolent
with the Lord. God has ordained his blessed word, and made it the ordinary
means of our Salvation: the Devil has inferred the other as the ordinary
means of our destruction. God has set his holy Word and Ministers to instruct
us in the way of Life: the Devil instituted Plays and Actors to seduce us
into the way of Death: and will they yet compare the one with the other? If he
be accursed that calls Light Darkness, and Darkness Light; Truth Falsehood,
and Falsehood Truth; then a fortieri, is he accursed that says Plays and
Enterludes are Equivalent with Sermons, or compares Comedies and Tragedies to
the Word of God, whereas there is no mischief, almost, which they maintain
not. For do they not nourish Idleness? and Otia dant Vitia. Idleness is the
Mother of Vice, and many vicious Persons when they know not how any longer to
be idle, for variety of Idleness go to see Plays. Do they not draw the
people from hearing the Word of God, and Godly Lectures? For you shall have
them flock thick and three-fould to the Play Houses, and withal Celerity make
speed to enter in them, least they should not get place near enough unto the
Stage (so prone and ready are they to evil;) when the Temple of God shall
remain bare and empty. The Playhouse full, but the Church empty.
And those that will never come at Sermons will flow thither apace: the reason
is because the way that leads to life is Narrow, and few that tread that
Path: but the way that leads to destruction is Broad, and many find it. And
this shows they are not of God, who refuse to here his word: but of the
Devil whose exercises they go to visit. Do they not teach Cheating and
Cosenage, by publishing their tricks of Knavery? Do they not instruct in
Chambering and Wontonnesse, by showing how to court and congie? Do they not
insinuate Baudry, Act Foolery, and renew the remembrance of Heathen Idolatry?
Do they not induce Whoredom, and uncleanness? nay; are they not rather plain
deuourers of Maidenly Virginity and Chastity? For proose whereof but mark the
madding and running to Theaters and Curtains, daily and hourly, night and
day, time and tide, too see Plays and Enterludes. Where such wanton gestures,
such dishonest speeches, such laughing and fleering, such lipping and kissing,
such clipping and culling, such lustful passions, such wincking and glancing
of wonton eyes and the like is used, as is wonderful and exceeding shameful to
behold. The fruit of Plays.
Then these goodly Pageants being done, every one sorteth to his mate, each
bring another home-ward of their way: then begin they to repeat the lascivious
acts and speeches they have heard, and thereby infect their mind with wicked
passions, so that in their secret conclaues they play the Sodomits, orworse.
And these for the most part are the fruits of Plays.

The third objection is, that many good examples may belearned out of them. And
truly so there may; The third Objection what good there is to be learned as
Plays.
For if you will learn to do any evil, skilfully, cunningly, covertly, or
artificially, you need go noe other where then to the Theater: If you will
learn falsehood if you will learn cosonage, if you will learn indirect
dealing, if you will learn to deceive, if you will learn to play the
hippocrite, sicophant, Parasite and flatterer; if you will learn to cogge,
lie, and falsify, if you will learn to jest, laugh and fleere, to grinne,
nodde, and mow: if you will learn to play the Vice, to curse, swear, tear,
and blaspheme both heaven and earth, in all kinds and diversities of oaths; if
you will learn to play the Baud or courtesan, to polute your self, to
deuirginate maids, to defloure wives, or to ravish widows by enticing them
to lust, if you will learn to drabbe and stabbe, to murder, kill, and slay,
if you will learn to pick, steal, rob, and roue, if you will learn to
rebel against Princes, closely to carry treasons, to consume treasures, to
practice idleness, to sing and talk of filthy love and venery, if you will
learn to deride, quippe, scorn, scoff, mock, and flout, to flatter and
smoth, if you will learn to play the Devil, the swaggerer, the whoremaister,
the glutton, the drunkard, the injurious or incestuous person, if you will
learn to become proud, haughty, and arrogant: Finally if you will learn to
contemn God and all his laws, to care neither for heaven nor hell, and to
commit all kind of sin and mischief with secrecy and art, you need not go
to any other choole, for all these good examples may you see painted before
your eyes in enterludes and plays. Wherefore that man that gives money for the
maintenance of them, must needs incur the danger of praemunire that is scuere
judgment except they repent. A divine praemunire.
For the Apostle bids us beware least we communicate with other men's
sins, and this their doing is not only to communicate with other men's
sins, and maintain evil to the destruction of themselves and many others,
but also a maintaining of a great sort of idle and buzzing drones, to suck up
and devour the good honey, whereupon the poor bees should live. And therefore
let all Players and founders of Plays, as they tender the salvation of their
own souls, and others, leave off that cursed kind of life, and betake
themselves to such honest exercises and godly mysteries, as God has commanded
in his word to get their living with-all. For who will call him a wise man that
plays the fool and the vicer Who can call him a good Christian that plays
the part of a Devil the swerne enemy of Christ? who can call him a just man
that plays the dissembling hypocrite? who can call him a straight dealing
man, that plays a cosoners trick: and so of all the rest. The wise man is
ashamed to play the fool, but Players will seem to be such in public view
to all the world: a good Christian hates the Devil; but Players will become
artificial Diuelse excellently well: a just man cannot endure hypocrisy; but
all the acts of Players is dissimolation, and the proper name of Player
(witness the Apology it selte) is hypocrite: a true dealing man cannot endure
deceit, but Players get their living by craft and cosenage. For what greater
cheating can there be then for money to render that which is not moneys worth.
Then seeing they are fools, Of what sort of men Players be.
artificial Devils, hypocrites and coseners; most evident it is that their
Artis not for Christians to exercise, as being diabolical, and themselves
infamous: such indeed as the Lacedaemonians had, and we also have great reason
to extrude out of our common wealth, for they are Idle, vicious, cishonest,
malicious, peiudiciall and unprofitable to the same. They are Idle, for they
can take no pains, they know not how to work, nor in any lawful calling to
get their living: but to avoid labor and work, like brave and noble beggars,
they stand to take money of every one that comes to see them loyter and play.
Hence it is that they are Vicious; for idleness is the mother of vice, and
they cannot exercise their offices but in vices, and treating of and with
vicious men. They are dishonest; for they get not to eat by doing good works,
but by speaking filthy, vile, and dishonest words. They are malicious; for they
are accustomed, either for their friends or themselves, when they jove not a
man to speak evil of him: and colourably under hand to mock and flout at any.
They are prejudicial and unprofitable to the common wealth; for they cosen and
mock us with vain words, and we pay them good money, But now to draw to the
end and conclusion of my discourse, I will but only describe briefly and in
few words, who for the most part they are which run madding unto plays. In
general the vulgar sort, in whom, Cicero pro Planc. says non est concilium,
non ratio, non discrimen, there is no counsel, reason, or discretion. But to
particularize some amonst all. The profane gallant to feed his pleasure; the
City dames to laugh at their own shames: the Country Clown to tell wonders
when he comes home of the vanities he has seen, the baudes to entice, the
whores and courtezans to set themselves to sale, the cutpurse to steal, the
pickpocket to filch, the knave to be instructed in more cosoning tricks, youth
to learn amorous conceits, some for one wicked purpose, some for another: none
to any good intent, but all fruitlesly to mispend their time. But among any
others that go to the Theaters, when shall you see an ancient citizen, a
chaste matron, a modest maid, a grave Senator, a wise Magistrate, a just Judge,
a godly Preacher, a religious man not blinded in ignorance, but making
conscience of his ways? you shall never see any of these men at Plays, for
they count it shameful and ignominious, even an act of reproach that may
redound un to them.

Then to conclude all, seeing Plays are the institution of the Devil
himself, and the practice of Heathen people nouzeled in ignorance: seeing they
took original from Paganism, and were dedicated to their Idol-Gods, as now
also they are the house, stage and apparel to Venus, the music to Apollo,
the penning to Minerua, the songs to the Muses, the action and pronounciation
to Mercury: seeing they are inricht with fables, lies, dishonesties and all
kind of kanueries: seeing the actors of them have been counted ignominious, and
in all ages by the best men branded with infamy: seeing by the wisest men they
have been expeld out of their common wealth, and esteemed as vagabonds,
corrupters of good manners, subuerters of religion in peoples hearts, and
seducers of men to destruction: seeing by some they have not been admitted to
the Lords table: seeing their action both in word and deed is to be abhord:
seeing they carry the note and brand of all kind of cursed people on their
backs: seeing they were never ordained of God to give instruction, but by the
Devil to teach lewdnes and dissolution: seeing they are idle drones, and
prejudicial to the common wealth: seeing none of the best sort will frequent
their theaters for very shame: seeing the theater is Satan's Synagogue and the
devils own house: seeing Plays have been condemned by Pagans and
Christians, by Synods and Counsels, by ancient Fathers and late Writers, by
both the old and new Testament: seeing their subject and matter is nothing but
filthiness and villainy: seeing they are full of abuses, against which sundry
places of Scripture do testifye: seeing from them can be learned no good, but
any cuill that wickedness can desire. Then do I earnestly entreat cuery one, as
they love their own souls, to detest and abandon them. As for those which
will yet remain in blindnesle, or presume to go to Satan's Sanctuary, in hope
there to learn any good, let them consider in how palpable darkenesle they
wander, while they forsake the truth and cleave to fables, like unto whom the
Apostle mentions some in his 2. Epist. to Tim. 4.2. where he thus exhorts.
Timothy. Preach the word, be instant in season and out of season, improve,
rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering and doctrine. For the time will come
when they will not suffer wholesome Doctine, but having their ears itching,
shall after their own lusts get them a heap of teachers, and shall turn
their ears from the truth and be given unto fables. And finally let me entreat
eue^ one that will reclaim themselves from Plays, for the furtherance and
execution of their good thought and intention, to be are this Sermon of Saint
Paul in their mind. Ephesians. 4.17. This I say and testify in the Lord, that ye
henceforth wallke not as other Gentiles walk, in vanity of their mind, having
their cogitation darkened, and being strangers from the life of God through
the ignorance that is in them, because of the bardnes of their heart, who being
past feeling have given themselves unto wantonness, to work all uncleanness enen
with greedines. But ye (...) not so (...) Christ. If so (...) ^^ard him and
have (...) taught by him, as the truth (...) Jesus that ye cast off
(concerning the conversation in times just the old man, which is corrupt
through the d^^^aue^ble lusts: and be renewed in the Spirit of your mind.

-- Fides ab pudes esse Poeta^^^
Sinugis opus est pu^ilibus inseruire,
Et iucunda sequi spr^^^ ^^^^dacia vere.
FJNIS.

