GREENES ARCADIA, OR MENAPHON: CAMILLAES Alarm to slumber EVPHVES in his
Melancholy Cell at SILEXEDRA.

Wherein are descyphered, the variable effects of FORTUNE, the wonders of LOVE,
the triumphs of inconstant TIME.

A work, worthy the youngest ears for pleasure, OR, The grauest censures for
principles.

By ROBERTUS GREEN, in Artibus Magister.

Omne tulit punctum.



LONDON Printed by W. Stansby for I. Smethwicke, and are to be sold at his Shop
in S. Dunstanes Churchyard under the Dyall, in Fleet Street. 1616.

TO THE GENTLEMEN STVDENTS OF BOTH UNIVERSITIES.
CVrteous, and wise, whose judgments (not entangled with envy) enlarge the
deserts of the learned, by your liberal censures: vouchsafe to welcome your
Scholler-like Shepherd, with such University entertainment, as either the
nature of your bounty, or the custom of your common ciuility may afford. To
you he appeals that knew him ab extrema pueritia, whose placet he accounts
the plaudite* of his pains: thinking his day-labour was not altogether lauisht
sieve linea, if there be any thing at al in it, that does olere Atticum in your
estimate. I am not ignorant how eloquent our gowned age is grown of late, so
that every Mechanical mate abhors the English he was borne to, and plucks
with a solemn periphrasis, his vt vales from the inke-horne: which I impute,
not so much to the perfection of Arts, as to the servile imitation of
vainglorious Trag^dians, who contend* not so seriously to excel in action,
as to embowell the clouds in a speech of comparison, thinking themselves more
then initiated in Poets immortality, if they but once get Boreas by the beard,
and the heavenly Bull by the deaw-lap. But herein I cannot so fully bequeath
them to folly, as their idiot Art-masters, that i^^^ude themselves to our
ears, as the Alcumists of eloquence, who (mounted on the stage of arrogance)
think to out-braue better Pe^s with the swelling bumbast of bragging blanke
verse. Indeed, it may be, the ingrafted over ^^ow of some kill (...) conceit,
that ouer-cloyeth their imagination with a more then drunken resolution, being
not extemporall in the invention of any other means to vent their manhood,
commits the disgestion of their choleric encumbrances, to the spacious
volubilitie of a drumming decasillabon. Among this kind of men, that repose
eternity in the mouth of a Player, I can but ingrosse some deep-read
Schoolmen or Grammarians, who having no more learning in their skull, then
will serve to take up a commodity, nor Art in their braiue, then was nourished
in a Seruing-mans idleness, will take upon them to be the ironicall Censors
of all, when God and Poetry does know they are the simplest of all. To leave
all these to the mercy of their Mother tongue, that feed on naught but the
crumbs that fall from the ^ranslators trencher, I come (sweet friend) to thy
Arcadian Menaphon, whose attire (though not so stately, yet comely) does
entitle thee above all other, to that temperatum dicendi genus, which Tully in
his Orator terms true eloquence. Let other men (as they please) praise the
Mountain that in seven years brings forth a Mouse, or the Italianate Pen,
that of a packet of pilfris, affoords the Press a pamphlet or two in an Age,
and then in disguised array vaunts Ouids and Plutarchs plumes as their own:
but give me the man, whose extemporall vein in any humor, will excel our
greatest Art-Masters deliberate thoughts, whose inventions quicker then his
eye, will challenge the prowdest Rhetorician, to the contention of like
perfection, with like expedition.

What is he among Students so simple, that cannot bring forth ( tanquam
aliquando) some or other thing singular, sleeping betwixt every sentence? What
is not Maroes twelve years toil, that so famed his twelve Aeneidos? Or Peter
Ramus sixteen years pains, that so praised his petty Logic? How is it
then, our drowping wits should so wonder at an exquisite line, that was his
Masters day-labour? Indeed I must needs say, the descending years from the
Philosophers Athens, have not been supplied with such present Orators, as were
able in any English vein to be eloquent of their own, but either they must
borrow invention of Ariosto, and his countrymen, take up choice of words by
exchange in Tullies Tusculans, and the Latin Historiographers storehouses,
similitudes, nay whole sheets, and tractates verbatim, from the plenty of
Plutarch and Pliny: and to conclude, their whole method of writing, from the
liberty of Comicall fictions, that have succeeded to our Rhetoricians by a
second imitation; so that well may the Adage, Nil dictum quod non dictum prius,
be the most judicial estimate of our latter Writers. But the hunger of our
unsatiate humorists, being such as it is, ready to swallow all draffe without
difference, that insinuates it self to their senses under the name of
delights, imploies ofttimes many thredbare wits, to empty their invention of
their Apish devices, and talk most superficially of Policy, as those that
never ware gown in the University; wherein they revive the old said Adage,
Sus Mineruam, and cause the wiser to quippe them with Asinui ad lyram. Would
Gentlemen and riper judgments admit my motion of moderation in a matter of
folly, I would persuade them to physic their faculties of seeing and hearing,
as the Sabaeans do their dulled senses with smelling: who (as Strabo
reports) ouer-cloyd with such odoriferous savors as the natural increase of
their Country (Balsamum, Amomum, with Myrrh and Frankincense) sends forth,
refresh their nostrills with the unsavory sent of the pitchy flame, that
Euphrates cast up, and the co^iagious fumes of goats beards burned: so would I
have them, being surfeited unawares with the sweet saciety of eloquence, which
the lavish of our copious language may procure, to use the remedy of
contraries, and recreate their rebated wits; not as they did, with the senting
of slime or Goats beards burned, but with the ouer-seeing of that sublime
dicendi genus, which walks abroad for waste paper in each Seruing-mans pocket,
and the otherwhile pervsing of our Gothamists barbarism; so should the
opposite comparison of Purity, expel the infection of Absurdity, and their
ouer-racked Rhetoric, be the Ironicall recreation of the Reader.

But so far discrepant is the idle usage of our unexperienced and illiterated
Pu^^es from this prescription, that a tale of Ioane of Brainfords will, and the
unlucky Frumenty, will be as soon entertained into their Libraries, as the
best Poem that ever Tasso eternized: which being the effect of an undiscerning
judgment, makes dross as valuable as gold, and loss as wel-come as gain;
the Glow-worme mentioned in Aesops Fables, namely, the Apes folly, to be
mistaken for fire, when as God wot, poor souls, they have naught but their
toil for their heat, their pains for their sweat, and (to bring it to our
English Proverb) their labor for their travel. Wherein I can but resemble
them to the Panther, who is so greedy of men's excrements, that if they be
hanged up in a vessel higher then his reach, he soone^ kills himself with
the ouer-stretching of his windlesse body, then he will cease from his
intended enterprise. Often have I observed what I now set down: a secular wit
that has lived all days of his life by, what do you lack? to be more
judicial in matters of conceit, then our quadrant crepundious, that spit ergo
in the mouth of every one they meet: yet those and these are affectionate to
dogged detracting, as the most poisonous Pasquils, any durty-mouthed Martin, or
Momus ever composed, is gathered up with greediness, before it fall to the
ground, and bought at the dearest, though they smell of the Priplers lauender,
half a yee^e after ^or I know not how the mind of the meanest is ^ed with
this folly, that they impute singularity, to him that slanders privily, and
count it a great piece of Art in an inkehorne man, in any Papsterly terms
whatsoever, to expose his Supers^ours to envy. I will not deny, but in
Scholer-like matters of controversy, a quicker style may pass as commendable,
and that a qui^ to an Ass is as good as a goad to an Ox: but when the
irregular I^eot, that was up to the ears in (...), before ever he met with
probabile in the Vnluersitle, shall leave pro and contra, before he ca^
^carcely pronounce it, and come to correct commonweals, that never heard of
the name of Magistrate, before he came to Cambridge, it is no marvel if
every Alehouse vaunt the ^^ble of the world turned vpside down, (...) the
Child beats his Father, and the Ass whipp^th hi^ Master, Bull lest I might
seem with these night-^^owe^, Nimi^^ (...) in aliena republica, I will turn
back to my first Text of Studies of delight, and talk a little in friendship
with a few of our triuiall Translators. It is a common practice now a days
amongst a sort of shifting Companions, that run through every Art, and thrive
by none, to leave the ^rade of No^eriut, whereto they were borne, and busy
themselves with the endeavors of Art, that could scarcely L^^^nize their
neck-verse, if they should have need: yet English Seneca read by Candlelight,
yields many good sentences, as Blood is a beggar, and so forth: and if you
entreat him fair in a frosty morning, he will afford you whole Hamlets, I
should say, handfuls of Tragical speeches. But, O grief! Tempus ed^x rerum,
what is that will last always? The Sea exhaled by drops, will in continuance be
dry: and Seneca let blood (...) by line, and page by page, at length must
needs die to our stage; which makes his famished followers to imitate the Kid
in Aesope, who enamoured with the Foxes new-fangles, forsook all hopes of life
to leap into a new occupation: and these men renouncing all possibilities of
credit or estimation, to intermeddle with Italian Translations: Wherein, how
poorly they have plodded, (as those that are neither Pouerzal-men, nor are
able to distinguish of Articles) let all indifferent Gentlemen that have
traveled in that tongue; discern by their two-penny Pamphlets. And no marvel
though their ^ome-borne mediocritie be such in this matter; for what can be
hoped of those, that thrust Elisium into hell, and have not learned so long as
they have lived in the Spheres, the just measure of the Horizon without an
hexameter? Suffices them to bodge up a blanke verse with ifs and ands, and
other while for recreation after their Candle-stuffe, having starched their
beards most curiously, to make a Peripateticall path into the inner parts of
the City, and spend two or three hours in turning over French Dowdie, where
they attract more infection in one minute, then they can do eloquence all days
of their life, by (...) with any Authors of like argument. But lest in this
declamatorie veins, I should condemn all, and commend none, I will propound to
your learned imitation, those men of import, that have labored with credit in
this laudable kind of Translation. In the forefront of whom, I cannot but
place that aged Father Erasmus, that invested most of our Greek writers in the
robes of the ancient Romans; in whose traces Philip Melancthon, Sadolet,
Plantine, and many other reverend Germans insisting, have reedified the ruins
of our decayed Libraries, and maruellously enriched the Latin tongue with the
expense of then toil. Not long after, their emulation being transported into
England, every private Scholar, William Turner, and who not, b^ganne to vaunt
their ^mattering of Latin, in English impressions. But amongst others in that
age, Sir Thomas Eliots elegance did sever it self from al equals, although Sir
Thomas Moore with his comical wit, at that instant was not altogether idle: yet
was not knowledge fully confirmed in her Monarchy amongst us, till that most
famous and fortunate Nurse of all learning, Saint John's in Cambridge, that at
that time was as an University within it self, shining so far above all
other Houses, Halls, and Hospitalls whatsoever, that no College in the Town,
was able to compare with the Tithe of her Students, having (as I have heard
grave men of credit report) more Candles light in it, every Winter morning
before four of the clock, then the four of the clock Bell gave strokes: till
she (I say) as a pitying Mother, put to her helping hand, and sent from her
^ruitfull womb, sufficient Scholars, both to support her own Weal, as also
to supply all other inferior foundations defects, and namely, that royal
crection of Trinity College, which the University Orator in an Epistle to
the Duke o^, Somerset, aptly termed Colonia deducta, from the Suburbs of Saint
John's. In which extraordinary conception, Vno partis in rempublicam prodiere,
the Exchequer of eloquence, Sir John Check, a man of men, supernaturally
traded in all tongues, Sir John Mason, Doctor Watson, Redman, Ascam, Grindal,
Lever, (...) all which have either by their private readings, or (...) works,
re^urged the errors of Art, expelled from their purity, and set before our
eyes a more perfect method of study.

But how ill their precepts have prospered with our idle age, that leave the
fountains of Sciences, to follow the Rivers of Knowledge, their ouer-fraught
Studies, with trifling compendiaries, may testify: for I know not how it
comes to pass, by the doting practice of our Divinity Du^^es, that strive
to make their Pupils pulpit-men, before they are reconciled to Priscian: but
those years which should be employed in Aristotle, are expired in Epitomies,
and well too, they may have so much Catechism vacation, to take up a little
refuse Philosophy.

And here I could enter into a large field of inuectiue against our abject
abbreuiations of Arts, were it not grown to a new fashion among our Nation,
to vaunt the pride of contraction in every manuarie action: insomuch, that the
Paternoster, which was wont to fill a sheet of Paper, is written in the
compass of a penny: whereupon one merrily assumed that Proverb to be derived,
No penny, no pater noster. Which their nice curtayling puts me in mind of
the custom of the Scythians, who if they had been at any time distressed with
famine, took in their g^^dles shorter, and swaddled themselves straighter, to
the intent, no vacuum being left in their intrailes, hunger should not so much
tyrannize over their stomachs: even so these men oppressed with a greater
penury of Art, do pound their capacity in barren Compendiums, and bound
their base humors in the beggarly straights of a hungry Analysis, lest longing
after that infinitum, which the poverty of their conceit cannot compass, they
sooner yield up their youth to destiny, then their heart to understanding.

How is it then such bungling practicioners in principles, should ever profit
the Commonwealth by their negligent pains, who have no more cunning in
Logic or Dialogue Latin, then appertains to the literal construction of
either: nevertheless, it is daily apparent to our domestical eyes, that there
is none so forward to publish their imperfections, either in their trade of
gloss or translations, as those that are more unlearned then ignorant, and
less conceiving than Infants. Yet dare I not impute absurdity to all of that
society, although some of them have set their names to their simplicity. Who
ever my private opinion condemns as saultie, Master Gascoigne is not to be
abridged of his deserved esteem, who first beat the path to that perfection
which our best Poets have aspired to since his departure, whereto he did
ascend, by comparing the Italian with the English, as Tully did Graeca cum
Latinis. Neither was M. Turberuile the worst of his time, though in translating
he attributed too much to the necessity of the time. And in this page of
praise, I cannot omit aged Arthur Golding, for his industrious toil in
Englishing Ouids Metamorphosis, besides many other exquisite editions of
divinity, turned by him out of the French tongue into our own. M. Phaer
likewise is not to be forgot, in regard of his famous Virgil, whose heavenly
verse, had it not been blemished by his hautie thoughts, England might have
long insulted his wit, and corrigat qui potest have been subscribed to his
works. But Fortune, the Mistress of change, with a pitying compassion,
respecting Master Stanihursts praise, would that Phaer should fall, that he
might rise, whose heroical poetry infired, I should say inspired with an
hexameter fury, recalled to life, what ever histed Barbarism has been buried
this hundred year: and revived by his ragged quill such carterly variety, as
no Hodge ploughman in a Country but would have held as the extremity of
clownerie: a pattern whereof I will propound to your judgments, as near as I
can, being part of one of his descriptions of a tempest, which is thus. Then
did he make heavens vault to rebound,
with rounce robble bobble,
Of ruff raffe roaring,
with thwicke thwack* thurlerie bouncing.
Which strange language of the firmament, never subject before to our common
phrase, make us that are not used to term^nate heavens moving in the accents of
any voice, esteem of their triobulare Interpreter, as of some Thrasonicall
huffe snuff: for so terrible was his style to all mild ears, as would have
affrighted our peaceable Poets from intermedling hereafter, with that
quarrelling kind of verse, had not sweet Master France, by his excellent
translation of Master Thomas Watsons sugared Amyntas, animated their dulled
spirits, to such high-witted endeavors. But I know not how, their ouer-timerous
cowardice has stood in awe of envy, that no man since him durst imitate any
of the worst of those Roman wonders in English: which makes me think, that
either the lovers of mediocritie are very many, or that the number of good
Poets are very small, and in truth, (Master Watson except, whom I mentioned
before) I know not almost any of late days, that has showed himself singular
in any special Latin Poem: whose Amyntas, and translated Antigone, may march
in equipage of honor, with any of your ancient Poets: I will not say but we
had a Haddon, whose pen would have challenged the Laurel from Homer, together
with Car that came as near him as Virgil to Theocritus. But Thomas Newton with
his Leiland, and Gabriel Haruey, with two or three other, is almost all the
store that is left us at this hour. Epitaphers, and position Poets, we have
more then a good many, that swarm like Crows to a dead carcass, but fly
like Swallows in the Winter, from any continuate subject of wit.

The efficient whereof, I imagine to issue from the vpstart discipline of our
reformato^ie Churchmen, who account wit vanity, and Poetry impiety: whose
error, although the necessity of Philosophy might confute, which li^s
couched most closely under dark fables profunditie, yet I had rather refer
it as a disputatiue plea by Divines, then set it down as a determinate
position in my unexperienced opinion. But how ever their dissentious judgments
should decree in their afternoon sessions of ansit, the private truth of my
discovered Creed in this controversy is this, that as that beast was thought
scarce worthy to be sacrificed to the Egyptian Epaphus* who had not some or
other black spot on his skin: so I deem him far unworthy the name of a
scholar, and so consequently to sacrifice his endeavors to Art, that is not a
Poet, either in whole or in part.

And here peradventure, some desperate quipper will canuaze my purposed
comparison Plus vltra, reconciling the allusion of the black spot, to the
black pot, which makes our Poets vndermeale Muses too mutinous, as every
stanzo they pen after dinner, is full pointed with a stabbe. Which their dagger
drunkenness, although it might be excused with tam Marti, quam Mercurio, yet
will I cover it as well as I may with that prouerbiall foecundi cal^^es, that
might well have been doore-keeper to the kanne of Sile^us, when nodding on his
Ass trapped with Iuie, he made his moist nose-cloth the pausing intermedium
twixt every nappe. Let frugall scholars, and fine-fingered nouices, take their
drink by the ounce, and their wine by the halfe-penny worths: but it is for a
Poet to examine the pottle pots, and gage the bottom of whole gallons, qui
been vult poie in, debet ante pinion. A pot of blew burning ale, with a fiery
flaming toste, is as good as Pallas with the nine Muses on Pernassus top:
without the which, in vain they may cry, O thou my Muse, inspire me with some
pen, when they want certain liquid sacrifice to rouse her forth her den.

Pardon me (Gentlemen) though somewhat merrily I glance at their immoderate
folly, who affirm, that noman writes with conceit, except he take counsel of
the cup: nor would I have you think, that Theonino dente, I arm mystile
against all, since I do know the moderation of many Gentlemen of that study,
to be so far from infamy, as their verse from equality: whose
sufficiency, were it as well seen into, by those of higher place, as it
wanders abroad unrewarded in the mouths of ungrateful monsters, no doubt but
the remembrance of Macenas liberality extended to Maro, and men of like
quality, would have left no memory to that proverb of poverty, Si nihil
attuleris, ibis Homere for as. Tush, say our English Italians, the finest wits
our climate sends forth, are but drie-brained dolts in comparison of other
countries: whom if you interrupt with read rationem; they will tell you of
Petrarch, Tasso, Celiano, with an infinite number of others, to whom if I
should oppose Chaucer, Lydgate, Gower, with such like, that lived under the
tyranny of ignorance, I do think their best lovers would be much
discontented with the collation of contraries, if I should write over all their
heads, Hail fellow, well met. One thing I am sure of, that each of these three
have vented their meeters with as much admiration in English, as ever the
proudest Ariosto did his verse in Italian.

What should I come to our Court, where the other-while vacations of our grauer
Nobilitle are prodigal of more pompous wit, and choice of words, then ever
tragic Tasso could attain to? But as for pastoral poems, I will not make
the comparison, lest our countrimens credit should be discountenanced by the
contention: who, although they cannot fare with such inferior facility, yet I
know, would carry the bucklers full easily from all foreign brauers, if their
subiectum circa quod, should savor of any thing hautie. And should the
challenge of deep conceit be intruded by any forrainer, to bring our English
wits to the touchstone of Art, I would prefer divine Master Spencer, the
miracle of wit, to bandie line by line for my life, in the honor of England,
against Spain, France, Italy, and all the world. Neither is he the only
swallow of our Summer, (although Apollo, if his Tripos were up again, would
pronounce him his Socrates,) but he being forborne, there are extant about
London, many most able men, to revive Poetry, though it were executed ten
thousand times, as in Platoes, so in Puritans Commonwealth: as namely for
example, Matthew Roydon, Thomas Achlow, and George Peele: the first of whom, as
he has showed himself singular in the immortal Epitaph of his beloved
Astrophell, besides many other most absolute Comike inuentious (made more
public by every man's praise, then they can be by my speech,) so the second
has more then once or twice manifested hi^ deepe-witted schollership in places
of credit: and for the last, though not the least of them all, I dare commend
him unto all that know him, as the chief supporter of pleasance now living,
the Atlas of Poetry, and primus verborum Artifex: whose first increase, the
arraignement of Paris might plead to your opinions, his pregnant dexterity of
wit, and manifold variety of invention, wherein ( me iudice) he goes a step
beyond all that write. Sundry other sweet Gentlemen I do know, that we have
vaunted their pens in private devices, and tricked up a company of taffatie
fools with their feathers, whose beauty, if our Poets had not pecked with the
supply of their periwigs, they might have antickt it until this time, up and
down the Country with the King of Fairies, and diued every day at the
pease-porredge ordinary with Delfrigus.

But Tolass^ has forgotten that it was sometime sacked, and beggars, that ever
they carried their fardels on footback: and in truth no marvel, when as the
deserved reputation of one Roscius, is of force to enrich a rabble of
counterfeits: Yet let subjects for all their insolence, dedicate a De propundis
every morning to the preservation of their Caesar, left their increasing
indignities return them ere long their iuggling to mediocritie, and they
bewail in weeping blankes, the wane of their Monarchy.

As Poetry has been honored in those her forenamed professors, so it has
not been any whit disparaged by William Warners absolute Albions. And here
Authority has made a full point: in whose reverence insisting, I cease to
expose to your sport the picture of those Pamphleters, and Poets, that make a
patrimony of In speech, and more then a younger brothers inheritance of their
Abcie. Read favorably, to encourage me in the firstlings of my folly, and
persuade your selves, I will persecute those Idiots and their heirs unto the
third generation, that have made Art bankerout of her ornaments, and sent
Poetry a begging up and down the Country. It may be, my Anatomy of
Absurdities may acquaint you ere long with my skill in Surgerie, wherein the
diseases of Art more merrily discovered, may make our maimed Poets put
together their blankes unto the building of an Hospital.

If you chance to meet it in Paul's, shaped in a new suit of similitudes, as if
like the eloquent Apprentice of Plutarch, it were propped at seven years end
in double apparel, think his Master has fulfilled covenants, and only
cancelled the Indentures of duty. If I please, I will think my ignorance
indebted unto you that applaud it: if not, what rests, but that I be excluded
from your courtesy, like Apocrypha from your Bibles?

How ever, yours ever: Thomas Nash.

DElicious words, the life of wanton wit,
That does inspire our souls with sweet content,
Why has your Father Hermes thought it fit,
Mine eyes should surfeit by my hearts consent?
Full twenty Summers have I fading seen,
And twenty Floraes in their golden guise:
Yet never viewde I such a pleasant Green,
As this whose garnishe gleades comparde, devise.
Of all the flo^wers a Lilly once I loved,
Whose laboring beauty brancht it self abroad.
But now old age his glory has removed,
And greener objects are mine eyes abroad.
No Country to the downs of Arcadie,
Where Aganippes ever springing wels
Do moist the meades with bubbling melody,
And makes me muse what more in Delos dwells.
There feeds our Menaphons celestial Muse,
There makes his Pipe his pastoral report:
Which strained now a note above his use,
Fore-tels he will never come chaunt of Thoacs sport.
Read all that lift, and read till you mislike,
To condemn who can, so Envy be not Judge:
No, read who can, swell more higher, lest it shreeke.
Robin, thou have done well, care not who grudge.
Henry Vpcher.

The reports of the Shepherds.
AFter that the wrath of mighty Jove had wrapped Arcadia with noisome
pestilence, insomuch that the air yielding prejudicial savor, seemed to be
peremptory in some fatal resolution, Democles Sovereign and King of that
famous Continent, pitying the sinister accidents of his people, being a man as
just in his censures, as royal in his possessions, as careful for the weal^
of his Country, as the countenance of his Diadem, thinking that unpeopled
Cities were corros^nes in Princes consciences, that the strength of his
subjects was the sinews of his Dominions, and that every Crown must contain
a care, not only to win honor by foreign conquest, but in maintaining
dignity with civil and domestical in^^ghts. Democle* grounding his argument
upon these premises, coveting to be counted. Pater patria, calling a
Parliament together, whither all his Nobility incited by summons made their
repair, elected two of his chief Lords to pass unto Delphos, at Apollos
Oracle, to hear the fatal sentence, either of their future misery, or present
remedy. They having their charge, posting from Arcadia to the Tripos, where
Pithia sat, the sacred Nymph that delivered out Apollos Dylonimas, offering
(as their manner (...) Orizons and presents, as well to entreat by devotion, as
to persuade by bounty, they had returned from Apollo this doom.

When Neptune riding on the Southern Seas,
Shall from the bosom of his Lomman yield,
The' Arcadian wonder, men and (...) to please:
Plenty in pride shall march amidst the field.
Dead men shall war, and unborn babes shall frown,
And with their fawchons hew their footmen down:
When Lambs have Lions for their surest guide,
And Plannets rest upon the Arcadian hills:
When swelling Seas have neither ebb nor'tide,
When equal banks the Ocean margin fills:
Then look Arcadians for a happy time,
And sweet content within your troubled clime.
No sooner had Pithia delivered this scroll to the Lords of Arcadia, but they
departed and brought it to Democles, who causing the Oracle to be read amongst
the distressed commons, found the Delphian censure more full of doubts to
amaze, then fraught with hope to comfort: thinking rather that the anger of GOD
sent a peremptory presage of ruin, then a probable ambiguitie to applaud any
hope of remedy: yet loath to have his careful subjects fall into the balefull
Labyrinth of deshaire, Democles began to discourse unto them, that the
interpreters of Apollos secrets were not the conceits of humane reason, but the
success of long expected events, that Comets did portend at the first blaze,
but took effect in the dated bosom of the destinies: that Oracles were
fortold at the Delphian cave, but were shapte out and fluished in the Counsel
house. With such perswasiue arguments Democles appealed the distressed thoughts
of his doubtful Contrymen, and commanded by Proclamation, that no man
should pry into the quiddities of Apollo* answer, lest sundry censures of his
divine secrecy should trouble Arcadia with some sudden ^^tinie. The King thus
smoothing the beat of his cares, rested a melancholy man in his Court: hiding
under his head the double-faced figure of Ianus, as well to (...) the Skies of
other men's conceits with smiles, as to furnish out his own dumps with
thoughts. But as other beasts level their looks at the countenance of the
Lion, and birds make wings as the Eagles fly: so Regis ad arbitrium totus
componitur orbis: the people were measured by the mind of their Sovereign:
and what storms soever they smoothered in private conceit, yet they made hay,
and cried holiday in outward appearance: insomuch that every man repaired to
his own home, and fell either unto pleasures or labors, as their living or
content allowed them.

Whiles thus Arcadie rested in a silent quiet, Menaphon the King shepherd, a
man of high account among the Swains of Arcadia, loved of the Nymphs, as the
paragon of all their country yongsters, walking solitary down to the shore, to
see if any of his Ewes and Lambs were straggled down to the Strand to browze
on the Sea Iuy, whereof they take special delight to feed; he found his
stocke^ gazing upon the Promentory Mountains hardly: whereon resting himself
on a hill that ouer-peered the great Mediterraneum, noting how Phoebus fetched
his Laualtes ^n the purple Plains of Neptunus, as if he had meant to have
courted Thet is in the royalty of his robes: the Dolphines (the sweet
comeiters of Music) fetched their carreers on the calmed waves, as if A^ion had
touched the strings of his silver sounding instrument: the Mermaides thrusting
their heads from the bosom of Amphitrite, sat on the mounting banks of
Neptune, day (...) their watery tresses in the Sun-(...) Ae^dus for bare* to
throw abroad his gusts on the slumbring brows of the Sea-god, as giving
Triron leave to pleasure his Queen with destred melody, and Protens liberty
to sollowe his flocks without disquiet.

Menaphon looking over the champion of Arcady, to see if the continent was as
full of smiles, as the Seas were of favors, saw the shrubbes as in a dream
with delightful harnwnie, and the birds that chaunted on their branches, not
disturbed with the least breath of a favorable Zephirus. Seeing thus the
accord of the land and Sea, casting a fresh gaze o^ the water-Nimphes, he
began to consider, how Venus was feigned by the Poets to spring of the froth
of the seas: which dra^e him straight into a deep conjecture of the
inconstancy of love, that as if Luna were his lead-starre, had every (...)
ebbes and tides, sometime ouer-flowing the banks of Fortune with a gracious
look lightened from the eyes of a favorable lover, other whiles ebbing to the
dangerous shelfe of despairs, with the piercing frown of a froward Mistress.
Menaphon in this brown study, calling to mind certain Aphorisms that
Auarreon had pen^ down as principles of loves follies, being as deep an
enemy to fancy, as Nar^issus was to assertion, began thus to scoff at
Venus Deity.

Menaphon, thy minds favors are greater than thy wealths fortunes, thy
thoughts higher than thy birth, and thy private conceit better then thy
public esteem. Thou art a shepherd, Menaphon, who in feeding of thy ^oike
find out natures secrecis, and in ^rouenting thy lambs prejudice,
conceitest the astronomicall motions of the heavens: holding thy sheepe-walkes
to yield as great Philosophy, as the ancients discourse in their learned
Academies. Thou countest labor as the Indians do their Chrysocolla, wherewith
they try every metal, and thou examine every action. Content sits in thy
mind as Neptune in his Sea-throne, who with his trident mare appeaseth every
storm. When thou see the heavens frown, thou think on thy faults, and a
clear sky puts, thee in mind of grace: the Summers glory tells thee of
youths vanity: the winters parched leaves, of ages declining weakness. Thus
in a mirror thou measurest thy deeds with equal and considerate motions, and
by being a Shepherd find that which Kings want in their royalties. Envy
ouer-looketh thee, renting with the winds the Pine-trees of Ida, when the
Afric shrubs wave not a leaf with the tempest. Thine eyes are vailde with
content, that thou can not gaze so high as ambition, and for love: and with
that in naming of love, the shepherd fell into a great laughter. Love,
Menaphon, why of all follies that ever Poets fained, or men saulted with, this
foolish imagination of love is the greatest. Venus forsooth for her wanton
escapes must be a goddess, and her bastard a Deity: Cupid must be young and
ever a boy, to prove that love is fond and witless: wings to make him
inconstant, and arrows whereby to show him fearful: blind (or all were not
worth a pin) to prove that Cupids level is both without aim and reason: thus
is the god, and such are (...) as our Shepherds of Arcadie settle themselves
to fancy, and wear the caracters of Venus stamped in their foreheads, straight
their attire must be quaint, their looks full of amors, as their, gods ^uiuer
is full of arrows: their eyes holding smiles and tears, to leap out at their
Mistress favors or her frowns: sighs must fly as figures of their thoughts,
and every wrinckle must be tempred with a passion: thus suited in outware
proportion, and made excellent in inward constitution, they straight repair to
take view of their Mistress beauty. She as one obseruant unto Venus principles,
first, ^ieth love in her tresses, and wraps affection in the (...) of her
hair; snaring our swains in her locks, as Mars in the net, holding in her
forhead Fortunes Calendar, either to assign dismal influence, or some
favorable aspect. If a wrinckle appear in her brow, then our Shepherd must
put on his working day face, and (...) naught but doleful madrigals of sorrow;
if a dimple grace her cheek, the heavens cannot prove fatal to our
kinde-hearted lovers; if she seem coy, then poems of death mounted upon deep
drawn sighs, fly from their master to sue for some favor, alleging how
death at the least may date his misery; to be brief, as upon the shoares of
(...), the winds, continue never one day in one quarter, so the thoughts of a
lover never continue scarce a minute in one passion; but as Fortunes globe, so
is Fancies case; variable and inconstant.

If lovers sorrows then be like Sisiphus turmoiles, and their favors like
honny bought with ^all; let poor Menaphon then live at labor, and make
esteem of Venus as of Mars his Coucubine; and as the Cimbrians hold their
idols in account but in every tempest, so make Cupid a god, but when thou art
over pained with passions, and then Menaphon will never love: for as long as
thou temperest thy hand with labors, thou can not fetter thy thoughts with
loves. And in this Satyricall humor smiling at his own conceits, he took
his pipe in his hand, and between euery-report of his instrument, (...) a
Stanzo to this (...).

Menaphons Song.
Some say love,
Foolish love,
Does rue and govern all the gods:
I say love,
Inconstant love,
Sets men's senses f^r^^ at ods.
Some swear love,
Smoothed face love,
Is sweetest sweet that men can have:
I say love,
Sour love,
Makes virtues yield as beauties slave.
A bitter sweet, a folly worst of all,
That forces wisdom to be follies thrall:
Love is sweet:
Where in sweet?
In fading pleasures that do shine:
Beauty sweet.
Is that sweet,
That yields sorrow for a gain:
If love's sweet,
Herein sweet,
That minutes joys are monthly woes:
It Is not sweet,
That is sweet,
No where, but where repentance grows:
Then love who lift, i^ beauty be so sour,
Labor for me, love rest in Princes bower.


Menaphon having ended his roundelay, rose up, thinking to pass from the
mountain down to the valley, casting his eye to the sea side, espied certain
fragments of a broken ship floating upon the waves, and sundry persons driven
upon the shore like a calm, walking all wet and weary upon the sands: wondering
at this strange sight, he stood amazed, yet destrous is see the event of this
accident, he shrouded himself to rest (...), till he might perceive what
would happen: at last he might descry it was a woman holding a child in her
arms, and an old man directing her as it were hot guide. These three (as
distressed wrackes) preserved by some further fore-pointing Fate, coueted to
clime the Mountain, the better to use the favor of the Sun, to dry their
drench^^ apparel, at last crawled up where poor Menaphon lay close, and
resting them under a bush, the old man did nothing but send out sighs, and the
woman ceased not from streaming forth riuolets of tears, that hung on her
cheeks like ye drops of pearled dew upon the riches of Flora. The poor babe
was the touch stone of his mothers passions: for when he smiled and lay
laughing in her lad, were her heart never so deeply ouercharged with her
present sorrows: yet kissing the pretty Infant, she lightened out smiles from
those cheeks that were furrowed with continual sources of tears: but if he
cried, then sighs as smokes, and sobs as thunder-crackes, fore (...) those
showers, that which redoubled distress distilled from her eyes: thus with
pretty inconstant passions trimming up her baby, and at last to lull him
asleep, she warbled out of her woeful breast this Dittie.

S^phestias Song to her child.
Weep not, any wanton, smile upon my knee,
When thou art old, there'^ grief enough for thee.
Mothers wagge, (...) boy,
Fathers sorrow father^ joy.
When thy father first did see
Such a boy by him and me,
He was glad, I was (...),
Fortune chang^e made him so:
When he had left his (...) boy,
Last his sorrow, first his joy*
Weep not my wanton, smile upon my knee:
When thou (...) old there is grief enough for thee.
Streaming tears (...) stint,
Like (...) drop (...) flint,
Fell by course from his eyes,
That one another place supplies:
Thus he grieved in (...) part,
Tears of blood fell from his heart,
When he left his (...) the boy,
Fathers sorrow, Fathers joy.
Weep not my wanton, smile upon my knee:
When thou art old; there is grief enough for thee.
The w^nton smilde, Father wept,
Mother cryde, baby lept:
More lie crownde, more he cryde,
Nature could not sorrow hide.
He must go, he must kiss,
Child and mother, baby bliss:
For ^e left his pretty boy,
Fathers sorrow, Fathers joy.
Weep not my wanton, smile upon my knee,
When thou are old, there is grief enough for thee.


With this lullaby the baby fell asleep, and Sephestia laying it upon the
green grass, covered it with a mantle, and then leaning her head on her hand,
and her elbow on her lap, she fell afresh to power forth abundance of plaints,
which Lamedon the old man espying, although in his face appeared the map of
discontent, and in every wrinckle was a catalogue of woes, yet to cheer up
Sophestia, shrowding his inward sorrow with an outward smile, he began to
comfort her in this manner.

Sephestia, thou see no (...) preuailes against the gaze of the Basiliskes,
no (...) against the s^ing of the Taran^ula, no prevention to divert the decree
of the Fates: nor no means to recall back the driefull hurt of Fortune.
Incurable sores are without (...) Aphorisms, and therefore no salve for them
but patience. Th^n my Sephestia, ^ith thy fall is high, and fortune low; thy
sorrows great, and thy hope little, se^ing me partaker of thy miseries, set
all upon this, Solamen miseris socios hab^isse doloris. Chance is like Ianus,
double-faced, as well full of smiles to comfort, as of frowns to dismay: the
Ocean at the deaddest ebb returns to a full tide, when the Eagle means to
soar highest, he raises his ^light in the lowest da^es: so s^reth it with
fortune, who in her highest extremes is most unconstant: when the tempest of
her wrath is most fearful, then look for a calm: when she beats thee with
Nettles, then think she will strew th^^ with Roses: when she is most familiar
with ^urtes, her intent is to be most prodigal, Sephestia. Thus are the
^^rowes of fortune feathere^ with ye plumes of the bird Halc^^^e, that changes
color with the ^one, which hows^euer she shoots them, pierce not so deep but
they may be ^^ced. But Sephestia, th^^ art daughter to a s^ing, exiled by him
from the hope of a crown was, banished from the pleasures of the Court to the
painful fortunes of the country, parte^ for love from him thou can not but
love, from Maximus, Sephestia, who for thee has suffered so many dissa^ours,
as either discontent or death can afford. What of all this, is not H^pe the
daughter of Time? Have not stars their favorable aspects, as they have
froward opposition? Is there not a Jupiter as there is a Saturn? Cannot the
influence of smiling Venus stretch as far as the frowning constitution of
Mars? I tell thee Sephesti^, Juno f^ldeth in her brows the Volumes of the
destinies: whom melancholy Saturn deposes from a Crown, she mildely
aduanceth to a Diadem^: the^ fear not, for if the mother li^e in miseris, yet
has she a Scepter for the Son: let the unkindness of thy father be buried in
the ^inders of obedience, and the want of Maximus be supplied with the
presence of his pretty babe, who being too young for fortune, lies smiling on
thy knee and laughes at Fortune: learn by him Sephestia, to use patience,
which is like the balm in the vale of Iehosaphat, that (...) no wound so
deep; but it cures: thou see already Fortune begins so change her hiew,
for after the great storm that p^^t our ship, we found a calm that bronght
us safe to shore; the mercy of Neptune was more then the envy of Aeolus, and
the discourtes^e of thy Father is proportioned with the favor of the gods.
Thus Sephestia, being copartner of thy misery, yet do I seek to allay thy
martyrdom: being sick to my self, yet do I play the Physician to thee,
wishing thou may bear thy sorrows with as much content, as I brook my
misfortunes with patience. As he was ready to go forward with his perswasiue
argument, Sephestia fetching a deep sigh, filling her tender eyes with tears,
mads this reply.

Sweet Lamedon, once partner of my royalties, now partaker of my wants, as
constant in his extreme distress, as faithful in higher fortunes: the Turtle
pearketh not on barren trees, Doves delight not in soul cottages, the Lion
frequent^ no putrified haunts, friends follow not after poverty, nor has
^^ister chance any drugs from the Phisicions. Nullus ad amissas ibit amicus
opes: and yet Lamedon; the misfortune of Sephestia abridgeth not our old
contracted amity, thou temperest her ^xile with thy banishment, and ^hee
sailing to Stix, thou ^erriest over to Phlege^on: then Lamedon, saying as
Andromache said to Hector, Tu Dominus, tu vir, tu mihi frater cris: Thy aged
years shall be the Calendar of my fortunes, and thy gray hairs the Paralels
of mine actions. If Lamedon persuade Sephestia to content, Po^tia shall not
^^ceede Sephestia in patience: If he will her to keep a low fail, she will
veil all her sheet: if to forget her loves, she will quench them with
labors: if to accuse Venus as a foe, I will hate Cupid as an enemy: and
seeing the destinies have driven thee from a crown, I will rest satisfied with
the country, placing all my delights in honoring thee, and nursing up my pretty
wanton. I will imagine a small cottage to be a spacious Palace, and think as
great quiet in a russet coat, as in royal habilliments. Sephestia, Lamedon
will not scorn with Juno to turn her self into ye shape of Semelas nurse,
but unknown, re^^ careless of my fortunes: the hope of times return shall be
the end of my thoughts, the smiles of my son shall be the nourishment of my
heart, and the course of his ^outh shall be the comfort of my years, every
laughter that leapes from his looks, shall be the holiday of my conceits, and
every ^eare shall furnish out my grief^s, and his fathers funerals. I have
heard them say, Lamedon, that the lowest shrubbes feel the least tempests, and
in the valleys of Africa is heard no thunder, that in country rooms is
greatest rest, and in little wealth the least disquiet: dignity treads upon
glass, and honor is like unto the herb Sinara, that when it bloometh most
gorgeous, then it blasteth: Aulica vita splendida miseria, Courts have golden
dreams, but cottages sweet slumbers: then Lamedon, will I disguise my self,
with my clothes will I change my thoughts; for being poorly attired, I will be
meanly minded, and measure my actions by my present estate, not by former
fortunes. In saying this, the babe a want and cried, and she fell to tears
mixed with a ^ullable.

All this while Menaphon sat amongst the shrubs, fixing his eyes on the
glorious object of her face, he noted her tresses, which he compared to the
colored Hyacinth of Arcadia, her brows to the mountain snows that lie on the
hills: her eyes to (...) gray glister of Titans gorgeous mantle, her alablaster
neck to the whiteness of his flocks, her tears to pearl, her face to
borders of lillies interseamed with roses: to be brief, our Shepherd Menaphon
that heretofore was an Atheist to love, and as the Thessalian of Bacchus, so
he a contmner of Venus, was now by the wily shaft of Cupid so entangled in
the perfection and beauteous excellency of Sephestia; as now he swore, no
benign Planet but Venus, no god but Cupid, no exquisite deity but Love. Being
thus fettered with the pliant persuasions of fancy, impatient in his new
affections, as the horse that never before felt the spur, he could not bridle
his new conceiud amors, but watching when they should depart, perceiving by the
gestures of the old man, and the tears of the Gentlewoman, that they were
distres^, thought to offer (...) help that lay within the compass of his
ability. As thus he mused in his new passions, Lamedon and Sephestia rose up,
and resolved to take course which way the wind blew: passing so down the
mountain^ to g^^ seek out some town, at last they passing fastly on, Lamedon
espied Menaphon: desirous therefore to know the course of the country, he
saluted him thus.

Shepherd, for to far thy attire warrants me; cour^eous, for so much thy
countenance imports: i^ distressed, persons, whom Fortune has wronged, and the
seas have favored, (if we may count it favor to live and want) may without
offense ^raue so far side, as to know some place where to rest our weary and
weather-beaten ^^nes, our charges shall be^ paid, and you have for recompense
such thanks, as Fortunes out-lawes may yield to their favorers. Menaphon
hearing him speak so gravely, but not ^itting his ear to his eye, stood
staring still an Sephestias face, which she perceiving, flashed out such a
blush from her alablaster cheeks, that they looked like the rud^^ gates of the
Morning: this sweet bashfulnesse amazing Menaphon, at last he began thus to
answers.

Strangers, your degree I know not, therefore pardon if I give less titl^,
then your estates ^^rite: fortunes from (...) are princes fortunes, and kings
are subject to ch^^c^ ^ destiny. Mis-hap is to be salued with pity, not
scorn: and we that are fortunes darlings, are bound to relieu^ them that are
distressed: therefore follow me, and you shall have such succor, as a Shepherd
may afford. Lamedon and Sephestia, were passing glad, and Menaphon led the way,
not content only to feed his sight with the beauty of his new Mistress, but
thought also to infer some occasion of parl^y, to hear whether her voice were
as m^ledious as her face beautiful, he therefore prosecuted his prattle thus:
Gentlewoman, when first I saw you sitting upon the Arcadian promontorie with
your babie on your lap, and this old father by, I thought I had seen Venus
with Cupid on her knee, (...) of Troy and the (...) your looks could discover
no less th^n. Mar^ (...), and the beauty (...) child as much as the digni^^
of her wanton: at last (...), that yo^ (...) distress; (...) partake your so
(...), and (...), I pity ouercharged persons, in lieu (...) het (...) your
name, country and ^^^^ntage, (...) by the a (...), that the swains (...) love,
replied (...) Courte^^^ (...) did look like Venus at: a blush, it way (...)
the (...) goddess wept for her fair: Adonis: my boy (...) Cupid, but the
fou^^ of Care* Fortunes (...) in his youth to be (I hope) her darling in his
age (...) that your look^ saw our grief, and your ^hought (...) shall give
thanks (the bount^ of (...) hearts pray that the gods may be as friendly to your
flo^^s, as you favorable unto us. My (...) is Samela, my country Cypres, my
(...), the wis^ of a (...) Gentleman now (...), sh^pheard (...), lest it be
^edious for thee to hear it, and a double grief for me^ to (...) it. The
shepherd not daring displease hi^ Mistress, (...) threats hanging (...) her
lips, (...) them (...) to his house: (...) as they were art (...), he began at
the door to entertain them thus: Fair^ Mistress, the flower of all our Nimphe^
that li^^ here in Arcadia, this is my cottage wherein I live content, and your
lodging, where (please it you) ye may rest (...) to cover the (...), nor (...)
wealth: for shepherds use neither to (...): you shall ^^nde here (...) and
milk so? dai^ (...), and (...) for ^l^^hing, in every corner of the house.
Content sitting smiling and tempering (...) thing with a (...): this if ye can
brook and accept of (as gods allow the meanest hospitality) ye ^all have such
welcome and (...) Phil^mon and Baucis gave to Jupiter* Sephestia thankt him
heartily, and going into his house, (...) what he promise (...) that they had
sat a little by the (...) and were (...) warmed, they went to supp^^, where
Sephestia (...) well, as one whom the sea had made (...), and Lamedon so plied
his teeth, that at supper he sp^ke not (...) taken their ^e^past* Menaphon
(...) they were (...), and that sleep chimed on to the rest, let them see
their lodging, and so gave them the good night. Lamedon on his ^ock-bed, and
Sephestia on her country ^ouch,) were so (...), that they slept well and but
Menaphon, poor Menaaphon, neither asked his (...) for his (...), nor took his
male-spade on his neck to see his (...) but as a man pained with a thousand
passions, drenched in distress, and ouer-whelmed with a multitude of uncouth
(...); he (...) like the pictures that Pers^^ turned with him (...) head into
stones. His sister Carmela kept his house, (for so was the country wench
called) and she seeing her brother sit so (...)-contented, stepped to her
cupboord, and fetched a little beaten spice in an old bladder, she spared no
evening milk, but went amongst the cream boll^s, and made him a posset. But
alas, love had so locked up the shepherds stomach, that none would down with
Menaphon. Carmela seeing her brother refuse his spiced drink, thought all was
not well, and therefore sat down and wept: to be (...), she blubbered, and he
(...); and his men that came in and saw their ^^^ster with a kercher on his
head, mourned: so that amongst these swains there was such melody, that
Menaphon took his bow and arrows, and went to bed: where casting himself, he
thought to have beguiled his ^assions with some sweet slumbers: but love that
smiled at his new entertained champion, sitting on his beds head, wicked him
forward with new desires, charging Morph^^^, Phobetur, and Ic^lon the gods of
sleep, to present unto his closed eyes the singular beauty and rare (...) of
(...): and for so will we now call her) in that the Id^^ of her excellence
forced him to breathe out scalding sigh^s smothered within the furnace of his
thoughts, which grew into this or the like passion.

I had thought, Menaphon, that he which wears the bay leaf, had bin free
from light (...), and the Eagles (...) a preservative against thunder, that
labor had been (...) so love, and the eschewing of idleness an Antidote
against fancy: but I see by proof, there is no adamant so ^ard, but the blood
of a Goat will make soft: no (...) so well defenced, but strong battery will
enter, nor any heart so plyant to restless labors, but enchantments of love
will over come. Unfortunate Menaphon, that of late thought^^^ Venus a strumpet,
and her son a bastard: now must thou offer incense at her shrine, and swear
Cupid no less then a god: thou have reason* Menaphon, for he^ that lives
without love, lives without life, presuming as Narcissus to hate all, and being
like him, at length despised of all. Can there (...) ^ sw^^ter bliss then
beauty, a greater heaven then her heavenly perfections that is mistress of thy
thoughts? If the sparkle of her eyes appear in the night, the s^arres blush at
her brightness: if her hair glister in the day, Ph^^bus puts off his wreath
of diamonds, as overcome with the shine of her tresses: if she walk in the
fields, Flora seeing her face, bids all her glorious flowers (...) themselves,
as being by her beauty disgraced* ^^ her Ala^aster neck appear* then Hye^^s
covers his s^old, as surpassed in whitenesse^ to be short, Menaphon, if
Samela had appeared in Ida, Juno for majesty, Pallas for wisdom, and Venus
for beauty had let my Samela have the Supremacy* why should thou not then
love, and think there is no life to love, seeing the end of love is the
possession of such a heavenly paragon* but what of this, Menaphon? have thou
any hope to enjoy her person? she is a widow: true, but too high for thy
fortunes: she is in distress. Ah, Menaphon; if thou have any spark of
comfort, this must set thy hope on fire* want is the lodestone of affection,
distress forces ^eeper then fortunes frowns, and such as are poor, will
rather love then want relief: fortunes frowns are whetstones to fancy, and
as the horse starteth at the spur, so love is pricked forward with distress.
Samela is shipwracked, Menaphon releeue^ her: she wants, he supplies with
wealth, he s^es for love, ^yther must she grant* or buy ^eniall with
perpetual repentant^. In this hope (...) the poor shepherd: and with that,
Menaphon laid his head down on the pis^ow, and took a sound nap, sleeping out
fancy with a good slumber.

As soon as the Sun appeared, the shepherd got him up, and (...) fat with this
hope, went merrily with his men to the folds, and there (...) ^orth his sheep,
after that he had appointed where they should graze, returned home, and looking
when his guests should rise, having slept ill y^ last night went roundly to his
breakfast: by that time he had ended his (...), Lamedon was gotten up, and so
was Samels. Against their rising, Carmela had (...) her cookerie, and Men^phon
^yred in his ru^^et Ia^ket, his red sleeves of chamlet, his blew (...), and
his round ^^ops of country cloth, bestirred him, as every joint had been fat
to a sundry office. Samela no sooner came out of her Chamber, but Menaphon as
one that stai^^ed piety for his passions, had her good morrow (...) lovers
look: Samela knowing the foul by the Feather, was able to cast his disease
without his water, perceived that C^pid had caught the poor shapheard in his
(...), and unless he ^aught quickly to break out of the ^hare, would make him
a (...) fair looks she gave him, and with a smiling sorr^^ discovered how
she grieved at his misfortune, ^ yet (...) him: well to breakfast they went,
Lamedon and Samela sed has, but Menaphon like the Argiue in the (...) of
Arabia, lived with the contemplation of his mistress ^^a^ty: the Salamender
lives not without ^^re, the H^rring from the water, the Mo^e from the earth,
nor the C^^eleon from the air: nor could Menaphon (...) but in ^^ght of his
Samela, whose breath was perfumed air, whole eyes were (...) where in he
delighted to daily, whose heart the earthly paradise, wherein he desired so
ingrasse the (...) of his love and affection: thus did the poor shepherd
^athe in a kind of bliss, while his eye f^^^ing on his mistress face, surfeited
with the (...) of her perfection. So long he gazed, that at length breakfast
was ended, and he destrous to do her any service, first put her child to
nurse, and then led her forth to see his folds: thinking with the ^^ght of his
flocks to inueigle her, whose mind had rather have chosen any misfortune, then
have deigned her eyes on the face and feature of so low a pesant. Well, abroad
they went, Menaphon with his Sheephooke fringed with crewell, to signify he
was chief of the Swains, Lamedon and Samela after: plodding thus over she
grieve fields, at last they came to the mountains where Menaphons flocks
grazed, and there he discoursed to Samela thus. I tell thee fair Nymph, these
plains that thou see stretching Southward, are pastures belonging to
Menaphon: there grows the Cinque^^ile, and the Hyacinth, the Cow^^ip, the
Primrose, and the Violet, which my ^locks shall spare for flowers to make thee
Garlands, the milk of my Ewes, shall be meat for my pretty wanton, the w^ll
of the fat wethers, that seem as sine as the fleece that Jason fetch^ from
Colchos, shall serve to make Samela webs withal, the mountain toys shall be
thy morning walk, and the sha^^^ Valleys thy euenings Arbor, as much as
Menaphon owes, shall be at Samelaes command, if she like to live with Menaphon.
This was spoken with such deep affects, that Samela could scarce keep her from
smiling: yet she covered her conceit with a sorrowful countenance, which
Menaphon espying, to make her merry, and rather for his own advantage, seeing
Lamedon was asleep, ^^oke her by the hand, and sat down, and pulling forth
his pipe, began after some melody to carroll out this roundelay.

Menaphons roundelay.
When tender ^wes brought home with Evening Sun,
Wend to their fold,
And to their holds,
The shepherds trudge when light of day is done.
Upon a tree,
The Eagle Jove's fair bird did perch,
There rests he:
A little fly harbor then did search,
And did presume (though others laughed thereat)
To perch whereas the princely Eagle sat.
The Eagle frownde and shook his royal wings,
And charg'de the Fly,
From thence to hye.
Afraid in haste, the little creature s^ings,
Yet seeks again,
Fearful to pea^ke him by the Eagles side,
With moody vain,
The speedy post of Ganimede replide:
Vassal, auant, or with my wings you dye,
Is It fit an Eagle seat him with a fly?
The fly craved pity, still the Eagle frownde.
The silly fly,
Ready to dye,
Disgracde, displacde, fell groueling to the ground;
The Eagle saw,
And with a royal mind, said to the fly,
Be not in awe,
I scorn by me the meanest creature dye:
Then seat thee here: the joyful fly up s^ings,
And sat safe shadowed with the Eagles wings.


As soon as Menaphon had ended this ronndelay, turning to Samela, after a
country blush, hes began to court her in this homely fashion: what think you*
Samela of the Eagle for this royal deed? that he falsified the old Proverb,
Aquila non capit muscas. But I mean, Samela, are you not in opinion, that the
Eagle gives instance of a princely resolution, in preferring the safety of a
fly, before the credit of her royal majesty? I think Menaphon that high
minds are the shelters of poverty, and Kings seats are couerts for distressed
persons, that the Eagle in shrowding the fly did well, but a little forgot her
honor. But hold think you, said Samela, is this proportion to be observed in
love? I guess no, for the (...) did it not for love, but for succor. Has love
then respect of circumstance: Else it is not love, but lust; for where ye
parties have no simpathy of estates, there can no firm love be fixed: discord
is reputed the mother of division, as in nature this is an vnrefuted principle,
that it faulteth, which fails in uniformity. He that grafts Iilliflowers
upon the Nettle, marreth the smell, who couets to tie the lamb and the lion in
one tedder, makes a braule: equal fortunes, are loves favorites, and therefore
should fancy be always limited by Geometrical proportion, lest if young
matching with old, fire and frost fall at a combat, and if rich with poor,
there ha^ many dangerous and brauing objections. Menaphon half nipped in the
pate with this reply, yet like a tall soldier stood to his tackling and made
this answer: suppose gentle Samela, that a man of mean estate, whom
disdainful fortune had abased, in tending to make her power prodigal in his
misfortunes, being feathered with Cupids bolt* were snared in the beauty of a
Queen, should he rather die then discover his amors? It Queens (quoth she)
were of my mind, I had rather die, then perish in baser fortunes. Venus loue^
Vulcan, replied Menaphon: truth, quoth Samela, but though he was polt-footed,
yet he was a god. Phao inioyed S^pho, he a ^erriman that lived by his hands
thrift, she a princess that sat invested with a diadem. The more fortunate,
quoth. Samela, was he in his honors, and she the less famous in her honesty. To
leave these instances, replied Menaphon (for love had made him hardy) I, sweet
Samela, infer these presupposed premises, to discover the baseness of my mean
birth, and yet the ^eepnesse of my affection, who ever since I saw the
brightness of your perfection shining upon the mountains of Arcady, like the
glister of the Sun upon the toplesse promontory of Sicilia, was so snared with
your beauty, and so inueigled with the excellence of that perfection that
exceeds all excellency, that love entering my desire, has maintained himself
by force, that unless sweets Samela grant me favor of her love, and play the
princely Egle, I shall with the poor ^^ie perish in my fortunes: he concluded
this period with a deep sigh: and Samela grieuing a^ this folly of the
shepherd, gave him mildely this answer.

Menaphon, my distressed haps are the resolution of the destinies, and the
wrongs of my youth are the forerunners of my woes in age, my native home is my
worst nurcery, and my friends deny that which strangers preiudicially grant: I
arrived in Arcadie shipwrackt, and Menaphon favoring my sorrows, has
affoorded me succors, for which Samela rests bound, and will prove
thankful: as for love, know that Venus stands on the Tortois, as showing
that love creeps on by degrees, that affection is like the snaile, that
steals to the top of the lance by minutes: the grass has his increase, yet
never any sees it augment, the sun shadoweth, but the motion is not seen: love
like those should enter into the eye, and by long gradations pass into the
heart: Cupid has wings to fly, not that love should be swift, but that he may
so^re hie, to avoid base thoughts. The Topaz being thrown into the fire,
burns strait, but no sooner out of the flame but it freezeth: straw is soon
kindled, but it is but a blaze: and love that is caught in a moment, is lost in
a minute: give me leave, Menaphon, first to sorrow (...) my fortunes, then to
call to mind my husbands late funerals, then if the fates have assigned I
shall fancy, I will account of thee before any shepherd in Arcadie. This
conclusion of Samela drew Menaphon into such an ecstasy for joy, that he
stood as a man metamorphozed: at last, calling his senses together, he told
her he rested satisfied with her answer, and thereupon le^t her a kiss, such
as blushing Thetis receives from her choicest Leman. At this Lamedon awaked,
otherwise, no doubt, Menaphon had replied, but breaking off their talk, they
went so view their pastures, and so passing down to the place where the sheep
grazed, they searched the shepherds bags, and so emptied their bottles, as
Samela marvelled at such an uncouth banquet: at last they returned home,
Menaphon glorying in the hope of his success, entertaining Samela still with
such curtesy, y^ she finding such content in the cottage, began to despise the
honors of the court. Resting thus in house with the Shepherd, to avoid tedious
conceits, she framed her self so to country labors, that she oft-times would
lead the ^^acke^ to the fields her self, and being dressed in hamely attire,
she seemed like Ocnone that was amorous of Paris. As she thus often traced
along the plains, she was noted amongst the shepherds of one Doron next
neighbor to Menaphon, who entered into the consideration of her beauty, and
made report of it to all his fellow swains, so that they chatted naught in the
fields but of the new shepheard^sse. One day amongst the rest, it chanced that
Doron sitting in parley with another country companion of his, amidst other
tattle, they prattled of the beaut^e of Samela. Have thou (...) her, quoth
Melicertus? (for so was his ^rland called) I quoth Doron, and ^^ghed to see
her, not that I was in love, but that Agreeued she should be in love with
such a one as Menaphon. What manner of woman is she, quoth Melicertus? As well
as I can, answered Doron. I will make description of her.

Dorons description of Samela.
Like to Diana in her summer weed,
Girt with a crimson robe of brightest die,
goes fair Samela.
Whiter then be the flocks that straggling feed,
When washed by Arothusa faint they lie,
is fair Samela.
As fair Aurora in her morning gray,
Decked with the ruddy glister of her love,
is fair Samela.
Like lovely Thetis on a calmed day.
When as her brightness Neptunas fancy move,
shines fair Samela.
Her tresses gold* her eyes like glassie streams,
Her teeth are pearl, the breasts are ivory,
of fair Samela.
Her cheeks like rose and lilly yield forth gleames,
Her brows bright arches framde of ebony:
thus fair Samela
Passes fair Venus in her brauest hiew,
And Inno in the show of majesty
for she^^ Samela.
P^llas in (...) all three if you will view,
For beauty, (...), and matchless dignity,
yield to Samela.


Thou ha^^ ((...) Melic^^us) made such a description* as (...) should painst
^nt the perfection of his (...) thinks the Idea of her person represents (...)
an object to my san^^e, and that I see in the discovery of her excellence, the
rare beauties of-: and with that he (...) as it seemed his heart (...) as the
Lapithes when they (...). Doron maruelling at this sudden event, was half
afraid, as if some apopl^^y had astonished his senses, so that cheering up his
friend, he demanded what the cause was of this ^^daine conceit. Melicertus no
niggard in discovery of his fortunes, began thus: I tell thee Doron, before I
kept sheep in Arcadle, I was a shepherd elsewhere, so famous for my flocks,
as Menaphon for his foldes; beloved of the Nymphs, as he likte of the Country
Damsels; coveting in my loves to use Cupids wings, to soar high in my desires,
though my self were borne to base fortunes. The hobby catches no prey,
unless she mount beyond her mark, the Palm tree bears most boughs where
it grows highest, and love is most fortunate where his courage is (...), and
though beyond his compass. Grounding therefore on these principles, I fixed
mine eyes on a Nymph, whose parentage was great, but her beauty far more
excellent* her birth was by many degrees greater then mine, and my worth by
many discents less then hers: yet (...) Venus loved Adonis; and Luna Endymion,
that Cupid had boltes feathered with the plumes of a Crow, as well as with the
pens of an Eagle: I attempted, and courted her, I found her looks lightning
disdain, and her forehead to contain favors for others, and frowns for me^
when I alleged faith, she crossed me with Aeneas: when loyalty, she told (...)
when I swore constancy, (...) when I craved a final resolution (...), she
^ld her brows full of wrinckles, and her eyes full of fury, turned her back,
and shook (...) off with a Non placet. Thus in loves I lost loves, and for her
love had lost all, had I not when I near despayred the (...) of some court^ous
star, or rather the very excellence of some Mistri^ favors salued my half
despayring malady: for she seeing that I held a superstitious opinion of
l^ue, in honoring him for a Deity, not in counting him a vain conceit of
Poetry, that I thought it sacrilege to wrong my desires, and the basest
fortune to inhaunce my fortune by fals^fyng my loves to a woman, she left from
being so rammag^, and gently came to the first, and granted me those savors
she might afford or my thoughts desire: with this he^ (...) and fell again
to his sigh^^, which Doron noting, answered thus. If (my good (...)) thou did
enjoy thy loves, what is the occasion thou beginnest with sigh^^, and endest
with passions? Ah, Doron, there ends my joys, for no sooner had I triumphed in
my favors, but the (...) of my fortunes fell like the herbs in Syria, that
flourish in the morn, and fade before night^ o^ like unto the fly Tyryma,
that takes life, and leaves it all in one day. So (my Doron) did it fare with
me, for I had, no sooner enjoyed my love, but the heavens (envious a shepherd
should have the fruition of such a heavenly Paragon) sent vnr^uocable Fates to
deprive me of her life, and she is dead: Dead Doron: to her, to my self, to
all, but not to my memory, for so deep were the caracters stamped in my
inward senses, that oblivion can never raze out the form of her excellence.
And with that he (...) out of those dumpes with music, (for he played on his
(...) certain (...) he had contrived in praise of the country (...)) but
plain as Doron, as plain (...) him to (...) roundel^y, and he (...) to this
effect.

D^r^n^ I^gge.
Through the shrubs as I can crack,
For my Lambs pretty one^,
Among many little on^^,
Nymphs I mean, whose hair was black,
As the Crow,
Like the snow,
Her face and brow^^ shine I ween,
I saw a little one,
A bonny pretty one,
As bright, buxome, and as sheene,
As was she
On her knee,
That lul^d the God, whose arrows warnes,
Such merry little ones,
Such fair fac'de pretty ones,
As dally in loves chiefest harms:
Such was mine,
Whose gray (...)
Made me love. I ga^ to wo^
This sweet little one,
This bonny pretty one,
I wooed hard a day or two,
Till she bad,
Be not sad,
Woo no more, I am thine own,
Thy decrest little one,
Thy truest pretty one:
Thus was faith and firm love shown,
As behoues
Shepherds loves.


How like you this ditt^e of mine own (...), qu^th Doron? As well as my
mus^cke, replied Melicertus; for if Pan and I stri^e, Midas being Judge, and
should hap to give me the garland, I doubt not but his Asses ears should be
doubled: but Doron, so long we dispute of (...), and forget our labors, that
^ath our (...) to morrow our merry meeting hindered. That is true (quoth Doron)
for there will be all the (...) and country Damsels, and amongst them (...)
Men^pho^ will bring (...) thee, and therefore good Melicertus, (...) be going.
With this prattle, away they went to their (...), where we (...) them and
return to Memphon, who triump(...) in y^ hope of his new loves, caused Samela
to tric^e (...) her country attire, and (...) her self brave against (...)
th^n thought, to be coy were to discover her thoughts, (...) her self up in
^rm russe (...) and that (...) as if Venus in (...) had thought (...) it with
her lou^ly (...). The (...), and (...) they went, but Lamedon was left behind
to keep the house* At the hour^ appointed, M^naph^n, C^mela, (...) came, when
all the (...) make mercy. (...) as word was brought, that Menaphon (...) new
(...) a^ the company began to (...) to prepare his eye for (...) a Heards^a^s
daughter of the same Parish, that long had (...) Menaphon, and he had filled
her (...) with stownes, (...) with (...), and her heart with grief; yet (...)
her (...) who (...) that instant came with Menaphon in to the house. No sooner
was she entered into the parlour, but her ryes gave such a shine, and her face
such a brightness, that they (...) and she (...) her self among so many
unknown (...) such a vermilion blush, that the country (...) themselves fell
in love with this faith Nymph, (...) not (...) Menaphon for being over the
(...) with such a beautiful creature. Doron ^^gged Melicertus (...) and so
awak^ him out of a dr^^me: for he was d^^yly drowned, in the contemplation
(...) excellency; sending out (...) of sighs in remembrance of his old (...)
meditating on her favor, how much she resembled her that death had deprived
him of: well, her welcome was great of all the company, and for that she was a
stranger, (...) to make her the mistress of the (...) Menaphon, (...) no small
(...) the advancing of his (...), ^oing passing (...) and pleasant with the
rest of the company, insomuch that every one perceived how the po^re Swai^^^
fed upon the dignities of his Mistress graces. (...) this, (...) and Caimela
winking upon her fellows, answered her (...) with a (...), which doubled her
grief* for (...) pains are more pinching i^ they he gi^ded with a (...), then
if they be galled with a (...), Whiles thou there was (...) of such looks, as
every (...) an (...) Sal^^la willing to see, the fashion of these country young
Frowes, cast her eyes abroad, and in viewing every face, at last her eyes
glanced an the leakes of Melicertus, whose countenance resembled (...) Lord,
that as his face, but (...) upon ^ stranger, she restraint of her leakes; and
so taking her (...) particular abi^^t, (...) abroad to make general survey of
their Countre^^deme (...) all this gazing, he that (...) the face, fearing
their eyes should feed or surfeit on his Mistress beauty: if they glanced, he
thought strait they would be Riuals in his loves; if they ^^atly looked* then
they were deeply (...) in affection if they once (...), they had received some
glance from (...) that ma^e them so (...) if she laughed, she (...) and at that
he (...) thus sat^ poor Menaphon all dinner while pained with a thousand
jealous passions, keeping his teeth garders of his stomach, and his eyes,
watchmen of his l^^es: but Melicertus half impatient of his new conceived
thought^, determined to try how the Damsel was brought up, and whether (...)
was as (...) (...) ^^gan to brake ^ilence (...).

The ^r^^es which the (...) the (...) which the (...) by, were never ^o (...)
^aies they did (...) ple^san^ pa^^^es* were i^ not (...) famous for the beauty
of the (...) roundel^^^^ o^ our (...) disgra^^* (...) day with such (...)
country swains s^^^^ (...) company ^am^els both (...) entertain them ^^^th
pretty to ^ry ^^^ wits* (...) to this they all agreed with a Plaudite. ^he^
quoth Melicertus: by your leave, since I was ^^r^^ in (...), I (...) ^^ first
in question, and therefore (...) come (...) * ^^rst to you: at this Samela
blushed* and he began (...).

Fair Da^^e^l, when Nar^us chattes with Iu^o* he ha^ pardon, in that his
(...) more to (...) the goddess, then to (...) his (...) pr^s^mp^ion* i^ I,
(...) be ouerbold, forgive me: I reque^t not (...) (...) from ^ed^omnesse. Then
gentle (...) if you should be (...): (...) the anger of the gods* into (...)
ships* what creature would you (...) (...) Samela blushing that she was (...)
yet (...) pregnant wit, (...) the (...) love) made him this answe^e*

Gentle shepherd, (...) maidens to coy: lest the (...) the other (...)
w^et^^ne^, and by (...) ^es^iphere^ in ^^rne^^ (...) in craving pardon, when
you (...) grant of pardon. ^^er^^^re ^ to ^^^r ^u^^^ion* Daphne, I remem^^^,
(...) (...) Virgins (...) according to their merits, but if my wish might serve
for a Metamorpho^^^, I would be ^urned into ^ sheep* ^ sheep* and why so
mistress? I reason thus, quoth Samela, my supposition should be simple, my life
quiet, my (...) the pleasant pla^nes of Arcadie, and the wealthy riches of
F^^r^, my (...) the c^^^e streams that flow from the (...) of this continent,
my air should be cl^^re, my walks spacious, my thoughts at ease, and can
there (...) shepherd) a^y better premises to conclude my reply than these?
But have you no other allegations (...) your resolution? Yes sir quoth she, and
far greater* ^hen the law of our first motion, quoth hes, commands you to
repeat them. Far be it, answered Samela, that I should not do of free will any
thing that this pleasant company commands: therefore thus; were I^ sheep, I
should he guarded from the saldes with jolly Swains, such as was Lunas Love
on the hills of Lat^os; their pipes sounding like the melody of Mercury,
when he luld asleep^ Argus: but more, when the Damsels tracing along the
Pl^ines, should with their eyes like Sun-bright beams draw on looke^ to (...)
on such sparkling (...) weary with ^eede, should I lie and look (...) their
beautie^, (...) the ^^otted wealth of the richest (...) I should listen so
their sweet lays, more (...) Syr^ns: thus feeding on the (...) of their (...)
I should like the Tyrian better fall (...) with (...) darling. I but, quoth
Melicertus, these faire-faced damsels often draw forth the kindest sheep (...)
And what of that Sir, answered Samela, (...) with beauty, die for love? (...)
there is more kindness in ^easte, (...) they die (...) love when larkes die
(...) they show (...) sparks they have of (...) they draw (...) their (...) the
Sea (...) answered (...) of a weathercocke, that brought forth such a wauerin^
companion: for you, ^* Menaphon* measure your l^^kes by minutes, and your loves
are like lightning* which no s^^ner ^^ash on the eye, but they vanish. It is
then* quoth Menaphon, because mine eye is a ^oolish judge, and (...) ^^^
basely: which when my heart (...), it casts away ^^ re^use. It were best then*
said Pesana, to discharge such (...) judges of their ^eates, and to ^et your
eare^ ^earers of your love pleas. If they ^^ult, quoth Melicertus, every market
^owne ha^h a remedy, ^r el^e there is never a ^aker (...). Stay, cur^^^us
shepheard^, quoth Samela, the^e ie^^s are t^o broad before, they are ^ynicall
like Diogenes ^ui^s* that had large ^eathers and sharp (...)* it little (...)
in ^^is company to bandy ta^nts o^ love* seeing you are ^nwedded* and these all
maidens a^^icted to chastity. You s^^ake well as a patroness of our credit,
quoth Pesana, for in^eede we be virgins, and ^^icte^ to virginity* ^ow (quoth
Menaphon) that you have got a Virgin in your mouth, you will never leave
ch^nting the word* ^ill you prove your self either a Vestall or a ^ibill*
Suppose she were a Vestall, quoth Melicertus, I had almost said a Virgin (but
God forbid I had ma^^ such a ^^ubtfull suppo^^tion) she might carry water with
Amulia in a ^^ue: for ^^ongst all the rest o^ virgi^^* we rea^^ o^ none but her
that wrought such a miracle* Pesana hearing (...) pleasantly Melicertus (...)
with her (...), ^hou^ht to ^iue him ^ great ^^ne to ^nawe ^^on* which (...)
cast in ^i^ (...) thus bri^^ely. I remember (...), that Epicurus measured every
man's diet by his (...) princ^ples: Apr^da^ the great ^acedonian pir^^, thought
every one had a letter of (...) that sails in the Ocean: none (...) to kn^cke
at Diogenes (...)* (...) was su^^^^ed a C^nick; and ^^^cie (...) to (...)
vanitie^, that you will t^^^ke Vesta a (...) of poetry* Samela (...) these
(...) brake off their (...) with (...) to end (...) s^ri^e* I pray you let ^^
(...) the o^^^ion of Doron, ^^r all this while neither (...) ^or C^^^ela have
^ttered one word, but ^ate as censors at our pleas: ^were necessary he told us
how his heart came thus on his halfepeny. Doron hearing Samela thus pleasant,
made presently this (...) reply: (...) was ((...) mistress) in solemn doubt
with my self, whether in being a sheep, you would be a r^m or an we? an (...)
no doubt, quoth Samela, for ^ornes are the (...) but then that the head can
bears: As Doron was ready to reply, came in suddenly to this parley ^ours or
s^ue old shepherds: who broke off their prat^^e, that from that, they fell to
drinking: and ^o after some ^^rley of their stocks, every one departed to
their own (...), where they talked of the (...) perfection of Samela,
especially Melicertus, who gotten to his own cottage, and lien down in his
couch by (...) on Samelaes shape.

Ah Melicertus, what an object fortune this day brought to thy eyes! presenting
a strange Idaea to thy sight, as appeared to Achilles of his dead friend
Patroclus, tresses of gold like the ^^ammels of Sephestiaes (...) a face fairer
then Venus, such was Sephestia* her eye paints her out Sephestia, her voice
sounds her out Sephestia, she seems none but Sephestia: but seeing she is
de^d, and there lives not such another Sephestia. sue to her and love her, for
that it is either a selfsame or another Sephestia, In this hope Melicertus
tell to his slumber, but Samela was not content: for she began thus to mus^
with her false: May this Melicertus be a shepherd* or can a country cottage
afford such perfection* does this coast bring forth such excellency? then
happy are the virgin that shall have such suitors, and the wives such pleasing
husbands, but his face is not in: (...) with any (...) his brows contain the
characters of nobility, and his looks in shepherds wee^ are lordly his voice
pleasing, his (...) of gentry: weigh all these equally, and (...) Samela, is
it not thy Maximu^? (...) away with these (...) could the dreaming of (...)
call Hec^or from his grave? or can the (...) my husband rasse (...) from the
seas? Tush, (...) ^^t to such v^nitie^* ^^ i^ dead, and therefor g^ieue not
t^^ me^ory with the ima^ina^^on of (...) ^ew reuiu^, ^o^ there h^^^ ^^ene ^ut
one (...) (...) ^o ^ee Virbuius* tw^c^ a man: to sa^^^ Samela then this
suppose* i^ they court th^e with (...)* ^ntertaine them with ^ose^: (...) i^
^ee woo* ^ee wooed and ^or no (...), (...) like M^ximus. Thus ^ee rested* and
(...) she s^^^t, all ^^rties, ^eing equally content and satis^ied with (...)
exc^p^ Pelana, who ^ettered with the (...) ^^ her ^e^^ ^el^ued Menahpon, (...)
c^rs^n^ Cupid (...) ^eitie, that would make more ^ay-light i^ the ^^r^^^ent
then o^^ (...)* more rain (...) Iris and more loves in o^e ^^art th^n o^e
settled passion: many prayer^ (...) made to Venus ^or re^^n^^, many (...) to
Cupid* many ^ri^ans to Him^^n^us* (...) the ^y^e o^ ^er ^e^^res. Well (...)*
(...) she wa^ (...)* she ^^ot^ered all with ^^t^enc^* and thou^ht ^^ (...)
love (...) not to love and thus thee d^ily* ^r^ue out ^^e (...) labor and
looking to her herd, ^^a^^n^ every ^ay by Doron who was (...) ^insman* what
su^^^sse Menaphon had in his loves* Thus (...) and (...) to make a more
^l^asing* (...) among^t the^ th^^. Melicertus (...) ^s ^^ was wont to do with
his (...)* dro^^ (...) ^raze ^^ (...) the swains of Menaphon (...) entertained
(...): who a^^ord^^^ t^ (...) every day* Melicertus* (...) daughter at the
most, could not tell ^o^^ to cour^ ^er: yet, at length calling to remem^ra^ce
^er (...) ^it ^^s^^uered in their l^^^ ^is^ours^^* (...) ^all and ra^^et*
seeing ^he (...) but Samela and ^e were in the (...), ^e le^^ ^^s ^^ocke ^n the
valley, and ^^e^t unto ^^r* and salu^ed her thus.

^istris, ^^ all e^^^ that ^lance ^ut at ^^^ ^xcellence o^ your ^erfection,
^oueraigne of al such as Venus ^^th (...) for (...), Oenones ^uer-match,
Arcadie^ co^e^, bea^^ies second (...), all (...): (...) like Juno when she
^^r^^ w^tcht her wh^^e ^e^^er ^^ the (...), as bright as (...) Phoe^e ^ou^^e^
on the ^i^ ^oy of the r^^dy element, I was by a strange ^ttractiu^ ^orce
^rawne, as the adamant draws the iron, or the (...) the ^^^aw, to (...) your
sweet self in the ^^ade, and (...) you such company as a poor Swain may
y^^ ^^ wi^^out (...)* which if you shall vouch to (...) of, I shall be ^^ gla^
of such (...), as Paris wa^ ^^rst ^^ his ^e^^ ^eloue^ ^^ramour* Samela looking
upon the shepherds (...), (...) broken s^ghes, thought to be pleasan^ wi^^ her
shepherd thus: Arcadies Apollo, whose brig^^^^^ (...) every (...) to ^u^^ as
the He^o^^opion does (...) of shepherds the (...) spirit, wo^en^ wrong, in
wronging many with (...) ^u^ (...)* (...) welc^^e, as we vouchsa^e ^^ your
service, (...) of your com^^ny, as of him that is the (...) of all (...), and
(...) upon any light par^^ would (...) you to (...) your cunnin^, Samela m^de
this reply* b^ca^se ^^e ^^ar^ ^im ^o super^ne, as i^ Eph^^^^ h^d (...) him to
(...) his mothers (...) borne (...) to ^ee (...): and Melicertus ^^^^k^ng
Samela had learned wi^h Luci^^a i^ At^e^^, (...) non^ ^ut si^il^^, ^ma^ine^
(...) her (...) t^ ^ee ^^ought l^ke Sap^o, (...) either in (...) Samela (...)
Pri^^^u^ ^^nton (...) not ^e with^^t (...) o^ Nymphs to ^ollow ^im in the ^ale
^^ I^a, ^e^^ty (...) attend her excellency: if the ^^e^^eard be true: i^ like
Narcissus you wra^ not your (...) in (...) of ^is^aine, you cannot but have
(...) rare ^^^ag^n to your (...), whom I would have you (...) ^escribe as loves
la^^ love, if ^oue could (...) Juno: ^hy (...) shall (...) and I a^uenture with
my voice to set out my mistress ^auour, for your excellence to (...) ther^ore
^^us: yet, Melicertus, for that he ^a^ a ^urther reach, would not make any
clownish ^escr^^^^on, chanted it thus c^^^ingly.

Melicertus description of his Mistress.
Tune on my Pipe, the praises of my love,
And midst thy Oaten (...).
How fair she is that makes by mistake moun^
And every string of thy hearts Harp to move,
Shall I compare her form unto the Sphere,
Whence Sun-bright Venus (...) her silver shine?
Ah, more then that by just compare is thine,
Whose Cristall looks the cloudy heavens do clear.
How often have I descending Ti^^^ seen,
His burning locks couch in the sea? Queens lap,
And beauteous Th^^^ his red body wrap,
In watery robes, as he her Lord had b^^ne?
When as my Nymph impatient of the ^ight,
Bade bright Atre^^ with his train give place,
Whiles she led forth the day with her fair face,
And lent each star a more then Delia^ light.
Not ^oue or nature (should they both agree,
To make a woman of the firmament,
Of his mixed purity) could not invent
A skieborne form so beautiful as she.


When Melicertus had ended this roundelay in praise of his Mistress, Samela
perceived by his description, that either some better Poet then himself had
made it, or else that his former phrase was dissembled: wherefore to try him
thoroughly, and to see what snake lay hid undo the grass, she followed the
chase in this manner. Melicertus, might not a stranger crave your Mistress name?
At this the shepherd blushed, and made no reply. How now, quoth Samela* what?
is she so mean that you shame, or so high that you fear to bewray the
sovereign of your thoughts? stand not in doubt man: for be she base, I read
that mighty Tamberlaine after his wise Xenocrate (the worlds fair eye) passed
out of the theater of this mortal life, he chose stigmaticall Tru^s to please
his humorous fancy. Be she a Princess, honor hangs in high desires, and it
is the token of a high muld to venture for a Oueene: then gentle shepherd tell
me thy mistress name. Melicertus, hearing his Goodesse speak sofauorably,
Breathed out this sudden reply: high Samela, and therefore I fear with the
Syrian Wolves to bark against the Moon, or with them of Scyrum, to shoot
against the Stars in the height of my thoughts soaring too high, to fall with
woeful repenting Ica^is: No sooner did mine ^ye glance upon her beauty, but as
if love and fate had sat to forge my fatal disquiet, they trapt me within her
looks, and haling het Idaea through the passage of my sight, placed it so
deeply in the center of my heart, as ma^ger all my studious endeavor it still
and ever will keep restless possession: Noting her virtues, her beauties, her
perfections; her excellence, and fear of her too high borne parentage, though
painefully fettered, yet have I still feared to dare so hauty an attempt to so
brave a personage: lest she offensive at my presumption, I perish in the height
of my thoughts. This conclusion broken with an abrupt passion, could not so
satisfy Samela, but she would be further inquisitiue. At last, after many
questions, he answered thus: seeing, Samela, I consume my self, and displease
you, to hazard for the salve that may cure my malady, and satisfy your
question, know it is the beauteous Samela. Be there more of that name in
Arcadie, beside my self, quoth. she? I know not, said Melicertus, but were there
a million, only you are Melicertus Samela: but of a million, quoth she, I
cannot he Melicertus Samela: for love has put one arrow of desire in his
quiver, but one string to his how, and in choice but one aim of affection.
Have ye already, said Melicertus, set your rest upon some higher Personage?
No, said Samela, I mean by your self, for I have heard that your fancy is
linked already to a beautiful shepherdess in Arcadie. At this the poor Swain
tainted his cheeks with a vermillion die, yet thinking to carry out the matter
with a jest, he stood to his tackling thus: whosoever, Samela, descanted of
that love, told you a Canterbury Tale, some prophetical full mouth, that as
he were a Cobblers eldest son, would by the Last, tell where and there is she
wrings, but his sowterly aim was just level, in thinking every look was
love, or every fair word a pawn of loyalty. Then said Samela, taking him at a
rebound, Neither map I think your glances to be fancies, nor your greatest
protestation any assurance of deep affection: therefore ceasing off to court
any further at this time, think you have proved your^selfe too tall a soldier
to continue so long at battery, and that I am a favorable so that have
continued solong at parley: but I change you by the love you a we your dearest
mistress, not to say any more as to^ching love at this time. It Samela, said he,
thou had ini^yned me as Iuo^. did to Hercules, most dangerous labors, I
would have discovered my love by obedience, and my affection by death: yet let
me crave this, that as I began with a Sonnet, so I may end with a Madrigall.
Content, Melicertus, quoth she, for none more then I love musich* Upon this
reply the shepherd proudtu, followed with this ditty.

Melicertus Madrigall.
What are my sheep without their wonted food?
What is my life except I gain my love?
My sheep consume and faint for want of blood,
My life is lost unless I grace approve.
No flower that saplesse ^hriues,
No Turtle without pheare.
The day without the Sun, does lowre for woe,
Then woe mine eyes, unless thy beauty see
My Sun Samelaes eyes, by who (...) know
Wherein delight cansis^s where pleasure^ be.
Naught more the heart reuiues
Th^^ to (...) his dear,
The stars from earthly earthly (...) their light,
Our humors by their ligh^ possess their power:
Samelaes eyes fed by any weepi^e sights,
Iufud^s my pains or i^yes, by smile or lowr^.
So wends the source of love,
It feeds, it falls, it ends.
Kind looks clear to your joy, behold her eyes,
Admire her heart, desire to taste her kisses;
In them the heaven of joy and solace lies:
Without them every hope his succor misses.
Oh how I love to prove,
Whereto this solace tends.


Scarce had the Shepherd ended this Madrigall, but Samela began to frown,
saying he had broken promise. Mel^certus alleged, if he had uttered any
passion, it was sung, not said. Thus these lovers, in a humorous descant of their
prattle, espied a far off old Lamedon and Menaphon coming toward them:
whereupon kissing in conceit, and prattling with interchanged glances,
Melicerius ^tole to his sheep, and Samela ^ate her down making of nets to
ca^eh birds. At last, Lamedon and her love came, and after many gracious looks,
and much good parley, helped her home with her sheep, and put them in the folds:
but leaving these amorous shepherds busy in their loves, let us return at
length to the pretty babie Samelas child, whom Menaphon had put to norse in
the country. This infant being by nature beautiful, and by birth noble, even in
his cradle expressed to the eyes of the gazers, such glorious presages of his
approaching fortunes, as if another Alciades (the arm-strong d^rling of the
doubled night) by wrestling with snakes in his swa^dling ^lowtes, should
prophesse to the world the approaching wonders of his prowess: so did his fiery
looks reflect ^^rror to the weak beholders of his ingrafie^ nobility, as if
some God twice-borne, like to the Th^ra^ian Bac^^^^, (...) his he auen-borne
deity, should delude our eyes with the alternate form of his infancy. Five
years had full run their monthly revolution, when as this beauteous boy began
to show himself among the shepherds children, with whom he had no sooner
contracted familiar acquaintance, but steaite he was chosen Lord of the
May-gam^, king of their sports, and Ringleader to their reuel^ insomuch that
his (...) or another (...) holding him by chance, ^ounted in his Kingly
Majesty, and imitating honorable justice in his games^^e exercite of
discipline, with tears of joy took up these prophetical terms: well do I
see, where God and Fat^ has vowed felicity, no adverse fortune may expel
prosperity. Pleusid^pus thou art young, thy looks high, and thy thoughts
hautie, soueraignety is seated in thine eyes, and honor in thy heart: I fear,
this fire will have his flame, and then am I undone in thee my Son ^y
countrylife ((...) countrylife) in thy proud soaring hopes, dispoited and
disr^abed of the disguised array of his rest, must return ru^^et weeds to the
folds where I left my fears, and haste to the court of my hell, there to
inuest me with my wonted cares: how now Samela, will thou be a Sybill of
mishaps to thy self? The angry heavens that have eternized thy exile, haste
establish^ thy content in Arcady, my content in Arcady, that we may be no
longer then my Pleusidippus days in Arcady, which I have cause to fear: for
the whelps of the Lion are no longer harmless then when they are whelps,
and babes are no longer to be awed then while they are babes. I, but nature:
and there with she paused, being interrupted by a tumult of boys, that by young
Pleusidippus command fell upon one of their fellows, and beat him most cruelly
for playing false play at Nineholes: which she espying through the lattice
(...) not choose but smile above measure* but when she saw him in his childish
terms condemn one to death, for despising the authority bequeathed him by
the rest of the boys, then she bethought her of the Persian Cyrus, that
deposed his Grandfather Astyages, whose use it was, at like age to imitate
majesty in like manner. In this distraction of thoughts she had not long time
stayed, but Lamedon and Menaphon called her away to accompany them to the
solds, whiles Pleusidippus hasting to the execution of justice, dismissed of
his boyish session till their next meeting: where how imperiously he behaved
himself in punishing misorders amongst his equals, in using more then jesting
justice toward his untamed copesmates, I refer it to the A^^als of the
Arcadians that dilate not a little of this ingenious argument. In this sort did
Pleufidippus draw forth his infancy; till on a time walking to the shore,
where he with his mother were wrackt, to gather Cockle and pebble stones, as
children are wont: there arrived on the strond a Thessalian Pirate named
Eurilochus, who after he had forraged in the Arcadian confines, driving before
him a large booty of ^easts to his ships, espied this pretty infant, when
gazing on his face, as wanton Jove gaze^ on Phrygian Ganimede in the fields of
Id^, he^ exhaled into his eyes such deep impression of his perfection, as that
his thought never thirsted so much after any prey, as this pretty Pleusidippus
possession: But determining first to assay him by courtesy, before he a^^ailed
him with rigor, he began to try his wit after this manner. My little child,
whence art thou, where were thou borne, what is thy name, and wherefore
wanderest thou thus all alone on the shore? I pray ye what are ye Sir, quoth
Pleusidippus, that deal thus with me by interrogatories, as if I were some
runaway? Will thou not tell me then who was thy father? said he, Good sir, if
ye will needs know, go ask that of my mother. He has said well, my Lord,
quoth Romanio, who was one of his special associates, for wise are the
children in these days that know their own fathers, especially if they be
begotten in dog-dayes, when their mothers are frantic with love, and young men
furious for lust. Besides, who knows not that these Arcadians are given to
take the benefit of every Hodge, when they will sacrifice their virginity to
Venus, though they have but a hush of net^les for their bed? and sure this boy
is but some shepherds bastard at the most, howsoever this wanton face
imports more then appearance. Pleusidippus eyes at this speech resolved into
^ire, and his face in purple with a more then common courage in children of his
years and stature, gave him the lie roundly in this reply: Pesant, the bastard
in thy face, for I am a Gentleman: were thou a man in courage, as thou art a
cow^ in proportion, thou would never have so much impaired thy honesty, as
to derogate from my honor. Look not in my face, but leuel at my heart by this
that thou see: and therewith he ^et ^riue at him with such ptbble stones as he
had in his hat, insomuch that Romanio was driven to his heels, to shun this
sudden haileshot, and Eurilochus resolved into laughter, and in terms of
admiration most highly extolled so exceeding magnanimity in so little a body:
which how auailable it proved, to the confirmation of his fancy that was
before inflamed with his features, let them imagine that have noted the
imbecillitie of that age, and the unresisted fury of men at Arms. Suffices
at this instant to unfold (all of her circumstances of praise laid apart) that
Eurilochus being far in love with his extraordinary lineame^ts awaited no
farther parley, but willed his men, perforce, to hopse him a ship-boord,
intending as soon as ever he arrived in Thessalie, by sending him to the Court
as a present, to make peace with his Lord and Master Agenor, who not long
before had proclaimed him as a notorious Pirat throughout all his dominions.
Neither swarued he one whit from his purpose: for no sooner had he cast anchor
in the port of Hadrianopolis, but he arraied him in choice silks, and Tyrian
purple, and so sent him as a prize to the king of that Country: who walking as
then in his Summer garden, with his Queen the beauteous Eriphila, fell to
discourse (as one well seen in Philosophy) or Herbs and flowers, as the
savor or color did occasion: and having spent some time in disputing their
medicinable properties, his Lady reching him a Marigold, he began to moralize
of it thus merrily: I marvel the Poets that were to prodigal in painting the
amorous affection of the (...) to his Hyacinth, did never observe the relation
of love twixt him and the Marigold: it should seem either they were loath to
incur the displeasure of women, by propounding in the way of comparison any
ser^ile imitation for headstrong wives, that love no precepts less then those
pertaining unto duty; or that the ^lower not so usual in their gardens as
ours, in her unacquainted name, did obscure the honor of her amors to Apollo,
to whose motions reducing the method of her springing, she waketh and
steepeth, opens and shuts her golden leaves as he rises and sets. Well
did you fore-stall* my exception, quoth Etiphila, in terming it a servile
imitation: for were the condition of a wise so slavish, as your similitude
would infer, I had as liefe be your page as your spouse, your dog as your
darling. Not so, sweet wife, answered Agenor, but the comparison holds in
this, that as the Marigold resembles the Sun both in color and form, so each
man's wife ought every way to be ye image of her husband, framing her
countenance to smile, when she sees him disposed to mirth, and contrariwise
her eyes to tears, he being surcharge with melancholy: As the Marigold
displayeth the orient ornaments of her beauty, and to the resplendant view of
none but her lover Hyperion: so ought not a woman of modesty lay open the
allurements of her face to any but her espoused Pheere, in whose absence, like
the Marigold in the absence of the Sun, she ought to shut up her doors, and
solemnize continual night, til her husband, her Sun making a happy return,
vnsealeth her silence with the joy of hid sight. Believe me, but if all
flowers (quoth Eriphila) afford such influence of eloquence to our adverse
Orators, I Will exempt them all from my smell, for fear they be all planted to
poison. Often have I heard (replied Agenor) our cunning Phisicians conclude, that
one poison is harmless to another, which if they be so, there is no cause why
a thistle should fear to be s^ung of a Natile. I can tell you sir, you were
best beware, ^eft in wading to^ far in comparisons o^ thistles and Nettle^,
you ochange not your Rose for a Nettle. If (...) Agenor, it is no more, but my
gardener shall pluck it up by the roots, and throw it over the wall as a weed.
To end this jest, which else would issue to a jar, what purple flower is this
in form like a Hyacinth (quoth Eriphila) so cunningly dropped with blood, as
if nature had intermeddled with the Heralds art to ^mblazon a bleeding heart?
It (...) flower, into which Poets faigne, Venus (...) dying (...) to hi^ turn^d
afaire Boy, but (...) it ^ossible ((...) Eriphil^) that ever nature should be
and so bounteous to a Boy, to give him a face in despite of women so faira?
feign would I see such an object, and then would I defy beauty for imparting
our excellency to any infer object. In saying those words, (as if fortune
meant to present her fancy with her desired felicity) Romanio conducted by
one of the Lord, came with young Pleusidippus in his hand into the privy
Garden: where discoursing unto the King the intent of Eurilochus, in presenting
him with such an inestimable Jewel, the manner of his taking of the Strond of
Arcadie, with other circumstances of vowed allegiance: all which being
greatefully accepted of Agenor, he sealed their several pardons, and gave
them leave to depart. But when he had thoroughly observed every perfection of
young Pleusidippus, he burst into these terms of passion: Had Sea-bo^^e P^ntia
then an applyable ear in our idleness, that to testify her eternal Deity,
she should send us a second Adonis, to delude our senses? what ever may deserve
the name, fair have I seen before, beauty have I beheld in his brightest
orb, but never set eye on immortality before this hour. Eriphila, likewise
in no less ecstasy, seeing her eyes to ^azle with the re^^exe of his beauty,
and her cheeks tainted with a blush of disgrace by t^o too much gazing on his
face, said: that either the Sun had left his b^wer to beguile their eyes with a
borrowed shape (which could not keep in his brightness,) or Cupid dis^^ounted
from his mother^ lap, left his how, and quiver at random, to outbraue the
Thessalonian dames in their beauty. In this contrariety of thoughts, being all
plunged wel-nigh in a speechless astonishment, the fair child Pleusidippus,
not used to such hyperbolicall spactators, broke off the silence, by calling
for his victuals, as one whose empty stomach slace his coming from sea, was
not ouer-cleped with delicates. Wherout Agenor, revived from him trance,
wherein the present wonder had inwrapt him, demanded such questions (...) his
name and parentage, as the Pirates ignorance could not unfold: but he being
able to tell no more then this, that his mother was a Shephear^esse, and his
own name, Pleusidippus, cut off all other interrogatories, bp calling after
his childish manner again, for his dinner. Whereupon, Agenor, commanding him
to be had in, and used in every respect as the child of a Prince, began in
his solitary walk by his countenance to ralculate his Nativity, and measure
his birth by his beauty, contracti^g him in thought, heir to the Kingdom of
Thessaly, and husband to his daughter, before he knew whence the child
descended, or who was his father.

But leaving young Pleusidippus, thus spending his youth in the Thessalian
Court, protected with the tender affection of such a courteous Foster-father as
Agenor, return we where we left, back into Arcadie, and meet his mother
the fair Samela returning from the Foldes: who having discoursed by the way as
she came home to Lamedon and Menaphon, what she late saw and obserned in her
Son, they both conjoined their judgments to their conclusion, that he was
doubtless borne to some greater fortunes then sheepcotes could contain, and
therefore it behooued her to further his Destinies with some good and liberal
education, and not to detain him any longer in that trade of life, which his
fortune withstood: but by the way, to rebuke him for tyrannizing so Lordly over
the Boys, left the neighbor Shepherds might happily intrude the name of
injury on them being Strangers; for his insulting over their children. With
this determination came she home, and calling for Pleusidippus, according to
their former counsel, he would (...) wise be found. Thereupon inquiry was
made among all the Shepherds, diligent search in every Village, but still the
most carefullest Post returned with, Non est in^entus. Which Samela hearing,
thinking she had utterly lost him whom fortune had saved, began in this manner
to act her unrest: Dissembling Heavens, where is your happiness? Unconstant
times, what are your triumphs? Have you therefore hitherto fed me with ^ouie,
that ye might at last poison me with gall. Have you ^atted me so long witly
Sordenian smiles, that like the wrack of the Sirens, I might perish in your
wiles? Cursed that I was to a^^ie in your courtesse^ cursed that I am to taste of
your cruelty! O, Plousidippus, live thou, or art thou dead? No, thou art
dead, dead to the world, dead to thy kinsfolks, dead to Cypres, dead to
Arcadie, dead to thy mother Samela: and with thee dies the Worlds wonder, thy
kinsfolks comfort, Cypres soul, Arcadies hopes, thy mothers honors. Was this
the prophecy of thy Sovereignty, to yield up thy life: to death so (...)?
wretched was I of all women, to bring the forth to this infencie.

O cruel The^i^, that did reuolue such inevitable fate: hard-hearted death
to prosecute me with such hate. Have we therefore escap^e the ^urio of the
seas, to pepish on the land? was it not enough that we were exiled from higher
prosperity, but we must all of us suddenly be overwhelmed with the ouerflow
of a second adversity? my husband and my father to be swallowed in the fury of
the furge, and now thou to be (and therewith her eyes distilled such abundance
of tears, as stopped the passage of her plaints, and made her seem a more then
second Niobe, be wailing her seuenfold sorrow under the form of weeping
Flint.) Menaphon, who had ouerheard her all this while, as one that sought
opportunity to plead his unrest, perceiving her in that extremity of agony
for her sons supposed loss, stepped to her presently and cheered her up in
these these term: fair shepherdess, might y^ (...) of contritia^ raise the
dead from destruction, then were it wisdom to bewail what weeping might
recall: but since such anguish is fruitless, and these plainings bootlesse,
comfort your self with the hope of the living, and omit the tears for the
dead. Why, quoth Samela, how is it possible a woman should lose him without
gr^efe, whom she has conceived with sorrow he was, sw^^te Menophon, the
divided half of my essence, soul to my joys, and life to my delights, as
beaute^us in his birth, as is our bright how-hearing god, that played the
Shepherd awhile for love, amidst our pleasant Areadian downs. What ever he
was in heautie, quoth Meniphon, procee^ed from your bounty, who may by
marriage make his like when you please: therefore there is no cause, why you
should so much grieve to (...) your first work defaced, that of a new ^old can
form a far better then ever he was (...) ^ere more (...) his like proceed
from (...) ^oynes: I (...) he made the Chamber bright with his beauty when he
was borne, and check^ the night with the golden rays that gl^amed from his
looks: never more may ^ ^e the mother of such a (...). Yes, Samela (quoth the
(...) but if thou will list to my loves, I will (...) the with is (...) reas^
as ever he was. Alas, poor Swain, said ^hee, thou hopest in vain, fluee and
her must reap what thou have sown, and gather into his (...), what thou have
(...) in the furrow. Another (...) what I have (...) Therewith he^ (...) and
s^tting his cap, he could not tell which way, in a hot^ (...) uttered these
words of fury: (...) of Greece, (...) thou my love with this (...) ingratitude?
(...) I therefore with my plenty supplied thy (...), that thou (...) thy pride
should (...) my (...) thee iii (...), to wound me in thy welfare with
disdain Deceitful woman (an^ there with he swore a holiday oath, by (...) the
god of the sepheards) either ret^rat love for love, or I will turn thee forth
of doors to (...) can, and make thee pitied for thy poverty, that (...)
honored in every man's eye through the support (...) of thy beauty. Be like
then, quoth Same^a, when you on (...) me into your house, you (...) not in
regard of the laws of hospitaliti^, but only with this (...) the Arms of your
fancy: then Sir, I have (...) am less indebled to your (...) I thought no
less, said (...), when your struggling eye at our last ^eating, would (...)
every corner of our company, that you would prove such kind (...): but if you
will needs (...) you (...) ^aster, I warrant you: thou see which of our heard
less yongsters will take you in, when I have cast you forth. Th^se* said she,
that out-countenante Menaphon and his self, and are better able then your
self: but howsoever I find their ^auour, I henceforth de^ie you and your
fellowship. And therewith in great rage she flung away into the next chamber,
where her uncle Lamedon lay sleeping, who complaining of Menaphons
discourtesses, he strait invented this remedy: There was a Shepherd called
Moron (brother to Doron) that not long before dyed of a surfeit, whose house and
flock being set to sale after his decease, he bought them both forthwith for
Samela, with certain remainder of money he had, and therein enfeoffed her,
mangre the surie of Menaphon, who when he saw she was able to support her state
without his purse, became sick for anger, and s^ent whole Eglogues in anguish.
Sometime lying comi^ties in his h^d, he would complain him to the winds, of
his (...) in these or such like words: Forlorn, and forsook^, since Phisicks
does loathe thee, despair be thy death, love is a god, and des^iseth thee a
man: fortune blind, and cannot behold thy deserts: die, did, fond Menaphon,
that ungratefully have abandoned thy Mistress. And therewith stretehed
himself upon his (...), as thinking to have sl^p^, he^ was (...) by cares that
^^iled all rest from his eyes; where upon taking his Pipe in his hand, twin^
playing and singing he plained him thus.

Menaphons Song in his bed.
Your restless cares, companions of the night,
That wr^pt my joys, in folds of endless woes:
Tire on my heart, and wound it wish your spite,
Since love and fortune proves my equal foes.
Farewell my hopes, farewell my happy d^ies,
Welcome, sweet grief, the subject of my lays.
Mourn heavens, mourn earth, your Shepherd is forlorn,
Mourn times, and hours, since bale inuades by bower,
Curse every tongue, the place where I was borne,
Curse every thought, the life which makes me lowre.
Farewell my hopes, farewell my happy days,
Welcome, sweet grief, the subject of my lays.
Was I not free? was I not fancies aim?
Framde not desire my face to front disdainer
I was; she did: but now one silly maime
Makes me to droope, as he whom love has slain.
Farewell my hopes, farewell my happy days,
Welcome, sweet grief, the subject of my lays.
Yet drooping, and yet living to this death,
I sigh, I sue for pity at her shrine:
Whose fiery eyes exhale my vital breath;
And make my flocks with parching heat to pine.
Farewell my hopes, farewell my happy days,
Welcome, sweet grief, the subject of my lays.
Fade they, die I, long may she live to bliss,
That feeds a wanton fire with fuel of her form:
And makes perpetual summer where she is,
Whiles I do cry, ore-tooke with enules storm.
Farewell my hopes, farewell my happy days,
Welcome, sweet g^i^fe, the subject of my lays.


No sooner had Menaphon ended this Dittie, but Pesana hearing that he was
lately fallen sick, and that Samela and he were at mortal iarres, thinking to
make hay while the Sun shined, and take opportunity by her forelocks,
coming into his chamber, under pretense to visit him, fell into these terms:
Why, how now, Menaphon, has your new change driven you to a nightcap? Believe
me, this is the strangest effect of love that ever I saw, to freeze so quickly
the heart ye is set on fire so lately. Why, may it not be a burning fever
as well, quoth Menaphon, blushing? Nay, that can not be, said Pesana, since you
shake for cold, not sweat for heat. Why, if it be so, it is long of cold
entertainment. Why, said Pesana, has your h^te entertainment r^^led your
courage?

No, but her undeserved hate quite hindered my conquest. You know, said Pesana,
where you might have been let in long ere this, without either (...) any such
battery. With this the Shepherd was (...)* and Pesana ashamed: but at length
regathering his spiri^^, to bowray his Martyrdom, and make his old Mistress
some new music, he strained forth this Dittie.

Fair fields proud Floras vaunt, Why is it you smile
when as I languish?
You golden meads, why strive you to beguile
my weeping anguish?
I live to sorrow, you to pleasure spring,
why do you spring thus?
What will not B^re^ temp^st^ wrathful King
take some pity on us?
And send forth winter in rustie weed,
to wail my bemonings;
Whiles I distressed do tune my Country ^^ed
unto my g^^ings.
But heaven, and earth, time, place, and every power,
have with her conspired,
To turn my blissful sweet to balefull sour,
since I fond desired.
The heaven, whereto my thoughts may not aspire,
aye me unhappy:
It was my fault t'imbrace my bane the fire,
that forces me to dye.
Mine be my pain, but hers the cruel cause
of thi^ strange torment:
Wherefore no time my banning prayers shall pause,
till proud she repent.


Well I perceive, said Pesana, for all she has let you fly like a Hawke that
has lost her tire, yet you mean to follow suit and service, though you get
but a handful of smoke to the bargain. Not so, said Menaphon, but perhaps I
seek to return an il bargain, as dear as I bought it. If you do so, you are
wiser then this kercher shows you, said Pesana. Much idle prattle to this and
had Menaphon with Pesana in his sickness; and long it was not, but that with
good diet and (...) (especially by her careful atdendance) he began to (...)
or up his (...), and listen by little and little to the lo^^ (...) storned.
Leave we them to their equal (...) either of others society, and let us look
back to Thessalie, where Samelac^ stripling (now grown up to the age of 16.
years) flourisht in honor and feats of Arms above all the Knights of the
Court, insomuch, that the (...) of his fame, was the only news talked on
throughout every (...) in Greece. But Olympia, the mistress of his prowess (for
(...) was the Kings daughter named) was (...) that most of all ^xulted in the
far renowned reports of his martial perfections, to whose praise he did
consecrate all his ende^ours, to whose exquisite form he did dedicate all his
adventures. But Hel-borne fame, the eldest daughter of Bryoni^, envying the
felicity of these two famous lovers, dismounted eftsoons from her
brasse-sounding buildings, and (...) her self of her secrets in the presence
of young (...), among whose Catalogue the had not forgot to discover the
incomparable beauty of the Arcadian Shepherdess, whereof the young Prince no
sooner had received an inkling, but he (...) upon thorns till he had
satisfied his desire with her sight. Therefore on a time sitting with his
Mistress at supper, when for table-talke it was debated amongst them, what
Country (...) the most accomplished Dames for all things? after strangers and
others had delivered up their opinions without partiality, one among them all*
who had been in Arcadie, gave up his verdit thus freely: Gentlewoman (quoth
he) he it no disgrace for the Moon to stoop to the Sun, for the Stars to
give place when Titan appears: then I hope neither the Thessalians will ^ee
moved, nor the Grecians agreeued, if I make Apoll^s Arcadie, beauties meridian:
Neither will I proceed herein as our Philosophical Po^ts are wont, that muster
every mouer in the Zodiacks, every ^^xed Star in the Firmament, every
elementall word of art in an Almanacke, to prove that Country for beauty most
canonical where their Mistress abides: when as (God w^t) had they but learned
of Apelles, N^ Suitor (...) or (...), they would not have aspired above their
birth, or talked beyond their sowterly bringing up. Our Arcadian Nymphs are
fair and beautiful, thoug^ not begotten of the Suns bright rays, whose eyes
vaunt loves armory to the view, whose angelical faces are to the ^bs^^^^ earth
instead of ^^rmament: view but this counterfeit, (and therewithal he showed the
picture of Samela) and see if it be not of (...) to draw the Sun from his
Sphere, or the Moon from her Circle, to gaze as the one did on the beauty of
Daphne, or al night contemplate as the other on the form of Endymion.
Pleusidippus, who all this while heard his Tale with attentive patience, no
sooner beheld the radiant glory of this resplendant face, but as a man already
installed in eternity, he exclaimed thus abruptly: O Arcady, Arcady,
^or^houses of nymphs, and nursery of beutie! At which words Olympia starting up
suddenly, as if she a second Juno, had taken her Jove in bed with Alcmens; and
ouercasting the Chamber with a frown that was able to mantle the World with an
eternal night, she made passage to her choler in these terms of contempt:
Beardlesse vpstart of I know not whence, have the favors of my bounty (not thy
desert) entered thee so deeply in ouer-weening presumption, that thou should
be the foremost in derogation of o^^ dignity and blaspheming of my beauty? I
tell thee miscreant, I scorn thy clownish Arcadie with his inferior
comparisons, as one that prizeth her perfection above any created constitution.
Pleusidippus, upon this speech stood plunged in a great perplexity, whether he
should excuse himself mildely, or take her up roundly: but the latter being
more level to his humor then the former, he began thus to rowze up his
fury: Disdainful dame, that vpbraidest me with my birth as it were base, and
my youth as it were boyish: know that though my Parents and Progeny are envied
by obscurity, yet the sparks of renown that make my Eagle-minded thoughts to
mount the heavenly fire imprisoned in the pannicles of my crest, inciting me to
more deeds of honor, then stout Perseus effected with his sauch^n in the
fields of Hesperia, ascertaines my soul I was the Son of n^ coward, but a
gentleman: but (...) of pare^tage, is such an ^yesore to thy envy, hold, take
thy sauors (and there with he threw her glo^e) and immortalize whom thou will
with thy toys, for I will to Arcadie in spite of thee, and thy affinity,
there either to (...) out mischance, or a new Mistress.

With this, in a great ^age he rose from the hoord, and would have mounted
himself to ^^part in that mood, had not the Lords and gentlemen there present
dissuaded him from such an unadvised enterprise. Neither was this unkindness
kept so secret, but it came to the Kings ear as he was new risen from dinner,
who for the love he ^ar^ to Pleusidippus, whom he had honored with Knighthood
not long before, and for the toward hopes he saw in him, took pains to go to
the chamber where they were, and finding his daughter in strange manner
perplexed with the thoughts of Pleusidippus departure, her eyes red, and her
cheeks all to be blubberd with her jealous tears, he took her up in this
manner. Daughter, I thought I had chose such a one to be the object of your
eye, as ye might have every way loved and honored as the Lord of your life, and
not have controlled as the slave of your lust. Did I therefore grace him with my
countenance, ye you should distaine him with your taunts? Peevish gyrle, I
advise thee on my displeasure, either reconcile thy self betimes, and reform
thy vnreuerent terms, or I will disclaim the love of a Father, and deal by
thee no more as a daughter. Olympia, who already had sufficiently bitten on ye
bridle, took these words more unkindly then all her former bitterness, which
she disgested but sowrely: nevertheless making necessity the present times
best policy, she humbled her self as she might with modesty, and desired
the best interpretation of what was past. Pleusidippu^, whose courteous
inclination could not withstand this submission, in sign of reconcilement,
gave her a stoccado des labies: yet was he not so reconciled, but he kept on
his purpose of going to Arcadie, whereat Olympia (though she grudged inwardly,
yet being loath to offend) held her peace, and determined to bestow upon him a
remembrance, whereby he might be brought to think on her in his absence, which
was the device of a bleeding heart flothig in the Sea wa^es, curiously stamped
in Gold, with this ^otto about it: portum aut mortem, alluding as it seemed, to
the device in his shield, wherein (because it was taken up by Eurilochus on the
shore) was cunningly drawn in a field argent, the sea waves with Venus sitting
on the top, in token that his affection was already fettred. Here hold this
(said she) my sweet Pleusidippus, and hang it about thy neck, that when thou
art in Arcadie, it may be ever in thy eye, so shall these drops of ruth that
paint out a painful truth withdraw thy fancy from attracting strange beauty:
which said, the tears gusht from her eyes, and Agenors likewise, who gave him
nothing so much in charge, as to make haste of his retain. Pleus^^ippus,
though he could have bin content to have done the like for company, yet he
had such a mind on his journey, that he brake off such ceremonies, and hasted a
shipbord, and in a Bark bound for Arcadie, having the wind favorable, made a
short cut: so as in a day and nights sailing, he arrived on the shore joining
on the Promontorie where he, his mother, and Lamedon were first wracked.

Leave we him wandering with some few of his train that came with him along the
seaside, to seek out some Town or village where to refresh themselves, and
let us a while to the Court of Democles, where our History began* who having
committed his daughter with her tender babe, her husband Maximinus and Lamedon
his uncle, without ear or Mariner, to the fury of the merciless wanes,
determined to leave ye succession of his kingdom to uncertain chance: for his
Q. with Sephestiacs loss (whom she deemed to be dead) took such thought,
that within short time after she died Democles as c^relesse of all weathers,
spent his time Epicure-like in all kind of pleasures, that either art or
expense might afford, so as for his dissolute life he seemed another
Heliogabalus, deriuing his security from that grounded tranquillity, which
made it prouerbiall to the world, No heaven but Arcadia. Having spent many
years in this variety of vanity, Fame determining to apply her self to his
fancy, s^nnded in his ear the singular beauty of his daughter Samela: he
although he were an old Colt, yet had not cast all his wanton teeth, which
made him under the brute of being sick of a grie^ous Apoplexy, steal from
his Court secretly in the disguise of a shepherd, to come and seek out
Samela, who not a little proud of her new flock, lived more contented then if
she had been Queen of Arcadie, and Melicertus ioying not a little that she
was parted from Menaphon, used every day to visit her without dread, and court
her in such Shepherds terms as he had, which how they pleased her, I leave
to you to imagine, when as not long after she vowed marriage to him solemnly
in presence of all the Shepherds, but not to be solemnized till the prophecy
was fulfilled, mentioned in the beginning of this History. Although this
penance exceeded the limits of his patience, yet hoping that the Oracle was not
uttered in vain, and might as well (albeit he knew not which way) be
accomplished in him as in any other, was contented to make a virtue of
necessity, and await the utmost of his destiny. But Pleusidipp^s, who by this
time had perfected his policies, exchanging his garments with one of the
Heardgroomes of Menaphon, tracing over the plains in the habit of a
shepherd, chanced to meet with Democles as he was new come into those
quarters, whom mistaking for an old shepherd he began many impertinent
questions belonging to the Sheepcotes; at last he asked him if he knew
Samelaes sheepfold: who answering doubtfully to all alike, made him half
angry: and had not Samela passed by at that instant, to fill her bottle at a
spring near the foot of the Promontory, he should like enough have had first
handsell of our new Shepherds sheephooke. But the wonder of her beauty so
wrought with his wounded fancy, that he thought report a partial spreader of
her praises, and same too vase to talk of such forms. Samela espying this
fair shepherd so far ouergone in his gazing, stepped to him, and asked him if
he knew her that he so ouerlookt her. Pardon me, fair shepherdess (said
Pleusidippus,) if it be a fault, for I cannot chose being Eagle-sighted, but
gaze on the Sun the first time I see it. And truly I cannot choose but compare
you to one of Aesops Apes, that finding a Glow-worme in the night, took it for
a fire: and y^^ seeing a face full of ^eformitie^, mistake it for the Sun.
Indeed it may us mine eye^ made opposite to such an object may fail in their
office, having their lights rebated by such brightness. Nay, not unlike, quoth
Samela, for else out of doubt you would see your way better. Why, quoth
Pleusidippus, I cannot go^ not of the way (...) I meet such glistering
Goddesses in my way* How now, Sir Paris, are you out of your Arithmoticke? I
think you have lost your wits with your eyes, that mistake Arcadie for Ido,
and a Shepherdess for a Goddess. How ever it please you (quoth Pleusidippus)
to ^^rogate from my pr^wasse by the title of Paris, know that I am not so far
out of my Arithmeticke, but that by mistiplication I can make time of one, in
an hours warning, or be as good as a cipher to fill up a place at the worst
hand: for my wit suffices, be it never so simple, to prove both re and voce,
that there can be no vacuum in rerum natura: and mine eyes, or else they
dec^iue me, will enter so far in art, as, niger est (...) albo, and teach me
how to discern twixt black and white.

Much other circumstance of prattle passed between them, which the Arcadian
records do not show, nor I remember: suffices, he pleaded love, and was
rep^lst: which drove him into such a choler, that meeting him supposed
Shepherd, who lying under a bush had all this while euer-heard them, he entered
into such terms of indignation, as Jove shaking his earth-quaking hair, when
h^ sat in consultation of Licaon. Wherefore Democl^s perceiving Pleusidippus
repulst, who was every way graced with the ornaments of nature, began to cast
over his badde penny-worths, in whose face age had surrowed her wrinckles,
except he^ should lay his Crown down at her feet, and tell her he was King
of Arcadia; which in Common-wealth^ respects, seeming not commodi^ns, he
thought to turns a new leaf, and make thisyoung Shepherd the means to
perfect his purpose. He had not far from that place a strong Castle, which
was inhabited as then by none but Tilsmen and Heardgr^mes, thither did be
persuade Pleusidippus to carry her perforce, and ^^ert that by constraint, that
he could not atchiue by entreaty; who listening not a little to this counsel,
that was never plotted for his advantage, presently put in practice what he of
late ga^e in precepts, and waiting till the evening that Samela should fold her
sheep; having given hi^ men the watchword, ma^ger all the shepheardes
adjoining, he mounted her behind him; and being by Democles directed to the
Castle, he made such ha^orke among the stubboorne. Heardsmen, that will they,
nill they, he was Lord of the Castle. Yet might not this prevail with Samela,
who constant to her old shepherd, would not entertain any new love: which
made Plousidippus thi^^lle all his Harvest lost in the reaping, and bl^mish all
his delights with a mournful drooping.

But Democles, that looked for a mountain of Gold in a Molehill, finding her
alone, began to discourse his love in more ample mann^r then ever
Pleusidippus, telling her how he was a King, what his revenues were, what
power he had to advance her, with many other proud vaunts of his wealth, and
prodigal terms of his treasure. Samela hearing the name of a King, and
perceiving him to be her Father, stood amazed like Medusae. Metamorphosis, and
blushing (...) with intermingled sighs, began to think how injurious
Fortune was to her shown in such an incestuous Father: but he, hote-spurred
in his purpose, gave her no time to deliberate or consider of the matter, but
required either a quick consent, or a present denial. She told him, that the
Shepherd Mdicertu^ was already entitled in the ine^rest of her beauty,
wherefore it was in vain what he or any (...) th^^ could plead in the way of
persuasion.

^^ee thereupon entering into a large field of the baseness of shepherds, and
royalties of Kings, with many other assembled sembled arguments of delight,
that would have fetch Venus from her Sphere to dispo^^: but Samela, whose
mouth could digest no other meat save only her sweet Melicertus, ashamed so
long to hold ^arley with her father about such a matter, flung away to her
withdrawing Chamber in a dissembled rage; and there, after her wonted manner
bewailed her misfortune^.

Democles, plunge^ thus in a Labyrinth of restless passions, seeing Melicertus
figure was so de^ply printed in the center of her thoughts, as neither the
resolution of his fancy, his Metamorphosis from a King to a Trauailer,
Crowns, Kingdom, preferments, (batteries that soon over throw the fortress
of women's fantasses) when Democles, I say, saw that none of these could remove
Samela, hearing that the Arcadian Shepherds were in an uproar for the loss of
their beautiful, Shepherdess, his hot love changing to a bird of coy
disdain, he intended by some revenge, either to obtain his love, or satisfy
his hate: whereupon thoroughly resolved, he stole away secretly in his
shepherds apparel, and got him down to the plains, where he found all the
Swains in a mutiny about the recovery of their beautiful Paragon. Democles
stepping amongst the rowte, demanded the cause of their controversy. Mary
sir, quoth Doron, bluntly, the flower of all our garland is gone. How mean you
that sir, quoth he? We had, answered Doron, an Ewe amongst our Rams, whose
sleece was as white as the hayres that grow on Father Boreas chinne, or as the
dangling dewlap of the silver Bull, her front curled like to the Erimanthyan
Boar, and spangled like to the worsted stockings of Saturn, her face like
Mars treading upon the milke-white clouds: believe me, Shepherd, her eyes
like the fiery torches tilting against the Moon: This Paragon, this none,
such, this Ewe, this Mistress of our flocks, was by a wily Fox stolen from our
folds, for which these shepherds assemble themselves to recover so wealthy a
prize. What is he, quoth Menaphon, that Doron is in such debate with? Fellow,
can thou tell us any news of the fair Shepherdess, that the Knight of
Thessalie has carried away from her fellow Nymphs. Democles thinking to take
apportunitie by the forehead, and seeing time had feathered his bolt, willing
to assay as he might to hit the mark, began thus. Shepherds, you see my
profession is your trade, and although my wandering fortunes be not like your
home-borne favors, yet were I in the Groves of Thess^lian Tempe, as I am in
the plains of Arcadie, the Swains would give me as many due honors, as they
present you here with submisse reverence. Beauty that drew Apollo from heaven
to play the Shepherd, that fetched Jove from heaven to bear the shape of a
Bull for Agenors daughter, the excellence of such a metaphysicall virtue, I
mean (shepherds) the fame of your fair Samela, houering in the ears of every
man as a miracle of nature, brought me from Thessaly to feed mine eyes with
Arcadies wonder: stepping along the shore to come to some sheepecote, where
my weary limbs might have rest. Love that for my labors thought to lead me to
fancies pauillion, was my conduct to a Castle, where a Thessalian Knight lies
in hold; the Portcullis was let down, the bridge drawn, the court of guard
kept: thither I went, and for my tongue I was known to be a Thessalian, I was
entertained and lodged: the Knight whose years are young, and valor
matchless, holding in his arms a Lady more beautiful then Loves Queen, all
blubbred with tears, asked me many questions, which as I might I replied unto:
but while he talked, mine eye surfeiting with such excellence, was detained upon
the glorious show of such a wonderful object: I demanded what she was, of the
standers by, and they said she was the fair Shepherdess, whom the Knight had
taken from the Swains of Arcadie; and would carry with ye first wind that
served into Thessalie: this (shepherds) I know, and grieve that thus your
loves should be ouermatcht with Fortune, and your affections pulled back up
contrariety or destiny. Melicertus hearing this, the fire sparkling out of
his eyes, began thus, I tell thee, shepherd, if Fates with their forepointing
pensils did pen down, or fortune with the deep variety resolve, or love with
his greatest power determine to deprive Arcadia of the beautiful Samela, we
would with our blood sign down such spells on the plains; that either our
gods should summon her to Elysium, or she rest with us quiet and fortunate:
thou see the shepherds are up in Arimes to revenge, only it rests who shall
have the honor and principality of the field. What needs that question, quoth
Menaphon, am not I the Kings Shepherd, and chief of all the bordering Swains
of Arcadia? I grant, quoth Melicertus, but am not I a Gentleman, though tired
in a Shepherds skincote, superior to thee in birth, though equal now in
profession? Well, from words they had fallen to blows, had not the shepherds
parted them, and for the avoiding of further troubles, it was agreed that they
should in two Eglog^es make description of their love: and Democles, for he was
a stranger, to fit Censor, and who best could decipher his Mistress perfection,
should be made general of the rest. Menaphon and Melicereus condestended to
this motion, and Democles sitting as a Judge, the rest of the shepherds
standing as witnesses of this combat, Menaphon began thus.

Menaphons Eglogue.
Too weak the wit, too slender is the brain,
That means to mark the power and worth of love:
Not one that lives (excep the hap to prove)
Can tell the sweet, or tell the secret pain.
Yet I that have been prentice to the grief,
Like to the cunning Seaman, from afar
By guess will take the beauty of that star,
Whose influence must yield me chief relief.
You Censors of the glory of my dear,
With reverence, and lowly bent of knee:
Attend and mark what her perfections be,
For in my words my fancies shall appear.
Her locks are plighted like the ^leece of wool,
That Jason with his Grecian mates atchiu'de:
As pure as gold, yet not from gold derived,
As full of sweets, as sweet of sweets is full:
Her brows are pretty tables of conceit,
Where love his records of delight does qu^te:
On them her dallying locks do daily ^lore,
As love full of^ does feed upon the b^ite:
Her eyes, fair eyes, likes the purest lights
That animate the Sun, or ^^eere the day:
In whom the shining Sunbeams brightly play,
Whiles fancy does on them divine delights.
Her cheeke^ like ripened Lillies steept in wine,
Or fair Pomegranate kernels washed in milk:
Or snow-white threads, in nets of crimson silk,
Or gorgeous clouds upon the Suns decline.
Her lips like Roses ouerw^sht with dew,
Or like the purple of Nar^issus flower:
No frost their fair, no wind does waste their power,
But by her breath, her beauties do renew.
Her crystal chin like to the purest mold,
Enchac'd with daintiest Daisies soft and white:
Where fancies fair Pauilion once is pight,
Whereas embraced his beauties he does hold.
Her neck like to an I^orie shining Tower,
Where through with azure veins sweet Nectar runne^:
Or like the down of Swannes where S^ness^ wo^nes,
Or like delight that does it self devour.
Her paps are like fair Apples in the prime,
As round as orient pearls, as soft as down:
They never veil their fair through winters frown,
But from their sweets love sucked his Summer time.
Her bodies beauties best esteemed bower,
Delicious comely, dainty, without stain:
The thought whereof (not touched) has wrought my pain,
Whose fair, all fair and beauties does devour.
Her maiden wount, the dwelling house of pleasure,
Not like, for why no like surpasses wonder:
O blessed is he may bring such beauties under,
Or search by suit the secrets of that treasure.
Devoured in though, how wanders my deuio^?
What rests behind I must divine upon.
Who talks the best, can say but ^airer none:
Few words well coucht do most content the wise.
All you that hear, let not my filly style
Condemn my zeal: for what my tongue should say,
Serves to enforce my thoughts to seek the way,
Whereby my woes and cares I do beguile.
Seld speaks Love, but sighs his secret pains,
Tears are his Truce-men, words do make him tremble^
How sweet is love to them that can dissemble,
In thoughts and looks, till they have reapt the gains?
A lonely I am plain, and what I say
I think, yet what I think tongue cannot tell:
Sweet Censors, take my silly worst for well:
My faith is firm, though homely be my lay.


After the hapless Menaphon had in this homely discourse shadowed his heavenly
^rlight, the shepherd Melicertus, after some pause, began in this sort.

Melicertus Eglogue.
What need compare, where sweet exceeds compare?
Who draws his thoughts of love from fencelesse things,
Their pomp and greatest glory does impair,
And mount Loves heaven with ouer-leaden wings.
Stones, herbs, and flowers, the foolish spoils of earth,
Floods, metals, colors, dalliance of the eye:
These show, conceit is stained with too much dearth:
Such abstract fond compares make cunning dye.
But he that has the feeling taste of love,
Deriues his essence from no earthly joy:
A weak conceit his power cannot approve,
For earthly thoughts are subject to annoy.
Be whist, be still, be silent Censors now,
My fellow-swaine* h^as told a pretty Tale,
Which modern Poets may perhap^ allow,
Yet I condemn the terms, for they are stale.
Apollo, when my Mistress first was borne,
Cut off his locks, and left them on her head,
And said, I plan^ these wires in Natures scorn,
Whose beauty shall appear when Time is dead.
From forth the Crystal Heaven, when she was made,
The purity thereof did ^aint her brow:
On which the glist'ring Sun that sought the shade,
Began set, and there his glories, does auow.
Those eyes, fair eyes, too fair to be describde,
Were those that erst the Chaos did reform:
To whom the heavens their beauties have ascribde,
That fashion life in man, in beast, in worm.
When first her fair delicious cheeks were wrought,
Aurora brought her blush, the Moon her white:
Both so combinde as passed natures thought,
Compilde those pretty Orbs of sweet delight.
When Love and Nature once were proud with play,
From both their lips her lips the corrall drew:
On them does fancy sleep, and every day
Does swallow-ioy, such sweet delights to view.
Whilome, while Venus son did seek a bower,
To sport with Psiches, his desired dear,
He chose her chin, and from that happy stovvre,
He never stints in glory to appear.
Desires and joys that long had served Love,
Behold a hold, whence pretty eyes might woo them;
Love made her neck, and for their bost behoue
Has shut them there, whence no man can undo them.
Once Venus dreamt upon two pretty things,
Her thoughts they were affections chiefest nests:
She sucked and sighde, and bathde her in the springs,
And when she wakte, they were my Mistress breasts.
Once Cupid sought a hold to couch his kisses,
And found the body of my best beloved,
Wherein he closde the beauty of his blisses,
And from that bower can never be removed.
The Graces erst, when Alcedelian springs*
Were waxen dry, perhaps did find her fountain
Within the bale of bliss, where Cupids wings
Do shield the Nectar fleeting from the mountain.
No more, fond man: things infinite, I see,
Brook no dimension: hell a foolish speech,
For endless things may never talked be,
Then let me live to honor and beseech.
Sweet Natures pomp, if my deficient phrase
Has stained thy glories by too little skill,
Yield pardon, though mine eye that long did gaze,
Has left no better pattern to my quill.
I will no more, no more will I detain
Your listening ears with dalliance of my tongue:
I speak my joys, but yet conceal my pain,
My pain too old, although my years be young.


As soon as Melicertus had ended this Eglogse, they expected the doom of
Democles, who hearing the sweet description, wherein Melicertus described his
Mistress, wondered that such rare conceits could be harbored under a
Shepherds gray clothing: at last he made this answer. Arcadian Swains,
whose wealth is content, whose labors ^^e tempered with sweet loves, whose
minds aspire not, whose thoughts brook no envy, only as riuals in affection,
you are friendly emulato^^ in honest fan^ie: since fortune (as enemy to your
quiet) has rest you of your fair Shepherdess (the worlds wonder, and
Arcadies miracle) and one of you as champion must lead the rest to revenge,
both destrous to show your valor as your forwardness in affection, and yet (as
I said) one to be whole chieftaine of the train, I awarde to Melicertus that
honor (as to him that has most curiously portraied out his Mistress
excellence) to hear the sole rule and supremacy. At this, Menaphon grudged,
and Melicertus was in an extasse of joy, so that gathering all his ^orces
together of stout headstrong clownes amounting to the number of some aco. he
apparrelled him self in armor, color sabled, as mourning for his Mistress: in
his shield he had figured the waves of the sea, Venus sitting on them in the
height of all her pride. Thus marched Melicertus forward with old Domocle^, the
supposed Shepherd, till they came to the Castle where Pleusidippus and his
fair Samela were resident. As soon as they came there, Melicertus begirt the
Castle with such a siege, as so many sheepish Caualiers could furnish: which
when he had done, summoned them in the Castle to parley: the young Knight
slept upon the walls, and seeing such a crew of base companions, with iackets
and rustie bills on their barks, fell into a great laughter, and began to taunt
them thus: Why, what strange Metamorphosis is this? Are the plains of Arcadie,
whilome filled with laborers, now ouer-laide with Lances? Are sheep
transformed into men, swains into soldiers, and a wandering company of poor
Shepherds, into a worthy troop of resolute Champions: No doubt, either Pan
means to play the God of war, or else these be but such men as raze of the
teeth of Cadmus. Now, I see the beginning of your wars, and the pretended end
of your stratagems: the shepherds having a madding humor like the Greeks to
seek for the recovery of Helena, so you for the regaining of your fair
Samela. Here she is a shepherdess, and I a Priam to defend her with
resistance of a ten years st^ge^yet, for I were loath to have any castle sacht
like Troy, I pray you tal^ me, which is Agamemnon? Melicertus hearing the youth
speaking thus proudly, having the sparks of honor fresh under the cinders of
poverty, incited with love and valor, (two things to animate the most dastard
Thersites to enter combat against Hercules) answered thus: Unknown yongster of
Thessalie, if the fear of thy hardy deeds, were like the diapas^n of thy
threats, we would think the Castle of longer siege, then either our ages
would permit, or our valor adventure: but where the shelfe is most shallow,
there the water breaks most high: empty vessels have the highest sounds,
hollow rocks the ^owdest echoes, and prattling Gloriosors the smallest
performance of courage: for proof whereas, swing thou have made a rape of
fair Samela, one of her vowed shepherds is come for the safetile of her word^
to self, to chall^nge thee to single combat: if thou overcome me, thou shall
freely pass with the shepherdess to Thessalie: if I vanquish thee, thou shall
feel the burden of thy rashness, and Samela the sweetness of her liberty.
Pleusidippus marvelled at the resolution of the shepherd: but when Domocles
heard how if he won, she should be transported into Thessalie, a world of
sorrows tumbled in his discontented brain, that he hammered in his head by
many means to stay the fair Samela: for when Pleusidippus in a great choler
was ready to throw down his gantlet, and to accept of she comda^^ Democles
stepped up, and spoke thus: Worthy Mirrors of resolved magnanimity, whose
thoughts are above your fortunes, and whose valor more than your revenues,
know that Bitches that puppie in haste, bring forth blind Whelps, that there
is no herb sooner sprung up than the Spattarmia, nor sooner fades: the fruit
too soon ripe are quickly rotten, that deeds done in haste are repented at
leisure. Then brave m^n in so weighty a cause, and for the conquest of so
excellent a Paragon, let not one minute begin and end the quarrel, but like
Fabius of Rome use delay in such dangerous exploits, when honor sits on wreaths
of Laurel to give y^ Vie^or his Garland: defer it some three days, and then
in solemn manner end the combat. To this good motion, not only Pleusidippus,
and Melicertus agreed, but all y^ company were consenting, and upon pledges of
truce given, they rested. But Democle^ seeing in covert he could not conquer,
and that in despairing loves secrecy was no salve, he dispatched letters to the
Nobility of his Court, with strait charge that they should be in that place
within three days with 10000. strong. This news came no sooner to the
General of his forces, but leuying so many approved Soldiers, he marched
secretly by night to the place Democles in his Letters had prescribed, and
there joyfully entertained by the King, they were placed in ambash, ready when
the signal should he given to issue out of the place, and perform their
Sovereigns command. Well, the third day being come, no sooner did Titan arise
from the watery couch of his Lemman, but these two Champions were ready in the
lists, accompanied with the rout of all the Arcadian shepherds, and old
Democles whom they had appointed for one of the Judges. Pleusidippus seeing
Melicercus advance on his shield the waves of the Sea, with a Venus sitting
upon them, marvelled what the shepherd should be that gave this Arms, and
Melicercus was as much amazed to see and strange Thessalian Knight vaunt his
Arms without difference: yet being so fraught with direful revenge, as they
scorned to salute each other so much as with threats, they fell toughly to
blows. Samela standing on top of a Turret, and viewing the combat, the poor
Lady greeuing, that for her cause such a stratageme should arise in Arcadie,
her countenance full of sorrow, and floods of tears falling from her eyes,
she began to breathe out her passion. Unfortunate Samela, borne to mishaps,
and forepointed to sinister fortunes, whose bloomes were ripened to mischa^ce,
and whose fruit is like to wither with despair, in thy youth sat discontent
pruning her self in thy forehead, now in thy age sorrow hides her self
amongst the wrinckles of thy face; thus art thou unfortunate in the prime, and
crossed with contrary accidents in thy autumn, as hapless as Helens, to have
the burden of wars laid on the wings of thy beauty. And who must be the
Champion? whose sword must pierce the Helmet of thine enemy? Whose blood must
purchase the freedom of Samela, but Melicercus? if he conquer, then Samela
triumphs, as if she had been chief Victor in the Olympiades: if he lose
every drop falling from his wounds into the ce^tre of his thoughts, as his
death to him, so shall it be to me, the end of my loves, my life, and my
liberty. As still she was about to go forward in her passion, the trumpet
sounded, and they fell to fi^ht in such furious sort, as the Arcadians and
D^mocles himself wondered to see the courage of the Shepherd, that he tied the
Knight to such a ^ore task. Pleusidippus likewise feeling an extraordinary
kind of force, and seeing with what courage the Knight of the Shepherds
fought, began to conjecture diversely of the war, and to fear the event of
the combat. On the contrary part, Melicertus half wearied with the heavy
blows of Pleusidippus, stood in a maze how so young a wa^ should be so expert
in his weapon.

Thus debating diversely in their several thoughts, at length being both weary,
they stepped back, and leaning on their swords, took breath, gazing each on
other. At last, Pleusiddippus burst into these speeches. Shepherd in life,
though now a Gentleman in armor, if thy degree be better, I glory, I am not
disgraced with the combat: tell me, how ^^rest thou so far wrong (...), as
to bear mine arms on thy shield? Princocks (quoth Melicercus) thou lie,
they be mine own, and thou contrary to the law of Arms bear my Crest
without difference, in which quarrel, seeing it concerns my honor, I will
revenge it as far as my loves: and with that he gave such a charging blow at
Pleusidippus helm, that he had almost ouer-turned him: Pleusidippus left not
the blow unrequited, but doubled his force: insomuch that the hazard of the
battle was doubtful, and both of them were ^aine to take breath again.
Democles seeing his time, that both of them were so weakened, gave the
watchword, and the ambush lept out, slaughtered many of the Shepherds, put
the rest to flight, took the two Champions prisoners, and sacking the Castle,
carried them and the fair Samela to his Court: letting the Shepherdess have
her liberty, but putting Melicertus and Pleusidippus into a deep and dark
dungeon.

Where leaving these passionate Lovers in this Catastrophe, again to Doron,
the homely blunt Shepherd: who having been long enamoured of Carmela, much
good wooing past betwixt them, and yet little speeding: at last, both of them
met hard by the Promontory of Arcadie, she leading forth her sheep, and he
going to see his new yeaned Lambs. As soon as they met, breaking a few
quarter blows with such country glances as they could, they geered one at
another lovingly. At last, Doron manfully began thus.

Carmela, by my troth good morrow, it is as dainty to see you abroad, as to
eat a mess of sweet milk in July: you are proved such a house-doue of late,
or rather so good a huswise, that no man may see you under a couple of Capons:
the Churchyard may stand long enough ere you will come to look on it, and the
Piper may beg for every penny he gets out of your purse: but it is no matter,
you are in love with some stout Ruffler, and yet poor folks, such as I am,
must be content with pottage: and with that, turning his back, he smiled in
his sleeue, to see how kindly he had given her the ^ob: which Carmela seeing,
she thought to be even with him thus.

Indeed, Doron, you say will, it is long since we met, and our house is a
grange house with you: but we have tied up the great dog, and when you come,
you shall have green rushes, you are such a stranger: but it is no matter,
soon hot, soon cold, he that mingles himself with draffe, the hogs will
eat him: and she that lays her love on an unkind man, shall find sorrow
enough to eat her sops withal. And with that, Carmela was so full stomackt
that she wept.

Doron, to show himself a natural young man, gave her a few kind kisses to
comfort her, and swear, that she was the woman he loved best in the World, and
for proof (quoth he) thou shall hear what I will praise: and you (quoth she)
what I will perform. And so taking hand in hand, they kindly sat them down,
and began to discourse their loves, in these Eglogues.

Dorons Eglogues joined with Carmelaes.
Sit down, Carmela, here are cubs for Kings,
Slowes black as Iet, or like my Christmas shoes:
Sweet Sidar, which my leathern bottle brings:
Sit down, Carmela, let me kiss thy toes.

Carmela. Ah, Doron, ah my heart, thou art as white
As is my mothers Calfe, or brinded Cow:
Thine eyes are like the slow-wormes in the night,
Thine hairs resemble thickest of the snow.
The lines within thy face are deep and clear,
Like to the furrows of my fathers waine:
Thy sweat upon thy face does often appear,
Like to my mothers fat and kitchen gain.
Ah, leave my toe, and kiss my lips, my love,
My lips are thine, for I have given them thee:
Within thy cap it is thou shall wear my glove,
At football sport thou shall my champion be.

Doron. Carmela dear, even as the golden ball
That Venus got, such are thy goodly eyes,
When cherries juice is iumbled there withal:
Thy breath is like the steame of apple-pyes.
Thy lips resemble two Cowcumbers fair,
Thy teeth like to the tusks of fattest swine,
Thy speech is like the thunder in the air:
Would God thy toes, thy lips and all were mine.

Carmela. Doron, What thing does move this wishing grief?

Doron. This Love, Carmela, ah, it is cruel Love:
That like a slave, and caytiue villain thief,
Has cut my throat of joy for my behoue.

Carmela. Where was he borne?

Doron. In faith I know not where:
But I have heard much talking of his dart:
Aye me poor man, with many a trickling tear,
I feel him wound the forchearse of my heart.
What, do I love? O no, I do but talk.
What, shall I die for love? O no, not so:
What, am I dead? O no, my tongue does walk.
Come kiss Carmela, and confound my woe.

Carmela. Even with this kiss, as once my father did,
I seal the sweet endentures of delight:
Before I break my vow, the gods forbid,
No not by day, nor yet by darksome night.

Doron. Even with this garland made of Holly-hocks,
I cross thy brows, from every shepherds kiss:
Heigh ho, how glad am I to touch thy locks,
My frolic heart even now a free man is.

Carmela. I thank you Doron, and will think on you:
I love you Doron, and will wink on you:
I seal your chapter parent with my thums,
Come kiss and part, for fear my mother comes.



Thus ended this merry Eglogue betwixt Doron and Carmela: which (Gentlemen) if
it be ^ust with pretty Similies, and far fetched Metaphors, think the poor
country Lovers knew no further comparisons the^ our within compass of their
country Logic. Well, it was a good world, when such Simplicity was used, say^s
the old Women of our time, when a ring of a rush would tie as much love
together as a gimmon of gold: but gentlemen, ^^ce we have talked of love so
long, you shall giu^ (...) leave (...) show my opinion of that foolish sanc^^e,
th^^.

Sonetto.
What thing is love? It is a power divine,
That reigns us, or else a wreakfull law,
That doomes our minds to beauty to incline.
It is a star, whose influence does draw
Our hearts to loud (...) being of his might,
Till he be master of our hearts and fight.
Love is a discord, and a strange di^^^
Betwixt our sense and reason, (...) whose power
As mad with reason we admit that force,
Which wit or labor (...) may devour.
It is a will that brooketh no consent:
It would refuse, yet (...) may repent.
Love's a desire, which for to wallen (...),
Does lose an age of years, and so does pass
As does the shadow ^e^ered from his prime,
Seeming as though it were, ye never (...):
Leaving behind naught but repent^nt thoughts
Of days ill spent, for that which profit ^ough^s.
It Is now a peace, and then a sudden war,
A hope consumde before it is conceived,
At hand it fears, and menac^^^ (...),
And he that games, is most of all deceived.
It is a secret hidden and not known,
Which one may better feel then (...) upon.


Thus Gentlemen have you heard my verdit in this So^^^ now will I return to
(...) Carmela, who not seeing her mother come, sell aga^^ to a (...), and thus
it was.

After they had thus (...) their Eglogues, they plighted faith and truth, and
Carmela, very bris^ly (...) her mouth with a (...) it* with a kiss, which
Doron takes (...) a little paying loath to depart, they (...) went a (...)
their (...) Leaving them therefore (...) their (...) again to Democles, who
seeing no (...) to persuade; Samela to love, neither the hope of the (...)
crown, no^ the title of a (...) lastly (...) threats, but all in vain: for
(...) by nature, (...) that he was her father, and (...) by love, in that (...)
Melicertus lay imprisoned only for her (...) (...) erauing pardon of Maxim^us
and Sephestia: and to show that the outward (...) of his watery eyes had a
(...) thy with the (...) of his heart, he impa^^^d the head of his young
Nephew Pleufidippus with the Crown and Diadem of Arcadie: for that his
brother Lamedon had in all distress not left his daughter Sephestia, he took
the matter so kindly, that he reconciled himself unto him; and made him Duke
in Arcadie. The success of this fore-rehearses (...) g^^wing so Comicall, they
all concluded after the (...) solemnizing of the Coronation (which was made
famous with the excellent deeds of many worthy (...),) to pass into Thessa^e,
to contract the marriage betwixt Pleusidippus, and the daughter of the
Thessalian King. Which nowes spread through Arcadie as a wonder, that at last it
came to Menaphons ears: who hearing the high parentage of his supposed Samela,
seeing his passions were too aspiring, and that with the Syrian Wolves he
barked agains the Moon, he left such Lettice as were too fine for his lips,
and courted his old love Pesana, to whom shortly after he was married. And
lest there should her left any thing imperfect in this pastoral accident,
Doron (...) himself up, and iumped a marriage with his old friend Carmela.

FINIS.

