GREENES, GROATS-VVORTH of wit, bought with a million of Repentance.

Describing the folly of youth, the falsehood of makeshifte flatterers, the
misery of the negligent, and mischiefs of deceiving Courtezans. Written
before his death and published at his dyeing request.

Foelicem fuisse infaustum.

LONDON Imprinted for William Wright. 1592.

The Printer to the Gentle Readers.
I Have published here Gentle men for your mirth and benefit Greenes groates
worth of wit. With sundry of his pleasant discourses, ye have been before
delighted: But now has death given a period to his pen? only this happened
into my hands which I have published for your pleasures: Accept it favorably
because it was his last birth and not least worth? In my poor opinion. But I
will cease to praise that which is above my conceit, and leave it self to
speak for it self? and so abide your learned censuring.

Yours VV. VV.

To the Gentlemen Readers.
GEntlemen. The Swan sings melodiously before death, that in all his life time
uses but a iarring sound. Green though able enough to write, yet deeplyer
serched with sickness than ever heretofore, sendes you his Swanne like song,
for that he fears he shall nener again carroll to you woonted love lays,
never again discover to you youths pleasures. How ever yet sickness, riot,
Incontinence, have at once shown their extremity yet if I recover, you shall
all see, more fresh sprigs, then ever sprang from me, directing you how to
live, yet not diswading ye from love. This is the last I have writ, and I fear
me the last I shall writ. And how ever I have been censured for some of my
former books, yet Gentlemen I protest, they were as I had special
information. But passing them, I commend this to your favorable censures, that
like an Embrion without shape, I fear me will be thrust into the world. If I
live to end it, it shall be otherwise: if not, yet will I commend it to your
courtesies, that you may as well be acquainted with my repentant death, as you
have lamented my careless course of life. But as Nemo ante obitum felix, so Acta
Exitus probat: Beseeching therefore so to be deemed hereof as I deserve, I
leave the work to your likinges, and leave you to your delights.

GREENES GROATES-VVORTH OF WIT.
IN an Island bounded with the Ocean. there was sometime a City situated, made
rich by Merchandise, and populous by long peace, the name is not mentioned in
the Antiquarie, or else worn out by times Antiquity, what it was it greatly
skilles not, but therein thus it happened. An old new made Gentleman herein
dwelt, of no small credit, exceeding wealth, and large conscience: he had
gathered from many to bestow upon one, for though he had two sons he esteemed
but one, that being as himself, brought up to be golds bondsman, was therefore
held heir apparent of his il gathered goods.

The other was a Scholar, and married to a proper Gentlewoman and therefore
least regarded, for it is an old said saw: To learning and law, there is no greater
foe than they that nothing know: yet was not the father altogether unlettered,
for he had good experience in a Nouerint, and by the universal terms therein
contained, had driven many a young Gentleman to seek unknown countries, wise
he was, for he boar office in his parish and sat as formally in his foxfurd
gown, as if he had been a very upright dealing Burges: he was religious too,
never without a book at his belt, and a bolt in his mouth, ready to shoot
through his sinful neighbor.

And Latin he had some where learned, which though it were but little, yet was
it profitable, for he had this Philosophye written in a ring, Tu tibi cura,
which precept he curiously observed, being in selfeloue so religious, as he
held it no point of charity to part with any thing, of which he living might
make use.

But as all mortal things are momentanie, and no certainty can bee-found in
this uncertain world: so Gorinius, (for that shall be this usurers name)
after many a gowtie pang that had pincht his exterior parts, many a curse of
the people that mounted into heuens presence, was at last with his last
summons, by a deadly disease arrested, wheragainst when he had long contended,
and was by Physicians given over, he called his two sons before him: and
willing to perform the old proverb Qualis vita finis Ita, he thus prepared
himself, and admonished them. My sons (for so your mother said ye were) and
so I assure my self one of you is, and of the other I will make no doubt.

You se the time is com, which I thought would never have aproched and we must
now be separated, I fear never to meet again. This sixteen years daily
have I liude vexed with disease: and might I live sixteen more, how ever
miserably, I should think it happy. But death is relentlesse, and will not be
entreated witles: and knows not what good my gold might do him: senseles, and
has no pleasure in the delightful places I would offer him. In brief, I
think he has with this fool my eldest son been brought up in the
university, and therefore accounts that in riches is no virtue. But thou my
son, (laying then his hand on the yongers head) have thou another spirit: for
without wealth, life is a death: what is gentry if wealth be wanting, but bace
servile beggerie. Some comfort yet it is unto me, to think how many Gallants
sprunge of noble parents, have croucht to Gorinius to have sight of his gold: O
gold, desired gold, admired gold? and have lost their patrimonies to Gorinius,
because they have not returned by their day that adored creature? How many
Scholars have written rymes in Gorinius praise, and received (after long
capping and reverence) a sixpeny reward in sign of my superficial liberality.
Breefly my young Lucanio how I have been reurenst thou see, when honester men
I confess have been set far off: for to be rich is to be any thing, wise,
honest, worshipful, or what not. I tell thee my son: when I came first to this
City my whole wardrop was only a suit of white sheep skins, my wealth an old
groat, my woonning, the wide world. At this instant (o grief to part with it)
I have in ready coin threescore thousand pound, in plate and Jewels xv.
thousand; in Bonds and specialties as much, in land nine hundred pound by the
year: all which, Lucanio I bequeath to thee, only I reserve for Roberto thy
well red brother an old groat, (being ye stock I first began with (wherewith I
wish him to buy a groats-worth of wit: for he in my life has reprooud my
manner of life, and therefore at my death, shall not be contaminated with
corrupt gain. Here by the way Gentlemen must I digress to show the reason of
Gorinius present speech: Roberto being come from the Academie, to visit his
father, there was a great feast provided: where for table talk, Roberto
knowing his father and most of the company to be execrable usurers, inuayed
mightily against that abhorred vice, insomuche that he urged tears from
diverse of their eyes, and compunction in some of their hearts. Dinner being
past, he comes to his father, requesting him to take no offense at his liberal
speech, seeing what he had vttred was truth. Angry son (said he) no by my
honesty (and that is some what I may say to you) but use it still, and if thou
can persuade any of my neighbors from lending upon usury I should have the
more customers: to which when Roberto would have replyde he shut himself into
his studdy, and fell to tell over his money.

This was Robertos offense: now return, we to sick Gorinius, who after he
had thus unequally distributed his goods and possessions, began to ask his
sons how they liked his bequestes, either seemed agreed, and Roberto urged
him with nothing more than repentance of his sinnloke: to thine own said he,
fond boy, and come my Lucanio, let me give thee good counsel before my death:
as for you sir, your books are your counselors, and therefore to them I
bequeathe you. Ah Lucanio, my only comfort, because I hope thou will as thy
father be a gatherer, let me bless thee before I dye. Multiply in wealth my
son by any means thou may, only fly Alchymie, for therein are more
deceites than her beggerlye Artistes have words, and yet are the wretches more
talkatiue than women. But my meaning is, thou should not stand on conscience
in causes of profit, but heap treasure upon treasure, for the time of need:
yet seem to be devout, else shall thou be held vile, frequent holy excercises
grave company, and above al use the conversation of young Gentlemen, who are
so wedded to prodigality, that once in a quarter necissitie knocks at their
chamber doors: profer them kindness to relieve theirwants, but be sure of
good assurance: give fair words till days of payment come, and then use my
course, spare none: what though they tell of conscience (as a number will
talk) looks but into the dealinges of the world, and thou shall see it is but
idle words. See thou not many perish in the streets, and fall to theft for
need: whom small succor would relieve, then where is conscience, and why art
thou bound to use it more than other men? See thou not daily forgeries
periuries, oppressions, rackinges of the poor, raisinges of rents, inhauncing
of duties even by them that should be al conscience, if they meant as they
speak: but Lucanio if thou read well this book (and with that he reached him
Machiauels works at large) thou shall se, what it is to be so foole-holy as to
make scruple of conscience where profit presents it self.

Besides, thou have an instance by the thread bare brother here, who willing to
do no worng, has lost his childs right: for who would wish any thing to
him, that knows not how to use it.

So much Lucanio for conscience: and yet I know not what is the reason, but
somewhat stinges me inwardly when I speak of it. I father said Roberto, it
is the worm of conscience, that vrges you at the last hour to remember your
life, that eternal life may follow your repentance. Out fool (said this
miserable father, I feel it now, it was only a stitch. I will forward with
my exhortation to Lucanio. As I said my son, make spoil of young Gallants,
by insinuating thy self amongst them, and be not moved to think their
Ancestors were famous, but consider thine were obscure, and that thy father
was the first Gentleman of the Name: Lucanio, thou art yet a Bacheler, and so
keep thee till thou meet with one that is thy equal, I mean in wealth:
regard not beauty, it is but a bayte to entice thine neighbors eye: and the
most fair are commonly most fond, use not too many familiars, for few prove
friends, and as easy it is to weigh the wind, as to diue into the thoughts of
worldly glosers. I tell thee Lucanio, I have seen four-scoore winters besides
the od seven, yet saw I never him, that I esteemed as my friend but gold, that
desired creature, whom I have so deerly loved, and found so firm a frind, as
nothing to me having it has been wanting. No man but may think deerly of a
true friend, and so do I of it laying it under sure locks, and lodging my heart
therewith.

But now (Ah my Lucanio) now must I leave it, and to thee I leave it with this
lessen, love none but thy self, if thou will live esteemd. So turning him to
his studdy, where his chief treasure lay, he loud cryde out in the wise man's
words, O mors quam amara, O death how bitter is thy memory to him that has al
pleasures in this life, and so with two or three lamentable groans he left his
life: and to make short work, was by Lucanio his son interd, as the custom
is with some solemnity: But leaving him that has left the world to him that
censureth of every worldly man, pass we to his sons: and se how his long
laid up store is by Lucanio lookyd into. The youth was of condition simple,
shamfast, and flexible to any counfaile, which Roberto perceiving, and
pondering how little was left to him, grew into an inward contempt of his
fathers unequal legacy, and determinate resolution to work Lucanio al
possible injury, here upon thus converting the sweetness of his studdye to the
sharp thirst of revenge, he (as Envy is seldom idle) sought out fit
companions to effect his unbrotherly resolution. Neither in such a case is ill
company far to seek, for ye Sea has scarce so ieoperdies, as populous Cities
have deceiving Sirens, whose eyes are Adamants, whose words are witchcraftes,
whose doors lead down to death. With one of these female serpents Roberto
consorts, and they conclude what ever they compassed equally to sharre to their
contents. This match made, Lucanio was by his brother brought to the bush,
where he had scarce pruned his wings, but he was fast limd, and Roberto had
what he expected. But that we may keep form, you shall hear how it
fortuned.

Lucanio being on a time very pensive, his brother brake with him in these
terms. I wonder Lucanio why you are disconsolate, that want not any thing in
the world that may work your content. If wealth may delight a man, you are
with that sufficently furnished: if credit may procure any comfort, your word I
know well, is as well accepted as any man's obligation: in this City, are
fair buildings and pleasant gardens, and cause of solace, of them I am assured
you have your choice. Consider brother you are young, then plod not altogether
in meditating on our fathers precepts: which howseuer they sauored of profit,
were most vnsauerly to one of your years applied. You must not think but
sundry merchants of this City expect your company, sundry Gentlemen desire
your familiarity, and by co^uersing with such, you will be accounted a
Gentleman: otherwise a pesant, if ye live thus obscurely. Besides, which I had
almost forgot and then had all the rest been nothing, you are a man by nature
furnished with all exquisite proportion, worthy the love of any courtly lady,
be she never so amorous: you have wealth to main taine her, of women not little
longed for: words to court her you shall not want, for my self will be your
secretary. Breefely why stand I to distinguish ability in perticularities,
when in one word it may be said which no man can gainsay, Lucanio lacks
nothing to delight a wife, nor any thing but a wife to delight him? My young
master being thus clawd, and pufft up with his own praise, made no longer
delay, but having on his holidaie hose he trickt himself up and like a
fellow that meant good sooth, he clapped his brother on the shoulder and said.
Faith brother Roberto, and ye say the word lets go seek a wife while it is
hot, both of us together, I Will pay well, and I dare turn you loose to say as
well as any of them all, well I Will do my best said Roberto and since ye are so
forward lets go now and try your good fortune.

With this forth they walk, and Roberto went directly toward the house where
Lamilia (for so we call the Curtizan) kept her hospital, which was in the
suburbs of the City, pleasantly seated, and made more delectable by a
pleasant garden wherein it was situate. No sooner come they within ken, but
Mistress Lamilia like a cunning angler made ready her change of baytes that
she might effect Lucanios bane: and to begin she discovered from her window
her beauteous enticing face, and taking a lute in her hand that she might the
rather allure, she soung this sonnet with a delicious voice,

Lamilias song.
Fie fie on blind fancy,
It hinders youths joy:
Fair virgins learn by me,
To count love a toy.
When love learnd first the ABC of delight,
And knew no figures, nor conceited phrase:
He simply gave to due desert her right,
He lead not lovers in dark winding ways,
He plainly wild to love, or flatly answered no,
But now who lists to prove shall find it nothing so,
Fie fie then on fancy,
It hinders youths joy,
Fair virgins learn by me,
To count love a toy.
For since he learnd to use the Poets pen,
He learnd likewise with smoothing words to feign,
Witching chaste ears with trothles tungs of men,
And wronged faith with falsehood and disdain.
He gives a promise now, anon he swears no,
Who lists for to prove shall find his changings so,
Fie fie then on fancy,
It hinders youths joy,
Fair virgins learn by me,
To count love a toy.
While this painted sepulcher was shadowing her corrupting guilt, Hiena-like
alluring to destruction, Roberto and Lucanio under her window kept even pace
with every stop of her instrument, but especially my young Ruffler, (that
before time like a bird in a cage had been prentise for three lives or one
and twenty years at lest to extreme Avarice his deceased father) O it was a
world to see how he sometime simperd it, striving to set a countenance on
his new turned face, that it might seem of wainscot proof, to behold her face
without blushing: anon he would stroke his bow-bent-leg, as if he meant to
shoot love arrows from his shins: then wypt his chin (for his beard was not
yet grown) with a gold wrought handkercher, whence of purpose he let fall a
handful of Angels. This golden shower was no sooner raind, but Lamilia ceast
her song, and Roberto (assureing himself the fool was caught) came to Lucanio
(that stood now as one that had stard Medusa in the face) and awaked him from
his amazement with these words. What in a trance brother? whence springs
these dumps? are ye amazd at this object? or long ye to become loves subject?
Is there not difference between this delectable life, and the imprisonment you
have all your life hither too endured? If the sight and hearing of this
harmonyous beauty work in you effects of wonder, what will the possession of
so divine an effence, wherein beauty and Art dwell in their perfectest
excellence. Brother said Lucanio lets use few words, and she be no more then
a woman, I trust you will help me to win her? and if you do, well, I say no more
but I am yours till death us depart, and what is mine shall be yours world
without end A men.

Roberto smiling at his simplenes helpte him to gather up his dropped gold, and
without any more circumstance, led him to Lamilias house: for of such places
it may be said as of hell.

Noctes atque dies patet atri ianua ditis. So their doors are ever open to
entice youth to destruction. They were no sooner entered but Lamilia her self
like a second Helen, court like begins to salute Roberto, yet did her wandering
eye glance often at Lucanio: the effect of her intertainment consisted in these
terms, that to her simple house Signor Roberto was welcome, and his brother
the better welcome for his sake: albeit his good report confirmde by his present
demeaner were of it self enough to give him deserved entertainment in any
place how honorable soever: mutual thanks returned, they lead this prodigal
child into a parlor garnished with goodly portratures of amiable personages:
nere which an excellent consort of music began at their entrance to play.
Lamilia seeing Lucanio shamefast, took him by the hand, and tenderly wringing
him used these words. Believe me Gentleman, I am very sorry that our rude
entertainment is such, as no way may work your content, for this I have noted
since your first entering that your countenance has been heavy, and the face
being the glass of the heart, assures me the same is not quiet: would ye wish
any thing here that might content you, say but the word, and assure ye of
present diligence to effect your full delight. Lucanio being so far in love,
as he persuaded himself without her grant he could not live, had a good
meaning to utter his mind but wanting fit words, he stood like a trewant
that lackt a prompter, or a plaier that being out of his part at his first
entrance, is feign to have the book to speak what he should perform. Which
Roberto perceiving, replied thus in his behalf: Madame the Suns brightness
daisleth the beholders eyes, the majesty of Gods, amazeth humane men, Tullie
Prince of Orators once fainted though his cause were good, and he that tamed
monsters stood amated at Beauties ornaments: Then blame not this young man
though he replied not, for he is blinded with the beauty of your sun
darkening eyes, made mute with the celestial organe of your voice, and fear
of that rich ambush of amber colored darts, whose points are leueld against
his heart. Well Signor Roberto said she, how ever you interpret their sharp
level, be sure they are not bent to do him hurt, and but that modesty
blindes us poor maidens from uttering the inward sorrow of our minds,
perchance the cause of grief is ours how ever men do color, for as I am a
virgin I protest, (and there withal she tainted her cheeks with a vermilion
blush) I never saw Gentleman in my life in my eye so gracious as is Lucanio
only this is my grief, that either I am despised for that he scorns to speak,
or else (which is my greater sorrow) I fear he cannot speak. Not speak
Gentlewoman quoth Lucanio? that were a jest indeed, yes I thank God I am sound
of wind and lym, only my heart is not as it was wont: but and you be as good as
your word that will soon be well, and so craving ye of more acquaintance, in
token of my plain meaning receive this diamond, which my old father loud
dearly: and with that delivered her a ringe wherein was a poynted diamonde of
wonderful worth. Which she accepting with a low conge, returned him a silk
Riband for a favor tide with a true loves knot, which he fastened under a
fair Jewel on his Beuer felt.

After this Diomedis and Glauci permutatio, my young master waxed crancke, and
the music continuing, was very forward in dancing, to show his cunning: and
so desiring them to play on a hornepipe, laid on the pauement lustely with his
leaden heels, cornetting, like a steed of Signor Roccoes teaching, and wanted
nothing but bells, to be a hobbyhorse in a morris. Yet was he soothed in his
folly, and what ever he did Lamilia counted excellent: her praise made him
proud, in so much that if he had not been entreated, he would rather have
died in his dance, then left off to show his mistress delight. At last
reasonably persuaded, seeing the table furnished, he was content to cease, and
settle him to his victuals, on which (having before labored) he fed lustely,
especially of a Woodcocke pie, wherewith Lamilia his caruer, plentifully plied
him. Full dishes having furnished empty stomachs, and Lucanio thereby got
leisure to talk, falls to discourse of his wealth, his lands, his bonds,
his ability, and how himself with all he had, was at madame Lamilias
disposing: desiring her before his brother to tell him simply what she meant.
Lamilia replied My sweet Lucanio, how I esteem of thee mine eyes do witness,
that like handmaides, have attended thy beauteous face, ever since I first
beheld thee: yet seeing love that lasts, gathers by degrees his liking:
let this for that suffice, if I find thee firm, Lamilia will be faithful: if
fleeting, she must of necessity be unfortunate: that having never seen any
whom before she could affect, she should be of him injuriously forsaken. Nay
said Lucanio, I dare say my brother here will give his word forth at I accept
your own said Lamilia: for with me your credit is better than your brothers.
Roberto brake off their amorous prattle with this speech. Since either of you
are of other so fond at the first sight, I doubt not but time will make your
love more firm. Yet madame Lamilia although my brother and you be thus
forward, some cross chance may come: for Multa cadunt inter calicem
supremaque labe. And for a warning to teach you both wit, I Will tell you an old
wives tale.

Before ye go on with our tale (quoth Mistress Lamilia) let me give ye a caveat by
the w^y, which shall be figured in a fable.

Lamilias Fable.
THe Fox on a time came to visit the Gray, partly for kindered chiefly for
craft: and finding the hole empty of all other company, saving only one Badger
enquired the cause of his solitariness: he discribed the sudden death of his
dam and sire with the rest of his consortes. The Fox made a Friday face,
counterfeiting sorrow: but concludinge that deaths stroke was inevitable
persuaded him to seek some fit mate wherewith to match. The badger soon agreed,
so forth they went, and in their way met with a wa^ton ewe straggling from the
fold: the fox bad the Badger play the tall stripling, and strout on his
tiptoes: for (quoth he) this ewe is lady of al these lawnds and her brother chief
belweather of sundry flocks. To be short by the Foxes per swasion there would
be a perpetual league, between her harmeles kindred, and all other devouring
beasts, for that the Badger was to them all allied: seduced she yielded, and
the Fox conducted them to the Badgers habitation. Where drawing her aside under
color of exhortation, pulled out her throat to satisfy his greedy thirst. Here I
should note, a yoonge whelpe that viewed their walk, infourmed the
shepheardes of what happened. They followed, and trained the Fox and Badger to
the hole, the Fox before had craftily conuaid himself away, the shepherds
found the Badger rauing for the ewes mur there, his lame^tation being held for
counterfeit, was by the shepherds dogs werried. The Fox escaped: the Ewe was
spoiled, and ever since between the Badgers and dogs has continued a mortal
enmity: And now be aduized, Roberto (quoth she) go forward with your tale, seek
not by sl y insinuation to turn our mirth to sorrow. Go to Lamilia (quoth he) you
fear what I mean not, but how ever ye take it, I Will forward with my tale.

Robertoes Tale.
IN the North parts there dwelt an old Squier, that had a young daughter his
heir; who had (as I know Madam Lamilia you have had) many youthful Gentlemen
that long time sued to obtain her love. But she knowing her own perfections
(as women are by nature proud) would not to any of them vouchsafe favor:
insomuch that they perceiving her relentlesse, showed themselves not altogether
witless, but left her to her fortune, when they found her frowardnes. At last
it fortuned among other strangers, a Farmers son visited her Fathers house:
on whom at the first sight she was enamoured, he likewise on her. Tokens of
love past between them, either acquainted others parents of their choice, and
they kindly gave their consent. Short tale to make, married they were, and
great solempnitie was at the wedding feast. A young Gentleman, that had been
long a suitor to her, vexing that the Son of a Farmer should be so preferred,
cast in his mind by what means (to mar their merriment) he might steal
away the Bride. Hereupon he confers with an old Beldam, called Mother Gunby,
dwelling thereby, whose counsel having taken, he fell to his practice, and
proceeded thus. In the after noone, when dauncers were very busy, he takes
the Bride by the hand, and after a turn or two, tells her in her ear, he had
a secret to impart unto her, appointing her in any wise in the evening to sind
a time to confer with him: she promised she would, and so they parted. Then goes
he to the Bridegroom, and with protestations of entire affect, protests that
the great sorrow he takes at that which he must utter, whereon depended his
especial credit, if it were known the matter by him should be discovered.
After the Bridegrooms promise of secrecy, the gentleman tells him, that a friend
of his received that morning from the Bride a Letter, wherein she willed him
with some sixteen horse to await her coming at a Park side, for that she
detested him in her heart as a base country hynde, with whom her Father
compeld her to marry. The Bridegroom almost out of his wits, began to bite his
lip. Nay, says the Gentleman, if you will by me be aduizde, you shall salve
her credit, win her by kindness, and yet prevent her wanton complot. As how said
the Bridegroom: Mary thus said the Gentleman: In the evening (for till the
guests be gone, she intends not to gad) get you on horseback, and seem to be
of the company that attendes her coming, I am appointed to bring her from the
house to the Park, and from thence fetch a winding compass of a mile about,
but to turn unto old Mother Gunbyes house, where her Lover my friend abydes:
when she alights, I will conduct her to a chamber far from his lodging; but
when the lights are out, and she expects her adulterous copesmate, your self
(as reason is) shall prove her bedfellow, where privately you may reprove her,
and in the morning early return home without trouble. As for the Gentleman my
friend, I will excuse her absence to him, by saying, she mocked me with her
Maid in stead of her self, whom when I knew at her alighting, I disdained
to bring her unto his presence. The Bridegroom gave his hand eit should be so.

Now by the way you must understand, this Mother Gunby had a daughter, who all
that day sat heavily at home with a willow garland, for that the Bridegroom
(if he had dealt faithfully) should have wedded her before any other. But men
( Lamilia) are unconstant, money now a days makes the match, or else the match
is marde.

But to the matter: the Bridegroom and the Gentleman thus agreedh: e took his
time, conferd with the Bride, persuaded her that her husband (notwithstanding
his fair show at the marriage) had sworn to his old sweet heart, their
neighbor Gunbyes daughter, to be that night her bedfellow: and if she would
bring her Father, his Father, and other friends to the house at midnight, they
should find it so.

At this the young Gentlewoman inwardly vexed to be by a peasant so abusde,
promised if she saw likelihood of his slipping away, that then she would do
according as he directed.

All this thus sorting, the old woman's daughter was trickly attyrde ready to
furnish this pageant, for her old mother provided all things necessary.

Well, Supper past, dancing ended, and the guests would home, and the
Bridegroom pretending to bring some friend of his home, got his horse, and to
the Park side he rode, and staide with the horsemen that attended the
Gentleman.

Anon came Marian like mistress Bride, and mounted behind the Gentleman, away
they post, fetch their compass, and at last alight at the old wives house,
where suddenly she is conuayd to her chamber, and the bridegroom sent to keep
her company, where he had scarce deuisd how to begin his exhortation: but the
Father of his Bryde knocked at the chamber door. At which being somewhat
amazed, yet thinking to turn it to a jest, since his Wife (as he thought) was
in bed with him, he opened the door, saying: Father, you are heartily welcome,
I wonder how you found us out here; this devise to remove our selves, was
with my wives consent, that we might rest quietly without the Maids and
Batchelers disturbing. But where is your Wife said the Gentleman? why here in
bed said he. I thought (quoth the other) my daughter had been your wife, for
sure I am to day she was given you in marriage. You are merrely disposed, said
the Bridegroom, what think you I have another wife: I think but as you
speak quoth the Gentleman, for my daughter is below, and you say your wife is
in the bed. Below (said he) you are a merry man, and with that casting on a
night gown, he went down, where when he saw his wife, the Gentleman his
Father, and a number of his friends assembled, he was so confounded, that how
to behave himself he knew not; only he cryde out that he was deceived. At
this the old woman arises, and making her self ignorant of all the whole
matter, inquires the cause of that sudden tumult. When she was told the new
Bridegroom was found in bed with her daughter, she exclaimd against so great
an injury. Marian was calde in quorum: she justified, it was by his
allurement: he being condemnd by all their consents, was adjudged unworthy to
have the Gentlewoman unto his Wife, and compeld (for escaping of punishment) to
marry Marian: and the young Gentleman (for his care in discovering the Farmers
sons lewdnes) was recompenst with the Gentlewomans ever during love.

Quoth Lamilia, and what of this? Nay nothing said Roberto, but that I have
told you the effects of sudden love: yet the best is, my brother is a maidenly
Batchler; and for your self, you have not been troubled with many suitors.
The fewer the better, said Lucanio. But brother, I con you little thank for
this tale, hereafter I pray you use other table talk. Lets then end talk,
quoth Lamilia, and you (signior Lucanio) and I will go to the Chesse. To
Chesse, said he, what mean you by that? It is a game, said she, that the first
danger is but a check, the worst, the giving of a mate. Well, said Roberto,
that game ye have been at already then, for you checked him first with your
beauty, and gave your self for mate to him by your bounty. That's well taken
brother, said Lucanio, so have we past our game at Chesse. Will ye play at
Tables then, said she: I cannot, quoth he, for I can go no further with my
game, if I be once taken. Will ye play then at cards. I said he, so it be at
one and thirty. That fools game, said she? Well all to hazard, said Roberto,
and brother you shall make one for an hour or two: content quoth he. So to
dice they went, and fortune so favored Lucanio, that while they continued
square play, he was no looser. Anon coosenage came about, and his Angels
being double winged, flew clean from before him. Lamilia being the winner,
preparde a banquet; which finished, Roberto aduisde his brother to depart
home, and to furnish himself with more Crowns, least he were outcrackt with
new comers.

Lucanio loath to be outcountenanst, followed his advise, desiring to attend
his returue, which he before had determined unrequested: For as soon as his
brothers back was turned, Roberto begins to reckon with Lamilia, to be a
sharer as well in the money deceitfully won, as in the Diamond so wilfully
given. But she, secundum mores meretricis, iested thus with the scholar. Why
Roberto, are you so well read, and yet show your self so shallow witted, to
deem women so weak of conceit, that they see not into men's demerites. Suppose
(to make you my stale to catch the woodcocke your brother) that my tongue
ouer-running mine intent, I spoke of liberal reward: but what I promised,
there is the point; at least what I part with I will be well aduisde. It may be
you will thus reason: Had not Roberto traind Lucanio unto Lamilias lure,
Lucanio had not now been Lamilias pray: therefore since by Roberto she
possesses the prize, Roberto merits an equal part. Monstrous absurd if so you
reason; as well you may reason thus: Lamilias dog has killed her a Dear,
therefore his Mistress must make him a pastie. No poor pennilesse Poet, thou
art beguilde in me, and yet I wonder how thou could, thou have been so
often beguilde. But it fares with licentious men, as with the chased Bore in
the stream, who being greatly refresht with swimming, never feels any smart
until he perish recurelessy wounded with his own weapons. Reasonlesse
Roberto, that having but a brokers place, ask a lenders reward. Faithles
Roberto, that have attempted to betray thy brother, irreligiously forsaken thy
Wife, deservedly been in thy fathers eye an abject: think thou Lamilia so
loose, to consort with one so lewd. No hypocrite, the sweet Gentleman thy
brother, I will till death love, and thee while I live, loath. This share
Lamilia gives thee, other getst thou none.

As Roberto would have replide, Lucanio approcht: to whom Lamilia discourst the
whole deceit of his brother, and never rested intimating malicious arguments,
til Lucanio utterly refusde Roberto for his brother, and for ever forbad him
his house. And when he would have yielded reasons, and formed excuse, Lucanios
impatience (vrgd by her importunate malice) forbad all reasoning with them that
was reasonlesse, and so giving him Jack Drums intertainment, shut him out of
doors: whom we will follow, and leave Lucanio to the mercy of Lamilia.
Roberto in an extreme ecstasy, rent his hair, cursed his destenie, blamd his
treachery, but most of all exclaimd against Lamilia: and in her against all
enticing Curtizans, in these terms.

What meant the Poets in inuectiue verse,
To sing Medeas shame, and Scillas pride,
Calipsoes charms, by which so many did?
Only for this their vices they rehearse,
That curious wits which in this world converse,
May shun the dangers and enticing shoes,
Of such false Sirens, those home-breeding foes,
That from the eyes their venim do disperse.
So soon kills not the Basiliske with sight,
The Vipers tooth is not so venomous,
The Adders tung not half so dangerous,
As they that bear the shadow of delight,
Who chain blind youths in tramels of their hair,
Till wast bring woe, and sorrow have despair.
With this he laid his head on his hand, and leant his elbow on the earth,
sighing out sadly,

Heu patior telis vulner a factameis! On the other side of the hedge sat one
that heard his sorrow: who getting over, came toward him, and brake off his
passion. When he approached, he saluted Roberto in this sort.

Gentleman quoth he (for so you seem) I have by chance heard you discourse
some part of your grief; which appears to be more than you will discover, or
I can conceit. But if you vouchsafe such simple comfort as my ability may
yield, assure your self, that I will endeavor to do the best, that either may
procure you profit, or bring you pleasure: the rather, for that I suppose you
are a scholar, and pity it is men of learning should live in lack.

Roberto wondering to hear such good words, for that this iron age affoordes
few that esteem of virtue; returned him thankful gratulations, and (vrgde by
necessity) uttered his present grief, beseeching his advise how he might be
employed. Why, easily quoth he, and greatly to your benefit: for men of my
profession get by scholars their whole living. What is your profession, said
Roberto? Truly sir, said he, I am a player. A player, quoth Roberto, I took
you rather for a Gentleman of great living, for if by outward habit men should
be censured, I tell you, you would be taken for a substantial man. So am I
where I dwell (quoth the player) reputed able at my proper cost to build a
Windmill. What though the world once went hard with me, when I was feign to
carry my playing Fardle a footebacke; Temporamutantur, I know you know the
meaning of it better than I, but I thus conster it, its otherwise now; for my
very share in playing apparel will not be sold for two hundred pounds. Truly
(said Roberto) it is strange, that you should so prosper in that vain practice,
for that it seems to me your voice is nothing gracious. Nay then, said the
Player, I mislike your judgment: why, I am as famous for Delphrigus, and the
King of Fairies, as ever was any of my time. The twelve labors of Hercules have
I terribly thundered on the Stage, and played three Scenes of the Devil in the
High way to heaven. Have ye so (said Roberto?) then I pray you pardon me. Nay
more (quoth the Player) I can serve to make a pretty speech, for I was a
country Author, passing at a Morrall, for it was I that pende the Morrall of
man's wit, the Dialogue of Dives, and for seven years space was absolute
Interpreter to the puppets. But now my Almanacke is out of date:

The people make no estimation,
Of Morrals teaching education.
Was not this pretty for a plain rhyme extempore? if ye will ye shall have
more. Nay its enough, said Roberto, but how mean you to use me? Why sir, in
making Plays, said the other, for which you shall be well paid, if you will
take the pains.

Roberto perceiving no remedy, thought best in respect of his present
necessity, to try his wit, and went with him willingly: who lodgd him at the
Towns end in a house of retayle, where what happened our Poet, you shall after
hear. There by conuersing with bad company, he grew A malo in peius, falling
from one vice to an other: and so having found a vain to finger crowns, he
grew cranker than Lucanio, who by this time began to droope, being thus dealt
with by Laminia. She having bewitched him with her enticing wiles, caused him
to consume in less than two years that infinite treasure gathered by his
father with so many a poor ma^s curse. His lands sold, his jewels pawnd, his
money wasted, he was casseerd by Lamilia, that had coossend him of all. Then
walked he like one of Duke Humfreys Squires, in a threadbare cloak, his hose
drawn out with his heels, his shoes unseamed, least his feet should sweat
with heat: now (as witless as he was) he remembered his Fathers words, his
unkindness to his brother, his carelesnes of himself. In this sorrowhe sat
down on pennilesse bench; where when Opus and Vsus told him by the chymes in
his stomach it was time to fall unto meat, he was feign with the Camelion to
feed upon the air, and make patience his best repast.

While he was at this feast, Lamilia came flaunting by, garnished with the
jewels whereof she beguiled him, which sight served to close his stomach after
his cold cheer. Roberto hearing of his brothers beggary, albeit he had little
remorse of his miserable state, yet did seek him out, to use him as a
property, whereby Lucanio was somewhat provided for. But being of simple
nature, he served but for a block to whet Robertoes wit on: which the poor
fool perceiving, he for sooke all other hopes of life, and fell to be a
notorious Pandar, in which detested course he continued till death. But Roberto
now famozed for an Arch-plaimaking-poet, his purse like the sea sometime sweld;
anon like the same sea fell to a low ebb; yet seldom he wanted, his labors
were so well esteemed. Marry this rule he kept, what ever he fingerd before
hand, was the certain means to unbind a bargain, and being asked why he so
slightly dealt with them that did him good? It becoms me, says he, to be
contrary to the world; for commonly when vulgar men receive earnest, they do
perform, when I am paid any thing aforehand, I break my promise. He had
shift of lodgings, where in every place his Hostess writ up the woeful
remembrance of him, his laundresse, and his boy; for they were ever his in
household, beside retainers in sundry other places. His company were lightly
the lewdest persons in the land, apt for pilferie, perjury, forgerie, or any
villainy. Of these he knew the casts to cog at cards, coossen at Dice; by
these he learnd the le gerdemaines of nips, foystes, connycatchers, crosbyters,
lifts, high Lawyers, and all the rabble of that unclean generation of vipers:
and pithily could he paint out their whole courses of craft: So cunning he was
in all crafts, as nothing rested in him almost but craftines. How often the
Gentlewoman his Wife labored vainly to recall him, is lamentable to note: but
as one given over to all lewdnes, he communicated her sorrowful lines among
his loose truls, that iested at her bootlesse laments. If he could any way get
credit on sc^res, he would then brag his creditors carried stones, comparing
every round circle to a groaning O procured by a painful burden. The shameful
end of sundry his consorts deservedly punished for their amiss, wrought no
compunction in his heart: of which one, brother to a Brothell he kept, was
trust under a tree as round as a Ball.

To some of his swearing companions thus it happened: A crew of them sitting in
a Tavern carowsing, it fortuned an honest Gentleman and his friend, to enter
their room: some of them being acquainted with him, in their domineering
drunken vain would have no nay but down he must needs sit with them;
being placed, no remedy there was, but he must needs keep even compass
with their unseemly carowsing. Which he refusing, they fell from high words to
sound strokes, so that with much adoo the Gentleman saved his own, and shifted
from their company. Being gone one of these tiplers for sooth lackt a gold
Ring, the other swear they see the Gentleman take it from his hand. Upon this
the Gentleman was indicted before a Judge, these honest men are deposde: whose
wisdom weighing the time of the braule, gave light to the Jury, what power
wine-washing poison had, they according unto conscience found the Gentleman not
guilty, and God released by that verdit the innocent.

With his accusers thus it fared: One of them for murder was worthily executed:
the other never since prospered: the third, sitting not long after upon a
lusty horse, the beast suddenly did under him, God amend the man.

Roberto every day acquainted with these examples, was notwithstanding nothing
bettered, bur rather hardened in wickedness. At last was that place justified,
God warnethmen by dreams and visions in the night, and by known examples in
the day, but if he return not, he comes upon him with judgment that shall
be felt. For now when the number of deceites caused Roberto be hateful
almost to all men, his immeasurable drinking had made him the perfect Image of
the dropsy, and the loathsome scourge of Lust tyrannized in his bones: lying
in extreme poverty, and having nothing to pay but chalk, which now his Host
accepted not for current, this miserable man lay comfortlesly languishing,
having but one groat left (the just proportion of his Fathers Legacy) which
looking on, he cried: O now it is too late, too late to buy wit with thee:
and therefore will I see if I can sell to careless youth what I negligently
forgot to buy.

Here (Gentlemen) break I off Robertoes speech; whose life in most parts
agraeing with mine, found one self punishment as I have done. Hereafter
suppose me the said Roberto, and I will go on with that he promised: Green
will send you now his groats-worth of wit, that never showed a mites-worth in
his life: and though no man now be by to do me good: yet ere I die I will by
my repentance endeavor to do all men good.

Deceiving world, that with alluring toys,
Have made my life the subject of thy scorn:
And scornest now to lend thy fading joys,
To length my life, whom friends have left forlorn.
How well are they that die ere they be borne,
And never see thy sleights, which few men shun,
Till unawares they helpelesse are undone.
Often have Isung of Love, and of his fire,
But now I find that Poet was aduizde;
Which made full feasts increasers of desire,
And proves weak love was with the poor despizde.
For when the life with food is not suffizde,
What thought of Love; what motion of delight;
What pleasance can proceed from such a wight?
Witness my want, the murderer of my wit;
My ravished sense of wonted fury reft;
Wants such conceit, as should in Poems fit
Set down the sorrow wherein I am left:
^ut therefore have high heavens their gifts bereft:
Because so long they lent them me to use,
And I so long their bounty did abuse.
O that a year were granted me to live,
And for that year my former wits restorde:
What rules of life, what counsel would I give?
How should my sin with sorrow be deplorde?
But I must die of every man abhorde.
Time loosely spent will not again be won,
My time is loosely spent, and I undone.
O horrenda fames, how terrible are thy assaults? but vermis conscientiae, more
wou^ding are thy stings. Ah Gentlemen, that live to read my broken and confused
lines, look not I should (as I was wont) delight you with vain fantasies, but
gather my follies altogether; and as ye would deal with so many parricides,
cast them into the fire: call them Telegones, for now they kill their Father,
and every lewd line in them written, is a deep piercing wound to my heart;
every idle hour spent by any in reading them, brings a million of sorrows to
my soul. O that the tears of a miserable man (for never any man was yet more
miserable) might wash their memory out with my death; and that those works
with me together might be interd. But since they cannot, let this my last
work witness against them with me, how I detest them. Black is the
remembrance of my black works, blacker than night, blacker than death,
blacker than hell.

Learn wit by my repentance (Gentlemen) and let these few rules following be
regarded in your lives.

1 First in all your actions set God before your eyes; for the fear of the Lord
is the beginning of wisdom: Let his word be a lantern to your feet, and a
light unto your paths, then shall you stand as firm rocks, and not be mocked.
2 Beware of looking back, for God will not be mocked; and of him that has
received much, much shall be demanded. 3 If thou be single, and can abstain
turn thy eyes from vanity; for there is a kind of women bearing the faces of
Angels, but the hearts of Devils, able to entrap the elect if it were possible.
4 If thou be married, forsake not the wife of thy youth to follow strange
flesh; for whoremongers and adulterers the Lord will judge. The door of a
harlot leads down to death, and in her lips there dwells destruction; her
face is decked with odors, but she brings a man to a morsel of bread and
nakedness: of which my self am instance. 5 If thou be left rich, remember those
that want, and so deal, that by thy wilfulnes thy self want not: Let not
Tauerners and Uictuallers be thy Executors; for they will bring thee to a
dishonorable grave. 6 Oppress no man; for the cry of the wronged ascends to
the ears of the Lord: ney there delight to increase by Usurie, least thou loose
thy habitation in the everlasting Tabernacle. 7 Beware of building thy house to
thy neighbors hurt; for the stones will cry to the timber; We were laid
together in blood: and those that so erect houses, calling them by their names,
shall lie in the grave like Sheep, and death shall gnaw upon their souls. 8
If thou be poor, be also patient, and strine not to grow rich by indirect
means; for goods so gotten shall vanish like smoke. 9 If thou be a Father,
Master, or Teacher, join good example with good counsel; else little avail
precepts, where life is different. 10 If thou be a Son or Servant, despise
not reproof; for though correction be bitter at the first, it brings
pleasure in the end.
Had I regarded the first of these rules, or been obedient to the last; I had
not now at my last end, been left thus desolate. But now, though to my self
I give Consilium postfacta; yet to others they may serve for timely precepts.
And therefore (while life gives leave) I will send warning to my old consorts,
which have lived as loosely as my self, albeit weakness will scarce suffer me
to write, yet to my fellow Scholars about this City, will I direct these few
ensuing lines.

To those Gentlemen his Quondam acquaintance, that spend their wits in making
plays, R.G. wishes a better exercise, and wisdom to prevent his extremities.
IF woeful experience may move you (Gentlemen) to beware, or unheard of
wretchedness entreat you to take heed: I doubt not but you will look back with
sorrow on your time past, and endeavor with repentance to spend that which is
to come. Wonder not, (for with thee will I first begin) thou famous gracer of
Tragedians, that Green, who has said with thee (like the fool in his heart)
There is no God, should now give glory unto his greatness: for penetrating is
his power, his hand lies heavy upon me, he has spoken unto me with a voice
of thunder, and I have felt he is a God that can punish enemies. Why should thy
excellent wit, his gift, be so blinded, that thou should give no glory to
the giver: Is it pestilent Machiuilian policy that thou have studied? O
peevish folly! What are his rules but mere confused mockeries, able to
extirpate in small time the generation of mankind. For if Sic volo, sic iubeo,
hold in those that are able to command: and if it be lawful Fas and nefas to
do any thing that is beneficial; only Tyrants should possess the earth, and
they striving to exceed in tyranny, should each to other be a slaughter man;
till the mightiest outliuing all, one stroke were left for Death, that in one
age man's life should end. The brocher of this Diabolical Atheism is dead, and
in his life had never the felicity he aimed at: but as he began in craft;
lived in fear, and ended in despair. Quam inscrutabilia sunt Dei iudicia?
This murderer of many brethren, had his conscience seared like Caine: this
betrayer of him that gave his life for him, inherited the portion of Judas:
this Apostata perished as ill as Julian: and will thou my friend be his
disciple? Look but to me, by him persuaded to that liberty, and thou shall
find it an infernal bondage. I know the least of my demerits merit this
miserable death, but wilful striving against known truth, exceeds all the
terrors of my soul. Defer not (with me) till this last point of extremity;
for little know thou how in the end thou shall be visited.

With thee I join young Iuuenall, that biting Satyrist, that lastly with me
together writ a Comedy. Sweet boy, might I advise thee, be aduisde, and get
not many enemies by bitter words: inueigh against vain men, for thou can do
it, no man better, no man so well: thou have a liberty to reprove all, and
name none; for one being spoken to, all are offended; none being blamed no man
is injured. Stop shallow water still running, it will rage, or tread on a worm
and it will turn: then blame not Scholars vexed with sharp lines, if they
reprove thy too much liberty of reproof.

And thou no less deserving than the other two, in some things rarer, in
nothing inferior; driven (as my self) to extreme shifts, a little have I to
say to thee: and were it not an idolatrous oath, I would swear by sweet S.
George, thou art unworthy better hap, since thou dependest on so mean a stay.
Base minded men all three of you, if by my misery you be not warnd: for unto
none of you (like me) sought those burres to cleave: those Puppets (I mean)
that spoke from our mouths, those Anticks garnisht in our colors. Is it not
strange, that I, to whom they all have been beholding: is it not like that
you, to whom they all have been beholding, shall (were ye in that case as I
am now) be both at once of them forsaken? Yes trust them not: for there is an
vpstart Crow, beautified with our feathers, that with his Tigers heart wrapped in
a Players hyde, supposes he is as well able to bombast out a blanke verse as
the best of you: and being an absolute Johannes fac totum, is in his own
conceit the only Shake-scene in a country. O that I might entreat your rare
wits to be employed in more profitable courses: and let those Apes imitate your
past excellence, and never more acquaint them with your admired inventions. I
know the best husband of you all will never prove an Usurer, and the kindest
of them all will never prove a kind nurse: yet whilst you may, seek you
better Masters; for it is pity men of such rare wits, should be subject to
the pleasure of such rude grooms.

In this I might insert two more, that both have writ against these buckram
Gentlemen: but let their own works serve to witness against their own
wickedness, if they persevere to maintain any more such peasants. For other
new-commers, I leave them to the mercy of these painted monsters, who (I doubt
not) will drive the best minded to despise them: for the rest, it skils not
though they make a jest at them.

But now return I again to you three, knowing my misery is to you no news:
and let me heartily entreat you to be warned by my harms. Delight not (as I
have done) in irreligious oaths; for from the blasphemers house, a curse shall
not depart. Despise drunkenness, which wastes the wit, and makes men all
equal unto beasts. Fly lust, as the deathsman of the soul, and defile not
the Temple of the holy Ghost. Abhor those Epicures, whose loose life has
made religion loathsome to your ears: and when they sooth you with terms of
Maistership, remember Robert Green, whom they have often so flattered,
perishes now for want of comfort. Remember Gentlemen, your lives are like so
many lighted Tapers, that are with care delivered to all of you to maintain:
these with wind-puft wrath may be extinguished, which drunkenness put out, which
negligence let fall: for man's time is not of it self so short, but it is more
shortened by sin. The fire of my light is now at the last snuff, and for want
of wherewith to sustain it, there is no substance left for life to feed on.
Trust not then (I beseech ye) to such weak stays: for they are as changeable
in mind, as in many attyres. Well, my hand is tyrde, and I am forced to leave
where I would begin: for a whole book cannot contain their wrongs, which I am
forced to knit up in some few lines of words.

Desirous that you should live, though himself be dying: Robert Green.


Now to all men I bid farewell in like sort, with this conceited Fable of that
old Comedian Aesope.

AN Ant and a Grasshopper walking together on a Green, the one carelessly
skipping, the other carefully prying what winters provision was scattered in
the way: the Grasshopper scorning (as wantons will) this needless thrift (as
he termed it) reproved him thus:

The greedy miser thirsts still for gain,
His thrift is theft, his weal works others woe:
That fool is fond which will in caves remain,
When among fair sweets he may at pleasure go.
To this the Ant perceiving the Grasshoppers meaking, quickly replyde:

The thriftie husband spares what unthrift spends,
His thrift no theft, for dangers to provide:
Trust to thy self, small hope in want yield friends,
A cave is better than the deserts wide.
In short time these two parted, the one to his pleasure, the other to his
labor. Anon Harvest grew on, and reft from the Grasshopper his woonted
moisture. Then weakly skipt he to the meadows brinks: where till fell winter
he abode. But storms continually pouring, he went for succor to the Ant his
old acquaintance, to whom he had scarce discovered his estate, but the
waspish little worm made this reply.

Pack hence (quoth he) thou idle lazy worm,
My house does harbor no unthrifty mates:
Thou scorndst to toil, and now thou feelst the storm,
And starust for food while I am fed with cates.
Use no entreats, I will relentlesse rest,
For toyling labor hates an idle guest.
The Grasshopper foodlesse, helpless and strengthles, got into the next brook,
and in the yielding sand digde for himself a pit: by which he likewise
ingrau'de this Epitaph.

When Springs green prime arrayd me with delight,
And every power with youthful vigor filled,
Gave strength to work what ever fancy wild:
I never feared the force of winters spite.
When first I saw the sun the day begin,
And dry the Mornings tears from herbs and grass;
I little thought his cheerful light would pass,
Till ugly night with darkness enterd in.
And then day lost I mournd, spring past I wayld,
But neither tears for this or that auailde.
Then too too late I praifd the Emmets pain,
That sought in spring a harbor against the heat:
And in the harvest gathered winters meat,
Preventing famine, frosts, and stormy rain.
My wretched end may warn Green springing youth
To use delights, as toys that will deceive,
And scorn the world before the world them leave:
For all worlds trust, is ruin without ruth.
Then blessed are they that like the toyling Ant,
Provide in time against winters woeful want.
With this the Grasshopper yielding to the wethers extremit, died comfortles
without remedy. Like him my self: like me, shall all that trust to friends or
times inconstancy. Now faint I of my last infirmity, beseeching them that
shall bury my body, to publish this last farewell written with my wretched
hand.

Foelicem fuisse infaustum.

A letter written to his wife, found with this book after his death.
THe remembrance of the many wrongs offered thee, and thy unreproved virtues,
add greater sorrow to my miserable state, than I can utter or thou conceive.
Neither is it lessened by consideration of thy absence, (though shame would
hardly let me behold thy face) but exceedingly aggrauated, for that I cannot
(as I ought) to thy own self reconcile my self, that thou might witness my
inward woe at this instant, that have made thee a woeful wife for so long a
time. But equal heaven has denide that comfort, giving at my last need like
succor as I have sought all my life: being in this extremity as void of
help, as thou have been of hope. Reason would, that after so long wast, I
should not send thee a child to bring thee greater charge: but consider he is
the fruit of thy womb, in whose face regard not the Fathers faults so much,
as thy own perfections. He is yet Green, and may grow straight, if he be
carefully tended: otherwise, apt enough (I fear me) to follow his Fathers
folly. That I have offended thee highly I know, that thou can forget my
injuries I hardly believe: yet persuade I my self, if thou saw my wretched
estate, thou could not but lament it: nay certainly I know thou would. All
my wrongs muster themselves before me, every evil at once plagues me. For my
contempt of God, I am contemned of men: for my swearing and forswearing, no man
will believe me: for my gluttony, I suffer hunger: for my drunkenness, thirst:
for my adultery, vlcerous sores. Thus God has cast me down, that I might be
humbled: and punished me for example of other sinners: and although he
strangely suffers me in this world to perish without succor, yet trust I in the
world to come to find mercy, by the merits of my Savior to whom I commend
thee, and commit my soul.

Thy repentant husband for his disloyalty, Robert Green.

Foelicem fuisse infaustum.
FINIS.

