GREENES VISION: Written at the instant of his death. Containing a penitent
passion for the folly of his Pen.

Sero sed serio. Imprinted at London for Thomas Newman, and are to be sold at
his shop in Fleetestreete, in Saint Dunstons Churchyard.

To the right worshipful and his especial good friend, M. Nicholas Sanders of
Ewell Esquier, T. Newman wishes all feliciti^.
WERE I as able as I am willing (Right Worshipful) to show my self thankful
for your many kindnesses extended unto me, some more accomplished Dedication
then this, should have offered it self to your judicial view at this
instant.It was one of the last works of a well known Author, therefore I hope
it will be more acceptable. Many have published repentaunces under his name,
but none more unfeigned then this, being every word of his own: his own
phrase, his own method. The experience of many vices brought forth this last
vision of virtue. I recommend it entirely to your worships even ballancing
censure. None have more insight then you into matters of wit. All men of Art
acknowledge you to be an especial Mecenas, and supporter of learning in these
her despised latter days. I am one that have no interest in knowledge, but the
inseperate love that I bear to them that profess it: That attendant love on
good letters, strives to honor you in whom Art is honored. I think not this
pamphlet any way proportionable in worth with your worshippes patronage: but
it is my desire to yield some increase to your fame in any thing that I shall
imprint. Thus wishing to your worship that felicity and contentment, which
your own best governed thoughts do aim at, I most humbly take my leave.

Your Worships most bounden T. Newman.

To the Gentlemen Readers, Health.
GEntlemen, in a vision before my death, I foresee that I am like to sustain
the shame of many follies of my youth, when I am shrouded in my winding sheet.
O let not injurious tongues triumph over a dead carcass. Now I am sick, and
sorrow has wholly sea^d on me: vain I have been, let not other men show
themselves vain in reproching my vanity. I crave pardon of you all, if I have
offended any of you with laciuious Pamphle^ing. Many things I have wrote to get
money, which I could otherwise wish to be suppressed: Poverty is the father of
innumerable infirmities: in seeking to salve private wantes, I have made my
self a public laughing stock. He that comes in Print, sets himself up
as a common mark for every one to shoot at: I have shot at many abuses,
over s^o^^e my self in describing of some: where truth failed, my invention
has stood my friend. God forgive me all my misdeameanours: now in the best
lust of my years, death I fear will deprive me of any further proceeding in
security. This book has many things, which I would not have written on my
Tomb: I write this last, let it be my last will and testament. Farewell, if I
live you shall hear of me in deuinitie, in the mean time, accept the will for
the deed, and speak well of me when I am dead.

Yours dying. Robert Green.

GREENES VISION.
After I was burdened with the penning of the Cobbler of Canterbury, I wared
passing melancholy, as grieuing that either I should be wrong with envy, or
wronged with suspicion. But when I entered into the consideration, that slander
spares not Kings, I brookt it with the more patience, and thought, that as
the strongest gustes offend less the low shrubs than the tall Ceda^s: (...)
the blemish of report would make a less scarre in a cottage than in a palace:
yet I could not but conceit it hardly, and so in a discontented humor I sat me
down upon my bedside and began to call to remembrance what fond and wanton
lines had past my pen how I had bent my course to a wrong shore, as beating my
brains about such vanities as were little profitable, ^owing my se^d in the
sand and so reaping nothing but thorns and thistles. As this I recounted over
the follies that youth led me unto, I stepped to my Standish that st^^^ hard by,
and writ this Ode.

Greenes Ode, of the vanity of wanton writings.
THough Tytirus the Herds swain,
Phillis loue-mate felt the pain,
That Cupid fires in the e^e,
Till they love or till they die,
Straigned ditties from his pipe,
With pleasant voice and cunning strip^^
Telling in his song how fair,
Phillis eie-browes and her haire^
How her face past all supposes:
For white Lillies: for red Roses.
Though he sounded on the hills,
Such fo^d passions as love wills,
That all the Swains that foulded by,
Flockt to hear his harmony,
And vowed by Pan that Tytirus
Did Poet-like his loves discuss,
That men might learn mickle good,
By the verdict of his mood,
Yet old Menalcas ouer-ag'd,
That many winters there had waged.
Sitting by and hearing this:
Said, their words were all amiss.
For (quoth he) such wanton lays,
Are not worthy to have praise^
Iigg^s and ditties of fond loves,
Youth ^o mickle folly mooues.
And told this old said saw to thee,
Which Coridon did learn to me,
It Is shame and sin for pregnant wits,
To spend their skill in wanton fits.
Martial was a bonnie boy,
He writ loves grief and loves joy.
He told what wanton looks passes,
Twixt the Swains and the lasses.
And mickle wonder did he write,
Of Women's loves and their spite,
But for the follies of his pen,
He was hated of most men:
For they could say, it was sin and shame
For Scholars to endite such game.
Quaint was Ovid in his ^ime,
Chiefest Poet of his time.
What he could in words rehearse,
Ended in a pleasing verse^
Apollo with his ay-greene baies,
Crowned his head to show his praise:
And all the Muses did agree,
He should be theirs, and none but he.
This Poet chaunted all of love,
Of Cupids wings and Venus doue^
Of fair Corima and her hew,
Of white and red, and veins blew.
How they loved and how they greed,
And how in fancy they did speed.
His Elegies were wanton all,
Telling of loves pleasings thrall,
And cause he would the Poet seem.
That best of Venus laws could deem.
Strange precepts he did impart,
And writ three books of loves art.
There he taught how to woe,
What in love men should do,
How they might soonest win,
Honest women unto sin:
Thus to tellen all the truth,
He infected Romes youth:
And with his books and verses brought
That men in Rome naught else saught,
But how to tangle maid or wife,
With honors breach through wanton life:
The foolish sort did for his skill,
Praise the deepnesse of his quill:
And like to him said there was none,
Since died old Anacr^on.
But Romes Augustus worlds wonder,
Brookt not of this foolish blonder:
Nor likt he of this wanton verse,
That loves laws did rehearse.
For well he saw and did epsy,
Youth was sore impaird thereby:
And by experience he finds,
VVanton books infect the minds,
Which made him straight for reward,
Though the censure seemed hard,
To bannish Ovid quite from Rome,
This was great Augustus doom:
For (quoth he) Poets quils,
Ought not for to teach men ils.
For learning is a thing of prise.
To show precepts to make men wise,
And near the Muses sacred place,
Dwells the virtuous minded graces,
It Is shame and sin then for good wits,
To show their skill in wanton fits.
This Augustus did reply,
And as he said, so think I.
AFter I had written this Ode, a deep insight of my follies did pearce into
the center of my thoughts, that I felt a passionat remorse, discovering such
particular vanities as I had soothed up withal my forepassed humors, I began
to consider that that Astrea, that virtue, that metaphisicall influence which
makes one man differ from an other in excellence being I mean come from the
heavens, and was a thing infested into man from God, the abuse whereof I found
to be as prejudicial as the right vser thereof was profitable, that it ought to
be employed to wit, in painting out a goddess, but in setting out the praises
of God: not in discovering of beauty but in discovering of virtues: not in
laying out the platformes of love, nor in telling the deep passions of fancy,
but in persuading men to honest and honorable actions which are the steps that
lead to the true and perfect felicity: the serpent is then therefore an odious
creature, for that he sucketh poison from that Odorifferous flower, from whence
the painful Be gathers her sweet Honnie. And that Lapidarie is holden a man
woorthlesse in the world, that will wrest the secret operation of the Diamond,
to a deadly Aconiton: And such scholars deserve much blame, as out of that
precious fountain of learning will fetch a pernicious water of vanity: the
trees that grow in Indea have rough banks, but they yield precious gummes: and
the stones in Sicillia have a duskie couller, but being cut they are a orient
as the sun: so the outward phrase is not to be measured by pleasing the ear,
but the inward matter by profiting the mind: the puffing glory of the lofty
style shadowing wanton conceits is like to the skin of a serpent that
contriues impoysoned flesh, or to a panther that has a beautiful hide but a
beastly paunch: for as the flowers of Egypt please the eye but infest the
stomach, and the water of the river Orume cools the hand but kills the
heart, so books that contriue scurilitie, may for a while breed a pleasing
conceit and a merry passion: but for every dram of mirth, they leave behind
them in the readers mind, a Tunfull of infecting mischiefs, like to the
Scorpion, that flatters with his head and stings with his tail. These
premises drive me into a maze, especially when I considered, that we were
borne to profit our country, not only to pleasure our selves: then the
discommodities that grew from my vain pamphlets, began to muster in my sight:
then I called to mind, how many idle fancies I had made to pass the Press, how
I had pestred Gentlemen's eyes and minds, with the infection of many fond
passions, rather infecting them with the allurements of some enchanted
Aconiton, then tempered their thought with any honest Antidote, which
consideration entered thus far into my conscience.

Greenes trouble of mind.
FAther of mercy, whose gracious favor is more pliant to pardon, then we to
become penitent, who are more willing to shadow the contrite heart with
remission, then we to offer our selves with hearty repentance: I here in the
humbleness of heart, pro^^ra^e my self before the throne of thy majesty,
vphoulden with mercy and love, as one blushing at the blemish of my vile and
detestable offenses, wherewith I have purchased the burden of thy wrath, being
so heavy a load, that the shoulders of my poor diseased conscience, being
ready to sink under so heavy a weight, destitute of any mean to support the
same, or to cure the passion of such a malady, but by the salve that grows
from the death of thy bitter passion, who camst into the world, not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance.

When I do (great Physician of our deepest misdeeds) but glaunce mine ^ye at
the object of my sin, and Sicco pede pass them over as faults of course, and
follies of youth: yet I am pierced with so sharp a passion, that I cannot
conceal the greef of my conscience, but it bursteth forth in sighs and
groans, insomuch that I think life an enemy to my weal, and I wish the
beginning of my days had been the hour of my departure.

But when with a strict insight, I say, Read rationem villicationis, and take
a straight account what the deeds of my youth have been, how full of vanity,
and fond conceited fancies, oh then what a fearful terror does torture my
mind, what a dungeon of dollours lies open to swallow me? As the Scorpion
stings deadly, and the Uipers bites mortally, so does the worm of my
conscience grype without ceasing. And yet O Lord, a deeper misery, for when
with a foreseeing consideration I look into the time to come, wherein the
secret conjecture of my faults and offenses, shall be manifested and laid to
my charge, and that I know Stipend^um peccati mors, Oh then whether shall I
fly from thy presence, shall I take the wings of the morning and absent my
self? can the hideous mountains hide me, can wealth redeem sin, can
beauty counteruaile my faults, or the whole world counterpoyse the balance of
mine offenses? oh no, and therefore am I at my wits end, wishing for death, and
the end of my miserable days, and yet then the remembrance of hell, and the
torments thereof drive me to wish the contrary. But when I covet long life,
and to see more days then this imagination wrings me, I think, as I was
conceived in sin and from my birth inclined to ill: so the sequel of my
days will grow a Malo in penis, and the longer the worse, the more years,
the more offenses: for the life of man is as the Panther, the longer he lives
the more spots he has in his skin, and the Onix, the longer it is kept, the
more strokes it has. So our nature is so corrupt, that we renew not our bill
with the Eagle, but grow blacker and blacker with the Halciones.

When I ruminate on these premises, then I loath the length of more days,
fearing least the aptness of my corrupt flesh, through the rebellion thereof,
against the spirit, heap greater plagues upon my poor soul. What shall I do
then Lord, thus distressed on every side, having no hope of comfort left me, but
fear and despair. If I seek to man, I know the strength of Sampson, the
policy of Achitophell, the wisdom of Solomon, to be vain in this respect,
for all have sinned, and are within the compass of my miserable condition:
being payned with this malady, to whom shall I fly for medicine? even to the
sweet Phisytian of all sycklie souls, to thee that can with a word cure all
my sorrows, to the kind Samaritan, that wilt power wine and Oil into my
wounds, set me on thine own beast, and take care for the saluing of my
hurt^, that can say, thy sins are forgiven, and I am whole.

To thee I come (over heated with the thirst of sin) for water, that may
spring in me a Well of life: I am heavy laden, and I will lay the burden on
thy back, for thou art a promised mediator for the penitent unto God the
Father. It is thou that seek the wandering sheep, and bring him home on
thy shoulder^: thou will not loose that groate, but find it with joy, thou
weepest in the neck of thy repenting Son, and killest the fat Calfe for his
welcome: thou have cried out in the Streets, Were your sins as red as
Scarlet, I Will make them as white as Snow, and were they as Purple, I will make
them as white as Wool. These proclaimed promises is comfort, this heavenly
voice is consolation, whereby I am revived, and my conscience lightened of the
follies of my youth: now have I found the true and only physician for my long
diseased soul, even he that came to heal the penitent. Give me grace Lord,
then to take perfect handfast of these comfortable sayings: stretch forth thy
hand, and I will with Peter spring into the water^ for thou will vphould me:
let me touch with faith the hem of thy Uesture, and then I shall enjoy the true
working of that most singular medicine, thy death and bitter passion, who
sufferedst for our sins, and on the cross criedst Consumatum est, to take
away the punishment due for our transgression: oh thy mercy is infinite whereby
thou call us, thy love unsearchable, whereby thou fauourest us, and thy
wisdom incomprehensible, whereby thou guidest us: all these do appear to be
imparted toward me, in that thou stirrest up in my heart a loathing of my
sin, and that the follies of my young years are odious in my remembrance.
Since then O Lord thou have touched me with repentance, and have called me from
the wilderness of wickedness and extreme despair, to place me in the
pleasant fields of sinc^ritie, truth and godliness, and so shadow me with the
wings of thy grace, that my mind being free from all sinful cogitations, I
may for ever keep my soul an vndef^^ed member of thy church, and in faith,
love, fear, humbleness of heart, prayer, and dutiful obedience, show my
self regenerate, and a reformed man from my former follies.

BEing in this deep meditation, lying comtemplating upon my bed, I fell a
sl^epe, where I had not line long in a slumber, but that me thought I was in a
fair medowe, sitting under an Oak, vi^wing the beauty of the sun which
then showed himself in his pride: as thus I sat g^sing on so g^rg^ous an
obiect^ I spied coming down the Meade, two ancient men, aged for their
foreheads were the Calenders of their yeares^ and the whiteness of their
hairs bewrayed the number of their dayes^ their pace wa^ answerable to their
age, and In diebus illis, hung upon their garments: their visages were
wrinckled, but well featured, and their countenance contained much gravity.
These two old men came to me, and sat down by me, the one of the right hand,
and the other on the left: looking upon them earnestly, I espied written on the
ones breast Chawcer, and on the others Gower: Chawcer was thus attired as near
as I can describe it.

The description of sir Geffery Chawcer.
HIs stature was not very tall,
Lean he was, his legs were small,
Hosd within a stock of red,
A buttond bonnet on his head,
From under which did hang I ween,
Silver hairs both bright and sheene,
His beard was white trimmed round,
His countnance blithe and merry found,
A Sleeuelesse Iacket large and wide,
With many pleights and skirts side,
Of water Chamlet did he wear,
A whittell by his belt he bear,
His shoes were corned broad before,
His Inck horn at his side he wore,
And in his hand he bore a book,
Thus did this ancient Poet look.
Thus was Chawcer attired, and not unlike him was John Gower, whose description
take thus.

The description of John Gower.
LArge he was, his height was long,
Broad of breast, his lims were strong,
But couller pale, and wan his look,
Such have they that plyen their book,
His head was gray and quaintly shorn,
Neately was his beard worn.
His visage grave, stern and grim,
Cato was most like to him^
His Bonnet was a Hat of blew,
His sleeves straight of that same hew^
A surcoate of a taw^^e die,
Hung in pleights over his thigh,
A breech close unto his dock,
Handsomd with a long stock,
Pricked before were his shoone,
He wore such as others done,
A bag of red^ by his side,
And by that his napkin tide,
Thus John Gower did appear,
Quaint attired as you here.
Sitting as a man in a maze at the view of these two ancient Poets, as well at
the gravity of their looks, as the strangeness of their attire. At last sir
Geffrey Chaucer start up, and leaning on his staff with a smiling countenance,
began thus to break silence. My friend quoth he, thy countenance bewray thy
thoughts, and thy outward looks thy inward passions: for by thy face I see the
figure of a discontented mind, and the very glaunce of thine eyes is a map of
a disquieted conscience. Take heed, I tell thee sorrows concealed are the
more sower, and greefes smoothered, if they burst not out, will make the heart
to break: I confess it is best to be secretary to a man's self, and to
reveal the inward thoughts to a stranger is more folly, yet I tell thee,
better brook an inconvenience then a mischief, and be counted a little fond,
then too froward. Therefore if thy grief be not to private, or so near to thy
self, that thou will not bewray it to thy shirte: many festring sores
launched are the sooner cured, and cares discovered are the sooner eased: thou
have here two, whom experience has taught many medicines for young men's
maladies, I am sir Geffrey Chaucer, this John Gower, what we can in counsel,
shall be thy comfort, and for secrecy we are no blabs. H^ering sir Geffrey
Chaucer thus familiar, I took heart at grass to my self, and thought now I
might have my doubt well debated, between two such excellent scholars:
whereupon putting of my hat with great reverence, I made this reply.

Grave Lawreats, the tipes of Englands excellence for Poetry, and the worlds
wonders for your wits, all hail, and happily welcome, for your presence is a
salve for my passions, and the inward greefes that you perceive by my outward
looks, are already half eased by your comfortable promise: I cannot deny
but my thoughts are discontent, and my senses in a great maze, which I have
damd up a long while, as thinking best to smoother sorrow with silence, but now
I will set fire on the straw, and lay open my secrets to your selves, that your
sweet counsels may ease my discontent. So it is, that by profession I am a
scholar, and in will do affect that which I could never effect in action, for
feign would I have some taste in the liberal sciences, but Non licet cuibis
adire Corinthum, and therefore I content my self with a superficial insight,
and only satisfy my desire with the name of a Scholar, yet as blind Baiard
will iumpe soonest into the mire, so have I ventured before many my betters, to
put my self into the press, and have set forth sundry books in print of
love and such amourous fancies which some have favored, as other have
misliked. But now of late there came forth a book called the Cobbler of
Canterbury, a merry work, and made by some mad ^ellow, containing pleasant
tales, a little tainted with scurilitie, such reverend Chawcer as your self set
forth in your journey to Canterbury. At this book, the grauer and greater
sort repine, as thinking it not so pleasant to some, as prejudicial to many,
crossing it with such bitter in^ectiues, that they condemn the Author almost
for an Atheist. Now learned Lawreat, here lies the touch of my passione: they
father the book upon me, whereas it is Incerti authoris, and suspitiouslye
slander me with many hard reproaches, for penning that which never came within
the compass of my Quill. Their allegation is, because it is pleasant, and
therefore mine: because it is full of wanton conceits, and therefore mine: in
some place say they the style bewraies him, thus upon supposed premises they
conclude peremptory, and though some men of accoumpt may be drawn by reason
from that suppose, yet that Ignobile Vulgus, whose mouths will not be stopped
with a Bakers batch, will still cry, it was none but his: this father Chawcer
has made me enter into consideration of all my former follies, and to think
how wantonly I have spent my youth^ in penning such fond pamphlets, that I am
driven into a dumpe whether they shall redound to my ensuing credit, or my
future infamy, or whether I have done well or ill, in setting forth such
amourous trifles, herein resolve me, and my discontent is done.

At this long period of mine, Chawcer sat down and laughed, and then rising up
and leaning his back against a Tree, he made this merry answer. Why Green
quoth he, know thou not, that the waters that flow from Pernassus Founte,
are not tied to any particular operation? that there are nine Muses, amongst
whom as there is a Clio to write grave matters, so there is a Thalis to endite
pleasant conceits, and that Apollo has Baies for them both, as well to crown
the one for her wanton amors, as to honor the other for her worthy labors:
the brain has many strings, and the wit many stretches, some tragical to
write, like Euripedes: some comicall to pen, like Terence: some deeply
conceited to set out matters of great import: others sharp witted to discover
pleasant fantasies: what if Cato set forth seueare censures, and Ovid amorous
Axioms, were they not both counted for their faculties excellent? yes, and
Ovid was commended for his Salem ingen^i, when the other was counted to have a
dull wit, and a slow memory: if learning were knit in one string, and could
express himself but in one vain, the^ should want of variety, bring all into
an imperfect Chaos. But sundry men, sundry conceits, and wits are to be praised
not for the gravity of the matter, but for the ripenes of the invention: so
that Martial, Horace or any other, deserve to be famoused for their Odes and
Elegies, as well as Hesiode, Hortensius, or any other for their deeper precepts
of doctrines. Fear not then what those Moroste will murmr, whofe dead cinders
brook no glowing sparks nor care not for the opinion of such as hold none but
Philosophy for a Subject: I tell thee learning will have his due, and let a
vipers wit reach his hand to Apollo, and he shall sooner have a branch to
eternize his fame, than the sowrest Satyricall Author in the world. We have
heard of thy work to be amorous, sententious, and well written. If thou
doubtest blame for thy wantonness, let my self suffice for an instaunce, whose
Canterbury tales are broad enough before, and written homely and pleasantly:
yet who has bin more canonised for his works, than Sir Geffrey Chaucer. What
Green? Poets wits are free, and their words ought to be without check: so it
was in my time, and therefore resolve thy self, thou have done Scholler-like,
in setting forth thy pamphlets, and shall have perpetual fame which is
learnings due for thy endeavor. This saying of Chawcer cheered me until old
John Gower rising up with a sour countenance began thus.

John Gower to the Author.
WEll has Chawcer said, that the brain has sundry strings, and the wit
diverse stretches: some bent to pen grave Poems, other to endite wanton
fancies, both honored and praised for the height of their capacity: yet as
the Diamond is more estimated in the Lapidaries shop than the Topace, and the
Rose more valued in the Garden than Gillyflowers: So men that write of Moral
precepts, or Philosophical Aphorisms are more highly esteemed, than such as
write Poems of love, and conceits of fancy. In elder time learning was so high
prized that Scholars were companions for Kings, and Philosophers were fathers
of the Commonwealth, upholding the state with the strength of their precepts:
their wits were then employed either to the censures of virtue, or to the
secrets of nature: either to deliver opinions of Moral Discipline, or
conclusions of natural philosophy, being measured by the gravity of their
sayings, not the wantonness of their sentences: And so long were poets titled
with many honors as long as their poems were virtuous, either tending to
suppress vanity with Hesiod, or to advance arms and valor with Homer. But
when they began to wrest their sonnets to a wrong use, then they were out of
credit, and for an instaunce of their follies, Ovid there graunde Captain,
was rewarded with bannishment. They which considred that man was born to profit
his country, sought how to apply their time, and bend their wits to attain to
perfection of learning, not to inueagle youth with amors, but to incite to
virtuous labors: some in their Academies, taught the motion of the Stars,
the count of the heavens, some the nature of trees, plants, herbs and stones:
others deciphered the secret qualities of beasts, birds, and fouls, others,
writs of Aconomical precepts, some of policy, some of government of Common
wealths, and how the Citizens should follow virtue, and eschew vice: others
delivered instruction for manners. Thus all generally aim^d at an universal
profit of their country, and how to keep youth from any touch of idle
vanities. None in their writings discoursed either of love or her laws: for
Venus then only was holden for a wandering planet, not honored for a wanton
Go^desse. Philosophers were dunces in loves doctrine, and held it infamous for
to be tainted with the blemish of fond fancy: much more to pen down any
precepts of affection, if then Ethnik philosophers, who knew not God, but by a
natural instinct of virtue sought so carefully to avoid such vanities, and
only bent the sum of their wits to their countries profit: the^ how blamworthy
are such as endeavor to show their quick capacities in such wanton works, as
greatly prejudice the state of the commonwealth. I grant there is no weed so il,
but some will gather, no stone so crasd, but some will choose: nor no book so fond
but some will favor: but Vox populi vox Dei the most and the grauest will account
it vain and scurrulous. Therefore trust me, John Gowers opinion is: thou have
applied thy wits ill, and have sowed chafe and shall reap no harvest. But my
master Cha^cer brings in his works for an instance, that as his, so thine
shall be famoused: no, it is not a promise to conclude upon: for men honor his
mere for the antiquity of the verse, the english and prose, than for any deep
love to the matter: for proof mark how they wear out of use. Therefore let me
tell thee, thy books are baits that allure youth, Sirens that sing sweetly, and
yet destroy with their notes, fair flowers without smell and good phrases
without any profit.

Without any profit (quoth Chawcer) and with that he s^art up with a frown:
no Gower, I tell thee, his labors, as they be amorous, so they be sententious:
and serve as well to suppress vanity, as they seem to import wantonness. Is
there no means to cure sores, but with Corasiues? no help for vicers, but
sharp implasters? no salve against vice, but sour satyr^s? Yes, a pleasant
vain, quips as ni^ the quick as a graner inuec^^ue, and under a merry fable
can Esope as well tant folly, as Hesiode correct manners in his Heroicks. I tell
thee this man has joined pleasure with profit, and though his Be has a
sting, yet she makes sweet honny. Has he not discovered in his works the
follies of love, the sleights of fancy, and lightness of youth^ to be induced
to such vanities? and what more profit can there be to his country than
manifest such open mischiefs, as grew from the conceit of beauty and deceit of
women: and all this has he painted down in his pamphlets. I grant quoth Gower)
the meaning is good, but the method is bad: for by aming at an inconvenience,
he brings in a mischief: in seeking to sppresse fond love, the sweetness of
his discourse allures youth to love, like such as taking drink to cool their
thirst, feel the taste so pleasant, that they drink while they surfeit. Ovid
drew not so many with his remedy of Love from love, as his Ars Amandi bred
amorous scholars, nor has Greenes Books weaned so many from vanity, as they
have wedded from wantonness. That is the reason (quoth Chawcer) that youth is
more prone unto evil than to good, and with the Serpent, suck honny from the
sweetest sirops, and have not Poets shadowed weighty precepts in slender Poems
and in pleasant fancies used deep perswations? who bitte the Curtizans of his
time and the follies of youth more than Horace, and yet his Odes were wanton.
Who more inuaied against the manners of men than Martial, and yet his verse
was lascivious? And had he not better (quoth Gower) have discovered his
principles in some grave sort as Hesiode did or Pindaris, than in such amorous
and wanton manner: the lightness of the conceit cracks half the credit, and
the vanity of the pen breeds the less belief. After Ovid had written his Art
of Love, and set the youth on fire to embrace fancy, he could not reclaim them
with Ot^a si tollas periere cupidinis arcus.


The thoughts of young men are like Bauins, which once set on fire, will not
out till they be ashes, and therefore do I infer, that such Pamphlets do
rather prejudice than profit. Tush (quoth Chawcer) all this is but a
peremptory self conceit in thine own humor for I will show thee for
instance, such sentences as may like the grauest, please the wisest, and
instruct the youngest and wantonnest, and they be these: first, of the
disposition of women.

Sentences collected out of the Authors books.
Quid leuius bruto? ^ulmen, quid fulmine? flamma,
Quid flamma? mulier, quid muhere? nihil.

1 BE not overtaken with the beauty of women, whose eyes are framed by art to
enamour, and their hearts by nature to inchant. 2 Women with their false tears
know their due times, and their sweet words pearce deeper than sharp
swords. 3 Women's faces are lures, there beauties are baits, their looks
nets, their words charms, and all to bring men to ruin. 4 A hard favored
woman that is renowned for her chastity, is more honorable than she that is
famous for her beutie. 5 She which houldeth in her eye most coins, has often in
her heart most dishonesty. 6 A woman may aptly be compared to a Roase, for as
we cannot enjoy the fragrant smell of the one without prickkles: so we cannot
possess the virtues of the other, without some shrewish conditions. 7 Though
Women have small force to overcome men by reason, yet have they good fortune to
vnder-mine men by policy. 8 Women's pains are more pinching, if they be
girded with a frumpe, than if they be galled with a mischief. 9 The ready way
to fire a woman to desire is to cross the^ with disdain. 10 Some women have
their loves in their looks, which taken in with a gase, is thrust out with a
wincke. 11 Women's ears are not theeir touchstones but their eyes, they see and
make choice, and not hear and fancy. 12 Women often resemble in their loves the
Apothecaries in their Art, which choose the weeds for their shops, when they
leave the flowers in the field. 13 Every look that women lend is not love,
nor every smile in their face is not a prick in their bosom. 14 Women's
hearts are full of hoales, apt to receive, but not to retain. 15 The Clossets
of women's thoughts are ever open and the deapth of their heart has a string
that stretches to their tongues end. 16 A woman is like Fortune standing upon
a Gloabe, winged with the feathers of ficklenes. 17 Women's hearts are the
Exchequers where fancye yields up her accounts. 18 Women, be they chaste, be
they courteous, be they constant, be they rich, renowned, honest^ wise: yet have
they sufficient vanities to counteruaile their virtues. 19 Women's excellency is
discovered in their constancy 20 As the glittering beams of the Sun when it
arises, decketh the Heavens: so the glittering beauty of a good wife adorneth
the house.
How say thou Gower, quoth Chawcer to these sentences? are they not worthy
grave ears, and necessary for young minds? is there no profit in these
principles? is there not flowers amongst weeds, and sweet aphorisms hidden
amongst effeminate amors? Are not these worthy to eternize a man's fame, and
to make the memorial of him lasting? I cannot deny quoth Gower, but the
sayings are good, both pleasant and Satyricall: but if they had been placed in
an other humor, how much more had they been excellent? for is not a Diamond
placed in gould, more precious, then set in Copper? and sentences in a matter
of import, higher valued, then thrust in amongst vain trifles? If ripe wits
would consider, what glory redounds by deep studies, they would never busy
their brains about such superficial vanities. Tushe, quoth Chaucer, it
behooues a Scholar to fit his Pen to the time and persons, and to enter with a
deep insight into the humors of men, and win them by such writings as best
will content their fancies, I tell thee. Omne tulit punctum, qui miscuit vtile
dulci: What, a pleasant tale stuffed full of conceit, breeds delight to the
ear, and pierces into the thoughts: Demosthenes when he could not persuade
the Athenians with his long and learned Orations, drew them to withstand
Phillip with a merry Fable. And Alcibiades wrought more amongst his Soldiers
with his pleasant allusions, then with all his grave exhortations: for proof
Gower thou shall here me tell a tale for the suppressing of jealousy, which
tell me how thou likest when thou have heard it. With that he sat him down,
and so did Gower: and I in the midst was very attentive.

Chawcers tale of Jealousy.
THere dwelled in Grandchester hard by Cambridge, a man called Tomkins, a
Wheelewright he was, and such a one as lived by his art, who being a young man
and unmarried, held it a religion every sunday to frolike it in the Church
yard: his doublet was of leather, russetted after the best fashion, fair
trust before with a doozen, and a half of Pewter Buttons: A Ierkin of Graye
Carley, with a tagd welt of the own, and because his dublet was new, his
sleeves hung down very properly: a round slop of white, with two guards about
the pocket hole, gra^st with a lock stock, that for wearing at the knee were
fen^st with two pieces of a Calves skin: his Ruff was of fine Lockeram,
stitcht very fair with Couentrie blew: a Green Hat fresh from the
Haberdashers, tied up before, and a brooch of Copper, wherein Saint George sat
very well mounted.

Thus Tomkins came ruffling amongst the wenches to the Churchyard, where he was
always foregallant of the Country gambals, performing his charge with such a
grace, that the proudest wench in all the parish would favor him with her
Napkin. The Be flies so long amongst the flowers, that at last he lights on
one: and Tomkins could not touch the fire so often, but he must warm, put Flare
and Fire together, and they will flame: and so proper a Squire could not court
it so often among so many fair maids, but at last he was caught by the heel,
and over the shoes forsooth in love, and with whom? with a Maid that every
day went to sell Cream at Cambridge.

A bonnie Less she was, very well tucket up in a Russet Petticoate, with a
bare hemme, and no fringe, yet had she a Red Lace, and a Stomacher of Tuft
Mockado, and a Partlet cast over with a prittie whippe, and dressed she was in a
Kerchiffe of Holland, for her Father was a Farmer, her girdle was green, and
at that hung a large Leather Purse with fair threaden Tassels, and a new pair
of yellow gl^ues, tufted with read raw Silk very richly: and forsooth this
Maids name was Kate, her did Tomk^ns love, insomuch that many looks past
between them, and many wooings, that at last he brake the matter to her, and
she that was old enough to give an answer, said^ if he could get her Fathers
good will she was content. At this Tomkins struck the bargain up with a
kiss, and sought opertunitie to meet with her Father to break the matter unto
him. At last, Fortune so favored, that her Fathers Axletree broake as he wa
carrying manure to the ground, whereupon he was feign to pull forth his horses,
and in all post have to send for Tomkins, and forsooth Kate must be the woman
to fetch the Wheele-right: Away she goes, and as she went smug'd her self up
with her harding Aporne, and comes to Tomkins honse, whom she found lus^^e at
his work, she saluted him, and he down with his Axe and gave her a welcome,
she did her message, and he left all works and went with her. As Soon as he
came to her fathers house, he went about his work, and made him a new
Axeltree: when he had done, he was bidden come in and drink, and her father
drew forth his pnrse and pleased him for his pains. Tomkins, that thought
now to bewray the matter, putting his Axe under his arm, desired the old man
he might have a word with him, to whom he discoursed the whole matter as
concerning his Daughter. He heard him like an old Fox, and considered
Tomkins was a young man and a thriftie, and had a good occupation, and therefore
he could not have a fitter match. Whereupon, after some pratle between them,
all was agreed, and the marriage day was set down: Against which, the Tailor
of the Town had work enough for the Bride and Bride-groomes apatell, and many
a Goose and many a Pig lost their life against that day. Well, on a Sunday it
was, and the maids flockt to Kates fathers house, striving to make the Bride
handsome, who had a fresh Gown of homespun Cloth, and was very finely
dizond in a little Cappe, and a fair paste: the Glouer sold two doozen of two
penny Gloves, which she gave to her friends, and I warrant you Tomkins house was
as full of lusty Gallants, that took care to set out their Bridegroom all
new from top to toe, with a pair of green Garters tied cross above the knee,
and a d^zen of Crewell Points that set out his hose very fair. Thus with a
branche of Rosemarie marched Tomkins to the Church, where Kate and he met: and
there, to be brief, they were married: well that day was past with dancing
and Honney moon it was for a month after, Tomkins did little work, for he
had enough to do to look on his fair wife: yet she went as she was woonte
when she was a Maid to Cambridge with her Cream: but Tomkins on a day,
considering that Scholars were mad fellows, began to be ieaiious, least some
of them might teach his Wife Lodgick, so that he cut her off from that vain,
and tied her to her Distaffe, and caused her to sit by him as he wrought.

Long were they not married, but seeing his Wife was the fairest in all the
parrish, and noting that diverse of his neighbors did use to his house, he
began to wax iealious, in so much that every look she cast, he thought to be
love, and if she smilde it went to his heart, for he thought it was a favor.
Thus Tomkins grew almost mad, and yet durst not wrong his Wife, because her
father was one of the chief men in all the parish, and beside his wife was so
honest, as he could fi^de her in no fault: yet thus smoothering his own
suspicion he lived in a second hell, not daring let his wife go out of his
sight, and scarce trusting his own eyes, Kate was not so simple but she could
perceive it, and grieved, that without cause she was so wronged, yet poor we^ch
she conceald her groefe with patience, and brookt his suspicion, till she might
with credit revenge: for causeless jealousy is the greatest breach to a
woman's honesty: I know not how she dealt with the Wheel write, but a
Scholar of Trinity Hostell Vitiauit Glicerium, and made poor Tomkins look
over the pale like a Buck in season. Women have their shifts, and if they be
willing, they have as many inchauntments as ever Cyrces had to turn men into
hornd beasts. Still was Tomkins suspicious, but fault he could find none, for
Kate was a wary wenche, and the Scholar had taught her Si non cast, tamen
caute: But his jealousy still stuck in her stomach, that on a time she
desired the Scholar to devise some mean how he might rid her husband of his
fond suspicion, let that alone for me, quoth the Scholar, take no care, before
sunday at night ^le make him singe a new song: Kate went home, and to her
wh^ele she goes, and makes much of her Tomkins, who upon Friday next carried his
wife to her fathers, and commanded her to stay there while he went to
Cambridge, and came again, she obeyed his charge, and away goes he toward
the good town. By the way as he went, in a dump studying on the beauty of his
wife, feeding himself with his iealious humor, he ouertooke a Scholar, to
whom he gave the time of the day^: Welcome friend quoth the Scholar, where do
you dwell? sir quoth he, at next town at Granchester, at Granchester man quoth
he, I am glad I met thee, now shall I laugh a little: I pray thee tell me
friend, have you not a Wheele-wright that dwells there they call him Tomkins?
yes marry sir quoth he, I am his next neighbor. I pray you what of him: if
thou dwelst so near, I marvel (quoth he) thou do ask? why he married
bonnie Kate of Granchester, that soulde Cream: and now he is the most famous
Cuckould in all the country. This went as cold as a stone to Tomkins heart,
yet because he would learn all, he conceald the matter, and bare it out with
a good countenance, and said that although he dwelt at the next door, yet he
never heard so much. I Will tell thee man quoth the Schol^r, for a Quarte of Wine,
I Will show thee, the next time she comes to town, with whom she is familiarlie
acquainted: Marry quoth he, and at the next Tavern I Will bestow it on you, and
to morrow comes lusty Kate to Cambridge, and if you do me so much favor, i will
bestow a dish of Apples on you, to e^te these winter ^uenings: the Scholar
thankt him, and to the wine they went, and the next day Tomkins was appointed
to come to Trinity Hostell to such a Chamber, upon which conclusion he did
his business and home he went. He bare out the matter with a good face,
although he was full of choler in his heart, and could not sleep, to think S.
Luke was his Patron. But the next morning early he had his wife make her r^ady
to go to market, for he was not well and keep his bed h^e would till she
came again. Kate start up and made her self very handsome, and suspected
there was some thing in the wind: well, to Cambridge she must, for it was her
husbands charge, and away she went. No sooner was she out of the doors, but
up got be and made him self ready, took the key in his pocket, and crossed
another way to Cambridge, that he was seen of none, and to Trinity Hostell he
goes, and found out the Scholar, who had him welcome, thankt him for his wine,
and told him you are come in a good hour, for follow me and I will show you
where your wife and a Scholar are now making merry together. The matter
before was debated amongst them how poor Tomkins should be handled. Well the
Scholar brought him secreatly to a Chamber window, where looking in, he might
see his wife sitting upon a Scholars lap eating of a pound of Cherries: skarce
could he keep his tongue from railing out, but at the Scholars request he
bridled it and put it up with patience. Well, home he would to provide for his
wives welcome, but the Scholar told him he should drink first, and filling
him out drink, gave him a Dormitarie potion, that after he had talked a
little, he fell in a dead sleep: then went the Scholar in and fetched Kate out,
and showed her her husband. Merry they were, and past away the time while it
was late in the night, and then they heaued up Tomkins on a horse back, and
carried him home to his house, undressed him, and laid him in his bed, and though
it were late, Katherine called her mother up, and reueald the whole matter to her.
The old beldame laughed, and said, the ieal^ous fool was well served. Well the
Scholars had good cheer made them, and away they went, and the Mother and the
daughter set up a watching Candle, and sat very mann^^ly by a good fire,
looking when Tomkins should wake. About midnight, the drink left his
operation, and he suddenly awoke, and starting up, swore by gogs nownes, you
arrant whore i will be reuengde upon thee: with that his mother and his wife stepped
to him, and said, what cheer son, fie leave such idle talk, and remember
God: nay you whore (quoth Tomkins) i will be reuengd both on you and your knave
scholar. Daughter quoth the old Beldam, go for more neighbors, he begins to
rave: good Son leave these words, and remember Christ, with that Tomkins
looked about, began to call himself to remembrance, and saw he was in his bed,
with a Kercher on his head, watched by his mother and his wife, marvelled how he
should come from Cambridge, that in this mase he lay a long while, as in a
trance: at last he said, alas where am I? Marry husband (quoth Kate) in your
own house, and in your own bed, sick God help you, why (quoth he) and was I
not at Cambridge to day? at Cambridge man alas, when I came home, I found you
here, and my mother sitting by you, very sick: and so you continued till
within this hour, and then you fell into a slumber: why but quoth Tomkins, was
I not at Cambridge this day, and saw thee in Trinity hostell? In Trinity
Hostell, trust me (quoth she) I was not there this two year, and for your
being at Cambridge, God help you, I pray God you were able to go thither. Why
Mother (quoth he) make me not mad, as soon as my wife went to Cambridge, I
start up, made me ready, and went to Trinity hostell, and there saw I her
with these eyes, sitting upon a Scholars knee, eating of a pound of Cherries.
Well Husband (quoth Kate) and how came you home again? I marry (quoth he)
their lies the question: I know well of my going thither, and of my being
there, but of my return, why I remember nothing. No I think so poor man
(quoth she) for all this day have thou been a sick man, and full of broken
slumbers and strange dreams: I will tell thee Son this disease is a mad
blood that lies in thy head, which is grown from jealousy, take heed of it,
for if it should continue but six days, it would make thee stark mad, for it
was nothing but an idle and a iealious fancy, that made thee think thou were
at Cambridge, and saw thy wife there: and was I not then out of my bed,
quoth he? no God help you, quoth the Mother. Then wife quoth he, and he wept,
I ask both God and thee forgiveness, and make a vow, if God grant me
health, never hereafter to suspect thee, thou shall go whether thou will, and
keep what company thou will, for a iealious mind is a second hell. Thus was
Tomkins brought from his suspicion, and his wife and he reconcilde.

WHat say thou quoth Chawcer to this tale, is there any offense to be taken,
is it not a good inuectiue against jealousy: Sauf vostre grace, quoth John
Gower, sir Geffrey, your tale is two scurrulous, and not worthy to trouble my
grave ear: such fantastical toys be in the Cobbler of Canterbury, and that
bred the book such discredit: call you this a method to put down any
particular vice, or rather a means generally to set up vanity? this is the
sore that creepes into the mind of youth, and leaves not fretting till it be
an incurable ulcer: this is the rust that eats the hardest Steel, and cannot
be rubd off with the purest Oil. Men's minds are apt to follies and prone to
all such idle fancies, and such books are Spurs to prick them forward in
their wickedness, where they need sharp bits to bridle in their wanton
affections: cannot the Physician salve a malady, without under a poyson^d and
pleasant strope, he hide a medicinable potion, when the operation of the one
shall do more prejudice, then the virtue of the other can work profit? Shall
I in such sharp hooks lay aluring baits? shall I seek to draw men from
dancing with a Ta^er, to persuade men to peace with weapons, or exhort men to
virtuous actions with tales of wanton affections? no Green, mark John Gower
well, thou have write no book well, but thy Nunquam ^era est, and that is
indifferent Linsey Wolsey to be borne, and to be praised and no more: the rest
have sweet phrases, but sower follies: good precepts tempered amongst idle
matter, Eeles amongst Scorpions: and Pearls, strowed amongst pibbles: believe
not Sir Geffrey Chawcer in this: mark but his mad tale to put down
Iealowsie, I will tell a tale to the same effect, and yet I hope, neither so
light of conceit, nor so full of scurrilitie.

John Gowers tale against Jealousy.
IN the city of Antwerpe, there dwelled a gentleman of good Parentage, called
Alexander Vandermast, who being endued with Lands and livings, such as were
able to maintain an honest port, thought not with the Cedar to die fruitles,
nor to end his name with his life, and therefore to have a private friend with
whom to communicate his thoughts, and issue to maintain the fame of his
house, he thought to wed him self to some good wife with whose beauty he might
delight his eye, and with whose virtues he might content his mind. At last
looking about, he saw many fair and well featured, but they had faults that
bred his mislike: Some thought to amend Nature with Art, and with Apothecaries
drugges, to refine that which God had made perfect: Such artificial paintings
he likt not, as being the instances of pride. Some had their eyes full of
Amors, casting their looks with such alluring glaunces, that their very
immodestie appeared in their eie-lids, those he held too forward to the fist:
Some had delight to hear themselves chat, and had more talk in their tongues,
than wit in their heads, those he counted for Gosseps, and let them slip:
taking thus a narrow view of the maids of Antwerpe. At last, he spied one
amongst the rest, who was fair, modest, silent, and generally endued with all
virtues, as highly commended through all the City for her chastity, as she
was praised for her beauty. Upon her did Alexander cast his eye, and so fix
his heart, that he began entirely to affect her, knowing what a precious jewel
he should have, if he got so virtuous a wife: For he had read in Jesus
Syrache, that happy is that m^n that has a virtuous wife, for the number of
his days shall be double. A virtuous woman does make a joyful man, and whether
he be rich or poor, he may always have a merry heart. A woman that is
silent of tongue, shamefast in countenance, sober in behavior, and hon^st in
condition, adorned with virtuous qualities correspondent, is like a goodly
pleasant Flower, decked with the coullers of all the Flowers in the Field, which
shall be given for a good portion, to such a one as fears God.

These sayings made Alexander an earnest suitor to Theodora, for so was the
Maids name: and so followed his purposed intent, that not only he obtained
the good will of the Maid, but the consent of her parents, so that in short
time there was a marriage, not only concluded, but fully consumated. These two
agreed together lovingly, and in such loyalty, that all Antwerpe talked of the
affection of the one, and the obedience of the other, and the love of both:
living in this concord, the devil that grudged at the sincerity of Job,
grieved at the mutual amity of these two, and sought to set them at odds,
which he attempted with the perni^ious fire of Jealousy, a plague that offers
deepest wrong to the holy estate of marriage, and sets such mortal
variance, as hardly by any means can be pacified. Where married couples agree
together, it is a great happiness, and a thing very acceptable in the sight of
God: but as in music are many distords, before there can be framed a true
Diapasin, so in wedlock are many farres, before there be established a perfect
friendship: Falling out there may be, and words may grow between such sweet
friends: but Amantium irae amoris redinte gratia est:
(...) wh^re Jealousy ^nter^ by stelth^ from thence he cannot be thrust out by
forc^. This pestilent humor entered into the mind of Alexanderi^ for seeing he
had the fairest wife in all Antwarpe, and that many Ma^chants resorted to his
house, he found that women are weak vessels, and conceited a Iealious opinion
without ^^use, thinking such as came to enter parle with him for traffike, come
rather for the beauty of hi^ wife, then for any other trade of Merchandise, in
so much that he pind her up in her Chamber, and kept himself the Key: not
content with this, sitting one day in a great dump^ he fell into this
meditation.

Alexander Vandermast, his iealious meditation with himself.
THou have married thy self Alexander, to a Woman, and therefore to a thing
light and inconstant, whose heart is like to feathers blown abroad with every
wind, and whose thoughts aim at every new object, thou might Vandermast
have foreseen this, for thou have red, that Armins of Carthage being earnestly
persuaded to marry, answered, I dare not, for if I chance upon one that is
wise, she will be wilful: if wealthy, then wanton: if poor, then pee^ish:
if beautiful, then proud: if deformed, then loathsome: and the least of these
is able to kill a thousand men. Why Alexander did thou not eschew this,
foreseeing this, and knowing them to be such evils? why did thou load thy
self with such a heavy burden, oh how art thou changed? what motion has
madded thee with this conceit? thou were wont to say that they were Heavens
wealth, and earths miracles, adorned with the singularity of proportion, to
shroud the excellency of all perfection, as far exceeding men in virtues, as
they excel them in beauties, resembling Angels in qualities, as they are like
to God^ in perfec^ne^ ^^ing purer in mind then in moulde, and yet made of the
purity of man: just they are, as giving love her due: constant, as houlding
loyalty more precious then life, as hardly to be drawn from united affection,
as the Salamanders from the Ca^ernes of Etna. Oh Alexander, I would they were
so, then were thou as happy, as now thou art miserable: but no doubt their
hearts are made of Iet, that draw up fancy in a minute, and let it slip in a
moment, and their thoughts so fickle, that they covet to feed on every new
object: they s^eke to marry, that the husband may cover their faults, and like
Atheists they count all pardoned, that is done with secrecy. She rises up
says the Wise man, and wipeth her mouth, as though she had made no offense.
No doubt there be such as thou dooest decipher, but torment not thy self with
Jealousy, let not thy heart suspect what neither thy eye sees by proof, nor
thine ears here by report, Theodora is virtuous, and chaste, honor dwells in
her thoughts, and modesty in her eyes, she treades upon the Tortuse, and
keeps her house, and strayes not abroad with every wanton giglet: She lays
not out the tramels of her hair to allure men's looks: nor is she wanton in
her eye lids, she seeks not to company with strangers, nor takes delight in
much prattle, but as Susanna was to Ioachim, and Lucretia to Collatine, so is
Theodora to Alexander. She is like to the virtuous Woman which Solomon sets out
in the Proverbs, who eats not her bread with idleness, she is up early and
late, laboring gladly with her hands: she occupies Wool and Flax, lays
hold upon the Distaffe, and puts her fingers to the Spindle: such a one
Alexander is thy Theodora, whom Antwarpe admires for her virtues, and thou
may love for her perfection. Such she seems indeed^ but women are subtill^
showing themselves to disdain that which they most desire, and under the mask
of a pure life, shadow a thousand deceitful vanities^ She is fair, and many
eyes awaite upon her beauty, and women are weak creatures, some women.

I see many Merchants flock to my house, and amongst them all, perhaps she
will like one: tush, for all her show of constancy and virtuous perfection, I
will not trust her, nor believe her, for women are subtle to allure, and
slipperie to deceive, having their hearts made of wax ready to receive every
impression: and with this he starte up, and went^ to look if his wives Chamber
door were safe loc^t, and so went about his business, but so discontent in
his thoughts, as all the world might epsy his grief by his passions. Theodora
saw all this, and perceived the folly of her husband, and brookt it with great
patience, for that she knew her self free from al intended suspicion, coveting
with her forcible effects of d^tie, to race out the cankred rust of Jealousy,
that bred such secret and silent iarres betwixt her and her Alexander, pind up
thus as a ha^k in a mew to solace her, she had recourse to her book, aiming in
all her Orizons for grace, that her actions might be directed, and the course
of her life so leaueld, that no blemish might taint the brightness of her
credit, otherwhile for recreation she would take her Lute in her hand and sing
this Ditie.

Theodoras Song.
SEcret alone, and silent in my bed,
When follies of my youth do touch my thought,
And reason tells me that all flesh is sin,
And all is vain that so by man is wrought.
Hearts sighs,
Eyes tears,
With sorrow throb when in my mind I see,
All that man does is foolish vanity.
When pride presents the state of honors pomp,
And seeks to set aspiring minds on fire,
When wanton Love brings beauty for a bait,
To scortch the eye with over hot desire.
Hearts sighs,
Eyes tears,
With sorrow throb when in my mind I see,
That pride and love are extreme vanity.
Oh Love that ere I loved, yet love is chaste,
My fancy lik^ none but my husbands face.
But when I think I loved none but him,
Nor would my thought give any other grace,
Hearts sighs,
Eyes tears,
With sorrow throb, when in my mind I see,
The purest love is touched with Jealousy.
Alas mine eye had never wanton looks,
A modest blush did ever taint my Cheeks,
If then suspicion with a faulse conceit,
The ruin of my fame and honor seeks,
Hearts sighs,
Eyes tears,
Must needs throb sorrows, when my mind does see,
Chaste thoughts are blamd with causeless jealousy.
My husbands will was ere to me a law,
To please his fancy is my whole delight,
Then if he thinks whatsoever I do is bad,
And with suspicion chastity requight:
Hearts sighs,
Eyes tears,
Must needs throb sorrows, when my mind does see,
Duty and love are quit with jealousy.
No deeper hell can fret a woman's mind,
Then to be tainted with a false suspect,
Then if my constant thoughts be ouercrost,
When prattling fond, can yield no true detect.
Hearts sighs,
Eyes tears,
Must needs throb sorrows, when my mind does see,
Duty and love are quit with jealousy.
Seek I to please, he thinks I flatter then,
Obedience is a cover for my fault,
When thus he deemes I tread my shoo awrie,
And going right, he still suspects I halt,
Hearts sighs,
Eyes tears,
Must needs throb sorrows, when my mind does see,
Duty and love are quit with jealousy.
No salve I have to cure this restless soar,
But sighs to God, to change his iealious mind,
Then shall I praise him in applauding himns,
And when the want of this mistrust I find:
Hearts sighs,
Eyes tears,
Shall cease, and Lord ^le only pray to thee,
That women near be wronged with Jealousy.
Theodora having ended her Dittie, laid by her Lute, and sat in a muse, when
diverse Merchants came in to ask for her husband, amongst the rest, one was
very pleasant with the Maid of the house, and fell to prattle with her, in
which instant Alexander coming in, and seeing them in secret and private talk
(and the Merchant with a letter) began straight to mistrust that the Gentleman
was communing with his maid for the delivery of some amourous letter to her
Mistres: whereupon he began to enter into such a frantike, as he regarded not
the salute of his friends, but seemed like a mad man, not answering according
to their demands, but in such abrupt replies, that all of them espied the man
to be passing passionate, thinking some fond humor so infected his brain, that
he would grow lunatike: whereupon, after some short parle with him, they all
departed, and took their leave, leaving him deep perplexed in his deepest
thoughts: first he went and looked if the door were fast, which he found as
strongly locked as he left it, then he questioned with his maid about the
talk and the letter, she discourst unto him all the truth, but in vain, for
so deeply had suspicion grafted mistrust in his conscience, that belief could
take no place, but that his heart suspected, that he thought verily to be as
sure as the Gospel, for who so is pained with the restless torment of
iealous^e, doubts all, mistrusteth himself, being always frozen with fear,
and fired with suspicion: With this canckred poison was the mind of Alexander
so corrupt, as he thought verily his wife had played false, and that he being
blind, had eaten the fly: whereupon he studied how to quittance her villainy,
so heavy an enemy is Jealousy to the holy estate of matrimony, sowing
between the married couples such deadly seeds of secret hatred, that love
being once raced out by sacklesse distrust, through envy there ensues a
desire of blo^die revenge, and so it fell out with Alexander: but that God
which defends the innocent, shrouded guiltless Theodora under his wings, and
kept her from the peremptory resolution of her frantike husband. Well, at last
jealousy entered so far into his thought, that he fell into a Lunatike
melancholy, and like a mad man fled out of his house, and ran about the
Fields, haunting secret Groves, and solitary places to feed his humor. The
report of this strange chance, was bruted abroad throughout all Antwerpe,
which made men to wonder at the mattersome had hard opinion of Theodora, and
said her lewdness bred his frenzy, and that Alexander having spied some
wanton trick by his wife, fell into that Lunacie, condemning her for a
pernicious courtizan: others seeing the virtuous disposition of the woman,
could not be induced to so hard a suspicion, but thought the brainsick
jealousy of the man had procured that strange malady: some suspended their
judgments both of him and her, till further trial might make it manifest, but
the most part spoke ill of her, especially his parents and kinsfolk, who
reuilde her, and called her strumpet, turning her out of door as a Courtizan
deser^ing no better favor.

Thus hardly was poor Theodora vsd, who took all patiently, and being
dis^^est and wronged, went to a poor woman's house, who upon mere p^^tie
harbored her, where falling to her labor, she confyrmed to all good minds,
the as^ured con^^dence of virtuous cha^^itie: being there poor, changing her
apparel to the place, she went in her white Was^coat, and sat to her wheel,
whereon woorking busily every day above other, noting her innocence, and how
unjustly she was accused, she burst out into tears, and blubbred out this
passion.

Theodoras meditation of her Innocence.
Unfortunate Theodora, whose thoughts are measured with envy, and whose deeds
are weied with suspicion, the prime of thy years is nipped with mishappes, and
when the blossoms of thy youth should grow to ripe fruits. they are bitten with
the frostes of Fortune When thou were a maid, modesty hung in thy looks, and
thy chaste thoughts appeared in thy countenance, all Antwerpe spoake of thy
beauty and applawded thy virtues, and now being a wife, they accuse thee of
vanity and lightness, whereas thy constancy is as great, and thy chastity no
less. Ah, but infamy galleth unto death, and lives after death: Tush
Theodora, virtue may be blamed, but never shamed. The Diamond may be hidden in
dirt, but never loose his operation: the Sun may be obscured with a Cloud,
but at last it will break forth in his brightness, and virtue hidden with
slander, will at last maugre envy appear without blemish. Ah Theodora, but
Alexander, thine Alexander, the joy of thy youth, and the content of thy mind
is run lunatic, and al for thee I confess: and my heart greeues at his
mishap, and with daily Orisons I will pray, that his jealous thoughts may be
raced out: his parents and friends hold th^e for a Curtisan: all Antwerpe
woonders at thee, and exclaimes against thee for a strumpet, the more is my
sorrow, and the greater my misery: but the Lord who is Chrodiognostes, whose
eye sees the secrets of al hearts, sees mine innocence. Oh, but what shall I
do to recover my husbands weal, and recover my former credit: might my blood
be a salve to cure his malady, or my life ease the sore that so torments him, I
would with the hazard of my soul, se^ke to recover the weal of his body^ and
lanch out the dearest drops of blood, to purchase his least content. But
jealousy that infectious fiend, has wrought thy bitter bale, and his utter
overthrow, setting such a flame of fire in his breast, as neither reason nor
counsel can quench. What shall I then do? sit thee down Theodora, and let thy
prayers pearce the heavens cry out in the bitterness of mind, take hold of the
hemme of Christ's vesture by faith, and with the blind man say: thou son of
David, look upon the innocence of thy handmaid, redress her wrongs, and heal
the malady of her husband. Orizons Theodora have wings, and if they be plumed
with the feathers of an assured belief in Christ his passion, they fly fast
through the farthest spheres, and penetrate even the throane of his majesty:
and that they plead for grace, from whence by the help of the lamb, who sits
there a Mediator for us, they return not without regard Do this first
Theodora, then sit thee down to thy work, and with thy hands thrist, satisf^e
thy hearts thirst. Forget thy amors, and fall to labors, and be sure of this,
in thy cottage thou shall shun much envy, and many reproaches: for Fortune
seldom looks so low as poverty. Content thee with thy estate, for adversity
is the trial of the mind, and mishap is the balance of the thoghts Use
patience, for it is a great proof of virtue and be not seen abroad: for
secrecy kills infamy, and such as delight to be seen, shall have their credit
touched with many tongues, and have this verse hung on their back.

Spectatum veniunt, veniunt spectentur vt ipsae.
Thus living poorly, content: and pati^nt in thy labors, Antwerpe shall
think it was thy husbands folly, not thy vanity.

Thus Theodora satisfied her self with her own persuasion, and in the cottage
shund the storms that fortune inflicted upon great mansions, as she thus
rested happy, for that

Foelix qui potuit contentus viuere par^o.
Alexander romed up and down still perplexed with his jealous passions, and
finding no ease in his conscience: for jealousy is like the biting of
Hidaspis, which suffers a man to take no sleep: Lunatike he was, and yet
sundry times he would hoth reasonably meditate with himself, and confer with
others, sorrowing at the fondness of his own suspicion: but straight again
he would with the Dog return to his vomit, and fall to his old vain of
frenzy, with general exclamations against beauty: yet so sententious, that
amongst the rest I remember some of his principles, which seemed rather the
censure of some ripe wit, then the fruits of any Lunacie, and they as I
remember be these.

Alexanders sentences in his Lunacie, against beauty.
1 AH, beauty is a vain thing, whose paintings are trickt up with times
coullers, which being set to dry in the Sun, loose their brightness with the
Sun. 2 Beauty is a Charm, worse then Cyrces had amongst her confections,
for it first inchaunteth the eye, then bewitcheth the heart, and at last brings
both to utter ruin, when of it self it is but like the Flower Asautis, that
loses couller with every loud wind. 3 Beauty draws many men's eyes to
look on so gorgeous an object, and is often the cause of many dishonest
actions. 4 Beauty is delightsome and pleasant, yet nothing more perilous and
deadly. 5 The more beauty, the more pride, the more pride, the more
inconstancy. 6 Beauty, when it is not ioynde with virtue, is like the feathers
of a Phoenix, placst on the carcass of a Crow. 7 Beauty is often the fairest
mark that leads to mishaps. 8 Beauty is a couller dashed with every breath,
a flower mixed with every frost, and a favor that time and age defaceth.
These sententio^s and satyricall inuectiues against beauty, did he breath out
in his madne^^e, which seemed he was more melancholy then Lunatike^ well
howsoever, about he ran restless and passionate, till on a day, coming into a
meadow, he saw in a little houell made with boughs, an aged man sitting,
houlding a serpent in his hand, that with her teeth still bit her self, and
still the aged father smilde. Alexander standing by, and seeing this, as mad as
he was, marueld at the matter, and upon a sudden said: Father what do thou
mean by that embleame? The old man turning his head, and seeing Alexander,
was nothing abasht but replied: My Son quoth he, I am viewing the
Enugmaticall figure of Ielowsi^: of Jealousy quoth Alexander? as how? marry
quoth he, thus. Thou see this Serpent, it is bred in the Cauernes of
Sicillia, brought from thence, and given me by a merchant, the name of it is a
Limster: mark how Nature has made it full of spleen and choler, still
intending to do, and restless to revenge: but so has the cerious workman of
all provided, that it can bite nor prejudice no creature but it self, which
disposition when I considered. I compard it to a jealous m^n, who being pinched
with that passion, hurts none but himself, and galled with suspicion, biteth
with the Lemster his own flesh: for I tell thee my son whosoever is fired
with jealousy, or touched with that hateful passion of mistrust, ^e fretteth
inwardly, takes no rest, and consumes himself with inward grief, hurting none
but himself, as containing all the misery within himself. Ah Alexander quoth
he, I know thee, and sorrow that I so thee thus fond, to be brought into such
dishonor, by the suspicion of a woman, when being Jealous of her, thou
wringest thy self at the heart, when thou hurtst not her little finger, if
thou could conceit what it were, and knewst the secret operation and inward
prejudice, thou would shake it off, as a toye worthless a man of such
calling. Antwerpe I tell thee pitties thee as they love thee, and wonders at
thee, as they note thy follies, and are angry ^t thee, as thou perseuerest in
so vains an humor: and because thou shall have an insight by me into the
^ollie of th^^e own humor, I will set thee down the description of jealousy:
wherein, as in a glass thou may perceive thine own madding passions.

The old man's description of jealousy.
Jealousy is a canckar, that fretteth the quiet of the thoughts, a moath that
secretly consumes the life of man, and a poison spetially opposed against the
perfection of love. The heart being once infected with jealousy, the sleeps
are broken: dreams, disquiet slumbers, thoughts, cares, and sorrows: the life
woe and myserie, that living he dies, and living prolongs out his life in
passions worse then death. None looks on his love, but suspicion says this
is he, that comes to be contriuall of my favors: none knocks at his door,
but starting up he thinks them messengers. None talks, but they whisper of
affection, if she frown, she hates him, and loves others: if she smile, it is
because she has had success in her loves: look she frowardlye on any man,
she dissembles: if she favor him with a gracious eye, then as a man tainted
with a frenzy, he cries out, that neither fire in the straw, nor love in a
woman's looks can be conceald. Thus does he live restless, makes love that
often is sweet, to be in taste as bitter as gall, and consumes himself with
secret torments.

How say thou my son (quoth the old man) have I not hit thee in the right
vain, and made a perfect description of thine own patheticall humors. Oh
quoth Alexander, and he sat him down with tears in his eyes, and sighs, in
such sort, and so deeply straind, as his heart was ready to burst. Now Father,
and never before now, do I see into the depth of mine own follies, and
perceive how infortunately this Ielowse conceit has led me: but teach me, how
shall I shake of this fiend, that so mortally haunts me? by what mean^s shall I
race out this passion, that so pains me: and have the disquiet of my thoughts
satisfied. Oh my Son (quoth the old man) thou art commanded by the wise
man, not to be iealious over the wife of thy bosom, least she show some
shrewd point of wickedness upon thee: for nothing more greeueth an honest
woman, nor draws more aptly to some mortal resolution, then to be suspected
without cause. And I tell thee my Son, Antwerpe has ever spoken well of thy
wife, whatsoever thou have misconstred. Thou have then done amiss, in
absenting thy self from her, for thou art chargde not to depart from a good
and discreet woman that is fallen unto thee for thy portion, in the fear of
the Lord: for the gift of her honesty is above gould. A woman of few words,
is a gift of God: and to a well nurtured Maid may nothing be comparde. An
honest and mannerly woman, is a gift above other gifts: and there is no
weight to be compard to a woman's mind, that can rule it self like as the
clear light upon the holy Candlestickes: so is the beauty of the face upon an
honest body, like as the goulden pillars upon the sockets of silver, so are the
fair legs upon a woman that has a constant mind.

A fair Wife reioyseth her husband, and a man loves nothing better: but if
she be loving and virtuous withal, then is not her husband like to other
men. He that has gotten a virtuous woman, has a goodly possession, she is
unto him a help and pillar on whom he rests: where no hedge is, there the
goods are spoiled: and where no Husband is, there the friendlesse mourns.
Dooest thou mark my Son these Sentences? if thou have so good a wife: oh,
how have thou sinned, to wrong her with Jealousy: to taint thine honor, and to
blemish the credit of her chastity. If she be wanton, and will never want
one: but sits down as Syrach says, and opens her Quiver to every Arrowe,
then my Son shake her off, abide not with such a woman, least ye feel the
force of the law: but be not jealous: for that breeds thy fatal ruin, and
to her is no prejudice. Oh Father (quoth he) these words, as they pierce to
the quick, so are they Balm unto my distressed soul: I feel a comfort in
the sweetness of your counsel, and these principles are perswas^^e arguments
to race out my former folli^s. I must of force confess, that I married her a
Maid, famoused through all Antwerpe for her virtue, as she was spoken of for
her beauty. And being married, I found her obedient, chaste, modest, and
s^lent: but her beauty bred the bane, and was the means of all my misery: For
when I noted the excellency of her feature, and the rareness of her
perfection, and considered that every man's eye aimed at so fair an object that
women's hearts were of wax, ready to receive every impression, and saw how
diverse Merchants of the city flockt to my house, then the sting of Jealousy
began to torment me, and suspicion brought me into this melancholy humor:
I need not paint out in particulars. For Father, thou have described
sufficiently my pa^^ions, how I was passionate, only let this suffice, I was
jealous, but whether with cause or n^, there lies the question. Were I
satisfied in this, I would say, farewell to all fond Jealousy, to ease the^ of
this martyrdom. My son I will not only relieve them with counsel, but aid
thee with the effect of my Art. Thou have been absent a long while, from thy
wife, and al men hold thee still for lunaticke: I having some skill in
Negromancie, will change thy countenance into ye shape of a most beutiful young
man: being thus metamorphosed, thou sh^lt go to thy wife, and being now
crossed with pouerti^, and liui^g poor distressed in Cottage, thou shall proffer
her gold and maintenance, I tell thee my son, thou shall carry with th^e two
great persuasions, to make bre^ch into a woman's honesty, which is beauty and
wealth, chi^flie where the party is pinched with pennurie. If she y^elde unto
th^e, shake her off as an inconstant Curtilan, and then be more iealouse. For
what should thou be suspicious of that which thou know? If she withstand,
and had rather brook honest p^uertie, than violate her chastiti^. Oh
Alexander, then sorrow at thy follie^, say ^hou has^ sinned against so ve^^^ous
a wif^, and recon^ile thy self unto her, and be not touched any more with
jealousy, for that is a hell to thee, and no hurt to her. This counsel did
greatly comfort Alexander, that he not only humbly thanked the old man for
his advise, but entreated him to prosecute the intent of his purpose, which he
presently did, for by his art he made him seem a beautiful young man, fair
to the eye and well proportioned, but in all form, far from that which he
was: having store of Crowns in his pursse (thus transformed) away he trudgeth
toward Antwerpe, where in the subur^es, he heard of his wife how she was
wronged by his friends, turned out of doors, and lived there with a widow
woman, in a poor cottage: her fame was good, and the report of her labors
were great, her honesty highly valued, and her patience much commended, which
greatly comforted the thoughts of Alexander: at last learnin^ out the house, he
went thither, and coming in asked for Theodora, who humbly rose and saluted
him with such modest curtes^e, as did importe a show of great v^rtue. Alexander
noting her bashfulnesse, began to consider, that if she plaide false, she was
cunning to coin her countenance, and he sought therefore to try her thus.

Fair Mistress, whom Fortune has made as miserable, as Nature had formed
beautiful, and whom the cross aspect of the plan^ts, have left as distressed,
as the Gods in their favors have made virtuous. Know this, that coming as a
stranger to Antwerpe, it was told me by mine host, as a wonder, of the
extremity of your husbands jealousy, and the excellency of your patience:
his follies, and your virtues: his suspicion, and your constancy. His report
made me desirous to see with mine eye, what I heard with mine ear, that I
might confirm report with a fure witness. Now s^eing you, and noting your
exterior lineaments, gracst with so many inward perfections, I praise Nature
for her workmanship, accuse Fortune for her tyranny, and sorrow that so
beautiful a creature should be bitten with such bitter crosses.

But necessitye is a sore penance, and extremity is as hard to bear as death:
yet Mistress Theodora it is a cold comfort, is wrapped in no remedy: a
grievous ulcer, that no Chirurgie can find a salve for: and a hard sorrow that
no relief can medicine. Seeing therefore your husbands jealousy has left you
from friends and many cares, seek, as you have hitherto ^hockt Fortune with
patience, so to thwart mishap with a present remedy, and thus it is: Your
beauty Mistress Theodora, is able to content any eye, and your qualities, to
satisfy the most curious mind: which as it does amase me, so it drives a
pitiful compassion into my thoughts to lay any plot for your better estate.
Therefore may it please you to vouchsafe of such a friend as my self, your want
shall be relieved, and your necessity redressed: I will take you from this
cottage, to a place more fit for your calling: your rags shall be robes, and
your thin diet plenteous fare: and to make up all fortunate, you shall have
such a friend at your command, as no mishap any way can divert from your
love. If you stand upon the loss of your honor, and the blemish of your fame:
to answer that objection, first Antwerpe has made hazard of your credit, and
though without cause, yet they have calde your name in question, and infamy is
such a deep color, that it will hardly be raced out with oblivion: to take
you from such vipers as cease not to sting you with the envy of their tongues:
I will carry you from the reach of them all, and the greatest wonder lastest
but nine days, nor will the talk of your departure continue any longer
terms: for the offense, why it is love, and that shadows wanton scapes: what
is done closely is half pardoned and affections that are mainteyned with
loyaitie, are but slender faults: let not fear of a little fame, tie you still
to such extremity: Misery is a malady that ought to have no respect of
medecin, and where necessity does breed a soar, foolish is that patient if
he makes doubt to accept of any salve. What Theodora your husband is Lunatic,
never to be hoped for, nor had again in his right wits: then vouchsafe a
friend, who if no other mask will serve, will shadow all faults with gould.

Theodora could scarce stay the bearing of such a long discourse, knowing it
was preiuditiall to a woman's credit, to listen to such prattle, alluding to the
French proverb. Le ville que parle, le femme qui S'esconte,
L'ane se gaigne, l'aul^e, S'effonte.
Whereupon she pulled her hand from his, and with a modest blush made him answer.

I cannot deny sir, but I have found Fortune my foe, yet to counteruaile her
malice I have had Patience my friend, and what the world has obieded with
suspicion, I have answered with innocence: for my present misery, as I brook
it with content, so I hope to find the heavens more favorable: and for my
husbands follies, I count his present jealousy counteruailde with his former
loves, and hope that God will change his opinions into better censures, and
make him conceit of me as favorable, as now he thinks hardly. In the mean
time sir, your aim is far beyond the mark, and your compass directed by a
wrong star: for though I be pinched with want, and touched with that sting
that forces many to attempt unlawful actions, yet had I rather sit with
Cornelia, and satisfy my hunger with hands labors, then frolic it with
Lamia, and buy repentance with delicates: no Sir, think not that all the
poverty in the world can hale me from the thought of mine old honor, or any
shower of misfortune, drive me from the seat of virtue, better live in low
content, then in high infamy: and more precious is want with honesty, then
wealth with discredit: Therefore sir, I thank you for your proffer, but I am
no traffike for such a chapman: but report this wheresoever you come, that I
would scorn a crown, in respect of constancy, and vould the participation of
a kingdom light, in value of my chastity: I tell you sir, though I be a woman,
yet the love that I bear, and the duty that I owe to my husband howsoever he
has wronged me, makes me so resolute, that neither extremity shall diswade me
from affecting him, nor any proffer of riches persuade to fancy any other. And
whereas you object, that my credit is already crasde in Antwerpe, I deny not
but I am suspected, and of most, wrongde with hard reproaches: yet carrying a
clear conscience, I have this hope, that seeing Temporis filia veritas
Time and my good behavior shall wipe out the blemish of such causeless
infamy, and then shall I show my self to mine own honor, and their
discredit. And whereas you say, that Lovers faults are slender offenses, I
answer: that there can be no greater stain to a woman, then to be touched with
loss of her good name, especially being confirmed and ratified by proof: for
that being lost, she has no more whereon to boste, and that made Lucretia let
out a pure soul from a defiled body.

Then good Sir, you know my mind, my poverty is my content: mine honor, my
wealth: and mine innocence, the only thing that is left to quiet my
conscience: therefore as your Mart was little, your market being done, the
door is open, and you may go when you please.

Alexander hearing this, was highly contented, yet thought to give one assault
more, and houlding her fas^ by the wrest, returnde her a reply thus.

Tush Mistress Theodora, women must be coye, and seem at the first to
disdain that, which after they desire: else might they be thought very light,
that would come at every lure. I have been a Huntsman, and will not at the
first default give over the chase: therefore advise your self better, take
time when you will give me an answer: ask counsel of your pillowe, I can
tell you, gould is a goodly thing, and there is not a warmer coat^ then wealth:
what, such faults are checked with a smyle, not controulde with a frown, and
men smother up Lovers offenses with favor. Be not peremptory, for in that you
shall discover rather folly then any advised wisdom, such as have diseases,
and refuse remedy are worthy still to bide in the pain, and they who are
over the shoes in want, are worthy the Staff and the Wallet, if they will
not any way reach at wealth. Consider therefore with your self, and to morrow
this time I will come and crave an answer.

Theodora, having her face full of choler plucked away her arm, sat her down
to her Wheel, and then reasoned thus roughly with him.

Sir, never take any longer days, where the party is unwilling to set no
further date: nor give any more attemptes, where the Castle is impregnable,
Know, your suit is in vain: and your words breathed into the wind: and to be
short, take it as you please, I hold your gold in scorn, and your self
(unless you were more honest) in disdain. If you be so passionate, that you
must needs have a Paramour, go seek such Lettice where they grow, for here
is none for your lips: you shall not find here a Danae that will be drawn
in with a shower of gold, but rather a Diana, whom Venus and al her frowns
could never affright. Therefore take this for a final answer, if you come any
more, you shall find your welcome as bad as may be, and for want of
entertainment, you shall do your account at the door, and so Sir, if you be a
Gentleman, be gone.

This cheared so the heart of Alexander, that in that very moment he left to be
jealous, and conceived such a new love toward Theodora, that he could scarce
abstain from embracing her, but yet he bridled his affection, and seeing he
could do no good, took his leave very courteously. He was no sooner out of
door, but Theodora rose and shut it. Alexander subtly stole under the
window, to hear what she would say, and according to his expectation, he
heard her say thus to her Landes-Ladie.

Oh (quoth she) and she fetched a deep sigh: How does Fortune frown, and how
is the time injurious, that men think gold able to bannish virtue, and Fame to
be less vallued then treasure. Because I am poor, what, does Antwe^pe
think, I mean to make sale of my chastititie? and because extremity has
bitten me by the he^le: Do men think, pel^e shall draw me to become a wanton?
no, I call him to witness that knows mine innocence. I hold mine honor as
dear as my life, and my constancy as precious as the apple of mine eye: and
though as the wise man writ, the dishonest woman sai^s, what, we are in the
da^k and compast in wi^h the wals^ fear not, no man ^an ^spie us, yet the eye
of the Lord sees al and he searches the heart and the rain^s, and punishes
such offenses in justice: Far rather had I be openly blamed, being innocent,
than have a good report with a guilty conscience: for though I be wrongfully
accused, yet the Lord is able at all times to raise up a Daniell that may
clear them that put their trust in him. Poverty, want, extreamitie,
misfortune, all seem easy, being tempered with content and patience: but
riches, treasure, prosperity, and wealth, are odious, being tainted with the
stain of an adulterous name. No Alexander, wheresoever thou be, or
whatsoever thy Fortune is, or how so ever thou have wronged me, yet thy
faults shall not make me offend, nor thy abuse draw me to any prejudice: But
I will be loyal Theodora, the constant wife of Alexander for ever: for in the
book of Wisdom this I read.

Wisdom Chapter 4. O how fair is a chaste generation with virtue, the
memorial thereof is immortal: for it is known with God and men, when it is
present, men take example thereat, and if it go away, yet they desire it, it is
always crowned and houlden in honor, and wins the reward of the universal
battle.

With this she ceast, and fell to her spinning, and Alexander he went his way to
find out the old man, whom he found solitary in his houel As soon as he
cast up his eye and saw Alexander: Oh my son Alexander (quoth he) what news?
Alexander sat him down and fetching a deep sigh, said, father, I have
sinned, and wronged my wife with a false suspect^ Now do I find, that she that
loves loyally, may well be crossed with calamity, but never justly accused of
inconstancy: suspicion may put in a false plea, but proof never maintained
the action, and with that he discourst from point to point, how he had dealt
with Theodora, what proffers, what answers, and what she said in his absence.
The old man at this was very glad, and demanded of him, how he felt him
self from his former frantic humor? quight shaken off (quoth Alexander) and
therefore now pull off your enchantment, that I may return to my former shape,
and home to my wife, which he did, and after many good instructions (glad that
he had recald him from his jealousy) he took his leave of Alexander, who
trimming up himself like a pilgrim, departed toward Antwerpe, and in the
evening coming thither, went to his Fathers house. As Soon as he came in and
was espied, they all ran away as afraid of him: But when with reverence his
Father saw him do his duty, he^ entertained him with tears, and demanded of
him, how he farde? Alexander said well, and sat down by him, and discourst to
him at large all his fortunes, his meeting with the old man, and what had
happened, still crying at every sentence, how he had wronged his loving
Theodora: At this glad news all his friends and kinsefolkes were sent for, and
there at a solemn supper, the discourse of all was declared unto them: They
reioysed at his happy metamorphosis, and sorowed at the hard abuse they offered
to Theodora.

But to make amends, the next day there was a great ^ea^^ provided, and all the
chief of Antwerpe bidden thither as guests. Theodora was sent for, her husband
and she reconciled, set into her former estate, held in great estimation for
her constancy, and her husband ever after free from all suspicious jealousy.

NOw Sir Geffrey Chawcer (quoth Gower) how like you this tale, is it not more
full of humanity, then your vain and scurrulous invention? and yet affects as
much in the mind of the hearers? are not grave sentences as forcible, as
wanton principles? tush (quoth Chawcer) but these are not pleasant, they breed
no delight, youth will not like of such a long circumstance Our English
Gentlemen are of the mind of the Athenians, that will sooner be persuaded by a
fable, than an Oration: and induced with a merry tale, when they will not be
brought to any compass with serious circumstances. The more pity (quoth
Gower) that they should be so fond, as to be subject to the delight of every
lewd fancy, when the true badge of a Gentleman, is learning joined with valor
and virtue, and therefore ought they to read of Martial Discipline, not of the
slight of Venus: and to talk of hard labors, not to chat of foolish and
effeminate amoures. Aristotle read not to Alexander wanton Elegies, but he
instructed him in Moral precepts, and taught how to govern like a King, not
how to court like a lover: But now a days, our youths desire to read amourous
pamphlets, rather then Philosophical actions, and covet like Epicures rather
to pass the time in some pleasant fable, then like Philosophers to spend the
day in profitable Aphorisms: but when the black Ox has trod on their foot,
and that age hales them on to old years, and the Palm tree, as the Preacher
says, waxes white, then will they repent those hours they have spent in
tossing over such fruitless papers. Therefore Green take this of me, as thou
have written many fond works, so from hence forth attempt nothing but of
worth: let not thy pen stoop so low, as vanity, nor thy wit be so far abused
to paint out any precepts of fancy, but fly higher with the Hobbie: soar
against ye sun with the Eagle: carry spices into thy nest with the Phoenix: and
do nothing but worthy thy wit and thy learning. Is not a Diamond as soon cut
as a pebble? a rose as soon planted as a weed? a good book as easily pend,
as a wanton Pamphlet? Then Green, give thy self to write either of humanity,
and as Tullie did, set down thy mind de officiis, or else of Moral virtue, and
so be a profitable instructor of manners: do as the Philosophers did, seek to
bring youth to virtue, with setting down Ariomes of good living, and do not
persuade young Gentlemen to folly, by the acquainting themselves with thy idle
works. I tell thee, books are companions, and friends, and counsailors, and
therefore ought to be civil, honest, and discreet, least they corrupt with
false doctrine, rude manners, and vicious living: Or else pen some thing of
natural philosophy. Diue down into the Aphorisms of the Philosophers and see
what nature has done, and with thy pen paint that out to the world: let them
see in the creatures the mightiness of the Creator, so shall thou reap report
worthy of memory. Thus Green have I counseled thee, and the seven lib^rall
Sciences lie before thee as subjects whereon to write Leave love and her
follies, let Venus be a star to gaze at, or else, if thou will needs
Poetically have her a Woman, accept her an infamous strumpet to wonder at: let
fancy alone, and meddle no more with affection: thou have said enough, and if
Augustus had lived, as much as would have deserved bannishment. Now that I have
counseled thee, tell me Green, what think thou of my aduertizement? how
art thou resolved? Do thou not repent of thy time misspent, in penning such
fruitless pamphlets? Rising up reverently with my Cap in my hand, I made
them this answer.

The Authors answer to Gower and Chawcer.
LEarned, and lawreat, whose censures are Authentical: I have noted your words
with such attention, that my mind is cleared of that doubt, wherewith it has
been long blemished: For now I perceive Father Chawcer, that I followed too
long your pleasant vain, in penning such Amourous works, and that ye fame
that I sought after by such trauail, was nothing but smoke. I did with the
Southern wind bring in clouds to destroy my self, and like the Smith, make a
tool to breed mine one bane: and hunt after fame, when in deeds I found the
ready path to infamy. My pamphlets have past the press, and some have given
them praise, but the grauest sort, whose mouths are the trumpets of true
report, had spoken hardly of my labors: For which, if sorrow may make
amends, I hope to acquit some part of my miss with penance, and in token
(Father Gower) that what my tongue speaks, my heart thinks: I will begin
from hence forth to hate all such follies, and to write of matters of some
import: either Moral to discover the active course of virtue, how man should
direct his life to the perfect felicity, or else to discourse as a Naturalist,
of the perfection that Nature has planted in her creatures, thereby to
manifest the excellent glory of the maker: or some Political Axioms, or
Acanonicall precepts that may both generally and perticularly profit the
Commonwealth. Hence forth Father Gower, farewell the insight I had into loves
secrets, let Venus rest in her sphere, I will be no Astronomer to her
influence, let affection die, and perish as a vapor that vanishes in the
air, my years grow toward the grave, and I have had bouts enough with
fancy: They which held Green for a patron of love, and a second Ovid, shall
now think him a Timon of such lineaments, and a Diogines that will bark at
every amourous pen. Only this (father Gower) I must end my Nunquam sera est,
and for that I crave pardon: but for all these follies, that I may with the
Ninevites, show in sackcloth my hearty repentance: look as speedily as the
press will serve for my mourning garment, a weed that I know is of so plain
a cut, that it will please the grauest eye, and the most precize ear. Thus
father Gower, thy counsel has made me a convert and a penitent deeply
sorrowful for the follies of my pen, but promising here that no idle
fancies shall grow any more from my conceit, hoping you will take my hand for a
pawn of the faith of my promise, I rest yours in all humble duty. At this
Gower wroong me by the hand, and smilde, and Chawcer shakt his head and fumed:
All three rising, and ready to depart when the Meadow was all shadowed with a
light, which suddenly vanished: and there appeard a man in great royalty,
attyred gorgeous, in the habit of a King: carrying such gravity in his
countenance, as it struck both fear and reverence into my thoughts: At his
presence Chawcer and Gower abasht, and both putting off their Bonnets, fell on
their knees: my self in a great maze, did him such duty as belongde to a
Potentate: but still mine eye gasde on the man, whose description take thus.

The description of Solomon.
HIs stature tall, large, and hie,
Lim'd and featured beauteouslie,
Chest was broad arms were strong.
Locks of Amber passing long,
That hung and waued upon his neck,
Heavens beauty might they check.
Visage fair and full of grace,
Mild and stern, for in one place,
Sat mercy meeklie in his eye:
And Justice in his looks hard by.
His Roabes of Bisse, were crimsen hew,
Bordred round with twines of blew:
In Tire no richer silk sold,
Over braided all with gold:
Costly set with precious stone,
Such before I near saw none.
A massy Crown upon his head,
Checquerd through with Rubies red.
Orient Pearl and bright Topace,
Did burnish out each valiant place.
Thus this Prince that seemed sage,
Did go in royal Equipage.
THis gorgeous Potentate drew near me, and taking me by the hand, lifted me up
from the place where I kneeled, and said thus: My son, they which respect their
fame, are the children of wisdom: and such as fear the danger of report, shall
be houlden virtuous. I know thy thoughts by thy looks, and thy face bewraies
thy resolution. The Pro et contra these have had about thy pamphlets, them I
heard, though thou have not seen me, and I have equally weighed their
censures: Chawcers opinion has his, Master Gower refelled, and made them by
his counsel peremptory to leave the follies of thy pen and all wanton
Amors, to betake them to Philosophy and higher labors: but to divert thee
from that opinion my son am I come to put knowledge in thy lips, and to
teach thee wisdom. I am he that craved it of the Lord, and he gave me it,
and made me wiser then the sons of men. Therefore harken to my words, and let my
sayings sink down into thy heart, so shall thou be honored in the streets, and
be had in estimation before the Magistrate. Wisdom my son is more worth
then precious stones, yea, all the things that thou can desire, are not to be
compared to it. Wisdom has her dwelling with knowledge, and prudent counsel
is her own: with her is the fear of the Lord and the eschewing of il. As for
pride and disdain, and a mouth that speaks foolish things, she utterly
abhors them. She gives counsel, and is a guide, and is full of
understanding and strength^ through her kings reign: through her, princes make
just laws: through her, Lords bear rule, and Judges of the earth execute
judgment: she is loving to those that love her, and they that seek her early,
shall find her. Riches and honor are with her: yea, excellent goodness and
righteousness: her fruit is better then gold, and her increase more worth, than
fine silver. The Lord himself has hirin possession, therefore harke^ to her,
for blessed is ye man that watches at her doors: who so finds her, finds
life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord, and who so offends against her,
hurts his own soul: and who so hates her, is the lover of death. If then my
Son, Wisdom be so precious, how have thou misspent thy youth, that have
haunted after foolishness and beaten thy brains about idle fancies, and yet
art now resolving to continue in vanity: I tell thee, I have sought out to
find what is perfect under the Son: and I have found nothing but wisdom,
without blemish.

Learning has many branches, and teaches her Scholars many strange things,
and yet my Son, when thou have waded the depth of her knowledge, and sought
into the secret of her bosom, thou shall find all thy labors to be vexation
of mind and vanity. Can thou number and extract, as the cunning
Arithmetician: or with Geometry measure the ground, and level out the plains
by the excellency of thine art. Can thou reach unto the heavens with thy
knowledge, and tell the course of the Stars, setting down their aspects,
oppositiues, times, and sextiles, and discourse of the influence of every Star?
can thou with music please thine ear, and with the meladie of her Cords
make thy heart merry? Can thou tell the secrets of Philosophy, and like a
cunning naturalist, discover the hidden aphorisms of art, and set out the
nature and operation of all things? well my son, say thou can write of all
these things, yet when thou dooest with a careful insight, enter into the
consideration, what the end of all is, thou shall find the study of them to
be utter vexation of mind, and vanity: and the fame that grows from such
labors, to vanish away like smoke, or a vapor tossed with the wind: If
then all be folly, seek Wisdom, and she will teach thee the fear of the
Lord. Therefore my Son, follow my counsel from henceforth, as thou have
made a vow to leave effeminate fancies, and to proclaim thy self an open
enemy to love: so abjure all other studies, seeing Omnia sub coelo vanitas,
and only give thy self to Theology: be a Divine my Son, for her documents
are severity, and her food is the bread of life: her principles came from
Heaven, and her words came from above, so shall thou make amends for the
follyes of thy youth, and as thou have seduced youth by thy wanton Pamphlets:
so shall thou instruct them by thy godly labors. Divinity, why it is a
study that far surpasses all the seven liberal sciences, and the least
spark that it does lighten, is more bright then all their fading glories: it
comprehends the law of the Lord: and by it shall thou know what the depth
of his will is. Theology is mother of all knowledge, for from it comes
health of the soul, and through it thou shall win men unto heaven. Then my
Son, leave all other vain studies, and apply thy self to feed upon that
heavenly Manna, whose taste shall comfort thy heart, and drink of those
waters, which shall spring in thee a well of life, and so shall thou recover
thy fame that thou have lost, and be accounted of amongst the Elders of the
City Covet not to blind thy self with the illusions that other arts
present unto thee: for so shall thou have the portion of the fool, and the end
of thy labors shall be vanity: for all knowledge except it, is mere folly:
and there is no wisdom, but the knowledge of the law of the Lord.

Therefore be not wise in thine own conceit, for he that will not here
instruction, shall feel the smart of the rod. Deuinitie I tell thee, i^ the
true wisdome^ and upon her right hand is long life, and upon her left hand is
riches and honor: her ways are pleasant, and her paths are peaceable: she is
a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her, and blessed are they that
keep her fast. The first point of wisdom, is, that thou be willing to obtain
wisdom, and when thou have got her, she will make thee a gracious head, and
garnishe thy temples with a Crown of glory: if then my Son, all knowledge,
all sciences, all arts, all learning except Theology, be mere foolishness
and vanity: leave the quiddities of Lodgick, and aphorisms of Philosophy:
and apply thy wits only to divinity. Hold not these precepts light, that I
have given thee, nor disdain not my counsel, for I that speak to thee am
Solomon.

And this he spoke with such a majesty, that the terror of his countenance
afrighted me, and I started and awoake, and found my self in a dream: yet
Gentlemen, when I entered into the consideration of the vision, and called to
mind not only the counsel of Gower, but the persuasions of Solomon: a
sudden fear tainted every limme, and I felt a horror in my conscience, for
the follyes of my Pen: whereupon, as in my dream so awooke, I resolved
peremptorily, to leave all thoughts of love, and to apply my wits as near as
I could, to seek after wisdom so highly commended by Solomon: but howsoever
the direction of my studies shall be limited me, as you had the blossoms of my
wanton fancies, so you shall have the fruits of my better labors.

Rob. Green.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London for Thomas Newman, and are to be sold at his shop in
Fleetestreete, in Saint Dunstons Churchyard.


