Planetomachia: Or the first part of the general opposition of the seven
Planets: wherein is Astronomically described their essence, nature, and
influence:

Diversely discovering in their pleasant and Tragical histories, the inward
affections of the minds, and painting them out in such perfect Colors, as
youth may perceive what fond fancies their flourishing years do foster: and
age clearly see what doting desires their withered hears do affoorde.

Containing also a brief Apology of the sacred and mystical Science of
Astronomy: By Robert Green, Master of Arts and student in Physic. 1585.

Imprinted at London for Thomas Cadman, dwelling at the great North door of S.
Paul's, at the sign of the Bible.

To the right Honorable the Lord Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester, Baron of
Denbigh, of the honorable order of the Garter, and S. Michael Knight, Master of
the Queene^ Majesty's Horses, and one of her Highness most honorable priu^e
Counsel: Robert Green wishes increase of Honor and virtue.
APelles (right Honorable) drawing the counterfaite of Honor, pourtrayeth her
holding in the one hand a Star, and in the other a Stone: meaning as I
suppose by this his Embleame, that although noble minds entitled with
dignities should retch as hie as the Skies, yet they might not disdain to
look as low as the earth. Jupiter glutted with drinking of Nectar, sharpened
his stomach with chewing of Philemons sower Grapes. Honor of times has her
eye as soon delighted with the sight of a crooked table, as with the view of a
curious Picture: and as well could Tmolus laugh at the homely Music of Pan,
as wonder at the heavenly melody of Apollo. The mind wearied with weighty
affairs, seeks as soon to be recreated with some pithie conceits, as with
any deep contemplations: and rather with slight devises to procure mirth,
the^ with sollemne shows to foster melancholy. They which offered gifts unto
Alexander, presented him with some warlike munition. None contented Crassus so
much as they which brought him strange Characters. Nigidius being demanded
why he gave Antonius Pius the bud of an Olive, reddily answered: because he is
the flower of clemency. So (right honorable) it is not possible that your
Honor being a Maecenas of learning, should want the trouble of Scholars,
neither that being such a worthy favorer of good letters, even the meanest
(amongst who^ I rest) should not endeavor their simple skill to show how
duetifully they are affected to your honors noble and virtuous disposition.
Which consideration of this your rare and singular mind, has forced many to
present the fruits of their labors to your Lordships patronage: so that all
they which reap profit by others pains, and gain knowledge by the works of
them which have waded the depth of Myneruas Laberinth, are bound to praise and
extol your honor: whose courteous favor toward learning, has forced them to
discover their skill for your Lordships private pleasure, but the Commons
public commodity. These premises thoroughly weighed, although my ignorance
might justly abash me from troubling your honor with such frivolous trash: yet
the duetifull and humble affection wherewith I find my self bound to such a
worthy patron of good letters, has emboldned me to present your Honor with
this Pamphlet, being a Planetomachia or general opposition of the seven
Planets: wherein is Astronomically decyphered their nature and essence, and
plainly shows (that since every man is naturally borne under the influence and
irradiate constellation of one of these wandering Stars, and that one is
always predominant in the configuration of every nativity) what proper
qualities each particular Planet does appropriate: painting out what
affectionat desires Jupiter does allot to them that are Iouialistes: and what
qualities Saturn does infuse upon them which are Saturnistes, together with
the diseases incident to their co^stitution and complexion. But as Horace
always sung his satyrs upon the Lute, and Phidias painted black Vulcan
sitting in an Iuorie Chariot: as Protagines carved the counterfaite of Irus in
a wedge of gold: and Demosthenes sawsed his weighty inuectiues with some
pretty and pleasant inventions. So (right Honorable) I have mixed melancholy
with Music, and tempered the brawles of the Planets with pleasant though
tragical histories: which if your Honor shall accept, my travel shall be so
requited, as if I had optained most rich treasures. And thus hoping your Honor
will pardon my rashness, and think of my mind more then of the matter, I
commit your Honor to the Almighty.

Your Honors in all duetifull service to command, Robert Green.

To the Gentlemen Readers, health.
I Present here (Gentlemen) unto your woonted courtesies, a civil conflict
between the seven Planets: not discovering in this Pamphlet any strange or
myraculous news of the opposition or aspect of the Stars, but only showing
their nature and essence, and what proper qualities their celestial
configuration and influence does infu^e into human bodies: so that their
proper dispositions once known, it shall be easy by their outward affects to
judge what Planet is chiefly predominant in his natural constitution: But that
I might not be to tedious to young minds, I have interlaced my Astronomicall
discourse with pleasant Tragedies, that your profitable Harvest may be gleaned
together with delightful pains. And thus committing my self and my labors
to your courtesy, I most heartily and humbly bid you farewell.

Yours to use, Robert Green.

(...) IN EOS QVI VETVstam Astrologiae scientiam derident.
TElluri caelum si saecula prisca maritant^
Si sine vi caeli, si sine sole nihil?
E caelo vires si stirpibus atque metallis^
Cynthia si morbos iudicat vna tuos?
Si caelo tellus substernitur? infima coelum?
Si mouet: and proprio temperat arbitrio?
Si inferiora vigent radijs, moderata supernis
Cur coelum sordet, sordida terra placet
Cessa sacrilego coelum insectarier ore,
Et fratrem Astrologum nosere perge tuum.
Multa tibi Astrologi debent Grene atque reponent.
Creed mihi meritis pramia digna tuis:
Quite percupide rogitant (O Grene) Rogari
Si tamen a doctis tu been far potes:
Vt quos in magno numero noctesque diesque
Describis libros adere nil dubites
Optati venient, relegentur non sine laud:
Ac immortali nomine, vine, vale.
P. H. Armiger.
In praise of the Author and his Book.
IF wise Ulysses with his wit
did purchase lasting fame,
And sacked the wealth of wisdoms stoare
to burnish out his name.
If Virgils Poems wan him praise,
for mixing mirth with skill:
Or Ouids Iestes with sage advise,
did pollish out his quill.
If Horace writtes, whose sacred doomes
were interlac'd with sport,
Did get him for his pleasant vain,
a name of rare report.
No doubt then justly Green may gain,
more happy fame then those:
Who seeks of deep Astrology,
the secrets to disclose.
To show what every Planet yeeldes,
what force he does infuse
To human minds: what properties
the Iouialistes do use.
What sollempe fits the Saturnistes,
what qualities they have.
Ho^ Mars with choler much adust,
do^he c^use his crew to rave.
A^^ what ^iseases incident,
^
(...) and proper name
of every grief and pain.
But this his skill with rare delight,
is saweed in such sort;
As grauer heads may counsel find,
and younger years disport.
Both by his learned censure may
most pleasant profit gain:
With friendly speech and praises due,
then recompense his pain.
FINIS.
Henry Gale, Master of Arts.
In Epicureos.
FOnd Epycurus with thy crew,
which scorns the course of heavenly frame^
Bend down thine eye and take a view,
peruse this work, and blush for shame:
To see thy doting doomes refeld,
which taste of naught but earthly slime:
And now by right and force compeld,
to yield to truth in this our time.
Wherein Astrology her famous lore^
does justly claim her sacred due.
As Green has proved she did before:
and now her praises does renew.
With such surpassing wit and skill,
as shall display thy brutish will.
FINIS.
George Mear^^ Gentleman.
In (...).
Ride Epicure deum, gere nescia pectore fati,
finge nihil caeli significare faces
Creed mihi, ad nigrum quando raptaberis orcum:
Hic tua quod plectat scommata Numen erit.
Sultum pecus est, non homo, quicunque Astronomiae studio non tenetur: cuius
neminem nisi deum authorem and repertorem faciundum puto.

Plato.
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury, Luna.
Saturn.
I Am sorry Venus, that thou art descended from me being a God, or that the
destinies (not to be controlled) have appointed thee for a Goddess: but
especially that thou art one of the vii. Planets, whose celestial influences
are predominant in terrestiall creatures. I hear the complaints of the^ which
are skillful in the calculation of natiuities, exclaiming against thy thrice
accursed constellation, for by thee, Venus, the prime of years which ought to
be spent in virtues, is consumed in idle vanities. Youth which in the golden
age delighted to try their virtues in hard armours, take their only content
in delicate and effeminate amors: through thee young minds are blinded with
lascivious love, and aged years pestered with fresh affections: thou do
inchaunt the hearts of men with unfit fancies, and layest beauty as a snare
to intrappe virtue. Love (as they whom hapless experience has taught make
report), is the only plague which infecteth the minds of mortal men, and
what dangerous euentes proceed of this frantic impression, spring, fond
Venus, of thy accursed influence: so that if the Gods would be ruled by me,
thou should not only be deprived of thy place among the Planets, but exiled
from all dignity in the heavens and denied to have any more power upon earth.

Venus.
Saturn, if Gods might wax old as they are immortal, I would think age had
made thee doat, but I need not deceive my self, for it is thy accustomed
melancholy that drives thee into these bitter inuectyues. Thou art sorry that
I am come of thy line, and I therefore descent because the destinies have
appointed my progeny from such a peevish Parent, whose celestial (but
unfortunate) impression joined with a perpetual vnluckly irradiation, breeds
both in men's minds and bodies such hapless passions sawsed with so bitter and
woeful events, as I sorrow to hear their cursing complaints, and shame to
desce^d from the race of such a despised Planet: whereas contrary in the course
of al configurations, whether I be in some improper and sinister house, or my
virtue darkened with some unlucky aspect either in Conjunction or Opposition,
yet the mildness of my influence does always mittigate, though not
extinguishe, the cruel disposition of all other unfortunate stars. And
further sir, to show that your inuectiue sauoureth more of rancour the^ of
reason, I say that those natiuities which are favored with my happy aspecte,
dispose the mind to a continual pronenesse and forwardness: unto pity,
friendship, amity, and love. Love: yea, Love I say, as neither God nor man
justly can gainsay, which often times pacifieth displeasures among heavenly
powers, and appeaseth debates among earthlye creatures. It is y^ enemy to
dissension, the friend to quiet, yea the preserver and conseruer of humane
actions, so that what is done well, either is love, or proceeds from love.
But Saturn, let those two crabbed Philosophers, who hated love, and fed upon
gall and mela^choly, I mean Timon and Aparmantus: come forth, and thou shall
hear them with bitter curses accuse thy Saturnine complexion, to be the spur
that pricked them forward to their desperate philosophy,

Mars.
Truth Venus, and therefore Saturn for a while by the consent of his own son
Jupiter, was most justly exiled, for y^ through his peevish frowardnes, neither
could the gods agree in heaven, nor men upon earth.

Jupiter.
Mars, you mistake the matter: my father Saturn is the most noble of all the
planets, for his influence is principally predominant in age, wherein vayn
thoughts and fresh affections are suppressed, and wisdom only bears swaye,
breeding in men's minds a hateful contempt of vice, and a happy desire of
virtue, and therefore the golden age wherein al lived justly was called Aetas
Saturnea.

Luna.
Tush Jupiter, blame not Mars, his hand is on his halfepenie, he plaieth like
the Lidian stone, which rubbed with the juice of Mandrake becomes hot where
before it is most cold. Venus is the goddess of beauty, and will love: Mars a
god, and must love: let not his broken coin stand for starling, for he
speaks of affection: all the Gods either do know it or may know it.

Mars.
Luna, your reproach may be counted a praise, for there is no hold to be taken
at your words, whose verdict is so variable, ye ere Jupiter can turn his
back, you will change your tale, never singing one soug^e, nor remaining in
one mind, least if your censure should at any time be al one, you might be
thought not to be Luna. But it is for you to talk with the goddesses not with
the Gods.

Saturn.
Mars, Luna has reported as much as she can prove, and yet no more then we
know, but letting her defend her own quarrel, I say, that respecting your own
lucklesse constellation, it were most fit for you to hold with Saturn, for
wrath, envy, wars, choler, blood, murder, hatred, proceeds from your
influence.

Mercury.
Not so Sir, in this I will speak for Mars, he breeds in men's minds
valor, prowess, magnanimity, courage, constancy, resolutions, without fear,
and settled determination, without change.

Jupiter.
And you Mercury, policies sleights, fair promises and small performance,
causing men by your variable impression to flatter friend or foe, to swear in
mouth, and for swear in heart, to bear two faces under a hood, to carry a Lamb
in his shield, and a Tygre in his bosom: with the one hand to present spice,
and with the other hemblocke.

Sol.
Is it not a shame, right mighty Gods, that your grauities should be so blinded
with raging choler as to your own discredit, to rippe up those things which
ought not so much as in secret to be thought or named: cease then from these
despiteful taunts and let us wash down these bitter words with a cup of
sweet nectar.

Saturn.
Not so Sol, we will have Venus wanton toys discovered in heaven, that her
lascivious allureme^ts may be avoided on earth, I will prove her by invincible
arguments, to be the most pernicious of all the Planets, and if she and the
rest of the Gods be content since in order thou art placed in the midst of us
all, thou shall be moderator in our controversies.

Venus.
No doubt saturn, a good motion, for now though I cannot revenge thy unjust
injuries by force, yet I may plague thee with my tongue, in telling the truth.
I am content to accept Sol as an indifferent Judge, whose doom once
pronounced, shall stand without controlment. I will therefore to confirm my
former reasons, first, make a perfect description of Saturnes essential
estate, then show by a history not unknown to you al, what hapless mischiefs
proceed from his infectious influence.

Sol.
Since I am by these sacred Gods appointed Moderator in this controversy, I
ordain first, that Venus say her mind both in the description of Saturnes
essence, and in rehearsing her history, until the end whereof without any
quarrellous interruptions I enjoin you al to silence.

Venus Astronomicall description of Saturn.
RIght mighty Gods, the Chaldeans, Arabians, Grecicians and Latinists, most
skillful interpretors of celestial mysteries, do with Claudius Ptolomeus and
Galen call the star of Saturn intemperate, unfortunate, and ill affected,
perhaps for the melancholy humor which with a secreat violence does rage and
reign in humane bodies, procuring by his Saturnine influence, both cold and
dryness, as Ptolomeus in Libro primo Apotellesmaton, does witness in these
words: (...) etc.

The star of Saturn is especially cooling and somewhat dry: which two improper
qualities, although proper to his nature, how they do ex diametro repugne those
two precious temperatures of humane life, I mean heat and moisture, there is
no man so simple which does not perceive. The nature of this star therefore
is most prone to infect and corrupt: and yet of force I must confess that this
Melancholy humor does not in all things, and through all things, so equally
exercise his force and vigor, nor so totally and determinately make such
dismal infusion, but that he has his particular commodities. For as with
confections tempered by Art, the Physicians sometim^s procure good and
wholesome effects: So from this star (although unfortunate) joined in good
and perfect temperature, mixtion, and irradiation, with other stars, do ensue
no mean and small commodities, but haec aliena non sua sunt: Whereby we
evidently perceive, that to what Art or Science so ever the Saturnists apply
their minds and diligence, in that, for the most part, they do easily excel
all others: To aver the which, Plato and Aristotle do agree, writing that they
which in all ages have flourished in wit, Philosophy, Government of commonweals, Poetry, or any other Arts were al of a melancholic constitution: as
Socrates, Pericles, Demosthenes, Archimedes, Ulysses, Scipio, Aaiax, Acneas,
Democritus, Galen, Caesar, Virgil, Hercules, and innumerable other of the same
sort: whom for their continual studies incessant labors, profound inventions
and deep cogitations, the historiographers have reported to be such.

Here further is to be noted that Saturn with his Melancholy humor does not
erect in all bodies his influence equally, but represents and resembles the
nature of Wine, which for a certain Idiot^opian of bodies and varieti^ of
natures, does not affect all with the selfsame manner of drunkenness, for
some it moves unto babbling, some to striefe, other to vomit, some to
silence, many to sleep or laughter, and some unto rage and choler. So Saturn
with his Melancholy humor does move some unto laughter, as Democritus: some
unto tears, as Heraclitus: others to prattling, as Thersites: some to
Eloquence, as Nestor: to patience and silence, as Socrates and Ulysses: to
fear as Pysander, to mirth as Lucullus, to sadness as Crassus, to musing as
Archimedes: in fine, it moves diverse men to diverse affectes, according to the
proportion of the quantity or quality predomynant: All which affectes are
styrred up by certain fumes and vapors, proceeding from Saturnine and
Melancholy blood, which ascend unto the Tower of the mind and there trouble
the vital spirits and the brain, which, as Galen says, is the storehouse of
the senses, and vital actions whereof ensue diverse doubts, thoughts,
reasons, discourses, opinions, studies, and fantasies, according (as I said
before) to the variable nature in quantity and quality of the said Mela^choly
blood puffing up such gross fumes and vapors as it were out of a hot and
fiery matter. For we evidently see that more gross smokes and smelles, do
proceed from burnt Oak, then from Alder, from sea coal then from wood, from
Sulphur then from Frankensence because of the diversities of their substance
proper to their particular natures: so this star procures diverse effects
according to his diverse temperature, for sometime it procures boldness, as in
Hercules: and being much adust, fearful cruelty, as in Ajax, continuing long
for the abundance of the terrene quality therein predominant, but and if it
exceed more in coldness then either in heat or dryness, it ingendreth fear
and slothfulness as in Pysander and Thersites. By these former reasons it is
evident (ye mighty gods) that the unfortunate influence of Saturn with his
Melancholy humor conceived intemperately in a gross and thick matter,
tourneth as it were, to infectious poison, which in some living bodies lies
dead, as Sulphur removed from the fire: and in other some flameth out as
burning brimstone, which not only burns but also infecteth all things with
his troublesome vapoures and smokes. To be short Saturn of himself is wholly
intemperate, unfortunate and ill affected, and if it happen that he procures
any good effects, it comes by the perfect temperature, mixtion, and
irradiation of other fortunate planets. But seeing I have Astronomicallie
described the essential nature of Saturn, I will now lay open the
dispositions of his Melancholy Disciples.

A marvelous Anatomy of Saturnistes.
THese Saturnistes are strange affected (...) laughing once in their life with
Crassus making slow have in all things: carrying Uinager in their breasts:
and bying hope with gold: every where holding the Woolfe by the ears: as full
of cyes as Argus: smelling at Onyons, yet eating the seed: in friendship
doubtful, smally regarding their neighbors profit: rejecting the Oxen, yet
using the Carts: brought up in Heraclitus house, and taught in the School of
the Areopagite: determining one thing while they sit, and another as they
stand: hardly with old Foxes caught in the snare: preferring hate before
love: and with one breath blowing both hot and cold: hardly granting their
right hand to any manne: more inexorable than Rhadamentus: more cruel in
speech then the Scythians: uncertain in sure matters, always knitting their
brows and looking down to the ground: Supping with Hecates, and taking
counsel in the night: gaping for dead carcasses, as Uultures: seeing both
before and behind as Ianus: having eyes in their hands: which believe nothing
but that they see, and as the Lattine proverb says: Ni^^l nisi quod
Aristophanis and Cl^antis lucernam ^lea^ emitten^^^^ ^ in covetousness
insatiable: strayning all things through a seue: bearing hope in their face and
sorrow fit their hearts^ known more by name then by manners: tything my^^ an^
(...) s^r^e: in delays surpassing Scipio, and Fabius: changing all into (...)
as Mydas: so many words, so many senses^ as hardly changing their hair, as the
Woofe: skillful Artificers in resembling, or dissembling: delighting to feed
on sour Grapes^ carrying bread in the one hand, and a stone in the other: as
unthankful as Swallowes^ in steed of a Fish giving a Scorpion (...) of
company, doing nothing well but when they die: thinking the savor of any
gain to be sweet, preferring profit before shame, and requiring tribute of
the dead: having many ears, and many eyes: bearing a head without a tongue:
more dumb then Fishes: at talk and company, not uttering one word, and yet
Sardonio risu omnia condientes: reaping that which other men sow: ignorant in
that they cheefely know, answering all things in three words: fearing their
own shadows, and starting at flies: licking up salt and feeding upon gall:
giving hair for wool, seeking a knotte in a rush: in life resembling cockles:
and doing sacrifice without any smoke: and thus much for their disposition.
Now as concerning the diseases incident to the Saturnine constitution which
commonly proceed of too much black choler, adust or corruption of blood,
cruditye or rawnes: imbecillitie of heart excess of cold and dryness, or
abundance of gross phlegm: they be these: Quartaines, Falling sickness,
Leprosies, Morphes: Canckers, Apostumes, Dropsy, Palsies, Hemoraydes, Bluddy
flixe, pain of the Guts and Raines, with other more. As concerning other
things, the Saturnistes have their pulses slow and small: sweat, sowex, and
heavy: black deiections, terrible dreams, as of death, Carcasses, Sepulchers
Darkness, Torments, Devils, and black things: As touching the four
faculties of human life, for his secreat malice Saturn chalengeth none:
although there be some Physicians and Astrologers that do attribute unto him
the faculty Retentiue. In these few words I have decyphered Saturnes
malignant disposition, and now by your patience mean to confirm my reasons
with a pleasant, though Tragical, History.

Venus Tragedy.
THere dwelled in the City of Ferrare a Duke called Valdracko, favored of his
Citizens more for fear, as they were subjects, then for love, as they were
freemen, honored of strangers, who had cause to trafficque in his
territories, otherwise hated of all, whom neither duty nor profit had
entangled: For this Valdracko being stricken in age, was of such a melancholicke
disposition, as he ruled more after the crabed frowardness of his own doting
will, then dyrecting his course to minister Justice mingled with mercy. Yet in
this one thing deserving great commendation, that he was never found to be
partial to any: I mean not that he used such a due proportion of Justice, but
that he loved none but himself. Polliticke he was, (taught by the experience
of many years) hardly admitting any into familiarity, unless he might sell
his courtesy for profit, and they buy his favor with repentance. But in
private and secreate counsayles he used no friend but himself, fearing to
find that in others which he found rooted in his own canckred stomach: So
skillful to shadow his spightful practices with glosing colors, as resembling
the Pyrit slo^^ he burned sorest when he was thought most cold. To trust any
he thought was to despise security, and to desire mishappe, and therefore
known more for his authority, then by his manners. He carried his thoughts
sealed up with silence, pained with that which he most liked: namely, fearful
mistrust. He counted great gifts little gods, caring not if he might
gain, what means he did use to get, counting all things honest that were
profitable, and thinking Gall most sweet if it were tempered with Goulde, as
the event of his wretched life did make manifest. For this Valdracko although
despighted by the gods and nature, for placing such o^ous qualities in such an
old carcass, yet was he favored by Fortune in possessing large and
sumptuous revenues, and not only advanced with the title of honor and
dignities: but also, wherein he most ioyed, he had one only child called
Pasylla a Lady, so furnished with outward shape of the body, and inward
qualities of the mind, so decked with the gifts of Nature, and adorned with
sundry exequisite virtues, as Ferrara did not so much despise her Father for
his vicious disposition, as they did extol her fame for her virtuous
sincerity. For she (although to her great grief) seeing into her Fathers
lawless actions, how with pretensed fla^tery, like to the Hiena, he had
snared some to their utter mishappe, and that under color of law with exacted
extortion, he had oppressed the poor, sought not only as far as she durst,
to pull her Father from such inordinate gains, but also secreatly made
recompense to such as her father unjustly had almost brought to ruin. This
Pasylla flourishing thus in happy and deserved fa^e, was generally loved of
all, but particularly liked of one called Rodento, only son and heir to an
Earl in Ferrara called Il Conte Coelio, who on a time passing by the Palace
of Valdracko, chanced to have a sight of the Lady Pasylla, as she stood in a
window talking with a young Gentlewoman, her Cozen German, called Pandyna,
Rodento amassed at the sight of such a heavenly creature, stood a long while
astonished at her excellent beauty, insomuch that Pasilla casting her eye
aside espied him, and with that shut the casement, which somewhat daunted the
mind of the young Gentleman to be so suddenly deprived of that object which so
greatly pleased his eyes. But taking this her modest discourtesie in good part,
he passed on to the Church: where having devoutly heard divine service he
returned home, f^eling in his mind a sparkling heat of affection, which he
took as a toie of youth, rather to be laughed at for the sudden passion, then
to be prevented for any ensuing danger. But after he had taken his repast with
the Earl his Father, he withdrewe himself into his Chamber thinking to
beguile the long summers day with a few sweet slumbers, which fell out
otherwise: For being once solitary he felt his mind perplexed with more
vehement and strange passions: whereas before his affection was scarce warm,
now his fancy began to flame: the Idea of Pasyllas comely personage
presented it self so lively into Rodentos imagination, as he felt himself
half snared with her singular beauty: which crafty Cupid noting, having his
wings plumde with times Feathers, least he might let slip occasion, seeing
this young nouice at discouert, thought to strike while the iron was hot, and
so drew a boult to the head and hitte Rodento at the very heart, which pierced
so deep as no means but death could ever after cure his malady: for then
the fame of Pasyllas virtuous life began to allure him, the report which all
Ferrara made of her courtesy, was a chain to entangle his freedom: her
honor, birth, parentage, and incomparable beauty gave such fierce assaults
to his perplexed fancy, as no defense of reason was able to withstand these
violent impressions. Rodento seeing himself payned with these unacquainted
fits, was driven into a quandarie, whither he should valiantly resist the
inchaunting tunes of Cupids sorcerie, and so stand to the chance what so ever
the maime were: or else yield to the alluring call of beawtie, and so spend
his youth in seeking, and sing for doubtful, though desired favors. Tossed a
while in these contrary thoughts he began to consider at last, that to fix
his fancy upon Pasylla, was with the young Griphons to pecke against the
stars: and with the wolves to bark against the moon, for there had been such
a perenmitie between the house of the Valdracchie and the Celij, that neither
the Duke would condiscende his daughter should match with him: nor yet the
Earl his father be content yt he should fancy Pasylla. Further he knew that
as the herb Spattania no sooner sprouteth above ground but it blometh, and
the Eggs of the Lapwing are scase hatched before the young ones can run: so
women resembling the Apples of the tree Pala, are scarce ripe before they
desire to be pluckte, and their years not able to discern love before they
behalf drowned in love: whereof he might gather that Pasylla being so young,
beautiful, and a woman, could not live so long but err this time affection
had pulled her by the sleue: if then this his conjecture were true, his love
should reap but loss, and his pain be requited with travel. These
considerations began somewhat to repress his doting fancies, but Cupid not
willing to take so slender a repulse, sought straight to race out these
despayring thoughts with the comfortable conserues of hope, and to draw
Rodento out of the Labirinth of distrusting fear, with the assured
possibility of atchiuing his enterprise. He therefore began to encourage his
champion with these plausible conjectures: that although there had been a
perpetual dissension between their two houses, yet there might grow as great
friendship in their hearts, that the enmity of the parents could not hinder
the amity of the children, that Pasylla was a woman, and therefore to be
won: if beautiful, with praises: if coie, with prayers: if proud, with
gifts: if covetous, with promises: in five, that as there is no stone so hard
which cannot be cut, no Hawke so ramage which cannot be manned, no Tygre so
fierce which cannot be tamed: so there is no woman so infected with the bitter
poison of self will, none so spotted with the stain of hellishe cruelty, nor
so wedded unto wilful frowardness, but they may be drawn to the lure by some
of the forenamed practices. Rodento pricked forward with these pithie
persuasions, and yet driven back with the fear of some hopeless denial,
stood diversely perplexed, whether he should with a momentarie content sue
after loss, or with a long disquiet seek after gain: remaining a while in
these doubts half frantic with such unaccustomed fittes he fell into these
passionate complaints.

Ah Rhodento, how art thou diversely perplexed? driven either to purchase
hapless content with fading pleasures, or to gain a happy disquiet with
ensuing profits: if thou choose the first thou art like to repent at the
last, if the other, suer with Hercules after painful labors to obtain fame
and quiet. The Caspians fearinge to be stiffled with sweet sauors, wear in
their bosoms buds of Hemlock, the people Pharusii doubting to surfeit with
drinking the Iui^^ of lyquorrise, prevent such perils with chewing Rhewbarbe. It
is better to be payned with the sting of a snake, and recover: then be tickled
with the venom of the Tarantula, and so die laughing. Hard, yea ^ard it is
Rodento, to ride on Seianus horse for his beauty, and then perish, or to gain
the gold of Tolosse with assured mishap. Better it is for a time with sorrow to
prevent dangers, then to buy fading pleasure with repentance. Repentance? Why
Rodento what cause shall thou have to repent? Is pain always a companion to
pleasure? is danger the handmayd to love? is fancy never painted but treading
upon thorns? Yes no doubt, as Cupid has arrows y^ do pierce, so they make
sweet wounds. Venus I grant has a wrinckle in her brow, but ii. dymples in
her cheeks: she frowns not upon them that sacryfice at Paphos, but pains
such as despise her deity. Love Rodento, why do thou love? yea, alas: and
therefore unhappy because in love, a passion so unfit for thy young years, as
if thou yield to Cupids allurements, thou shalt have cause either to curse
the destinies for appointing him a God, or accuse the gods for creating thee a
man. For Love whatsoever y^ luck be, is always tempered with loss: if thou
win, thy gains shall be like theirs, who buy honey mixed with gall, the
sweetness not half so much pleasing the taste, as the bitterness infecteth the
stomach. Parrasius drawing the cou^terfait of love, painteth her, tickling
youth on the left side with a feather, and stinging him on the right with a
Scorpio^, meaning that they which are sotted with the sorceries of Cupid, reap
for one dram of gold, a pound of dross, and for one pynt of pure oil, a
whole tun of infectious poison, being a fading pleasure mixed with bitter
passions, and a mysery tempered with a few momentary delights. It is for
youth Rodento, to spend their flourishing years in virtues not in vanities, to
delight in hard armours, not in delicate and effeminate amors, not to dally in
the chamber with Paris, but to march in the field with Hector, to wish they
could love Love, not to repent they have loved. Hercules (...) his fame, not
with recounting his lawless and lic^nci^us loves, but by atchieui^g strange
and invincible labors, the one winning him endless renown, the other
untimely death. Seek then to bridle fancy with reason, and to restrain
d^^^ing affections with due counsel: quench the flame of appetite with
wisdom, and reaching at hon^r, spurn at beauty: so may thou say, Venus
flames are but flashes, and call Cupid a despised boy, not a re^oubted God.

Rodento thinking thus with blaspheming curses to shake off fancies shackles,
went out of his chamber to sport himself with his companions, where he passed
away y^ day in playing at chesse, but although he gave the check, he was feign
at last to take the mate: for Venus hearing with what despitefull terms, he
abused her dietie, thought, seeing he despised love, to make him yield unto
love, and with panting sighs to crave pardon, where with bitter speeches he
had rayled: she therefore, seeing that he began to make a rampire against
fancy, thought to give a fresh assault to his half defended fortress, and
to send desire as a Heraulde to make ye challenge, ye beuty as a cha^pion might
perform ye charge: which done, Rodento willing still to withstand her power,
passed three or four days in perplexed passions, counting love as a toy,
which being taken in a minute, might be left off in a moment: but he found yt
as the Abesto^ stone once kindled, can never be quenched, as the Griphon if he
once soar into the air, will never come down without his pray: so if Venus
give the assault, it is impossible to escape without sacking: if Love display
her flagge, she never returns without victory, which forced Rode^to to present
them with prayers, whom he had plagued with curses, and where he had shed the
blood there to offer the sacrifice. For the remembrance of Pasillas beauty so
fiered his affections, yt as the fly Pyralis cannot live out of the flame, nor
the bird Trochiles keep from the infectious Crockedile, so unless he might
enjoy yt which he feared to possess, no means but death could cure his
malady. Rodento pyning a long while in these doubtful thoughts, began once
again to debate with himself in this fort.

O poor and infortunat Rode^to, thou art perplexed thou know not how,
pestered with unfit fancies, and pained with fond affections, wishing to
possess with an unwilling mind, and in a hot desire troubled with a cold
disdain. Alas thou reachest at that with thy hand, which thy heart would feign
refuse: playing like the bird Ibis, in Egypt, which hates serpents, yet
feeds on their eggs. Thou loves Pasilla, a thing far unfit for thy years,
thy calling, thy thoughts. Consider, consider Rodento, thou ar^ the son of
Conte Celio, who had rather see thee taken away with untimely death, then
attainted with such unhappy love, the one should breed but his mome^tary sorrow,
ye other his and thy perpetual misery. Yet love is a virtue: truth, if it be
measured with dutiful choice, not if it be maimed with wilful chance. Is there
none to love but Pasilla the daughter of Valdracko, between who^ and thy
father there has bin such a mortal emnity? will she co^se^t to love, who already
is sworn to hate^ will Celio agree, or Valdacko co^discend? No, nor if thou be
wise, wilt persist in such unnatural passions: for better were it for thee to
die by concealing love, then live and enjoy such unfit love. The Bull and the
Hiena cannot be fed together in one stall. The Elphant eats not where the
mouse has crept. The Eagle and the Dove, peark not on one branch. These
br^^te beasts moved only by sense, thou a man and not to be persuaded by
reason? Cease then Rodento to love her whom thou ought to hate, let rigor
blast fancies blossoms, and enuies shadows spot beauties colors with
disdain: play like the tree Cytisus, that suffers no fly to light upon his
flower, let thy mind be like Hercules temple whereinto no dog can enter,
suffer not love to scale that fort wherein freedom has taken charge, so
shalt thou both escape ensuing dangers, and prove thy self a du^tifull
child. Ah Rodento, what do thou mean to measure the Heavens with a line?
or to furrow the Seas with a plough? Seek thou to extinguishe Love by force,
or to prevent fancye by counsel? Do thou mean too quench fire with a
swoorde, or to stop the wind with a feather. Thou know Love is to be
feared of men, because honored of the Gods. Jupiter could not resist fancy,
nor Apollo withstand affection: they Gods, and yet in love, thou a man, and
appointed to love. It is an impression Rodento, not to be suppressed by
wisdom, because not to be comprehended by reasons: without law, and
therefore above all law: strive not then against the stream, feed not with
the Dear against the wind, seek not to appease Venus with slanders, but with
sacrifice. Pasilla is beautiful and virtuous, to be won with entreaty, if
thou fear not to attempt. What though Valdrecko frown, may not she favor? he
stiffled by Saturn, and therefore must hate, she stirred by Venus, and
therefore will love. If Pasilla like, pass not if he lowre: yea let both your
Parents mislike, so you two rest in contented quiet.

Rodento had no sooner uttered these words, but he felt his mind half
eased with flattering him self thus in his follies, so that from doubting if
he might love, he fell to devising how to obtain his love: he began to
consider that Valdracko was his enemy, and that he might not go to his house,
least he should procure his secret harm, for the flattering of an enemy is
like the melody of the Sirens, who sing not to stir up mirth, but to allure
unto mishap. Rodento. I say, doubting that Valdrackos melancholy disposition
could carry in a painted tomb rotten beams, durst not venture too far for
slipping over his shoes, thinking also that if the Earl his Father should know
by any means of his pretense, he would straight seek to prevent his purpose.
Seeing then that at this breach there was no way to give the assault, he
determined to meet her as she went abroad, and then to reveal unto her the
sum of his suit, this devise was not so soon invented, but it was as readily
misliked, knowing that she went continually accompanied with such guarde of the
Dukes household, that he should hardly be admitted to her speech, and if he were,
yet he should neither have fit time nor opportunity, to move so weighty and
secret a matter: Well, Rodento having a spur in his side to prick him
forward in his enterprise, could take no rest till he might find some means
how to manifest his affections. At last after sundry fond thoughts, he
determined to send her a letter, which he knew was such a secret servant as
would neither blabbe nor blush, in delivering his masters message, but to
who^ he should commit the charge, he knew not, so that he passed three or
four days in careful thoughts, till at last he called to remembrance that
there dwelled hard by the Dukes house, an old Gentlewoman called Clarista, who
made often repair unto the Lady Pasilla, she, he thought, was the fittest
person to bring about his purpose, knowing that old women often times were more
greedy of coin, then charie of conscience, that for lucre they would not
stick to allure young minds even unto vanities, and that not only she might
deliver the letter secretly, but also temper Pasillas mind (if she were
obstinate) with some forcible persuasions. This pollitike invention pleased
Rodento so well, that he determined with all speed to put his devise in
practice: he therefore presently went into his study and there framed a letter
to this effect.

Rodento Celij to the Lady Pasilla, health and happiness.
IF the Gods ( Pasilla) had appointed as well salues to cure the inward
passions, as they have medicines to mittigate the outward maladies, neither
should I have been forced with hope to gape after uncertain bliss, nor with
despair to fear assured misery. But such dismal decrees are allotted to men
by the unjust destinies, that the griefs of the mind are neither to be salued
by cunning, nor appeased by counsel, neither to be redressed by help of
physic, nor relieved by advise of friends. I speak this Pasilla, by proof,
and curse the gods for such haples experience, because, if I should have ease
of my passive, I should surfeit with too much joy, and if find the disease
incurable, die with too great sorrow. It may be Pasilla, thou will marvel at
this strange malady, that is pestered with such contrary principles: but I have
more cause to moan, that am payned with such crooked passions. Thy beauty, thy
beauty Pasilla has made the wound, and thy sweet consent must appease my
torments: the impression of thy virtues, and thy mind fraught with such
singular qualities, has so enchanted my affections, and so snared my freedom
in the bands of fancy, that being wholly deuoyde of liberty I remain thy
loyal servant. Yea such a breach has Love made into the bulwark of my
breast, that the shape of thy exquisite perfection is so shrined in my heart,
as no means but death can stain it with oblivion. I had thought that as the
Eagle cannot be hurt with lightning, nor the olive with thu^der, so a free mind
could not have been pierced with fancy: but now I try by proof, that as the
playnest table is most apt to receive any form, as the cleerest glass is
most brittle, the purest chrisolite soonest wrought, and the whitest lawne most
subject to moales: so ye mind which rangeth with most security in the large
lees of liberty, and abhors Cupid as a fury, shall soonest be bound in the
painful fetters of affection, and be forced to honor Venus as a goddess. For
Pasilla, after I had (I hope by happy chance) taken a view of thy outward
shape, and thy inward qualities imprinted in my mind, thy beauty, and virtue,
thy personage and parentage: my senses were so sotted with the consideration of
this excellency, that ever since, I remain a captive to love and loyalty. It
may be Pasilla, and I fear it will be, that Rodento shall be suspected of thee
for a flatterer, and no doubt hated of thy father as an enemy, but would to
God I might as soon obtain his favor, as by time try mine unfeigned
affection, and then would I hope to enjoy that I wish, and eschew that I fear.
Alas Pasilla^ it is not for Rode^to to flatter in his loves, least he falter in
his life: yet were it to me far more ease, though less credit: but I hope
thou will not misconstrue of my affection, nor distrust my protestations, but
in recompense of my good will, like a little, though not love so much, as I
would: and in this hope I rest, feeling some comfort in this, that if thy
courtesy cure not my malady, yet thy cruelty by speedy death shall cut off my
misery.

Thine though never thine, Rodento Celii.


ROdento had no sooner ended his letter, but (...) al speed h^^ posted to the
house of Clarista, whom he found sitting solytary in her parlor: Clarista seeing
Rodento, half amassed at his unlooked for arriual, rose up, and reverently gave
him a courteous welcome, saying: that there could no man in all Ferrara have come
to her house, whose presence would more have contented her desire, protesting
that she was for sundry causes so bound unto the Earl his Father, that she
would think her self happy if her poor service in any wise might make a
requital of his benefits, and some show of her good will. Rodento glad to
hear her duetifull and friendly protestation, thought that now all things
would fall out according to his wish, and therefore thinking to give her
grass for hay, soothyng up her doting flatteries, with as fair promyses,
taking her by the hand, first charged her upon her oath and honesty, that
she should most secretly conceal, whatsoever at that present time he
should make manifest. Then with careful looks, and far fetched sighs, he
brake the matter unto her, promysing that if she stood his friend with
careful diligence, secretly to deliver his message, and with some forcible
persuasions to procure Pasilla to take pitye of his passions, he would so
largely and bountifullye requite her friendlye travail, as she should have
cause to think she dealt for a thankful person. Rodento had not half
uttered his mind, ere Clarista with solemn oaths began too protest, that
she thought her self happy that now she should have some means to show
how duetifully she was affected to the house Celij, commending greatly the
noble mind of Rodento, that being young, he had made so wise and woorthye a
choice: promising not only secrecy in so waightye a matter, but also to use
al possible persuasions to the stirring up of such a luckye bargain. Rodento
driven into an ecstasy, for joy of Claristas forward diligence, thinking it
best in extremities to give a spur to a trotting horse: greased her in the
fiste with a few angels, which precious oyntement so soupled her old
joints, that it was no need to bid the (...) wife tr^^, for she presently
began to trick up her self toward her io^rney which Rodento perceiving,
took his leave and departed till the next day, when he promised to return for
an answer of his letter^ Clarista bidding him farewell after she had taken
counsel of her glass, to paint out her wrinckled face with a few fresh colors
(a disease rooted in women from their swathing cloutes, and not worn out
until they come in their winding sheet) posted, and in all have, to the palace
of Valdracko, whither she was courteously entertained by the Lady Pasilla and
her Cozen Pandina, whom she found walking in the gallery, for commonly young
Gentlewomen are delighted with old wives doting fables, and directed after
their secret counsels, counting their sayings as Oracles, and thinking that
age has taught them that, which as yet their youth cannot conceive: so that
they esteem it a religion to observe their fond and superstitions principles:
which moved Pasilla greatly to honor and reverence Clarista, so that taking her
by the hand, and withdrawing themselves aside to a baye window, they fell into
long and serious talk, but at last Clarista willing, while the fish was
wanton, to cast forth the baytes, presented Pasilla with this letter, desiring
her to read it secretly in her chamber, and the next day to deliver her a
friendly and favorable answer, saying, that partly she knew the contents,
which was a suit so fitting for her honor, that if she could condescend to the
request, no doubt she should prove her self as wise, as fortunate. Pasilla
half amassed at this unlooked for message, began with the gosling to perceive
what the old goose meant by her wincking, and to fear that the old Pandar
suborned by some lewd mate, had attempted to persuade her to some unlucky
match, so that at the first she refused the letter, til at last forced by the
earnest entreaty of Clarista to take it, she put it up in her pocket, promising
if it contained nothing prejudicial to her honor, she would the next day
redeliuer an answer. And with that being both satisfied, they went again to
Pandina who all that while was walking alone in the gallerye, passing away the
after noone in such endless chat, as women when they meet, can discourse of:
till the night drawing on, Clarista took her leave and departed, Pandina and
Pasylla being presently calde to supper: where having taken the^^ repast with
the Duke, they withdrew themselves to their lodgings, Pandina into her bed
chamber, and Pasylla into her closet, where she no sooner came but in have she
unripped the seals and found the contents so strange and unlooked for, that
she both mused and marueiled at Rodentos sudden passion, and Claristas fond
persuasion, laughing at her foolish attempt, and at his (as she thought)
dissembled affection: thinking that the young Gentleman inflamed with a secreat
hate, sought to spoil her honesty under the colored pretense of Amity, and
with the crocodile to weep Rose water at the first, and to spitte venom at
the last: For she knew that there: had been such mortal hatred betwixt the
Count Coelio and her Father, that as the flames of Eteocles, and Polynires did
part in their funerals, so there could never grow any perfect affection
between her and Rhodento. Yet the fame of his exquisite perfection and
virtuous qualities, the renown of his valiant prowess, and bountiful
courtesy, was so blaz^e abroad throughout all Farrar^, that as his friends
had cause to commend him for his valo^, so his very foes could not condemn
him because of his virtues. Pasylla calling to mind the perfect proportion of
his person, was half tickled with a consenting affection: so that if her will
might have stand for a law, Rodento had not mist of his love: but as fancy
forced her to listen to his suit, so duty dr^ue her to deny his request, yet
with such modest courtesy as the young Gentleman should have no great cause to
unslike of her answer: being in this good mind, she took pen and Ink and
writ him a letter to this effect.

Pasylla to Rodento Coeli^ wishes as she ought.
IT is impossible, Rodento, with music to allure Ulysses, because with Peril
he hardly escaped the Syrons melody. when the Eagle sluttereth, Doves take not
their flight: neither will the Dear stand at the view of a dog, though he
fear not to gaze at the sight of a boult: where hateful suspicion breeds
enmity, there it is hard with painted shadows to procure amity. Synons mouth
sauored of Honey, when his heart was seasoned with Gall. Cassius had a dimple in
his cheek when he had a daggar in his hand: and they which covet most
bitterly to betray, must first seek most sweetly to intrappe. I speak this
Rodento, because I see thy infectious poison presented in rich plate, thy
filthy dross covered with gold, and thy crooked meaning with a colored
motion. Can the house of the Coelii favor Valdracko? or can thou love where
thy father has always sought to hate? Nay shall Pasylla be so mad to think
thy glozing truth, other then guilefull treachery, or thy sacred desire to
obtain other then a feere at despite to revenge? if she should, thou mighest
well have great occasion to laugh, but she far more cause to repent. It had
been good Rodento, to have halted, but not before a Cripple, and if thou
would needs flatter (fancy thou say) to have drawn the plot for some
other person, for thou might think, if I spied no deceit, I were too fond,
and if I doubted no dissembling, too creedulous, si^h then thy hook being bare
thou can catch no fish thou may sit down and play with thine Angle. But
put case Rodento does love, shall therefore Pasylla begin to like, no she has
learned to be blind at profers, and deaf at promises, to hear little and
believe less: least in harkning to the charmer she hap to be enchanted. It is
not for fools to play with swords, nor for maids to dally with love, least
the one have cause to cry, and the other to repent. There is nothing sweeter
then liberty, nor any thing more sooner lost, which men seek to obtain with
flattery, and to reward with falsehood, yet I will imagine Rodento does love,
and Pasylla could love, will Valdracko grant he should enjoy his daughter? no,
he had rather prevent her with untimely death, then pretend such an unlikely
demand: he would sooner consent to pain her with some hellish misery, then
place her in such a hapless marriage. But alas what is this to the purpose?
Rodento does love, and must enjoy his love, or else poor soul die for love.
Truly either the man's mind is very weak that will pine away with such a
passion, or his body very feeble that will perish for so small a malady, but
since your stomach Rodento, is so queasie, I will give you this comfortable
principle, that as it is hard for women not to consume with care, so it is
impossible for men to die of a conceit, the ones minds melting like wax, the
others hardened like Adamant. And yet howsoever the case stands though I neither
can nor may love thee Rode^to, yet I will not hate thee but wish that our
parents were as assured friends as the children might be perfect lovers, and so
farewell.

Her own and not possible to be yours Pasylla.


PAsylla having thus finished her letter, feeling her cyes to be half closed
with drowsy sleep went to her bed thinking to beguile the long night with
swee slumbers, but it fell out otherwise, for Venus willing to favor such a
forward champion as Rodento, thought to yoke the neck, which as yet never
yielded, and to fire that fancy with a lusting desire, which hitherto had
been frosen with a chaste disdain: she therefore presented unto Pasylla the
beauty and young years of Rodento, the virtuous disposition of his mind,
wherein he was simple, and the perfection of his outward shape wherein he was
singular: in the one, excelling most: in the other, inferior to none: which
duly considered, drove her to debate thus doubtfullie with her self.

Ah unhappy Pasylla, whose mind is pained with unacquainted passions, and
whose head is troubled with unequal thoughts, shall thy Uirgins ^^ate ^e
stained with fond desires or thy young years darkened with Cupides shadows?
It Is fit for thee Pasylla to spend thy youth in labors, not in loves: to
pace solemnelye after Vesta, not to gadde wantonlye after Venus. Maids must
have denial in their mouth, and disdain in their hearts, so ^ha^ they (...)
securely despise fancy, Diana is painted kissing (...), and spotting beau^ies
face with a Penfel. Uirgi^s (...) ^^light in ancient counsels, not amorou^
conceits, le^^^ in smelling upon sweet Uiolets, they stumble on bitter (...).
Truth Pasylla, thou gi^e^ good precepts, if thou can follow th^^e own
p^^^ciples. Thou art persuaded by Rode^^o to love, but take heed of such
baleful allurements: (...) thy self against his charming des^^^ with a ^hast
di^^rine, so shall thou be ^^er that as he which wears Laurel cannot be hurt
with lightning, nor he that carries the pen of an Eagle perish with thunder:
so shall neither love nor fancy pain thee with hapless passions. Think
this: Rodento is a man and therefore (...) he says, a lover, and so a
flatterer: as fickle as the Wol^^s of Syria, which forget their pray ere they
are half satiffied: and as dissembling as Jupiter, who feeds Alcmena for a
while with Nectar, and then kills her with fire. Since then Pasylla, to love
is to loose, fear not Venus as a (...), but ^espise her as a wanton: entreat
not Cupid with prayers, but wi^h cur^^s ^ell Fancy thou will reject her as a
vassal, not regard her as a virtue. For Rode^to, rail against him as thy foe,
a^swere him not as a friend, burn his letters to despite him, and in steed
of courtesy, present him with Me^^eas inchaunted casket: who is enemy t^ thy
Father but Conte Coelio^ and who can wish thy mishap but his sonne^ Does
Rodento love Pasylla, (...), he hates Pasilla, he faineth love to procure thy
loss, he flattereth to try thy folly, and if he find thee to fond he will
bring thee a sleep with melody, and then strike of thy head with Mercury.
Ah Pasylla, condemn not Rodento without cause, if thou ^^^nest not to love
him, delight not to lack him: profer (...) Net^l^s, since he presents thee with
(...), if he yield thee Honey, rub not his hiue with Gall, answer him friendly
though thou strain eucresie to flatter: For sweet promises please more then
sower gifts, and pleasant po^io^^ are better taken though infectious, then
bitter ^i^^es though most wholesome. And know this Pasylla that the (...) of the
^ill Chymera is to be quenched with hay, not with water, the mountain in
Harpasa, to be removed with ones fingar, not with the whole strength; and love
to be driven out with reason, not to be thrust out with force, least in
striving against Venus she play the woman and seek to revenge.

Pasylla had scarce uttered these last words, but wearied with doubtful
thoughts and bitter passions, she fell a sleep, passing away the night with
slumbring dreams till the morning that she wooke, and assaulted afresh by
Cupid, had fallen to her old complaints, had not one of her gentlewome^ brought
her word that Clarista had waited there a good space to speak with her.
Pasylla smiling at the diligent have of the old Pandar, commanded she should
be brought in, but she no sooner was within the door, but Pasylla as one in
choler starting up in her bed, told her she was more soon come then
welcome: and that it was far unfitting for her aged years to be a messenger
in such a foolish matter: how, as she had before honored her for her grave
counsels tending unto virtue, so now she would despise and abhor her as a
doting fool, alluring young minds unto vanity: that if Valdracko should
know of her rash attempt, he would not only forbid her his house, but also
punish her as a spectacle that others should beware to solicit any such
fond and unlawful suits, but since it was the first offense she was content to
pardon the fault, and to put up the injury with silence: marry if either she
should presently utter any words in her own defense, or ever hereafter
trouble her with any such trash, she would cause her father with rigor to
revenge it to the uttermost, and with that she cast her the letter she had
made, charging her to carry it to Rodento, and to tell him that she so meanly
accounted either of his person or parentage, that after she had opened his
letter and saw from whom it came, she disdained to read the contents, so that
whatsoever his suit were, he might keep it secreat to himself: And with that
she laid down again, telling Clarysta since she had heard her mind, she
might depart at her pleasure. Clarista seeing Pasylla in such a fury, durst not
stand to defend her former attempt for fear of further danger, but humbly
craved pardon if she had done amiss, promising both with al dutiful service to
make her amends, and also never to be a stifler in the like cause, with a
submisse reverence she took her leave and departed. Pasylla seeing how
fearful the old Gentlewoman was, smiled at her self that she could so
cunningly dissemble, thinking she had done very well in not disclosing her
mind to such a doting fool: For she knew that old women though by many years
they knew how to speak, yet no time nor age could learn them to be secreat,
that they wear their hearts in their hands, and carry their thoughts in
their tongues end, that they covet to hear, and fear not to speak,
participating their private counsels to every one that calls them gossyp.
This consideration moved Pasylla rather to make a small scarre by speaking
title, then a deep wound by blabbing to any^ and musing thus in these
thoughts, she fell again a sleep. But Clarysta trudging home with a flea in
her ear, found Rodento at her house, whom after reverent salutations done, she
nipped on the Pate with this heavy news, telling him that Pasylla was so
strange, as she would not so much as vouchsafe to read the contents of his
letter: but after she knew from whence it came redeliuered it with great
choler, charging her in hard and bitter terms never hereafter to solicit
any such suit, least she m^^e her father privy to her alluring practices. And
therefore she earnestly entreated him either to cease of from his suit, or else
to use some other messenger, for she never durst attempt hereafter to break
the matter. Rodento hearing this heavy news and seeing as he thought his letter
returned without an answer, sat a long while as one in a trance tormented with
such pinching assaults of fancy, as Clarysta might easily perceive how the
poor Gentleman was perplexed: at last thinking it best to cover a discontented
mind with a contented countenance, and with the bright colors of mirth to blot
out the dark shadows of sorrow, he began faintly to smile, and looking upon
the letter threw it down on ye ground, and treading on it with his f^ete, told
Clarista that he hoped not to set that at his heart which Pasylla set at her
heel: but as she requighted his affection with despite so he me^t to raze out
fancy with disdain, and not only to cease of from such heedelesse suits, but
from such haples loves, yet pro^^^^^^ to remain her friend for her forward
willingness. He took his leave of Clarista and went home to his lodging, where
he no sooner arrived but looking more narrowly on the letter, perceived by the
folding that either it was not his, or else Pasylla had opened it, and read the
contents: wherefore breaking up the seals, he found that Pasylla had either
pe^ned down the happy censure of his perpetual felicity, or else the dismal
dome of his endless mishap, wavering thus between fear and hope, he read
her answer viewing and reuiewing over every line, waying every word, and
making a construction of every syllable, till at last he found bitter gall
tempered with Honey, and willing consents shadowed with wilful denials,
perceiving that Pasylla could be content to love, if her father would
condescende to like: that although the first lines were as triffe as steel,
yet the conclusion was as pliable: as wax, that her hard words to Clarista
were to shadow her own secreats not to reiecte his lawful suits. These happy
considerations of Pasyllas letter so salued the sorrowful mind of Rodento,
that where before he did sink in dispayer, now he did swime in bliss, his
restless disquiet was turned to contented peace, hoping that in time Pasylla
would be trained to fancy, and so repay him with mutual affection, intending
that this faint repulse should not drive him from assaulting the fort, least in
fearing at the first shot, he might be thought not worthy to vanquish: marry
he meant not to deal any more with Clarista because he perceived Pasylla
doubted of her secrecy, but to seek some other means to obtain his purpose,
and in this contented hope, he rested till time and opportunity might further
his pretense. But Fortune who knows no mean seeing Rodento begin to clime
unto happiness, thought to lift him up to ye skies, yt she might with more
violence pash him down lower then hell, and to bring this to pass she thus laid
her platform. I^ fortuned that within few days Pasylla and her Cousin Pandina
being walking together in the Garden, Valdracko thinking his daughter had bin
in her closet, went up to speak with her, but finding ye door unshut, which
Pandina by forgetfulness had left open and none within, stepped into the closet,
and began to rifle among the loose papers which were lying on the boorde, and
at last by unhappy luck light on the letter which Rodento sent to ^andina,
which after he had thoroughly perused, and perceived by the contents the sum
of his suite, he searched further, and found the copy of his daughters
answere^ containing so mild a repulse, and so friendly denials that he was
pained with strange and uncertain thoughts, thinking if he should with rigor
reprove his daughters folly, it were but to make her over fervent in affection,
knowing that women fly frowardly from those things whereunto they are
persuaded, and wilfully attempt those actions, from which with sensible reasons
they are forewarned. To forbid Rodento to prosecute his suit, was to stop
swift streams with a sword, and to stay the blastes of the winds with a vale
of silk, so that he was doubtful what to do: yet in this resolute: rather
then his enemy should triumph in obtaining his purpose, to prevent his
pretense with the untimely death of his own daughter. Being in this quandarie
he laid down the letters and went to his bedchamber, where being sollitarie,
surcharged with melancholy dumps, he fell to sundry strange devises, at last
after he had leand a while on his elbowe, he determined to color his secreat
grief with the balefull shadow of despite, and now to repay his old hate with
a speedy and bloody revenge, hoping under the pretensed color of frienship
not only to procure his own gain and good fortune, but also utterly to
subvert and extinguish the hole house and family of ye Conte Coelio which
wretched pretense he wrought in this wise. The citizens of Ferrara, I mean
both the nobility and comminaltie were appointed to meet and assemble in the
guild hall, there to debate of some weighty matters pertaining to the profit
of the weal public, whether at ye day appointed amongst the rest repaired the
Earl as one in greatest authority next the Duke in all Ferrara, who after the
citizens had agreed upon such matters as were in question, ready to depart,
was stayed by Valdracko, who after some unaccustomed courtesy requested ye
Conte, that if his leisure could permit, he would stay a while, that they two
might have some private conference. Coelio half astonished at this strange
kindness of the Duke, told him that whatsoever his leisure was, he was ready
to make attendaunce to know his graces pleasure, and with that both of them
stepping aside. Valdracko tricking up his currishe mind with colored
speeches, began to frame his trothlesse talk to this effect.

I need not rehearse, Conte Celio, the hateful dissension that has continually
bred between our ancestors most hapless and bloody events, and the sparks
remaining in us, a burning fire of revenge, so that by our dismal and daily
iarres, both our houses have been distempered, and the whole city of Ferrara
greatly disturbed. As of late musing with my self, I duly considered ye cause
of this endless strife, and waighed with my self what woeful enormities ensued
of such rechlesse choler, finding my predecessors wrongfully giving the
occasion of this mischievous quarrel, moved with the sting of conscience, I
thought good, as the debate sprang from my parent, so it should end in the
child: and therefore if it please you to accept my proffer, I here am content to
remit al former injuries, and as we have been hitherto disseuered by enmity, so
we may be united by amity, that not only Ferrara, but all Italy shall have
cause both to muse and marvel at this our sudden Metamorphosis, and that you
shall not think I mean with painted shadows to make a gloss upon the text, for
the confirming of this my proffered and unfeigned friendeship, I will bestow my
daughter Pasilla upon your son Rodento.

Valdracko had no sooner uttered these words, but Conte Celio was driven into a
maze, greatly maruelling at these unlooked for proffers and ioyeing, at this
unaccustomed friendship, yet fearing to find a pad in the straw, and a burning
spark amongst cold ashes, knowing that the Cats half waking winks, are but
traynes to entrap the mouse, that when the Eagle hides his talents most close,
then he means to seize upon his pray, ye Valdracko was a wily Fox, and could
shadow the dark colors of revenge, with the glistering hue of reconciled
amity^ how he was of a melancholic constitution, and therefore not to be
trusted, that his demure countenance foreshewed most despightfull rancour, that
Caesar feared more Brutus for his secret and solemn behavior, the^ al his
foreign foes for their force and prowess. These considerations feared Conte
Celio from ventring too far into an unknown foord, yet waying with him self
that the Duke neither would, nor could dissemble, since he meant to confirm his
promise with such a good pledge, he thought best to accept of his proffer,
and to unite their two houses by so happy a match. He therefore returned him
this courteous and friendely answer.

Marvel not (right mighty Duke) if I stand in a maze at this strange and
unlooked for motion, since at our first meeting, I rather expected opprobrious
words of despitefull enmity, then any such friendly speeches of desired amity.
But since it has pleased your grace to pass over all former dissentions
quarrelles, long time continued between our two houses, which has bred such
civil mutinies, and secret slaughters in Ferrara: I not only accept of your
happy and fortunate proffer, but yield co^digne thanks for your Graces long
desired courtesy, offering my son and my self to rest wholly and faithfullye
yours in all duty to command.

With that, Valdracko embraced the Earl, swearing that he made such account of
his friendship, as he would observe that day as the most fortunate in all his
life. The Senate who all this while waited when either these 2. enemies should
part, or else fall into their accustomed choler, seeing their friendly
imbraceme^ts, were all amazed with sudden joy, and driven as it were into an
ecstasy at this strange Metamorphosis, yet greatly astonished: because they
were not privy to their secret conference, which the Duke perceiving, to put
them out of their musing dumps, told the^ how that they two, which neither by
the fear of authority, nor friendly persuasions, could be reconciled, had
now casting all old grudges aside, renewed a perfect league of amity, and to
confirm the same, they were agreed to unite their houses, and to marry Pasilla
with Rodento.

This happy news greatly ioyed the Senators minds, and also the whole city
of Ferrara, that they sorrowed not so much before their hateful dissension,
as they now rejoiced at their loving agreement. Well, Valdracko covering the
bloodye mind of a gripe under the simple pens of a Dove, carried the Count
Celio home with him to dinner, where the Duke entertained him with such
sumptuous cheer, and solemn courtesy, as the poor Earl thought such heartye
friendship could not be fained. But when Pasilla saw with what intertainment
her father cheered up the Count, she marueiled at this strange courtesy, and
blushed at her own conceits, calling to mind her friend and lover Rodento:
thinking that since their parents of enemies, were become friends, that the
children might of dissembled foes, grow to be professed lovers. As thus she was
quickening her wits with these amorous conceits, Valdracko and the Earl having
taken their repast, the Duke calling his daughter unto him, began to make her
partaker of his new determination, how he meant if she could fancy, to match
her with young Rodento, a Gentleman of worthy parentage, and comely personage,
endued with wit and singular qualities to content her mind: enriched with
wealth, and large possessions to maintain her estate: both young, beautiful, and
rich: great gifts sufficient to content, and little gods able to command, even
Vesta her self to leave her virginity: if then she could consent to love and
like so brave a gentleman, he would think her duetifull obedience did requi^e
his fatherly providence: otherwise if she should mislike of his choice, and
upon wilful frowardnes oppose her self against his mind, he would not only
repay her fond mislike with the like despite, but also disinherite her of all
his possessions.

Pasilla, who was easy to entreat, told the Duke, that the command of the
father, was a constraynt to the child, that Parents wills were laws, so
they past not all laws: and therefore she was content to frame her fancy, as
it pleased his Grace to dispose: this duetifull and modest answer of Pasilla,
pleased the Duke, in so much that to strike the iron, while it was hot,
least any thing might fall out between the cup and the lip, they sent for
Rodento, who maruellyng (...) hear that his Father was a gueste to such an
unacquainted host, came with all speed, and being admi^ted into the chamber
of presence, found Valdracko, his father and Pasilla in secret talk. The Duke
no sooner espied Rodento, but he arose from the table, and embracing him, gave
him most friendlye and courteous intertainment, telling him what match they had
made if it pleased him, with a willing consent to knit up the bargain. Rodento
half stifled with the joy of this happy motion, most willingly accepted their
proffers, and taking Pasilla in his arms, lovingly sealed up the match with a
few sweet kisses, to their and their fathers happy content. Well, all things
thus fortunately finished the marriage appointed to be celebrated the next
spring, Celio went home to his lodging, leaving his son Rodento passing away
the time in amorous conceits with his love and Lady Pasilla. But Fortune
grudging at this happy success, crossed their sweet and delicious favors with
bitter and despiteful frowns: For Valdracko noting the prosperous estate of
Celio, began to think, that unless he might traitorously bereave him of his
life, neither should his house flourish, nor his mind be satisfied with revenge.
To breed therefore his own content, and the final confusion of the Earl, he
determined to appoint some desperate ruffian to murder him: which done, he
should not have any man in Ferrara, y^ would withstand him, and he might use
Rodento as it pleased him: passing many days in this bloody intent, sometime
halled from such treachery, with the sting of conscience, and then ince^sed to
such vilany, with the spur of cruel hate, he fell at last thus to debate with
him self.

What do thou mean, Valdracko, to trouble thy mind with such balefull
passions, or so much as in thought to intend such desperate attempts, the
performance whereof is so unnatural, as such bloody actions, if there be any
Gods, cannot escape without some deadly and direful revenge? consider
Valdracko, thou have promised Celio a fish, and will thou present him a
scorpio^? have thou newly sworn to be his friend, and will thou be his foe? Is
the son betrothed to thy daughter, and will thou betray the father unto death?
what will Ferrara think at this thy treachery: nay will y^ Gods suffer thee to
practice such mischief? No no, assure thy self Jupiter wants not plagues to
punish such loathsome offenses. Tush fond fool, if thou stumble at a straw thou
shall never leap over ^ block, if thou fear to practice, thou shall never
perform^ it is lawful to dissemble with thine enemy, and to revenge, is
commendable. Why Valdracko, is Celio thine enemy? No, he has yielded him self
with submisse, courtesy, to rest at thy command. And have thou not yet doting
fool, learned, that it is better to trust an open enimy^ then a reconciled
friend, that injuries may not be forgotten as long as the scarres remain,
that foes must never be admitted as friends in countenance. Why then should
thou stay thy intent for Celios dissembled friendship? No, dispatch him, and
then shall thou be sure, Fortune her self cannot daunt thee with mishap.

Valdracko remaining resolute in this his bloody purpose, chose out a desperate
ruffian in the city to put this his determination in practice, promising him
for his pains three thousand crowns, and to convey himself out of the country.
The varlet with who^ necessity prevailed, more then either conscience or
honesty, conde^cended, without any denial to the Dukes request, swearing: that
as soon as time and place would serve, he would make a dispatch of the
Earl, which indeed within few days he brought to pass. For, as the Count
Celio was passing through a blind lane of the city, he shot him through with a
pistol, and with that fled: but the Citizens rising in an vproare, at the
report of this hapless murder, apprehended the ruffian, and brought him
before the Duke and the Senate, who with wayling (but feigned tears) sorrowing
for his frindes mishap, exclaimed against such treacherous cruelty, and rising
up as one in a fury, commanded one of his men to cut out his tongue: at which
sentence, the vilde wretch amazed, perceived the Dukes policy, and therefore
would have revealed his villainy, had he not bin prevented by the Officers, who
cutting out his tongue, cast it at the Dukes feet. And by that, the report of
Celios death was come to the ears of Rodento, which so tormented him, as he
fell down in a sound, so perplexed, as he almost lost his senses. Pasilla also
hearing of this mishap, surcharging her self with sorrow, went yet to comfort
her beloved Rodento. The Duke himself, and the Senate, yea all the nobility of
Ferrara, sought to persuade the young Gentleman, but such was his tender love
toward his father, as no counsel, or comfort, could appease his sorrow.
Valdracko to cover his guile, caused first the murderer, in steed of three
thousand crowns, to be put to death with most cruel torments, and then took
great care for the solemn funerals, providing them with such sumptuous cost and
charges, as all Ferrara spoke of his friendship. Well, the funeralles being
ended, and Rodentos sorrow decreasing, by tract of time he repaired agane to
his beloved Pasilla, greatly appeasing his heavy passions by her desired
presence, and was more carefully entreated of the Duke then before: for within
short time, Valdracko provided for the marriage, which was solemnised with such
magnificence, as belonged to such great and worthy personages. The noble men to
show their dutiful good wills to the Duke, appointed iusting and tourneyes
for the honor of the Bride, and the Citizens shows and triumphs, to signify
their loving obedience, passing many days in sportes and pastimes: Valdracko
requiting their affections with such sumptuous cheer and prodigal expenses, as
all Italy had cause to praise his liberality. The marriage at last consummated
and ended, Pasilla, and Rodento remaining in such happy estate, as Lovers may,
which have the fruition of their loves, thought their bliss so propped up
with prosperity, as sinister fortune could never breed their mishap, but it
fell out otherwise. For Valdracko after that his daughter had bin married about
five months, felt the sparks of revenge to be raked up in y^ dead ^indars of
hate and malice, which stirred abroad, began again to grow to a great flame,
so that he thought his mind not sufficiently glutted with revenge, unless he
might utterly race out the name of the Celij, and so he himself enjoy al their
possessions, thinking if he might with out suspicion dispatch Rodento, he should
have most happy success in all his affairs, neither fearing God, nor
regarding the love of his daughter, so he might finish up his balefull
tragedye. Where, by the way, we may note the pestilent and despiteful
disposition of these Saturnists, who under the color of a secret and solemn
profession, hide a hateful and revenging dissimulation, proffering to Caesar
with Cassius, (...) the other a bodkin: kissing love in the streets, and
murdering him in corners: playing like the herb B^^r^n, which bears a
fair flower, but in^ecteth with the smell. But leaving them to their doting
fancies, again to Valdracko, who still persisting in his purpose, the better
to put it in practice, went to a graunge house of his, three miles distaunt
from Ferrara, where after he had remained three or four days, he
secretelye dispatched a letter to his cupbearer, willing him in any (...)
upon his life and allegiance, to poison his son in law Rodento: who after
he had received the letter, and re^d the contents, seeing the alluring
promises of the Duke, if he pertour^^ed his command, and the cruel
threatenings, if he de^ied his request, the next morning provided an infectious
powder, and gave him a deadly and fatal draft, whereupon Rodento straight
sickened, and within four hours died: Pasilla tearing her hair, and
scratching her face, seeking to kill her self, had not her Ladies and
ge^tlewome^ kept her from such desperate actions. The cup hearer having
performed this filthy fact, felt such a hell in his conscience, y^ taking some
of the powder, drank it up, and so beg^^ to faint with the pains of death. Now
when he was speechles, he sent for Pasilla, unto who^ he delivered her fathers
letter, and then turning his head yielded up the ghost. Pasilla reading ye
letter, and perceiving her fathers villainous treachery, began to fall from folly
unto fury, and with raging terms to curse such a peenish pare^t: at which
(...) Valdracko came home, and hearing this heavy news began to same kind of
sorrow, and with weping tears to bewail ye death of Rode^t. Pasilla grudging at
these crocodiles tears, so^what appeased her sorrow, with the hope of spedy
revenge, which she performed in short time. For her father being gone to bed,
and fallen in a sound sleep, she came into his chamber, and pulling off her
garters, b^u^d him hand and foot, and the^ waking him out of his dreams, as one
ince^sed with some hellish fury, staring on his face, she breathed out these
gastfull speches. Though the gods (vile and accursed Valdracko) are so pacie^t,
yt they spare to revenge thy bloody massacres with speedy miseries, yet ye
destinies, not to be co^trolled, have appointed me as a cruel (...) minister of
thy fatal mishap. I know, and I sigh and sorrow, that I ha^ cause to know
that nature requires obedience (...), and yet wills love in the Parents,
that where (...) wants, there the gods are not slow to revenge. But I (...)
to be obedien^ to such a tyrant, who digresseth from nature, and des^^ thee for
my father, which have so displeased the Gods. For g^^^ng therefore lawfully, al
dutiful affection, I exclaim against thee, (...) traitor, who by treachery have
slain the good Count Celio, and by poison have murdered my sweet husband
Rodento, covering under a fair face, a false mind, and under the color of
aged virtue, the substance of hateful villainy: Could no fear of god nor
dread of man drive thee from such (...) dealing? could no ^^ing of conscience
vtterre thee from su^he deeds and no love to thy child prohybite thee from
such hellishe practices? But why do^st thou prattle Pasilla, thou see they
could not. Grant not to the treacherous wre^th then, so much ^auour, as to let
him inioye one moment of life, but revenge his wickedness, and (...) thine
own woe. And with that, Valdracko was about to speak, but Pasilla incensed
with a furious (...) up the sword, and wounded him sore, and after many bloody
^low^s, he yielded up the ghost. When she had thus cr^c^y murdered her father,
yet iustlye requited the iniu^y she to^k pen and incke, and wrote the effect of
this tragical discourse that al might know the cause of this bloody fact,
which fini^hed, ^^e fell groueling on the sword, and so ended, both her life
and her miseries.

Saturn, Jupiter, Mars Sol, Venus, Mercury, Luna.
VEnus had no sooner ended her tale, but Saturn rising out of his seat, as
one in a chafe, fell into these Collericke terms.

Saturn.
Venus, you play like them which seeking to shoot against the stars, are
wounded with their own Arrows in the fall: or like the envious Porcuntine,
who coveting to strike others with her pens leaves her self void of any
defense: you have here told a tale of Valdracko, which shows not my crabbed
influence, but your own crooked constellation, for it was the wilful
forwardness of Pasylla in her do^ing fancies, and her lascivious love in
liking her fathers enemy, that procured those hapless events: yea, it was the
unbridled affection of staylesse youth, not the careful wisdom of settled age
that wrought this Tragical discourse.

Venus.
Saturn, if old men could blush no doubt all the gods should perceive thou
were more ashamed in defending so false a cause then in hearing me rehearse the
case, but I will not say you doat because you are old, but dissemble because
you are wise, so shall I both excuse your fondness, and commend your wit: but
this I hope I may say without prejudice that your arguments savor as much ^f
reason as Luna does of constancy.

Luna.
You might have said, Venus, as you do of honesty, and so all the gods would
have thought his arguments of small force, but were his reasons as full of
substance as you of light qualities, it were against Aristotle to deny either
premises or conclusion.

Venus.
You learned this Logic Luna, of End^mion, but let that pass, and seeing Sol
is appointed Moderator in this our controversy, I think he cannot but say
that the hapless and tragical events of this history came by the predominant
influence of Saturn: for was it not the Melancholy disposition of Valdracko
that nourished so long the glowing sparks of revenge toward the Conte Coelio?
and his Saturnine constitution, that with a coulored show of amity, repayed
most faithful friendship with cruel enmity? did he not carry in the one
hand bread, and in the other a stone: and prefer his private injuries
before public credit or honesty? yea: did not such melancholicke impressions
pester his mind as he was the cause of the most tragical and bloody
Massacres?

Mercury.
Truth Venus, such is the crabbed disposition of Saturn, as they which are
borne under his influence, delight in tragical treacheries, performed with
most subtle and secreat attempts, so that Caesar feared more the two
Saturnists, Brutus and Cassius, then all his foreign foes of any other
constitution.

Jupiter.
Mercury, you speak without commission, I am glad you are so greatly
beholding unto Venus, indeed she cannot want counselors, nor champions, she
allows them such large fees. But I pray you wherein is my Father Saturn so
greatly to be blamed: was not Valdracko forced by the disordinate affection of
his daughter Pandina to his enemies son Rodento, rather to prevent mishappe
by some synister means, then to bring his hole house and famelie, to most
miserable decay and ruin.

Mars.
Jupiter, if large fees may make bold champions, or brawling counselors, you
have greatest cause both to fight and chide in Venus behalf, she has given
you many a fat present, as Europa da^as Alcmena, I have named enough I think,
to stop your mouth.

Luna.
Mars, what Jupiter has gotten, I know not, but what Vulcan got with his net,
we al know, not a fish, but a God. But it is well you defend not her honesty
but her arguments.

Sol.
Cease from these biting quips, they are fit for brabling Sophisters, not for
the gods, and hear my verdict, I am of this mind that the hapelesse euentes
of this tragical discourse came by Saturnes synister influence, that Coelios
death proceeded of a malicious and secreat hate, that Rodentos balefull mishap
spronge from a Saturnine revenge, predominant in the configuration of
Valdrachos nativity, imprinting in his aged mind a melancholy despite,
which brought to pass this woeful and unnatural tragedy. This is my censure:
but now since Venus has ended her tale, Luna, I charge you to report her
Astronomical description, because Saturn will speak more of ran^or then of
reason.

Saturn.
Sol, we have agreed that your sensure shall stand for a sentence, and therefore
I will not inueigh against your verdict, but am content to bear the blame of
Valdrachos ill nature, yet that you and the rest of the gods may know that
there comes more harm by disordinate and lawless Venus, then by me, I will
rehearse an history, wherein you shall easily perceive that love sotteth the
senses, infec^e^h youth, destroys age, and is the very plague both to the
mind and body.

Lunas Astronomicall description of Venus.
THe star of Venus (right mighty gods) is so simply called, as Tullie
avouches, quod ad res omnes veniat, and the ancient Arabians call it, astrum
genitale or prolifioum, for the temperate moisture, and favorable influence
that it distilleth upon all human bodies: for the nature of Venus is to
infuse into all inferior substances, while they are ingendered or nourished a
certain Humidatum sucoum, or delicate moisture, yet notwithstanding so thin
and subtle that it shall (...) and f^llow more the nature of (...) then of
showers, which natural^ and proper quality in my iu^gement caused the a^ncient
Poets (...) attribute this Epitheton unto Venus: A^^a: ab alendo. Now as
concerning her other quality of (...) note that ^^we h^^e in natural he^^e
placed (...) that does cherish and nourish as is Sol, and his irra^i at star
Jupiter: so we have set down^ another which does burn and scortch
intempera^ely, as does Mars with his adult and y^llow chollar: so likewise in
the nature of co^^nesse we do appoint Venus to be ^om^o^ate and favorable, and
Saturn with his melancholy humor to be unfortunate and maligna^^: of the which
opinion are Prolomeus, Galen, and the Chaldes, saying: that amongst the
Planets, there are two favorable, well affected, and friends to nature, namely
Jupiter and Venus, and two Saturn and Mars ^^holsome, bitter lucklesse, and
ill affected. To confyrme the which. I will rehearse Ptolomeus own sentence^^
the end of his first Apotellosma^^^. There are four humors (says he) or
first natures: whereof two are fruitefull^ Fortunate, and luckie, tha^ is to
say, heat and moisture, by which all things ^o increase and prosper: The other
two dismal malign and dangerous (namely) cold and dryness by which all
things are weakened and ruinate. The ancient Astrologers constitute Venus and
Jupiter, temperate in nature for their heat and moisture, Saturn and Mars
intemperate: for the nipping cold of the one, and the burning, inflamed, and
adust heat of the other. And thus far Ptolomeus himself, by whose verdite
we are induced to think and affirm that the influence of Venus of moist
without any excess with a small and temperate warmness: which the Poets
perhaps respected when they fained Venus to come of the foame of the sea,
calling her Aphrodite: but Euripides thinks she is so called (quod Aphrones
si^t) and of an imperfect mind, that suffer themselves to be overcome by Venus
allurements. Of ye faculties she does challenge unto her y^ appetitiue and of
humors, Phlegm: but yet doul^e, unsavory and natural: yea such as Asclepiades
affirms y^ may easily be changed into blood, and for the native heat may be
easily decocted, and thus much for her essential description. Now as
concerning the peculiar affections of those men, in whom she is predomynant.

They be pleasantly disposed, and endued Attic^ qu^dam lepore: knowing rather
the manners of their friends, then hating them: delighting in flowers, and
precious ointments: carrying about them the purse of Cupid tied with the blade
of a Leeke: scratching their head with one finger, and, to use the Latin
proverb ( molle peruncti Lesbiantur, and Corinthiantur: eating Lettice, and
stalking on their typtoes: Lidio more viuentes: careful to increase beauty,
and somewhat tickled with selfeloue: carrying Honny in their mouths, and like
Spanyels flattering with their ^ayles: in their right ears bearing oil,
having twinkling eyes, and soft delicate hair: apt to get children and given
to propagation: applying these minds to songs and sonets, addicted to pity,
mercy, and favor: Et in v^ramuis aurem, and vtrunque oculum Dormientes. The
peculiar diseases to this star are Cathars, Coryse Branchy, Lethargies,
Palsies, Apoplexies, Gonorrhea pass^o, obstructions of the raines, bladder, and
belly, with pains in the secreat parts: quotidian fevers, pains in the heade^
Lieuteria diarrhea diabete, dropsies, and other more, proceeding of crudities,
excess and abundance of Phlegm. windiness, imbecillitie of heat,
perfrigerations, and such others. As touching their pulses they be small, slow,
and soft, their sweat, unsavory: urine, pale and thin: their deiections
white, moist, and (...) of Crudity: dreaming for the most part of waters,
Bathes, Fishings, Snakes and such like.

Saturnes Tragedy.
THe City of Memphis is highly commended for the nourse of good letters,
because in that place learning was rewarded with her due deserts, and
ignorance, as near as might be, so utterly exiled, as every Mecanicall man
was able to yealde a reason of the principles of his science. In this City,
famous in those days for learning and virtue, dwelled an infamous strumpet
called Rhodope, descended of good parentage, and of comely personage, honorable
for her birth, and renowned for her beauty: but her outward hue was so spotted
with inward vice, as her praise was not such for the perfection of the body,
as the discredit was for ye lascivious disposition of her mind, which was so
stained with wanton affections, that I think Venus her self could not have
past her in vanities. This Rhodope racking her honesty to maintain her pomp
and pride, forgetting shame and conscience (two virtues long since exiled from
Venus Court) set her body to sale, and in the prime of her years became a
professed courtesan: so that for the appointed price, every straggling stranger
might pray upon such loathsome Carrion. This shameless strumpet took small
delight to be seen in the City: but when she went abroad to take a view of
the streets, she past in such sumptuous ^ort that the Citizens a long time
after had matter enough to talk of her magnificence. It so fell out on a day,
that she determined to go sport her self at a fountain (which is dedicated
unto Venus) a miles distance from Memphis, whether she went accompanied with
such young youths, as were snared in her alluring bewty: being come to the
place which for the situation seemed to be an earthly paradise, after they
had refreshed themselves with stoare of dainty delicates, which were provided
by Rhodope, they past away a great part of the day with amorous conceiptes and
pleasant parles: till at last the weather waring somewhat warm, Rhodope
desirous to bath her feet in the cool fountain, caused one of her maids to
pull of her shoes, which were imbrodered with gould, and richly be set with
stones, which she diligently doing as she laid them on the green grass, very
necessary to help her mistress ^off with her hoase, an Eagle soaring a loft,
and seeing the glistering of the goulde, soused suddenly down and carried
away her right shoe in her gripe, which sudden sight greatly amazed Rhodope
marueiling what this strange and prodigious chance should portende:
beginning straight coniecturally to construe this hap to the worst, but her
companions were of an other opinion, for some of them said it was a sign of
good luck, other that it was a token of honor and dignity: All (her self
excepted) said the best, because women are most pleased with praises and
promises, and she rested to think the best, whatsoever in outward countenance
she did pretend. Well, after they had diuersely descanted upon this event,
she with her company returned to the City of Memphis, but the Eagle with the
shoe took her flight to the Court of Psamnetichus, who at that very moment
was walking alone in his privy Garden: as soon as she came over the kings
head, not by chance, but by some unfortunate and dismal destiny, she let the
shoe fall, and with a marvelous cry soared again into the air: which
soodaine and prodigious sight so amazed the old king, and so astonished his
senses, as they which gazed at the gastlie head of Gorgon. At last come to
himself, he took up the shoe, marueiling whether it did belong to some
heavenly Nymph, or some mortal creature. The shape pleased his fancy. the
glistring beauty thereof delighted his eyes: (to be short) Cupid the accursed
son of Venus, seeing him at discouert, drew a boult to the head and struck
Psamnetichus at the very heart, which perced him so deep, that he began
not only to like the shoe, but to love the owner of such a precious Jewel:
feeling a tickling affection to enter into his mind, whereupon he began to
smile at his own folly that he should be so fond now in his age to doat,
more then he did in his youth.

Where by the way we may note the despightfull malice of Venus, who
perceiving that her unfortunate and ill affected influence, is hindered by a
virtuous disposition, and that although her accursed configuration be of great
force to infuse a certain pronesse to unlawful venery, yet being prevented by
a provident and well disposed mind, it does little avail, quia sapiens
dominabitur astris. Then incensed with an envious rage, she seeks to entrap
virtue with the stumbling blocks of vice, and to inchant the minds of the wise
with her poisoned and alluring sorceries: letting pass, neither time nor toil^
till she has brought wisdom to such a bay: as either she must yield to her
masking folly, or buy her quiet with perpetual torment: but leaving Venus to
her vanities, again to Psamnetichus: Who seeking to shake of this new found
affection, flong out of the garden into the chamber of presence where he
found his son Philarkes and other noble men dancing with the Ladies and
Gentlewomen, unto whom both he showed the shoe and reaueled the chance,
promising that what Lady could pull it on, should have what Lawful demand
she would make. All desirous of gain and glory (believe me, two Idols that
women most honor) assailed to win the price, but it was as easy for them as
for Vulcan to draw on Thetis slipper on his poult foot: whereat Philarkes and
the noble men smiled, but Psamnetichus pinched with an unacquainted passion,
began to imagine what heavenly creature she was, to whom this shoe did belong:
feeding himself in this musing humor until such a burning desire crept into
his mind that neither reason, nor counsel could assuage, so that withdrawing
himself into his secreat chamber holding the shoe in his hand, he cast
himself on his bed, where he murmured out these or such like complaints.

Ah thrice unhappy Psamnetichus, what unfit fancies be these for thy aged
years? what fond thoughts for thy gray hears? what unmeet musings for thy
stayed mind? will thou feeke to rake for quick coals among dead cynders? to
search for fresh flowers among withered weeds? to sow youthful desires in
aged minds? if thou do this Psamnetichus, think, though thou have but a
short time to live, yet thou shall have a long time to repent. For love in age
is like fire among dry sticks which kindled with ye least puff, is quenched
in the least moment. Love Psamnetichus? why art thou in love, yea: with whom?
Alas I know not^ and therefore the more unfortunate is my love. Pigmalion fell
in love with his Marble picture an affection so strange, as he was both blamed
and pitied for doting on such a senseless Image. A Senators son in Rome
loved extreemly the Iuory picture of Vesta, which wroughte him such discredit
as he was exempted for bearing office in the city. Were my case such, I would
think my self fortunate. But a shoe of gold is the only thing that bewitcheth
my mind, such a strange fancy, as time has never made report of the like.
Tush Psamnetichus, it is not the shoe, but the Dame that owes the shoe, which
has enchanted thy affection: it is the Idea of her person, which by a secret
imagination, is imprinted in thy mind, that has pierced thy heart: seek then
by some means to free thy self from those fetters, which unless thou
unloose, thou can not but loose. Dye then Psamnetichus, for nothing can free
thee from love but death. It is no earthly creature, but some heavenly
goddess, that owes this Jewel, the excellent shape of her, to whom this
precious gemme does belong, was never placed on earth, but enthronysed
amongst the heavens, the worse is thy hap, and the less cause have thou to
hope: to hope? why not? Psamnetichus no doubt, she is a woman, and therefore
to be won with praises, or promises, for that she is a woman.

As thus he continued his complaints, his son Philarkes came into the
chamber, whereupon Psamnetichus ceased, and for that time made no show of
sorrow, but passed away the day with other talk. The night being come,
faining himself not well at ease, he giving his son and the other noble men
the good night, went to his bed, thinking by sleep to have driven away such
fond affections, but he was no sooner laid, but waking slumber, and half
dreaming thoughts, so tormented him, that he could take no rest: whereupon he
began to cast a thousand doubtful conjectures in his mind, what he had best to
do: at last he found out this devise.

He called to remembrance that there was in his court a certain skillful
magician called Nestor, who by his secret science might not only be a means to
discover what Lady was the owner of the shoe, but also if through frowardness
(a disease common to Venus darlings) she refused his proffer, might by some
amorous potions, aid him to obtain his purpose. This polliticke conceit
pleased him passing well, so that on the morrow (fearing that delay might
breed danger) he sent for this old doting Nestos, who coming to the kings
presence, and with great reverence, doing his obeisance, craved to know his
Majesty's pleasure: Psamnetichus courteously resaluting him, took him by the
hand, and led him into his privy garden, where charging him first upon his
life and alleageaunce most secretly to conceal whatsoever he should in that
place make manifest: then he broke with him in the matter, promysing if he
could tell him by his art who owed the shoe, he would reward him so
largely, as he should have cause to speak of his bounty: otherwise if by
negligence he should be found slack, he would so bitterly revenge his froward
disobedience, as he should have cause both to curse him self and his
science. Nestos allured with the large promises of the King, and feared with
his sharp and cruel threateninges, made aunsweare, that what were able to be
done by Art, should with all skillful diligence be performed: and
hereuppon he craved three days to make a show of his cunning. Psamnetichus
(such was the heat of his new kindeled fancy) thought it a long time to
yield so small a verdict, yet he was content, hoping by this means he
should be fully satisfied. Calchos leaving the King in his dumpes, hyed him
home to his lodging, and entering into his study, began to fall to erecting of
figures, to take the elevation of the pole, and the hour wherein the shoe was
found, but these superstitious ceremonies would not show what he sought for:
so that in fine, from consecrating, he was feign to fall to flat coniuring,
wherein after he had swette like a dog to adjure the Dyuell, he perceived
by the Oracle, that he had made an end of his work, which he had no
sooner done, but with all speed that might be, he posted to the Court,
where being admitted to Psamnetichus presence, all the nobles commanded to
avoid the chamber, he uttered these words.

I am sorry (right mighty Prince) that I cannot justly conceal, that your
Grace has straightly commanded me to reveal, my allegiance for bidding the
one, and your highness so stricklye urging the other. I have done what
learning and science ca^ allow, yet unwilling to show what y^ froward
destinies do allot. But I hope wisdom shall prevent that, which fancy seeks to
pretend. The Lady which owes this shoe, is one whose perfection of body is
greatly darkened with the imperfection of the mind, and whose singular beauty
is such, yet so stained with the spot of las^iuious vanity, as all may judge
she was framed by nature to despite virtue. It is Rhodope, that infamous
strumpet of Memphis. Nestos had scarce uttered these words, but Psamnetichus
(as one enraged with a frantic passion) began in most cruel terms to
exclaim against Love and Fortune, braying out such bitter curses against
Venus, and her inequall laws, that poor Nestos seeing his unbridled fury,
was more afraid to persuade him, then to conjure a devil: trembling a while
for fear, that the king should wrecke his wrathon his old carkase. At last
when Psamnetichus had somewhat appeased his furious passions, he rewarded
Calchos and licensed him to depart, with drawing himself into a secret place,
where he powered forth these complaints.

Ah unjust Venus, and most accursed Cupid, whose hateful delight, is to drown
men in unequal thoughts, and to make them doat in unfit fancies, seeking
most to assail those minds which think themselves most safe under the
shield of virtue: coveting with bitter pleasures to procure sweet torments,
and with seruyle affections to entangle free minds. Alas I see, and I sigh,
and sorrow to see, that there is no dignitye, honor, age, nor years, which
can resist the alluring charms of Love. Love Psamnetichus? why do thou
love? It is a word unmeet for thy mouth, but a passion far more unfit for
thy mind. Thy graye hayres are fruits for death, not blossoms for Venus. Thy
years are too be spente in repentyng thy former follyes, not in renewing
fresh and amorous fancies. It is more ^itte for thy age to cast how to dye,
then to care how to love. Peace Psamnetichus, do not so much as once name
love: why not? Trees may have roots, though no leaves, and though flowers fall,
herbs may have sap. Love in age is a virtue, so it be not blemished with
inequall choice. Truth, fond fool, but what choice haste thou made? Of some
famous Princess? oh no, it were too well: of some beggar? were she virtuous,
why not? Oh Psamneticus, would to God it were so well. No, no, thou have chosen
Rhodope, a strumpet, not half so famous for her beauty, as infamous for her
vanity, one whose honesty, nay dishonesty, is to be bought by every straggling
stranger. Love is unfit for thy years, because thou art old, but such love is
unmeet for thee were thou never so young. What will the peers of Egypt say, if
they hear but of thy doting thoughts? will not thy poor subjects sorrow to be
ruled by such a Queen? But alas, what will Philarkes do? Surely either seek
to cut her days short with untimely death, or to end his own life with
continual grief. Ah Psamneticus, it were more honorable for thee to die by
concealing love, then live and enjoy such hapless love.

And with that he fetched such a deep sigh, as it might well witness, how he
sought with hateful disdain to quench such fond desires, striving with
reason to bridle appetite, and with wisdom to suppress affection, flying
from that by his own will, whereunto he was led by an unfortunate influence,
but he found that to wrestle with love, was with the crab to swim against the
stream, and with the Dear to feed against the wind: whereupon feeling such a
deep impression to enter into his heart, as neither counsel, nor reason could
race out, he yielded an unwilling consent to love, though the only thing he
sought to hate. Pinched a long time with these contrary passions, his care and
sorrow so increased sorrowing, that he had made so ill a choice, yet careful
how he might obtain his choice, that his aged and feeble complexion, weakened
with a more heavy burden, then he was able to bear, had almost yielded unto
death. His son Philarkes marueling at his fathers unaccustomed dumpes, seeing
that he had made a change of his wonted pastime, and pleasures for solitary
thoughts and contemplations, cast diverse conjectures (...) his head^ what might
be the cause of his fathers sudden sorrow, (...), it could not be for want of
honor, in that he was a king^ if gold might make one merry, as no doubt it is
the only whe^^sto^e to mirth, his father wanted no treasure. Egypt was not
pestered with civil tumults, nor troubled with foreign invasions. Al which
things duly considered, he could not conjecture what should be the occasion of
his fathers sorrow: so ye desirous to know, what should be the cause of his
care, and willing (if it lay in his power) to redress it: finding his father
within few days alone in ye garden, at his accustomed dumps, he brake with him
to know the cause of his dolor, craving reverently of his father, if it were
his pleasure, that he would make him partaker of his griefs, seeing that there
is no better remedy for a troubled mind, then to participate his care to some
secret friend, promising (as it was his duty by the law of nature to protest)
that if his life might be a means to appease his heavy passions, he would
most willingly free him from those perplexed sorrows.

Psamnetichus hearing the dutiful obedience of his son, and noting with what
unfeigned protestatio^s he uttered these words, partly for the joy he conceived
of his sons good nature, and partly for the remembrance of his own doting
affections, he burst forth into tears, yet seeking to conceal, that shame
forbad him to reveal, finding this excuse most fit for the time, and his
strange passions.

Philarkes, thou know every thing is measured by his due time. The spring
has fresh flowers, and pleasant gleames. Autumn withered leaves and bitter
storms. Youth is painted gazing at the stars, Age looking down to the
ground. Pleasant conceytes are the blossoms of young years, and melancholy
thoughts, the fruits of gray hairs. I tell thee Philarkes when I was young, I
delighted in mirth and labor: and now being old, I joy in ease and sadness.
Thou marueilest how I can be so subject to dumpish thoughts, and I wonder how
thou can be so free from care and griefs. It is not want of prosperity, but
the experience of many years, y^ has taught me in age to think how to die.
The joy of my youth, and the comfort I should have ha^ being old, is gone: I
mean thy mother Farina, the remembrance of whose death, makes me as sorrowful
as thy life and ^bedience makes me joyful. Cease then, good Philarkes, to
enquire the cause of my care, and seek not to redress that which nature
denies to have any remedy.

Philarkes was satisfied with his fathers answer, but Psamnetichus more
troubled with his sons demand, so that he could take no rest, but lingered in
doubtful thoughts, til at last reason yielding to appetite, and wisdom to
affection, he determined to enjoy a full content, though he both overthrew him
self and his kingdom. Being resolute in this determination, for the better
bringing to pass of his purpose, he appointed that his Court should be
kept at the City of Memphis, and heerevpon commanded, that with as much
speed as might be, the Court should remove. The Courtiers willing, because
the Winter drew on, to soiourne in the city, used great diligence in
dispatching their affairs: and the Citizens hearing that the King should come,
willing to show themselves dutiful subjects to so loving a Souerain, endeavored
to receive him in the most sumptuous and solemn manner they could, providing
shows iustes, tourneyes and triumphs: sparing no expenses, to show their
dutiful affections. Psamnetichus perceiving by outward actions, the inward
good will of his Citizens, requited their kindness with such friendly
courtesy, and princely magnificence, that with one general assent, they all
praised his bounty and virtue.

Psamnetichus settled thus in Memphis, began now only to care how he might enjoy
the sight of Rhodope, hoping yt when he had glutted his eyes with her beauty,
he should free him self from the snare of disordinat fancy. To send for her to
the Court, was the ready means to reveal his folly to the whole world, and
to repair unto the house of a Curtesan, was to dishonor his princely dignity,
with a servile discredit: but to remain still in the hellish passions, was in
life to suffer far worse pains then death. At last, seeing his troubled
mind could find out no shiftie devise, he thought it best to make some of
his trustye servants privy to his affections, who perhaps by some subtle
policy might procure him to obtain his purpose: and he thought none so
fit for the participating of such a waightye matter, then his Chamberlayne
Zorastes: unto whom on a day when he found fit time and opportunity, he
revealed the whole matter, laying before him two baytes, preferment, and death,
promising that if in secret wise he could help him to the sight of Rhodope,
he would bountifully reward him with liuinges and dignities: otherwise if
either he should halte, or be found slack in the perfourmaunce of his
command, all tortures and torments should be too easy for the revenge of
his disloyalty. Zorastes hearing with sorrow this hapless pretense of the
King, knowing that he was so resolute in his purposes, as no reason or
counsel could diuerte from his determinations, thought persuasions would
little prevail: and therefore told him, that if his Majesty would follow his
devise, he would that night bring him to the sight of Rhodope, in such secret
sort, that no man but they two, should so much as once suspect the matter. For
the fulfilling of this his promise, he advised the king to feign him self
sick, and to give a special charge, that none, no not his son Philarkes,
should trouble him, unless they were sent for by Zorastes. This done, he
willed Psamnetichus to disguise him self in the attire of one of his
Gentlemen, and then they two passing out at a posterne gate, which opened into
a dark lane, might without danger or suspicion, go unto the house of Rhodope.

This pretty policy greatly pleased the king, so that without any further
consultation, he put Zorastes devise in practice: for as soon as the night
came, he changed both his apparel and countenance so cunningly, as he might
be taken rather for some stale Courtier, then for so mighty a Potentate.
Having made thus an unfit Metamorphosis of him self accompanied with
Zorastes, he passed thorough the Posterne, and went straight to the house of
Rhodope. Where we may note, the intemperate and malicious influence of Venus,
who by her irradia^ constellation, do work such straun^ge affectes in man^
minds, (...) after they have yielded a little to her allurementes, neither
wisdom, age, reason, counsel, dignities, nor honor, can race out her
dismal and malign impression: yea, her infused working is of such force, that
who so is pricked forward by her entising persuasions, sees no danger, or
discredit so hapless, which he will not adventure to obtain his purpose. But
now to Rhodope, who being certified by one of her maids, that a Gentleman of
Psamnetichus Court was at the door, attyring her self with most costly
jewels, and perfuming her house with most sweet odours, she sent for him up
hastily, and at his coming, intertayned him with such amorous glaunces, and
lascivious courtesies, that he began both to marvel, and smile at the artificial
sleightes of such an infamous strumpet: seeing with what cunnyng
dissimulation, she began to show a feigned kind of affection, and how gain
had taught her to allure the minds of every stranger, he began to conceive a
loathing hatred of her lewd life, that desire was ready to turn to disdain,
had not wanton and lascivious Venus with the intising charm of beautye,
inchaunted his doting affections. For when he had gazed a while on her
excellent perfection, seeing there was nothing in her, her mind excepted, but
that was singular, he exclaymed against the Gods, that to despyghte nature,
had placed such hel^ishe conditions in such a heavenly creature. But such was
the force of unbridled fancy, that he could not conceive such disdain at
her vanity, as he did desire to her beauty. For his senses were so besotted
with this alluring Siren, that he lost at last not only his liberty, but his
life, by her pernicious trecheries. Well, Psamnetichus passing away the
Evening with Rhodope, in such hapless pleasures, as he then thought most
happy, having somewhat satisfied himself with her desired presence, at last
took his leave, and giving her the farewell, with an unwilling Conge, departed
speedily, and secretly to the palace, whither being ^ome, no sooner he was
entered into his chamber, but casting him self upon his bed, the beautye and
perfection of Rhodope, gave him such fierce assaults as he could take no rest,
but at last he burst ^orth into these complaints.

Psamnetichus, would to God either thou had^^ been borne to less dignities,
or more wisdom, so should thy hap have been better, or thy discredit less:
but where will is a subject to folly, wishes are counted but too fond. Thou
art a King Psamnetichus, and aged: thy honor might persuade thee to more
virtue, and thy years dissuade thee from such vanity. Will thou yield to love
her, whose staylesse affection, neither likes any, nor loves her self: if thou will have a Concubine, choose such a one, as may only be at thy will, not at
every base vassals command. In deed Rhodope has done a miss: what then? may
she not make amends? yes no doubt, though she has flattered them which are
subjects, she will, nay she dare do no otherwise but fancy thee which art
her sovereign. Rest then content Psamnetichus, Rhodope may be woone, and what
can thou wish more? Alas yes, for unless she be my wife, neither can I like,
nor she love. Thy wife? will thy counsel and commons agree to such
inconvenience? will thy son consent so such (...) unequal match? will they
fond fool? nay they shall: in despite of them my will shall stand for a law,
and I will follow content, not counsel. Rhodope is worthy to be a Queen,
and I say, that none in Egypt dare gainsay: she shall be a Queen.

And with that, feeding him self in his humor he fell asleep, passing away the
latter part of the night with many pleasant dreams. On the morning as soon as
he go up, he assembled the Dukes and nobles of Egypt, and commanded them upon
their allegance, they should not depart from the (...) till they heard further
of his pleasure. The same day he caused writtes to be directed into every part
of his kingdom, to s^mmon the Lords and Barrons to a Parliament, which should
be holden within xv. days. This strange and sudden news made the Lords of
the counsel to marvel what weighty affairs the king had to enact by
statute, which he would not make them privy unto: so many men, so many wits^
every one yielded his verdicte but all mist the Cushion: especiall^e Philar^^^
began to (...) that his Father had not told him the cause of this sudden
convocation: but seeing it was the kings pleasure, to conceal the secret to
him self, they rested content till it might be made manifest in the open
assembly.

The day of the Parleament being come, the nobility aray^^ in their roa^es,
attended upon the King to the Parleament house, where every one set in his
degree, as the common speaker was ready to have made his Oration, the King
willed him to silence, commanding that Rhodope should be sent for, and that
then he would declare the cause of their assembly. This drove them al into
dumpes, every one whispering to other their virdict of the Kings will. Some
thought there was some great complaints made to the king against her for her
lascivious life. Other thought she had pretended some treason against his
person^ al by imagination suspecting the worst, yet not half so ill as the
sequel proved. The message was no sooner delivered to Rhodope but a quaking
fear possessed al her joints, doubtinge she had committed some heinous fact
which deserved death: or y^ because she was a common curtisan, the King meant
to confiscate her goods to the Crown. These and such like doubts daunted her
mind: yet chering her self somewhat, for that she knew she was guiltless
from murder or treason, decking her self in rich and costly attire, she
went with the guard to the Parleament house: whereinto as soon as she was
entered, with reverent obeysaunce kneelinge before the King, she fearefullie
attended to hear his Majesty's pleasure. The Dukes and Lords of Egipte were
driven in a maze at the excellent beauty of Rhodope, cursing and accusing the
gods of injustice, that had blemished such excellent perfection, with such
imperfecte qualities. But Psamnetichus gazing a long while on her face, began
almost to fall a sleep in sweet conceits, til at last putting such thoughts
out of his mind, with a stern and disdayneful look, he uttered these speeches.

It is no marvel if you stand amazed (Right mighty Princes of Egipte) to
see your King, who was wont to crave your consent in small affairs, without
your council now to begin a thing of such great importance, I mean a
Parleamente. But he that seeks to have his purpose vnpreuented, must not
plume his actions with times feathers, least either fortune or counsel
hinder his enterprise. Many things fall out between the cup and the lip:
and danger is always a companion to delay. To take away therefore all
occasions of hindrance, I have upon the sudden assembled you, not only to
hear what I can say: but without either doubt or denial, to confirm what I
shall say: death having deprived me of her in my latter years who was my only
Joy in the prime of my youth, I mean your good Queen Farina. And although I
am old yet not so stricken in age but that I must and can yield to affection:
so that I intend, nay I will in dispight of as^menne, take Rhodope here
present to my wife, and before we depart from this session, she shall be crowned
Queen. It may be, nay I am assured you all will greatly mislike of the match,
and grudge that your king should marry with a Curtisan. But I charge you all in
general, and I wish each one that loves his own life, neither with counsel
nor reason to persuade me from that I have purposed, least he incur further
danger, and my perpetual displeasure.

Psamnetichus uttering these words with a furious countenance, drove the
Noble men to silence: But Rhodope into a greater maze, that the king upon so
small acquaintance should choose he^ for his wife: whereupon conceiving an
unspeakable joy (for a woman's heart swe^eth) with nothing more then honor)
she with humble reverence kneeling upon her knees, extolled Psamnetichus
courtesy, that he would vouchsafe being a king, to look an so base and
infamous a creature as she was, promising to remain his handmaide, pressed to
perform what his grace could either wish or command, if the loss of her
life might accomplish, his desire. But Philarkes, who sat nipped on the pate
with this strange news, enraged with wrath and choler, could starse keep
his hands from preventing his fathers misery, by the violent death of such a
vile strumpet, which Psamnetichus partly perceived by his countenance, wished
him to speak his mind without controlement, whether he liked of the match or
no: promising to pardon whatsoever was said. Philarkes with a face fraught
full of fury, and a mind inflamed with choler, choosing (if he might) rather
present death then to see his Fathers dignity attainted with such dishonor,
uttered his mind briefly in these woods.

May it please your highness, I fear to offend, if I say what I should, and
yet were loath to flatter, in saying what I would not: but since I may have
free liberty to speak what I think, my verdict shall be soon given. I confess
that what pleases the father ought to content the son, and therefore I count
Psamnetichus will a law to Philarkes: yet as obedience wishes a consent, so
nature wills with a friendly denial to diswade from things that offend, not
only men, but are even hateful to the gods. I say therefore, that Psamnetichus
should get more honor by exiling such an infamous strumpet, not only from
Memphis, but out of all the confines of Egypt, then if he had obtained more
triumphs then that invincible Caesar. No doubt your grace shall soon, nay I
fear too soon, find my words to be true, that in hoping to get a sweet
content, you shall gain a sour disquiet: like to them which pleased with the
color of the tree Lotos, are poisoned as soon as they taste of the Apples.

Psamnetichus, such was his love, or rather unbridled lust, as he would not
suffer Philarkes to speak any word more, but in great choler protested if his
promise had not been past, he would have made him repent those opprobrious
speeches. The Noble men seeing the kings fury, were all in their dumpes, and
durst not for fear to death gainesay yt which he had said, so that presently
Rhodope was appareled in rich and princely roabes and by two of the chief
Dukes of Egypt lead from the Parliament house to the temple of the god
Appollin, where the Archflamyne, as his office was, not only crowned her
Queen, but also with the sacred rites celebrated and finished up the marriage:
in the honor whereof the Noble men making a virtue of their necessity,
appointed certain triumphs and shows ^issembling their inward sorrow with
outward conceits, and shadowing the counterfeite of grief with pleasures
colors. But poor Philarkes pinched to the heart with his fathers doting folly,
spente the whole day in blubbring forth bitter tears, so that he was feign to
absent himself from the banquit: whereas Pasmneticus feeding his eyes more with
gasing on the incomparable beauty of his new foreworne spouse, then his
stomach with any dainty delicates, feasted his Citizens and subjects the
space of twelve days, so sumptuouslye as they might perceive he spared for no
cost to show his liberal mind. But as the longest summers day has his
evening, so this feast being ended, and every one departed to their houses,
Psamneticus and Rhodope lived with such sweet concent as two such new married
couples can enjoy. This secure quiet continued by the spare of one whole year,
till Venus either grudging at their half honest love, or disdayning that
Rhodope had begun to leave her accustomed vanity, and was waren more charie,
and less amorous, thought to show her lawless power by some more unlawful
means: she therefore sought to yoke that neck which as yet was never tamed,
and to inflame that heart with a burning desire, which hitherto had been
frozen with a cold disdain, to bring which to pass she wrought this
hapless means.

It fortuned y^ on a day as Rhodope looked out of her Chamber window, she
espied young Philarkes playing at the barriers with diverse noble men his
companions, wherein he behaved him self so valiantly, as he showed that he
was far superior to them all in courage and valor. Rhodope commending in
her mind both his prowess and perfection, began to be tickled with a more
then accustomed affection toward him, for the gray hears of Psamneticus had
already glutted her fancy, and the young years of Philarkes began to sharpen
her halfepined stomach: for women's affections are not feade with kingedomes or
treasures, but with youthful conceits and sweet amors. Age may be allotted
to gaze at bewties blossoms but youth must clime the tree and enjoy the
fruit. Well, Rhodope being a woman, and therefore both amorous and inconstant,
shamed not to disdain the father and desire the son: yielding her self
captive to lust at the first alarm. To be short, Venus had so snared her in
the beauty of her son Philarkes as her only joy was in enjoying the sight of
his person, yet as there is no weed so had which serves not to some use,
nor confiction so deadly which has not one good simple: so in Rhodopes mind,
holely stained with vice, there were some sparks of virtue: for she considered
with her self, that Psamnetichus of a common and infamous strumpet, had without
any desert, but upon mere affection, made her a Queen: and if she should so
falsify her faith, the gods would not suffer such disloyal ingratitude to be
unrevenged. Further, the impossibility of obtaining such incestuous love, was a
means to persuade her from such laseiuious thoughts. But she whom Venus had
blinded with shameless affection, cared not for these considerations, but
followed her own forward will, seeking not to repress her lust, but how to
enjoy her love: so yt she began to show Philarkes, more then accustomed favors,
painting her beauty out with fresh colors, and seeking to intrappe the young
Prince with alluring flatteries, and amorous glaunces. Philarkes whose young
years were apt for love, began more narrowly ^o mark the beauty of Rhodope
then he had done before, seeing her singular perfection to be such, and her
beauty to be so rare, that she stained not only all the ladies in Egypt, but
as he thought in all the world, resembling rather a heavenly Nymph then a
mortal creature, insomuch he thought his father not to be blamed for making so
good a choice, and wishing himself if ^uer he married as happy a chance.
These sparks of affections grew by time to a great flame, so that he began
not only to like, but to lust after Rhodope which he sought to repress with
these reasons. First he persuaded himself that incestuous adultrie was a sin
so repugnant to nature, as the very brute beasts did abhor the committing
of such a fact, and that it was so odious both to the gods and men, as it were
better to commit either sacreledge, or murder: but these thoughts could not
quench that which injurious Venus had once set on fire, for he felt his mind so
passionate with ye beauty of his mother in law, as no counsel might appease
his malady: yet nature and virtue so much prevailed, that he chose rather to
die then to consent unto such unnatural disloyalty: his grief so increased
by concealing his disordinate fancies, that he fell into a dangerous
sickness, having his head so weakened with continual ear, and yrke some
passions: that he was almost brought into a frenzy. Psamnetichus seeing his
son thus perplexed, sent for the most learned Physicians in all Egypt, but
neither could they conjecture his disease, nor redress his malady, which so
grieved the king as he took no delight but in sorrowing for his son
Philarkes. Rhodope, who was more then half sick with the same disease,
intending to see if she could sift out the cause of his sickness, decked her
self in her brauest attire and went to visit Philarkes: coming into his bed
chamber, and finding him lying as one in a trance, she commanded all to avoid
the chamber for a while. Philarkes no sooner saw Rhodope, but he start up in
his bed and staring in her face fetched a deep ^igh. She who by her former
occupation was a great calculater of such secreat passions, knew without
feeling of his pulse, where his greatest pain was, sitting therefore down upon
his bed, taking him by the hand she entreated him with sugared speech, and
amorous persuasions to unfold the cause of his sickness, promising not only
to conceal it, were it never so secreat, but to redres it if lay in her power,
were it never so dangerous. Philarkes hearing Rhodope utter these unfeigned
protestations, hoped that he might have some success in his suit, but shame of
his unlawful request, enjoined him a long time to silence, til at last
affections ^anishing fear, with bashful face and blubbring tears, he
revealed unto her the cause of his sorrow, how her beauty had so inchaunted
his mind, and bewitched his senses, that unless her consent were a conserve to
cure his care, there were no means to free him from his passions but death.
Rhodope no sooner heard Philarkes utter these words, but as one in a rage
she rose up rassing with bitter terms against his folly, whereas God knows,
it was the only thing she desired, a woman's fault, to thrust away that with
her little finger, which they pull to them with both their hands. Although
Philarkes saw her in such a chafe, yet he would not give over the chase at
the first default, but stood fast to his tackling, insomuch that after a few
consenting denialles, she agreed, as soon as place and time would serve, to
fulfill his request. Philarkes sealing up the bargain with a few sweet kisses,
rested content with this desired consent, and in short time recovered his
former health, to the great joy of his father Psamnetichus, and his mother in
law Rhodope.

Well, these two hapless lovers, living a while in their supposed happiness,
the gods grudging at such unnatural actions, revenged their brutish disloyalty
with a speedy and cruel punishment: for so it fell out, that Psamnetichus
spyed in short time their (not to be named) villainy on this wise.

The king being gone on progress, left the Queen at home, as he thought,
half sick, (for what cannot women feign to fulfill their fancies) and
commanded his son Philarkes to bear her company, until his returning: not
thinking to repair to Memphis, til a month were fully expired. Psa^netichus
being gone, the two lovers floated in bliss, having such fit opportunities
for the fruition of their loves, as they could wish or imagine. But the king
doting on the beautye of his young wife, had not been absent ten days, but
that he took post horse, and rode very secretly and speedily to Memphis, where
being arrived, passing in at the posterne gate, only accompanied with
Zoroastes his chamberlain, he found Rhodope and Philarkes in bed together fast
on sleep. Which strange and unnatural sight so danted the old king, as a
quaking cold possessing his limbs, he stood trembling for the horror of
such a bruitishe fact, till his chilling fear turning into a flaming choler,
he fell almost into a raging frenzy, yet he somewhat appeased his furye,
till he had sent for two or three of his Noble men, which he had left
at the Court to be attendaunt in his absence upon the Queen, that they might
be witnesses of this unnatural incest. They were no sooner come, but with
raging threats, he wakened the two hapless Lovers out of their sweet slumber,
who seeing Psamnetichus and the noble men standing by, as beholders of their
villainous adultery, were so amazed, as they could not utter one word. The
king disdayning to debate of ye matter with these vilde wretches, pullyng
forth his arming swoorde, at two strokes dispatched them both: a punishment
too good for such a heinous offense, and a death not sharp enough for such
incestuous traitors.

Psamnetichus had no sooner finished this tragical stratageme, but ashamed at
his own doting follye, and sorrowefull that his son had so far
transgressed the law of nature, went presently into his study, and there
finding a vyall of poison, to release him self from ensuing miseries, ended
his days with that deadly confection.

A brief Apology of the sacred Science of Astronomy.
CLazomenius Anaxagoras being demanded wherefore he was borne, answered, to
behold the Heavens, and that whether his feet could not carry him, he might
with sight and mind arrive: thinking that man was therefore framed, with an
upright countenance to behold the heavens, and as it were in a Glass to
contemplate the glorious Majesty of his Creator, that he might not wholly
addict himself to the fading pleasures of this world: nor be drowned with
doting on the momentary delights of these earthly felicities, but apply his
actions and thoughts in considering the divine essence which might draw him to
love and honor such a GOD, as had wrought such a miraculous frame. But
iniquity has so greatly altered the state of times, and such is the perverse
nature of man, that he wholly forgets the cause of his Creation, and with
Poliphemus in Homer, do almost deny that there is any God, or cares for the
sight or knowledge of the heavens: And with the Epicures places his content in
his Uineyards, and granaries, gaping after pelf, and thinking his
contemplation high enough in gazing after the painted shadows of fading
riches: in which (because waking he hoth sleep, and sleeping he does watch,
being hongrie: yet filled, and though never so full, yet with the thirsty
Serpent Hydaspis is never satisfied) He does with Antyphanes pronounce this
sentence, Mortalia mortales decent. Esteeming the conte^plations of the heavens
and heavenly mysteries, to be vain and ridiculous, and with doting Democritus
carrying in their minds this peevish Paradox.

Mitte Arcana Dei, Coelumque inquirere quid sit:
Cumsis mortalis, quae sunt mortalia cura.
B^t this sentence: quam Epicurismum oleat, let the learned judge whose divine
thoughts reach up to the skies, and there with secret contemplation does
contemn the baze minds of such as with the Scarab Fly, delights only to
live in dung and mire: whose peevish disposition Tully in his Somnio Scipio^is
does exclame against, where he faineth that Scipio being translated up to the
Heavens, and seeing the vanity of these fond worldlings, does cry our against
their folly, and condemn them as mad men, which wonder at any mortal thing,
when only those heavenly and superior maruels are to be contemplated and
admi^ed. Thrice unhappy then we^ be thought, who are not delighted with this
sweet and pleasant contemplation, and whose minds are not moved with the
wonderful works of God and Nature. He is a foolish beast, not a man says
Plato, which is not delighted with the study of Astronomy: whereof God
himself is the author, in which opinion is Marcus Manilius in his
Astronomicall discourse to Augustus Caesar, where he denies it to be possible,
that the knowledge of things so far different from us, should be
comprehended by any mortal man, without a divine inspiration given unto them
from God, which he notes in these words.

Foelix qui ad sydera mittit.
Sydereos oculos, propiusque aspectat olympum:
Cognatamque sequens mentem se quaerit in Astris.
But no marvel though the ignorant do inueigh against this sacred science, when
as the learned men themselves do neither make account of Astrology, nor yet
exercise it: But when by chance they happen upon any that do for want of ^^il
prognosticate any thing amiss, they straight condemn the stars and hate
Astrology it self: judging it rather false and frivolous, the^ either true or
necessary: much like them which hearing an unskillful Musition sing, rashly
without reason do despise Music it self. As touching the antiquity of this
sacred Science, and the first inuenters thereof, I will make brief report,
that both the ignorant and learned may perceive in what credit it has been
with our Ancestors. The first finders out of the secret mysteries of
Astronomy were the Ethiopians: the cause thereof proceeding partly of the
wisdom of that Nation, (for in all other things they have a marvelous
provident fore^ight) partly of the opportunity of the Region wherein they
inhabit: for because with them there is a continual clearenesse of the Sky,
without any mutation of the year, measured with an equal and temperate
proportion: So that when they first saw the Moon not always appearing with
the same countenance but of a variable shape, chau^ging from one form into an
other, they thought this matter worthy with great diligence to be sought out:
in which quest after they had waded a while with industry, they found that the
Moon had no proper light of her own, but borrowed it of the Sun. They also
fought out the course of the Stars, which we call wandering Stars or
Planets, discovering their essence, nature, effects and qualities, giving them
names according to their proper and peculiar virtues. These things first the
Ethiopians found out in the Heavens: then they taught this Art (although then
imp^rfect) to the Egiptians, who found out the reason of Divination increasing
the Science greatly: showing the perfect course and motion of every Star, the
number of the y^r^s, months and hours, measuring the month by the course of
the Mo^^e, and the year by the annual revolution of the Sun. To which also
they added great matters, setting down the o^d^r of the wandering Stars, and
fixed Stars, appointing ^he Zodiac and the twelve signs through which they
pass by course, painting them forth in diverse shapes and figures: some
representing men, others Fowls, beasts, and Fishes: whereof the Egiptia^s did
vary in their holy rites. For all the Egiptians did not divine generally by all
the twelve signs, but did severally each one use his particular. Therefore they
honored a Rain, which deui^ed by Aries: they eat no Fishes which take any
annotation by Pisces: neither do they kill a Goat which respect Capricornus.
What other thing did their Idol Apis portend, but their Astronomical
conjectures by Taurus? Thus the Egiptians proffited greatly in this Science:
wherein presently after the Lybians began to excel, and after them the
Babylonians, who affirm they were the first finders out of Astronomy: but I
think the Science was long used by the Ethiopia^s, before the Babylonians had
any perfect sight therein. The Gretians neither received the knowledge of
Astrology of the Ethiopians nor Egiptians: But Orpheus the son of Aeagar and
Calliope, was there first Schoolemaister, who t^ught them no plain way but in
dark problemes and mysteries: For he instituted certain Feasts called Orgia:
wherein upon his Harp he delivered them in Sonnets the principles of
Astrology. Furthermore, by his Harp which had seven strings, he did represent
the consent of the moveable Stars: which when he did strike he did overcome
all things, and moved both Stones, Birds and Beasts. The Poets by this
signified his great skill and industry in Music: and the Gretians willing to
honor him, appointed him a place in the Heavens, wherein a few Stars being
conjoined in one circle is called Orpheus Harp: so that if ever you shall see
Orpheus either carved in a Stone, or painted out in colors, he sits in the
midst like a Musitio^ holding a Harp in his hand, and about him a great
multitude of creatures, amongst which there is a man, a Ball, and a Lion,
representing that part of the Zodiac nerest unto the which he does approach.
It is reported also that Tyresias the Boetian, was very famous in the art of
deuination: And the Poets feign that he was both man and woman: but for no
other cause then that he found out how the Signs and Planets were some
feminine and some masculine. It is evident also how greatly the Gretians
esteemed the Science of Astrology, when as Atreus and Thiestes striving for
their fathers Kingdom, were by a common consent of the Argiues allotted, that
whether of them excelled others in Astronomy should enjoy the Empire. Then
Thiestes showed them of the sign of Aries in the Zodiac, whereof it was
fained that Thiestes had a golden Ram. But Atreus told them of the course of
the Sun, and of his rising and setting, that he was the midst of the
Planets, and gave light to the rest: of his motion, and swiftness, and of his
peculiar virtues and properties, whereof the Argiues made him King and honored
him greatly. The like I suppose of Bellerophon, who I think did not ride on a
winged horse, but being skillful in this Science, was contemplating daily
among the Stars, so that he ascended into heaven, not by a flying horse, but
by a wise and conceiving mind. The same is to be thought of Phrixus, the son
of Athamantes, whom the Poets report was carried up and down in the Air upon a
Ram. And as for Dedalus the Athenian, I esteem him to be a perfect
Astrologer, in which Science he greatly excelled in his time, and instructed
his son therein. But Icarus tickled forward with the heat of youth, and
trusting to much in his imperfect skill, began at the first to search the
deapth of Astrology, and to wade so far in the intricate mysteries thereof,
that climing to hie he erred from the truth, and fell headlong into the deep
Sea of supernatural conceits: whereof the Gretians said he was drowned in the
Sea called Mare Icarium: Neither do I think that Pasipha fell in love with a
Bull, and by the means of Dedalus obtained her incestuous pleasure, but that
hearing by his report of the Sign Taurus placed in the Zodiac, she fell in
love with the science of Astrology, and by the means of Dedalus, had skill in
the same: so that she was said, copulare cum Tauro. Amongst them which have
been favorers of this Art, some have labored in one part and some in an
other: one seeking to know the perfect course of the Moon: some of the Sun:
others of the rest of the Planets, according to their particular disposition:
as Endimion whom they feign to have slept with Luna: and Phaeton to be the
son of Soll: but these being fables, did yet allude unto their Astronomicall
qualities, wherewith these men were severally indewed. For who is so simple to
think that Eneas was the son of Venus: or Mynos the son of Jupiter:
Ascalaphus of Mars: or Antolycus of Mercury: but that in the configurations of
their Natiuities, Venus was predominant in the one, Jupiter and Mars in the
others: that as in the begetting or procreation of children, they take some
likelihoode of their Parents, so being borne under one of the Planets, they
borrowe of them their form, shape, valor, minds, and actions: for by the
happy aspect of Jupiter Mynos became a King: Eneas borne fair by the favor
of Venus: Antolycus given to deceit and robbery through the malignaunt
influence of Mercury. Furthermore, neither did Jupiter cast Saturn into
bonds, nor throw him headlong into hell, nor offer him these unnatural
injuries which the Poets feign. But Saturn is very slow and dull in his
motion, and is far removed from our Horizon, so that his motion may hardly
be marked of mortal men: and for this cause is said to stand as though bound
in chains. But who so narrowly considers the sacred and mystical verses of
Homer and Hesiod, shall find their fictions did tend to the discovery of
Astrology. For where as he tells of the chain of Jupiter, and of the Darts
of Sol, I do think he means their irradiation: in showing the Cities which
Vulcan did ingraue in the Target^ of the Adultery of Mars and Venus, and there
disclosing by all the Gods, respects only the mysteries of this Science. And
although Homer has showed of the concurse of Venus and Mars: yet in other
verses he severally describes there diverse influence, as thus. Tute venus
iucunda magis connubia cura.
Then as touching Martial affairs.

Cuncta cito haec curae fuerint Marti atque Mynerua.
These things moved our ancestors greatly to esteem of Astrology, so that
they neither builded cities: made or edified any walls, killed any man: nor
married any wives before they had asked counsel of the Astronomers. Yea, the
very Oracles of the Profane gods were not different from the Art of
Astrology. For at Delphos every virgin delivered the meaning of Apollos
doomes, which represented the sign Virgo, and in Dydymus he had a Temple which
signi^ied the Figure of Gemini: in fine, Astrology was so honored, and
counted so holy a thing, that Licurgus the Lawgiuer of the Lacedaemonians, did
partly direct the government of his co^mon-weale, by the couse of the Heavens:
instituting a Law, that when they would invade any foreign nation, they
should not go to war before the full of the Moon: thinking that the
administration of a City was not all one in the full and in the wane. But
although our ancestors were thus studious of Astronomy, and delighted greatly
in the science: yet in these our days we affirm that it is impossible to find
any end of this art, because it is neither certain nor true, and that neither
Mars nor Jupiter are moved in the Heavens for our cause, neither have the
Planets any care of humane actions: but are necessarily carried about in their
Globes and Spheres. Unto which foolish objection, not I, but Ptolomie does
answer.

A^o stellas in coelo, suo quidem motu volui: Caeterum obiter eius motus
effectum ad nos peruenire. An vis equo currente, and gallinis, aut hominibus
tumultu antibus, lapides subsilire, stipulasque mo^^eri ventis cursu
concitatis, and syderum vertigine nihil aliud effici, quam pro motu proposito?
Quum modici ignis ad nos calor defluat, nec prorsus nostra causa ignis ardeat
(non enim curae illi est nostra calefactio) cur syderum nullam recipiemus
defluxum? sane fieri non potest, vt per astrologiam ex malis bona ^aciamus,
neque mutare quicquam earum rerum, quae ab illis ad nos demanant. Thus much
Ptolomey, Now I think, yt according to Ptolomey this science is very
profitable: to them which use it well. For when as by a perfect calculator
prosperity and fortunate success is prognosticated unto us, they breed in us
a delightful hope that they shall ensue: but when any sinister mishappes are
foreshewed and foreseen, then they are less greeuons, because they are warely
looked for, and so by time the burden of such ensuing dangers, by a provident
foresight is somewhat mittigated, and this is my simple censure of Astrology:
which I conclude with the Golden verses of Ovid, in his first book de Fastibus.

Foelices animae quibus haec cognoscere primum,
Inque domos superas scandere cura fuit:
Credibile est illis pariter vitijsque, iocisque,
Altius humanis exeruisse caput.
Non Venus and vinum sublimia pectora fregit:
Officiumquefori, militiane labor:
Non leuis ambitio, perfusaque gloria fuco:
Magnarumque fames sollicitauit opum.
Admouere oculis distantia sydera nostris:
Aetheraque ingenio proposuere suo.
AMICO SVO AMANTISSIMO FRANCISCO HANDO IN ARTIBVS MAGISTRO DIAlogus sanequam
venustus ex operibus Joan: Ioui: Ponta: breuissimae excerptus Dicatus.
Quo docetur quatenus Coelestium prognosticorum significationes procedant. Et
quod voluntas ^olius hominis propria illis nequaquam subijciatur: modo sensuum
titillationibus, and cupiditatum thectamentis non acquieuerit.
Robertus Greenus: and Franciscus Handus. HANDVS. QVid ni mihi cum astrologis
bellum sit? Cum Iouianum hunc videa^ qui tam multa scripsit de syderibus,
saepenumero illis irasci, nec omnino satisbene de illorum dictis atque
enuntiatis s^ntire cum tamen eius disciplinae sit ipse mirifice studiosus.
Quanquam vt mihi semper visus est non vt Ioannes Pycus in ipsam disciplynam
armis equisque quod dicitur erumpit, cum illam tueatur vt cognitu maxim dignam
ac pene diuinam. Sed Astrologos quosdam vt parum cautos minimeque prudentes
insectatur ac ridet.


GREENVS. Non temere hoc quidem Hand, quid enim magis sieve absurdum, sine
temerarium, quam quod coniecturis precipu const^t ad necessarium esse velle?
Cum enim coeli, syderumque agitation^ inferiora haec (quod liquido apparet)
citatu moderentur ^uo^ne quaquam tamen quae ab illis innuuntur, ijsdem numeris,
cadem, ^^oque quae portenduntur via vbique eueniunt quod res ipsae inferiores
superioribus illis causis, aut non omni e part assentiantur, aut repugnent.


HANDVS. Sunt illae igitur causae agentes ac primae, ha vero patientes, as
secundae.


GREENVS. Nimirum sunt: nam nec calor ipse solis vbique est equalis ne^
terrarum situs idem, ac par omnium. Quodque ad communium res spectat,
voluntates ipsae nostrae, modo sensibus imperare voluerimus, liberae quidem
sunt, syderalibusque agitationibus aliquant^ validiores: quod quonam modo fiat,
id si aperuerim, non indignum conuentu. isto videatur. Quatuor haec corpora,
quaeque alio nomine sunt elementa, and materiam generationi suggeru^t, vel ipsa
eadem potius sunt materia, quatuor humores subministrant, ex quibus haec
constant omnia. Hi pro motu solis, lunaeque, ac vtriusque habitu (ne de alijs
nunc loquamur stellis) in assiduo vbique sunt, aut incremento, aut imminutione,
quae e regeneratio cietur atque corruption: and proinde in eodem nunquam
persistunt statu: quando and solis, and lunae mutationes ipsi quoque imitentur:
ac luna continen^^r pene fluctuet. Sol vero erraticis cum stellis nunc fit ipse
propior. nunc contra remotior ab regionibus quas incolimus. Quibus e rebus and
incrementa sequutur humorum qualitatumque, and item imminutiones. Has ad res
permultum etiam conferunt regionum tum situs, tum habitus: cum Apulia, Libiae,
Aegiptus, aprior sit calori, siccitatique augendae quam aut Germannia, aut
Gallia: hae vero quam illae frigori atque humectationi. Ad hec terrarum aliae
no^ multam quidem hominum exiguunt aut operam, aut industriam in re frumentaria
procuranda: alia contra suapta natura parum sunt feraces. Quid quod habitus
ipse locorum alibi obtusiora gignit ingenia, alibi magis acuta, eademque
versutiora? Quo sit vt tam multa quoque rerum earundem sint varietates: quod ^n
saporibus potissimum, at succis ostenditur: itemque in animalibus, sieve faeris
sieve alitibus: actum in celeritate eorum, tum etiam (...) ^^aturae and rob^re:
vt humores ipsi non solum coeli and flellarum agitationes sequantur, verum
etiam agrorum naturas, ac regionum tum situm tum habitum. Quod cum ita sit, ne
stellarum quidem effectiones vbique aut eadem, aut pares esse possunt. Quae qui
Astrologus probe considerauerit, vix ille longius aberrauerit a coelestium
prognosticoru^ significationibus vere pronuntiandis: quousque tamen coniectura
ipsa sese tuto confer poterit. Haec igitur ipsa, cum tantopere inter se
dissentiant, ac tam sint cognitu difficillia, quam profecto sunt, nata est hinc
obseruatio: cuius proprium est intueri, quae appareant signa: eaque
animaduersa, multumque retentam mente, quid tandem adferant expectare: in deque
a re ipsa prognostica dicta sunt. Non tamen vt semper praestent quae promittere
videantur. sed quod plaerumque tantum, cum and medici, and nautae, ipsi quoque
agricolae in curationibus. agritudinibusque ite^ in pluuijs aut serenitatibus
frugu^que pro^entu, aut huberiore, aut modico non raro se a signis deceptos
quera^tur. Minus vt mirum videri debeat, si Astrologi quoque fallantur: cu^
ipsae aliquando causae in vice^ pugnent, actionesque ac passiones inter sese
(vt dictu^ est) no^ vno modo dissentia^t. Tertio ante anuo Ca^panus ager
aestiuis pluuijs plus solito laborauit: eodem tamen tempore in agro Brutio, ac
Crot^t^iensi, de nimia siccitate atque astu vineae exaruerunt. Hinc igitur
vanae Mathematicoru^ praedictiones, quod ad ea quae portendi videntur a
stellis, non omnes co^ueniant simul causae: permultaque eos latea^t,
quemadmodum and medicos. Et hi quidem frustra haberi solent, non solum propter
naturam morbi, and humorum parum cognitam, verumetiam agrotantium, and
regionis, a^risque ipsius ob alias causas, atque alias, ac tuum ventoru tuum
exhalationum. Illi vero propter incognitas stellaerum misturas, aut quod in id
tempus incidant significationes aliquarum si^e copulationum, sieve eclipsium aut
cometarum, multis ante anuis eas portendentium, quae parum quidem obseruatae
fuerint. Interdu^, quod regio ipsa perniciosis a ventis aut vexetur, aut a
salubribes deferdatur, plusque venti ad prohibendum valiant, quam ed ^ocendum
hostilis stellarum irradiatio. An non hetruriae mari^ima pleraque pestileus est
ora, propter paludes, halitusque malignos ab his assiatus, aurasque illos
agitantes: cum colliuae eius regionis sunt quam suluberrima? Itaque, and in
locis illis palustribus sulutiffer^ stellaru^m configurationes parum prodesse
per aestatem poterun^: and collinae salubritati non adeo malign nocebunt ac
pestilentes. Patrij quoque mores consuetudinesque, and municipales arts,
neonon institutatum publica, tum domestica, multum in vtramque partem conferunt
syderalibus configurationibus. Quid, quod reru^ certa cognitio eaque scientia
dicitur in generalibus per serutationibus versatur? Quis igitur humorum ex
quibus constamus singulares adsequi possit, sieve commistiones, siu^
temperaturas? Quic cursus syderu^ particulares vires, quae tum abstrusissimae
sunt, tum pene etiam infinitae? Quis item aduersantium, interse causarum
digladiationes particulatim cognitas, and obseruaros habeat, and quantum, and
quousque? Itaque illi ipsi qui ad particulares praedictiones dilabuntur, ab
ipso etiam Ptolomeo habentur derisui: Cum necessesit eorum coniecturas,
obseruationesque hac in part vacillare: ipsasque non solum deerrare a via,
verum tarpissime delabi, deque vestigio ruere. Vides igitur Hand vnde tam
multi Mathem iticorum errores proficiscantur coniectureque tam fallaces: vt
iure quidem irasci illis and possis, and debeas, in pestilentijs pradic^ndis,
itemque in sterilatibus, tempestatibus alluuionibus, and ouentis alijs.

Veniamus nunc ad hominum voluntates, quibus si sese ipsa sensibus dominandas
permiserint, nibilest fluxius, imbellius, addam ^tiam fractius, domab^liusque.
Contra nihil quod sit illis generosius, robustius, imperiosiusque, vbi sensus
ipsos corumque illectamenta nihili fecerimus, miserimusque sub iugum. Vendidit
Marc. Cato confectum, iam senio equum: qui cum ipse sieve consul, siu^ praetor
militauerat. Marcus inquam cato optimus sui temporis Orator, optimus senator,
optimus imperator, sic enim est habitus. Cur vendidit? quia voluit: quia plus
apud eam attenuissima illae valuit parsimoniae cura, quam ratio. and senatore,
and oratore, and imperatore, tam valide etiam spectato digna. Quodque vsurpar^
esset solitus, bonum patrem familias vendacem esse oportere magis, quam emacem,
voluit etiam in re sua preceptum id pertinacissime tenere. At coactus est ad
hoc ipsum ab natalitia coeli, st^ll^^umque configuratione. O coelum
auarissimum, o stellas tam atte^^ate ac sordenter parcas, qua in hoc ^um
atten^^, at tantoper^ peruicaces. Potuit proculdubio coeli, st^ll ru^que
configuratio Marcum Catunem facere ad Parsimoniam propensiotem propter humorum
e quibus constaret compactionem: non tamen vt cu^ summa and sena^orum, and
ciuium romanorum sieve accusatione, sieve irrisione, militarem, vel consularem
potius equum, vilissimo etiam cap^u^ pretio venderet: ac si equus ille,
nascente Catone, solicitas stellas etiamde sua venditione fecerit.

Ptolomeus Aegipti rex sororem suam duxit vxorem, impulsus videlicet
expugnatusque natalis coeli, a^ stellarum themate. O prophanum coelum cum
themate etiam tam impuro, and inquinato: in qoutam immanis reposita osset
libido. Quis vel etiam sum improbus, ac peruicax adseuerar^ hos audeat?
Etenim configurationes illae intemperantiam tantam partendunt humorum and
concretionis corporea atque in re quidem venerea detur etiam and in sororea
coniunctione. An non foelicissimus ipse rex, and potentissimus, poterat quod
quidem noluit sororem suam alij matrimonio locare ipseque aliam sibi ducere? At
medici, vel modicis adhibitis medicamentis, humorem, qui nimius sit temperant,
coguntque sub regulu^: qui nimius atque attenuatus, eu^ exsuscitant, and
attoll^^. Tu vero rex eximie, minime potuisti no^aria^ ista^ libidinem
continere: quod videlicet noluisti. Patrauit igitur scelus hoc, quia voluit:
nam si noluisset, qua diximus via euitare illud omnino poterat. Quod vt
patraret, credibile est multas, variasque in ^a r^ cogitationes consumpsisse:
sed passus est a libidine tandem se vinci. At apud Persas eiusmodi matrimonia,
and erant vsitata, and concessa: secutusque est finitima gentis exempla. Iam
qua promtitudine secutus est ipse Persas? Cur non Macedones secutus est ips^
suos? Laudatissimosque macedonum reges? Nequaquam autem secutus, est, quia
noluit: quia imperari maluit sibi a libidine, quam ipse libidini imperare. I
nunc and coelum incusa, ac stellas, nefariasque stellarum configurationes.

Nero Augustus singulari fuit crudelitate nobilitatus: quis sanae tamen
cogitationis insicietur, in procreando Nerone seminis, humorumque temperaturam,
e qua fotus ipse, and concretus est, apprime malignam fuisse? stellasque ipsas
eam ad rem pluri^^m (...) contuliss^, vt suaepte natura Nero procliuis esse^,
^^que incitus ad saeuitiam? ^uer^ igitur huius rei causae, tum natura ipsa e
qua Nero constitit, quod male esset fermentata, tu^ s^ellarum maelus habitus,
peruersaque configuratio, quae aut humore^^ secuta est, malignum illum quidem,
atque perverse affectum: au^ eum malignitate, ac depriuatione affecit sua. Est,
detur hoc quidem. At inuenire noua suppliciorum genera, inusitat aque
excogitare tormenta, and cum artifice conuenire, qua via ad maternum naufragium
nauicula expertum strueretur, Neronis haec fuit, sanguinariaeque eius
volu^tatis, non stellarum ac coeli. Fuit autem Neronis, quia voluit, voluit
aute^, quod ab ambitione rapiebatur, qua expugnaetus, conculcauit ipse
rationem. Sed desine (mi Hand) pluribus iam exemplis vti, maximorum etiam
virarum, quaerum valuntates victa cupiditatibus, aut sensum captae illecebris
iere precipites. Quoc^ea, his in bunc modum expli^atis, quaeramus cadem hec
aliquando exploratius.

Principio, laeus omnis, viruperaetioque versatur in voluntarijs ^ctionib^s,
existitque ab illis. Quum enim (natura duce) moneainur, ^d ^a cupienda quae
boni alicui^s speciem prae se ferant, eaeque ^ sensibus represententur, de
quorum titillatione animus sese excitat: non prius tamen ad ea peregenda,
quibus adsecuturum sese illa confidat, aenimus ipse expergiscitur quam voluntas
quo suscitetur: quae initio quidem vt libera, ac sui iuris latius euagatur:
post vero secum adhibita in consilium ration^, ac fraenum sibi ips^ imponens,
eo accepto sese ipsa moderatur, redigitque intra praescriptum: mox
deliberandaeligit, quae pro facultate ac viribus eligenda videantur: quin
ratione duce, illa ipsae perscrutatur diligentius, perpendi^que maiore cum
pensitatione, quae a sensibus sunt oblata an talia sint, quaelis species eorum
sese offert: sint necne vtilia ipsa, and iucunda, an rursum inutilia and
molesta. Post vero his perpensis, and cognitis, euagationeque illa tam libera
sub frenum coercita, iter statim ingreditur, quo quae eligenda esse duxit,
pernenire ad ea possit juru itaque, atque arbitrij eius fuit, vellet necne sine
eligere and persequi, s^u nihil omnino curare. Est igitur suapte natura,
statinique exquo suscitata est, libera: quae rationem si sequatur, liberate
vbique suam and tuebitur, and retinebis: sin relicta ratione a sensibus
delinita ill^s obsequatur, (...) (...) liberate, captina ducetur, and quae
imperare ips^ sibi nolust imperi^ seruet alieno. Est igitur sui iures, ac
libera, quoties sese a sensuu, mabarumque cupiditatum vi, ac captiuitate
tuebitur. Tunc vero facile tuebitur, cum excitata inter came, sensus ipsos
controuersia, boua ne sint, an mala quae a sonsibus offeruntur, rationem
sequitur: illamque sibi in auxilium vocabit: cuius etiam consilio vtetur ac
ductu. Annon tibi voluntas ipsa videatur libera, quae cum sensibus in certameri
descendat? quaque victrix omnino enasura sit, preterquam si illorum insidiosis
blanditijs cap^se patiatur. Demu^ quta ad actiones tunc accingimur, cum
voluntas ipsa voluerit, and elegerit, and decreuerit suseipicudu^ aliquodsiue
inceptum, sieve nego^ium, merito actiones ipsae ad voluntatem referuntur: quae
si cum ratione progredietur, nimirum ipsae laudabuntur: contra, vituperabuntur,
vbi and in eligendo, and in progrediendo, de rationis via aberrans, sensumque
delitijs emollita cupiditatem sequitur ducem, ac illius inhaerebit vestigijs.
Non solum autem res ipsae, actionesque volunt atem liberam esse testantur, ver
umetiam nomen ipsum deliberand^: qu^d videlices liberum eius sit in decernendo
iudicium, velit ne suscipere, and persequi, an contra desistere, as sensum
ipsorum monita dilabi sinere. Legum quoque constitutores ac moderatores
populorum idipsum testantur: cum impunita dimittant crimina, quae furentes
admittunt, atque insania perciti: quod voluntaria ^ae minima sint, nec furentes
ipsi liberi aut sint, ant haberi debeant. Postremo autem considerandum videtur,
cum sensus ipsi corporci sint, singulique corporeis vtantur instrumentis, vt
auribus ad audiendum, eculis ad videndum, naribus ad odorandum, palato,
linguaque ad gustandum, manibus si^e al^a corporis part ad tangendum:
voluntatem tamen ipsam nulla part corporis vti, nullaque recorporea: quin aut
deliberat, aut eligit, decernitque: quippe cum vis ea, potestasque, tantum sit
animi, atque ex omnibus animalibus hominis vnius: quo fit vt ceterorum quidem
sit sieve impetus, sieve instinctus tantummodo. homini vero voluntas propria, and
peculiaris. Igitur sit stellarum ^ffectiones versantur in corporibus
inferioribus, and in his rebus tantum quae ex elementis constant: ipsaque
clementa campus (...) quidam sint, in quo stella vires suas exer^ent, quanam
via ^oluntates hominu^ illarum agitationibus subiectae erunt? quarum
iurisdictio tantum sit in elementis, rebusque elementaribus? Animus vero^, and
incorporeus ipse sit, and ab omni pror sas elementari qualitate ac condition
vacuus: cui^s vis po^issima quide^ sit ipsae voluntas: quae action: ad quas
homo natus est, vel commendatione honestet, vel exprobrio damnet, and
contemptus proijciat. Iure igitur (mi Hand) mathematicis illis succenses and
Astrologis, qui ad omnes res futuras predicandas, hominumque mores, ac fortunas
ab ipso ortu statim pronunciandas tam sint apti, ac si in eis nulla sit
libertas, nullaque deliberandi, aut eligend^ sieve ratio, sine authoritas: quae
quidem tanta est, vt homo sui iuris sit in his administrandis omnibus, in
quibus animus imperare habeat: nec corporis e^ opus sit ministerio, ac
praesidijs.

Possunt tamen coelestes configurationes impedimento illis tune esse, ac sese
animo ipsi oppener: cum corporeis atque externis auxilijs, ac fauoribus
indigeat. Vbi vero actiones solius tantum fuerit animi, frustra tunc de
stellarum actionibus, ac viribus disputatur: cum, vt dixi, animus ipsi liber
sit, ac suapte arbitratu eligat, decernatque.

Haec habus tecum (mi Francisce Hand) tuamque in d^fenstonem quae hic dic^re^:
Longius fortasse quam portio dicendi ferret mea: breuius certe quam res ipse
exigit Quamobrem finem his faciam: si prius tamen boc subdiderim: Hominum
illarum numerum oppidoquam exiguum esse, animum qui colant, animique arbitraru
vtantur, atque imperio: cum multitudo f^re vniuersa corpori sit onimo debita,
corporeisque illecebris: us fortasse Mathematicis ipsis and Astrologis
nermittendum sit, laxissimis etiam habenis currere ad Apotellesmata
pronuntianda.


Saturn. Jupiter. Mars. Soll. Venus. Mercury. Luna.
As Soon as Saturn had ended his tragical history, Jupiter with a smiling
countenance began to upbrayd Venus in this sort.

Jupiter.
VEnus, it is better they say to sit still then to rise up and fall, and more
honor to put up injuries with quiet then to revenge with loss: In seeking to
dishonor my father Jupiter, you have wrought your own discredit: resembling
the Woolfe, which whilst he lurketh to devour the Lamb, is himself sore
bitten with the Panther. What hapless and unnatural actions do proceed from
your incestuous influence, the Gods may perceive by the sequel of Saturnes
tragical history: wherein he has drawn such a perfect Anotomie of lawless
love, as no doubt it is the only spite that displeases the Gods in heaven,
and pestereth men upon earth.

Venus.
Sir, you mistake the matter, for these tragical events proceed not from the
effects of Love, but by the fleeting inconstancy of Luna, whose mutable
influence breeds in love a ^ickle desire to sport in change: for the often
iarres between you and Juno come not in that you are lovers, but because Luna
having a place in every nativity, sets down this sentence as an infallible
principle: Est natura hominum nouitatis auida.

Mars.
Well said Venus: let Jupiter put that in his eye he has got by thine
answer: for Lunas despightfull inconstancy has made poor Juno were the
horn in her Crest, and the Cuckowe in her Shield, yea, and caused Jupiter
himself to be thought less honest then men, and too dishonest to be a God.

Luna.
Was it Lunas inconstancy (good sir) that caused Psamnetichus to dote in the
love of a common Strumpet: Or came it by my influence that Philarches was
tickled with such incestuous lust toward his mother in law Rhodope? Do
inconstancy go before choice, or change before affection: Tush Mars, were
you not afraid that if you spoke troth, Venus would take the toye and put you
out of Commons, you would not be of this mind: but I bear with you more then
either Vulcan can or will.

Saturn.
Luna, thou have touched Mars at the quick: for in deed he is so pinde to
Venus sleeue, that although he rage and raise, yea, and say more then he knows
against all the Gods, yet he dare not say what he think if Venus hold up her
finger. But I marvel greatly that Mercury is so silent: surely I commend him
he loves not to wrangle in a wrong cause.

Mercury.
I am glad you are so pleasant Saturn, but you mistake my meaning: for when
Venus and Mars hit the nail on the head by attributing Psamnetichus and
Philarches miseries to Lunas inconstaunt influence, I confirmed their censure
by silence: for you know, Qui tacet consentire videtur.

Soll.
What need these cross blows in so plain a case, it is evident by the
sequel of Saturnes tragedy, that love brings with it many enormities,
breeding in old age doting affections, in young years wanton and lascivious
thoughts, inchaunting the minds of men with such unbridled affections, as
neither wisdom nor reason can restrain. Some by love are brought from
prosperity to mishap: Others from dignities to discredit: all gain loss:
Some fading pleasures, but none in the end perpetual quiet. Whereof I
infer, that those hapless events which chanced to Psamnetichus, Philarches,
and Rhodope, was through the bitter delights of wanton Venus.

Jupiter.
Soll, thou art worthy to give Oracles, since thy censure is yielded without
parcialitie: but because Mars stands so stiffly in defense of Venus, I will
first make a description of the essential nature of Mars, then show what
tragical mishaps proceed by his bloody influence.

Soll.
We are content Jupiter (I answer for all) your pain shall be to rehearse the
events, and we to attend with silence.

Jupiters Astronomicall description of Mars.
THe Grecians (right mighty gods) do make manifest even by the Epitheton which
they attribute to the Star of Mars, (...), that it is of a fiery and
inflamed nature, annexed with such burning heat and hurtful intemperancie,
stirring in men's bodies such hot and adust choler, and infusing qualities
together with his irradiation, more apt to destroy, then to engender or
nourish. Which the ancient Astrologers have noted in terming Mars (...) of
infecting or corrupting one as Phurnitus affirms, (...), of loss and
mishappe. Therefore Galen and Ptolomey do judge him as well or rather more, then
Saturn to be an unfortunate and unlucky Planet, since by his intemperate
heat he does burn and inflame, breeding such abundance of yelowe and adust
choler: that thereof do spring many enormities, as well to the mind as to the
body. For by the intemperate heat and vehement motion of choler: do proceed
innuinerable perturbations, whereof do ensue violent actions, and inconsiderat
affections, and passions, as brawlings, contentions, murders, wars, and such
like: so that the Poets fitly have figured Mars to be the God of wars, and
Bellona to be his sister. But leaving them to their fictions: let us see what
can proceed of immoderate heat but cholmicke inflammations, which are apt to
burn, dry, and consume: procuring hapless and dangerous passions: which
Ptolomey in his first Book Apotellesmaton, notes in these words. Martis
stella and arefacit, and vrit sicut congruit igneo ipsius calori, and solis
vicinitati vt qui illius spherae subiectus sic. And for this cause as I
conjecture, the ancient Astrologers have denied Mars for his appropriate
malice, to challenge any of the faculties Animal, as also they have done to
Saturn: yet of those which are natural, they have granted him the faculty
attractiue: of the inward parts he has the liver, or rather the bladder,
wherein the gall lies: which the Grecians call (...): the Latins, Bilis
folliculum: or rather Biliosi humoris armariolu^. And thus much briefly for the
Astronomicall description of Mars: Now as touching the disposition of the
Martialistes.

They are commonly over rash, not fearing to rush through sword and fire:
seeking to move immovable things: carrying a head without a brain: impatient
in injuries: doing al things with preposterous advise: being variable in their
purposes: prodigal of their own, and desirous of other means: enterprising
great matters: making of loathsome Sinckes lofty Towers: lifting up their
brows every where: touching the heaven with their fingers, and speaking
tragically as Giants: wearing Hay in their horns, and mingling the heavens
with the earth: having their feathers far bigger then their neasts: carrying
Waines laden with reproachful slander: wearing Nettles in their nose, and
whetting their teeth upon bitter Sorrel: Enraged as though they were stung
with a Briese, and more imperious then Phalaris: As cruel to them which yield
as Wolves: giving to those which run a spur: wearing a body without a
breast: whetting Iron with Iron, and putting fire to towe: quenching flames
with Oils: bearing gall in their mouth, fire in their hearts, and cutting
large thongs out of other men's leather.

As touching the diseases incident to Martialistes, they be Tertian fevers,
Iaundice, Phrensies, hot Agewes, Inflammations, Bloody flix, Megrimes,
hotnesse of Urine, and such like, which commonly proceed of the quantity or
quality of yellowe choler abounding: of aduston of blood, of fiery and
chollericke euaporations. Further, they which participate of the nature of
Mars, have their pulses great and swift: Urine yellowe, fiery, and biting:
sweat sharp, salt and bitter: deiections yellow: the tongue commonly dry:
their dreams of fire, burning, slaughters, strife, wars, armours, and such
like. Thus I have described Mars his malign disposition, and mean to confirm
my sayings with a tragical history.

Jupiters Tragedy.
IN those days when taking the shape of a man, I visited the poor house of
Philemon and Baucis, coasting diverse Countries, happily I arrived in Scithia,
whereof after Tomyris was Queen: being nighted in those parts, I chanced on
a fair and sumptuous Palace, situated hard by the Sea side: coming to the
gates I found the wicket open, whereon was engraven this Posie (Enteraunce is
denied to none.) Seeing such a free passage, I passed through the base Court and
came into ye Hall: where I found a young and beautiful Lady, accompanied with
six Damosells, all ouergrowne with grief, doing Sacrifice (as I thought) to
some of the Gods: but drawing more nigh, I espied the Lady (which by her port
seemed to be Mistress to them all) burning Frankensence upon Coals, and
holding the heart of a man in her hand, she violently stabo it through in many
places: which when she had done, two of her Maids presented unto her two dead
men's skulles full of wine: whereof when she had drunk a little of either,
gushing forth abundance of tears, she called for a Lute: whereon she plaide
and warbled out this woeful dittie.

What more mishap can fret the mind,
then wish each day to dye:
And yet to live in lingering grief
alas, such life lead I.
Whose life, if life, thrice worse then death
is fraught with such annoy:
As pinde with care can never taste
one dram of happy joy.
I rue to see that most I wish,
most hateful words I blenge^
My surest joy to weep my fill,
my greatest wealth revenge.
Thus do I lead a hapless fate,
Content with woe: enricht with hate.
As Soon as she had ended this mornefull Madrigale, she gave the Lute to one of
her Maids, and the rest ready to depart: but casting her eye aside she espied
me: wherewith she came pacing toward the place where I stood, and with a
courteous and princely countenance she gave me a friendly welcome: and taking
me by the hand led me into her bed chamber, where supper was already
provided: after we had taken our repast, I desirous to know the strange manner
of her Sacrifice, made request to know the cause of her continual sorrow: what
both the pearcing of the heart, and the drinking of the dead men's skulles did
mean. She nothing coy to condescend to a strangers entreaty, began her talk
in this manner.

Jupiter.
In this Country of Scithia there reigned a King not long since called
Euandrus, who by his natural inclination was wholly addicted unto martial
prowess, taking such delight in blooddie wars and cruel Skirmishes, as he
thought himself unfortunate, when either his enemies for fear, or he for want
of some just occasion, was driven to live in unwilling quiet. This Eua^drus had
such happy success in his attempts, as by his valor and courage, he had made
a conquest of all the kingdoms adjacent to his dominions, Libia only excepted,
which was possed by a cruel and merciless Tyrant named Charaxes, who seeing
that fortune without any check, had long time favored Euandrus: thought, that
after great calmes, would ensue little storms, that low ebbes followed hie
tides, and that fortune, after so many sweet favors, could not but show some
sower frowns: whereupon he levied a mighty Host, and made a suddayne
invasion into the borders of Scithia, burning and spoiling all the country,
thinking by his desperate attempt, to make the king shrink and seek for
Truce. But the event fell out contrary to his expectation. For Euandrus
hearing how Charaxes had attempted the Conquest of his Country, gathered a
great Army, to the number of a hundredth and fifty thousand Footmen, and
four thousand Horsemen, manfully marching forward, to defend his Country,
and withstand the force of his iniurius enemy. Wherein Fortune not willing at
this time to give him the foil, showed him such accustomed favor, that he
valiantly discomfited Charaxes and all his Host, yea and took the King
himself prisoner: retourning into Scythia with such triumphs, that his
subjects had both cause to fear and honor such a King. Charaxes being thus
brought prisoner into Scythia: Euandrus as he was fortunate in obtaining the
conquest: so he was favorable in using the victories, thinking it as Kingly to
pardon: as to conquer, and as great renown to be gotten by showing mercy to
professed foes, as courtesy to assured friends: For he entreated not Charaxes as
a wret^hed Captive, but as a worthy Prince, entertaining him with such friendly
familiarity, as the Lybians had great cause to extol his clemency. Euandrus
bathing thus in the streams of bliss, sitting firmly on ye fickle top of
prosperity, had ye check given him by fortune on this wise.

He had by his wife which was the lately deceased, three Children, two were
sons, borne twins at one instant, and in such a moment, that it was almost
hard to guess, which was ye eldest, the one was called Fresnitus, ye other
Rhomphanus, his daughter named Lyndana, a Lady of such exquisite perfection
and singular beauty, that she stained not only in those days, the fairest
dames of Scythia, but almost of all the world. This Lyndana, seeing that there
had been a perpetual enmity between her father and the predecessors of
Charaxes: and that it was not yet extinguished in the Son, grudging not
only, that contrary to his desert, he was entreated so courteously: but
sorrowed that it was not in her power with rigor to revenge his presumptuous
attempt. Yet thinking to pay a woman's part: she detested him with a secret and
deadly hate. But Charaxes contrariwise resembled the Bears, which looking and
smelling along while at the herb Moli, at the last ^ateth it, and is
poisoned: so he gazing on the singular perfection of Lyndana, was suddenly
stricken with the sight of her beauty, and so snared with the due consideration
of her virtuous quality, that he remained far more perplexed, by being a
captive unto Lyndana, then that he was vanquished by Euandrus. For he doubted
not of the ones assured courtesy: but greatly feared the others half
suspected cruelty, he thought the king was to be persuaded by reason, in that
he was a man. The princess he knew was a woman, and therefore led by
unbridled rage of froward wilfulness, either flaming into much love, by no
counsayles to be quenched, or freesing into great hate, by no prayers to be
kindled. Therefore these contrarieties greatly daunted the mind of Charaxes, and
drove him into such doubtful passions, that at last he fell into these bitter
complaints.

Charaxes, thou see now by experience, that hapless fortune knows no
mean, but either she straineth her strings so hie that they crack, or else
lets them so, that they will give no sound, either flourishing her counterfaits
with such fresh colors as dim the sight, or tricking them up with such dark
shadows as cannot be seen, lifting up some to the Skies with sweet and
inconstant favors, and driving some lower then hell, with bitter and assured
frowns. Happy, yea thrice happy are they whose estate is so tempered by the
Stars, that they they may both despite and despise this unjust and
deceiptfull goddess. It had been better for thee Charaxes to have died by the
Sword in the Field, and have gained glory, then perish by love in the chamber,
and reap discredit. Ah Lyndana, thy beauty has so bewitched my senses, and
inchaunted my affections, as no means but thy sweet consent, can express my
hapless passions. O despitefull Fortnne, was it not sufficient to use me as
thy captive, but to make me a servile slave unto love, who rules her
subjects, not with reason, but with rigor: and being lawless rages over them
without law: what Charaxes, do thou count it slavery to serve so brave a
dame as Lyndana, whose inward virtues and outward perfection is such, as she
deserves to be a mate for the most famous Prince of the world: yet in love,
whatsoever the luck be, there is no gains but loss: yielding a pleasure
mixed with bitter passions, and a misery te^pered with a few momentarie
delights, breeding a fading content to some, but at last a perpetual mislike
to al. Why Charaxes, if thou do sorrow at thy chance, seek to eschew the
charm? If thou fear to perrishe by hearing the Sirens sing, stop thine
ears against their melody? Or play like Eagles, which surfeting on Spices,
bite upon the blades of Hemlocke: Or as the Inhabitants of Tryca, who when
they have cloyed their stomachs with eating sweet Dates, purge themselves with
feeding on stinking Garlic. So, if thou art snared with beholding the virtues
of Lyndana, free thy self by considering her vanities. She is beautiful, yea,
but thine enemy, and one that seeks to despite thee with a secret hate,
the daughter of him, who with a flattering courtesy couets perhaps to breed at
last thy bane and misery. Tush Charaxes, if thou seek by counsel to cure
love, thou shall as much prevail, as he that goes about to bind the wind in
fetters of Silk. Thou love Lyndana, seek then to enjoy her love, unless
if thou strive against love, thou perrish in seeking after love. She is a
woman, and therefore to be won, thou have time, place, and opportunity:
despise not then fortunes favors, least if by delay, the grass be cut from
under thy feet thou repent, when had I wist shall come to late.

Charaxes having uttered these words, felt his new gall to grow to a greater
grief, and that the continual presence of Lyndana so perplexed him, as he
pined with restless passions: Sometimes daunted with fear: now incensed with
hope, presently trusting to obtain if he did sue: and then dispayring to seek
least he should not obtain: tossed a long time with these contrary thoughts,
at last he determined to give the assault whatsoever his chance were. Well,
fortune intending to further him in his purpose, brought it so to pass, that
within a few days he went to recreate himself in the Garden, where he found
Lyndana walking solitarilie in an Arbor of Juniper, whom after he had saluted
with a submisse courtesy, he entertained in these terms.

Lyndana, I cannot but marvel what delight you take in these solitary dumpes,
unless either you make this Arbor a place for your private prayer, or else your
head be troubled with some loving passions: if I guess right at the first I
were loath to hinder your devotion: if at the last I am glad my company shall
cut of your musing fancies.

Lyndana frowning at this hap to be troubled with such an vnwelcommed guest,
casting a coy look on her new Lover, made him this short and sharp answer.

Sir, if you marvel at my dumpes, I cannot but muse at your rash coniectu^es,
that either devotion or love must breed solitariness: but I think your
Logike is as much as my Latin, and then no marvel you make such simple
distinctions. Well, admit I were at my prayers, you are not the Saint to whom
I mean to make my petitions: and if I be in love, take no thought, your
mothers son may take his chance for all my choice.

Charaxes hearing Lyndanas sharp reply, had a help cast in his way for
heauing it any more at Mawe: so that he stood nipped on the pate with this new
speech, as if he had with Medusas presence been turned into a Marble picture:
which Lyndana espying, she began to laugh not at his present folly, but as she
thought at his ensuing misery: hoping that if he were entangled with her
beauty, and that he were snared with the ^ut consideration of her excellent
proportion, then she might have time to show how she desired both to hate and
revenge. Charaxes as thus, he for fear and she for disdain, ceased to pass
away the time in any familiar conference, there came into the Garden her
Brethren Frestinus and Romphanus: who saluting Charaxes very friendly, spent
the morning while dinner time in diverse kind of exercise: wherein Charaxes was
very active, as one framed by nature wholly to Mars and Martial exploites.
Well, the tables being covered, the King commanded these three companions to
be sent for: who with humble obeysaunce sitting down at the table took their
repast: but only Charaxes whose sorrow and grief was such, as he could not
but chewe upon his raging choler, and feed upon gall and melancholy
flattering: Love persuading him to march on for all the first repulse and
hateful disdain, willing him to retire before any stroke were struck, so
might he though he obtained no conquest, yet not with disgrace loose the
field. Troubled with these diverse doubts, assane as dinner was ended, he got
him into his Chamber, where being alone by him self, he began to consider the
crooked disposition of Lyndana, and her froward crabbednesse, in crossing him
continually with despightfull ouerthwarts: how for desire she requited him with
disdain: and for love with hate: that although being a prisence he was
courteously entertained by Euandrus, yet the undeserved cruelty of Lyndana was
such a hell to his conscience, as he would not live long in such servile
subjection. Whereupon, he began to fear that the familiar friendship of the
King was but a cloak to cover his revenging mind, and that no doubt for all
his flattery he meant to prevent him by untimely death: so that he determined
to seek al means possible to escape into his own Country: in which
determination fortune furthered him in this wise. It so fell out that the King
who greatly delighted in chasing of the wild Bore, went on a time to see some
sport into a Forest, not far of from his Palace, only accompanied with
Charaxes, Frestynus, Romphanus, and three of his Gentlemen: they had not long
beaten up and down the Forest, but they rowsed a mighty great Bore so huge
and monstrous, as it half amazed the King to see the bigness, and so stout in
courage, as he would not flee one foot from the Dogs, but held them all at a
bay, hurting diverse of them very sore: whereat the King somewhat chaffed,
wicking his horse and charging his spear ran furiously upon him and hit the
Bore upon the shoulder, yet pearcing him very little, but the Beast afraid
with the stroke, fled, and the Dogs after in chase, every man preasing to be
foremost to have most view of the sport, galloping through the thickets so fast,
that within two or three hours all the company was disseuered, none remaining
with the King but only Charaxes: who seeing that now he might have occasion to
draw himself out of the Kings danger, began diversely to conjecture with
himself what he should do. First he considered with himself the great
courtesy of Euandrus in using the victory, that whereas with rigor he might
have revenged the burning of his Borders, yet overcome with clemency he forgot
al such in^uries, and intertayned him with most friendly familiarity: that
being taken prisoner, he did not use him as a captive, but granted him the
liberty of a King. These things moved Charaxes not so much as in thought to
give any offense to his highness, thinking that if he should reward the
courtesy of the King with treachery, not only his enemies but even his very
friends and subjects would despise him as an unthankful person. But as he was
thus virtuously persuaded by the good inclination of his mind, so he was
enforced by a secret rancour to imagine, that to be captive in setters of
gold, was to live in a glistering misery: so that he thought no means
howsoever unlawful it was to be neglected, for the recovering of his former
freedom: which hellish thought ouercomming his former intent, drove him into
such a desperate mind, that seeing the King ride before him, he charged his
Bore spear, and came thundering so fast upon Eurandrus, that before he could
turn his horse he run him quite through, and threw him out of the saddle
dead upon the ground: when he had committed this heinous and bloody fact,
drawing the King into a thicket, he spurred his horse and coasted out of the
Forest, and with as much speed as might be fled out of the confines of
Scithia, and so secretly and safely within short space arrived in Libia. But
leaving Charaxes to his good luck, again to Frestynus and Romphanus, who with
great sport so hotly pursued the Bore, that within three or four hours they
killed him, and sent him to the Court by two of the Gentlemen there present:
which done, missing the King their father, they straight thrust into the thick
of the Forest to go seek him: but coasting and coursing through each holt and
lawne, find him they could not: yet not leaving of to hallowe and to blow
their horns, but they could not hear any replye, except the chatting Echo,
who always returned them the last end of their measures. At last, Rhomphanus
began to persuade his brother Frestynus, that no doubt the King and Charaxes
were gone to the Court: upon which persuasion they both went home: where they
no sooner arrived, but they met their sister Lyndana, who asked where her father
was: Is not the King then (quoth Frestynus) come home, we have this day been
hunting the Bore, and in the midst of our chase we lost the sight of the King
and Charaxes, whom since we could never see nor hear. Pray God (quoth
Lyndana) that Libian traitor has not by any sinister means procured his
mishap. This sudden motion so troubled the minds of the two Princes, that they
were perplexed with diverse passions, fearing that which afterward to their
great mishap proved but too true. Whereupon they caused a troop of Gentlemen
to go in quest of the King, and they two accompaning the rest came to the
Forest, where every man as love and duty bound them did their endeavor to be
the first that should find out their leage and Sovereign: But Fortune willing
to show her dismal despite brought it so to pass, that after a long time
they had labored in vain, Romphanus happened to pass by that thicket wherein
the King lay dead, and casting his eye aside, espied a dead corpse all weltered
and bathed in blood: which hapless sight so amazed Romphanus mind, that
daunted with the terror of such a fearful spectacle, he had not the power to
alight from his horse to look who it should be that was so cruelly murdered,
but stood still gazing as one in a trance, til one of the Gentlemen came by:
who seeing Romphanus so amazed, and espying the dead body, alighted, and
perceived straight it was their King and sovereign Euandrus: then gushing
forth streams of tears he wailed and wrong his hands, cursing and accusing
that day as most dismal and unfortunate. Romphanus seeing that it was his
father, fell from his horse in a pasme, and was hardly recovered by the
Gentlemen: yet at last coming to himself, pulling out the Bore spear (for as
yet it remained in the wound) he would have ended his days with violent death,
as means to cure his unspeakable grief, had he not been hindered by him that
was present, who persuaded him with frie^dly advise to despite fortune with
patience, and in extreme mishaps to make a virtue of necessity: but he talked
to ye wind and playde with Orpheus to the senseless stones, for Romphanus
could no way be pacified, but still raged and rayled against the cruel
destinies, who by their rigorous doomes had appointed his father such a vilde
and hapless death: As thus he was weating his fathers corpse with tears came
his brother Frestynus, who seeing this monstrous Massacre, was no less payned
with pinching grief then Romphanus: yet such was his inward sorrow as he
could not shed one tear, but sitting down by his father taking the Bore
spear in his hand, uttered these woeful words.

O hapless and thrice accursed fortune, who annointest the Cradle with Honey,
and rubbest the Sadle with Gall, who if if thou sportest with youth, always
despightest age, who pamprest at the first with sweet pleasures: and poysonest
at the last with bitter mishaps: was there no means to revenge, but by death:
no frowns but balefull blows: no thing to glut thee withal but my Fathers
blood. Ah now I see, and I sorrow and sigh to see, that where thou fauourest
much, there thou fletterest most, that thy painted caskes are filled with sower
wine: that when thou cariest in the back of thy hand a Lamb: thou bydest in
the palm a Tiger, unhappy are they that find thee most fortunate, because in
thy greatest glory, lies closed up most balefull misery. Oh Euandrus, was
Caesar more fortunate then thou in thy life, or could he be more unfortunate at
his death, he triumphing for his victories, and thou invincible for thy
conquestes: he slain by his supposed friends, and thou by thy reconciled toes,
both advanced by fortune as a flattring goddess, and both by her driven to
mishap as a merciless fury. Happy, yea thrice happy then are they who
despise Fortune, for that they are to low for Fortune. The highest Caedars have
the greatest falls, the call Reeds are most shaken with the wind: Low
shrubbes withstand great tempests, and little Minnowes may safely swim through
the fishers net. Irus feared not to drink of every dish, but Alexander was
poisoned in his own cup: Content is great riches, and patient poverty is
the enemy to fortune. Honor is the first step to disquiet, and dominion is
fettered with envy: Glory gapeth at mistrust, and Kings are Fortunes
bondslaues. More happy then had Euandrus been, if he had enjoyed a poor life
with prosperity, then a Princes state with such dyrefull misery. But alas,
what avails it to condemn Fortune, when she triumphs in our bitter curses.
It is for me with patience to despite that injurious goddess, and with rigor
to revenge that treacherous traitor Charaxes, who most vilanously has betrayed
his assured friend. And with that such was his grief, as he was not able to
utter any more words, but at last, seeing his brother Romphanus so impatient
in his passions, dissembling as much as he could his outward sorrow, began
with counsel to appease his complaints, and to comfort him in that case,
wherein he himself needed a medicine: Yet somewhat saluing his brothers sore,
they left of their d^llor, and taking up the king, carried him home to yt Court,
at which sight, both the Nobles and Commons cried out for the loss of their
Sovereign. But Lyndana as one half Lunaticke or enraged with some hellish
fury, fell into such frantic passions, that her sorrow could by no means be
appeased: For women's sorrows are either to extreme, not to be redressed, or
else tricked up with dissimulation not to be believed. The comfortable
counsayles of her brother could not prevail: the persuasions of her Ladies and
gentlewomen were in vain, so that she went to her bed, where weried with
wayling tears: grief and watching so weakened her wits, that she fell almost
into a frenzy. But Frestinus saluing his care, with patience, provided a rich
and sumptuous To^be for his fathers corpse, enriching his funerals with such
magnificent provision necessary for the entombing of such a potentate, as all
the subjects sorrowing for the loss of their King, yet reioysed that they
should be governed with a Prince of such virtuous and natural disposition.
Frestinus careful that nothing should want to the beautifying of the Tomb,
caused an Epitaphe to be engraven in a Marble Pillar, wherein stood a King all
armed in rich Plate, holding in the right hand a Diadem beset with precious
stones, whereat hanged a great Globe of Lead, fastened with a very small wyre:
round about the Globe was written this Poesy.

Ad Astra honor. Ad orcum miseria.
In the other hand he held a Lady blinded with a vale, which stood upon a
round Bowl, with smiling and delightful countenance, putting with her right
hand a flower to his Nose, and with her left striking him into the back with
an Arrowe, on her breast was written this Poesy.

Fauere videor: nocere sentior.
In the midst of this Marble Pillar did hang a Table, wherein was curiously
engraven this Epitaphe.

HEre lies in Tomb a peerless King,
by fortune plaste in happy state:
Who never felt the sting of dyer mishap,
but triumphed still secure by fate.
In honor, wealth, and conquest such,
as envy feared at him to grutch.
But fortune by in constant spite,
repayd at last his joys with pain:
For by mishap this peerless Prince,
was by a traiterous Caitiffe slain.
Then trust not fortune when she smyle,
for then she works most spightfull guyle.
Well, the Funeralles being most richly and sumptuously finished, after a few
days were past in bewayling Euandrus death, Frestynus sommoned a Parliament,
unto which all the Nobility with certain of the Commons elected generally
repaired: wherein as eldest son and heir apparent, he was by the common
consent of them all rightly crowned King of Scythia. This thing with others
concluded, the day of his Coronation being come according to the custom of ye
Country, the Dyadem was set on his head, to the great joy of al his subjects,
who showed their duetifull good will and obedyence in appointing Iustes and
Turneyes, in making rare and strange shows, performed with such cost and
diligence, as it bred a great content to all men. But Romphanus, whose heart
was puffed up with a greedy desire of glory, thought he was not borne to be
a subject, but a sovereign, and that since it was hard to judge by the
momenta^ie space of their birth whether was the eldest, he was hardly
dealt-withall, that he was not either elected King, or else at the least had the
kingdom divided betwixt them. This motion greatly troubled the mind of
Romphanus, yet he a long while sinothered this aspyring envy, till he might
find some just occasion to utter his canker^^ stomach, and as well as the rest
showed the love of a Brother and the duty of a Subject, till it fell out by
the despightfull means of fortune, that a certain Lord in Scythia called
Pasquino, being somewhat hardly dealt withal by Frestynus (for in deed he was
somewhat tyrannous to his subjects) made a Mutiny, and raised an Insurrection
against the King, gathering a great Host, which grew in short time to a huge
multitude, because Romphanus taking time least the grass might be cut from
under his feet, joined himself with Pasquino, so that their two powers being
united was of great force. Frestynus troubled with this sudden tumult, hearing
that his Bruther Romphanus was joined to the Rebels, was greatly grieved: yet
no whit dismaying himself levied a mighty army, and marched toward the
Camp where the Duke Pasquino and his brother lay: they hearing of the kings
power, and understanding by a Herralt, that the next day they must either flee
or give him battle, set their Soldiers in good array, and went into the
field: where when the Armies were almost ready to meet, Romphanus began to
exhort his Soldiers to consider what they had taken in hand, that they were
to fight against Frestynus their King, who had not governed the^ with mercy
but with rigor, whose will in all actions was a law, to whom if now they
should yield, he would not take pity of them as a loving Sovereign, but
torment the^ as a cruel Tyrant, that they were to fight for their freedom and
liberty, their lands, children and wives: how it was not upon the part of a
Subject they did rise, but for one to whom of right the Croune did belong, who
if he should obtain the victory, would reward them with present coin and
ensuing favor and courtesy: With these and such like persuasions he
encouraged his Soldiers, and so animated them with ^eare and hope, that as it
were in a desperate mind they ran upon their enemies, and after a sore and
dangerous b^ttell, many (...) of either part, Frestynus was put to flight
(...) hardly escaped with his own life: yet by the swiftness of his horse he
secretly fled into the Country, where for a time he lurked in diverse places,
till at last fearing his Brothers fury he coasted over into Libia. Romphanus
in the mean time having obtained the Conquest, thought now with Caesar, if he
could not settle him self by right, to place himself with force and rigor:
therefore he first cut of all those of the Nobility which he knew were his
Brothers familiares, and placed in their Offices his chiefest friends: Then
sommoning a Parliament, was straight elected and crowned King. Safely and
securely settled thus in his Kingdom, he little feared or thought of his
Brother Frestynus: who lying unknown in the Borders of Libia, hearing what was
done by Romphanus, thought rather to offer his Kingdom to his enemy Charaxes,
then put up his Brothers treacherous injuries. Whereupon he presently went to
Charaxes, who seeing Frestynus in such estate, was greatly amazed: yet he most
courteously and kingly embraced him, and demanded the cause of his so strange
and unlooked for arrival. Frestynus unfolded unto him the cause of his coming,
how Romphanus his brother had sediciously driven him out of his Kingdom and
Country, and possessed himself of the Crown and Dyadem, and that if it
pleased him to take the matter in hand, and by force repossesse him of his
Domynions, he would acknowledge himself his Subject and pay him yearly tribute.
Charaxes seeing the way laid open before him to enjoy the Kingdom of Scythia,
made answer to Frestynus, that he would for his sake give Romphanus such a
breakfast, as he should never be able to digest it, bidding him be of good
chere, for what he had promised he would with all speed perform. Upon this
Frestynus rested, and Charaxes smyling in his sleeue mustered all Libia, and
gathered a mighty Host of good and valiant Soldiers, furnishing them with
such Armor, and his Camp with such warlike Artillarie and Munition, as was
able to afray the greatest Prince in those parts. Being thus provided, he
protracted no time but passed into Scythia, where he raced down diverse Towns
which withstood him, putting all to the edge of the sword that obeyed not to
the Herralt sent under the name of their lawful King Frestynus. This bloody
invasion terrified so the Scythians, that he quietly passed through a great
part of the Country without any skirmish, but at last Romphanus met him with a
great power and joined battle: between whom was a dangerous and cruel
conflict: the Scythians fearing the tyranny of Frestynus and Charaxes, and the
Libians hoping for no mercy if they remained vanquished: The combat continuing
still doubtful, till the two Brothers Romphanus and Frestynus met, between
whom there was a mortal combat: at last Frestynus feeling himself in some
perril, redoubled his strength and slew Romphanus: who no sooner was dead but
his Soldiers began to faint and to flee: whereupon the Libians pursued them so
fast, that they made a monstrous massacre, leaving of all the Army few or
none alive. Constrained at last by the approaching of the night to retire: the
Libians went home to their Tents with great joy and triumph: Amongst whom went
Frestynus as a worthy Conqueror, joyful for so happy a Conquest. Well, the
Soldiers banqueting and making chere for their good success: Charaxes and
Frestynus supped together as good friends, and departed not while late in the
night. But upon the next morning Charaxes being early up, came into Frestynus
tent, accompanied with diverse of his Nobles, whom he found fast a sleep in his
bed, and drawing out his arming sword, without respecting either law of God or
man smot of his head, leaving the body weltring in his blood: which when he had
done, he called straight for a Herralt at Arms, and taking the heads of the
two Brothers, sent them speedily to the Lady Lyndana, with a Letter to this
effect.

Charaxes of Libia to the Scithian Princess Lyndana, grants life.
AS it is valor Lyndana to conquer: so it is wisdom to use the victory, it is
better rigourously to return with triumph: then to be thought courteous and
lose the conquest. If thy father Euandrus had known as well how to have used
the Sword in Peace as in War, his untimely death had been foreseen: and thy
brothers miseries prevented: but his mishap has bid me to beware: and rather
to strike with the Sword then be beaten with the Scaberd. Thy brothers are both
slain^ if my word can carry no credit, let their heads which I have sent be
the witness to my speeches. My power and force is such, that I can far more
easily subdue Scythia, then thou art able to defend. My counsel wills me to
take away thy life: least hereafter it procure my loss, yet lest thou
should think I ever loved to hate, I will continue my former good will,
for such continually has been the affection that I have borne toward thee:
Yea thy beauty has so fettered my freedom, and thy singular perfection has
so battered the Bulwark of my breast, as no persuasion is able to dissuade me
from thy love. Consider Lyndana, I may command thee by force, and yet I
entreat thee by prayers: for that I know constrained fancy is like to the
Lute string, which retched to hye cracketh before i^ gives any sound. Since
then Lyndana, thy beauty ha^h inchaunted my affections, and bewitched my
senses, yield to grant love for love, and become my Concubine, so shall thou
enjoy a trusty lover, and save thine own life, otherwise, if through froward
wilfulness thou deny my request, thou art like to end thy days in endless
misery.

Thine as thou use him Charaxes of Lybia.


THe Herault taking the heads and the Letter, went with all speed to Syraaca,
the chief City of Scithia, where being admitted to the presence of Lyndana,
he first requested her on his knee, that although he brought his message from
a most merciless Tyrant, yet it would please her grace to pardon him as a
servant, and with that presented the heads and the Letter. This strange sight
struck such a desire to revenge, into the heart of Lyndana, that as one
nothing amazed, she took her brothers heads and kissed them, and without
changing countenance or letting fall one tear, delivered them to one of her
Ladies, and then opening the Letter read the contents, which after she had
thoroughly perused, she put in her Pocket, and told the Herault that he should
not only have an answer, but also return without harm, charging her
servants with great courtesy to entertain him. This strange demennour of
Lyndana, drove the Heralt into a great maze, that such a Princely valor should
be shrouded under so beautiful a creature. Well, Lyndana withdrawing her
self into her Chamber, took Pen and Incke and returned him this answer.

Lyndana of Scithia to the Tyrant Charaxes disdain.
CHaraxes, if thy fortune were not better then thy valor, or thy trech^^ie
more then thy courage, my Fathers mishap had been less, and thy misfortune
more. But such is thy vilanous mind, as like the Bastard Wolves of Syria, thou
sparest not to pray on dead Carrion. Thou reprouest my Father for using the
victory, and thy reproach cons^teth in thy Conquestes. For thy justice is
tyra^nie, and thy martial prowess rechlesse treason. Thou have slain my
Father and murdered my two brethren, and what glory shall thou gain but
infamy and discredit: yet the gods have spared my life, that I may revenge thy
loathsome discourtesie. Uilde coward, do thou think to conquer Scithia, no
no, unless my quarrel were worse, or thy courage better, thou shall know and
find I will plague thy treacherous cru^ltie with most despitefull misery. Thou
have sent me my brother heads, but I hope shortly to pull out thy heart: which
shall gain me honor, for dispatching such a traitor. Do thy Counsel wish
thee to take my life, no doubt hardy men: that will beat them which are
absent. But thy love and affection is such: as no means but death can hinder
thy fancy. Truth thou art like unto them, which liking the fruit, cut down
the tree, and which loving the Eggs, kills the foul. But would to God thou
were in love, and that thy desire were as great as my disdain: then false
Traitor should thou know with what liking I would requite thy love. But
disdayning to write unto so vile a wretch, I defy thy force, and protest I
live to hate, and hope to revenge.

Thy protested foe Lyndana, Princess of Scythia.


THE Herralt having received the Letters, hasted back again to the Camp:
where being arrived, he delivered them to Charaxes: who vnripping the Seals,
found how little Lyndana either passed for his love or threats. Whereupon,
falling from desire to disdain, and from love to hate, he made a sollempne
protestation to ra^e the walls of Syranca, within two days to spare neither
old nor young: and as for Lyndana, no torture should be sufficient to requite
her cruelty. Hereupon he marched forward with his Host toward the City, and
within two days encamped about it, laying siege very nigh to the walls, and on
the next morrow with battering Pieces and rams of Iron assayed to beat it
down: The which Lyndana perceiving, willing rather to end her days by
untimely death, then to fall into the hands of such a Tyrant, assembled all
the Citizens, and there exhorted them to be valiant, and to consider that
Charaxes had first slain their Lord and Sovereign Euandrus, then his two
sons, Frestynus and Romphanus, and now meant not only to spoil her and the
whole Country, but also to put them and their wives and children ^o the edge
of the sword: so that it were better for them to dye valiauntly in the field
and so prevent ensuing mishap, then to fall into the hands of such a Tyrant
and live in perpetual misery. This persuasion of a woman so animat^d the
Scythians minds, that they became not only resolute but desperate, preferring
death before captivity, and choosing rather to perrish in combat with glory,
then yield to Charaxes with slavish discredit. And hereupon, setting
themselves in array, they valiauntly issued out of the City. Lyndana standing
in a Turret upon the walls to encourage them the more, minding (if her
Citizens were overcome) to throw her self headlong from the top of the Tower.
The Libians seeing them issue out, smyled at their rash folly: and marching
forward, thought to have daunted them at the first dash; but the Scythians
manfully rushed upon their enemies, end in short time made such slaughter of
the Libians, that they were feign to retire: the Scythian Horsemen pursuing so
hotly that they brake the ranckes: and Charaxes seeing his Soldiers go to the
wor^t began to fly, but he was followed by two noble men of Scythia so fast,
that he was taken alive: all the rest of his Soldiers without mercy put to
the edge of the sword, that there was not so much as one left to carry news
home to Libia. Lyndana seeing this unlooked for Conquest, rejoiced greatly: but
especially when she saw Charaxes taken prisoner: whom after she had in her
custody, she put to death with fondrie kinds of tortures: and taking out his
heart alive, works her endless revenge on it in this manner: and to satisfy
her love to her Brethren, drinks wine out of their skulles. Thus sir (quoth
the Lady) you hear the strange manner of my Sacrifice, which I have and will
use to my perpetual content.

Saturn. Jupiter. Mars. Soll. Venus. Mercury. Luna.
Jupiter had no sooner ended his Tragedy, but Mars rising up from his Seat,
began with furious terms to taunt Jupiter in this sort.

Mars.
IVpiter, your tragedy with his bitter and woeful events, has not driven such
passionate impressions into the minds of these sacred Gods, but that they can
affoorde to laugh at your foud and fantastical applications: seeing in
coveting to conquer, the victory returns to an other man's glory, and
shooting at the Fort, you faint in the weakness of your own force: As though
most wilful wise Jupiter, it came through my infectious influence, that
Euandrus was slain by the vilanous treachery of Charaxes: or that the
intestine iarres which rose between the two Brothers Frestynus and Romphanus,
happened for that I was predominant in the calculation of their nativity: but
rather that honor (the first step to mishap) forced Charaxes to enterprise
that dismal mischief: and the desire to rule, bred the civil dissension
between the two Princes: for if Euandrus had been content with the limmits and
bounds of his own Country, neither had his mishap nor his childrens misery
so infortunatly chanced.

Saturn.
Mars, your reasons can neither be of any great weight nor of any stayed
wisdom: because they are fiery, proceeding from such a burning Planet and
furious, yielded by such a chollericke God. But hearing your natural
inclination so fitly and rightly decyphered by Jupiter, we are forced to bear
with your folly, because we must allow you to be Mars.

Venus.
Saturn, I think you have rubd your brows with ye sweat of a Bull, because
you are so light in the brains: or smelled to the herb Anyta, that purges
melancholy: you are so pleasant, you run descant on Mars his doomes,
disallowing the^ without any reason, and yet not able to disprove them by any
right: but it is your old custom, when your are weary with plodding in your
dumpish moodes, then you fall though crookedly to trauerse in your doting
merriments.

Luna.
Venus, no doubt your skill in simples is very good you are so perfect in
declaring the secrets. How Saturn has rubd his brows we know not, but that
Vulcan is a Bucke of the beast head, every fond Forrester can discern. It Is
pity the poor Smiths head is feign to be a subject for Mars to work upon:
but it is no great matter, for Vulcan reuengeth in painting out the discredit of
the one, and the dishonestie of the other.

Mercury.
It Is happy Luna your course is in the night, for else your lickerous lips
would be thought to savor of the same Lettice: but letting that pass, I pray
you tell me how this Tragedy can happen by the sinister constellation of Mars,
since the ^he cause is always judged by the effects: what forced both Euandrus
and Charaxes to make such mutual invasions, the Martial influence of Mars? No,
but rather Iupiter^ ^mbitious infusion, which wrought in them both a greedy
desire of glory.

Jupiter.
Mercury, you speak of affection, was it not first a Martial and hateful
mind in Euandrus, who never thought him self content, unless in imbrewing his
hands in bloody battles, and thinking himself then only unfortunate when he
was driven to live in unwilling quiet? Was not Charaxes of a merciless and
furious disposition, to repay Euandrus courtesy with such hellish cruelty:
and having once obtained Libia, to seek the life of the lovely Lady Lyndana:
but I appeal to the sacred verdict of Soll.

Soll.
Jupiter and ye mighty Gods, my censure is that the events of this bloody and
balefull Tragedy, came by the intemperat influence of Mars: for Euandrus and
Charaxes by the configuratio^ of their natiuities (as the success of their
actions make manifest) were mere Martialistes, given to debates and dissension,
to broils and tumults, feeding upon gall and choler: And as for Ro^phanus, it
is evident it was not the desire of glory and dominion, but a bloody and
envious mind, which sought with secret malice to breed his brothers
mischief: so that I conclude, al these sinister and tragical Massacres, came
by the balefull influence of Mars.

Mars.
Soll, I rest content with your doom, but since Jupiter stands so much upon his
Pantofles, I will first make an Astronomical description of Jupiters essence,
and then prove by a true and Authentical Tragedy, that most hapless miseries
come by the desire of honor and ambition.

Soll.
Not so Jupiter, for you see the night has cast her duskie Mantle on the Sky,
and Thetis stands waiting where I shall wet my glistering rays in the Ocean,
so that we must at thi^ (...) dissolve this sacred Parliament: but as soon as
Aurora (...)th me from my drowsy neast I will meet in this present place,
and moderate your controversies: until when I wish you all to remain as
friends without any quarrelous dissentions.

FINIS.
Robert Green.

