MEDITATIONS AND DISQVISITIONS UPON The one and fiftieth Psalm of DAVID.

Miserere mei Deus.

By Sr. RICHARD BAKER, Knight.



LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin, for Anne Bowler, and are to be sold at the
Marigold, in Paul's Churchyard. 1638.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EDWARD, Earl of DORSET, of His Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Counsel; Lord Chamberlain to the Queen; and Knight of the
most Noble Order of the GARTER.
MOST Honored Lord, I know, you neither like, nor have leisure, to look upon
trifles; but I know also, you account not discourses of Piety, in the number of
trifles: This makes me bold to present your Lordship, with this short Treatise
of Meditations; that being short, it may not divert you long; being Pious, not
divert you at all. J so much honor your Lordship, for your public virtues;
so much am bound to you, for your private; that J cannot forbear to present
you with something, as a testimony of my service in both: and a richer present
I could not think of, than Meditations upon this Psalm of David; which is
indeed, the Masterpiece of his Repentance, as his Repentance the Masterpiece
of all his Virtues. The Jewel it self is from David, only the Case from me;
and though the Jewel deserve a more Illustrious Case; and your Person a more
Jllustrious present; yet there is color to hope I may be pardoned in both;
seeing, the Jewels splendor, gives a luster to any case; and your Nobleness,
to any present. And though it might be presented with a better hand; yet it
cannot with a better heart; seeing he presents it, that is

Your Lordships humble and devoted servant,

RICHARD BAKER.

Perlegi librum hunc cui Titulum est (Meditations upon the 51. Psalm) eumque
tipis mandari permitto.

SAMVEL BAKER.
Ex aedib. Londin. Iunii 21. 1637.
MEDITATIONS AND DISQVISITIONS upon the 51. Psalm of DAVID.
O LORD our GOD, how Excellent is thy Name, in all Verse 1.
the World! Thy glorious Majesty is Excellent; but that brings nothing to me;
Thy Justice is Excellent, but That brings me to Nothing: It is thy Mercy, that
must do me good: and therefore, thy other Excellencies I Adore; but This I
Invocate. To Invocate thy Justice, I dare not; Thy Glory, I cannot: but thy
Mercy, I both Dare, and Can: For, why should I not Dare; when Fear gives me
Boldness? How should I not be able, when weakness gives me strength? Why
should I not Dare, when Thou Invitest me to it? How should I not be able, when
Thou Drawest me to it? Do Thou Invite me, and shall I not Come? Do Thou
Draw me, and shall I draw back? Can there be a Patron so powerful as Thou?
Can there be a Supplyant, so dejected as my self? Of whom then, is it fitter,
to ask for Mercy; than of Thee, O God, who art the God of Mercy? and for whom,
Is it fitter, to ask for Mercy, than for me, who am a creature of Misery? If
I were not so miserable; Thou could not be to me so Merciful: and have I
not reason then to ask that of Thee which thou could not have so much
occasion, to manifest to me, as by me? If it were not for sin; there should
be no Misery; and if no Misery; no exercise for thy Mercy: and will thou let it
stand Idle, where it has so foul sins; for so fair Fields, to walk in?
Have thou Mercy, and will thou not show it? Or will thou show it to others, and
not to me? To say, I have not deserved it, were to make it no Mercy; for, if I
deserved it; it were Justice, and not Mercy. Is not thy Mercy over all thy
Works; and am not I the work of thy Hands? The more Mercy thou show, the
more is thine Honor; and will thou not do that which is most for thine
Honor? Thou did show Mercy to Adam; who was the first sinner: and thou did
show Mercy to the Thiese on the Cross; who was the longest sinner: and will thou not show Mercy to me, who am not the first; and hope, not to be the
longest? Have thou showed Mercy to so many, that thou have not Mercy left for
me also? If thy Mercy were finite, and could be exhausted; It were no charity
to ask it, lest others might want it; but seeing it is Infinite, and can never
be spent; why should I be sparing to ask it, or Thou to bestow it? Thy Mercy
is Infinite, or none at all; for all thou art is Infinite; and will thou by
showing thy Mercy, less; show thy self to be Merciless? If thy Mercy be
Infinite, it must extend to all; and how extends it to all, if not to me? Thou
have as much Mercy for me, as if thou had none to have Mercy on but me: and
can it be, thou should have so much for me, and let me have none of it? Can
my daily Infirmities alien thy Love? This were to think, thou did not love
me, but for my goodness: and alas! what goodness is there? What goodness
ever was there in me, that thou should love me? Can thy Love aliened, turn
away thy Mercy? This were to think, thy Mercy did reach no further than thy
Love; and so, because I know, thou love not sin, I might justly fear, thou
would never have Mercy upon sinners. But, O gracious God, Thou love for thy
loves sake; and Thou have Mercy for thy Mercies sake; and seeing thy Love,
which is thy self, can never leave Thee; It makes me assured, thy Mercy,
which is thy Nature, will never leave me. If I refused thy Mercy, thou might
justly withold it: but now, Behold, I hold my Breast open to receive it; Or if
I did not ask thy Mercy, thou might forbear to show it; but now Behold; I
beg it upon my knees. I am none of Zebedees sons, that ask to sit at thy
right hand, and at thy left; I desire not Exaltation, but Absolution; It is not
thy Bounty I ask, but only thy Mercy; Have mercy upon me, O God, according
to thy loving kindness; and according to the multitude of thy tender Mercies,
do away mine offenses.

It may be thought severity in God, to cast 20.
Adam out of Paradise, for only One sin: But was Adams sin, but only One? but
One perhaps in Action, but a Million in Affection. For, say It was Pride? has
not Pride more branches than a Tree has? Say it was Gluttony? has not
Gluttony more dishes than Dives had? Say it was Curiosity; has not Curiosity,
more Eyes than Argus had? Say it was Disobedience? has not Disobedience, more
faults than Absolon had? For how else could Manasses sins come to be more
than the sands of the Sea, if it be not, that a sin, though but in Thought,
may justly be thought a Million of sins? And as it is said in the Gospel,
that a man was possessed with an unclean Spirit; but that unclean Spirit was
a Legion: So we may say of every sin; It is but One sin; but that One
sin is a Legion. Here therefore, O my soul, take heed thou mis-take not thy
self, in casting up the Audit of thy sins; and think, thou have perhaps but
One or Two sins, to answer for to God; when in Gods sight, every sin thou
committest is a Legion; and for a Legion of sins thou must make thy account,
thou shall make account. And now, seeing my sins are in number so many, and so
great in measure; have I not reason to ask for mercies, of equal proportion?
although therefore I ask not thy Bounty, but thy Mercy; yet the Bounty of thy
Mercy I ask; to ask less than would serve, would prejudice my wants, and not
relieve them; and how then can I ask less than a multitude of great Mercies,
to do away my offenses; who have a multude of great offenses, to be done away?
But has God then, a multitude of Mercies, whereof some be greater, and some be
lesser? Is not his Mercv, as himself is, only One and simplicissimus? No
doubt, It is so in it self; One and single as himself; but yet in relation to
us, and to our understanding; It is said to be, as it is applied: To every
sin, a Mercy; to great sins great mercies; to a multitude of sins, a
multitude of Mercies. But is not this, a Disorder in praying; to pray for that,
for which we should rather give thanks? to pray for a multitude of great
mercies, as though we had them not already? When we should rather give thanks
for them, which we have so continually? For is it not Gods great mercy to us
all, that we be not all consumed? and this great mercy multiplied unto us;
when thousands fall on our right hand; and ten thousands on our left; yet we in
the midst of these dangers, are kept safe from danger? Is it not his great
mercy, that he gives Riches and Plenty; and this mercy multiplied unto us,
when so many are pined away with penury; yet our Land flows, with Milk and
Honey? Is it not his great mercy, that the light of the Gospel shines upon us;
and this mercy multiplied unto us, when so many live in darkness; and in the
shadow of death? These indeed are great Mercies; yet they are but the mercies
of his Patience: or of his general Goodness and Bounty; and of these mercies,
we may justly be afraid: as it is said; There is mercy with thee, that thou
may be feared: but it is the mercies of his special Love, that I desire;
and of these mercies, there can be no fear; for, Love casts out Fear. The
mercies of his Patience, and of his Bounty; are not his tender mercies; we may
have them, perhaps, and to our hurt: as long Life; but to heap up wrath
against the day of wrath; Riches and Honors, but to make our Camel the
greater; and the unfitter to pass through a Needles Eye; The light of the
Gospel; but to make us the more guilty, and subject to be beaten with more
stripes: but his tender mercies, are the mercies of his Love; and can never be
had, but for our good; for, Love covers the multitude of sinne^; and this
covering of our sins is the (...) ^ecovering of Paradise; and su^ers not the
Angel, with the flaming sword, to find any thing in us, to keep us out. O
therefore, how ever it pleases thee, O God, to deal with me, in the mercies
of thy Patience; by length of days: or in the mercies of thy Bounty, by Riches
and Honors; be pleased at least, to grant me the mercies of thy Love, to
cover my sins; and according to the multitude of thy tender mercies, Do away
mine offenses. It was a great mercy, even of thy Love; that with great
miracles, thou did bring the Israelites out of Egypt; but, that thou did
endure to be grieved with that Generation, forty years together; and yet
bring them at last, into the Land of Canaan; this was a multitude of great
mercies. And yet more than this: It was a great mercy, that thou did suffer
our first Parents, after their great sin, to live; and to propagate their
sinful Race; but, that thou did send, thine only Son, to Expiate their
sin; and to make satisfaction for it, with infinite Indignities, in Life and
Death; this was a multitude of great and tender mercies. And now, that I have
the multitude of Gods tender mercies at the height; what would I have it to
do? Even to do away mine offenses: For this is a work, for a multitude of
mercies; and of mercy only. Thy Power O God, is Almighty, and yet cannot; Thy
Justice most perfect, and yet will not; Thy Wisdom Infinite, and yet knows
not, how to do away offenses, without thy Mercy; but thy Mercy alone, and of
it self, both Can, and May, and Will; and therefore, thy Mercy is the
Sanctuary that I fly unto; and seeing thou delightest, in showing of mercy,
Behold, I show thee a large Field here, wherein thou may show it; a Multitude
of my great sins, for a Multitude of thy great mercies. And because sins
are Pollutions; and no way to do away Pollutions so well as by washing;
Therefore wash me thoroughly from mine Verse 2.
Inquitie, and cleanse me from my sins;

I must confess, I was at first afraid of thy washing; for thou did once
wash the whole World; and then, thou did wash away the sinners, but not the
sins; and if thou should wash me so; It were as good for me, to be unwasht;
but I consider, that washing was in thy Justice: the washing I desire, is in
thy Mercy; and I should not have dared to pray thee to wash me: if I had not
prayed thee first, to have mercy upon me; for it is thy washing in mercy only,
that washes clean; thy washing in Justice, washes clean away. But why is
David so preposterous in making his suit? To pray God, to wash away his sins;
before he make his confession, and tell what his sins be? As a man, that
should require his Physician to cure his disease; without telling what he
ailes; and what his disease is. But is it not, that the ardour and burning
heat, which David felt of his sins; made him, as it were, to leap into the
water, at the very first; crying out to be washed; quite forgetting all order,
through the violence of his ardour? much like to Saint Peter; who through heat
of desire, to be instantly with Christ whom he saw upon the water; never
stayed, but girt his coat about him, and leapt into the water, clothes and
all. Or is it, that David might well require to be cured of his disease,
without telling it; being come to a Physician, who knew his disease better than
himself? Or is it indeed, that to tell our disease, is part of our curing; to
confess our sins, is an act of our washing, and therefore no preposterous
course in David, to pray for washing, before confessing; seeing no confessing
is truly sound; which has not its beginning, and is not proceeding from Gods
washing?

But how can we answer this to God? He says unto us by Esaias; Wash you, Make
you clean; meaning, it seems, we should wash our selves; and now we come to
him to wash us; as though we should say; If you will have us be washed, you
must come and do it your self? Indeed, both must be done; God must wash us,
and we must wash our selves: but Gods washing, is not like our washing; Gods
washing is by the fire of his Spirit; our washing is by the water of
contrition: Gods washing is by pardoning; our washing by repenting. Peter
washed himself, when having denied his Master, he went out, and wept bitterly:
Christ washed him, when he prayed for him, that his faith might not fail.
David washed himself, when for grief of his sins, he watered his bed with
tears; God washed him, when he sent him word by the Prophet Nathan, that his
sin was forgiven. And indeed, if God wash us not with his water of pardon;
the water of our own tears, will do no great good: It may wet, but not wash;
or wash, but not cleanse, if God put not our tears into his bottle, which
only can give them the power of cleansing. For Esau had a flood of tears to
wash himself withal; but God never put them into his bottle: they were tears
for his punishment, but not for his sins; and therefore they might wet,
perhaps, but they never cleansed. Oh then, Put my tears into thy bottle, O
God: for they are tears for my sins, and not for my punishment; and then wash
me with them, and I shall be clean. My tears, God knows, are of themselves
too cold, unless they be warmed by the fire of Gods Spirit; but if we bring
the water, and God bring the fire: then indeed a fit Lexative will be made to
make us clean. O then, warm the cold tears of my repentance with the fire of
thy Spirit, O God; and then wash me with them; that my repentance it self
being first cleansed, may be made effectual to cleanse me from my sin. Our
own washing is of it self imperfect; and makes us never a whit the cleaner:
because we mis-take the water, as Pilate did; who washed his hands from
Christ's blood, where he should have washed them in Christ's blood; but thy
washing, O God, is never without cleansing; for thou can not mis-take the
water, who art the water thy self; and not in a Cesterne, but the Fountain it
self. We wash our selves commonly, but as the Pharisees wash their cups; only
the outside; and this makes us but Hypocrites: but thy washing. O God, is
always inward; for, Thou searchest the hearts and reins; and this is the
washing that makes the true Israelite, in whom there is no guile. When Naaman
was cured of his leprosy, by washing in Jordan; did God then wash him; or did
Naaman wash himself? Indeed both; Naaman washed himself, by obedience and
confidence in Gods power; God washed him by giving power to the water, and
confidence to Naaman. But this power, was but a personal estate to Jordan; it
has no such power in cleansing of me: the water that must cleanse me, is the
water that flowed out of my Saviors side; and in confidence of the power of
that water, I humbly prostrate my self before thee, O God, and say; Wash me
thoroughly from mine iniquities, and cleanse me from my sins.

But why should David speak so superfluously? Use two words, when one would
serve? for, if we be cleansed, what matter is it, whether it be by washing or
no? Yet David had great reason for using both words; for he requires not, that
God would cleanse him by miracle, but by the ordinary way of cleansing; and
this was washing; he names therefore, washing as the means; and cleansing as
the end: he names washing, as the work a doing; and cleansing as the work
done: he names washing, as considering the agent; and cleansing, as applying it
to the patient: and indeed, as in the Figure of the Law there was not; so in
the Verity of the Gospel, there is not any ordinary means of cleansing, but
only by washing: and therefore out of Christ our Saviors side, there flowed
water and blood; water to wash us, and blood to cleanse us: water, to make the
laver of our regeneration in Baptism; and blood, to make the laver of our
expiation in Christ's sacrifice: but though the words seem here, to be thus
distinguished; yet otherwhere, they are oftentimes promiscuously used; and as
well cleansing, as washing referred to this water: as well washing as
cleansing, referred to this blood.

But what means David, to say, Wash me from mine iniquity, and cleanse me
from my sin; as though he would be washed from one thing, and cleansed from
another? and not be cleansed from that for which he is washed? But is it not,
that iniquity and sin, though called by diverse names, are both the same
thing; but called iniquity, as being a transgression of the Law; called sin,
as being an offense against God? Or is it, that in sin there is both a
stain, and a gu lt?; and he prays to be washed from the stain, and cleansed
from the guilt? Or is it indeed, that he uses diverse words, to show that he
asks forgiveness for all his sins, by what name or title soever they be
called?

But is not this an indignity, to the great Majesty of God? we put our meanest
servants to wash our clothes, and will we put God to so mean an office, to be
a Launderer of sins? Yet see the humility of Majesty, an humility, even to
ecstasy: he descends yet lower; not only to wash our sins, but to take our
sins upon him. It seems Saint Peter indeed, was in this error, to think it
an indignity: and therefore would not by any means suffer, that Christ should
wash him; until he heard Christ say; unless I wash thee, thou can have no
part in me; and then he cried, Not my feet only, but my hands and my head:
and is not this my case also; that unless God wash me, I can have no part in
him? And will I lose my part in God, for want of washing? Oh therefore my
soul, prepare thy self for this washing; put off thy clothes, and strip thy
self stark naked; keep not so much as fig-leafes about thee, either to hide
thy sins by contumacy, or to cover them by hypocrifie, or to slight them by
indulgency; but lay them all open and bare before the face of God; that whilst
nothing is interposed between Gods water and thy sins; it may without
impediment have full liberty to work upon thee.

But what though God do wash us? are we 20.
sure his washing will always cleanse us? Why is it then, that he says; I
have purged thee, and thou wast not purged: for may he not as well say; I have
washed thee, and thou wast not cleansed? and if not cleansed, as good not
washed. Oh therefore, Not wash me only; but cleanse me from my sins; that as
in washing, thou show thy Love: so by cleansing, thou may show thy Power;
seeing it is an office, which as none will be willing to undertake, but he
whose love is unspeakeable: so none can b^ able to discharge, but he whose
power is uneffable. For, can washing be without touching? And would any man
foul his fingers, to touch so foul a thing as my sin; if he did not love
exceedingly? Can cleansing me, be without doing a Miracle? for seeing it
cannot more truly be said, that I have sin, than that I am sin; what is it
now to cleanse me, but even laterem lavare? which was never counted less,
than either a labor lost, or a miracle wrought: and can any do mira^les, but
he, whose power is unlimited? Oh then, Wash me from mine iniquity, that I
may praise thee for thy Love; and cleanse me from my sin, that I may
magnify thee for thy Power; which, as I shall do both, if once I be cleansed:
so I am able to do neither; until I be washed. For alas! O Lord, what am I,
but as a filthy ragge before thee? Who am I, but the man by the high way side,
lying bound and wounded? No means at all left me; to wash, much less to
cleanse my self; They must be both thine own, thine only work, O God, both
to wash me, by thy preventing grace; and by thy assisting grace to cleanse me:
Oh then, cleanse me from my sins, O God; let not the foulness of my
sins, make thee unwilling to wash me: Let not the reluctance of my flesh,
make thee unable to cleanse me; but make thy work of washing me, to prosper
in thy hand. Oh wash me; but not as Simon Magus was washed; who came fouler
out of the water, than he went in; but as the Eunuch was washed; who came so
clean out of the water, that he was ready to run through fire and water, for
thy names sake: and by his washing, was made a fit Minister, for the washing of
others. And now, O great God, since it has pleased thee, to descend to so low
a work as washing me; O wash me thoroughly; not rince me only; as though I
were but lightly stained; and had but some small spots upon me; but wash me
thoroughly, as having a leprosy that over-spreads me; a foulness that is
deeply engrained in me; so deeply, O God, that nothing but a washing by thine
own hand can fetch it out. And yet stay; why should I put God to this trouble
of washing me at all? seeing I have an easier way of cleansing, taught me by
the Centurion in the Gospel; Speak the word only, and I shall be clean; or,
if this be still too much; an easier way yet taught me by another; Si vis,
potest me mundare; If thou will, thou can make me clean. O gracious God;
whether it be by washing; or, by speaking the word; or, by thy will only to
have it so; whatsoever be the means, let this at least be the effect; that
though I be not made bright, which is more than I can be, yet I may be made
clean, which is no more than I must be; for I am not of the Pharsees mind, to
think my self cle^ne enough already; But, Verse 3.


I know mine iniquity, and my sin is ever before me; although, perhaps, it be
a knowledge, I were better be without: For, Christ knew no sin; which we may
be sure, he should have done, if it had been worth the knowing. Christ indeed
knew no sin in himself; but he knew sin in it self; he knew no sin by
committing it; but he knew sin by understanding it. My misery is not that I
know sin; but that I know my sin; that I have sin of mine own to know.
Christ knew no sin, because he could not say; I know my sin: but I know my
sin, because I cannot say, I knew not sin: And yet who will believe, that a
man knows sin, that will be meddling with it? We say, there are no miracles
now adays in the world; and can there be a greater wonder than this; that a
man should know sin, and yet commit it? should know the foulness of sin;
and yet lie wallowing in it? should know the horror of sin; and yet run
headlong into it? But is it not, that we are all in this, the children of
Adam? Our eyes are not opened, till we have eaten of the forbidden fruit; we
know not sin truly, till we have committed it; we see not the foulness,
till we feel the guiltiness; and this makes me say now, which I could not so
well say till now; I know mine iniquities, and my sin is ever before me:
for, they were strangers to me before; and I knew not their conditions; but now
I find what they are; and am sick of their company: They were indeed pleasing
to me in the doing; but are now most loath some, being done: They stood behind
me at first, as servants waiting upon me; but are now ever before me,
astormenters seazing upon me; that if ever I loved them before; I hate them now
a thousand times more.

But why should David make it so great a matter, to say, I know my sin; as
though a man could commit a sin, and not know it? as though Adam could eat
of the forbidden fruit, and not know he had eaten it? Adam indeed knew his
eating; yet he knew not his sinning; he knew his nakedness, but he knew not
his guiltiness; if when he answered God; I know my nakedness, he had said, I
know my sin; he might, perhaps, have tarried in Paradise still; that we may
see, how hard a thing it is to say, I know my sin, which cost Adam no less
than Paradise before he could say it. And how much easier came David to be able
to say, I know my sin? For, do we think he could say it, as soon as he
had committed it? No, nor almost a whole year after; that as we may say of
Adam; it cost him a great place: so we may say of David, it cost him a long
time, to learn to say, I know my sin.

But how can David say, I know my sins; and yet in another place, said, Forgive
me my secret sins? For, if he know them; how be they secret? and if they be
secret, how does he know them? Indeed, both David, and every one of us, has
sin enough to serve both turns; not only, because sin is of a greater
size in Gods sight, than it is in ours; and therefore leaves much for him to
see, which to us is secret; but because also, there are many actions in our
life; which we so lightly pass over, as if we thought them no sins; perhaps,
thought them Virtues; when yet in Gods sight, they are grievous sins. David
had committed a great sin, which he could not choose, but know to be a sin;
and therefore might justly say; I know my sin; but that his sin had caused
Gods Name to be blasphemed; this was a sin he knew not, till God himself did
tell him: and from hence he might justly suspect he had cause enough in other
sins, to say; Forgive me my secret sins. Saint James says, In many things
we offend all; this we all know; and gives us all just cause, to say; I know
my sin; but what those many things are, in which we offend; and what those
offenses be, which in many things we commit; this, many times we know not: and
gives us as just cause to say, Forgive me my secret sins.

But alas! my soul, I must not stay here, only to know my sin; and keep it
to my self, as though I thought it a Jewel, which none might know of, for
fear of losing it; but in this, I acknowledge the great favor of God, that as
I know my sin; so I acknowledge my sin: For, far be it from me, I should
be found of Saul's disposition; to think to make God believe, that I saved the
fat of the sheep for sacrifice; when I saved them for mine own profit; this
hiding a sin, is a greater sin than the sin it hides: For, it is an affront
to Gods omnipotency; Adams Fig-leafes proved as hurtful to him as the
forbidden fruit; for nothing lays our sins so open to God, as our seeking to
hide them; and although it be often times dangerous to acknowledge a fault to a
civil Magistrate, who without our acknowledging could not know it; yet there
can be no danger, to acknowledge our sins to God; who knows them already,
whether we acknowledge them or no: Our acknowledging them to him, is not a
discovery, but the first degree of recovery; and seeing I am now traveling to
repentance; how is it possible, I should ever come at it, if I acknowledge not
my sins; which is the first step to it? and therefore, howsoever I am guilty
of many great and heinous sins; yet of this sin, of hiding my sin; thou
can clear me, O God; for, I acknowledge mine iniquity, and my sin is ever
before me.

But yet, what good will the knowing, or the 20.
acknowledging my sin do me; if I let it slip from my heart, as soon as it
is off my tongue? If having once acknowledged it, I cast it behind me, and
think no more of it? Behold, therefore, O God, I set it before me, and am
always beholding it: It is ever before me in Meditation; for I cannot but be
thinking still, how foolish I have been, to procure thy displeasure, though it
had been Regni causa; for the gaining of a Kingdom; how much more to provoke
thine anger, for the pleasing only of some idle fancy? It is ever before me
in remorse; for it is ever running, as a sore in my mind, that against thee
only have I finned; againstwhom only, I should not have sinned; much like the
fault of our first Parents; who seem to have eaten of that fruit only; of
which fruit only, they should not have eaten. It is ever before me in
prospect; for, looking earnestly upon sin; I can see nothing i^ i^, that
should make any man to love it: It is deformed and crooked; it is foul and
ill-favored; it is unsound and diseased; it is old and wrisled, that I wonder
at my self, how I was ever gotten but once to embrace it; yet I see wi^all, it
paints and makes a fair show; it perfumes, and makes a sweet smell; it is in
profession, an Angel of light, and carries Apples in its hand, of the tree of
Good and Evil; that would entice any man. It is ever before me in terror;
waking, me thinks I hear the Judge pronouncing sentence of condemnation
against me; fleeping, I am frighted with dreams no less fearful; If a
leaf do but wagge, me thinks it threatens me; If a Bird do but chirp, it
seems to accuse me; I am frighted with light; and jealous of darkness: For,
how can I choose but fear, lest all thy creatures have set themselves against
me; who have so unnaturally; so unloyally; so ungratefully for my sel^ against
thee? For, Against Verse 4.
thee, against thee only have I sinned; not against Heaven; not against Earth;
not against Angels; not against men; for to these I never vowed allegiance;
nor stand engaged: but against thee only; against thee my Father; and so have
^inned in disobedience: Against thee my sovereign Lord; and so have sinned in
rebellion; against thee my Benefactor; and so have sinned in ungratefulness;
that while no grace has been found wanting in thee, that might have kept me
from sinning; no grace has been found in me, to keep me from sin.

But i^ there not matter here to make us at a stand? For, to say, against thee
I have sianed; is most just and fit: but to say, Against thee only I have
sinned; seems something hard. It had, perhaps, been a fit speech, in the
mouth of our first Parent Adam; he might justly have said to God; Against thee
only have I sinned; who never sinned against any other: but for us to say it,
who commit sins daily against our neighbors; and specially for David to say
it; who committed two notorious sins against his neighbor, and faithful
friend Vriah, what unfitter speech could possibly be devised? But is it not
that these actions of David, were great wrongs indeed, and enormous iniquities
against Vrias; but can we properly say, they were sins against Vriah? For,
what is sin, but a transgression of Gods Law? And how then can sin be
committed against any, but against him only, whose Law we transgress? Or, is
it, that it may justly be said; Against thee only have I sinned; because,
against others, perhaps, in a base tenure; y^ only against God in Capite? Or,
is it, that David might justly to say to God; Against thee only have I sinned;
because, from others he might appeal; as being a King, and having no
superior; but no appealing from God; who is King of Kings; and supreme Lord
over all? Or is it, that we may justly say? Against thee only I have sinned;
seeing Christ has taken; and still takes all our sins upon him; and every sin
we commit, is as a new burden laid upon his back, and upon his back only? Or
is it lastly, that I justly say, Against thee only have I sinned; because in
thy sight only I have done it? For, from others I could hide it, and did
conceal it; But what can be hidden from thy Allseeing Eye? And yet, if this
had been the worst; that I had sinned only against thee; though this had
been bad enough, and infinitely too much; yet it might, perhaps, have admitted
reconcilement; but to do this evil in thy sight; as if I should say, I would
do it, though thou stand thy self and look on; and as it were in defiance;
what sin so formidable? what sin can be thought off; so unpardonable? A
sin of infirmity may admit Apology; a sin of ignorance may find out
excuse; but a sin of defiance can have no defense. But has not David a
defense for it here; and that a very just one? For, in saying, Against thee
only I have sinned, that thou might be justified in thy saying; does he not
speak, as though he had sinned, to do God a pleasure? therefore sinned, that
God might be justified? And what can be more said for justifying of a sin;
then to say it was done for justifying of God? But far is it from David, to
have any such meaning; his words import not, a lessening, but an aggravating of
his sin; as spoken rather thus; because a Judge may justly be taxed of
injustice, if he lay a greater punishment upon an offender, than the offense
deserves; therefore to clear thee, O God, from all possibility of erring in
this kind; I acknowledge my si^s to be so heinous; my offenses so grievous,
that thou can never be unmercifull in punishing, though thy punishing should
be never so unmerciful: For, how can a Judge pass the bounds of equity; where
the delinquent has passed all bounds of iniquity? and what error can there be,
in thy being severe, when the greatness of my fault is a Justification of
severity? That thou can not lay so heavy a doom upon me, which I have not
deserved? Thou can not pronounce so hard a sentence against me, which I am
not worthy of: If thou judge me to torture; it is but mildness: If to die the
death, it is but my due: If to die everlastingly, I cannot say, it were unjust.
Yet in judgment, O Lord, remember mercy; consider not how foul I am become;
but how I am become foul; for though my sin be great, yet I was not the
beginner of it; for, Behold, I was borne in iniquity; and in sin has my
mother conceived me; Verse 5.
And seeing my birth did not amend my conception; how should my growth amend my
birth? Did not sin, at least the Author of sin, hear thy voice, when thou
said, Increase and multiply? Which, though not spoken to him, yet, as an
Intruder, he claims to have a part; and seeing all the parts of my soul and
body have increased and grown greater since my birth; will not he look, that
si^ne also shall have a share in growing, as well as they? Does any thing grow
so fast as a weed? and is there any so very a weed as finne? has it not
been growing ever since I was borne; and can so fast growing, in so long
growing, make less than a Monster? And am I a fit Champion to encounter
Monsters? Indeed I encountered a Bear, and slew him; a Lion, and killed him; a
Giant, and overcame him: but these were no Monsters, at least no Monsters to be
compared with sin. Oh the monstrousness of sin! far harder to be vanquished
than all the Monsters that ever Nature made; for I could vanquish a Bear, a
Lion, Giant, the greatest of Natures Monsters; but with all my forces have not
been able to vanquish this Monster Sin.

But why am I partial toward my Parents; and charge my poor Mother with
conceiving me in sin; but let my Father pass without blame? Or, is it, that
to say, I was borne in sin, is as much as to say, I was begotten i^ sin; and
so my Father has a share of my sin in begetting me; as well as my Mother in
conceiving me? Indeed, if Eve had only sinned, and not Adam; it might have
been said, we were conceived in sin; but not, perhaps that we were begoten
in sin; or if Adam had ^ly sinned, and not Eve; it might have been said, we
were begotten in sin; but not, perhaps, that we were conceived in sin: but
now that Adam and Eve, have both of them sinned; it is justly said: I was
begotten in iniquity, and in sin ^ath my Mother conceived me; and so, we are
all of us, sinners now of the whole blood; both by Father and Mother; and no
Inheritance so sure to us from them, as this of sin; and in this Inheritance
we are all great husbands; whatsoever becomes of Naboths Vineyard, we commonly
make sure work to improve this; and we seldom leave, till we can leave more
of it to our children, than we received from our Parents: and seeing no
diseases are so incurable as those which come Extraduce, from either of our
Parents; how incurable must sin needs be, which is Extraduce, from them
both? If I were only borne in sin; then all the time I lived in the little
world of my Mothers womb, I must have been without sin; and so might hope,
thou would at least have some respect, to that time of Innocence I lived
there: But now, that not only I was borne in sin, but my Mother also
conceived me in sin; now I was a sinner as soon as a creature, and not one
minutes time of Innocence to plead for my self. And now, alas! O Lord, What
could thou ever look for at my hands, but only sin? The Leopard cannot
change her spots; no more can I that am conceived in sin, conceive any thing
but only sin: It is natural to me; and Nature will have her course. But
though it be natural to me to sin; yet it is not natural to me, to sin
so grievously as I have done; for then every one should be as great a sinner as
my self; but now, that I must say with Saint Paul, Of all great sinners, I am
the greatest; this is an estate of sin, which I have not by Inheritance, but
by Purchase; and I cannot blame Nature, but my self for this: all the help is,
that though I might be ashamed to do it; yet I am not ashamed to consesse it;
and is not a sincere confessing, in the balance of thy Mercv, O God, of even
weight with the not doing? and therefore, although the sin I conf^sse be
great; and being great, must needs be greatly displeasing to thee; yet this
conf^ssing my sin to be great; cannot be displeasing: For, Thou love truth
in the inward Verse (...).
affections; and this my confession comes from thence: For, there is a truth in
words, when it is without lying; as Saint Paul says, I speak the truth; I lie
not: but this truth reaches not home to confessing of sins: and there is a
truth in deeds, when it is without lying; as Christ said of Nathaniel; Behold
a true reaches, in whom there is ^o guile: but neither does this truth rea^h
home to confessing of sins; but there is a truth in heart, when it is in
sincerity: as it is said here, Thou love truth in the inward affections, and
this is the truth that carries home the confessing of sins, to its full period.
For though thou love all truth, and every where; yet the truth of the inward
affections, thou affectest most inwardly; for this is properly within thine
own survey; soeing thou only art (...), the trier and searcher of the heart
and reins. Truth of words may have for its motive, vainglory and praise of
men; truth of deeds, awe of the Law; but truth in the inward affections, can
have no motive, but only the love of truth; which therefore must needs be
pleasing to thee, who art thy self, both Love and Truth.

Where thou love truth, thon teach wisdom; 20.
and because thou love truth in the inward affections; thou teach wisdom,
in the secret of the heart; and who can come to teach it there, but only thou?
Superficial and External wisdom, is the gift oft-times of Nature, sometimes
of Art; but this wisdom in the secret of the heart, is only Gods Advowson;
none can give it; none bestow it; but God himself, and he alone. Wherefore, O
God, though I have not hated that which thou hate, the committing of sin; yet
seeing I have loved that which thou love, the truth of heart; thou have
taught me wisdom in the secret of my heart; though thou did not give me the
grace to prevent sin; yet thou have taught me the wisdom to repent sin; a
wisdom which none can have, unless he be taught; and none can teach but
only thy self; a wisdom which cannot be had, but in the heart; and no where
in the heart, but in the secret of the heart. A man may have the wisdom to
see his sin, by the outward eye of the heart; and he may have the wisdom
to understand his sin, by the common sense of the heart; but he cannot have the
wisdom to repent his sin; but only in the secret, and innermost of his
heart. And we need not wonder, that God only is the Schoolmaster of this
wisdom; seeing the wisdom of the world is not capable of it; it is a
secret, hidden from carnal eyes: It is as hard a matter to feel the power of
repentance, in the soul; as to believe the resurrection from the dead, in the
body; both great secrets; but this, perhaps, the greater; as being indeed, the
ref^rrection of the soul. There are wisdoms of diverse sorts in the heart of
man; the voluptuous man has a wisdom, to accomplish his desires; the worldly
man has a wisdom to gather riches; the Politician has a wisdom, to compass
his ends; but all these wisdoms are but floating in the heart; or rather but
hovering about the heart, as the Crow about the Arc; they enter not into the
secret of it; not bring into the heart, as the Dove into the Arc, the Olive
branch of peace: For when the mind bethinkes it self, and dives into its own
bottom; it finds no place for these distended and swelling wisdoms; which
indeed, the secret of the heart h^th not room enough to receive; only the
contracted wisdoms of Humility and Repentance, can find harbor and
entertainment there.

But though a little room will serve humility; yet as little as it is it must
be clean; and what one cleane^ have I, in my whole heart; to give Humility or
Repentance entertainment? O therefore; Purge me with Hysop, and I shall be
clean; Wash me, and I shall be whiter Verse 7.
than snow. But did not the washing I had before, make me clean; and what
need then, of any more cleansing? It seems, that washing was but only for a
preparative to purging; to make it work the better; at least it went not so
far, as the secret of the heart: And seeing the foulness of my sin, has
pierced my heart to the very bottom; no remedy now, but I must be purged, if I
will be cleansed. But do I well, to prescribe to God, with what he shall
purge me; as though I knew, all Gods Medicines as well as himself? and which
is worse; I to prescribe, and he to minister? But excuse me, O my soul; it is
not I that prescribe it to God; it is God, that prescribes it to me: for Hysop
is his own receipt; and one of the ingredients prescribed by himself, to make
the water of separation for curing the leprosy. But why then with Hysop; and
not with Ellebor, or Scammony tather? For how else happens it, that Gods
purging should not work; as he says himself: I have purged thee, and thou
wast not purged; but that he gives purges of too weak operation? for Hysop,
God knows, is but a weak purger; it searce reaches to amend the errors of
the first digestion; and how then is it possible, it should ever be able to
purge away my sins; which have tainted my blood; and are grown, as it were, a
part of my very substance? But is it not, that Gods arm, is of a strange
strength; and can put force into the weakest Instruments; and therefore, can
do more with Hysop, than all the world besides can do with E^lebore? But it
is indeed the great Love, or rather indulgence of God; that he will never use
Ellebore where Hysop will serve; never use roughness and severity, where
lenity and mildness may be effectual. Reserve then, O God, thy Ellebour and
thy Scammony for more stubborn and reluctant humors; `Purge me with Hysop
only, and I shall be clean. I must confess, I was glad at heart, when I first
heard Hysop spoken of; to think, I should be purged so gently; and with a
thing, that may so easily be had; for Hysop grows in every garden; and then I
thought I might go fetch it thence; and purge my self; but now I perceive,
this is not the Hysop, of which Solomon writ, when he writ from the Cedar, to
the Hysop: but this Hysop is rather the herb Grace; which never grew in
garden, but in that of Paradise; and which none can fetch thence, unless God
himself deliver it. The truth is; this Hysop was sometimes a Cedar; the
highest of all trees, became the lowest of all shrubs, only to be made this
Hysop for us: For, Christ indeed is the true Hysop; and his blood, the juice of
Hysop that only can purge away my sins; that I need not now fear the
weakness of Gods purge; seeing this Hysop far exceeds, not only Ellebore and
Scammony, but all the strongest drugs, that ever the earth brought sorth. Purge
me then, O God, with this true Hysop, and I shall 20.
be truly clean; Wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow. But how is this
possible? All the Diers upon earth, cannot die a red into a white; and how then
is it possible, that my sins which are as red as scarle^; should ever be made,
as white as snow? Indeed, such retrogradation is no work of humane art; it
must be only his doing, who brought the Sun ten degrees back, in the Dial of
Ahaz: for God has a Nitre of grace, that can bring, not only the redness of
scarlet sins; but even the blackness of deadly sins, into its native purity
and whiteness again.

But say it be possible; yet what need is there of so great a whiteness, as to
be whiter than snow? seeing snow, is not as paries dealbatus; a pain^d wall;
white without, and foul within; but it is white, intus and in cute; within and
without; thorowout and all over: and what eye so curious, but such a whiteness
may content? yet such a whiteness will not serve: for, I may be as white as
snow, and yet continue a Leper still; as it is said of Gehezi; that he went out
from Elisha, a Leper as white as snow: it must be therefore whiter than snow;
and such a whiteness it is, that Gods washing, works upon us; makes within
us: for no snow is so white in the eyes of men; as a soul cleansed from sin,
is in the sight of God. And yet, a whiter whiteness than this, too; for being
purged from sin, we shall induere stolam albam; put on the white robe; and this
is a whiteness, as much whiter than snow; as Angelical whiteness is more
than Elementar.

But may we not conceive rather, that in saying, Purge me with Hysop; it is
not meant purgando; but aspergendo; that so, there may be two degrees expressed,
of using the juice of this Hysop: one when it is, but a sprinkling only; yet
enough to take away the foulness of sin; another, when it is a full and
through washing; which besides the cleanness, adds also a beauty; and that to
admiration. Indeed, the least drop of Christ's blood, the true juice of this
Hysop; makes fit to stand in the congregation of the righteous; but a full
bathe of it gives a high degree, in the Hierarchy of Saints and Angels.
Howsoever, we may plainly see a great difference, between the washing that was
spoken of before; and the washing that is spoken of here; as great a
difference, as between cleanness and whiteness; for that washing was to
cleanse us; but this washing is to whiten us; of that it was said; Wash me,
and I shall be clean; but of this, it is said; Wash me, and I shall be whiter
thau snow: and therefore upon this, it presently follows; Verse 8.
and very justly; Make me to hear of joy and gladness; that the bones which
thou have broken may rejoice. For, white is the Emblem of joy: and where the
Emblem of whiteness is once had; the Motto of joy and gladness will not long
be behind. But we must be whited first; for while the blackness of sin
remains in the soul; there can be no Emblem of whiteness engraven upon it:
but if once we be whited by Gods washing; and have the Emblem upon us; this
Motto, we may be sure, will be added to the Emblem; He will make us hear of
joy and gladness. And the like may be seen, in the kindly order of Gods
Physic: First, a Purge; and then, a Cordial; having purged us with Hysop;
he will make us to hear of joy and gladness; but we must be purged first:
for while the peccant humors remain in the soul; there is no place fit for
the Cordial of joy, but if the humors be purged by the Hysop of repentance;
then the heart will be lightened; and the spirits refreshed; and the Cordial
of joy and gladness will have its full operation.

But had David ever any return of this Petition? Did God ever hear it, or
grant it? Oh, the wonderful graciousnesse of God! he heard it, and granted it;
made a return; and that presently; and by a sure mouth; the mouth of the
Prophet Nathan; Behold, God has forgiven thy si^; for this, no doubt, was the
joy, which David here makes suit to hear of; for what joy of what Jubilee, can
make the broken bones rejoice; but this only, that we be at peace with God,
through the remission of our sins? David was happy, that had a Nathan by whom
to hear it: but by whom may we have hope to hear it? Indeed, as happy in
this, as David: for though we have not the same Nathan, in individno, yet we
may truly say, we have him in specie; and the same message of joy, which that
Nathan told to David; our Nathans tell us, when they say; He pardons and
absolveth all them, which truly repent; and unfainedly believe his holy
Gospel: which though we hear, perhaps, as words of course; yet it is the very
same joy, which David here, makes such earnest suite to hear of.

But why should David pray to God; to make him hear of joy and gladness; and
not rather do, as his son Solomon did afterward; gather Gold and Silver; get
him men-singers, and women-singers; and so make joy and gladness to himself?
Alas, my soul! these are joys to be repented of; and not joys to repentance;
for, but for such delights as these, I had never fallen into these sorrows;
they have been my snares, and cannot now be comforts; it is not all the
delights and pleasures of the world, that can ease one pang of a penitent
heart. The sorrows are spiritual, and must have spiritual joys; thou, O
God, have caused the sorrows, and thou only can Minister the comforts; Qui
Vulnera fecit
Solus Achilleo tollere more potest.


But say, O my soul; how came thy bones to be broken? has this been the
work of Gods Hysop? Is the breaking of bones, the gentle purging that was
talked of? What could Ellebore or Scammony have done more? and yet thou can
not wonder so much, at the force of Gods purging, to break thy bones; as thou
may wonder at the force of his Cordial, to make thy broken bones rejoice;
and that which thou may wonder at more; the same Hysop is both the Cordial
and the Purge: wonderful indeed, that the same thing, should both break the
bones; and make the broken bones rejoice: yet so it is; for this Hysop, is not
only a cleanser; but a knitter and binder together: and as by the force of
cleansing, it breaks the bones; so by the virtue of knitting together, it
makes the broken bones rejoice; for, what greater joy, to broken bones, than to
be knit together; and made whole again? It was not I, God knows, that broke
my bones; I could never have had the heart to do it: It is thou, O God, did
break them; and that, in Mercy; for thou knewst, that unless my bones were
broken; my sin, that is bred in the bone, could never be thoroughly purged away.
And now, O God; if I be not purged enough already; purge me yet more, and
purge me still; until I be made more white than snow: but then, make me to
hear of joy and gladness: for, without this Cordial, I shall faint in my
purging; and shall never be able to go through, with thy course of Physic:
For my bones are already broken; and I have scarce any blood left me in my
veins; but if thou give me this Cordial of joy and gladness; my strength
will return; and my broken bones will be made whole again.

But why is it said; Make me to hear of joy and gladness; and not said
rather; Make me to feel joy and gladness? For, were it not better to feel
joy; than only to hear of joy? but indeed, we cannot feel this joy,
unless we hear it first: and if once we hear it; it is then our own
fault, if we do not feel it. For, what is this joy, but that, of which the
Angels brought tidings to the Shepherds; Behold, I bring you tidings of great
joy; This day is borne to you a Savior; one that shall make whole again all
broken bones; seeing he is one, of whom there shall not a bone be broken. But
what is this to us, that, his bones be not broken, if ours be? Great good to
us, if we be purged with this Hysop; for then we shall be united, and knit
unto him; made flesh of his Flesh; and bone of his Bone; that if his bones be
sound, and not broken; our bones shall quickly withal, recocover soundness.
And yet a greater joy, to be heard of, than this; for then indeed, we shall
hear of our greatest joy; when we shall hear this voice: Arise, thou that
sleep, and stand up; and God shall give thee light; for at the hearing of
this voice; all bones, though broken into a thousand pieces; though burnt, or
beaten to dust and ashes; shall all come together, and be knit together; and
shall be covered again with this very flesh; and in this flesh, I shall see my
Redeemer. And now, O my soul, thou may comfort thy self in hope; that
though thy bones be broken now, yet a time will come, when they shall rejoice;
and should never indeed rejoice, if they were not now broken; for this is a
world for breaking of ^ones; but we look for a new heaven, and a new earth;
when for their breaking now, they shall have beauty for ashes; and a garment
of gladness, for the spirit of heaviness. But, O merciful God, put me not
off so long for my joy; my broken bones, will be in a worse case, than Lazarus
body was after four days burying; if thou let me lie so long in the grave of
thy displeasure; my case requires a present remedy; and a remedy may be
applied, in the turning of a hand, at least with the turning of a face: Verse 9.
only Turn away thy face from my sins; and my broken bones will quickly
rejoice: For, to turn away thy face from my sins, is to turn away thine
anger for my sins; and to turn away thine anger, is to receive me into
grace; and if of this I might be once assured, it would make my broken bones
more nimble to leap for joy, than Abraham was to see thy day; for, as it was
the apprehension of thine anger, that broke my bones; so nothing can set them
together, and put them in joint again; until I be secured of thy Grace and
Favor.

But am I well advised, in praying God, to turn away his face from my sins?
For, am I not so wholly overspread with sin; that if he turn away his face
from my sin; he must needs turn it away from me too? and then, in what
horror of darkness should I be left? But is it not, that thy Wisdom, O God,
is so transcendent, that thou can easily abstract the sinner from the sin?
and then the more thou turnest thy face from my sin; the more thou will turn
thy face upon me; and the more I shall enjoy the light of thy countenance. If
thou should not turn away thy face from my sin; but stand looking upon it;
alas, O God! it would be a worse sight, than that which Cham saw in his fathers
nakedness; and a good son turned away his face from that; and can thou be
a good Father, and not turn away thy face from this? God forbid, thou should
ever say to me, as thou did once to our first Parent; Adam, Where art thou? a
question that was never asked, but when it was followed with a curse. For why
should thou ask, where I am; but that thou can not see, where I am? and
how can it be, thou should not see, where I am, but that thou can not see
me, for sin? Use then, O God, the transcendency of thy Wisdom; abstract me
from my sin; and make my sin and me, two several objects; that turning thy
face from my sin, thou may turn it upon me; and not need to ask me
where I am; but may see me where I am; and by seeing me, make me enjoy
the light of thy countenance.

But is my sin so pleasing a prospect; that I should need to fear, lest God
should stand looking upon it? Indeed, after his first creation, he looked upon
all his creatures; and saw them all exceeding good, and this was a prospect,
worth his looking on; but my sins, O God, are none of thy creatures; there is
no goodness at all, to be seen in them: therefore look not upon my sins;
but upon my repentance; and in this thou shall find, veter is vestigia formae;
that thou needst not to alter thy style; but say still; It is exceeding good.
But seeing, if thou turn away thy face from my sin; thou must needs turn
it, upon something else; upon what is it indeed, I would have thee to turn it?
Up on me? No. Upon my repentance? Neither; but though not upon my sins, yet
upon him that has taken my sins upon him; that as in him, thou art well
pleased; so through him, thou may be well pleased with me; and with my
repentance.

But what safety is it to me, that God turn away his face; if his ears stand
open? for my sins are crying sins; and it may be, as hurtful to me, that
God hear their cry, as see their foulness: For, what brought Caine to all
his misery, but that God heard the cry of his sin? but know, O my soul, that
God consists not of parts; though our weak capacities express him so; and if
we express him by parts; know also there is an absolute and sweet harmony
between them, in God; that if his face be turned away from seeing the
foulness of our sins; his ears shall never stand open, to let in their
crying. But what am I the better, that thou turn away thy face from my sin; if
my sin continue, and remain upon me still? For it is not the bold Nature of
sin, to be always pressing into thy sight; and as it were, forcing thee to
see it, whether thou will or no? Oh therefore, not only, turn away thy face
from my sins; but blot my finnes out; that as 20.
by turning away thy face, thou may not see my sins: so by blotting them
out, I may have no sins to be seen. But if God turn away his face from my
sins; how shall he seee, to blot them out? Not therefore, faciem cognitionis;
faciem but indignationis, not his face with which, he sees all things: but his
face, with which, he frowns upon evil things. But are not my sins themselves
blots? and how can blots be blotted out? they are blots indeed upon my soul;
but they are fair Characters in Gods Book; and there is a relation, between
Gods Book and my soul; that if they be blotted out in his Book; they shall
never be legible in my soul. But, O gracious God; I dare not trust to this
neither: for though by blotting them out, they may be made not legible; yet the
very blotting them out, will be a mark of remembrance, that they were once
there; and is it not a fearful thing, to think, thou should but once
remember them? Oh therefore, not only blot my Verse 10.
sins out: but Create in me a clean heart; that as by blotting them out,
they may be made not legible: so by creating in me a clean heart, there may
be no mark of remembrance, that ever they were written. Indeed, this blotting
out of sins; is but an Ablative case in the work of sanctification; the
Dative is of much more use: for this Dative is the giving me a new hear^; and
seeing the heart is the beginning of life; by having a new heart, I shall begin
a new li^e: and the sins of my old heart, shall be no more remembered.

O great God, into how many several forms of ossi^tance, do we miserable
sinners, diversifie thy glorious Majesty? We made thee first, our Landerer to
wash us; then our Physician, to purge us: and now our Creator, to new make us;
and indeed there was no staying, till we came hither: Our Dove can find no
rest, for the sole of her foot, till she return into this Arc again; for if
my sin were only a foulness; it might be helped with washing; or if only a
steining; it might be helped with purging; but seeing it is a total and
absolute corruption; now nothing can help it but a new Creation.

But how should David come to be so foul? was it by conversing with Bathsheba?
but what foulness could he take from her, who came but then, newly out of
her Bathe? O my soul, it is not a Bath of Milk and Roses, that can make a
cleanenesse in Gods sight; God has strange eyes; he can see foulness in
Bathsheba, though coming out of a neat Bath; and can see cleanenesse in
Jeremy, though coming out of a dirty dungeon; he can see foulness upon
Dives, for all his deliciousness and dainties; and can see cleanenesse upon
Lazarus, for all his (...) amongst the Dogs. This David knew (...), and
therefore all his suit is still for cleanenesse; Wash me, and cleanse me from
my sins; Purge me with Hysope, and I shall be clean; Create in me a clean
heart, O God; All for cleanenesse still; for he knew, if he could get
cleanenesse, he should have a Beauty which the Stars want: for the Stars
are not clean in Gods sight; he knew, that by having a clean heart, he should
not only be fit for God to see; but fit to see God; as Christ said: Blessed
are the clean of heart, for they shall see God: and then, if to be seen of
God, be the greatest glory; and to see God the greatest happiness; O how
glorious and happy, must a clean heart needs be, that is made capeable to
enjoy them both!

O therefore, Create in me a clean heart, O God; and renew a right spirit
within me: for thou have not so finished thy work of creation; but that thou
reteinest thy power of creating still: and wherein can thou better employ
that power, than in creating of clean hearts? It was a work of infinite
glory, to be the Creator of Heaven and Earth; yet to be the Creator of
clean hearts; is of all thy works of glory, the most glorious work. And
indeed, were it not better for me, and more ease for God; to create in me a
clean heart, once for all; than to be so troubled, with continual purgings
and washings, as now he is? as now I am? for alas, O Lord! thou may sooner
purge my heart out of my body; than purge sin out of my heart; but that it
will always, be returning to its vomit; and I shall break thy rest
continually, with importuning thee to wash me.

But why do I pray to God, for a clean heart; and not as well for clean
eyes, and clean hands; seeing these also, have there share in foulness, as
well as that? But is it not, that these are but the Emissaries of the heart;
and do all they do, by the hearts direction; that if the heart be clean,
these also will be clean of course; mine eyes will be clean; and never look
more, after any more Bathshebaes; my hands will be clean; and never be more
imbrued in the blood of any Vrias.

But, did not God, create in me a clean heart once already? and yet how foul
is it grown now? and what hope is there, if he create in me, a new clean
heart; but that it will grow as foul, as this I now have? But can it properly
be said, that God did ever create in me, a clean heart before? He made me one
indeed, but he created me none; he only created Heaven and Earth: as it is
said; In the Beginning, God created Heaven and Earth; and of that Earth, he
made me a body; and in that body, a heart; so I had a made heart, before; but
no created heart till now; for made, is of matter praeexistent; but created is
of nothing: although therefore my made heart, being made of dust, has always
been apt to gather dust; yet my created heart, as made of nothing; will have
nothing in it, from whence to gather foulness. But O my soul, trust not to
this; for, though there should be no foulness in the heart it self; yet the
stinch of the prison, in which it lies; will he always can^e enough to breed
in fection: unless thou can get ^ome such sove rain persume; that may keep
out i^l aires; and keep the place sweer: On therefore, n^ only Create in me a
clean heart; but (...) a right 20.
Spirit within me; for this (...) spirit, makes a better perfume, than that of
Tobies fish^; to keep all unclean spirits, from commi^ ^eere the heart. As
therefore Moses (...), the Genesis of man; by saying, that God first made him a
body; and then brea^hed a soul into him; so David describes here, the
Palingenesis of man: by saying. Create in me a clean heart and renew a right
spirit within me; that if Nicodemus had well understood this Psalm of David;
he needed not to have made such a wonder at Christ's speech, when he said;
Except a man be borne again; he cannot enter, into the Kingdom of Heaven: for
what is it, to be regenerat and borne again; but to have a clean heart
created; and a right spirit renewed in us? If only a clean heart be created;
and not withal a right spirit renewed within me, this will be but Vehiculum
sine Anriga; and I shall presently fall in oath mire of sin again; and grow as
foul, as ever I was before: but if thou vouchsafe to add a right spirit to my
clean heart; this will keep me right in the paths of righteousness; and
then, as I now praise thee for making me clean; so I shall praise thee as
much, or rather much more, for keeping me clean.

Thou, O God, that art the Maker; art also the renner of all things; yet I ask
thee for re^ of nothing in me, but only a right spirit: my veeres are waxed
old, and vanished away as a (...); yet I require thee not to renew them my
^reneth is d^yed up like a po^sheard; and my moisture is t^rned into the drouth
of summ^r; yet I require thee not to renew them: All my worldly friends, are
either taken from me, or gone from me; yet I require thee not to renew them:
all that I require thee to renew to me; is, only a right Spirit: for, so long
as this right spirit remained with me, and was my guide; I walked b^tore thee
in all uprightness; I durst then say; s^arch me, O God, and try me; Examine
my heart and my reins; but as soon as this spirit grew to decay, and waxed
faint within me; I present ly begun to falter in my steps; my iniquities
multiplied so fast, that they quickly grew to be m^han than the hairs of my
head; every thing was a temptation unto me; and every temptation prevailed
against me; but now, O God, Renew a right spirit within me; and this right
spirit will s^t all right that is amiss in me, because it is a right spirit;
will renew and quicken all that is dead and dull within me, because it is all
spirit.

But what more good will a right spirit do, when it is renewed; than it did
before, when it was first given? If it prospered not at the first planting;
what assurance of prospering at the second? but is it not, that a right spirit,
in a created heart, may stand firm; though in a made heart, it gave ground and
failed? and specially when it is a right spirit renewed; seeing renovation is
always with addition of strength; and no part of a house, is commonly so
strong, as that part is, which is newly repaired. Secundae cogitationes are
sapientiores; and secundi conatus are fortiores. Though once going about
Hiericho, did the walls no hurt; yet the going about them, again and again,
made them fall to the ground: though one Cock crowing, wrought nothing upon
Peter; yet the second times crowing, made him weep bitterly; Oh then, Renew in
me a right spirit, O God; and the walls of my sinful Hiericho, will fall to
the ground; the stupour of my dull brains, will resolve into tears.

When sin seeks to enter, and to get entertainment with us; it makes us
believe, we shall be like Gods; but when it is once entered, and has gotten
possession; it leaves us to find, we are not so much as fit for Gods company.
And it seems, as though we were put to our choice here; whether we will have
sins company, or Gods? for both we cannot have: if entertain sin; then we
must take our leave of God: if enjoy Gods presence; then we must give no
entertainment to sin: a hard choice to flesh and blood; but a right spirit
resolves it presently: Cast me Verse 11.
not off from thy presence, O God; let me enjoy that; and as for sin, I
utterly renounce it, though it should present it self to me, in greater pomp,
than Solomon clothed, in all his royalty. I had rather live one day in thy
courts, to enjoy thy presence; than to live accounted the son of Pharaohs
daughter: and Methuselahs age, in all the pleasures of the world. Do we see,
how the presence of the Sun, cheeres up the air; makes glad the earth; and
enlightens the whole world: and can we not see, the wonderful effects of
comfort, which are wrought in the soul, by the presence of God; in comparison
of whom, the Sun is not so much as a moate in the Sun? If it be thy pleasure,
O God; to withdraw thy presence from me, to make me sensible of my weakness;
yet cast me not off from thy presence, in displeasure, to make me despair of
thy Love. If thou will needs put a veil upon thy face, to keep mine eyes from
seeing thee; yet let it be, but as the veil upon Moses face; to keep mine
eyes from dazeling. It is potion bitter enough, to be deprived of thy presence,
though done in never so fair a manner; but to be cast out of thy presence, as
done in anger; what is this, but to give me gall and wormwood to drink? If I
needs must die; let it be upon the top of Nebo; where I may see the land of
Canaan before me; for there, thy presence is to comfort me; but let it not be
in the valley; where there is no representation of thy glorious presence, to
give me comfort. My sin, O God, I know is such, that may justly make me to
fly from thy presence; as it once made Adam. when he hid himself from thee;
yet in this case, I may hope thou will look after me; as thou did then
vouchsafe to look after him: but if thou cast me our of thy presence; and that
it be done, by thine own hand; Alas, O Lord! what hope is there left me, of
ever coming into thy presence again? As long as I am in thy presence, there
is hope; I may entreat; and thou art apt to be entreated; I may fall down and
humble my self; and thou give grace to the humble: but if it should once
come to this, that I were cast out of thy presence; alas, O God! thou would
then be quite of sight; clean out of hearing; that no entreaty could be heard;
no humbling, be seen; either to give me the comfort of hope; or to put me in
hope of any comfort. If thou, O God, should cast me off from thy presence;
whom could I hope, to have present with me? The Angels would be my guardians
no longer; for they would soon take notice of thy displeasure; and would never
regard, whom thou rejectest. The Saints would be my Associates no longer: for
if they found me not in thy presence; they would presently know, I were none of
their society; and their communion extends no further. And what company then
could I hope to have? Cain, perhaps, and Cham; the damned crew; miserable
comforters; or rather no comfo^rs but augmenters of my misery. But yet, O God;
if my sins unexpressable, have made thee unexorable; and that thou will needs
cast me off, from thy 20.
presence; at least, Take not thy holy Spirit from me: For, what were this,
but to put me out of thy service; and then to take away thy Livery too? Yet as
long as I have thy Livery on; it keeps me in credit; it gives me countenance;
it leaves me hope, I may be entertained again; as long as thy holy Spirit
stays with me; I have one to comfort me; one to put me in hope I may be
received into favor again; in no worse case, than Pharaohs Butler was; who in
disgrace for a time, was afterward restored to his former place; but if thou
take thy Livery from me; if thou take thy holy Spirit from me; Alas, O Lord! I
am then utterly undone; none left to comfort me; none, to speak for me: in as
ill a case as Pharaohs Baker; nothing left me to hope in, but a dream; and
that dream, nothing but of white Baskets; out of which, the Birds shall eat;
but nothing that is good, for me to taste. If thy holy Spirit, should of
himself depart from me; it would be a parting, exceeding grievous unto me; but
for thee, O God, to take him from me; where the manner of losing, is as much as
the loss; what grief can be spoken of, so unspeakable?

But having said, Cast me not off from thy presence; it may seem superfluous
to say; Take not thy holy Spirit from me; seeing, this of necessity follows
upon that; for how can Gods holy Spirit be, but where he is himself? and how
can it tarry with me, if I tarry not with him? They both indeed, grow upon one
tree; yet are several fruits; Gods presence brings with it, a passive
influence; his holy Spirit an active; although therefore, O God; thou bar me
of thy presence, and leave me inglorious; yet take not away thy holy Spirit
from me, to leave me profane. Thy holy Spirit, is the sanctifier; and will thou leave me to impiety and profaneness? Thy holy Spirit is the Directour;
and will thou leave me, without a Guide, in the most dangerous passages of
this wicked world? Thy holy Spirit is the Comforter; and will thou leave me
Disconsolate, in my manifold miseries? If thou take thy holy Spirit from me;
what spirit will be left me, but a spirit of error? a spirit of uncleanness?
a spirit of despair? and can thou for pity, leave me a prey, to such
outrageous spirits? O Lord, though my sins be as great as Cains; yet suffer
me not to despair like Cain; though my sins be greater than Saul's; yet
suffer me not to distrust thee like Saul; but, as it is a benefit; so let it be
a pledge of thy presence; and of thy holy Spirit; that I can pray unto thee for
thy presence, and for the continuance of thy holy Spirit. When I remember, the
sweet comforts, I have sometimes found in the motions of thy holy Spirit; and
when I think of the joy, I have conceived of thy salvation; Oh, how my heart
seems to leap within me; and how am I ravished, with ecstasies of delight? and
now to think this comfort should be taken from me; this joy should be bereft
me: Oh, what torment; what death; what hell can be so grievous!

But how can God cast me off from his presence, though he would: Is not God,
every where? and am not I somewhere? and must I not then, be needs where he is,
and in his presence? God indeed has a presence of Being; and this is every
where; and he has a presence of Power; and this is every where; but he has a
presence of Grace and favor; and this is not every where. His presence of
Power, is as well in the Ant, as in the Elephant; yet it makes not the Ant an
Elephant; and therefore, this is not the presence, that I desire: his presence
of Being is as well in hell, as in heaven; yet it makes not the hell a heaven;
and therefore, neither is this the presence that I desire; but his presence of
grace and favor, is not as well in the wicked, as in the penitent; for if it
were, it would make the wicked penitent; and therefore, this is the presence,
which I so much long to keep; which I so much fear to lose.

But why should I fear, least God should cast me off from his presence? Is not
his delight amongst the children of men? and am not I, one of that Generation?
And why should I fear, lest he should take his holy Spirit from me? was it
not he, that gave it me at first? and is he one, that will give a thing, and
then take it away again? Yet my sins make me, that I cannot but fear; for
why should he not cast me out of his sight; who has wrought so much
wickedness in his sight? why should he let his holy Spirit stay there, where
it is so much grieved? for, what do my grievous sins but grieve it? Oh vile
sin; of what cause thou art the effect; I know not; but this I know, thou art
the cause of most vile effects; for thou only art the cause, that God is like
to cast me off from his presence; thou only the cause, that God is like to
take his holy Spirit from me; and seeing in Gods presence, there is fullness of
joy for evermore; alas, in being cast out of his presence; what is left me,
but the fullness of misery for ever more!

But seeing thou have not cast me off from thy presence; but only removed thy
presence from me, because thy pure nature could not endure to stay in a
polluted heart; yet now that I am new made; and that thou have created a clean
heart within me; Now thou may return; and restore to me the comfort of thy
presence; the joy of thy salvation; and by this, thou shall show thou did not
take it away, to keep it away, but to make it more precious in restoring; thou
shall show, thou did not leave me, to forsake me; but to make thy self
more welcome in returning. But though some things are of such condition, that
we find their goodness, more by wanting, than by enjoying; as sickness makes
us more sensible of health; yet this needed not, in the comfort of thy
presence, seeing of this there can be no satiety; and we can never so well
learn to desire thee by wanting thee; as we are taught to embrace thee by
enjoying thee.

Although the fuites I make to thee, O God, be many; yet they are all so
subordinate to one another; that if thou deni'st me one; it were as good for
me, thou should deny them all: For what good will it do me, to have a
clean^ heart created in me; and thy blessed presence removed from me? What
good, to have a right spirit renewed; and thy holy Spirit to be taken away? as
if thou should supply me with props, and take away foundations? The fear
of this, lest thou should cast me out of thy presence, and take thy holy
Spirit from me; has so deeply wrought upon me, and brought me so low; that I
find no Physic now so necessary for me, as a Restorative: Oh therefore,
Restore to me the joy of thy salvation; for this Restorative exceeds not only
all the simples of Verse 12.
Nature; but all the compounds of art; for what Alchermes; what Gellies; what
Aurum potabile can be comparable, to this Restorative; The joy of thy
salvation? But had not this, been a fitt^r suit for Nabuchodonofor; from whom,
God took away at once, his Sense, Reason, and his Kingdom; than for David,
from whom God never took any thing that we know of, but only his child
begotten in adultery? yet David will hardly be dr^wne to think so; for hear
the moan be makes: Alas, O Lord! I live now, as it were, cast out of thy
presence; which is more to me, than for Nabuchodonosor, to be cast out of his
Kingdom; I feed now upon the bread of sorrow; which is more to me, than for
Nabuchodonosor, to feed upon the grass of the earth: I sit now, as a Sparrow
upon the house top; desolate and disconsolate; which is more to me, than for
Nabuchodonosor, to have no compauions but the beasts of the field: and yet, O
Lord, only Restore to me the joy of thy salvation; and it shall be more to
me, than for Nabuchodonosor to be restored to his Sense; his Reason; his
Kingdom again. This joy is to me, as Isaak was to Abraham; the whole comfort
of my life; and thou restored'st him to his Father in great compassion; and
will thou have no compassion on me; and not restore my Isaak to me again? O
merciful God; take away my goods; take away my health; take away my life; but
take not away this joy from me, unless thou mean to restore it again; for
without this joy, my goods will do me no good; I shall be sick of my health;
I shall be weary of my life; all joy without this joy, is but shadow of joy; no
solidnesse; no substance in it; other joys I can want, and yet want no joy;
but how can I want the joy of thy salvation; but I must needs fall into the
hell of my own perdition?

Indeed, all these graces, and specially these four, A right Spirit, and Gods
presence; his holy Spirit, and the joy of his salvation; are all, I may say, of
a covey; like Partridges that always keep together: or if at any time, parted
by violence; they never leave calling after one another, till they meet again:
and thus, a right Spirit calls after Gods presence; his presence, after his
holy Spirit; his holy Spirit, after the joy of his salvation; and the joy of
his salvation, calls after them all. O then, Restore to me the joy of thy
salvation: that this covey of thy Graces may be kept together; and that the
mournful voice of calling after one another, may no more be heard, to
disquiet my soul.

But how can God restore that, which he took not away? For, can I charge God,
with the taking away the joy of his salvation from me? O gracious God; I
charge not thee with taking it; but my self, with losing it; and such is the
miserable condition, of us poor wretches; that if thou should restore no
more to us, than what thou take from us; we should quickly be at a fault in
our Estates; and our ruin would be as sudden, as inevitable.

But why am I so ^arenest for restoring? for what good will restoring do me,
if I cannot keep it, when I have it? and how shall I more keep it, being
restored; than I kept it before, being enjoyed? and if I so enjoy it, as still
fear to lose it; what joy can there be in such enjoying? O therefore, Not
restore it only; but establish me with thy free Spirit: that as by thy
restoring, 20.
I may enjoy it entirely; so by thy establishing, I may enjoy it securely.
Indeed, if thou should only restore it; and then leave it for me to keep; I
should presently run a hazard of losing it again: but when thou restorest
it; and then confirmest it; and that with the seal of thy free Spirit; this
gives me an indefeasible estate; and absolutely frees me from fear of losing
it any more for ever. Alas my soul! what qualmes have these been? what
floatings between fear and hope? all the comfort is; that as Hope sets out
first, and gets the start of Fear, so it keeps the field last; and gets the
goal from Fear; For, Hope set^ing out by Gods renewing a right Spirit; and
then disturbed by fear, lest he should take away his holy Spirit; gets the
victory at last, by being established with Gods free Spirit: for this
establishing fixes our floating; and frees us from having these qualmes of
fear and hope any more: Not, that we can ever be free where they are; but
that they shall not be, where we are; not fear; because in a Haven; not hope;
because in possession.

But what mystery is it, that David intends here, by his triplicity of
Spirits? A right Spirit; a holy Spirit, a free and principal Spirit? Are they
not all one holy Ghost; but diverse operations? called therefore, the right
Spirit; because it directs us: the holy Spirit; because it sanctifies us;
the free and principal Spirit; because it governes us? And thus understood;
we may see, from whence the Collect in our Liturgy was gathered; which says:
Direct, Sanctify, and govern us in the ways of thy Laws; and in the works
of thy Commandments. Or is it, that he makes three suits for three spirits;
as intending to every person, in the Deity, one? intimating the second person,
by the right spirit; as being the way and the truth; the third person; by the
holy Spirit; as being the Author of sanctification; the first person; by the
free and principal Spirit; it being He, that must say, Fiat, to all that is
done? And thus understood, we may see from whence is framed, that Versicle in
our Letanie, which says: O Holy, Blessed, and glorious Trinity; three Persons,
and one God; have mercy upon us miserable sinners.

And now is David Monte potitus: gotten up, I may say, to the top of Mount
Gerizim; after many wearisome and painful steps. He was indeed so oppressed
with the burden; and so fettered with the chain of his sins; that he seemed
as a man distracted; not knowing in the world what course to take: yet not
willing to be wanting to himself; he tries all the ways; and uses all the
means he can possibly devise or think of. First, he prays God, to wash him
from his sins; and lest washing should not be sufficient; he prays next, to
be purged from his sins; but not trusting to these outward means; he thinks
upon a new course; and prays, to have his sins blotted out; as much as to
have Gods Debt-booke crossed; yet not satisfied with this neither; he then
flies to inward means; and prays, not only to have a clean heart created;
but a right Spirit renewed in him; that so he may be Purus corpore and spiritu:
and now one would think, he were certainly past all danger: yet even here he
falls into the most dismal frights, that ever seized upon a perplexed soul;
for he fears, least God should cast him off from his Presence; and lest he
should take his holy Spirit from him: most dismal frights indeed; yet
recovering his spirits, he bethinkes himself at last, of a way; that either
will serve to make him a freeman; or he must never look to be: and that is,
to be established with Gods free Spirit; and this indeed strikes the stroke;
and therefore this he makes his Murus Aheneus; for being now established with
Gods free Spirit; he finds himself so free; that he thinks himself, able to
set up a Free-schoole; and is confident to say; Then will I teach thy ways to
the wicked; and sinners Verse. 13.
shall be converted unto thee: Then if thou say unme; Et t^ conversus, converte
sratres; I shall do it, both boldly and effectually. Boldly; for I shall teach
thy ways to the wicked; who are but unruly scholars: and effectually; for
sinners shall be converted unto thee; which is the end of all schooling. And,
then if the Angels give a Plaudite to their conversion; I doubt not, O God, but
thou also wilt graciously accept the humble service, of the convertour; and
even thy self shall receive a benefit in thy glory; by the benefit which I
receive by thy pardon; for, as there have been many scandalled by my sin; so
there shall be many reclaimed by my repentonce; and they, who loved thee not
for thy Justice, shall fear thee for the mercy; and the^, who feared thee not
for thy mercy, shall love thee for thy justice; and thy Name shall be great,
amongst all Nations. O happy conversion; that is not barren, and ends in it
self; which was a curse in Israel; but as a fruitful mother, continues a race
of conversions; and shall therefore make the Convertour ^hine in Heaven, as a
Star of the greater Magnitude.

But am I a fit man, to teach thy ways to the wicked; who have walked, all my
life long, in the ways of wickedness? Am I likely to be a means for
converting of sinners; who have hitherto been occasion of perverting the
godly? Thou, O God, that tookest Amos from among the Heard-men of tekoa, to
make him a Prophet; thou also can take me from among the wicked of the world,
to make me, a converter of sinners. I take not upon me, to teach the godly, who
may better teach me; I teach only the wicked; None but sinners, are for my
School; I am not a Shepherd to tend the fold; but to fetch in, strayers: The
title of my profession is Dux conversorum; A guide of converts; all my
Doctrine, is only Repentance; and if any such be, that need no repenting; they
need not my teaching; nor belong to my School. But if any man, think
repentance, a lesson so easy, that he can take it out, and learn it, without
a teacher; let him but hear the lesson read, which I have learned, and he
must; if he will be a convert. Let him see my eyes swollen, with the floods of
my tears; and so must his be: Let him see me lie grovelling under sackcloth and
ashes; and so must he do: Let him see my knees brawned with kneeling at
Prayer; and so must his be: Let him see me go fasting with bread and water;
and so must he do: Let him see my back goared with stripes of contrition;
and so must his be: Let him see my breast torn, with sighings and groanings;
and so must he do; and if all this be not enough, to make a hard lesson; let
him see my heart broken, and shivered with sorrow; and so must his be. And now
let flesh and blood tell me, if this be a lesson to be learned without a
teacher?

But if Repentance be so hard a lesson to learn; how can David be so confident
of his teaching, to say, that sinners shall be converted by it? Indeed, when
Kings become Schoolemasters, no marvel, if sinners become converts: For, who
knows not the force of Regis ad exemplum? But is David then the only Phoenix
in this kind? Have we not amongst us at this day; and long may we have, a
King like David; who, though he teach not the same lesson that David did: (for
his lesson was only Repentance) yet his whole life, is a Lecture of Piety and
op^ghtnesse; a lesson so much better than David's; as to be in the first For me
of Virtue, is far more worthy, than to be but in the second?

But, Oh the the u^quier stare of a guilty conscience! David was much troubled
at first, about procuring his cleanenesse: and now he seems as much troubled
about (...) his foulness: I^ it, the Malus genius of sin, that is never
without fear; and therefore creeps into all corners? Or is it, the Bonus
genius of Repentance; that is never without care; and therefore searches all
corners? David had asked God forgiveness, for his iniquity; his sin; his
offenses; his transgressions; corners enough to meet with any sin, of what kind
soever; but is it enough to confess our sins; and to ask forgiveness, in
general terms; and never to make mention of any sin in particular? Indeed,
where sins be infinite; it were an infinite labor, to mention them all; and
with all our labor, could never be done: but yet, where there are eminent
sins; sins like Saul; higher than their fellows, by head and shoulders;
not to mention such sins, were a kind of concealing them; as if we meant to
hide them, in the throng; that they might pass unperceived; and there must be
no concealing, if we look for cancelling. Behold then, O God; an eminent
sin; a sin indeed, like Saul; so high above his fellows; that I dare not
say what it is, without saying Deliver me first; Deliver me Verse 14.
from blood guiltiness, O God; thou God of my salvation: and blame me not,
for doubling the Name of God here, seeing it is a deliverance, that requires a
double proportion of Gods assistance: For, though every sin may be said a sin
of blood; as whereof, the wages is death; yet this actual shedding of blood,
is a sin of the most scarlet-die; and stands in need of the greatest measure,
of God free Spirit to free it.

But what need David pray God, to deliver him from blood-guiltinesse? For what
blood had he shed? much, no doubt, in war; but, that was lawful; and left
no guiltiness; and therefore needed no deliverance. But what blood did he
shed unlawfully? No more did Ahab: No more did Iezabel; yet as guilty of blood,
as if they had shed it. When Magistrates command a thing to be done; they do
it: When a malicious person, imprecates a mischief to be wrought; he works
it: When a man plots a villainy to be acted; he acts it; and in all these ways,
though David actually shed no blood; yet he was as guilty of blood, as if he
had shed it. Peralium here, is as much as Perse; and therefore David knew he
had cause enough to say; Deliver me from blood guiltiness, O God.

But is there any hope, that this sin of blood, may ever be remitted? seeing
God has spoken it peremptorily; he that sheddeth man's blood; by man, shall his
blood be shed; and can I look, that God will break his Word, to do me a
pleasure? But is it not that Gods threatening, is ever with condition? For, was
it not so in Ninive? Forty days, and Ninive shall be destroyed: Yet forty
days came; and Ninive was not destroyed. Was it not so to Hezekiah? Set thine
house in order, for thou shall die of this sickness: yet H^zekiah died not of
that sickness; but lived fifteen years after. I know indeed, that the
condition of Gods Will there, though noe expressed, was yet intended: Unless
they repented; but what may be the condition of his will here? No doubt,
Repentance too; but with ths Codicill annexed: His blood shall be shed, unless
he can find some other, that will shed his blood for him. And alas! if this
be the condition, What am I the near? For, where can I find out any, that
will shed his blood for me? and if I could find one willing; where can I find
one able? An eye for an eye; a tooth for a tooth; and yet a man may live; but
blood for blood, and who can live, unless he be a God? An Angel cannot do
it; for he has no blood to shed. A man cannot do it; for he cannot lay down
his life, and take it up again; Thou only can do it, who art both God and
man; Thou God of my salvation; for thou art the Lamb that was slain; and is
alive; and I know, that my Redeemer lives. And will thou shed thy blood for
me; and not deliver me from b^d? Will thou pay a Ransom for me; and let me be
a Captive still? Will thou pay so dearly for a thing, and not take it, when
thou have done? Oh, Deliver me from blood-guiltinesse, O God; and my tongue
shall sing aloud of thy righteousness.

But why should David pray to be delivered from bloods; as the words indeed
are? For seeing he shed but the blood of Vriah only; the singular number might
well enough have served Is it, that the plotting of Vriahs death, drew with it
the deaths of many others? and so, just cause of praying to be delivered from
bloods? Or is it, that the several respects of relation in Vriah; made his
blood, as so many several bloods, in Gods account? One blood, as of the
husband of Bathsheba; Another, as of David's own subject: another, as of an
Innocent person: another, as of a faithful servant: another, as of a silly
Lamb, that carried letters of his own death; and which is most of all,
another, as of one that was venturing his life for David. But if these several
respects, make so many several bloods; and every blood must have a
deliverance; where shall we find a deliverer of so many respects, to make so
many bloods, to serve for deliverance? Indeed, we may look all the world
over; and find none such to be found; but only thou, O God, who art the God of
my salvation: For, in thee alone, may all the like respects be found: To answer
the blood, of the Husband of Bathsheba; here is the blood of the H^and of the
Church: To answer the blood, of King David's subject; here is the blood, of the
King of Heavens subject: To answer the blood of an Innocent person; here is the
blood of him, who only could say; Which of you could reprove me for sin? To
answer the blood of a faithful servant; here is the blood, of him, who was in
the House of God, more faithful, than his most faithful servant Moses: To
answer the blood of a silly Lamb, that carried letters of his own death; here
is the blood of him, who carried our flesh, of purpose to suffer death; and
that which is most of all; to answer the blood of him, that was then venturing
his life for David; here is the blood of him, that was then shedding his blood
for them, that shed his blood. But seeing, by this account; we find six
several bloods, in Vri^hs, shed by David; where find we six several bloods
in Christ, shed by him? Indeed, just six, and no more, nor less: One blood,
which he sweat in the Garden; another, which he shed with the stripes of the
whips; another, drawn from him with the pricks of the thorns; another, which
he shed on the Cross, with the nails in his feet; another, with the nails
in his hands; and the sixth, which he shed out of his side, with the point of
the Spear. And now, tha^ we have bloods enough, to serve for deliverance; how
shall we be able to apply them? Is it not, that they are all recollected; and
put into that cup, of which he said; Drink ye all of this? For the blood of
this cup, is that which washes away our sins; that which purges us with
Hysop; that which renewes a right Spirit within us; that which restores to us
the joy of his salvation; that which establishes us with his free Spirit; and
lastly, that which delivers us from bloods; that, David had great cause to say;
and we no less than he; Deliver me from bloods and blood-guiltinesse, O
God, Thou God of my salvation; and my tongue shall sing aloud of thy
Righteousness.

And now we may conceive, a match, as it were, to be tried here, between
Blood and Repentance; which of them shall cry loudest, and be soonest heard of
God; Blood cries for vengeance; and God is the God of vengeance. Repentance
cries for mercy; and God is the God of mercy; and so they seem both, upon
equal terms yet: but if we mark^ the order of Gods Titles; we shall find
his Mercy to take place of his Justice: Misericordia superexaltat judicium; and
therefore Repentance which cries for Mercy; shall be heard before Blood, which
cries for Justice. But if Repentance cannot get it with crying; she will at
least with singing; for she never sung till now; and now she sings; My tongue
shall sing aloud of thy Righteousness; where, Blood only cries, but cannot
sing: and seeing singing makes better music in Gods ears than crying;
Repentance shall be^eard, when blood shall be put to silence. But how loud will
the singing be, when not only Repentance sings; but Joy also, which is a loud
singer, shall join in consort, and sing with her? and if ever Joy sung, it
will sing now: For what geater joy; than for a bondman to be set at liberty?
For a man condemned for blood, to be delivered from blood? and if no joy can be
greater than this; then certainly no singing can be louder than that. But what
this song is that Repentance and Joy join in consort to sing; seeing the sweet
singer of Israel, has not vouchsafed to deliver himself: It is not for any
man now living, to deliver it: only we may conceive, that Repentances part,
is Deprofundis; and that Joys part, is In excelsis; Repentance sings the
Hosanna; and Joy, the Allelujah.

But may we not wonder at David; how he dares speak thus to God: Deliver me
from blood; and my tongue shall sing of thy Righteousness? as though he
thought, he might commit a wilful murder; and then have his pardon of God,
for a song? and what should his song be of? of Gods Righteousness. But what
Righteousness is in this; to suffer a righteous person to be murdered; and
then to set the murderer free? As much righteousness as this, we may find in
a Jew; who cried, Crucify Christ; and Deliver Barbas. But, O my soul,
forbear such thoughts; or rather, tremble at such blasphemies: Remember first,
that this song is not for getting of pardon; but for giving of thanks; and
what thanks so acceptable, as that which is cheerfully spoken; and what
spoken so cheerfully, as that which is sung? And then consider, what Gods
Righeousnesse is: He says himself; His ways are not, as our ways; and may
not we as well say; his Righteousness is not as our righteousness? Our
righteousness is blood for blood; but Gods Righteousnesse^ may be a song for a
murder. But then consider withal, what this song is; and how hard a thing it
is, to sing of Gods Righteousness; the Angels have enough to do to sing it;
it is their Allelujah: and seeing the singing this Allelujah, is the chiefest
service of an Angel; what deserves he less than an Angels place, that can
sing of Gods Righteousness? And that we may see, how transcendent a matter it
is, to do it; Behold David here, a man far abler than any of us; yet finds
himself not able, so much as to open his lips toward it; but is feign to call
to God for help: O Lord, open thou my lips; and my mouth shall show Verse 15.
forth thy praise: open them ind^ed, to bid Ioab number the people; and to
entice Bathsheba to folly, I can; but to open them to sing of thy
Righteousness; and to show forth thy praise; I am utrerly unable, unless thou
uouchsafe to open them for me: Oh then, open thou my lips, O God; for else I
shall be forced, to break off abruptly; and after so many great favors
received, be feign to go my ways without so much as saying, I thank you. But
it shall never be said of David, that he is so unmannerly; so ungrateful: If
thou but please, to open my lips; for then, as I have sung this Penitential
Psalm for my self; so I will sing an Encomiasticall Hymn for thee; and this
So reckoned by many of the Ancients.
fiftieth Psalm, as well as the fiftieth year, shall have its Iubile. If thou
open not my lips, neither Repentance will cry, nor Joy will sing; but both will
be as dumb, as the Devil in the Gospel; but if thou open my lips; my month
will turn Organist; and I shall strive with the Angels, in singing their
Allelujah. If I only open my lips; they will quickly shut again; and there
will not be a praise, that is worthy of thee; but if thou open them; Thou
openest, and no man shuts; and then I shall show forth thy praise to all
generations. Thy praise; but for what? for thy washing and purging me: for thy
creating in me a clean heart; and renewing a right Spirit within me; for thy
restoring to me, the joy of thy Salvation; and for establishing me with thy
free Spirit: that we may know, it is no ordinary opening of lips that will
serve; seeing it is not, a single praise; but a whole troop of praises, that
must come forth at once; I must praise thee for thy humility; that disdainest
not to make me clean; I must praise thee for thy bounty; that deniest not to
make me new; I must praise thee for thy patience, that attendest my
repentance; I must praise thee for thy graciousnesse, that acceptest my
repentance; and before all these, I must praise thee for thy mercy, that art
willing; I must praise thee for thy Power, that artable; I mst praise thee for
thy Justice, that know why; I must praise thee for thy wisdom, that
know how; to forgive me my sins; and to deliver me from blood; but above
all these, I must praise thee for thy glory; that having made the sands of the
^a, the stars of Heaven so innumerable; yet all of them put together, are not
counters enough to sum up thy praises.

And now I was thinking, what were fit, to Verse 16.
offer to God, for all his loving kindnesses he has showed me; and I thought
upon sacrifices; for they have sometimes been pleasing to him; and he has
oftentimes smelt, a sweet odor from them; but I considered, that sacrifices
were but shadows of things to come; and are not now, in that grace they have
been; for old things are past; and new are now come; the shadows are gone;
the substances are come in place; the Bullockes that are to be sacrificed now,
are our hearts; it were easier for me, to give him Bullockes for sacrifice,
than to give him my heart: but why should I offer him that he cares not for?
my heart, I know, he cares fore; and if it be broken and offered up by
Penitence and Contrition; it is the only sacrifice, that now he delights in.

But can we think God to be so indifferent; that he will accept of a broken
heart? Is a thing that is broken, good for any thing? Can we drink in a broken
Glass? Or, can we lean upon a broken staff? But though other things may be
the worse for breaking,; yet a heart is never at the best, till it be broken:
For, till it be broken, we cannot see what is in it, till it be broken, it
cannot send forth i^s sweetest odor: and therefore, though God love a whole
heart in affection; yet he loves a broken heart in sacrifice. And no marvel,
indeed; seeing it is even he himself that breaks it: for, as nothing but the
blood can break the Adamant; so nothing, but the blood of our scape-goate
Christ Jesus, is able to break our Adamantine hearts. Accept therefore, O God,
my broken heart, which I offe^ thee, with a whole heart; seeing, thou can
neither except against it, for being whole; which is broken in sacrifice: nor
except against it, for being broken; which is whole in affection.

But is not this to make God a cruel God; to make him delight, in broken
hearts; as though he took no joy, but in our sorrowing? No pleasure, but in
our tormenting? It is true indeed; God delights to be merciful; but yet he
delights not to be merciful unjustly: and justly he cannot be merciful, but
where he finds Repentance: and seeing Repentance can never be without
sorrowing; and such sorrow, as even breaks the heart with sorrow; this makes
the broken heart a pleasing sacrifice to God; because, as a just man's Prayer
ties up his hand, as it were, from doing of justice: so a sinners Repentance,
sets him at liberty, for showing of mercy.

And now, that I have prayed, and offered sacrifice for my self; shall I
forget my Mother Sion? For, is not Sion, the common Mother of us all? Shall I
forget the glorious City Jerusalem; whereof I am a member; and a Ci^izen? Can
I prosper, if my Sion suffer? Can I be safe, if Jerusalem be in danger? O
then, Do good, O God, in thy good pleasure to Sion; Build thou Verse 18.
the walls of Jerusalem. But shall I put God to so mean a work; to be a
builder of walls? O glorious God; what fitter work for thy Allmighty Power?
For what is it, to build the walls of Jerusalem; but to defend Jerusalem from
her enemies? And what arm of defense, has Jerusalem to trust to, against the
Host of her enemies; but thine only, O Lord, who art the Lord of Hosts? Thou
have indeed, laid a sure foundation in Jerusalem; but what is a foundation, if
there be no walls reared? A foundation is to build upon; and to what purpose,
if it be not built upon? and who is able to build upon it; but thou, O God, the
great Builder of the World, who with thy only Word, did buil^ the W^? ^h is
a Vineyard, if it have no hedges to fence it? no more is Jerusalem, if it hay
no walls to defend it. For, is it not subject to all sudden surprises? Lies it
not open to all Hostile invasions? and so, we should lose the end of Sion, in
the midst of Sion? For, what is Sion, but a Sanctuary for sacrifices? and how
can we offer thee, the sacrifice, of thankesgiving for our fafety; if we
cannot offer our sacrifices in safety? and what safety; if there be no walls to
defend us? Oh therefore, Build thou the walls of Jerusalem; and then, as in
thy good pleasure, thou have done a pleasure to Sion; so thou shall smell a
sweet odor; and take pleasure in Sion: for we shall offer thee, the
sacrifices of righteousness; With burnt offering; the offering of a true,
though imperfect righteousness; in the Jerusalem here below; and with whole
burnt offering; the offering of a perfect Righteousness, in the Jerusalem
that is above; and we shall offer Bullockes upon thine Altar; sing our (...)
upon that Altar, under which the Saints lie now, and sing their Dirges; their
Dirge, of How long, O Lord, Holy and True; shall be changed into songs of
external Jubilee, Angels and men; Christ himself, and his members, shall all
cast down their Crowns before thee; that thou only may be All in All; and
that thine may be the Kingdom; the Power; and the Glory; for Ever and Ever:
Amen.

And now, that we have heard the penitent David, make his confession; and say
his Orisons: seen him, make his Oblations, and offer his Sacrifices to God: It
may not be unfit, to draw an observation or two; from the manner of his
Leiturgie: and first, that this whole Psalm has in it, thorowout; Bimembres
sententias; verses, consisting of two parts: whereof the later, is ever an
augmentation of the former; as when he says; Wash me from mine iniquity: It
follows, and cleanse me from my sins; which is more than washing; and so an
augmentation. When he says; I know mine iniquity; it follows, and my sin is
ever before me; which is more than knowing his sin; and so, an augmentation.
When he says; Against thee only I have sinned; it follows; I have done this
evil in thy sight; which is more than sinning against him; and so an
augmentation. When he says, I was borne in iniquity; it follows; and in sin
has my mother conceived me; which is more than to be borne in sin; and so
still an augmentation: as likewise in all the rest, if we run them over; which
shows the great have that David makes in his journey of Repentance; and
therefore takes two paces at one stride; and climbes, as it were, two stairs
at one step.

A second observation may be; that almost all the Psalm through, but most
apparently in the middle verses. One deprecates the evil; and the next
following obsecrates the good: One expresses a detestation of his sins; and
the next following, an application of Gods Mercies; like a Gardener, that with
one hand, pluckes up weeds; and with the other, plants sweet flowers. For, in
saying, Purge me from my sins; he deprecates the evil; and pluckes up
weeds: and in the next following; Make me to hear of joy and gladness; he
obsecrates the good; and plants sweet flowers. In saying, Turn away thy face
from my sins; he deprecates the evil; and pluckes up weeds: and in the next
following; Create in me a clean heart; he obsecrates the good; and plants
sweet flowers. In saying, Cast me not off from t^y presence; he deprecates the
evil; and plucks up weeds: and in saying, Restore to me the joy of thy
salvation; he obsecrates the good; and plants sweet flowers. And by this, he
seems, as it were, to besiege God round with his Petitions; and to hold him
fast with both hands as Iaakob did the Angel: that he may leave him no way to
escape; and be sure not to let him go without a blessing.

Another observation, may be this; that in all this Psalm, David arrogateth
nothing to himself, but sin and misery; lying wholly at Gods Mercy, for the
remission of his sins; and so far from any ability to satisfy for
himself; that he acknowledges in himself an utter disability, but to speak
a good word; or but to think a good thought: and indeed, we may truly say;
that all the spirits in the Arteries; all the blood in the veins of this
Psalm; are but blasts, and drops of the Antheame in Christ's Prayer: For Thine
is the Kingdom; the Power; and the Glory, for Ever and Ever, Amen.

FINIS.

