THE MYRROVR OF MODESTY, wherein appears as in a perfect Glass how the
Lord delivers the innocent from all imminent perils, and plagueth the
bloudthirstie hypocrites with deserved punishments.

Showing that the graie heads of dooting adulterers shall not go with peace
into the grave, neither shall the righteous be forsaken in the day of trouble.

By R. G. Master of Arts.

Imprinted at London by Roger Ward, dwelling at the sign of the Talbot near
unto Holburne Conduit. 1584.

To the Gentle Rea ders health.
BEing requested Gentlemen of a certain Gentlewoman whose suit I durst not
deny to pen out this story of Susanna, more largely then it is written among
the Apopcripha. I stood in a doubt whether I should deny her request or put
my self to your iudgement^, ^o (...) upon (...) a tri^ with my fr^d seemed
unto her (...), to trouble your (...) such trash I thought was to strain to
much v^on your courtesy, fearing thus to displease the one or offend the other
I de^mined rather to abide her brunt the^ to seem over rash, until at last
she persuaded me that to trouble your patience was but a small crack, but to
any a Gentlewoman and my friend so reasonable a request a great discredit. To
prove this her censure was a sentence, and in this her will stood as a law,
so that to feed her fancy I have showed my self to be to fond. But hoping
when you weigh what a spur I had you will wink if you spy a spot, I rest upon
this point and so bid you farewell.

Yours to use R. G.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND Virtuous Lady, the Lady MARGARET, Countess of
Darbie, Robert Green wishes happy health, with increase of Ho^or and virtue.
THe Poet Homer (Right Honorable and virtuous Lady) took pains to pen the
travels of Vli^s because he was wise, and I have applied my small skill to
level out the life of Susanna, because she was c^st. He sought to pleasure
others by the show of Vl^s wisdom, and I (if I might) to profit all by
Su^nas chastity. Diverse (...) Vli^ sleps, (although they suspected it for a
fained tale) then I hope most will tread Susanna^ tr^, in that they know it
an unfeigned truth. But your honor may think I play like Ezops (...), which
(...) her se^fe with others feathers or like the proud Poet Batyllus, which
subscribed his name to Virgils verses, and yet presented them to Augustus: In
the behalf therefore of this my offense, I excuse my self with the (...) that
Vard^ made, when he (...) E^ius (...) to (...) Em^rour: I (...) be another
(...) picture, but (...) flou^ with mine (...) c^lours. Well Dianas present was
ever a bow. because (...) lou^d hunting: Pallas (...) was a (...) in that
(...) was valiant: and I think no fitter present for your Ladyships personage,
then this Mirror of Chast^, (...) you are vertnous. The renown of whose
virtuous quallities is such, and so great that your v^rie foes (if you have
any) shall be forced maug^ their face to speak well whatsoever their
spightfull minds do think. The fame therefore (right honorable) of this your
virtuous life, and the report of your Ladyships s^rpasing courtesy, encouraged
me to present this pamphlet to your honors protection, hoping that as the
goddess Themis thankefullie accepted the frankincense, which Dew calion
willingly offered at (...) altar: So your Ladyship will vouchsafe of my will
whatsoever the work be, and tak^e this Pamphlet in good part, though for want
of skill it be imperfect. Resting thus upon your I adiships courtesy I commit
your honor to the Almighty.

Your honors most humbly to command Robert Green.

A PRINCELY MIRROVR OF PEEREles modesty.
_(...) the (...) of King Astiages, there dwelt in Babylon a certain man
called Ioa^him, loved particulerly of each one sor his virtue, and honored
generally of all men for his parentage and progeny, more adorned with
v^rtuous perfections, then endued with wealthy possessions, and yet counted
one of the ^reatest wealth in all Babylon, so that he was feared of most for
his riches, and (...) above all for his Justice. This Ioachim. willing to take
a wife and to link himself in the holy league of Matrimony, coueted
caresullie to find out such a match that he might neither have ca^se to rue
his chance, nor repent him of his choice, knowing that after that knot was once
knit (had I wist) would come to late. He therefore sought out one Susanna, the
daughter of Helchias, a man who carefully sought to keep the law, and took
surpassing pains in the diligent instructing of his daughter, knowing that her
virtuous qualities would be a comfort to him, and a credit to her self. This
Susanna was endued with such exquisite beauty and exceeding virtue, as it was
heard to judge whether the pure complexion of of her body, or the persect
constitution of her mind, held the supremacy Ioachim ^rst noting the godly
disposition of her parents, began to think, that such tree such fruit, that if
the stock were good the graft would be the better, that seldom out of a
right Olive grew a wild branch that the best vine bears the best grapes,
and the honestest parents the most virtuous children: then hearing the singular
report that al Babylon made (...) virtuous qualities (for he counted it y^
point of a wise man rather to love by ^are than like by the eye) he thought
himself fortunate that it was his chance to make so good a choice, knowing
that a peaceable woman, and of a good heart, is a gift of the Lord, and there is
nothing so much worth as a woman well instructed, that a shamfast and faithful
woman is adouble grace, and there is no treasure to be compared to her
continent mind, that as the glittering beams of the Sun when it aryseth,
decketh the Heaven, so the glistering beauty of a good wise adorneth the
house, and that as golden pillars do shine upon the sockets of silver, so does
a fair face with a virtuous mind. Ioachim I say considering this, and
finding in Susanna beauty to feed his fancy, and virtue to content his
heart, by the consent of her parents, took her to his wife, who whiles they
lived and loved together in fortunate prosperity, it happened that there were
clected two of the most aunciente of the people to be Judges, such as the
LORD speaks of, that the iniquity came from Babylon, and from the ancient
Judges that seemed to rule the people. These two beauty, and were enflamed
toward her with inordinate affection, fond fancy had alre^die given them the
foil, and their aged hair yielded unto vanity, so that they turned away
their minds from God, and durst not lift up their eyes to heaven, least it
should be a witness of their wickedness, or a cor^ue to their guilty
conscience, for the remembrance of God is a terror to (...) unrighteous, and
the sight of his creatures is a sting to the mind of the reprobate. These
therefore feeling their deuillish hearts to be perplexed with such hellish
passi^ns cast of carelesselie the fear of GOD, from before their ei^, neither
remembering that they were Elders to give good example, nor Judges of the people
to minister right, their hoarie hairs could not hale them from sin, nor
their calling convert them from filthiness, but they greedily (...) up the
dregs of unrighteousness, and carefully busied their brains to oppress
the simple. Yet although they ha^ wholly soulde themselves over to sin, and
yielded their necks to the yeake of (...), they durst not so much as in
countenannce show what their wicked wills did pretend. For albeit they were
lincked together in the league of ^itie, and were such professed friends as
the consent of the one was a constraint to the other, and though they were both
fettered in the snare of her beauty, and (...) with the like flame, yet they
durst not be wray their gr^, how fondly ^ancie had bewitched them, neither
unfold how fleshly desire had drawn them to disordinate lust, for the wicked
is ashamed more of man than of God, and fears to be detected of that which he
cares not to commit in the sight of the almighty. While thus they st^de in
dread to bewraie their ^oating (...), they daily watched very diligently to
feed their ^ies with the fight of her beauty, and to gaze on the perfection
of her body, neither fleeing that which bredde their own (...), nor
remembering the counsel of the wise, who wishes a man not to gaze upon the
glittering beauty of a woman, least he fall through that which is precious in
her, nor to yield to the alarumes of inordinate lust, that he both d^stroie not
himself, and his heritage. This wholesome doctrine nothing cooling their
desires, they still (...) with the Sow in their wickedness, yea their former
custom ^n sining had so taken away the feeling of their offense, that although
their own conscience drove them from attempting openly such a fault, yet they
greedily sought in secret to commit so heinous a fact, each of them carefully
coniecturing by what means he might b^st bring to pass his pretended
purpose, so that the one said to the other seeing that our business is done,
and our office diligently executed, let us not delaie any longer, but hie us
home to dinner, either of them seeking by this subtle shift to shake off the
others company, that he might find fit opportunity to give the onset, they
being therefore departed and having taken their leave, went home with a flea in
their ears, having the prick of lascivious lust as a continual spur in their
side, neither of them taking any rest till they returned and met in the same
place from whence before they parted, which sudden and unlooked for meeting,
drove them both into such a dumpe as they stood amazed at this strange chance,
until at last the eldest of them burst forth into these speeches. Brother
quoth he, I cannot but both muse and marvel what ^inde has driven you so
sodeinlie into this coast, have you such serious business with master
Ioachim, or are you pestured with such importunate sutours that your return is
so speedy, but it is heard brother to delay when the devil drives, or to ^ull
back the foot when love or necessity soundes the march, I am not such a
dunce but, I can divine by a little motion what the mind means, nor so had a
physician but I can conjecture by the water what the patientes pain is, I s^
brother by imagination what you feel in ^ct, and it is heard to hault before a
creeple^ I therefore adjure you by the sacred b^nd of freendship, which has
and shall remain unviolable betwixt, us, that you (without faining) unfold
unto me y^ cause of your sudden coming, swearing unto yo^ by the God of our
fathers, that be it never so weighty, I will be as secret as a brother, and be
it never so dangerous I will help thee as a friend. The other Judge hearing his
strange salutation, made him this answer. Brother quoth he, I smell your
fetch, but it is heard to catch the fish when the hook is bare, and ill taking
of the fox when the traps is descried, (...) that will iuggle without art,
must play his feats under the boorde, least want of cunning crack his
credit, you cannot by musing at my speedy arrival, and by inquiring the
cause make me cease from maruatling at your so sudden coming, and to examine
the case, for your speed^ is as suspicious as my haste. But in a needful
matter to leave this needelesse niceness, which bewitcheth friends, is
friu^lus trusting upon your troth, and reposing my confidence on your protestro
freendship, I will freely without (...) unfold unto you my unfortunate state.
I call it unfortunate because I am half past hope to obtain my purpose, and
if I get that I ga^e for yet my greatest gain shall be loss. So it is brother
that the beauty of Susanna has so bleared mine eyes, and her comely
perfection so bewitched my senses, her singular feature has so fiered my
fancy, and her sweet face so fettered my freedom that I am perplexed with a
thousand contrary passions, the fear of God persuades from such wicked
fondnes, but the de^re of her beauty drives me to such wretched folly, my
conscience continually exhorts me not to attempt such a fact, but
concupiscence persuades to persist in my purpose, but he y^ is so serupulous
for the observing of the law, shall both pass his days without pleasure, and
yet at last be found a sinner. I mean therefore whatsoever y^ law wishes at
this time to have mine own will. In troth quoth the other, it is folly to cover
smoke, and more fondness to conceal love, but he is most fool of all that
fereth to bewray a serious matter to a secret friend, know therefore brother
that we are both feathered of on wing, and thy love exceeds not my lust, y^
burnest not more than I do, Susanna is the saint whom I do serve and her
exquisite perfection has inchaunted me, thy sore is my sorrow, and the same
pain does pinch us both alike, as therefore we have one malady, we will both
have one medecin, and as we have both happened on one pretense, so we will
fr^ndlie hazard to extaine one purpose. These two cursed caitifes, of the seed
of Chanaan southing one another in this deuillish imagination, concluded when
they might find her alone, to suck the blood of this innocent lamb, and
with most detestable villainy to assail the simple mind of this silly
Susanna. Perststing therefore in this hellish purpose, many days were not
passed ere they spied ^t opportunity (as they thought to obtain their desire,
for the season being very hot and the tender body of Susanna being sore
parched with heat, she (...) that (...) of her household, much less any
stranger had bin in the garden, went in as her use was with two maidens, only
thinking their secretly to wash hirselfe, and seeing the coast clear, and
hirselse solitarily said thus unto them, bring me quoth she oil and soap where
with to wash, and see that you shut the doors surely. The maidens carefully
obaieng their mistress command, shut the garden gates, and went out
themselves at a bac^e door, to fet what their mistress had willed them, not
seeing the elders because they were hi^, who no sooner saw the maidens gone,
and Susanna a fit pray for their filthy (...), but they rose up and ran unto
her, the one of them beginning to persuade her on this manner. Be not amazed
mistress Susanna quoth he to see us thus sodenlie and secretly arrived,
neither let our presence appale your senses, for we come not cruelly as as
foes, but (...) as fr^nds, if our coming be strange, the cause is as straight,
and where necessity for^eth there it is hard to strive against the stream,
be that seeks no way against his own will often times kicketh against the
prick, and he that strives to withstand (...) hoppeth against the hill. These
things considered if we offense in being to (...), your beauty shall bear the
blame, as the only cause of this enterprise, for to omit all frivolous
circumstances and to come to the matter, so it is that your divine hearts (...)
have so been perplexed with the passions of love, and have been so deeply
drowned in the desire of your person, that there is no torment so terrible, no
pain so pinching, no woo so greeuo^s, as the the grief which has griped us,
since we have burned in love toward you. Since therefore our liking is such,
let it be repaide again with love, let our firm fanste be requited with
mutuali affection, and in lieu of our good will, consent unto us, and lie with
us. That sin which is secretly committed is always half pardoned, she
lives (...) enough that lives charely, the garden gates are surely (...) can
see us, whereby to detect us of the crime. The credit which we carry in Babylon
shall be sufficient to shrow^ you from shame, our office shall be able to
defend you from ^istrust, and our graie hairs a shield to defend you from
suspicion, and by this small offense, you shall both pleasure us and purchase
to your self two such trusty friends as you may in all duetifull service
command. Susanna hearing this subtle serpent to breath out such brutishe
reasons, woondered to see two of their calling so blinded with the vale of
la^ciuious lusts, as to (...) so (...) against there own conscience, insomuch
that for a good space the stood astonished, until at last gathering hit
wits together, she burst forth into these speeches. It Is a saying quot^
she, not so common as true, that wh^ so sins against his conscience
sinneeth against his own soul, and he that knows the Law and wilfully
di^obeieth it, deserves many stripes, which sacred sentence I wyshe you to
consider, and no doubt it will be a sufficient modesty and account me for ever
as a common harlot, for the Lord suffers not the wicked to go unrewarded. She
says the wise man that is not continent but common in her love, and yields
that which is proper to her husband into the possession of a stranger,
disobeieth the law, makes breach of her plighted faith, and lastly plaieth
the wh^re in most hellish adultery, her children shall not take root, nor her
branches shall bring forth no fruit, her name shall be spotted with
infamy, and her discredit shall not quight be forgotten. And shall I then
knowing this wilfully work mine own woe, shall I repaye the troth my
husband reposeth in me, with such treachery, shall I requite his love with
such disloyalty, shall such guilefull discourtesie be a guerden for his
unfeigned good will, no the fear of God is a fortress unto me against such
folly, the love I bear to my husband is a shield to fence me from such
shameless fancy, and the care of mine own honor is a conserve against such
filthy concupiscence. Whereas you say that the finne which secretly is
committed is half pardoned, and that she lives Cast: which lives Caute,
that the gates are shut, that no man can epsy our folly, and that the place
is so secret that the offense cannot be prejudicial to my good name. I
answer, that I more esteem the wrath of God than the words of men, and I
dread more to commit such a deuillish fact before the sight of the almighty,
than before the eyes of all the world, man judges but the body, but God the
soul, the one being but a small pinch, the other a perpetual pain. (...)
(says the wise man that breaks wodlocke and thinks thus in his heart, who
sees me, the mistie clouds have covered me, and I am compassed about with a
clowdie darkness, my offense shall not be an object unto any man's eyes,
neither can any man discern my ^ooinges, I am secretly closed with in the
walls, whom m^de I to fear, and as for the LORD ^e is merciful, and will
not remember any man's sins, he is slow unto wrath, and promises spaedilie
to pardon the faults of the wicked. Such a one that fears more the eye of a
mortal man, than the sight of an immortal God, and knows not that the eyes
of the Lord is ten thousand times brighter than the glittering beams of the
sun, beholding the very thoughts of men, and searching the heart and the
raines, the same man shall be punished with earthly plagues and hellish
torments, he shall suddenly be taken in his own trappe, and he shall fall
before the face of every man, because he preferred his own pleasure before
the fear of the Lord. But alas it is vnfite for the young fawn to lead the
old bucke, for a blind man to be a guide to him which has his sight, nor meet
for a seely simple woman to instruct the Elders and Judges of the people, is
it my part to exhort you unto virtue, or rather is it not your duty to
persuade me from vice, but I hope this proffer is but to make a trial of mine
honesti^, and to sift out my secret intent, if otherwise, your wills and your
words be a like, ^ease your sut^, for you may well gape, but never gain you
look for.

The Judges hearing seely Susanna thus cunningly to confute their deuilish
co^nclusions, seeing she had infringed their reasons, by the power of the law
thought to wrest her upon a higher pin, and to lay such a blot in her way as
she should hardly wipe out. For although they knew she did rightly refell
their frantike folly, and perfectly perceive her godly counsel was a cooling
card to their inordinate ^sires, ye^ they were so blinded with the v^le of
^ciuious vanity, and so dimmed with the cloud of concupiscence, that the (...)
of God was of no force to hale them from this hellish folly, but that the
other Elder gave Susanna this sharp and wicked answer.

Susanna quoth he, Helias counsel did little prevail to persuade Ahab from
eni^ieng the vineyarde of Naboth, but that he both obtained his desire, and
rewarded such an obstinate subject with cruel death. Barsabe could not
withholde David both from sacking her honor and honesty and also from
murdering cruelly her loving husband Vrias, neither shall these painted
speeches prevail against our pretended purpose, for he is a cowarde that
yields at the ^rst shot, and he not worthy to wear the budde of beauty
that is daunted with the first denial, we have the tree in our hand, and
mean to enioie the fruit we have veaten the bushe, and will not now let the
birds escape, and seeing we have you here alone, your stea^ne (...) shall
stand for no sterling, b^t if y^ consent be assnred of two trusty fren^ if
not hope for no other hap (...) de^h for your denial. It Is a saying n^ so
common as true, that a woman's (...) treasure is her good name, and that the
which has cracked her credit is half hanged, for death cutteth off all
miseseries, but infamy is the beginning of all sorrows. Since then loathsome
^iscredit is worse then loss of life, assur^ thy self if thou deny us, we
will beat the with the rod, for we both will witness against thee, that we
took thee committing adultery with a young man and that the more covertly to
cloak thy whoredom thou did secretly send away thy maids, that so thou
might enjoy thy pleasure, and they not epsy thy practice. Our office and
authority, our age and honor shall suffice to witness our words to be true, so
that thou shall purchase to thy friends and thy fame perpetual discredit, and
to thy body without pardon, a most pinching and shameful death, seeing
therefore by consent thou shall still keep the report of thy chastity, and by
discredit thou shall reap death and discredit, show thy self a wise woman,
and of two evils chose the best.

Susanna hearing the mischeuous pretense of these subtle serpents and seeing
that they had so laid the train that she could no way escape the trappes
but either she must incur the ^aunger of the body, or the destruction of the
soul, was perplexed with such doubtful passions, and cumbred with such
careful thoughts the she (...) forth into trickling tears, sorrowful
sighs, and woeful wailings, which poor soul she blubbred forth in this
wise.

Alas quoth she most vilde and unjust wretches, is the fear of God so far from
your minds, as you seek not only to sack mine honor, but to suck my blud, is
it not injury enough in that you covet to spoil mine honesty, but that you
long to spill my life, has this sweet love you pretend such bitter taste, is
this the fruit of your fained fancy, no doubt the cause must be pernicious
when the effect is so pestilent, flatter not your selves in this your folly,
nor sooth not your selves in your sins, for there is a God that sees and
will revenge, and has promised that who so bindech two sins together, shall
not be unpunished in the one. But alas what avails it to talk of wisdom to
the fool, or of the wrath of God to a wilful reprobate. The charmer charm he
never so wisely charms in vain if the Adder be deaf, and the wise casts
stones against the wind, that seeks to draw the wicked from his folly. Let
me therefore poor soul more narrowly consider mine own case, I am alas
perplexed with diverse doubtful passions and grievous troubles assaileth me on
every side, if I commit this crime, though never so secretly, yet the eyes of
the Lord sees the very inward thoughts, and mine own conscience shall
continually be a witness against me of this wickedness, the reward of sin is
death, then what other hap can I hope for, but perpetual damnation if I do
this wicked deed, since the Lord himself has promised to be a swift witness
against all wilful adulterers. And if I consent not unto these unrighteous
Judges I am like to be unjustly accused of the like crime, so that both I
shall suffer death without cause, and yet (which is most grief, not die
without shame. By this means what dishonor shall I bring to my parents, what
discredit to my husband, and what infamy to my self and my seely children.
The hoarie hairs of my father Helchias shall be brought with sorrow unto the
grave, Icachim shall be ashamed to show his face in the streets of the city
and my poor babes shall be counted as the seed of an harlot, and yet alas I
my self altogether sacklesse, why my secret offense shall prevent all this
open shame, the Lord is slow to wrath, and his mercy ecceedeth all his works,
he wishes not the death of a sinner, and hearty repentance pacifieth his
displeasure. But O vile wretch that I am, why do I thus blaspheme against the
Lord and his law, why do I breath out these hellish speeches, can I say I will
repent at my pleasure, or shall I therefore sin in hope because the Lord is
merciful. No, no, it is better for me to fall into your hands, and not commit
the offense then to sin in the sight of the Lord, shall I not rather fear God
than man, and drea^ him more that kills both body and soul, than him y^
has power but to kill the body only, yet his scare shall be my defense. And with
that she cried with a loud voice and the two Elders cried out against her and
the one of them ran and opened the gate, y^ more to verify their vild intent.
Now when the servants hard the cry in the garden, they hastily rushed in at the
back door, to see what violence was offered to their mistres. But when y^
Elders had declared the matter unto them y^ servants were greatly ashamed for
such an infamous report had never bin bruted of Susanna: the fame of this
heinous fact being spread throughout all Babilo^ every man began diversely to
conjecture as fancy led them, her friends sorrowing suspected y^ cancred minds
of y^ cruel judges, her foes laughing said y^ dissembled holiness was dooble
sin, and that the holiest countenance has not alwais y^ honest est conscience
both friend and foe, notwithstanding wondering, at the strange chance. Well as
y^ nature of man is desirous of novelty, so on the morrow after y^ people
flocked to Ioachims house, to hear this case throghly canuased and thither
came the two Elders also, having their minds fraught with fury and their
hearts full of hate, mischiuou^ie imagining against Susanna to put her to death.
They therefore commanded presently before all the people to send for Susanna the
daughter of Helchias Ioachims wife and immediately they sent for her who came
accompanied with her father and mother, her children and all her kindred. The
Judges seeing Susanna to be come, and that she had her face covered with a
vale, commanded presently to uncover her face, that so they might satisfy
their filthy lust with the sight of her beauty, and feed their doting fancy
with the glistering hew of her divine feature. The people now more narrowly
noting her erquisite perfection, and singular beauty taking pity of her
mishap sorrowed and wept. But the two Elders stood up in the midst of the
assembly, and laieng their hand upon Susannas head, which powered forth
tears, and heaued up her eyes toward heaven, for her heart trusted in the
Lord, begun their tale of this manner.

We are sorry quoth they that we have cause this day to accuse Susanna the
daughter of Helchias, and wife of our freende Ioachim, neither would we
willingly be witness against her, if our own conscience did not compel us to
bear a true testimonic, we are Judges and Elders of the people, appointed by
God and chosen by the multitude and constrained by the law to have no respect
of persons, but to do justice unto all men, neither to be parcial to our
friends, nor envious to our foe, but with the balance of equity to measure
every man according to his merit, and with the sword of justice t^ uphold
virtue, and to beat down vice. This considered we are driven of force to
bewrate a heinous offense, which this Susanna has committed as follows. We
both having occasion s^cretlie to consult of weighty affairs, and often
frequenting the house of our friend Ioachim coveting solitarely to confer of
our secret business, thought it best (as our custom before had been) to
walk in the garden: where we had not walked long but Susanna came in
accompanied with two of her maids, whom presently she sent away from her,
most surely shutting the garden gates, and they were no sooner gone, but a
young man which had secretly hid himself in the garden came unto her, and
lay with her, we stand^ng in a corner, and seeing this wickedness were
astonished to see such a strange fact, and remembering what report was spread
abrod of Susannas chastity stood in doubt whither we dreamed of such a deed or
no, but at last we hastily ran unto them, and saw them as they were
together, willing therefore such wickedness should not be unpunished, nor
that such adulterous wretches should escape without the penalty of the law,
assayed to take this yoongue man, that he might have tasted of the torments
due for such an offense, but he was stronger than we, and in despite of us he
opened the gate, and leaped out, well although he had escaped our hands yet we
laid fast hold upon Susanna, and demanded of her what the yoongue man was,
of what tribe and what was his name, but she held her peace and said nothing.
Thus quoth they have you heard this heinous crime whereunto we are witnesses,
sorrowing that such sin should be found in Israel, and especially in the
child of so honest a father, and in the wife of so honest a husband. The
Judges having finished this their forged tale, the people gave credit to their
word^ and believed them as they that were Judges and Elders of y^ people
thinking that such subtle shifts could never lie hid in such simple age, that
such hoarie hairs would never devise such devilish practices, and upon their
credit they condemned her to death. Susanna hearing the fatal doom pronounced
against her by these unjust Judges, cried out unto the Lord with a loud voice
and said.

O God which see the secrets of al hearts, and know all things before
they come to pass, which descriest the very inward thoughts, and triest the
heart and the raines, thou know that because I would not consent unto the
^ilthie lu^te of these dooting leathers, nor agree by defyling my husbands
bed, to fulfill their fleshlye desires, that they have sclaundered me with
that crime whereof I was never guilty that they have unjustly accused of that
fault, whereas not so much as in thought I committed such a fact, they have to
satisfy their malicious mindss without cause invented this false crime, I
confess my self, O Lord to be a most grievous offender, but not in this fault
to deserve death but not for this deed. Hear then, O Lord my prayer, and let
the innocence of my case plead before thy majesty, if it be thy will prevent
their practices, confound their counsels, and let them which have diggcd the
pit for others fall into the snares themselves. Thou have never O Lord yet left
the innocent without help, but have delivered them which fear thee from all
adversity, thou did deliver Joseph from the hands of his brethren which
sought to spill his blood, and did prevent the practices of Saul, which
pretended to slay his ser^ant David, Elizeus being besieged within Dothan was
not only freed from his foes, but also guarded about with a troop of holy
Angels. Elias was preserved from the cruelty of Iesable, and (...) with
Ravens, nay who has trust^ in thy mercy, which has come to mishap? or who
has put his hope in thee which hat^ suffered harm? ^u O Lord if it be thy will
thou ^anst disclose the devises of these doting Judges, and unfold the
(...)-(...) of the false ^nesses, help then O Lord for in thee is my hope. The
people hearing the solemn protestation of sorrowful Susanna; thought she had
spoken these words to excuse her fault, but not that she was guiltless of the
fact, giving more credit to the reverend age of the Judges, then to the y^ng
years of a simple woman, supposing that her speech was more of custom to
cloak her folly then of conscience to clear her of that crime, and therefore
they led ^it to the pla^e of execution. But the Lord who never leaves them in
distress that put their trust in him heard her voice, and raised up the the
holy spirit of a young child whose name was Daniell, who seeing Susanna
carried by her ^alse accusers to be put to death, cried with a loud voice from
the (...) of this woman. Then all the people a^onished at this strange ^rie, and
amazed at the words of this y^ng child tourning toward him said, what (...)
these words that thou have spoken, then Daniel imbouldned by the spirit of
God, made this answer.

Are you such fools O ye (...), quoth he, that you will confirm the caus^
before you have discust the cafe or ^ supposed truth with out sufficient
trial, or condemn^ any person without du^ proof, will you accept the
witnesses (...) any man touching life before you have sifted him by secret
examination, know you not how that party is s^ne condemned whose death the
Judges do conspire, and where the Elders do bear evil will or seek revenge,
th^re the innotent is ever oppressed, for the weakest (a^ the old proverb
says) is always thrust to the wall. Will you admit him which is an accuser,
to be a con^ner, what i^stice can there be then, in judgment shall he which
comes in a^ plai^ determine the defendant doubts, who then will look for
eq^itie. if the witness will and word may ^ande for a law without
contradiction; then right shall be wrested according t^ the wish of every
wilful wretch. No le^ him which is an Elder of the people, and comes in to
be a witness, not be a Judge also, least the innocent perish, and true Justice
be perner^od, which now O ye fond Isralites ye shall try by experience, for
ye hau^ suffered these unjust Judges to con^mne a daughter o^ Isr^ell without
cause, and have let them been wicked witnesses to (...) the innocent blou^.
(...) sentence prono^nced against Su^ is unjust, and the witness of the Judges
is (...) perjury, therefore return to judgment, and the Lord will ^isclose
who rig^ deserves the the death. The people hearing this ^ourned (...) in all
have and ^he Gl^ts said thus unto him. Since it has pleased GOD quoth they
that ^ere is wisdom found in thy lips, and understanding in thine heart,
and that thou have knowledge given thee from about to search out that which
has been hidden from us al, come sit down amongst us, and execute the office
of an Elder that through thee the justice of God may be made manifest in
rewarding the wicked, and defending the innocent. Then said Daniell unto them,
put these two aside one from another, and I will examine them, so when they
were separated, he called one of them to whom he vttred these words.

It Is a sai^ng quoth he not so common as true, that he which looks continually
on the Sun, shall at last be blind, that who so handles pitch must needs be
de^led there with, the tree that abides so many blastes, at last falls by the
carpenters are, the bird that strikes at every stale cannot long escape the
snare, so long goes the pitcher to the brouke, that at last it comes broken
home, and he that securely swimmeth in (...), shall surely be drowned in
iniquity, who so binds two ^nnes together shall never be unrevenged in the
one, and he that delights to offend in youth, shall no doubt feel the
^unishment in age, the pouer^e is old, and yet very true, Quod defertur non
aufertur, Though God for a time suffer a man safely to wallow in his own
wi^kednesse, and to say unto his so^le, ^ush the Lord regards not the way
of sinners, nor suspecteth not the misdeedes of men, he is slow to wrath, and
prone to pity, yet at last the Lord looks down from heaven, and reuengeth
all his sins with a grievous plague, yea he rooteth him out from the face of
the earth, and his place is no more seen. Consider this then thou miserable
^aitife, who have gathered thy treasure with iniquity, and builded up thine
house with ^nne, that were in thy youth addicted unto vanity, and art now
waxen old in vice, how those sins which in thy young years thou did commit
secretly are now in thy hoarie age revealed openly, yea the Lord has
deferred his punishment, that his mercy may seem the mo^e, and thy ^nne the
greater He that has the dro^e drinks while he bursteth, and yet not
satisfied, the Leach has two ^ughters that never cries en^h: he that is ^ung
with the ^erpent Dipsas burn^th, but can never be cooled, and who is so
inflamed with sin which thirsts continually after wickedness, until he
has supped the d^egs of Gods displeasure to his own destruction, which now is
verified in thee, for thou have pronounced false judgments and have condemned
the innocent, thou have taken bribes to pervert justice, and thou have weighed
the law in a false balance, but the Lord shall send upon thee cursing,
trouble, and shame in all that which thou set thy hand to do, until thou
be destroyed and perish quickelie, because of the wickedness of thy works,
wherein thou have forsaken him, for thou art commanded not to over throw the
poor in his suit, but to defend (...) cause of the needy. ^is the duty of a
Judge to ^eept him far from a ^alse matter, and t^ measure all things in the
balance of equity, and not ^to deal unjustly with with the innocent and
righteous, but to hear the plaint of the poor, least the Lord take their
cause in hand, and consume ^im in his heavy ^pleasure. But thou who from thy
youth ha^ sworn to do wickedlie, have let the guilty go free, and borne
false witness against the sacklesse soul, and have ever perverted the seat
of judgment: Well if thou have seen Susanna commit this heinous crime, and
defile the bed of hit husband, if thou have taken her in adultery, and seen
her in the very act, tell me under what tree thou did see them commit
the offense. The Judge answered under a ^ Lentiske tree. Then said Daniell
verily thou have lied against thine own life, thou vast in betraieng the
innocent blasphemed against GOD, offended in bearing (...) witness, and s^ulde
thy soul to S^han by committing wilful perjury, so that the Angel of GOD
has received the sentence to cut thee in two.

Daniell had no s^ner vttere^ these words, but the people presently put him
aside, and brought forth the other to whom Daniell uttered these bitter
speeches.

O thou cursed seed of Canaan quoth he, and not of luda, who have been nursed
up in sin, and no^ed up in wickedness, the glittering heue of beauty has
blinded thee, and las^ious lust has be witched thy heart, found fancy has
given thee the foil, and fleshly desire has charmed thy affection, thou ha^
spente thy youth in follye and now meanest to end thin^ age in wickedness. But
as it is impossible for a fool to escape without reproach, so as hard it is for
a wilsull sinner to escape without revenge. Do thou not know t^t the law
forbids adultrie, and yet will thou entise a daughter of luda to such
folly, naie art thou not driven by duty to reward this sin with death, and
yet will thou persuade the innocent to such a deuillish de^de. Is the fear of
God so far from thine eyes, as thou will willingly work such wickedness, h^st
tho^ so small regard to the law as thou will suffer thy heart to be sub^rted
by lust. The (...) so abhors this crime, as he kill^ the Liones for
committing this fact, the Storke never m^leth but with his mate, nay the stone
Iasent will not be worn on the finger of an adult^rer, neither will the Olive
tree grow if it he planted by him that leads his life in unlawful lusts,
and will thou vild wretch she we thy self more careless in this crime then
brute beasts, moreckles then unreasonable cretures, more savage then
senseless stones, yea far less in virtue than a man, and far more in vice
then a beast, the Lord shall look down from heaven upon this thy lewdness,
and cross thee with such a gree^ous curse, as y^ shall be rooted out from
among the people. Is thy mind so mislead with ingratitude, or art thou so
deuoide of humanity as thou will repaie the good will that Ioachim she weth
thee, with such guilefull treachery, is thy conscience such as to requighe his
courtesy with wilful cruelty, has he fostered thee as a friend, and will thou abuse him as a foe, has he wished thy bliss and will thou work his bane,
has he sought thy weal, and will thou seek his woe, will thou without cause
accuse his wife of adultery, because she would not (...) to thy lure, if this
be the duty of a Judge, or the devotion of an Elder, let all Babylon judge.

But perhaps thou will say these words ar^ wind, and this long parle
tendes little to the purpose, that thou art greatly abused, for reprchending
of sin to be so roughly reproved, well if it be so that thou have weighed
thy friends case in the balance of equity, and have had such a (...) to the
executing of thine office, that no force of fraend^hip could prevail to
peruerte true Justice but that thou have of a clear conscience accused Susanna
of this filthy fact. Tell me under what tree did thou see them cominit
this crime.

The Judge although that he had wrongfullie sought to oppress the guiltless
person, yet he never shruncke from his purpose, but boldly answered under a
Myrtle tr^.

Daniell hearing this doting leacher to make so loud a lie answered. Art thou
so senseless quoth he, to suppose that although thou can keep thy s^ne
secret from men, yet thou can hide it from God, who not only knows the
deed but sees the very inward thought. No for although thou have hitherto
covered the substance of vice with the vale of virtue, and have cloaked thine
iniquity with the visour of equity, yet the LORD willing to unrip up this
thy folly, has now discovered thy doings, yea thou art fallen into the pit
which thou have prepared for others, thou art taken in thine own trappe, and
snared in the net which thou did lay to entangle the innocent, yea thou
have lied against thine own head, and the Angel of GOD waits with the
sword to cut thee in two.

With that all the whole multitude hearing how the Elders were trapped in
their own talk, and that the LORD had mightily wrought by the means of a
child to discover the hellishe practice cried out with a loud voice, and
praised God that saves them which put their trust in him, (...) seein^ that
Daniell had conuicte the Elders of false witness by their own mouth,
according to the law of Moses, the people dealt with them as they ^ought to
dealt with S^fanna, for the lord has promised that a false witness shall not be
unpunished, and he that speaks lies shall perish, so they were put to death,
and the innocent blood was saved the same day.

Helchias and his wife seeing that their ^aughter was by the power of God
preserved from the wicked pretense of these unjust Indges, and Ioachim her
husband hearing his wife clered of this crime, yea al her kindred seeing y^
there was no disho^ nestie found in her, but that she was with out spot, and
their stock unstained: They all praised God, that the innocent lamb was
delivered, and the faithful hipocrites so fitly detected. And from that day
forth Daniell was in great reputation amongst all the people.

FINIS.
LONDON Printed by Roger Ward dwelling a^ the sign of the Talbot, near unto
Holburne Conduit. 1584.


