More work for PRIESTS: OR AN ANSWER TO GEORGE GIFFORDS pretended defense of
Read Prayers and devised Leitourgies, comprised in the first part of his book;
Entitled A short Treatise against the Donatists of England: Wherein Is proved
that the serving of God in such away and manner is a superstitious and vain
worship.

Written By JOHN GREENWOOD Christ's faithful Martyr: Here-unto Is added by
another man, many other arguments against stinted service and book prayer.

Luke 16. 15. That which is highly esteemed among men, is an abomination in the
sight of God.

Printed in the year 1640.

The Preface
MY first writing being about that spiritual exercise of prayer and true
invocation of Gods reverend name, whereby the distressed soul of man, laden
with the burden of sin, compassed also about with so many deceitful enemies,
continual assaults of Satan, rebellion of the flesh, entisements of the world
etc. seeks daily help of God the Father, giver of all good gifts, having
thorough Jesus Christ free access by the direction of his holy spirit, for all
occasions to unburden it self of whatsoever grief, or occasion of thanks it is
moved with: I ought still, and by Gods assistance shall keep me in the meeknes
of the spirit, not withstanding his unchristian railinges, slanders, and
reproaches against me and the truth. I then showed that no other prayer could
utter and ease the several occasions and distresses of this conscience, and
that no other man's writing could speak for this soul unto God, but the heart
and mouth of him that prays for himself, or is chosen the mouth of many,
uttering to God his or their minds for their present wa^tes or occasion
urges, and the spirit gives utterance. And I further proved that only this
prayer pleases God, and is grounded on faith; to this effect I brought many
reasons out of Gods word, admiring the ignorance of this age, wherein (having
had the gospel of Christ thus many years in our own language to search and
try all things by) whole congregations do make no other prayer to God the^
reading over a certain number of words upon a book from year to year,
month to month, day to day etc. the same matter and words as they were
stinted, even out of that Portuis, englished out of Antichrists mass book;
besides private reading of menswritings instead of praying. And seeing this
counterfeit show of worship and pretended prayers was made common merchandise
in every assembly by this Antichristian preisthood, and that al men every
where, were compelled to bow down hereunto, and to offer up such counterfeit
sacrifices; I perceaved the first principle of Religion) which is to to
invocate the name of the true God, through the meditation of Christ in spirit
and truth, with heart and voice, for our present wantes according to the will
of God) was never yet sincerely taught by these time serving Priests: But as an
agreeable service to the humors of earthly minded, men which have not the
spirit of God, this ware was thrust upon al people. They well knowing, that such
a ministry and such a Church of wordlings could never have stood, without such
a Samaritan worship and Egyptian calf; and like earthly devises to counterfeit
a Religion, al men inclyned to some. And long have I heard this pretended
worship inveyed against by many (sometimes zealous) for the errors and
confused order thereof: Yet could I not hear any to set down or teach,
which was the true prayer that only pleased God, many contriving diverse forms
of words, as though they had known the heart of man, counseled the^ to read
them, day unto day, year unto year, at evening, morning, dinner, supper etc.
by portion, measure, and stint, as an offering to God what state soever the
soul was in; not teaching the difference between reading upon a book, and
prayer unto God, all the time. So that true and only prayer has not been
taught all this time, and those that knew how to pray aright neglect it, this
reading being most easy as they think, and they aprest thereunto, compelled in
the public assemblies thus to mock with God, after the manner of the papists
mattins, true zeal no where found, but in the persequuted remnant.

These my first writings, carried abroode by such as desired true instruction,
and willing to make others partakers of such benefits as God imparted unto
them, it fell into Mr GIFFORDS hand; Who (as it seems being a merchant of
such ware fynding the gain of the priesthood to depend here upon, or as he
says ( the peace and uniformitie of the Church) made head unto it; and that
not with purpose (as the fruit of his labor shows) to edify others, but
standing himself a minister to this Liturgy, having made shipwreck of that
conscience he sometimes was thought to have; with all bitterness of spirit, and
carnal wisdom, having no more savor of grace in his writings, then there is
taste in the white of an egg, flees upon me with uncharitable raylings,
slanders etc. And loadeth not only me, but all the faithful that walk by the
rule of Gods word, with opprobrious titles, of Donatists, Brownists,
Anabaptists, Heretics, Schismatiques, seditious, foolish, frantic, etc. to
bring not only us, but the truth of God into contempt with our Sovereigne
Prince, and all that fear God: for he cease not with laying al reproaches he
can devise upon our persons; as one of those Locusts, Rev. 9. whose similitudes
are like unto horses prepared to battle, whose faces like men, but their teeth
as the teeth of Lions; But also perverteth, blaspheameth, and by all means
defaceth the truth offered to him. Welseing the natural man perceiverh not the
things of the spirit of God (I will speak not here of the gifts of the spirit
but of the grace of God which sanctifies the same, many having Charismata that
have not Charin.) And seeing I am already thus rent, Gods truth delivered by
me, trodden under his feet, I will follow the council of Solomon who
forewarneth me that he which reproves a skorner receaveth to himself shame,
and he that rebukes the wicked himself a blot: And so turn me from him,
leaving him to the consideration of his own words: where he says in his
Epistle to the reader, He that seems most zealous in Religion and refrayneth
not his tongue, has but bitterness in his heart in stead of heavenly Zeal. And
though nothing else can be looked for at their bands that are Apostate from
that light they have sometimes themselves published, (of which sort the
world was never more full) yet for the good of Gods chosen scattered abroad,
and for the defense of Gods truth I cannot hold my tongue: And for the more
playnenes, I will answer as to him, though I mind not to have any more to
do with him, till God give him repentance. Wishing grace by the direction of
Gods holy spirit to him that reads, to weigh both sides uprightly, and to
follow the truth to his own salvation.

JO. GRENWOOD.

More works for Priests.
GEORGE GIFFORD.
To condemn and overthrow read prayer, ye bring as the ground or foundation of
al your matter, this Sentence, God is a Spirit and to be worshipped in Spirit,
Job. 4. This Scripture indeed is clear and strong to cut down al carnal
worship, as disgreeing from the nature of GOD. And if any maintain that the
very bodily action of reading is the worship of God, it may fitly be alleged
against them, etc.

JOHN GREENWODS Answer
Wisdom is Justified of her Children.
IT is agreed upon and consented unto on both sides, that seeing God is a
spirit, and only requires such to worship him, as worship him in spirit and
truth: all carnal worship is cut down hereby, of what sort soever, as
disagreeing from the nature of God: and that all fantastical devises of men;
namely, whatsoever is not warranted in his word, is carnal worship, a
wearisomnes unto him, and loathsome in his sight: So that no man ought to
intermedle, attempt, or practice any thing in show of worship, where of they
have not sure ground of his word: For even our God is a consuming fire.

Now to put away all your ( bodily) distinctions and earthly cavils, I still
affirm (as I have proved) the stinting, imposing men's writings upon public
assemblies, to have them read over by number and stint, or any other way, as a
worship of God instead of true invocation, is a mere devise of man, and so
carnal worship; as also all other reading of men's writings publicly or
privately in this abuse, for praying to God. Yet say you to apply this Scripture
John. 4.22.23. in this manner against read prayer, is frivolous, where I
appeal to all men's consciences, for the weight thereof. It is frivolous, you
say, except I can prove that a man cannot pray by the spirit of God with
sighs, and groans upon a book, or when prayer is uttered after a prescript
form, etc.. At the first step you go about to alter the question. All our
prayers ought to be uttered after a prescript form, even that perfect rule and
form our Savior gave to his Disciples and all posterities: But this is
nothing to the matter.

For the other which is nothing but a begging of the question, I alleged
certain reasons to this effect. First that those sighs and groans in reading
instead of praying were not of faith, seeing that those sighs and groans that
proceed of faith, minister matter to pray without a book. 2. That you did but
barely affirm the question in calling it prayer by the spirit, when one does
read, seeing reading is not praying at all: for as I then alleged, to invocate
the name of God in spirit, is by the work of the spirit to bring fourth of our
hearts prayer to God, which is then in truth when it agrees to Gods word. But
reading is another matter, namely a receaving of instruction into the heart
from the book. Out of the first Mr. GIFFORD makes men believe he has fetched
two heresies; the one a perfection of faith, the other that faith cannot be
joined unto, or stand with any outward helps for the increase thereof. Little
marveile, he found so many heresies in our whole writings, that could find two
or three in my first reason: but that you may remember your self better (though
you had two years to consider) I will bring the words before you again, if
peradventure you may have grace to call back your self. I said if the sighs
and groans (in that kind of praying) were of faith, it would minister matter
without a book, this sentence I may confirm by many testimonies of scripture,
that no perverted spirit can gain say or resist: the scripture teaches us
every where, that in praying the spirit only helps our infirmities, no other
helps mentioned or can be collected in the present action of prayer through
the Scripture. He has sent into our hearts the spirit of his Son crying:
Romans 8.26 Gal 4.6 2. cor. 4.13
Abba Father, we believe, therefore we speak. Yet here is not any show of
perfection of faith, but of the contrary, praying for our wantes. But this may
be gathered, that God only accepts the fruits of his own spirit in prayer,
and requires no more of any, but that every one according to the proportion of
faith, pray unto him, as occasion in them requires. Now to conclude that
because in praying we need not a book to speak for us, when the heart it self
and book of our conscience speaks with God; that therefore says never
needs instruction, but is perfect, were slanderous, false, and senseless.
The cause then of these heresies proceed hereof, that your sell fe Mr. Gifford
would needs frame two syllogismes, and in the moodes of your malice, constrain
the proposition of the present action in praying, to a general sentence of all
times and actions. though both our question here was of the very action of
praying, and in the conclusion of that very point within six lines after this,
you ad these words; Even in the time of their begging at Gods hands; so that
these heresies must be Mr Giffords and not mine, seeing they are found to be
coined of his idle brain, and godles heart, only to defame the truth.

But (say you) the most part are ignorant, weak, short of memory, etc.
therefore need all helps to stir them up to pray, etc. where, by your own
confession, reading is not praying, but a help to stir up to pray. And even
hereupon al our errors arise, that you cannot discern the difference of
spiritual gifts, with the distinct use of the^. We doubt not but before prayer,
and all the days of our life, we have need of helps of instruction to pray
aright, and for the fitnes of the mind and body, often fasting, reading,
meditating, etc. are great helps to go before to humble our selves in praying:
but in the present action of prayer when the heart is talking with God, the
eyes, hands, etc. with attention lift up to heaven, all the powers of our
souls and bodies conversant with God, to take a book and read, cannot be
called in this action a help, but a confounding of the mind, and of Gods
ordinances, and a doing we know not what, though before and after, it be an
exeellent means ordained of God, to instruct us to pray and al other duties.

As for the conformation you talk of, where I alleged that a troubled mind
is the pen of a ready writer, therefore needs not a book to speak for it
in the action of praying: Psalm. 51, 17
. By troubled mind I understood such a mind, as is presently moved with the
sight of some sin, or urged by other occasion: a broken spirit, a broken and
contrite heart: and not such a mind as in despair or doubt is perplexed: and
that the heart which is moved in faith with present occasion to call upon God is
the pen of a ready writer, (that is) has matter and words enough without a
book to utter his own wantes, we may read throughout the Psalms, My throat is
dry (says David) I am weary with crying etc. But here again in stead of
answer, you tell me, I run upon the rock of an heretical opinion of
perfection: Wherein I wonder (but that I perceave your right eye is blinded)
you should be so careless what you say, nay what after two years study you
put in print. Does it follow, that because the heart, moved with occasion
through the work of faith, has words and matter enough in praying without a
book to speak for it, that therefore faith is perfect? Let equal Judges
consider.

Here you say many are so troubled and perplexed in mind, that they cannot
pray till they have some consolation by the direction of others; which when
they cannot have, reading upon a book is a notable help, I allow all this and
agree, if you would make reading one thing, and prayer an other, diverse
exercises of the spirit etc. But in the very action of praying to have an
other speak unto us never so good words of exhortation, were but a
confounding of the mind and action, and an abuse of both those holy
exercises. Even so, by your own comparison, reading upon a book in the action
of praying, seeing we cannot do both at once. It is the spirit of God in the
very action of prayer that helps our infirmities. David in praying finding
his soul heavy, stirs up himself as thus. My soul why art thou cast down,
why art thou disquieted within me, Psalm. 42, and 43.
wait on God; For I will yet give him thanks, my present help and my God. He
had a troubled mind, his mouth wanted no words to provoke the Lord to hear
his complaint, and his heart to wait upon the Lord, and so through all the
Psalms you shall find the conversing of the soul with God to be such, as it
were a mockery to think reading upon a book could have any place in that
action, or that any man's writing could lay out the present estate of the soul
with the passions thereof. The Priest may say, my book why are thouso evil
prynted, for when they read the heart cannot reason and talk with God.

To the second point, which was but your bare assuming of the question, to say
a man may pray by the spirit upon a book etc. I alleged that to worship God
in spirit, is, when the inward faith of the heart, brings forth true
invocation, etc. this you grant to be most true, and that none other is
accepted of G O D; then that which proceeds from the inward faith of our own
heart: But you think that reading upon a book is to bring forth of the heart
true invocation. This cannot be, if we consider the difference between
proseuche and anagnosis prayer and reading, the one being a pouring fourth of
vows, petitions, supplications, the other a receaving into the soul al such
things as we read: This therefore I leave to all men's consciences to be
considered, whether the matter we read can be said a pouring fourth of the
heart, the whole use of these diverse actions through the whole Bible show yt
cannot. Now where I said that you teach men insteade of pouring fourth their
hearts, to help themselves with matter and words out of a book, you say I
speak fondly and foolishlie etc. Mine answer now is, yt is well I lied not,
if I had said you compel men to read upon a book in all your public
assemblies, certain words of your own writings by number and stint, from
year to year, and day to day, and the same instead of pouring out their
hearts before the Lord for their present wants, I had not lied. Now let all
men by that which has been said, consider the grossnes of it, and so the
folly remains to your self. But to help this matter, and to deliver your
self conniugly in such a strayte, you say you wish al men to use the help of
the book, that they might the better power fourth their hearts unto God, being
such as are not thoroughly able. First you grant here, the prayers read upon
the book is not the pouring fourth of the heart, but ought to be used only as
an help, wherbie you grant the whole question, and further all your assemblies
have had no other invocation of Gods name this many years, but a help to teach
them to power fourth their hearts. But whether men's writings may be read in the
public assemblies to this use, we shall after make manifest, Here yet is
granted but an help, and not the pouring fourth of the heart. And to whom is
it granted an help? to such as are not able to pray. Here either you must
confess your whole ministry is unable to pray, or that they transgress in
in this high worship of GOD: for in an other place you grant in all your
assemblies, this reading is used of men's writing for prayer, thus you may
behold your best worship to be nothing, but a help to teach you to pray.

Where I said that you teach men to fetch the cause of their sorrowing from the
book, even in their time of begging at G O D S hand, you say I speak fondly,
to call that the cause, which is the manifestation of the cause etc. You here
forget your arts, Is there no more causes then one? if it be the isntrumental
cause, it is sufficient to prove, that if your Ministers had not their book,
they had nothing to ask, or else asking that which is in the book, they ask
not that which before was in their own hearts, so not coming heavy laden,
they go empty away, and leave the matter in the book as they found it, till
the next day and then sing the same song, But true prayer is when the heart is
first prepared, and moved with the sight of their wants as the child that
asks bread: So we should not pray of custom, but ask the very thing
whereof our heart feels the want. Your comparison again betwixt the being
stirred up by a Sermon, and stirred up by reading, shows, that your self will
not make the reading the pouring fourth of the heart.

There is no question but the exercise of reading is chiefly for instruction
and increase of knowledge, and meditating is not the same, nether can be said
to be all the use of reading, though we deny reading to be praying, but because
we are forbidden contention about words, and I have offered you as much wrong
in saying you denied reading to be for meditation at all, I will proceed to
the more necessary doctrines. Also for the controversy of Canonical and
Apocryphal, we shall speak in due place. Thus (say you) you have answered
nothing at all unto this Commandment given by our savior Christ to use that
prescript form of prayer, say, Our Father etc, but by shift and cavil etc.
Here you think you have put me to a plunge, your self needed nothing doubt,
but that I allowed the Commandment holy and good, and to extend to all
Christians, as well as to the Apostles, namely, to use that prescript form of
prayer as the perfect pattern, and direction to all men's true prayers. But you
I trust will make difference betwixt a form to all prayers, and praying, or
prayer. And here you vehemently urge me to answer you, before I see you
conclude any thing from the place, and so I should run into folly, to
answer a matter before I hear it. In your first entrance of this discourse,
you were round in your Syllogismes, by two at once to wraft my words, and can
find none for your self, Yt seems your conscience is witness the matter would
not hang together. And me thinks you had never more need to have showed what
you would draw from this place Luke 11. Seeing I either mistook you the last
time, or else you make a simple collection: which was this: Christ said to his
Disciples, when you pray say Our Father. and, and not when you meditate say Our
Father. Now what would you conclude of this, except as I said, that Christ
would not have them, meditate that Scripture: But this I perceave was not your
meaning: now I partly think your Argument should be (if the sword were not
broken in the sheath) thus: Christ commanded his Disciples when they prayde,
to say, Our Father, etc. therefore to be tied to read over or say by roate
certain words, is lawful praying. For the first, that our Savior Christ
tied no man, or commanded none to say over those very words when they
prayde, but to pray according to that form, after that manner as Math. 6. I
manifested in my first writing. I. that our Savior did not command us to use
those words. 2. that Matthew. 6. does not keep the same words, nor that number
of words which Luke 11. does. 3. that he did not say, read these words when
you pray, or say these words by roate. After all which reasons slilye passed
away in both your answers, you come with your bare affirmation, that he
commanded those words to be said over by roate or reading: Yea a little after
you say, it is false to say that he commanded not the very words to he said
over when we pray. And you further conclude, that because Christ commanded his
Disciples to say over those words, therefore all men's writings in the form of
prayer may be brought into the public assemblies to be read for prayer, being
agreeable to the word. To which I answer that seeing no man's writings are
without error, it is pernicious and blasphemous doctrine you collect. First
because you make men's writings of equal authority with the form of prayer
which Christ has prescribed 2. for that you give men as much liberty and
authority to frame and impose their Liturgies as Christ had to set down a
form of prayer, he being Lord of the house. The wickedness of which
collections you shall never be able to answer.

And because you here urge me thereunto, I will make answer to your two
places of Scripture, wherewith by false interpretation you deceave the simple,
which taken from you, your matter is nothing but cavilling: The places are
these, Luke 11. Number, 6. and because the one explanes the other, and your
collections the same from both, I will begin with numbers 6.32, 33.34: etc.
Thus shall you bless the Children of Israel saying, the Lord bless thee and
keep thee, etc. Here you say they were commanded to use the very words
prescribed, in all their blessings. This I say is not true, for the Hebrew
word is Coh Tebaracu, thus shall you bless: where the word Coh is an adverb
of similitude, as we say, after this manner: which cannot be to say the same,
but according to the same instructions. This word Coh is used throughout the
Bible in this manner, in all the Prophets when they say, thus says the Lord:
where the sum of their prophesies are only recorded to us by the holy Ghost,
and not all the words. Again this blessing is used in the Psalms and
Chronicles in prayer, for the people, in many other words. Ely blessed Hanna
in other words, etc. And where in Luke 11.2. it is recorded, that our Savior
Christ commanded his Disciples, when you pray, I. Sam. 1 17
say Our Father, etc. it is plain by the doctrines following. 4.5.6.8.11.
verses, that Christ tied no man to the very words saying over, for he
teaches them to ask their particular wants, as a child asks bread or an
egg of his Father: also to importune the Lord for our particular wants. But to
make this place more plain, the same holy Ghost in the 6. of Matthew 9. verse
says, when you pray, say thus, Our Father, etc. where the greek word houtos
has the same signification that the Hebrew word Coh has, which is, after
this manner: and cannot be referred to the very words saying over, where upon
Mr. Calvin upon those words faith, Noluit filius Dei prescribere quibus verbis
utendum sit: The Son of God would not prescribe what words we must use. Now
consider how falsely Mr Gifford has interpreted these Scriptures, to say the
Priests were commanded to use the very words, and that Christ commanded to
use the very words. As for his collections, that therefore men's writings may
be imposed upon public assemblies, by stint and number to be prayde, it is an
intolerable error,and brings in all poopery.

Here I must call all men that read this fruitless discourse to be witness of
Mr. Giffords abuse of his tougue, to the defacing of Gods truth. In his Epistle
he proclaimed, that I called all men Idola^ters; which you shall perceave to be
his own words, and to that end I will briefly repeat it. In my first writing
I affirmed the reading imposed Liturgies by stint and limitation, instead of
true invocation, as also all reading menswritings for praying, to be idolatry.
In his answer he said, he could not see by what color it could be called
Idolatry, or maintained out of Gods word so to be; but it seems the penners
of these things take every sin against the first table of the Law, to be
Idolatry: if they do so (says he) and with all do hold, that no Idolater
shall be saved, then doubtless all are lost, etc. To this ignorant excursorie I
answered, that all false and devised worship by man's intention was Idolatry,
as the first and second commandments did testify. And to admit all the
breaches of the first table were not idolatry, yet reading of men's writings
instead of praying must needs be idolatry, seeing it is a transgression of the
second Commandment. Further (though I needed not have followed his empty
head, even a cloud without water) yet I proceeded to prove, that no idolater
could be saved but b y repentance for their known sin, and craving pardon
with David for their hidden sins and secreet faults. Psalm. 119
Moreover (said I) do you think any man is free from all inward and outward
idolatry, seeing we cannot keep one Commandment, and in some things we sin
all. In which words I plainly reproved his grossnes that concluded all men
idolaters which committed any idolatry, and that no idolater could be saved,
and distinguished between the sin of ignorance, weakness, and imperfection
etc. in Gods children, and open professed obstinate idolatry. Yet this godles
man would lay to my charge, that I should call all men idolaters, whereas I
never used such a word in all my writings, But only answered his folly in
this running out from the question, they were his own words that brought this
upon his own head, by concluding, that if every sin against the first table
were idolatry, and no idolater could be saved, then all are lost, let the
grosnes then be his, and not mine. And I leave it to the consideration of all
men, whether I may not say, that they which transgress the first or second
Commandments, do commit idolatry, without absurdity. But says he though it
be so, yet the Scripture calls not the godly, murderers, idolaters, etc. for
the relics of sin remaining. I answer that therefore your former absurd
cavilling, where you said, if we hold it idolatry, etc. is by your own mouth
fully answered.

But to avoyde this foil, he has an other evasion. J thought (says he) we
had reasoned about such gross idolatry as a church is to be condemned and
forsaken, which is defiled therewith. Here again you misreport me: J never
reasoned to that end in in this whole discourse, but only labored to show all
men this error of reading men's writings instead of praying, that they might
learn how to converse with God and their own Conscience, in prayer. And what
mendes will you make for this slandering and defacing of the truth, to all the
world all that I desire is your repentance and amendment, which God grant
unto you, if you be his.

It follows in your book thus: But seeing you confess that all men be
Idolaters, that is touching the remanents of sin, it must needs follow there
is no Church free from spots, etc. This word idolaters must still be yours,
and then I willingly grant, that no man living is free from idolatry,
concerning the relics of sin: Also that no Church upon earth can be without
spot upon earth: So that now, by your own confession, I plead not for
perfection in this life, though the more we want, the more we ought to
endeavor. With what face then could you publish me an Anabaptist in your
Epistle, and out of one mouth give contrary sentence? Does your ordinary teach
you to cast out such bitter waters of untruthes? was it possible I should bold
al men idolaters, and some men without committing of sin after regeneration,
especially to maintain both such heresies as you give out? Well consider
yourself, before the Lord call you to account for defacing his truth, and
pleading for Baal. I grant, yea, I were not of God if I should speak
otherwise, that the dear servants of God fall into most loathsome sins after
regeneration, that the riches of Gods mercy might appear in their repentance,
through the work of his grace. Then you reason thus: if there be always
spots and imperfectnes in the true Church upon earth, then all your Arguments
you bring against the Church of England, are of no force, except you will
maintain a perfection. Mine answer is, I will not meddle with your Chapter to
prove it a false church in this treatise, but refer you to Mr Barrowes
refutation of Mr Gifford, him that handles that part of your book. Yet I must
tell you your argument is very simple: For after the same manner you might
reason thus: If there be no true Church without spots upon earth, then the
Church of Rome is the true Chapter for it has many spots, and you all
Scismatiques: Again you assume the matter you should prove. It will be proved
against you, that you have not Ecclesiam a people called fourth of the world to
the obedience of Christ: Then, that the spots of your Church are Egyptian
ulcers, incurable running botches. But I purposed not to deal with your
Church, only my mind is to show the unlawfulnes of this reading and imposing
men's writings upon men's Consciences in stead of true praying. Of which sin
the Lord give you and this whole land grace to repent, that so men may learn
more ferventlie to call upon God.

The first Argument against read Prayer, etc.
No Apocrypha must be brought into the public assemblies: for there only
GODS word and lively voice of his own graces must be heard in the public
assemblies. But men's writings and the reading of them over for prayer are
Apocrypha, therefore may not be brought into the public assemblies.

GEORGE GIFFORD.
First touching the Proposition, No Apocrypha is to be brought into the
public assemblies: What can be more false? Apocrypha is opposed against
Canonical: If nothing may be brought into the public assemblies but
Canonical Scripture, then the Sermons and prayers of Pastors are to be
banished, etc.

JOHN GREENWODS Answer.
IN the answer of this, you will needs oppose against both Propositions, and
yet have nothing to say, if not, to royle the doctrines delivered with your
feet, least others should drink thereof. The part of a wise man had been to
lay his hand on his mouth. In the first Proposition you would oppose the word
Apocripha against the lively voice of Gods graces when you see I said only,
that no Apocripha might be brought into the public assemblies. And further to
explane my mind, least you should willingly find such a cavil, I added this
reason for there only Gods word and the lively voices of his graces are to be
heard: where I acknowledged those livelie voices to be Gods ordinance, yet
nether to be called Apocrypha nor Canonical. How can you say th^e I would have
these, or that these are banished, if all Apocrypha writings be banished the
public assemblies? Yet as I told you, I take Apocrypha to be all writings,
but the Canonical Authenique Scriptures. But (say you) then I will exclude the
Paraphrases upon the Scriptures and the Psalms in Meter etc. Affirm you them
to be Apocrypha as you do, and can do no other, and I will through Gods grace
prove they ought not to be brought into the public assemblies. First, no man's
writings are given to the Church by testimony of Gods spirit, and we are
only commanded to hear what the spirit says: therefore though men's
writings be permitted to be read privatelie of them that will, and thereupon
called Apocrypha (that is hidden) they may not be brought into the public
assemblies. Rev. 2. 11.
Secondly no man's writings are without error and imperfections, therefore not
to be brought into the public assemblies: 1 Timothy 3. 15.
The Church is the pillar of truth. Thirdly the Church is builded upon the
foundation of the Prophets and the Apostles Christ Jesus being the chief corner
stone, Other foundation can no man lay, etc.
and not upon men's writings, Therefore men's writings may not be brought into
the public assemblies. Ephesians. 2. 20. and 1 Cor. 3. Fourthlie if we might
bring in any men's writings into the public assemblies, the^ all men's
writings which we judge agreeable to the Scriptures. But this is forbidden,
Ecclesiastes 12. 11. 12. My proof of the first Proposition is this: If any
men's writings are to be brought into the public assemblies by Gods
commandment because they are agreeable to the Scriptures, as you in an other
place allege, then all that are thought agreeable to the Scriptures ought of
necessity by the same commandment, and if there be no commandment, then none
are to be make Authentic which God has not made Authentic, Gal. 3. 15 Heb.
2* 3 4. and 9. 14 Mat. 5. 18. 2 Timot. 3 15. 16. 17 Rev. 22. 18. 19.
For that were to set man in the place of God. No man's writings carry that
majesty, as does the pen of the holy Ghost. No man's writings are Cecuromenai,
Authentic, confirmed by signs and wonders from heaven, sealed by Christ's
blood, that not one word of title shall be unfulfilled, The Scriptures are all
sufficient. All men must walk by that one rule; To think there were not rules
enough prescribed by the Lord for his house were blasphemous and papisticall.
Now for the explication, interpretation, etc. and speech unto God in prayer:
God has given gifts unto men to pray and prophecye, and ordained his
ministry of Pastors, Teachers, whose lively voice is appointed to be the mouth
of God unto the people, and of his people unto himself, in the public
assemblies. And these graces are not Apocryphal, for no prophecy of the
Scripture is of private interpretation idias epiluseos: to every one is given
the manifestation of the spirit to proffit withal. Most execelent, 2. Pet. 1.
20. 1 Cor. 12 7.
men serve but their time in the public assemblies. Now J may conclude as J
began.

That only Gods holy word and the lively graces of his holy Spirit are to be
heard and offered up unto in him the public assemblies.

Where then in way of answer to the Minor Proposition, you say you see not how
our speech unto God should be Apocrypha: It answeareth not me, who deny an
other man's writing to be our speech in prayer unto God. But c^onvinceth your
self by you, own mouth thus: True prayer is not Apocrypha, but all men's
writings are Apocr.; Therefore men's writing is not true prayer. Here when you
have nothing to say for your self, you would make me believe that I account
the Psalms and the other forms of prayer in the Scripture to be Apocrypha
when they be read, though a little before you consested, you had in your last
writing done me wrong therein. I do account the reading of the for praying, to
be a groffe and superstitious abuse of them, yet them to be holy and canonical
script. And here you have flatly overthrown your self: saying the word
Apocrypha is used with us for that which is not Gods undoubted word unto us:
And in your last writing, which should have been your answer, you said, God
speaks to us only by the Canonical Scriptures. Now seeing you would make
your liturgy and devised forms of prayer, helps and instruction, and yet
cannot make them Canonical or Gods undoubted truth, they must not be brought
into the public assembly, much less imposed by law upon the consciences of
all men. And here remember all your Liturgies are cast out of the door:
besides that, you have not made in both writings one direct answer to this
most firm Proposition: which I will still leave upon you, thus.

Only the Canonical Scriptures and lively voice of Gods own graces are to be
brought into the public assemblies for doctrine and prayer.

But men's writings are neither Canonical scripture nor the lively voice of
Gods graces in such as he has appointed to speak in the public assemblies.

Therefore no man's writings, may be brought into, nor imposed upon the public
assemblies.

Thus might I make an end with this vain man, considering the whole matter is
proved against him, all that follows being but repetitions of these former
cavills, but that I must clear my self of his unconscionable slanders.

The Second Argument.
We must do nothing in the worship of God without warrant of his word. But
read prayers have no warrant in his word. Therefore read prayers are not to be
used in the worship of God.

GEORGE GIFFORD.
To this I answer at the first, that it is a great audacitie to affirm that
there is no warrant in the word for read prayers. When there be sundry
testimonies to warrant the same, unless you will make difference, between that
which a man reads upon a book, and that which he has learned out of the
book. Further I said, I do not remember that ever. I have read that God
commanded in the Scriptures that prayer shall be read upon a Book, etc.

J. GREENWOOD.
Seeing you have indeed not answered one reason or proof I alleged in my last
writing, but with must evil conscience (as the handling shows) perverted
them, I will leave them to be judged of them that shall see my writing. And
here, seeing you would not print it, I will answer your chief objections. First
then you grant, that if I put difference between reading upon the book, and
that which he has learned out of the book, mine Argument is found. For by
your own confession, God has not given any Commandment for read prayer, and
so it has no warrant. Whereupon I gain thus much. First, that they which
impose read prayer upon the Church, do that whereof they have no warrant in the
word, and that in the high service of God then, that they which read upon a
book for praying, do that whereof they have no warrant in Gods word: whereupon
al your Ministers must leave reading their stinted prayers upon the book, or
else stand under Gods wrath, and all that so pray with them, which will be a
fearful reckoning if they repent not of their sin showed them. And although
our question be cheiflie concerning the reading of men's writings instead of
praying, yet I am content the other abuse of the Scriptures be included also,
though I make not both in the same height of sin, as shall appear in my
several reasons. As an unconstant man then, you in the latter end of the
answer to this Argument would, call back again that, which you here have
granted: Namely, that there is no Commandment to read prayer upon a book for
praying.

Of the contrary thus you reason The people of God did read the Psalms upon a
book when they did singe, therefore men may read upon a book when they pray.
I deny your Argument: besides that all men may see Your unstablenes in denying
and affirming with one breath, you now go about to make reading of prayer a
Commandment: thus you prove it. Singing (say you) is a part of prayer. Singing
may be read upon a Book: therefore prayer may be read upon a book. Admit that
Singing were a part of prayer, yet does it not follow that all prayer may be
read upon a book. But you speak like an ignorant man, to say that Singing is
prayer, seeing they are two diverse actions and exercises of our faith: the one
never read for the other, nor said to be a part of the other, through the
Scriptures, but are plainly distinguished I. Cor. 14.15. what is it then I will
pray with the spirit, but I will pray, with understanding, I will sing with the
spirit etc. Again, if you be sad, pray, and if you be merye sing Psalms,
prosuxomai and psalo. I will pray, and I will sing, are diverse exercises of the
faith, if a man should say reading a chapter of the scripture, and prophesying
were alon, were he not wide. Even so every part of Gods service is not prayer.
I grant we are every where commanded to singe Psalms unto God. And alleged
that place of the Apostle to the Ephesians. 5. 19. Speaking to your selves in
Psalms and Himnes and Spiritual songs, etc. and that of the Coloss, only to
this end, that in Psalms singing we do not always speak unto God, as in
those Psalms which are only instructions and prophesies, in the 1. and 2.
Psalms you have not one word spoken unto God. Again, as all reading of the
prayers in the Scriptures, is not praying or speaking unto God, so the reading
or singing of Psalms I took to have been a speaking to our selves, a
stirring up of Gods graces in us etc. But I do not now nor did not then hold it
so, in all Psalms singing. And where you say I purposelie left out the latter
part in both places, which was this. Sing unto God with a grace in your
hearts, the Lord knows I had no purpose to injury the Scripture, nor
maintain an untruth, But though we might do those things with a grace to God
in our hearts, which were not properly and directly a conversing by thought
and word with him alone, but one thing might have kept you from crying out,
here sie, in that I added this, that I would not stand upon that reason, but
desired to know it further. But how unjustly could you number this for an
heresy maintained of us al in your Epistle, that we should deny that Psalms
should be song unto God. The Lord keep me from such error, And a woeful
physician you are; if I had been in such an error; For the 102. Psalm, I
never denied: but that it was a most excellent Psalm penned by Daniel or some
other Prophet, and given to the whole Church to be song or read as other
Psalms, in the form of prayer. But you must prove that the Church did use it
as you say, to read it over for praying, or were commanded so to do. This is
proof enough they did not, because it is a Psalm. Now though the Chapter speak
many times in the singular number, yet it is expressed in some other verse
that it is so. But now admit that you could prove that the psalms were read
insteade of, or for invocation, which you shall never be able to do, it does
not follow that men's writings should be brought into the assemblies and read
for prayer. The 6. of Numbers I have answered before: From the 92. Psalm you
reason thus. If the psalms and other forms of prayer in the scriptures were
read or said by rote, the very form of words for praying; Then reading
instead of, or for praying. Here you durst not set your assumption, it was so
false, which should be thus. But the Psalms and other forms of prayer were
read for praying, etc. This I showed you was very untrue, they were never
commanded so to be used, nor never so used. My proof was this, they are given
were by the holy Ghost for other uses, as singing, reading, etc. and not
commanded any where so to be used, so that you do but cavil, not having one
proof for all your shameless assertions. Now where I demanded what this made
for your Liturgies, and reading men's writings for praying, except you would
make your own writings of equal authority with the Scriptures: You answer.
That if I deny the consequence, it was lawful to use the Psalms, therefore
men's writings, then I will shut out all prayers, even the prayer of the Pastor.
See your carnal handling, shufling, and confounding Gods ordinances: Does it
follow that because men's writings may not be brought into the public
assemblies, or there be read for praying, therefore the prayers uttered by the
lively voice of the Pastor should hereby be excluded? this your shift was
answered in the first Argument, your cavils are stale, you are again
convinced. Touching the other matter of cunning phrases and forms of prayer by
roate, to say over certain number of words, it is popish and a mere evasion,
and bewraieth your ignorance in prayer, In this you have granted me that he
which prays not with a feeling of his present wants of his soul, but says
over certain number of words of custom or affectation, he is an hiprocrite,
which is true, proved. Mat. 6.7. Now by this examine your daily, monethlie,
annual etc. saying over, nay reading over certain words, every time the
same, as you are stinted. It is plain the sacrifice of fools. Ecclesiastes.
4.17. The two points wherein you protest so willingly to agree with me, were
these. First whether only such prayers as were made without the book, were
accepted of Gods children. Secondly whether the same spirit teaches us to
pray, that taught the holy men of God before time. You grant both these, but
that you would seem to alter the first question: well then, Gods own spirit
that taught them to pray without a book, or stinting of words, teaches us so
to pray now, and in the action of praying gives the mouth to utter what the
heart desires, moved with the same spirit. Still then after your long shifting
to and fro, I trust you will stand to your first words, that you never read in
the Scriptures any commandment for reading of prayers. Secondly, to say
over certain numbers of words or phrases of the Scripture of custom or
affectation, without feeling of, or asking for our present wantes, is
hypocrisy. Therefore I will conclude as I began, mine Argument standing good,
that, To do any thing in the worship of God werof we have no warrant of Gods
word, is sin: But read prayers have no warrant in Gods Word, Ergo, etc.

The third Argument:
We may not in the worship of God receave any tradition which brings our
liberty into bondage. Read prayer upon commandment brought into the public
assemblies, is a tradition that brings our liberty into bondage. Therefore
read prayer etc.

The Minor is thus proved, that God has left it in all men's freedom to pray
as the present occasion requires and the spirit gives utterance, according to
his will. Again no man has power to command any thing in the worship of
God, which God has not commanded etc. Mark 7.7.8.9. Math. 15. Gal. 5.1. etc.

GEORGE GIFFORD.
I say it is ungodlie and near unto blasphemy, to affirm, that prescript
form of prayer is a tradition bringing our liberty into hondage etc. my
reason was etc is, that the Lord by Moses prescribed a form of blessing etc.
Number. 6 the Prophets in the Psalms, have prescribed many forms of prayer. Our
Savior Christ prescribed a form of prayer, etc.

JOHN GREENWODS Answer.
HEre is a great storm, and yet nothing but wind. If you were in Caiphas his
place you would either have rent your clothes for zeal, or, else condemn me
before you understand what I say. Is it simple dealing do you think to say I
hold it a bondage breaking our liberty, for the Lord by Moses, the Prophets,
our Savior Christ also, to set down a form of prayer or to prescribe a form
of prayer? Did you not see that the Minor Proposition speaks of the reading
for praing, and not of the form of prayer? Again, of the commandment, whereby
men are compelled to read instead of praing? Did you not see that these words
brought into the public, assemblies, did specifye the matter to be men's
writings to be read in the assemblies as a worship, yea invocation of Gods
name: which is a gross mockery. Not that there is any Commandment to read
over those forms of prayer mentioned by you for praing, and so the
Commandment so to read them for praying, is an abuse of them, and a
Commandment of men and not of God, etc. But that much more odious it is to
bring in men's writings into the public assemblies., is proved unlawful in
the first argument, and then to commit Idolatry with them by reading them
jnstead of praing, and that to compel men by Commandment where God had set no
Commandment so to use them, was a bringing all men into bondage of popish
traditions. So that your common recital of these places of Scripture is abuse
of them, and you do but palinodian cauere. I think if you get St. I H O N S
gospel about your neck as the Papists do, you will think you have religion
enough. The more fearful is your Apostasy, you proceed from evil to worse.

GEORGE GIFFORD.
About the Commanding a prescript form of prayer to be used, our Church does
agree with all godly Churches, yea the reformed Churches have and do practice
the same, here therefore I wish the reader to observe that you Brownists do
not only condemn the the Church of England, but all the reformed Churches
whatsoever, and can be no other but Donatistes.

JOHN GREENWODS Answer.
I Trust your madness will appear to all men, the poison of Aspes is under your
tongue: he that cannot rule his tongue his Religion is in vain. Shall J in
your heat be pressed with multitude of, Churches? then hear what the Lord
faith, Thou shall: not follow a multitude to do evil, we have the word amongst
us, we shall by that word be either justified or condemned. Then either prove
your matter from the scriptures or else give ear to the Scripture. If those
Churches you speak of, bring men's writings into the public assemblies, and
enforce them to be read for praying, I would see their warrant, we believe not
because men say so, or do so, but because God speaks: And where he speaks,
all men must be silent. You may accuse other countries as you will, know not
their estate, but your drudgery insteade of true worship, is loathsome, the
priest with his massebooke, and the beggar with his clapdish canuize over the
Pater noster for their belly, which is your common worship, with other
trinckets. We shall speak of a Liturgy in due place, Here you breath out your
accustomed lies, slanders, and railings. First you term us Brownists and
Donatists, whereas I never conversed with the men nor their writings: I dereft
Donatus his heresies. And if they had been instruments to teach us any truth
we were not therefore to be named with their name, we were baptized into
Christ's. Brown is a member of your Church, your brother, and all Brownists do
frequent your assemblies.

And here you wish the reader to consider, that I condemn all reformed
Churches. do I condemn all Churches for reproving a sin by Gods word and
May not the true Churches (if they were such) err? Did I affirm at any time
that they were no true Church that used read prayers, remember your self, you
know who is the Father of such untruthes. But because your Conscience bare
witness you had wrongfully chardged me, and in from, all true Christians: you
bring it in by necessary consequence thus. you assi'me (say you) prescript
forms of prayer brought into the public assemblies to be the changing the
work of the Spirit into an idol, a tradition breaking Christian liberty, a
dead letter quenching the Spirit etc. and therefore most detestable. But all
reformed Churches receive and use it etc. therefore: You can reason well to
bring the truth into contempt, your moth is open and tongue whet as a sword
thereunto. If the proposition be true, draw what consequence you will, it is
yours and not mine, if the doctrine be true, it is Gods word that gives
sentence against the sin. And if you have any spark of grace, procure that
we may decide the truth with other Churches. Does it follow that because
imposing of men's writings to be read for praying is an heinous sin,
therefore they that use it are no Church, If I should say so, I should justly
be called an Anabaptist.

And here you accuse me to plead for such a freedom in the Church, that
nothing received which is imposed by commandment. Abaddon is the Father of
such Prophets. Does it follow that because we would have the Church free from
all traditions of men which have no warrant in Gods word, that therefore we
would not receave Gods ordinances by Commandment. That we ought to receave
nothing by Commandment in the worship of God, which God has not commanded,
the second commandment with the scriptures I have rehearsed, are evident,
Deuteronomy. 5.32.33. Mat. 2*5.2.3. Gal. 4.9. Collof. 2, 20 But seeing your self
graueled, (considering all the world cannot lay a Commandment to bring their
own inventions into the assemblies, where God has laid none, but forbidden
it:) you ran to your former places of scripture to wrast them as before,
where your collections are but vain repetions of that which has been
convinced before. Moses, the Prophets etc. prescribed forms of prayers,
therefore men now may thrust their writings into the public assemblies: Your
Argument is denied: and yet here is no warrant for the reading them over for
prayer.

G. GIFFORD.
The Church had power to expound those prayers mentioned in the Scriptures,
and to apply them to their several necessities etc.

J. GREENWOOD.
If you mean by expounding, the breaking of them up by doctrine up, and by
doctrine and prayer to apply them to the several uses of the Church by lively
voice, far be it from me to think otherwise. But if you mean by expounding.
to make homilies upon them, or liturgies by writing to be thrust upon the
public assemblies, you are wide, and now justify homilies instead of
preaching, and written prayers instead of praying: show your warrant. The
CHVRCHES power is limited by the word.

G. GIFFORD.
When the prayers be framed and composed of nothing but the doctrine of the
Scripture and after the rules of true prayer, nothing is brought in which God
has not commanded,

J. GREENWOOD.
THis might have come in before your raylings, but you saw it was too silly:
where is that commandment of God, that all men's writings in form of prayer
agreeable to the Scriptures should be brought into the public assemblies, your
bare word is not enough to put me to silence. And when you have got them into
the Church, you must prove that God has commanded they should be read for
prayer.

Where I said our Savior Christ never used the words when he prayed. in that
form of prayer he gave to his Disciples, nether commanded his Disciples to
say over these words, nether do we read that ever his Apostles did use them,
or enforced others to use any certain number of words, you say I spoke
untruly. For say you the Disciples desired him to reach them to pray, as John
taught his Disciples, and he commanded them, when you pray, say Our Father;
etc. Luke. 11. and S. Math. an Apostle has delivered the same to the whole
Church, I answer I have never heard that John Baptist taught his Disciples to
say over certain words, nether can it be gathered by our Savior Christ's
answer, for he answered not always the very demand according to their
words, but thereupon took occasion to instruct them as the saw need. And I
have proved by the 6. of Math. that our Savior did not command them to say
over the very words when they prayed: for the word Houtos in Matthew signifies
after this manner: Again that Math. records not the very number, or the very
same words that Luke does. And now I reason thus: if Christ had commanded
those very words to be said over in praying, then we must always when we
pray, say over those words: for in Math. 6. he says when you pray, pray thus.
Our Father etc. The etc. The word when shows, that this commandment is to
be observed at all times: And then the Apostles sinned in praying other words
Acts. 4.24.25. Further it being the most summary form of prayer, most ample,
most perfect etc. if those words were commanded to be said over, then we
ought not to use any others, for he is accursed that brings not the best
offerings he has. Malach, 1.14. By all these it is evident that our Savior nor
his Evangelists tied no man to the very words saying over, but according to
that form and those instructions: and now leave of your popish dreams. Yet
you would make men belive, I reasoned thus, that the Apostles did not nether
our Savior himself, or any that we read of, use these words in prayer,
therefore they did not use it. Nay I said, they did not use these very words
in their prayers, but used other words according to their particular wants, as
our Savior in the 17. of John is said to do: therefore he nether used nor
commanded others to say over those words. And so I may well conclude, that to
impose certain words to be read or said by roate for praying, upon the
Church, especially men's writings, is an intollorable pride, even a setting of
men in the place of God: Also that to use them or bow down unto them in that
order, is sin, and a breach of Gods law.

The fourth Argument.
Because true prayer must be of faith, uttered with heart and lively voice: it
is presumptuous ignorance to bring a book to speak for us unto God etc.

The fifth Argument.
To worship the true God after an other manner then he has taught, is
Idolatry. But he Commands us to come unto him, heavy laden with contrite
hearts, to cry unto him for our wantes etc.

Therefore we may not use reading of a dead letter, instead of pouring fourth
out petitions.

The Sixth Argument.
We must strive in prayer with continuance etc. But we cannot strive in prayer
and be importunate with continuance, reading upon a book. Therefore we must not
read when we should pray,

G. GIFFORD.
These 3. I joined together as having no weight, you say I answer by plain
contradiction without Scripture etc. And after wards is not my bare denial as
good as you bare affirmation: etc.

I. GREENWOOD.
STay your selves and wonder they are blind and make blind. Is there any
doctrine more spiritual, any more inculcated by the holy Ghost, the^ this
access unto God in the mediation of Christ, by his own spirit to make our
minds known unto God, to offer up the fruits of his own spirit in us, and
fetch increase from him by this secreat work of true invocation with the heart
and voice? This colloquie with the high majesty of God, is it a matter of no
weight to learn to discern between diverse exercises of the spirit, and to
exercise his graces aright according to his will? Right is it said, the
wisdom of God is foolishnes to the natural man. But Mr GIFFORD. will say he
grants the propositious true and weighty matters, it is the Assumptions that
be so frivolous, and as he said a little after, ridiculous: well, let them he
weyed. 1. That reading instead of praying is not a pouring fourth of the heart
by lively voice. 2. That it is a quenching of the spirit, to read an other
man's words upon a book, in the very action of pouring fourth our heart as we
pretend. 3. That it is not an vnburdening of a contrite heart by faith, but an
ignorant action to read for praying. 4. That we cannot strive in prayer,
continue in prayer, be importunate etc. by reading upon a book. These are
matters he thinks of so little weight, the bare denial and contradiction
whereof he holds of such credit, that it must suffice for answer, seeing he
says he has before proved the use of reading. See here he caleth it the use
of reading; He could not say that reading is praying, nether that these two
exercises of our Faith can be used both in one instant, as one action. I have
showed that proseuche and anagnosis, praying and reading, are diverse actions
both of the mind and body: let the reader consider what weight then this
matter is of, to talk with the living God.

But for the benefit of such as have grace to savor the things that are of
God, I will a little illustrate the Assumptions, at least some of them. 1. That
it is a quenching of the spirit to read an other man's words upon a book,
when I should power fourth mine own heart, the word itself must be considered,
the Apostle commands saying 1. Thessaloniaus. 5.19. extinguish ye not the
spirit. Now to suppress and leave vnvttered the passions of our own heart by
the work of the spirit, giving us cause of our own heart by the work of the
spirit, giving us cause of prayer, and instead thereof to read another man's
writing, I doubt not will be found and judged of all that have spiritual eyes
to see, a quenching of that grace, yea in that action, the reading hinders us
from pleading our cause with God, according to the occasions we see in our own
hearts. And by not teaching men to draw out the graces of God in them, to
offer up the sweet incense of his own spirit in prayer, but an other course
devised by fleshly policy, the people grow into such Atheism, that they
learn not all the days of their life to lay open their own soul before the
Lord in prayer. How much more then, by imposing stinted words to be read in
the whole assemblies, insteade of the lively graces, making it a sufficie^nt
ministry to read over such beggarlie wares, do you abandon Gods spiritual
gifts, and make an assembly of Atheists in most places of this land, yea
truly in the best assemblies compel such wares to be read, when and where the
lively voices of God present graces should only be drawn fourth as an holy
odor unto the Lord. Yea I appeal to the consciences of all that fear God, if
this have not brought the land generally to Atheism, that not one amongst an
hundred can call upon God.

2 That it is an ignorance to presume to come into so near a conversing with
God, and to do one action for an other, so offering the sacrifice of fools, let
it be sufficient proof that reading is not praying. That it is presumptuous, to
bring such lame sacrifices when you know to do better, let, it be considered
whether you would so uncircumspectly, and carelessly approach to the presence of
the Prince or any noble personage. Then if he be our Lord where is his honor,
his fear etc. when we will teach men and compel men to do they know not what
in his sight, and to offer such lame sacrifice. The Priests themselves care not
what offering they bring to him Malach. 1.

Thirdly the reading prayer can be at no hand a striving in prayer, for the
word agoniso which is read Romans 15, 30 signifies to contend in fervency both
in mind, and word, to prevail with God as Iaakob wrestled with the Angel,
and said, I will not let thee go except thou bless me, Genes. 32, 24.25.26.
Such ^rist you shall see throughout the Psalms in the prayers of David, and
the Prophets, alas, how this should be performed either by feruency or
contynuance, let the wise consider.

4. For importunacy and continvance in prayer, whereof we have many precepts,
let the word be looked upon, which is proscartereo to insist by perseverance
etc. as we see our Savior Christ make plain unto us by a parable, Luke
11.5*6.7.8, and Luke. 18.1.2.3.5.7. now shall not God avenge his elect which
cry night and day? Experience we see in Moses, who when he lifted up his
hands to heaven the Israelites so long prevailed: Exodus 17. You can not make
your read prayers serve in this use with all your divises, For how would you
effect this, except to make the Priest read till he sweat again, with vain
repetition, and the people that use such stinted prayers to say them often
over, as the Papists their fifteen Aue marias and five Pater nosters as a cure
of altheir grieves. By this little I have spoken, it may appear (though the
Lord knows I am a man of vncricumcised lips, neither able to utter that God
gives me by faith to see in these high things, neither yet comprehending any
title of the excelency, of them) it I hope it shall appear to Gods children,
how odious your merchandise is in Gods eyes, and how you make the ordinances of
God of true prayer, of none effect, by your traditions, he only approving the
lively graces of his own ministry, and such as have gifts and are called
thereunto, to be his mouth unto the people, and the peoples mouth unto him in
the public assemblies, you invent a new worship and extinguish his, which
makes men fall into dissolutnes and bloody tyranny against his Saints.

And where I alleged that Paul would pray with the spirit and understanding,
and therefore not upon a book, you answer that Paul had no such need of a
book as other men have. But if you had looked upon the text better, you should
see, that the Apostle in his own person teaches what ought to be done in all
Churches and of all men, And that he there takes away the abuse of spiritual
gifts. I Corin. 14.15 and in the same Chapter shows that this and all other
his doctrines are commannments of God. verse. 37 now either God prescribes two
ways to pray, or else your reading for praying is a devise of man. But your
self have confessed there is no commandment to read prayer for praying. Yet
here you cavil with your stale shift, that Paul taught others to singe Psalms
upon a book, which is a mere evasion, seeing singing is not praying. The same
Apostle faith to all that are borne of God, because we are sons God has sent
fourth into our hearts the spirit of his son which cries Abba Father. So
that although we have not like measure of grace, yet if we cannot pray we have
uot the spirit of God, Gal. 4.6.

I alleged as you say a reason here, why prayer read cannot be true prayer.
Jn reading we fetch the matter from the book which moves the heart, In true
prayer we fetch the matter from the heart which causes the mouth to speak.
Your answer is, that this a most ridiculous vanity, for tell me (say you)
this, when we bring fourth in true prayer matter from the heart which causes
the mouth to speak, has not the heart been first moved with the word of
faith, etc. Let men here, witness with me, what cause I had to esteem you as
a skorner. Again, how empty you are of any spiritual favor. And here you have
no answer to give, but ask me certain questions: First whether when we bring
fourth in true prayer. etc. the heart has not been first instructed. To this
I answer, that again you confess the reading prayer upon a book is not
praying, but an instruction of the heart to pray. If you would stand to this,
we should not need have so much labor, and all the places of Scripture which
you have alleged for to prove reading praying, have been merely wrested by
you to deceive the simple. Well(say you) but if the heart be first instructed
before it can utter matter in prayer, why may not the heart again be moved
with hearing or reading the word, and so utter prayer. Yes I grant and still
you grant me, that reading is not praying but moves to prayer: The^ all your
assemblies that have no prayer at all, and all that use read prayer for praying
do not pray but mock with God. See if your Ordinary will here be pleased
with you, Yet you would deny all this with the same breath by a shift, saying:
The heart in moved when one hears the prayer of the minister and presently
sends fourth prayers together with him. I trust you will not say that the
heart of the hearer prays one thing, and the Minister an other, again the
prayer of the minister is the prayer of the people, by Gods ordinance, whiles
they think one thing, and are mert to one end, for anoyding confusion one
speaks, ye all pray together one thing. But the minister may as well preach
and pray, or read any chapter and pray, as read prayers, and pray both in
one action of the mind, and voice, which were strange. Your cavil then
whether the heart may be moved, and pray, both at once, is taken away, seeing
you grant reading and praying, two several excercises of the heart and voice,
which cannot be performed at once with lively voice. The conclusion is then,
that either ye must fetch the matter out of your book when you read prayer,
and so do not pray for the particular wants where with the heart is moved and
pressed before you come, or else you pray not with lively voice at al, when you
read: The Lord then having taught us to break up our own hearts, and power
fourth our petitions with heart and voice, give grace to al his people so to
worship him.

The Seventh Argument.
We must pray as necessity requires. But stinted prayers cannot be as
necessity requires. Therefore stinted prayer is unlawful.

G. GIFFORD.
To this I answered, approving the Proposition. And in the Assumtion I did
distinguish of matters to be prayed for, as that there be things necessary to
be prayed for at all times. and of all men: of these a prescript form may be
used at all meetings of the Church, there be matters not at all times needful
to be prayed for, for such there can be no prescript form to be used
contynually, etc.

I. GREENWOOD.
I Have proved in the first Argument, that no men's writtngs are to be brought
into the public assemblies, for there the lively graces of Gods own spirit
and Cononical Scriptures only must be heard: In the Second, the vnlawfullnes
of reading for praying, in the third, the vnlawfullnes to impose any thing by
commandment, that God has not commanded. And here we shall handle in few
words the end of your stinted prayers. Your distinction is, far, differing
from the wisdom of the spirit, for though many things be at all times
needful to the public assemblies, yet stand not the assemblies either all at
any time, or any at all times in the same need and feeling of them, or fitnes
to receave them, so that except you ca^ make all assemblies in the same want of
such things as are always needful, or any at al times in the same
preparednes to ask, and use them that be needful, you can make no stinted
prayers for them. Give ear then to the Scripture in this point 1 Cor. 2.11.
For what man knows the things of a man, if not the spirit of man which is
himself, etc. Again, who knows what (shall be) tomorrow? Iam. 4.14.
Whiles you then thought to have found out more then the only wise governor
of his house law needful for his worship in his Church, and of every soul,
you have lifted up your self into his seat: and taken the office of his
spirit upon you, who searches the hearts and knows the reins, and
teaches his people how and when to ask, according to his will and their
needs, Romans 8.26.27. also the spirit helps our infirmities, for what we
should pray as we ought, we know not: But the spirit it self makes request for
us with sighs and groans, which can not be expressed: Yet searching the
hearts knows, the meaning of the spirit, because he makes request for the
saints according to the will of God. And where you say then, that if we mark
the prescript form of prayers of all Churches, we shall see this regard, Rom
8.7. and 11 34.1 Cor. 2.16. and 3.19.
that nothing be left out which is necessary, etc. This bewrays your
shallownes, the wisdom of the flesh is foolishnes with God: who has searched
the depth of Gods spirit, or known the mind of man? who can prescribe the
estate of all Churches, and what every moment is needful to be prayed for?
Odious then is such dross of a fleshly man's heart.

Your second provision, that nothing be prayed for in your liturgy that falls
seldom out, but they are limited to the time. Your Church has not this
provision, you compel men to pray against thunder and lightning at midd
winter, and in your most solemn feasts against sodeine death: But the truth
is, till you amend your ways, God will accept no sacrifice of you, much less
requires this at your hands, to do more in his worship then he has
commanded.

And where you say, in the Church of England the preachers are not limited
touching the matter of their prayers, it is not true, you are all sworn to
your portuis, howsoever, you may omit some of it for your Sermons, and under
pretext thereof. what part you will. And why is there not a form for prayer
prescribed, to be used after and before your Sermons? is it because the text is
not always the same, or that the speaker is not in like fitnes, or the
auditorie in the same preparednes? I assure you these things might be
sufficient cause why you cannot use always the same words, and pray according
to your necessities, and even so standerh the case for all other affairs in the
Church. The disposition of the soul and the distresses thereof, continve not
in one state one hour. But let me tell you why you have no form of prayer for
your preachings, In many of your parishes, or (as you would have them)
Churches, Sermons are of those rare things, whereof you say there can be no
prescript form of prayer, yea your liturgy approves a ministry and
sufficyent administration without any doctrine, which shows it came out of
the devils forge, and not out of Christ's Testament.

But seeing you would take upon you to set so many prescript forms of prayer,
as there are things necessary for every assembly to pray for, where Christ
has set none. And if it were a thing so necessary to have prescript words at
the administration of the Sacraments, I asked you whether our savior Christ
had not forgott himself as you thought, that when he commanded his ministers
to go preach and baptize, and showed them the words of institution, and the
Elements to be used with all things thereunto needful, he did not prescribe
some form of words for prayer in particular: In the tabernacle every pin
was prescribed, so that either such forms of prayer are not necessary, or
Christ's Testament has some wants. To this you answer, that it is not of
necessity there should be a set form of prayer prescribed for the
administration of the Sacraments: The minister may conceive prayer, etc. Hold
you to this, that it is not of necessity: you will deny it again in the next
Argument. Well here you grant, it is not of necessity. But you have not
answered me, tell me whether you hold it necessary or no. if it be at all
times necessary, the Testament is not perfect. Again do you not hold it of
necessity, when you excommunicate men, and depose your ministry for not
observing it? But you say, it is for conveniencie, If it be a part of Gods
worship, and all times convenient, then is it necessary, and if it be not
necessary, put such convenience in your corner Capp, or surplus. Now if it be
necessary at all times: you must prove it is commanded in Gods word, or else
say that all things necessary in Gods worship be not contained in Gods word,
which were blasphemous and papisticall to affirm. To this you grant all
things necessary and convenientare contained, and ask if I be ignorant that
there be many things contained in the Scriptures, that are not expressed in
particular, but be gathered from the general rules. No, I am not ignorant of
this; but if it may be gathered either by express words, or by general rules,
that there should be prescript forms of prayer for the administration of the
Sacraments, or any other particular action of the Church, then must it be so
of necessity, because God has commanded it, though not in particular, yet in
general rules: But you grant it is not of necessity: therefore it is not
commanded in particular, nor contained in any general rule,

Yet you demand of me, if one should, object that there were not commandment
in the scriptures, nor example for any prayers to be made at all before
preaching etc. I would say he should lie against God, we 1 Timothy 4. 5. Act.
16.13.13
have both. For the Apostle shows it was the chief part of their office, to
continue in the word and prayer. Act. 6.4.1. Cor. 14. and 1. Tim. 2, 1 Acts.
2.42. besides, all things are sanctified unto us by the word and prayer. And
because they never used doctrine in the Ch., but prayer went before therefore
their meetings is said to be unto prayer, some things there are I grant that
are not prescribed in particular, and yet are commanded by general doctrine,
as baptism of Infants. But whatsoever is commanded either in particular or
necessary collections, from general rules, are of necessity to be obeyed, as
the commandments of God and may not be altered, but your particular forms of
prescript words have no such warrant. Now seeing you would have no prescript
words of prayer for the minister to vle before his preaching, not of
necessity for the Sacraments, and have none for excommunication, etc. I
wondered where of your Portuis is made, and whereto it should serve, except for
churchings, and burialls and such popery, whereby you leave the commandments
of God to set up your own traditions. And here upon I demanded, whereupon you
would make your stinted and set prayers. You marvel I should be so babbling
and make such questions, you mean about your babbling worship. You say of the
particulars of the Lords prayer. I demand now again, whether you can
number the stars of heaven, or the sands of the sea, if not, much less the
particulars of the Lords prayer. There is medecin, and direction of prayer for
every soul and every disease, therefore to be drawn fourth by doctrine and
parier as need requires, you would set a liturgy upon some things, and
compel men thereunto every meeting, which were no thing else but to seal up the
fountain, and send men to the dry pitts of your execrable devises, from the
whole fountain, to a pitcher of water, from the lively graces of Doctrine and
prayer, to your own writings. Paul commanded to pray for Kings and Princes,
yet bound no man what words to use. The Lord give you repentance of such
presumptuous Tim. 2.1 34 5.
sin, as to alter his worship. If you cannot know the estate of the soul
before hand, you can make no forms of words for it.

The Eight Argument.
Read prayers were devised by Antichrist, and maintain superstition and an
Idol ministry: therefore read prayers and such stinted service are
intolerable etc.

G. GIFFORD.
Antichrist devised many blasphemous wicked prayers. But to say that the
making or following a prescript form of prayer was his, is most false, for
there were Liturgies in the Church of old, before Antichrist was set in his
throne etc.

J. GREENWOOD.
THe Scripture never enforced to read prayers for praying, nether stinted us
what, or how many words to use, nether is the forms of prayer prescribed in
the Scripture and devise of man. Let us then hold these two to be the matters
in hand, the one, reading in stead of praying, the other, stinging and
limiting by a written liturgy, what and how many words to pray, with all
other such prescriptions as your liturgy conteyneth All may be affirmed
antichristian which is not warranted by Christ's word: Yet your liturgy, is
even from that Antichrist lifted up into the throne you speak of, as may by
all men be seen that will compare it with the Portuis. And (as I have heard)
the Pope would have approved of your liturgy, if it might have been received
in his name. Now we have proved in the discourse before, that reading for
praying has no warrant from Gods Word, which makes them two several and
diverse actions every where.

Here then we must consider something for an other liturgy, then Christ's
Testament which we shall find to be nothing else, then an other gospel. And
because Mr Gifford says there were liturgies in the Church before Antichrist
was lifted up into his throne (which I will not deny) I would have all men
understand that I do not go about to prove the church no church that has a
liturgy (as mine Arguments are falsely wrested to that purpose) but to prove
the vnlawfullnes of such liturgy thrust upon men's Consciences, is only my
determination through Gods assistance. The word liturgy signifies publicum
manus, ergon Laon, the work of, or for the people: that is the very execution
of the ministerial actions in the Church, according to the word, of all the
officers thereof, that is the practice of those ministerial duties prescribed
by Christ, we may every where read. Jn the first of the Gospel of Luke the
23. verse it is said. And is came to pass that when the days of his
ministration were past, he went home to his house, meaning, Zacharias: where we
see the word Liturgy for his execution of his ministerial function. Now this
Leitourgia of the new Testament, is even the rule and function prescribed by
Christ, for the puqlique actions to be done in his Church: which leiturgu Gal.
1.8.9 Rev. 22.18.19.2 Tim. 1.13, 1 Timothy 6*14
of Christ is perfect, and he pronounced accursed that adds any thing thereto,
or taken any there from: yea al me^ are bound to keep the true pattern thereof,
without alterration or innouating any part of the same as is called a
commandment to be kept without spott, till the appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ. Now, to make an other leiturgie, is to lay other foundation, and to
make an other Gospel, not that there is an other Gospel, but that there are
some willing to pervert the Gospel of Christ. Then your leiturgies to which
you are sworn, and by which you administer, being (as you cannot deny) an
other leiturgie then Christ's Testament, is plainly an other Gospel, for the
Canons and rules you prescribe and impose are such, as he has not prescribed
or commanded, or at the best, a transforming of his ordinances. Now if you
should say, you do nothing but make laws of particular things collected from
the scriptures, and with that color impose your leiturgies, we have showed
the vnlawfullnes of bringing any man's writings, as rules into the Church, For
the explaining of the whole will of Christ, so far as is meet for us, he has
given us his officers to administer, according to his liturgy by lively voice,
and due execution of all things by one rule. Making then a new litourgia, you
must also make a new ministry, for Christ's ministry cannot administer
after a counterfeit liturgy. And that Antichrist was the chief Innouator of
this liturgy (howsoever the thing might be long a working by little and little)
it is plain when he is called Antikeimenos that opposite man, or laier of an
other foundation. Now we must not make all liturgies beside the Testam., of
like wickedness or blasphemy. But how near the most heynousest yours
approach, let him that answers the other part of your book witness unto me.

Now where I said you had confessed that you never read in the Scriptures any
warrant to read prayers unto God, you say now, I know I have falsified your
words. Surely it would be known, for I would not willingly so do, your
words you say were these, to your remembrance: God never commanded a man to
read prayer: upon the book: Is not this the same that I say: you confess
there is no warrant for reading prayer: is there any thing warranted in his
worship that he has not commanded? Then you ask me if I will gather thus, is
it not express commanded, therefore it is not warranted. No you forgot the
word expressie to help your self to say and vnsaye. I gathered, that because
you said absolutely it was not commanded, therefore it was not warranted. Here
you come again to show your ignorance in the scriptures, to say there is not
any exprese commandment to use prayer before or after doctrine. And
remember, you here will have it a commandment, and said before you hold it
not of necessity.

G. GIFFORD.
There would sundry inconveniences grow for want of a Lyturgie or prescript
forms of public prayers.

I. GREENWOOD.
Still I must put you in mind of the wisdom of that governor of his house
the builder, beginner and finisher of our Faith Christ Jesus: he forsawe what
inconvenience would have grown if either men or Angels should make new
liturgies, or other forms of prayer, then he has prescribed, for the public
assemblies. Here therefore you deeply chardge him, not to have done all things
that were needful, in not prescribing you more forms the^ he has done, or
not suffered learned divines to impose their own writings unto God. But see
what the Scripture says, who has known the mind of the Lord, that he might
instruct him. Again. 1 Cor 2.16. and. 2*20.
where is the wise, where the Scribe, where the disputer of this world has not
God made the wisdom of this world foolishnes? To put you out of doubt then,
that we need not any new liturgy, nor any men's writings to be brought into
the public assemblies, the Holy Ghost says, 2. Timot. 3.16. The whole
Scripture is Theopneustos, inspired of God, and profitable unto doctrine, unto
reproof, unto correction, unto erudition which is in righteousness, that the man
of God may be absolute, perfect fully furnished unto every good work. Now
if only the Scriptures be Theopnestos, and sufficient to make Gods children
absolutely perfect, even fully furnished to every good work, what blasphemy is
it to say, sundry inconvenience would grow, if men's writings were not
imposed upon the public assemblies?

And in this your wisdom, let us see what is the chiefest inconveniency that
would grow. You say everye frantic spirit (of which sort there be many in
the ministry) would not only be unlike themselves, but vary from others. I
answered, and still do, that the Papists have not so weak a reason for their
Idolatrous Liturgies, Rubricks, and Canons. You say it appears by all my
Arguments, how meet a man I am to judge the weight of reasons alleged by the
Papists, and others: well I am weak, and you strong, foolish and you wise, yet
might you have showed me a weaker reason which they allege for their
constitutions ecclesiastical, as they call the^. But my chief answer was
(whereby you might have been satisfied) that if it were but in Parases the
ministry should differ, it is no sufficient cause to ordeine liturgies. And
if they offend in matter of doctrine or conversation, the censure of the Church
should help that. The first you grant, the second also you confess, that the
Church should censure such things: But you say there are sundry other
differences in administration of public prayers and Sacraments, as in order
and ceremonies which the Chapter is is to have regard of, and not to leave
arbitrarie. All other ceremonies in Gods worship then Christ and his Apostles
have prescribed us, are diabolical, and not Apostolical. Then, for all
things done in the Church in those public actions, the offenders must be
admonished, if they trasgresse the rules of the word. And for the others you
speak of, you mean circumstances of time, place, kneeling, sitting, standing
etc. of them there can be no further laws, then Christ has prescribed, that
all things be donnne to edifying, in comelynes and decency etc. of these to set
particular laws, were to break the law of God, which leaves them in the
Churches liberty as need requires, to the glory of God. In these things to
do any thing contrary to the general rules of order, edifying, decencye
etc. the transgressour is by those rules to be instructed, admonished and
censured.

Well, here you have made a fair hand, to make read prayers but a matter of
order, which is all the worship you have, to bring in men's writings into the
public assemblies, to make the^ either rules to bind the conscience, and so
put them in the place of Gods book, or to read them over for praying, is but
a matter of order, well then put them in your cornerr Capp, we have enough of
rules for the ordering of Christ's spouse, without such Babilonish ware. Here
you say mine experience is not so great as my boldness. I pass not to be
judged of you, it is not like that the enchaunters of Egypt should know the
beauty of Sion: there is a cloud between you and us: we have (blessed be our
God) a pillar of fire before us. An other fault you say in my former reason,
is, that because the censure of the Church should redress defaultes, therefore
there needs no liturgy. Nay take all with you: No fault can be censured that
is not a transgression against the rules of Gods word, and those to be
censured by the doctrine and admonitions of the Church, therefore we need no
liturgies. To the word of God only, ought all men to be bound by covenant,
and for the transgressions thereof only, to be censured.

G. GIFFORD.
The Church has this power, to ordeine according to Gods word, and to
appointe such orders in matters of circumstance etc. as shall most fuly serve
to edification. And then these orders being established the Church is to drive
men to the observation of them.

I. GREENWOOD.
First, in this your papisticall mudde, I must tell you, your reading of men's
writings for prayer, is a fall worship of God, and not a matter of
circumstance, And for matters of order and circumstance, which are no part of
the worship, there can be no other laws made of them, then Christ has made: As
for ordeyning of laws in the Church, it is to plead for unwritten verities,
and to make the law of God unsufficient: neither can it be according to the
word, to make any law, that God has not made, but an adding to his word,
which is execrable pride: these your words then (according to Gods word) was
but a cloak to cover the grossenes of your position: for the word, ordeyne,
or create laws, is to make some, that are not made before: let us then see
your clean sentence to be this, The Church has authority in matters of order
and circumstance to make and ordain laws in his Church for his worship: now
see how you contradict these Scriptures: Rev. 22.18.19. Prove. 30.5.6. every
word of God is pure etc. put nothing to his word least he reproove thee and
thou be found a liar. likewise Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 12.32. and Gal. 3.15. though it
be but a man's covenant', when it is confirmed, no man does abrogate it, or
superordeine any thing to it. And the second Commandment forbids any
such human tradition in the worship of God: all the Popes trinckets might be
brought in by the same ground: We would willingly have seen your warrant for
this doctrine, your bare word is not sufficient to impose other laws then God
has made, upon his Church. This is the foundation of Popery and
Anabaptistrie, to give liberty to make laws in the worship of God. Yet you
will go further, that such laws being ordained and established by public
authority, the discipline and censures of the Church are to drive men to the
observation of the same. By your judgment our Savior Christ was an
Anabaptisticall Schismatique, that would not himself, nor his Disciples, obey
and observe the traditions of the Elders: And what says he unto pleaders for
traditions. It is thus written Mark 7.5. then asked him the Pharisees and
Scribes, why walk not thy disciples according to the tradition of the elders,
but eat meat with unwashed hands. Then be answered, surely Isay has
prophesied well of you hypocrites, as it is written, this people honoreth me
with their lips but their hearts are far from me. But they worship me in
vain, teaching doctrines men's precepts. For you lay the commandment of God
aside and observe the tradition of men.

And to help forth your evil matter, instead of proof from the scripture,
you fall out into furious exclamation against them that desire only to have the
word practiced: saying, who is able to imagine the innumerable divisions and
offenses in the practice of your anabaptisticall freedom, in which you deny
the Church to have power to ordeine and impose any orders? let all men judge
the venemousnes of this tongue, Christ pronunceth them accursed that add or
superordeyne any thing to his word, and you pronounce judgment of them, that
only obey his word. Shall it be said that Mr Gifford holds, that the only
practice of Gods word, would be the cause of iunumerable divisions and
offenses? This has been Satan's old accusation in the mouth of the most enemies
of Christ's Gospel: now it must be Mr Giffords accusation of Gods ordinances,
to be insufficient, unperfect, etc. fearful is his Apostasy from that truth he
has known. I take it, it is more like to be Anabaptistry, to practice any
thing without warrant of the word, to make their own devises laws, in Gods
worship, then to do nothing but what God has commanded, within the limits
of our callings.

For the frantic ministry, it came of your own words, that therefore you
must needs have a leiturgie, because there are many frantic spirits in the
ministry? then I say, it is like you have a frantic ministry, that cannot
be governed without another liturgy then Christ's Testament: For their great
gifts you speak of: I will not compare with them.

My reason from the Colossians was, that as the Church there is commanded to
admonish their Pastor Archippus, if he transgressed, and to stir him up to his
business, so all ministers that caused divisions, contrary to the doctrine of
Christ, were to be admonished, and avoided, if they repent not: so that the
word of God, and admonition by the same, if they tra^sgresse, is the way to
keep all men in due order, and not imposing Leiturgies upon the Church,
besides Christ's Testament.

And where you collected thus, that if read Prayers, and imposed liturgies be
Idolatrous, then where will you find a visible Church say you. I answered that
the true Church might err, even in this point, though not in like height of
sin. Then you desire, that the Churches of England may find like favor at
our hand: Mr. Barrowes refutation discovery, etc.
to which I answer, let him that handles that question with you, show you,
how your sins herein exceed other countries, and persequute such as reprove
you. Your church (as you all it) cannot plead ignorance. Your railing
speeches, of blind Schismatiques, Donatists etc. bewray what sweet water is in
the heart: if you cannot prove your Church to be the established Church of
Christ, they light all upon your self. There are none Schismatiques, but such as
depart from the faith, show wherein we have transgressed, and will not be
reformed. In the mean time you are Schismatiques from Christ, in that you
practice the Statutes of Omry. You chardge us with pride, for that ( you say)
we imagine to know more then all the Churches upon earth. This also has been
Satan's old weapon, to deface the truth Ierem. 18.18. why may not a simple babe
in Christ see that, which whole nations have not seen? we cannot but speak
the things Gods Word teaches us: if we speak truth, you need not oppose
that we judge any man, it is the word of God shall judge us all, and I say,
it is an old papish Argument, to reason thus (all Churches do such a thing,
therefore it is lawful) except you hold with the Pope, that the Church cannot
err, which were blasphemous. You are not well pleased that I will not say it
is no Church that has a liturgy imposed upon it, and because you have so
often slandered me, that I hold it so, you take great pains to conclude it. I
have said that to impose men's writings, to be read in stead of praying, 'is to
worship God after a false manner, that it is a devise of Antichrist, a dead
letter, quenching the spirit, not of faith, Idolatrous changing the work of
the spirit into an Idol, breaking our Christian liberty, and so most
detestable. By these speeches I condemn all Churches say you: this is not
true, I condemn but the sin. But you have said J deny that to be the Church,
that has any thing imposed. I say you speak an open untrueth; and remember the
judgment of him that inventeth and makes lies: And God give you grace to
repent, if you belong to him. The consideration of this our discourse, I
hartelie commendo to be duly and uprightly wayed, of all that fear God, who
grant us his grace to forsake any sin, where it shall be showed us, by how
weak instruments soever it be reproved, and pardon me all my defaults, in this
my hasty answer. Thus have we seen the unlawfullnes of thrusting men's
writings upon public assemblies, and reading instead of praying.

A general Argument against their worship, in respect of their present estate,
both of Ministers and people.
The Prayers of such ministers and people, as stand under a false government
are not acceptable, not only because they ask amiss, but because they keep
not his Commandments.

The prayers of such Ministers and people as be subject to Antichrist are
abominable:

Those Ministers and people which stand subject to the Bishops and their
Courts, are subject to Antichrist etc. Therefore their prayers etc.

G. GIFFORD.
These do concern the third and fourth accusation, and therefore the answer is
included in the answer to them. Yet I take exception against the first, that
the Church may be holden by force from executing Gods commandments touching
external government, and yet be the true Church of God, I alleged the
Church that was holden captive in Babylon etc.

J. GREENWOOD.
HEre, after your acustomed manner, you offer me great wrong, first, insteade
of answer, you alter the question very subtilie: then you dismember my former
answer, and not only so, but you have nether let my former answer be
answered, nor printed. Thus you alter the question, and answer not, where the
proposition speaks of a ministry and people standing under a false
government, you say the church may be holden by force, from executing Gods
commandments in external government, whereof I never doubted: what is this
then, but to deceave your Reader, both to judge sinisterlie of me, and be
drawn from the truth himself? But indeed you mean not this (holden by force)
of civil bondage or persequution, for then there were no difference between
us, and mine Argument should stand untouched, You affirm then that the Church
may stand under a false government, enforced thereunto by the tyranny of the
enemy, and yet in that estate be the true apparent Church, by open profession,
which is nothing else, then that the Church may profess Christianisme and
Antichristianisme, both at a time, subject in mind to Christ, and subject to
Antichrist in outwatde obedience. That you hold this doctrine in this place,
the process of your matter proves, and to make all plain, your words in the
last writing (which here you sum up) were these. But if the Church at any
time be by main force restrained from some privileges, or have some
government set over it, which agrees not with Gods word, which it cannot
avoid etct See now how smoothly this man has put away the cross of Christ, by
teaching men to stand under a government, contrary to Christ's. I thought the
ordinances of the new Testament had been a kingdom that could not be shaken.
Rev. 24, 9 10.11.12
Heb. 12.28. that none could have been a member of Christ, that receaveth the
marcke of the Beast, though it be but in his hand, or could be holden a member
of Christ, by outward profession, that here had been the patience of the
Sanicts, to suffer unto death, rather then to bow down, either in mind or
body to an other government, then Christ's. How is he a Lord to them that are
not governed by him? Well I needed not to have stod upon this doctrine, but
that be nether printed my former answer, nor answered in these points, and
mine own copy taken from me by the Bishops: so that this man may retract what
he will, and accuse as please him: if he have any common honesty, let my
former answer be seen.

But to prove the Church may be subject to an other government then Christ's,
which is even to say, that a man may give all allegiance by outward practice
to the King of Spain, and yet be her Majest. true subject, He says, the
Church was holden captive in Babylon, where he as cunningly hides himself as
before, though in my last writing, I urged him to answer, whether the Church
in Babylon was subject to their Idolatry, or no. To the civil power I doubt
not they were: But if the Priests and Levites stood Priests to the Idolatrous
worship in Babylon, whether the people of Israel bowed down to the outward
practice and obedience of their Idolatry, or no: then, if they did so, whether
they stood by profession the children of God, or apostate in that estate. None
of these things have you answered me. Let the examples of Hanania, Mishaell,
and Azaria testify Dan: 3. The people that returned repented their
transgressions, where they had any of them sinned, and made a new covenant with
the Lord, before they were received, Ezia 9.14.15. and 10. cap. 2.3.8. Yea the
voice of God was this, come out of her my people, and touch no unclean thing
and I willbe your God. We are before thee (says Ezra) in our trespass, and we
cannot stand before thee because of it. You never renounced your Antichristian
ministry, Esa. 52.11. Ierem. 51 6, 45.
you never made a new covenant since the deep defection of Poperye, but still
minister in that kingdom, and will not repent, yet boast your selves to be the
Church of God, cryinge out, the Temple the Temple. I answer then directly,
that whiles you stand subject unto, and practice and communicate with other
orders and governments, then Christ's, you are not by outward profession the
churches of Christ. I may not with you omit the word (wilful) because you
persequute the light, and so much higher is your sin. Here I must forewarne
the Reader, with diligence to consider Mr. Giffords disagreement and mine, he
having accused me of a fundamental heresy (as he callet hit) whereas he
himself maintayneth most gross errors, whereof J reproved him, yet he
persisteth, Namely, that the regenerate man may be said to stand in bondage to
sin, by reason of the corruption of the flesh that is in us, and of our
unperfectnes in this life. Then, that one standing in outward bondage to open
known sin, may in that estate be accounted and communicated with, as the
servant of Christ by outward profession, both at one instant: which is as much
to say, we may be to man's sight, the servant of the Devil, and the servant of
Christ, both at one time, by outward profession: so none should be
excommunicate: none be without, the world and the church light and darkness,
Christ and Belial, should be mingled together.

These heresies whereof, he most unjustly and untruly proclaymeth to be
mainteyned by us, is, that the regenerate man consents not to sin, after
regeneration, although in the last writing I testified the contrary: Namely
that the whole church might err, might committ some kind of Idolatry, that
no man was free from committing sin, etc: And now I testify to all the
world, that I was never infected with any such Anabaptistery, but have every
where resisted such damnable heresy. I have learned and taught many degrees
of sin, and differences of transgressions, which the dear children of God
fall into, after regeneration, in thought, word and deed, of ignorance, of
knowledge, of presumption, slippes, transgressions, and obstinate sin: Yea
that there is no sin, except the sin against the holy Ghost, but Gods
children, may commit it after regeneration, and be renewed by repentance, which
we ought to pray for in all sinners, but that one sin except. Not that men
should here upon take boldness to sin, because God gives repentance to his
elect, wherein the riches of his mercy appears, but rather serve him in
trembling and fear, as a jealous God, least with Esaw we find no place to
repentance, though we seek it with tears. Again, though in Gods sight, his
elected are never forsaken utterlie, nor the Holy Ghost utterly extinguished in
the repentance, yet to man's jndgement he that commits open known sin, and
persisteth obstinately in the same, cannot be held the child of God to us, by
outward profession, but must be cut of Numbers 15.27.31. Matt. 18.17. and 1
Cor. 5. till they repent. Much more none that stand open professed members of
the false Church, subject by the least outward bowing down to this
antichristian Hierarchy, and so continuing in bondage to a false government,
can be holden of us be true professors of Christ's Gospel. Now let us peruse the
several doctrines. Mr Gifford affirms, that the true Church might stand in
bondage to a false government, yet in that estate be held, and communicated
with, as the true Church, by outward profession: his words in way of proof,
be these. They may with St. Paul say, It is no longer I that do it, but sin
that dwells in me. for if the yoke wherewith he was held captive in part,
could not sake from him, but that he was the Lords free servant, it is no
reason that some outward bondage should make the Church not to be the spouse
of Christ. If a man command his wife (says he) to do a thing, and there be
violent force to withold her, she is not to be blamed. Romans 7. Mine answer to
this he durst not print, but perverted my words, so many as pleases him,
nether can I yet come by a copy of my former writing to show, what I then
replied. Now consider what government is, and what bondage is, and then behold
the wickedness of this man: Spiritual government is that sovereignty, Dominion,
and regiment that Christ Jesus, by his spirit, laws, ordinances, and officers
exercises in, and over his church, as it is written: And thou Bethlehem Judah
art not the least among the Princes of Judah, for out of thee shall come a
governor that shall govern my people Israel. again, thy Scepter is an
everlasting Scepter. I have set my king upon Syon my Holy mountain, Mat. 26.
Psalm. 3. and 45, and. 110, these laws and ordinances whereby this king
reigns, Mat. 116
are caled a kingdom that cannot be shaken Heb. 12.28. they that have not him
to reign over them, are by outward profession none of his. If I be your Lord,
where is my honor? again those mine enemies which would not that I should
reign over them, bring hither, and stay them before me, Luke. 19.27.

Also bondage or servitude is to be commandment, and to yield obedience in
subjection. Now to be in outward bondage to an other outward government, other
laws, officers, and ordinances then Christ's, is to be by outward subjection
servants of Antichrist, which has another foundation: for by outward
profession we cannot stand (to man's judgment) professed subjects to two kings
at enmitye. But we must be an enmity to the one, and so esteemed of all men,
much less members unto two diverse heads.

This then is mine answer here. 1. That it is an heresy to say a man may
stand in bondage to open known sin, and the free servant of Christ by
outward profession, both at one instant. 2, That it is a falsifying of the
Scripture, to say that St. Paul (in the 9. to the Romans) was in bondage to
sin, when he, in the inner man resisted sin, and daily prevailed against
the sin, which his flesh would have led him captive in, if there had not
been a stronger power to overcome that enemy, For he there reasoueth of the
benefits of the law, to manifest our sin, and our conquest over sin by
daily repentance, and reproving of sin in our selves, fighting against sin
in our selves, and labor to have victory over sin, though it continually
rebel. 3. How blasphemous were it to continue in known sin, in bondage to
it, and to say, it is sin that dwells in us, and not we, and so still to
bless our selves without amendment. O horrible peruertinge of the Scriptures
to men's destruction. 2. Pet. 3.16.4, That there is no Argument to be drawn, nor
consequence to to follow, from the relics of sin, and corruption of the
flesh in one man, or the whole Church, and a professed bondage to all false
government: no not between the open committing of sin in the whole Church,
or some members thereof, and a professed homage and subjection unto false
government, we cannot be partaken be partakers with the false Church and state,
at no hand. 1. Cor. 10.21.5. Lastly, that the subjection to an other
government, is as a wife that commits adultery. Hosea. 2.

I then reason thus on the contrary with you. Any man that after regeneration
commits open known sin, and contynueth obstiuate, as a bond servaunt there
unto, stands not the professed servaunt of Christ, but of sin. Ezechiel.
18. till he repent, so the whole Church, that persisteth in the open known
sin, and persequuteth the messengers that reprove the same. They, as every,
member of the false Church stands a professed servaunt of sin, so the whole
assemblies that stand; professed subjects of false government, no censures of
admonition belonging unto them, but calling of them, to repentance and
separation from the false Church. Then, as the wife that gives her self to be
one with an other man, is an adulteress Romans 7.3. so that Church that
subiecteth herself to an other government, ordinances, and laws then Christ's,
is an harlot. Now let all men say, whether I had not just cause to say, you
speak like a carnal libertine, and an Athiest, yea now, as one having his
conscience seated. to affirm, that the Church, remayninge in open known
bondage to a false government, may say as Paul said, it is not I that sin.
And, that continuing in that adultrie she is the spouse of Christ by outward
profession. You would say it were a false Argument, to say, the Church has
many imperfections, ignorances, transgressions etc. therefore stands in
bondage to sin, nay stands in bondage to an other head, and an other
government then Christ. Even so, to say the Church does sin, therefore may
continue in bondage to sin, is false doctrine: nay, to say it may stand in
open professed subjection to Antichrist, and be esteemed the Church of Christ
by outward profession in that estate, is damnable doctrine.

It is the flat contradiction of all the rules of the Scripture, to say, a man
may stand in bondage to sin, and the free servaunt of Christ by outward
profession, by man's judgment, at one time, seeing the obstinate offenders are
to be cast out of the assembly: But now, though the regenerate may fall into
these high sins, and contynve in their sin a long time, yea many years
deprived of Gods grace, to man's seeming, and to us he is the servant of Satan
for any thing we see, yet the Spirit of GOD is never utterly extinguished or
or deparred, after regeneration, but will recover the man again, and bring him
to repentance, as David after a whole year, for the strong man once displaced
and cast out by a stronger then he, the spirit never utterly departed again,
for then it were impossible that man should be renewed. Mat. 12.31. Heb. 10.29.
and. 6.4.

And hereupon I might say, Paul never continued captive in sin but was
always renewed by repentance. Further, this spirit of God (the sparks whereof
were never quenched utterly) did not, nor could not consent or give place unto
sin, for here is the enmitye and battle between the spirit and the flesh,
every where spoken of. Gal, 5.16.17. Romans 7. May I not now say then, that Paul
never continued captive unto sin, nor consented unto sin concerning the
inner man, or gave place unto sin in that place mentioned, without heresy:
And still reprove you, that when Paul reasons of the old man, or corruption
in him, you will conclude it of the new man, or inner man, and of the whole
man, when you see evidently, he opposes the one against the other: For whiles
the spirit striveth against sin, and reigns in us, though the flesh
rebel, and cause us to sin seven times a day, yet are we not overcome of
sine, so to remain in bondage no sin, that it should continue to reign in
us, as you may see in the same chapter Rom 7.5.6. Where you allege then, that
Paul saw a law in his members, which did lead him captive unto sin, you do
falsify the text: for he says leading me captive, and not did lead etc. for
there was a stronger then man, that suffered not the law of his members to
reign: for says be, I my self in my mind serve the law of God, but in the
flesh the law of of sin, so that the whole man could not be said to serve
sin. But (say you) afterward as concerning then the inner man we may besaid
to serve the law of God, and thereupon becalled the free servants of Christ,
notwithstanding this corruption of sin in the flesh: So the whole man by
reason of our imperfectnes may be said to be the servants of sin. No, it is
not true, for the whole man is called after the part that has greater rule in
us: as if the flesh rule in us, we are the servaunts of sin, and ledded by
Satan at his pleasure, but if the Spirit rule in us, we are the servauntes of
God, Sons of God, Saints of God, Citizens of Jerusalem, a royal nation,
holy and free people, Kings and Priests: not that we are perfect, or sin
not, but that sin raygneth not in us, but the spirit, whereby we suppress
sin, reprove sin, strive against sin, subdue sin, and though we fall
seven times, yet we rise again by repentance, and serve not sin. Rightly
therefore did I say, that man cannot serve 2 masters: for his servantes we are
to whom we give our selves as servants to obey, whether it be of sin, unto
death, or of obedience, unto righteousness. Romans 6.16.18. being made free from
sin, we are made the servantes of righteousness: So that the regenerat man, or
he that is by outward profession the servant of Christ, cannot be called the
servant of sin, by reason of the corruption of the old man, and dregs of
sin, neither can he that stands in bondage to any sin and gives himself
over to it be called in that estate the servant of Christ, till he repent, but
the servant of sin. 2. Pet. 2.19.

Therefore you must recant your false interpretation of Paul in the 7. to the
Romans and cease your blasphemous raylings, in calling the truth of God, the
rock of Brownisme. And consider the height of your sin, by concluding a
bondage unto sin of the whole man, for the corruptions of the flesh, which
through the work of the Spirit is daily subdued, though never, utterly rooted
out of our earthly members, and from the committing sin through frayltie,
and obstinate professed bondage to the false Church, false government, false
ministry etc. which is plainly the marck of the Beast, to whom with outward
obedience they bow down, and stand servants in his kingdom Revel. 14.9.11.12.

As for the 4, of the Galat. 26. where the Apostles aith, Jerusalem which is
abone is free with her Children, you durst not open it, nor expound it, but
blaspheame, rail, and slander, as though we should plead for such a freedom,
as should detract from Magistrates lawful authorities, from having Gods
ordinances established by commandment upon the Church etc, yea, that we
should hold Anabaptisticall free dome, as though we had power not to committ,
or consent unto sin: whereas we have every where by practice and
protestation, by word and writing testified to our Sovereigne Prince, and to
all men, the contrary. But Satan that old accuser and detracter of Gods
children, to deceive the world, sends out such lyinge spirits to deface the
truth. We, with all subjection and willinge obedience to our sovereigne Prince,
teach all men their obedience to the higher powers: Subjects to Magistrates,
Flock to Overseers, children to Parents, wives to their husbands, servantes
to their Masters etc. in all things in the Lord: and if they command us any
thing contrary to the law of God, we then patiently suffer without
resistance, or rebellious thoughts, The freedom then we have to speak of
here, which Christ had purchased for us* is, first that triumph over Hell,
Death, and damnation, through the merits of Christ apprehended by faith,
waited for in hope, Romans 8. Secondly, that because we were sons by election,
he gives us the spirit of adoption, and sanctification, whereby we mortify
the flesh, have power and dominion over sin, that it shall never reign in
us more unto condemnation, repe^ting daily of our trespasses, and craving
pardon for our hidden sins, and secret faults. Thirdly, we are through the
same spirit and word of truth delivered from all subjection of Antichist, of
the false Church, false ministry, false government etc. And they that have
not this fredome are not by outward profession the servauntes of Christ.
Further, we have freedom from all traditious of men that seeing we are bought
with a price, we are no longer servants of men, to be in bondage to any
beggarly rudimentes or devises of men, but in all peaceable manner, to worship
and serve God, within the limits of our callings, according to the word of
God, as it is revealed unto us: We have freedom to speak the truth with all
boldness, though all men should inhibite us: we would not have the doctrine
limited, stinted, bought and sold for Jewish tithes or mercenarie stipendes.

We have freedom to separate from such false Prophets as yourself, to come out
of Babel, etc. And in the true Church to reprove and withstand any sin or
traditions of men in due order only, and to be guided and governed by Christ's
laws and ordinances. In all this I trust you shall not find any Anabaptistrie
in the freedom we profess: this is the truth of the Gospel, whereby we are
made free.

Thus then we still affirm, that they which stand in open known bondage to
sin, are the servants of sin, and not of Christ, till they repent, by
outward profession. Further, that all which stand members of your parish
assemblies, stand not members of CHRIST by outward profession, but in bondage
to a false and Antichristian ministry, government, worship etc. and the bond
woeman and her son must be cast out. Further for all liturgies, and other
devises of men besides the canonical Scriptures and lively graces of his
Spirit, we hold they ought not to be brought into the public assemblies, nor
imposed upon men's conscience: But if any will write such, or read such, let
it be for their private use, as all other men's writtings: we despise not any
directions by word or writting, that may further us any way to the practice of
Gods ordinances, yet may they nether be imposed upon men's consciences, not be
made a part of Gods worship.

The Lord therefore that has thus far far fourth discovered the chaff and mift
of Antichrist delusions, even to babes and sucklings, publish the glorious
light of his blessed Gospel, that the peopel may see the counterfeit iuglinges
of all such false prophets, and come out from amongst them, that you may be
ashamed of your execrapale wares, and forsake your Romish Priesthood and give
glory to God, that yet offers grace,

Amen,
Christ's unworthy witness for the truth of his Gospel JOHN GREENWOOD.

9 Other Arguments to prove that all set forms of prayer to be used for prayer
are unlawful.
1. WE find that all the holy men of God according to their present need and
occasion used to pray in the spirit, through the help of the Holy Ghost, which
God has shed in the hearts of all his Children, without reading or saying by
rote any number of words; and for this we have plentiful Examples in Abraham,
Isaak, Jacob, etc.

2. Not any prescript Leiturgy can possibly be an ordinance of Christ, because
the Church without it may perfectly and entirely worship God, I say perform
all the parts of holy and spiritual worship, and this appears by the constant
and general practice of all the primitive Churches, who truly worshipped the
Lord many years, before any such read stinted service was devised or imposed.

3. This external means and manner of worshipping God in prayer, is no where
found in the written word (by the prescript whereof he is to be worshipped)
whatsoever the Jews Fable of Ezra, or the Papists of S. James or S. Peter: Yea
I do to the contrary affirm, that it did not seem good to the Apostles the
last penmen of the Holy Ghost, that any certain forms should be repeated or
read out of a prayer book. For if it had, they would have given commandment to
the Churches for the practice thereof:

4. Reading of prayer in the act of prayer, is directly contrary to that act
and nature of prayer; For in prayer we do pour out matter: to weet, the holy
conceptions of our mind, from within to without: that is from the heart to
God. On the contrary in reading we do receive and admit matter from without
to within; that is from the book into our heart; Ergo, etc.

5. The stinted and devised forms do quench the spirit of prayer, and this
appears in that men are so strictly tied unto them as till they stint be out
the spirit which the Lord gives his children, may not suggest one thought or
word otherwise; Neither when that is out any more, then what next follows, in
the prescribed prayers; and this is contrary to 1 Cor. 12, 7.

6. We find it promised, that under the Gospel the spirit should be
plentifully poured out, which he daily graciously performs in furnishing his
children with spiritual gifts, who accordingly pray (or at least all may) not
with prescript words, but with such as the spirit gives them utterance, God
preparing their heart, and bending his ear.

7. The truth brings forth no absurdity; but this does; Romans 8.26.
For Example, the spirit says the Apostle (speaking of all Christians) helps
our infirmities, for we know not what to pray as we ought: Yes Paul with your
leave right well, for we have in our Leiturgie what we ought to pray word for
word; and these things we can ask whether the spirit be present or no.

8. As it were a ridiculous thing for a Child, when he should ask of his
Father bread, fish, or any other thing, to read it to him out of a paper; So is
it, for the Children of God, to read unto God their Requests, even a most
foolish and riduculous thing.

9. As the reasons published to the world, against the reading of the Apocrypha
books in Churches, will serve as much and as well to condemn all devised and
imposed forms of prayer; So likewise the arguments brought against kneeling
before the bread and wine in the act of receiving, will prove that to fall
down before the common prayer book, is every way as superstitious and sinful
a thing. And so much the reader shall find certain, if he will indifferently
compare the things together.

FINIS.

