To the Right Honorable and virtuous his very good Lady and Mistress, the
Lady Margaret Countess of Cumberland: and to the no less Honorable and
virtuous the Lady Anne Countess of Warwick: Robert Green wishes increase of
Honor and Virtue.
SOcrates (Right Honorable) being forced by the Athenians to send presents to
Apollo, offered not up, as others did, the superfluity of wealth, but the
Aenigmaes of Hermes Tresmegistus, yielding this reason, that Apollo was not
poor but wise. Achilles beautified the Temple of Palace with Spears and
Helmets, in that the Goddess was patroness of Soldiers. Dyanas present was a
bow: And I by chance finding so precious a monument as the Web of Penelope,
the only trophee of her chastity, was persuaded to bestow it upon your Honors,
as upon two Ladies, whose virtues deserves among the best the patronage of such
a famous antiquity. For if truth be the daughter of time, and time the Heralt
that best imblazeth affections. The report that the Grecians made of the
Princess of Ithaca, may seem but a fiction compared with the fame of your
Ladyships virtuous resolutions: which are such and so rare, as your very
enemies (if you have any) are forced maugre their teeth to be true discouerers
of your virtues. Homer penned his Odissea comprehending the life of Ulysses
because he was wise. And I (may it please your Ladyships) have attempted the
discourse of Penelopes Web, for that sh^e was chaste, that as diverse reading the
Poets works did immitate his wisdom spoke well of his policy: so some by
glancing at this toy may take a president of her chastity, and give thanks to
your Honors, whose chaste and virtuous life brought this work to light. But
some may object that Homers pen deawd forth such ^ugred eloquence, as beseemed
the discourse of Ulysses travails: whereas my harsh style and method makes the
Web that of it self was as soft as the Seres wool, be as rough as Goats
hair. I confess my fault, and therefore by custom cla^me pardone of course:
yet thus far dare I answer for my self, that although Demosthenes had a
Plaudi^e for his Oration because it was curious: yet Nemius got the sentence
for the truth of his plain tale. Penelope her self was more chaste then
eloquent. Virgill was seen to have Ennius in his hand. The Romain Ladies
spurned at the sweet verses of Ovid, when they read over the Satyrs of
Inuenall* And I hope your Ladyships w^l vouchsafe of Penelopes Web, at least
for the virtue of the wowan that first wrought it, though the Cloth workers
art have given it so bad a gloss. Damydas caused his Parrat to pea^ke under a
Dragon of brass to defend it from the Vulturestyranny: and I shrowde this
simple work under your Honors patronage, that the envious, whose tungs cut
like Swords, may like the Serpent fear to offend that herb, whereon the
beams of the Sun does rest. Thus hoping your Ladyships will* ^r Penelopes
sake vouchsafe of such a homely present, though otherwise unworthy the
patronage of (...) Honorable personages* I commit your honors to the Almighty.

Your Ladyships in all duetifull service to command, Robert Green.

TO THE GENTLEMEN READERS HEALTH.
SO often (Gentlemen) have I relied upon your courtesy, and found you so
favorable, that still I adventure to present what I (...) to your judgments,
hoping as my intent is to pleaseall, if it might be without offense, so I
shallbe pardoned of all, though presumiug to far: It may be the forehead is
not always a true heralt of affections, neither the rules of Phisiognomie
infallible principles: for they which smiled at the Theater in Rome, might
as soon scoff at the rudeness of the Scaene, as give a Plaudite at the
perfection of the action, and they which pass over my toies with silence, may
perhaps shrowde a mislike in such patience, if they do, yet soothing my
self in the hope of their courtesies, I sleep content like Phid^as in mine
own follies, thinking all is well, til proof tells me the contrary. I was
determined at the first to have made no appeal to your favorable opinions, for
that the matter is women's prattle, about the vntwisting of Penelopes Web. But
considering that Mars will sometime be prying into Venus papers, and gentlemen
desirous to hear the parlie of Ladies, I thought rather to write a line to
much, and so be counted forward, then by leaving out one title, incur your
displeasures, and so be judged froward: but whatsoever I have done or written,
I only desire for my pains your favorable acceptance, and so wish to you, as
to my self, to live fortunate, and dye happy.

Yours to use, Robert Green.

To the Courteous and Courtly Ladies of England.
AFter that (Gentlewomen) I had finished this work of Penelopes Web, and was
willing to commit it to the Press, I ^ell to parlye with my self, whether I
should stay it as Apelles did Venus picture, half unfinished in the Printers
fourmes: or thrust it out as Myson did a ragged table bescratcht with a
pensell. Apelles was froward, and Myson too forward, both faulty, and every man
has his folly. It may be some will think me of Antisthenes faction, that
laid platformes of every man's life, and yet the Philosopher was more wise in
his precepts then wary of his own government: and count me very oeconomycall
that seek to set down the duty of a wife, and to deliver principles to
such a purpose. If I have intermedled too far, it is (Gentlevvomen) in
discovering the virtues of your sex, not in censuring severely of your actions:
for I present but the view of those virtues that naturally are, or incidently
ought to be as well in virgins that sacrifice to Vesta, as in wives* that make
secret vows to Lucyna. I reprehend not (as one thinking all generally to be
virtuous,) but persuade as one wishing particularly every one should live well
and dye better. If any that are enuyous grudge at my doing, I straight for
refuge fly to your good words, which I count as a sufficient defensory against
such as love to backbyte. Committing therefore my Book to your pa^ronage,
least the gates being too big for the City, the Mountain should seem to
swell and bring forth a Mouse, I wish you all such happy success as you can
desire and I imagine.

Robert Green.

Penelopes Web.
When as the stately City of Troy was sacked by the Grecians, and all the
Princely brood of Priamus either utterly extinguished by the sword, or fatally
exiled the place of their native residence: Ulysses, Prince of Ithaca, who had
remained ten years at the siege, resolved to leave the confines of Asia, and
to return to the government of his own Monarchy: but especially to see the
mistres of his thoughts chaste Penelope, from whom these broiles had so long
frowardly detained him: thinking as it was the part of a friend to accompany
Menelaus in revenge, so it was y^ duty of a husband by small delay to bewray
his affection: that it was the office of a Prince as well to study in Pallas as
to cry Alarm with Mars: that as great honor did depend in the Scepters as in
the sword: tha the green Laurel in the Senate house, was as pleasing an
object to y^ eye, as glittering armor in the field: Consideration, there
preuenter of bad I wist, tied him so to the performing of these forenamed
premises, that causing his weather Ships to be warped out of the Haven as soon
as they were made tyght, rigged and trimmed, able to brook wind and weather,
be ^oysed sail and thrust into the main, converting his course toward Ithaca:
but Fortune the enemy to prosperous resolutions, willing to bewray her self,
having commission from angry Neptune to show her inconstancy, kept him still
in the Court of Ithaca, for that Nature had made her beautiful by a
superficial glory of well proportioned lineaments, and virtue had made her
wise by aiming after fame with well ordered actions, thse two perfections the
special friend to fancy, armed with the long absence of Ulysses, and with many
rumors of his death, brought all the Peers of Ithaca to become suitors to
Penelope. She whom Love had arested for a subject, but never brought to any
servile obedience, whom the Idea of Ulysses printed in her thoughts, had
resolved to dye the wife of so good a Prince, refused their proffers, and with
the warrant of her chastity sought to appease their humorous persuasions. But
the Noble men whom delay and time had made impatient of denial, fell in to
flat terms and craved an answer. Penelope seeing that fortune had conspyred
her mishap, by breeding such a restless importunity to her wooers, was driven
to seek a knot in a Rush, and with policy to prevent that which the honest and
honorable pretense of her chastity was not able to defend. She therefore
beguiling time with labor, having begun a web wherein she spent the day, to
keep her self from ydelnesse, knowing that Otia si tollus (...) cupidinis
arcus, gave answer, that when her work was finished she would make a choice of
some one of them for her husband. The Noble men who knew that as ye work was
not great, the dated time could not be long, contented themselves with this
reply, which somewhat eased the mind of Penelope: but when she fell into
consideration with herself, that the longest Summer has his Autumn, the
largest sentence his Period, and the greatest labor his performance, she began
to be melancholy til Love had learned her a shift to make her work endless, by
vntwisting as much in the night as she woue in the day: this policy put in
practice, (for that the night the friend of sweet and golden sleeps grudged
that her benefits should be despised by the restless labor of such a politic
huswife) she determined accompanied with her Nurse and two Maids, to pass
away the time in parle, thinking thus both to further her content, and procure
pain to be mittigated by such pleasing delights: seeing therefore that her
Nurse began to nodde and her Maids to wink, she wakened them out of their
dreams with this mercy chat. I can but smile (Nurse) to see how time makes a
distinction of ages by affections, and the disposition of the senses follows
truly the temperature and constitution of their bodies, as a particular
instance makes manifest: for the time of the night (growing to rest) summons
both you and my Maids to sleep: yet though the affect is al one the effects
are diverse* for age whom nature has stored with imperfection and disease, and
therefore freed from the tax of disquieted thoughts, teaches the senses by
the desire of sleep, how the number of your years are dated unto death: that
with Antisthenes we may say how the bed r^sembleth the grave, and ye closing
of the senses the dissoluing of life: my maids who^ youth persuades unto rest,
and want of care, proves that the black Ox never troade on their feet,
only cares how to serve time* for that no other care has yet bitten them by
the heel, and so resolving their minds in quiet by such content, seeks to
pleasure the senses by sweet slumbers: but I poor soul whom fortune has set
as a subject, whereon to work the variable points of her inconstancy, find my
senses so countermanded with disquieted thoughts, as desire of content draws
me into a laborinth of restless passions.

Eubula one of her Maids that was most familiar with her Lady, made this
pretty and pithy reply: I remember (Madam) that Ph^dias, drawing the
counterfaite of youth, f^gureth labor as the task-master of his actions, and
ease as the paymaster of his deserts: meaning as I can conjecture by the
Embleame, that as it behooves youth to spend the day in work, whereby to
avoid the sugared snares that idleness lays to entrap the senses: so the
guerdo^ for such forward inde^ours is to consume the night in sweet and quiet
slumbers, least the vital spirits ouercharged with too much labor, should
either grudge at too sore an impost, or else fall to inconvenience by ouerlong
toil and watchings: Extremity is ever a vice, too much in every thing is
hurtful, and the greatest prodigality is the expense of the eye: I mean not
(Madame) in gazing want^nly, but in watching over niggardly: which when I
consider how prodigal your honor is in this point, I cannot but (as ever I
have done) merua^le at your wisdom and virtue, so now to wonder at your love
and constancy: forthinking with my self that your Grace is seated in a Throne
of Majesty, adorned with a Scepter and a Dyadem, honored with the possession
of a Kingdom and the title of a Queen, rich, beautiful and young, the very
advocates of vanity: and seeing that the affection your Highness bears to
Ulysses, the love to your Husband, the vow to your Lord, though in long absence
still qua^^^fies the forenamed pleasures with the sweet deaw of a modest
chastity: I must (Madame) without flattery say, that in requital of such
constant affection, the Gods in justice must crown you with immortality, and
the world reward you with fame and honor.

Indeed quoth Vygenia (for so was her second Maid called) when I see majesty a
contented copartner with labor, and a resolute farewell to ease: the chosen
companion to a Queen, I cannot think but love is a great Lord, that in a
woman's affections works such strange effects. Take heed quoth Ismena (which
was the last and youngest of the three) that in this word love, you deceive not
your self: for there is an Amphibological equivocation in it, which drowneth
y^ hearers often in a laborinth of perplexed conceits. As how quoth Penelope,
let us hear you make this distinction? Ismena that was young and very quick
witted, willing to content her Ladies humor by beguiling the night with
prattle, applying as well her fingers to the web as her tongue to the tale,
went forward thus in her description. Although (Madame) experience has not
taught me to set down the diverse effects of Love, yet the Physician by
reading* often knows the nature of the Simple as well as the Gardner that
planteth it: and he which sees Fortune standing on a Globe, may judge she is
fickle though he try not her inco^stancy: many speak of the Crocadiles tears
that never felt her deceipts, and diverse condemn Diogenes for a sinick that
saw not his Tub: The Shoemaker corrected Appelles picture, yet he kn^w not the
use of the Pensell: and I may by your honors patience talk of Venus Temple
that never smelt the fume of her Sacrifice: but to say what I have heard, thus
to the matter. Anacreon, Menander and Ovid, with others, who were studious in
this amorous Philosophy, have as they set down principles, so penned down
precepts, whereby the fond and variable effects of love is manifestly
deciphered, calling it by the name of a God, as under that title bewraying the
forceable efficacy that by a predominant quality, it does infuse into humane
minds: other whiles a Fury, as discovering the sorrows, griefs, and disquiets
that proceeded from such a furious humor, pain^ing Cupid blind, as noting the
selfconceipt in choice, like a little boy, as figuring small government, not
leueled by the proportion of reason, winged, as absolutely pourtaying
inconstant and fickle passions of Lovers, whose thoughts are variable, whose
joys are mome^tary, like to the shadows which Juno presented to the Giants,
bringing forth like the Ceader trees fair leaves but no ^^ui^es, and as the
Date having soft rindes, but with in stones as hard as steel: This love
(Madame) presented by Venus as an inueagle object, no sooner enters the eye
but he pierces the heart, not accompanied with virtue to persuade, but armed
with the outward hew of beauty to constrain, which what effect soever ensues,
waxes at last sorrow and repentance: Such was the love of Dido to Aeneas, that
seeing the curious form of the dissembling stranger, through too over hasty
affection, did both ruinate herself and her Kingdom. Ariadna by crediting the
sweet tales of Theseus, Med^a of Jason, Phillis of Demophon, and infinite
other, which entering into this passion runs headlong after endless repentance.

This love is like the Baaran Leaf which seen pleases, but touched pierces
the skin, this love is that which ouerruling young heads, sotteth the senses,
dulleth the wits, hinders quiet, and makes a passionate confusion in the
mind of man called by the title of love, which indeed is meer^ lust and
vanity: whereas true and perfect love has his foundation upon virtue only,
aiming at the inward perfection of the mind, not at y^ outward complexion of
the body, which decreaseth not but increases with time, uniting the hearts with
such strickt leages of amity, that it ^ccounteth all labor a pleasure, to show
endless desire by effects, as (Madam) to infer your self for an instance* who
not po^sessed with this fond fury, which me^ feign to come from Venus, but that
settled fancy, which we are sure proceeds from virtue, although the Prince
Ulysses has ten years been absent at the siedge of (...), and report in this
space has made sundry and time nor pretense of love can ever be able to
reconcile where De^^^pita (...) old age whom diseases has tied to the Crouch,
will now with the babe return to the Cradel: that stoo^ing to the grave by
burden of over many years, will yet offer a toothles Sacrifice to Venus for a
young husband: this well may becalled a marriage of Labor, where the married
couples so inequall in match, are continually troubled with a spirit of
dissension* for as the four Elements are different in their properties, so are
these disagreeing in their manners: the earth and air are not placed well in
one balance: the fire and water brooks not the self ^amelimites: age and
youth may conioyne in law but not in love, since the sanguine complexion of the
one, and the melancholye and saturnine co^stitutio^ of the other, are always
in thoughts, effect, and desires opposite ex dyametro: so that by the opinion
of Aristotle they be as it were immediate contraries: which Dyonisius the elder
noted very, well, when seeing his Mother passing old and over grown with age,
desirous to mary a young stripling, told her that it was in her power to violate
the laws of Syracusa, but not the laws of nature: this affirms Plato in his
Androgina, and agrees to the censure of Dionisius, affirming that marriage in
old Women is with the Giants bellum ger^^e, cum Diis, which the Roman Lady
Valeria well noted, who always had this saying in her mouth, that her husband
dyed to others, but lived to her forever. And heerin can I commend my good
daughter Penelope, that hating such marriages of labor, does intend both
toliue and dye to Ulysses. Nay good Nurse quoth Penelope, lets hear your last
distinction, I mean the marriage of grief: it is Madam quoth she, where the old
proverb is sulsil'd, better one house troubled then two, I mean where a bad
husband is coupled with a bad wife, where the one strives to overcome the
other, not in virtuous actions, but in disquiet and murmurings. I cannot think
quoth Penelope, that there is any husband so bad, which the honest government
of his wife may not in time reform, especially if she keep those three
special points that are requisite in every woman, Obedience, Chastity, and
Silence, three such graces Nurse, as may reclay me the most graceless husband
in the world: and because my mayds are young, and may in time try the fortune
of marriage, we will this night discourse of this point, to discover the effects
and efficacy of obedience: which (for that I will be first in this new devised
disputation) I will take in hand to discourse of, that both we may beguile the
night with prattle, and profit our mynds by some good and virtuous precepts.

The maids hearing their Lady in so good a vain were glad, and therefore
setting their hands to the Web, and their ears to her talk, Penelope began in
this manner. Zenobia the wife of Radamysius, King of Armenia, being demanded of
a Lady in her Court, how she procured her husband so deeply to love her as he
feared in any wise to offer her occasion of displeasure, answered by fearing ot
displease him, meaning that the chiefest point of wisdom in a good wife, is to
make a conquest of her husband by obedience. Aristides the true and perfect
Iusticiari^ of his time, caused the portraiture of a woman figured on her
knees, to be carried before y^ Brydes at their espousals, to signify that they
meant now to obey and submit, not to rule or command, for quoth he, such fond
and fanastick women as make choice of effeminate Husbands, thereby to challenge
a sovereign superiority over them, may rightly be compared to chose
presumptuous fools y^ had rather be masters of blind men, then servants to the
discreet and learned, which caused Plato in his Androgina to say that a wise
woman ought to think her husbands manners ye laws of her life, which if they
be good, she must take as a form of her actions, if they be bad, she must
brook with patience: His reason is thus. As a looking glass or Crystal
though most curiously set in Ebonie, serves to small purpose if it does not
lively represent the proportion and lineaments of the face inspicient: so a
woman, though rich and beautiful, deserves small praise or favor, if the
course of her life be not directed after her husbands compass. And as ye
Mathematical lines which Geometricians do figure in their carracters, have no
motion of them selves, but in the bodies wherein they are placed, so ought a
wife to have no proper nor peculiar passion or affection, unless framed ans,
providing Soldiers, money and Munition, took her journey as far as Athens,
where she received letters from Anthony to return back to Rome, which she
with great obedience performed, sending him all the forenamed necessaries,
although she perfectly knew that Cleopatra was with him in the field: But when
the wars betwixt him and Augustus were ended, he sent straight to command
Octauia that she should depart from his house, which she did so obediently,
that Rome after her death would have erected an Image in her praise, but that
Augustus would not suffer it, keeping Anthonies children, that he had by his
first wife, with such care and diligence, as it did well note to the world her
love and obedience. To confirm which more at large, I will rehearse a pleasant
history.

Penelopes Tale.
SAladine the Souldan of Aegipt, who by his prowess had made a general
conquest of the Southeast part of the world, took to wife Barmenissa the only
daughter and heir of the great Chan, who amongst sundry Suitors not inferior
to him in parentage and progeny, yet made such a careful choice of this young
Aegiptian Prince, not for his beauty (for that Nature had denied him that
favor) but for his virtue (fith he was wise and valiant) that imprinting the
perfection of his mind with a deep insight into the deepest place of her heart,
and sealing the knot of fancy with y^ signet fo marriage, she never so much as
in thought crossed him with any discourtesie: yet for that men are the subjects
of Fortune and therefore variable, and the true disciples of time, and therefore
momentary, he began to loath that in the fruit which he loved in the bud, and
to spurn at that in ye saddle, which he secretly used in the cradle, repaying
the faith of Bermenissa, not with flattery to inueagle her, but with foul
language the better to manifest his hate: which although Nature forbad her to
brook, yet obedience the Heralt y^ best imblazeth love, taught her that
against such sorrow there was no better salve then patience: that revenge in a
woman was not to be executed by the band, but by the heart, and yet not with
rigor but with clemency persisting in this opinion, Olinda the Concubine which
Saladine so greatly loved, sent a letter to this effect.

Olinda to Saladine health.
IF the inward affects of the mind be manifested by outward effects or the
brow the bashful bewrayer of secrets, and yet the true discouerer of thoughts,
may be credited, the Emperor of Aegipt in his loves resembles the Pyne tree,
whose leaves remain in one color but one day: Well might the censures fo wise
Clarks have bin caueats of my likely misfortune: for they say Princes
affections as they are glorious so they are brittle: that he favor of Kings
hangs in their eye lids ready with every wink to be wiped out: that as they
are full of Majesty and above law, so they are full of inco^stancy, because
without law: this which other spoke by proof, now I allege by experience: for
your Highness abridgeth me of my wonted allowance, not only in expense but in
looks, so that I account that day happy when Saladine but glanceth at Olinda.
The mistress of my mishap is thy injurious wife Barmenissa, to who^ I wish thy
ill fortunes and my miseries: she with a fained obedience seeks to inueagle
thee with a conceit of her love, who if she did love, could not content, for
she wants the eye pleasure, beauty: thou tickled with an inconstant humor do
listen to the melody of the old Siren, whose neck shadowed with wrinckles
affoords but had harmony: Keep not (Saladine) fire and water in one hand: in
running with the Hare hold not with the Hound: bear not both a Sword and an
Olive. Paris gave sentence but on Venus part, affection brooketh no division?
therefore if thou love Olinda, hate Barmenissa: follow the example of Anthony,
who after his choice of thy Countriwoman never favored Octauia: it is beauty
that mertis a Crown, and as well would the Diadem of Aegipt beseem they
Lemons head, as thy wives: I should, and yet were loath to flatter in saying
what I would not: but if I may have free liberty to speak what I think, my
verdit shall be soon given. I confess that what pleases the father ought to
content the son: and therefore I count the will of Saladyne a law to
Garinter: yet as obedience wishes a consent, so Nature wills with a friendly
denial to diswade from things that offend not only men, but y^ are even
hateful to the Gods. I say therefore that Saladyne should get more honor by
exyling Olynda, not only from Babylon, but out of all the confines of Aegipt,
then if he had obtained more tryumphes then that invincible Caesar. No doubt
your Grace shall soon, nay I fear to soon, find my words to be true, that
in hoping to get a sweet content you gain a sower mislike: like to them which
pleased with the color of the tree Lotos, are poisoned as soon as they taste
of the Apples.


Barmenissa, hearing how sharply her son shook up the Emperor, with a
modest countenance, as nothing grudging at the injury of fortune, at her last
farewell gave him this charge: Although son the law of nature wills thee to
be partner of thy mothers misfortunes, yet the Gods, whose laws are above
nature, commands that thou gainsay not the Edict of thy father: For as Proclus
the Academick affirms, there is nothing which we ought more to regard then
duty and obedience: the command of the father is not to be limited by the
conceit of the child, for as their superiority is without proportion, so their
wills ought to be without denials, first the frown of a father (says
Epictetus) is like the elevation of a Commet which foreshewes ever some fatal
and final ruin. Then Garinter offend not thy father in thought, least the
gods grudging at thy secret disobedience plague thee with an open revenge:
further son, thou art his subject, and be thy sovereign, what duty is due
to such a mighty potentate thou must by law and conscience offer unto him. And
seeing by the consent of the Aegiptian laws I am deposed, and O^^nda invested
with the regal crown: if a mothers command may be a constraint to the son.
I charge thee that thou show her the same obedience that belongs to a
Princess, and thy fathers wife, Philarke^s y^ son of Psamnet^chus ^beyed
Rhodope, whom his father raised from a common courteza^ to a Princess.
Antiochus the son of Demetrius buil^ed stately Sepulchers for his fathers
Concubines: Revenge (son) ought not to go in purple, but in white, and the
salve for injuries i^ not choler but patience: for mine own part Garinter I
set thee down no precept but y^ which my self mean to hold for a principle,
and thou by imitating thy mothers actions, show thy self to be duetiful, which
if thou perform, I will continnually pray to the Gods of thy good, otherwise,
if for my cause thou intend revenge, I wish thy ill: and so wishing to thy
father as to my sovereign, and to the Princess as to one honored with a
Diadem, I take my leave at yt Court, as well content with my adversity, for y^
it is ye kings command, as ever I was wi^h prosperity: And with this the
Princess departed, leaving both her son and the Nobles passing pensive for
her present disgrace, The Souldan not satisfied with this injury, caused
presently Proclamation to be made, that the Princess should have no relief,
but what she earned with her hands, that her ladies should be labor, and her
maintenance, no other then her own endeavor could provide: This edict
commanded to be published, the King solempnised his marriage with sumptuous
shows and triumphs, and Garinter that he might show how careful he was to
obey his mothers last command, brought in Maskes and comicall delights to
finish up the solempnitie of y^ nuptials. The festiual time being past, Olinda
puffed up with a sweet conceit of her prosperity, so ruled and ouerruled in
her government, using such tyranny in words, and persuading her Husband to such
disordred actions, that she generally fell in hate of all the people, in so
much that the Souldan himself grudged at her ambitious presumptions: Well
leaving her to her follies, again to the Lady Barmenissa, who fallen from a
Crown to a Cottage, and from a Scepter almost to a Scrip, still salued her want
with labor and her pauertie with patience, bearing as princely a mind in
adversity, as she did in prosperity, neither grudging at injury, nor gaping
after revenge, stayed thus upon this virtuous founda^ion, The happy fates thy
sor^ows have withstood,
By syning want and poverty thy share.
For now content (f^nd fortune to despite)
With patience lows thee quiet and delight.


Barmenissa had no sooner ended her madrigale, but that she heard a great
noise, which at the first amazed her, but at the last she perceived it to be
the voice of men: desirous therefore to be a partner of their secrecy, she kept
her self silent wtin the thicket, when she perceived certain of the nobles of
Aegipt y^ were retired to that solitary place, to confer of the ambitious
supremicy that Olinda used since her Coronation, and amongst the rest one of
the Lords, whose name was Egistus, burst forth into these terms.

Egistus Oration to the Lords of Egypt.
IT is not unknown (right Honorable Lords of Aegipt) not only to us, but to
the whole Empire, how the King, seduced by the flattering allurements of a
Strumpet, has not only violated the law of our Gods, in profaning the
nuptial Bed, made sacred by the holy law of Matrimony, but also the law of
Aegipt, which forbids divorce without cause: but since in a Monarchy the wills
of Princes may abide no ch^ck, but their reasons (how soever unreasonable) are
the principles y^ may not be infringed, it rests only for us to complain,
but not to redress: (...) aiming more at y^ weal of our country the^ our own
lives, we set our rest on the hazard and so desperately throw at al. First let
us consider that Saladine the mighty Souldan of Aegipt, puffed up with the
Highness of his Majesty, and number of his ^errisories subject to his
government, has been so tyrannous to his commons from his first Coronation,
that unless his unmod^^ate pride and presumption, had bin mittigated by the
verteous clemency of his wife, the burden of his cruelty long time since had
been intolerable: but now having deposed that peerless Princess, whose
virtues made her famous, and us happy, and married a Concubine, whose vanities
breeds her envy and our mishap: we are to look for no other event but our
particular ill fortune, and the general ruin of the weal public. Then my
Lords, least we should be spotted with the stain of ingratitude, in suffering
the Princess injury unrevenged: and least we should seem to be borne more for
our selves then our Country, let us attempt the restitution of the Queen, and
the fatal overthrow of the insolent Concubine, although death and danger were
the end of our enterprise: The plot my Lords I have laid by impoysoning her cup
at the next supper: but with this prouiso^, that no intent of treachery, shall
so much as in thought be pretended to the person of our Sovereign, whom next
under ye Gods we are bound to love and reverence. This my Lords is my purpose,
whereto if you consent, I mean this night to put it in practice: otherwise to
crave that my speeches may be buried in silence.

Egistus having ended his Oration, the Lords not only gave their free consent,
but also swear to be secret, and to be ayders in his defense, if any injury
should be offered for his enterprise: and upon this resolution they departed.
Barmenissa (who all this while held her self close in the Covert) having heard
their determination, was surprised with such sudden joy, that at last she
burst forth into these speeches.

Now Bermenissa, thou see that delay in revenge is the best Physic: that
the Gods are just and have taken thy quarrel as advocates of thine injury: now
shall thou see wrong over ruled with patience, and the iuyne of thine enemy
with the safety of thine own honor* time is the discouerer of mishap, and
Fortune never cease to stretch her strings til they crack: shame is the end
of treachery, and dishonor ever forerunnes repentance, Olinda has soard with
^ca^us, and is like to fall with Phaeton: sooner are bruses caught by reaching
too hye, then by stooping too low: Fortune g^udgeth not at them which fall, but
envy bytes the^ which climbes; now shall the Lords of Aegipt by revenging dound
to both your contentments: and then she made manifest the pretense of those
Noble men.

Olinda amazed at this sudden news (as base minds are ever fearful)
desired the Souldan that they might hye home, least some treason in that place
were intended: for (quoth she) I know, whatsoever she says, that Barmenissa
was the author of this treachery, whose life, how long so ever it be, is ye
continuance of my sorrows. The Souldan whom conscience began now to sting at
the very heart, turned his back without farewell, and no sooner came at the
Court, but caused the Lords that were favorers of this treason to be
apprehended, who willingly confessed their intended determination, with
resolution either to die or to perform it. The King, perceiving their
obstinacy, committed them to ward: and now to make proof of Olyndas
patience, he counterfeated a more deeper affection then ever he did, and for
confirmation thereof, he gave her free liberty to make choice of three things
without denial whatsoever she would crave: which Olynda taking kindly, desired
this grant to be sollemnely given before the Peers of Aegipt: Upon this
request the Souldan made Proclamation throughout all his Empire, that the
Nobility should within fifteen days appear at Memphis, where then he kept
his Court with notice also that upon that day the Queen should freely ask
three things of the Souldan without denial. The commons greatly grudged at
this grant, and began to mutiny, that a graceless Concubine should reap
such favors without desert. The old Empress, partaker also of this news,
willing to forwarne the Princess of ambition, determined with herself to send
her certain verses, as a cauea^e for so wary a choice. Wellleauing her to her
Poems: the Nobility and many of the Commons at the dated time came, where in
the Parliament house the Souldan revealed the cause of their coming: namely,
to be witnesses of his grant and her demand* Olynda fearing the worst, caused
the King sollemnely to swear, that he should not revoke whatsoever he had
promised. The Souldan taking advice, made this sollemne prostetation, and swear
by the God of the Aegiptians, that whatsoever he had promised to the right and
lawful Queen of AEgipt, he would perform. Olynda settling her self to utter
her mind, was interrupted by a messenger that came from Barmenissa with a
scrole. The Shuldan understanding to what effect it tended, caused it openly to
be read: the contents whereof were the verses following, over which was written
this lattin sentence. Tempora mutantur, and nos mutan^or in illis.

Aspiring thoughts led Phaeton (...)
Proud Icarus did fall he sour'd so hye:
Seek not to clymbe with fond Semyramis,
Least Son revenge the fathers injury.
Take heed, Ambition is a (...) ill
That fortune lays, presumptuous minds to spill.
The bitter grief that frets the quiet mind,
The sting that pricks the froward man to woe:
Is Envy, which in honor seld we find,
And yet to honor sworn a secret foe.
Learn this of me, envy not others state,
The fruits of envy is envy and hate.
The misty cloud that so eclipseth fame,
That gets reward a Chaos of dispight,
Is black revenge which ever wins shame,
A fury vilde that's hatched in the night.
Beware, seek not revenge against thy foe,
Least once revenge thy fortune ouergoe.
These blasing Commets do foreshew mishap,
Let not the flaming lights offend thine eyes:
Look ere thou leap, prevent an after clap:
These three forewarned well may thou fly.
If now by choice though aymest at happy health,
Eschew self-love, choose for the Common Wealth.
heard his melody and diverse landed at Samos that sails not to Corinth, (...)
is not the discovery of affection: neither to the talk of a husband the
proof of marriage: but feeling where your own shoe (...) ye, you aim at the
straightness of my last.

Ismena hearing her fellows at such dry blows, told them that how (...) so
ever they made it, their s^ken throtes would easily digest such (...) (quoth
she I dare swear the precisest of you both had rather a husband the^ hear of
him, seeing your years are enough and your minds not vowed to Minerua.

Penelope could not but smile at the chollericke prattle of her mayds and yet
for that the night was far spent and her Nurse in a sound sleep, she took
up their controversy, concluding with the opinion of her maid Ismenia, that they
had rather follow Juno to the Temple then Diana to the Woods: and rather sing
with Himenius the^ weep with Vesta. Well, the maids whose conscience told them
their Mistress propheste was truth, agreed to her principles with silence: and
Penelope waking her Nurse, mannerly foulding by her (...) went quietly to her
rest.

The second nights discourse.
AFter that the day was come, and the Suitors had filled the stately Palace of
^enelope with their several traynes, ye Princess put on hermourning attire,
which alwa^^s she was accustomed to wear since the absence of Ulysses: showing
her self (as Antisthenes commanded) a good wi^e discontent in her husbands
absence, y^ thereby she might both bewray the perfection of her love, and
quallifie the passionate d^sires of her Suitors: which seeing her daily busy
about her Web, and yet her labor (like Belyde^ Daughters to power water into
bottomless Tubs) endless, could not comprehend within the compass of their
imagination* what the reason of this should be, seeing so carefully she
endeavored her self to bring her work to an end. Well, resting in hope y^
time should ease their longing, they spent the day in sundry pleasant pas^imes
and several discourses, til the Sun declining to the West, they departed.

Penelope glad of their absence, seeing that Phoebus had lodg^d himself with
Ty^an, and Venus the sweet messenger of the silent night appeared in the Sky,
accompanied as before with her Nurse and her maids, she went to her old talk,
vntwisting that in the night, which before she had with great labor wrought in
the day. Sitting thus busily at their work, the old Nurse (who by the last
nights prattle had found the length of Penelopes ^oote) began to waken them out
of their dumps in this manner. I marvel, when I consider with my self that y^
Romans who couetto surpass the Gre^ians in all honorable and virtuous
actions, did not see into their own follies, when they erect ^e^ples unto
Flo^a, as a Goddess worthy of divine Sacrifice, appointing in honor of her
funeral day certain laiciuious sports and pastimes, called after her name
Floralia, she being a most vile and infamous Courtizane, and discrediting y^
state of their Common wealth with her incontinencie: and yet grudge to errect
an Image in the memory of Lucrece, that with her inviolable chastity, not
only honored the Roman virtue, but freed y^ ^ittie from the burden of a
Tyrant. The reason as I guess (quoth Penelope) is for that the nature of man is
so corrupt and addicted too vice, that what vanity presents, they still (be if
never so had) keep it as an object to their eyes: but what is veriously
performed they commit to obliuions charge to reward. In deed (quoth Is^enia)
now I perceive y^ my doubt is absolved, which long has holde^ me in suspense:
for long have I mused why only in all the whole world Diana has a Temple in
Ephesus, and Venus is commonly honored as the household God ^ar, that has a
corner in every man's kitchen: for in Paphos, Cipres, Athens, Samos, Rome, and
infinite other Cities, her Temples stand in the streets, di^couering the
erecters devotions by the costly and sum^tuous buildings. And yet (quoth
Eubula) the Vestals in Rome, who were dedicated to virginity, bare Palm above
the rest: for the Senators apparelled in their Robes of Majesty, never met any
of the^ in the street but they gave the^ credit then voluptuousness, so
nothing gets more honor and glory then chastity. The consideration whereof,
moved Julius Caesar rather to suffer a divorce, the^ an incontinent wife,
wishing if Gracchus had lived in his days, that he might have made an exchange
of y^ Empress for his chaste wife Cornelia so highly did that Monarch esteem
of that virtue Chastity says Epictetus is the very fair and redolent
blossoms that the tree of true and perfect love does afford, yielding so sweet
and fragrant a ^^uour that the most vicious and unbridled ^us^ and (...) by the
smell of such a divine perfume. Euripedes entering into the consideration of
this virtue, cries out, as wondering at the excellency thereof. O how is
chastity to be esteemed, that is the cause of such great glory and honor
amongst woman: for it shows the fear she owes to the Gods, the love she
bears to her husband, the care she has of same, the small desire to
inordinate affections, and makes her a woman, a very pattern of supernatural
perfection. Hipsicratea being demanded what was her richest Jewel, answered
chastity, alluding to the opinion of Crates the Philosopher, who was wont to
say: this (...) ornament that adorneth, and that thing adorneth a woman which
makes her more honorable: and this is not done by Jewels of Gold, Emeralds,
Precious stones or sumptuous attire, but by every thing that causes her to be
accounted honest, wise, humble and chaste. The Emperor Aurelius made certain
laws to inhibite superfluity of attire, affirming y^ such y^ curiously paint
out themselves with (...), sweet perfumes, and strange ornaments of pomp
(...) nobility of birth urge them to such bravery) make men most dissolute and
subject to folly: especially if such sumptuous sh^ws be aided with a rolling
eye and unchaste look whereas a wise woman through her honest behauior and modest
countenance, lead as many as cast their eyes upon her, to a continent reverence
of Chastity. Socrates was wont to say, that when a married wife holds her
looking glass in her hand, she should speak thus to her self, if she be
foul: what then should become of me if I should be also wicked? and if she be
fair: how shall my beauty be accounted of, if I continue wise and honest? for a
hard favored woman that is renouned for her chasti^y, is more honorable then
she which is famous for her beauty: The reco^ds that speak honorably of the
Roman Ladies, tell us that the wife of a poor Smith meeting the Empress
Faustina, took the wall of her in the streets, whereat the Empress grudging,
complained to the Senate, who sending for the poor woman, and demanding of
her if she committed the deed? she denied it not, and therefore her husband was
condemned in a certain sum* upon which sentence the woman appealed from the
Senate to the Emperor, who asked what she could say for her self? As muchquoth
she, as (if thou be just and wise) may suffice. For although I am not so
honorable as thy wife, yet I am more honest, and the Citizens of Rome ought to
es^eeme virtue before dignity: the Emperor upon this discharged the woman of
the sentence Alexander the great having at the conquest of Babylon taken a very
well ^auoured Egiptian Lady, a widow whom for her beauty he did greatly
affectionate, at night commanded one of his Captains to bring her to his
Tent, which she boldly refused, willing him to say to the King, that captivity
was no privilege to infringe chastily, and if he went about to dishonor her,
she would pervert such violence by death: this answer returned ^o Alexander;
he not only moderated his desire, but sent her his Signet, as a warrant of her
safety* Portia the wife of Brutus, was told by one of her servants, that
certain Embassadore of Samos were come, which were passing beautiful and well
proportioned men: hold thy (...) fool quoth she, would thou have ince
prepare a poison for mine honor by the means of mine eye? Cyrus King of
Pe^s^a making wars against the Sythians, had for his Pryze of the triumph a
very fair woman called Panther, who being the wife of Ab^adatas his enemy,
being desired of Cirus for his concubine, she told him that she was chaste, the
king little respecting this short answer, demanded a further resolution, why
quoth Panther? can there be any other answer, that is not comprehended in this
word, chastity? hereby noting that the Antidote against, the enuenomed
thoughts of men's alluring intisements, and the surest corrosiue to root out
such unbridled desir^^ (...) draw the^ to in^rdin^te affecti^n is this pretio^s
Jewel of chastity, the which the more to confirm, I will rehearse unto you ^
pleasant History, which happened not long since within our dominions of Ithaca.

Penelopes second tale.
IN this Country of Ithaca not long sin^e, there dwelled a Nobleman called
Calamus, of parentage honorable, as allied to the blood Royal: of possessions
rich, as one of the greatest revenues in all the Country: but therwithall so
wedded to the vain suppose of pleasure and delight, that his friends sorrowed
at the course of his unbridled follies, and his poor tennants groned not under
the burd^n of his ^ouetous desires, but were taxed with the grief of his
voluptuous appetite, for such was the incontine^cy of his life, as s^ciety of
wa^ton affections never glutted his mind with content: But as the Serpent
Hida^pis, the more he drinks the more he is ^ thirst, and as the Sala^and^r,
the more he lies in the fire, ^^e more desirous he is of the flame, so
Calamus, the more he off^nded in this intemperate concupiscence, the more his
thoughts were adicted to y^ vice, so as al his neighbors did wish he might fall
headlong into the Center of some deep misfortune. Wallowing thus in the sel^
conceit of his wickedness, on a day as he rode on hunting with certain of his
gentlemen, he stumbled by cha^nce at a ^armers house, whether as he road to
taste a cup of their small wine, for y^ the well her was hot, where he espied a
woman homely attired, of modest countenance, her face imported both love and
grau^ty, who seeing the Noble man approach, dying her crystal cheeks with a
vermillion ^ue, after humble salutations brought him in a country C^use such
drink as their cottage did afford. Calamus narrowly marking the proportion of
this country huswife, courteously took his leave and departed, but the sparks
of lust that had kindled a flame of desire in his fancy, perplexed his mind
with sundry passions: For calling to mind not only her exterior be auiy,
adorned with sundry and several graces, but also her inward perfection,
bewrayng that she was both wise and honest, he ^ell into this conside^ation
with himself: For shame ( Calamus) let not thy thoughts w^nder in a laborinth
to be endless: Seeing y^ flower of thy youth has (...) spent in vice, let the
fruit of thine age only (...) of (...) if the Gods had not the firstlings of
thy years, yet let the^ have thy gray head in pawn of a Sacra^ice: time is
(...) from vanity and vice: thy foot is stepping to the grave, and oport^nity
^ids thee tak hold of repentance. Venus is printed without wrinc^^os, as
signif^ing she is the Goddess of youth what of this, ^ond ^oole, suppose thou
were young, shall thou therefore (...): Do not the Gods forbid thee to crave y^
y^ i^ another man's due: Are not volupiuous (...) to be suppressed as well in
the young (...) as in the old tree: Is thy ^alloy so fickle as (...) must be
vewed with affection: (...) man, think this th^^ the poor man makes as great
account of his wife, as the greatest Monarch in y^ world both of an Empr^sse:
that honesty harbors as soon in a cottage, as in the Court^ y^ their minds
oppressed with want, are freed from the (...) of love* Then Cala^us, cease from
these trinolus (...), and seek no^ so much as in thought to offer wrong to so
modest a woman, whose honest behavior foreshews that she is poor, so she is
chaste, and holds as dear the price of her same as the state of her life. No
doubt Calamus, thou art become a holy Prelate, that have so many p^ecepts to
re^ell that thou have always followed: Is not love a Lord as well amongst
Beggars as Kings* Cannot Cupid as soon hit a Shepherds hook as a Sc^pter:
Does not poverty by natural insight yield to the desires of Nobility: Are
women's faces always Kalenders of truth: or are their ^ookes (as Ovid
affirms) euermindglasses: No, the thoughts of women hang not always in their
eyes: dissimulation is sister to Ia^us, and wanton appetite often ^etteth under
the Ma^ke of Chastity: Have thou he thereto not bin rep^lied with any resolute
denya^s, and shall thou now be overthrown with alooke? No, forward Calamus in
thy purpose, triumph man and say as Caesar did in his Conquests, veni, vidi,
vici: The Nobleman resting upon this wicked resolution, hearing of her husbands
mishap, powered out such continual fountains of tears, ^s not only Cala^us,
but all men took pity of her plain^s. Bu^ the unbridled (...) of lust, that
(...) it runs headlong into a laborinth of mischefes feele^h no remorce, had no
consideration of her daily sorrows, but resolved i^ not by entreaty, a^ least
by force to come to the end of his (...) desire. Which resolution being known
to Cratina: from prayers she went to policy, and therefore on the sudden
became more courteous, desiring Calamus that he would give her some space to
forget her old love and entertain a new choice: He whose fancy was some what
appeased with this good speech, granted her the term of a month* with free
liberty to walk in the garden and else where at her pleasure. Cratina enjoying
her wish so fortunatly, taking time by the (...), early in a morning stole
secretly from the Palace and fled into the Country, where in the day time
hiding her amongst bushes, and in the night traueling as fast as she could, at
last she came to the place where her husband was with the Collyeriand there
changing her apparel into the attire of a man, and her head bravely shorn, she
became a handsome stripling* The next day coming to the Colepits she demanded
service. The Master Collyer seeing the youth well faced, had pity of his want,
and entertained him: and for that Lestio his man wanted one to drive his Cart,
he appointed Cratina to attend upon him: She thanking the Gods that blessed her
with so favorable a service, was brought to the sight of Lestio and committed
to his charge. Lestio pitying the poor estate of such a young youth, noting
narrowly the lynamentes of her face, fell into sighs, and from sighs to
fears, for the remembrance of his sweet Cratina: who indeed pitying her
husbands plaintes, in that she was a true de^iner of his thoughts, could not
(as women's secrets often hang at the tip of their t^ngs) but bewray to her
husband what she was: who when he perfectly knew his wife so straungely
metamorphosed, what for joy of her presence, and sorrow that Fortune had made
them both thus unhappy, he fell into deeper complaints, till appeased by his
wife, they went merrily to their work.

But Calamus missing Cratina, and after diligent search perceiving she was
stole away, fell into such a melancholik humor, that his servants thought him
half in a frenzy: He commanded horse to be made out into every hie way, al
passages to be stopped, every woman to be examined, but in vain: which so
increased his fury, that taking his horse he rode up and down the Country as
one halfmad, but found not that which he sought for: at last Fortune envying
the happiness of Lestio and his wife, brought him where the Col^^ars were at
work, and a pretty space before he came at the pit he met Cratyna: who
seeing Cala^us, although he had disguysed himself, because he would ride
unknown, yet perfectly perceived what he was, and therefore would willingly
have been out of his company: but he called unto her, and she having her
lether Coat all dusty, and her sweet face al he smeared with coals, was the
bolder to go, and demanded of him what he wanted? Calamus inquired if such a
woman past not y^ way: Yes mary (quoth Cratyna) there past such a one in deed,
who as she reported fled from Cala^us, for that the Noble man would have rest
her of her chastity. Can thou tell my friend (quoth he) whether is she gone?
and if I could (quoth Cratyna) think (...) so little courtesy in me as to
bewray her: for by thy straigh^ inquiry I perceive thou art servant to that
dishonorable (...), that spares neither wife nor widow to satisfy his
vnbr^led lust. Calamus not brooking these hard speeches allighted from his
horse, thinking to have ^oel bu^^asled the boy: who as falt as he could fled to
the Colepit. The Colliars seeing their boy (who^ for his good behavior they al
generally loved) to be misused by a seruingman, took their whips in their hands
and demanded of Calamus what he meant to offer violence to any of their
company: for y^ (quoth he) the boy has greatly abused me. Crauna told the^ at
the whole matter: which known, the Colliars wished him if he were well to be
packing, Calamus seeing amongst such an unruly company he could not mend
himself, went his way with a flea in his ear: and as he road, perceived
where Lestio lay a sleep, who was not so disguised but he knew him perfectly
therefore thinking when he did wake to learn some thing out of him, and so
turning his horse into a Close hard by, rested himself behind a bush: Long he
had not sitten before Cra^ina came merrily whistling with her Cart, and told
her husband all what had happened, who both smiled that the Noble man had such
rough entertaynment, as also that she was so clean out of favor. Calamus who
ouerheard them, and perceived that the youth whom he took for a stripling was
Cratyna ye poor man's wife, felt such a remorce in his conscience for offering
violence to so virtuous and chaste a mind, that as soon as they were gene he
posted as fast as he could to y^ Court, where Menon the Grandfather of my Lord
Ulysses then reigned as Prince, and revealed unto him the whole matter: who
greatly pleased with the discourse, desirous to see so honest a wife, presently
dispatched a Purseua^t to command the Colliar to bring his man Lestio and his
boy before the King. The Purseuant sparing no horseflesh, came so fast from the
Court that he found the^ all at dinner: who after they heard his message, were
amazed, especially poor Cratina, who feared some new misfortune: yet cheering
her self, the better to comfort her husband, they went with the Purseuant to
the Court: where being brought before Menon and Calamus, he there complained of
the Collia^ how he had abused him in maintaining his boy to give him
ill^anguage. The Colliar (as a man amazed) confessed his fault, but
unwittingly, for that he knew him not: and therefore desired Calamus to be his
good Lord and master. Menon, who all this while had his eye on Cratina, ask^e
her what he was: May it please your grace (quoth she) I (...) to this man who
is owner of the pit, but under this other who is ouers^^r of my work: So then
(quoth the King) you (...) two maisiers, y^ one by day, the other by night: Nay
my (...) but one master, for we make small account of any service y^ is ^^ne in
the night. How say you (...) (quot^ the ^ing to (...)) is not this boy your
man: No my Lord (quoth he) only my (...), and that is all the service I crave
at (...). At this answer the King and Calamus smiled, and (...) fearing she was
discovered began to blush: which Menon (...), dema^nded of her of what age she
was? About eighteen my (...) (quoth the) Menon willing to try then what the
event would be: told the Collyar that he and his man, for that their faults
were shorow ignorance, might get them home: but for your boy (quoth the King)
seeing he is so young and well saced I mean to ^alie him my page. The Collyar
was glad he was so dispatched, but poor Lestio through abundance of grief
was almost driven into anextasie, so y^ changing color he could scarce stand
on his legs: which Cratina perceiving, seeing now Fortune had done her worst,
resolved to suffer all miseries whatsoever, f^ll down upon her knees, and
unfolded to the King what she was, and from point to point discoursed what had
happened between her and Calamus, intermedling her speeches with such a
fountain of fears, as the king pitying her plaints, willed her to be of good
cheer: for none in all his kingdom should offer her any vyolence. Calamus in
the behal^e of Cratina thanked the King, with promise before his Highness that
the virtuous and chaste disposition of her mind had made such a met amorphosis
of his former thoughts, that not only he was content to bridle his affections,
but to indow her with such sufficient lands and possessions, as might very well
maintain her in the state of a gentlewoman. The King praising Calamus for his
good mind, willing to be an actor in this Comedy, commanded his Steward to
furnish them with apparel, and afterward to convey them to Calamus Palace,
where they lived long after in presperous and happy estate.

The tale was long and the night was too far spent to run any further descant
onso good a plain song, and therefore Penelope having finished her task went
to her lodging.

The third nights discourse.
THe day no sooner appeared, but according to their old custom, the Noble men
of (...) repaired to the Pa^lace of Penelope, who fayning her self* not well,
kept her Camber, which her son* (...) ^spying, carried the Lords with him of
certain women washing of their clothes, where they talked of a certain place
in the town that was weak and worst defended. Many inconveniences grow of the
intemperancy of the tongue, as discention and strife in a house, whereas
contrariwise nothing more appeaseth choler nor shows modesty then silence.
To confirm the which, I will rehearse a pleasant and delightful History.

Penelopes third tale.
THe Historiographers whose Annual Records makes mention of that ancient City
of Delphos, where Apollo delivered his Oracles, sets down as Chronicled for
truth, that sometime there reigned as chief and Governor of the City, one
Ariamenes, a Prince, wise, as seated in a place where the meanest inhabitant
was able to discourse of wisdom: rich, as indewed with such and so large
possessions that all his bordring neighbors were inferior to him in wealth and
reuenews: and fortunate, for that he had three Sons: honorable, as descended
from such parentage, and virtuous, as sauouring of their fathers prudent
education. Ariamenes blessed thus every way with earthly favors, seeing his gray
hayres were summons unto death, and that old age the true limiter of time,
presented unto him the figure of his mortality, that he was come from the
cradle to the Crouch, and from the Crouch had one leg in the grave: knowing
that the kingdom of Delphos was not a Monarchy that fell by inheritance, but
that be might as well appoint his youngest son successor as his eldest,
being affected to them all alike: was perplexed with contrary passions, to
which of the three he should bequeath such a Royal Leagacy, since by such an
equal proportion Fortune had enriched them with favors. Nature, who is little
partial in such peculiar judgments, was by the several thoughts that
troubled Ariamenes head, almost set at an non plus; insomuch that the old King
driven into a Dylemma, fell into this consideration.

That all his sons were married to women descended from honorable parents,
and that since his Sons were so equal in their virtues, he was to measure his
affection by the conditions of their wives: for he knew that kings in their
government proved often such Iusticiaries as ye good or il disposition of their
wives did afford: for the greatest Monarchs have been subject to the plausible
persuasions of women, and Princes thoughts are often tied to the wings of
beauty. The Emperor Commodus had never bin so hated in Rome for this
tirannies, had he not been pricked forward to such wickedness by his wife.
Ma^cus Aure^us the true and perfect president of a Prince, confessed, that
hardly he could with stand the allurements of Faustina. The envy of a woman
hangs in the brow of her husband, and for ye revenge of an enemy the passes
not for ye loss of a friend. These things considered, Ariamenes was thus
resolved for himself, to bestow y^ kingdom on that son whose wife was
found to be most virtuous Therefore after this determined resolution he
presently dispatched messengers to his sons in their several Provinces, y^
they particularly accompanied with their wives should meet him at Delphos,
with general command also y^ his Nobillitie should make hasty repair to
that City. The Kings command being put in execution, his sons to signify
their duetifull obedience, sped them to y^ Court, where being come before their
father, Ariamenes after he had sit a while in a muse with himself, fell into
these speeches.

Nature (Sons) the perfect mistress of affection tyeth the father to his
children with such a ^^rickt league, that love admieteth no partiality, nor
fancy brooketh any difference, but a ^ust proportion of good will is ministered
if the parties have (...) in their virtues. Maicus Po^^i^ Cato who was a father
(...) children, was wont to say, that the love of a father as it was Royal, so
it ought to be impartial, neither declini^g to y^ (...) nor to y^ other, but
as (...) do merit. (...) who ha^ sixteen children of his own body, at his
death made equal distribution both of goods and lands alike to them (...) being
dem^unded why he did not give his eldest Son y^ greater portion, made this
answer. And is not the youngest also the son eat. To auorde which,
supposition, you refer his Highness to the general fame of the Country, y^
above the rest you exceed in obedience and chastity: Take heed Sister, fame
has two faces, and in that resembles time, ready as well to backbite as to
flatter: therefore they which build their virtue upon report, do allege but
a bad proof. But leaving your reasons to his Highness consideration, thus for
my self. I set not my good name at so small a price, as to hazard it upon the
chance of the tongue, that of al other members is most uncertain: although I
am sure my bordring neighbors of esteem of my doings, as they take my virtues
for a president of their actions: but I hope your Highness does consider y^ such
tree such fruit, that ye lively pourtraiture of the parents is as in a
Crystal manifested in y^ children: that nature is the best touchstone of
life: that educatio^ and nurture are as good as the Chrisocol to discern
Minerals: so they of manners. Then right mighty Prince, I first for proof of
my virtuous disposition lay down the honorable and happy life of my Parents
so well ordered, that ^ame and envy blusheth to stain them with any spot of
infamy: what care they had to bring me up in my youth, with what instructions
they passed over my tender years, I refer to your Majesty, as by willing
your second son to match in so mean a famely: since the rites of marriage
were celebrated my husbands disposition shall manifest. The eldest Sister
hearing how cunningly and yet crookedly this pretty Oratresse aimed at the
matter, could not suffer to hear so long a tale without replye, and therefore
went thus roundly to the purpose.

Sister ill might Phillis have blamed Dido for her folly since she her self
entertained straggling Demophon for a friend: The Cynicks that inueighed against
other men's faults were seldo^e culpable in the same crime: they which will have
their censures peremptory, must not build their reasons on uncertain
principles therefore wipe your nose on your own sleeue, and if you spy where
my shoe wrings me, look to the length of your own last: for in obiecting
selfeloue to me you fall a sleep in the sweet conceit of your own praise:
which indeed wisely you frame to hazard on the chance of fame, since your
deserts are so small as report is blind on y^ side which looks to your
virtues: the force of your reasons drawn from the authority of propagation,
alleging nature and nurture for proofs of your virtues, are too light to
counterpaise with a Crown: for we often see that Natures only error is found in
the dissimilitude of lineage: so that the tree bringing forth fair blos^omes,
yet the blomes may either he nipped in the bud with untimely weather, or
hindered with catterpillers, that it never prove good and perfect fruit. The
Cedar tree is fair of it self, but the fruit either none or very bad: It Is no
opinion to say a good father a good child, in that time often makes an
alteration of Nature. But your husband was commanded to have pleaded your
interest: mary I fear his conscience tells him the Crown hangs too bye for his
reach, since he must be feign to attain to it by your virtues.

The youngest Sister hearing how irreverently they brabled before the King,
began to blush: which Ariamenes espying, noting in her face the very
purtraiture of virtue, demanded of her why hearing her sisters so hard by the
ears for a Crown she said nothing? her answer was thus brief and pithy. He
that gains a Crown gets care, is it not folly then to hunt after loss?
The King looking for a longer discourse, and seeing contrary to his expectation
that she was only short and sweet, prosecuted still inquestioning, and
demanded what virtues she had that might deserve so royal a benefit? This
quoth she, that wh^^ others talk, yet being a woman I can hold my peace.
Ariamenes and all the Nobility of Delphos wondered at the modesty of the young
Lady, that contrary to her natural disposition could so well bridle her
affections. Therefore dehating the matter betwixt them which of the three were
most virtuous: although they found by proof that the other Ladies were both
obedient and chaste: yet for that they wanted silence, which (said Ariamenes)
comprehended in it all other virtues, they mist of the cushion, and the King
created his youngest Son heir apparent to the Kingdom.

PEnelope having ended her tale, the old Nurse greatly commended the
discourse, and because she would be pleasant at the parting blow, knowing that
Isme^a was a quick wench of her tongue, told her that this tale was a good
president for her to direct her course, seeing silence was so profitable. Tush
quoth Ismena, fear not you Madame: for when I have such a proffer as a Crown,
I will gaze so fast at that, that I will forget my prattle* but in says my
lips are too course for such Lettice, and so hye hangs the Grapes that the
Fox will eat none. Well Madame, I know your meaning, but for all the crack
my penny may be good silver, since silence is a virtue amongst women: but yet I
see no reason of necessity, seeing nature has been so niggardly in that
^auour. It may seem quoth the Nurse, that she has been rather too prodigal,
for thy tung wants no metal. As thus they were about to part with these merry
quips, a messenger came hastily rushing in, who told Penelope that Ulysses,
was arrived that night within the port of Ithaca: This word so amazed them all
with sudden joy, that lea^ing the endless Web, Penelope ^^lled for her Son,
and that night sent him in post to the Sea: where what news he heard of his
father I know not. But thus abruptly this night was the discourse broken off:
but for that fell out after his home coming, I refer you to the Paraphrase,
which shortly shall be set out upon Homers Odissea: till when let us leave
Penelope attending the return either of her Husband, or Son, or of both.

FINIS.

