GWYDONIVS.

The Card of Fancy WHEREIN THE FOLLY OF those Carpet Knights is decyphered,
which guyding their course by the compass of Cupid, either dash their ship
against most dangerous Rocks, or else attain the haven with pain and peril.
WHEREIN ALSO IS DESCRIbed in the person of Gwydonius, a cruel Combat betvveene
Nature and necessity. By Robert Green Master of Art, in Cambridge.

At London Imprinted for William Ponsonby. 1584.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, Edward de Vere Earl of Oxenford, Vicount Bulbecke,
Lord of Escales and Badlesmere, and Lord great Chamberlain of England. Robert
Green wishes long life with increase of honor.
THat poor Castilia^ Frontino (right honorable) being a very unskillful
painter, presented Alpho^sus, the Prince of Arago^ with a most imperfect
picture, which the king thankfully accepted, not that he liked the work, but
that he loved the art. The paltering Poet Cherillus dedicated his duncing Poems
to that mighty Monarch Alexander, saying that he knew assuredly if Alexander
would not accept them in that they were not pithie, yet he would not utterly
reject them, in that they had a show of Poetry. Caesar often times praised his
soldiers for their will, although they wanted skill: and Cicero as well
commended stammering Lentulus for his painful industry, as learned Laelius
for his passing eloquence. Which considered (although wisdom did will me not
to strain further then my sleeue would stretch) I thought good to present this
imperfect Pamphlet to your honors protection, hoping your Lordship will deigne
to accept the matter in that it seems to be prose, though some thing unsavory
for want of skill, and take my well meaning for an excuse of my boldness, in
that my poor will is not in the wane, whatsoever this imperfect work do want.
The Emperor Traian was never without suitors, because so courteously he would
hear every complaint. The Lapidaries continually frequented the Court of
Adobrandinus, because it was his chief study to search out the nature of
stones. All that courted to Atlanta were hunters, and none sued to Sapho but
Poets. Wheresoever Maecanas lodges, thither no doubt will scholars flock.
And your honor being a worthy favorer and fosterer of learning, has forced
many through your exquisite virtue, to offer the first fruits of their study
at the shrine of your Lordships courtesy. But though they have waded far and
found mines, and I gadded abroad to get nothing but Mites, yet this I assure my
self, that they never presented unto your Honor their treasure with a more
willing mind, then I do this simple trash, which I hope your Lordship will so
accept. Resting therefore upon your honors wonted clemency, I commit your
Lordship to the Almighty.

Your Lordships most dutifully to command, Robert Green.

To the Gentlemen Readers, health.
PAN blowing on his Oten pipe a little homely Music, and hearing no man
dispraised his small cunning, began both to play so loud, and so long, that
they were more weary in hearing his music, then he in showing his skill, till
at last to claw him and excuse themselves, they said his pipe was out of tune.
So Gentlemen, because I have before time rashly recht above my pitch, and yet
your courtesy such as no man have accused me, I have once again adventured
upon your patience (but I doubt so far) as to be rid of my folly, you will
at the least say as Augustus said to the Grecian, that gave him often times many
rude vearses: Thou had need (quoth he) reward me well, for I take more pains
to read thy works, then thou to write them. But yet willing to abide this
quip, because I may counteruaile it with your former courtesy, I put my self
to your patience, and commit you to the Almighty. Farewell.

Robert Green.

Ad Lectorem in laudem Authoris.
PVllulat en stirpi similis speciofa propago
Aureolusque nouo reuirescit ramus amoris
Vere: (tuo vere iam VERE dicandus honori):
Ista salus Iuueni, Comiti ^it gloria nosse
Accepisse decus: Comites vbi passibus aequis
Ales amor virtusque sagax decurrere norunt.
Ventilat iste faces, restinguit at illa furentes
Taedas. Ne^ taedet Pueri sic taedia caeci
Fallere, qui caecis conuoluit viscera flammis,
Ergo refer grates qui deuitare cupi'sti
Spumosos Veneris fluctus, scopulosque minaces
Qui fragilem tumidis cymbam mersisse procellis
Possent. Hac iter est, hac dirige, tutior ibis.
Richardus Portingtonus.

THE CARD OF Fancy.
THere dwelled in the City of Metelyne a certain Duke called Clerophontes,
who through his prowess in all martial exploits waxed so proud and tyrannous,
using such merciless cruelty to his foreign enemies, and such modelesse
rigor to his native Citizens, that it was doubtful whether he was more feared
of his foes for his cruelty, or hated of his friends for his tyranny: yet as
the worst weed springs up more bravely then the wholesomest herb, and as
the crookedst tree is commonly laden with most fruit, so this rigorous Duke was
so favored and fostered up by fortune, his estate being so established with
honor, and so beautified with wealth, so decked with the diadem of dignity,
and endued with fortunate prosperity, having in wars such happy success
against his foes, and in peace such dutiful reverence of his friends,
(although more for fear then favor) as he seemed to want nothing that either
fortune or the fates could allow him, if one only sore which bred his sorrow
could have been salued. But this grief so galled his conscience, and this
cursed care so combred his mind, that his happiness was greatly surcharged
with heaviness, to see the cause of his care could by no means be cured. For
this Clerophontes was endued with two children, the one a Daughter named
Lewsippa, and the other a son called Gwydonius, this Lewcippa was so perfect
in the complexion of her body, and so pure in the constitution of her mind,
so adorned with outward beauty, and endued with inward bounty, so pollished
with rare virtues and exquisite qualities, as she seemed a seemly Venus for
her beutie, and a second Vesta for her virginity; yea, Nature and the Gods had
so bountifullye bestowed their gifts upon her, as Fame her self was doubtful
whether she should make greater report of her excellent virtue, or exquisite
beauty. But his son Guydonius was so contrary to his sister Lewsippa,
(though not in the state of his body, yet in the stay of his mind) as it made
all men marvel how two such contrary stems could spring out of the self
same stock: His personage indeed was so comely, his feature so well framed,
each lim so perfectlye couched, his face so fair, and his countenance so
amiable, as he seemed a heavenly creature in a mortal carcass. But his mind
was so blemished with detestable qualyties, and so spotted with the stain of
voluptuousness, that he was not so much to be commended for the proportion of
his body, as to be condemned for the imperfection of his mind. He was so
endued with vanity, and so imbrued with vice, so nursed up in wantonness, and
so nusled up in wilfulness, so careless to observe his Fathers command, and
so retchlesse to regard his counsel, that neither the dread of Gods wrath,
nor the fear of his fathers displeasure, could drive him to desist from his
detestable kind of living. Nay, there was no fact so filthy, which he would
not commit, no mischief so monstrous, which he would not enterprise: no danger
so desperate, which he would not adventure: no peril so fearful, which he
would not perform: nor no action so devilish, which he would not execute. So
immodest in his manners, so rude in his iestures, yea, and so prodigal in his
expenses, as mines of gold were not able to maintain such witless
prodigality. This loathsome life of Cwydonius was such a cutting corasiue to
his Fathers careful conscience, and such a hapless clogge to his heavy
heart, that no joy could make him inioye any joy, no mirth could make him
merry, no prosperity could make him pleasant, but abandoning all delyght, and
avoiding all company, he spent his doleful days in dumpes and dolors, which
he uttered in these words.

NOw (quoth he) I prove by experience, the saying of Soph^cles to be true, that
the man which has many children shall never live without some mirth, nor dye
without some sorrow: for if they be virtuous, he shall have cause whereof to
rejoice, if vicious, wherefore to be sad, which saying I try performed in my
self, for as I have one child which delights me with her virtue, so I have
another that despights me with his vanity, as the one by duty brings me joy,
so the other by disobedience breeds my annoy: yea, as ye one is a comfort to my
mind, so the other is a fretting corasiue to my heart: for what grief is there
more griping, what pain more pinching, what cross more combersome, what
plague more pernicious, yea, what trouble can torment me worse, then to see my
son, mine heir, the inheritour of my Dukdome, which should be the pillar of
my parentage, to consume his time in roysting and riot, in spending and
spoiling, in swearing and swashing, and in following wilfullye the fury of his
own frantike fancy. Alas, most miserable and lamentable case, would to God
the destinyes had decreed his death in ye swaddling clouts, or y^ the fates had
prescribed his end in his infa^cy. Oh y^ the date of his birth had been the day
of his burial, or y^ by some sinister storm of fortune he had been stifled on
his mothers knees, so that his untimely death might have prevented my ensuing
sorrows, and his future calamities: for I see that y^ young fry will always
prove old frogs, y^ the crooked twig will prove a crabbed tree, that the
sower bud will never be sweet blossom, how that which is bredde by the bone
will not easily out of the flesh, that he which is careless in youth, will be
less careful in age, that where in prime of years vice reigns, there in
ripe age vanity remains. Why Clerophontes, if thou see the sore, why do
thou not apply the salve, and if thou do perceive the mischief, why do
not prevent it with medicine, take away the cause and the effect fails, if
Gwydones be the cause of thy ruth, cut him off betimes, least he bring thee to
ruin, better had thou want a son then never want sorrow. Perhaps thou will
suffer him so long till he fall sick of the Father, and then he will not only
seek thy lands and living, but life and all, if thou prevent not his purpose:
yea, and after thy death he will be through his lascivious life the overthrow
of thy house, the consumer of thy Dukedom, the wrack of thy common weal, and
the very man that shall bring the state of Metelyne to mischief and misery.
Since then thy son is such a sink of sorrows, in whose life lies hid a
loathsome mass of wretched mishaps, cut him off as a graceless graft,
unworthy to grow out of such a stock. Alas Clerophontes, shall thou be so
unnatural as to seek the spoil of thine own child, will thou be more
savage then the brute beasts in committing such cruelty, no, alas the least
misfortune of our children does so move us, that as the Spider feels if her
web be pricked but with the point of a pin, so if they be touched but with the
least trouble, we feel the pains thereof with prickking grief to pinch us.
Why has not nature then caused love to ascend as well as to descend, and placed
as dutiful obedience in ye child, as loving affection in ye father: and with
that he fetched such a deep sigh, y^ it was a sign of ye extreme sorrow he
conceived for his sons witless folly. But as he was ready again to enter
into his doleful discourse, to aggrauate his grief the more, and increas^ his
care, certain complaints were brought him by sundry Citizens, of the
outrageous behavior of his son Gwydonius, which being attentively heard, he
in great cholar called for his son, against whom he thundered out such
threatening reproaches, laying before his face the misery that would ensue of
such recklesse mischiefs, and promising that if he directed not his course by
a new compass, and leuelled his life by a new line, he would not only repay
his folly with the penalty of the law, but also by consent of his Commons,
disinherite him of his Dukedom: that Gwydonius greatly incensed with the
severe censure of his Father, broyling with furious rage, sturdely burst forth
into these stubborn terms.

SIr, (quoth he) if Terence his Menedemus were alive, and heard these your fond
and fantastical resons, he would as readely condemn you of crabbednes, as he
accused Chremes of currishnesse: for as he by too much austeritie procured his
sons mishappe, so you by too much severity seek to breed my misfortune. You
old men most iniustly, or rather injuriously, measure our stailesse mood by
your stayed minds, our young years by your horie hairs, our flourishing youth
by your withered age, thinking to direct our doings by your doatings, our
wills by your wits, our youthful fancies by your aged affections, and to
quench our fiery flames by your dead coals and cinders: yea, supposing that
the Leueret should be as skillful in making of a head as the old Hare, that the
young Cubs should as soon tapish, as ye old Fox, that y^ young Fry should as
well avoid the net as the old Fish, and that the young wantons should be as
wary as the old wysards. But this sir, is to make fire frost, to change heat
to cold, mirth to mourning, singing to sadness, pleasure to pain, and to tie
the Ape and the Bear in one tedder, since then young stemme^ will not be set on
a withered stock, that the young twigge likes not under the old tree, that
the toyish conceits of youth are unfit for the testie cogitations of age: I
mean for your satisfaction and my solace, to depart from the Court, and to
spend my days in travel.

Clerophontes no sooner heard this determination of his son Gwydonius, but
his sorrow was half salued, and his care almost cured, thinking that by
travel he should either end his life or amend his lewdness, and therefore
both hearted and hastened his son in this his new course, least delay might
breed danger, or time by some toye cause him turn his tippet, furnishing
and finishing all things necessary for his sons journey, who ready to go
(more willing to travel, than his father to entreat him) had this friendly
farewell given him by Clerophontes.

Son (quoth he) there is no greater doubt which does more deeply distress
the mind of a young man, then to determine with himself what course of life
is best to take, for there is such a confused Chaos of contrary conceits in
young wits, that whiles they look for that they cannot like, they are lost in
such an endless Laberinth, as neither choice nor chance can draw the^ out to
their wished desires, for so many veins so many vanities: if virtue draws
one way, vice drives another way: as profit persuades the^, so pleasure
prouokes them: as wit weighs, will wresteth: if friends counsel them to take
this, fancy forces them to choose that: so that desire so long hangs in
doubt, as either they choose none, or else chance on the worst. But in my
opinion, the fittest kind of life for a young Gentleman to take (who as yet
has not subdued the youthful conceits of fancy, nor made a conquest of his
will by wit) is to spend his time in travel, wherein he shall find both
pleasure and profit: yea, and buy^ that by experience, which otherwise with
all the treasure in the world he cannot purchase. For what changes vanity
to virtue, staylesse wit to stayed wisdom, fond fantasies to firm
affections, but travel: what represseth the rage of youth, and redresseth the
witless fury of wanton years, but travel: what tourneth a secure life to a
careful living, what makes the foolish wise, yea, what increases wit and
augmenteth skill, but travel: in so much that the fame Ulysses won, was not
by the ten years he lay at Troy, but by the time he spent in travel. But
there is nothing Gwydonius so precious which in some respect is not perilous,
nor nothing so pleasant which may not be painful: the finest gold has his
dross, the purest wine his lees, the brauest rose his prickles, each sweet
has his sower, each joy his annoy, each weal his woe, and every delyght his
danger. So travail Gwydonius is a course of life very pleasant, and yet very
perilous, wherein thou may practice virtue if thou take heed, or purchase
discredit if thou be careless: where thou may reap renown if thou
be virtuous, and gain reproach if thou be vicions: whereout do spring
wisdom and folly, freedom and bondage, treasure and trash, fame and
discredit, honor and shame, according to the dispotion of him which either
uses it to his profit, or abuses it to his discommoditie. Since then thou
shall bear sail in such perilous Strayghtes, take heed least thou dash thy
ship against most dangerous Rocks. It is a saying Gwydonius, not so common as
true, that he which will hear the Sirens sing, must with Ulysses tie himself
to the mast of a ship, least happily he be drowned. Who so means to be a suitor
to Circes, must take a Preservative, unless he will be inchaunted.

He that will fish for y^ Torpedo, must annoint his hand with the oil of
Nemiphar, least he be charmed, and who so means to enter combat with vanity,
must first surely defense himself with the target of virtue, unless he mean
to be a captive to care, or calamity. I speak this Gwydonius by experience,
which afterward thou shall know by proof, for in travel thou shall find
such subtle Sirens as will indaunger thee, such sorcering Cirees as will
inchaunt thee, such poisoned Torpedos, as will not only charm thy hand but
thy heart, if by my experience and other men's perils thou learn not to beware.
First Gwydonius, be not too sumptuous least thou seem prodigal, nor too
covetous least they count thee a niggard: for by spending in excess thou shall
be thought a vainglorious fool, and by too much sparing a covetous pesant. Be
not wilful in thy doings that they count thee not witless, nor too rash,
that they think thee not deuoyd of reason: be not too merry that they count
thee not immodest, nor too sober least they call thee sullen, but show thy
self to be an old man for thy gravity, and a young youth for thy actiuitie:
so shall all men have cause to praise thee for thy manners, and commend thee for
thy modesty. Be not too curious Guydonius, that they deem thee not proud, nor
too courteous, least they call thee counterfaite. Be a friend to all, and a foe
to none, and yet trust not without trial, nor commit any secret to a friendlye
stranger, least in too much trust lie treason, and thou be forced by
repentance to ^rie Peccaui. The sweetest Musk is sower to be tasted, the
finest Pills most bitter to be chewed, and the flattering friend most tickle
being tried, then beware least fair words make fools feign, and glozing
speeches cause had I wist come too late. Lend not Gwydonius a listening ear to
the Alarums of love, nor yield not thy freedom to the assault of lust, be not
dazeled with the beams of fading beauty, nor daunted with the desire of every
delicat damsel, for in time such bliss will prove but bane, and such
delightful joy, but despitefull annoye. Lust Gwydonius will prove an enemy
to thy pursse, and a foe to thy person, a canker to thy mind, and a corasiue
to thy conscience, a weakner of thy wit, a molester of thy mind, a besotter of
thy senses, and finally a mortal bane to all thy body, so that thou shall find
pleasure the pathway to perdition, and lusting Love the lodestone to ruth and
ruin. Seek not then Gwydonius greedely to devour that bait, where-vnder thou
know a hurtful hook to be hidden: frequent not y^ pleasure which will turn to
thy poison, nor covet not y^ company, which will convert to thy confusion,
least through such follye thou have cause in time to be sad, and I to be
sorrowful. Now Gwydonius that thou have heard the advertisement of a loving
father, follow my advice as a duetifull Child, and the more to bind thee to
perfourm^ my former precepts, that this my counsel be not drowned in
oblivion, I give thee this Ring of gold, wherein is written this sentence,
Praemonitus, Praemunitu^. A Posie pretty for the words, and pithie for the
matter, short to be rehearsed, and long to be related, inferring this sense,
that he which is forewarned by friendlye counsel of imminent dangers, is
fore-armed against all future mishappe and calamity, so that he may by
fore-warning prevent perils if it be possible, or if by sinister fortune he
cannot eschew them, yet he may bear the Cross with more patience and less
grief. Keep this Ring Gwydonius carefully, that thou may show thy self to
respect thy own case* and regard my counsel: and in so doing thou shall
please me, and pleasure thy self.

CLerophontes having thus ended his discourse, embracing his son with
fatherlye affection, and giving him his blessing, went secretlye into his
Chamber the more to cover his grief which he conceived for his sons
departure: unwilling his son should perceive by his sorrow how unfeignedly he
both liked and loved him.

WEll, Gwydonius having taken his leave of his father, furnished both with
counsel and coin, with advice of wisdom and aid of wealth, passed on his
journey very solempnly, until he was past the bounds of his fathers Dukedom,
and then as merry as might be he trauayled by the space of seven weeks
without any residence, until he came to a City called Barutta, where
(whether he were delighted with the situation of the place, or deluded with
the persuasion of some Parasiticall persons) he securelye setteled himself by
the space of a whole year: in which time he (...) carelessly floated in the
seas of voluptuousness, and so recklesselye raunged in lycentious and lawless
liberty, thinking himself a peasaunt if he were not prodigal, counting
nothing comelye if not costlye, nothing seemelye if not sumptuous, using such
monstrous excess in all his actions, that the Citizens of Barutta noted him
for a myrrour if immoderate life, and a very pattern of witless
prodigality: yea, his excessive expenses daily so increased, that Mines of
gold had not been sufficient to mayntaine his pompous magnificence, in so much
that the Magistrates of Barutta, not only meruayled where he had coin to
counteruayle his expenses, but also began to suspecte him either for some
skillful Alcumist, or that he had some large Commission to take up those
pursses that fell into lapse, for want of sufficient defense: whereupon being
called before the Magistrates and stricktlye examined what Trade he used, why
he stayed so long, in the City, and how he was able to maintain so
Princelye a port as he carried? Guydonius unwilling to have them priuye to
his Parentage, began to coin a scuse, yet not so cunninglye but he was
trapte in his own talk, and so cast in Prisonne, where he lay clogged with
care, and deuoyd of comfort, having not so much as one trustye friend,
amongst all those trothlesse flatterers which in prosperity had so
frequented his company, the ingratitude of whom, so perplexed his molested
mind, as surcharged with sorrow, he burst forth into these terms.

ALas (quoth he) now have I bought that by hapless experience, which if I
had been wise, I might have got by happy counsel: Now am I taught that
with pain and peril, which if self-love had not besotted my senses, I
might have learned with profitte and pleasure: that in the fairest Sands is
most fickleness, out of the brauest Blossom most commonly springs the
woorste Fruit, that the finest Flower seldom has the best smell, that the
most glystering Stone has oftentimes the least virtue, and that in the
greatest show of good will lies often times the smallest effect of
friendship, in most flatterye least faith, in the fairest face the falsest
heart, in the smoothest Tale the smallest Truth, and in the sweetest gloses
most sower ingratitude: Yea, I see now (quoth he) that in trust lies
treason, that fair words make fools feign, and that the state of these
feigned friends are like to the Marygolde, which as long as the Sun shyneth
opens her leaves, but with the least^ Cloud begins to cloase, like the
Uyolettes in America, which in Summer yield an odoriferous smell, and in
Winter a most pestilent savor: so these Parasites in prosperity profess
most, but in adversity perform least: when Fortune favors they laugh,
when she frowneth they lowre: at every full Sea they flowrish, but at every
dead Neape they fade: Like to the Fish Palerna, which being perfectlye white
in the Calm, yet tourneth passing black at every storm: to the Trees in the
Desartes of Aff^ica, that flourish but while the South wind blows, or to the
Celedony s^one, which retains his virtue no longer than it is rubbed with
gold. Since then Gwydonius, (quoth he) thou finds such falsehoode in
friendship, and such faythles deeds in such painted speeches, shake off
these fawning curres with the flagge of deflaunce, and from henceforth try
ere thou trust. I, but (quoth he) it is too late to apply the salve when the
sore is incurable to cry alarm when the City is overrun, to seek for
couerte when the storm is past, and to (...) heed of such flattering mates
when already thou art deceived by such fawning Merchants: now thou will
cry Cave when thy coin is consumed, and beware when thy wealth is wracked,
when thou have nothing whereof to take charge, thou will be chary, and when
follye has already given thee a mate, thou will by wisdom seek to avoid
the check, but now thou tryest it true, that thy Father foretold thee, that
so long thou would be careless, as at last Repentance would pull thee by
the sleeue, and then had I wist would come to late.

Well Gwydonius, since that which is once past can never be recald again, if
thou have by folly made a fault, seek by wisdom to make amends, and heap not
care upon care, nor add not grief to sorrow, by these thy pitiful
complaints, but cheer up thy self and take heart at grass, for the end of
woe is the beginning of weal, and after misery always insueth most happy
felicity.

Gwydonius having thus dolorously discoursed with himself, remained not above
ten days in prison, but that the Senate taking pity of his case, and seeing
no accusations were inferred against him, set him fr^e from his Purgatory, and
gave him good counsel that hereafter he should beware by such witless
prodigality to incur such suspicion. Theseus never triumphed more after he
had escaped the danger of the perilous laborinth, then poor Gwydonius did
when he was set free from this pernicious Limbo, now the bitterness of bondage
made his freedom seem far more sweet, and his danger so happily escaped,
caused his delivery seem far more delightful. Yet he conceived such
discourtesie against the Citizens, for repaying his liberal good will with
such loathsome ingratitude, that the next morning he departed from Barutta, not
stored with too much money for molesting his mind, nor ouercharged with coin
for ^ombering his conscience with too much care, but having remaining of all
his treasure only that ring which his father gave him, travailing very
solempnly toward Alexandria.

Where at that time there reigned a certain Duke named Orlanio, who was so
famous and fortunate, for the peaceable government of his Dukedom,
administering justice with such sincerity, and yet tempering the extremity of
the law with such lenity, as he both gained the good will of strangers in
hearing his virtue, and won the hearts of his subjects in feeling his
bounty, counting him unworthy to bear the name of a Sovereign, which knew
not according to desert, both to cherish and chastise his subjects.

Fortune and the fates willing to place him in the palace of earthly
prosperity, endued him with two children, the one a son named Thersandro,
and the other a Daughter called Castania, either of them so adorned with the
gifts of Nature, and beautified with good nurture, as it was hard to know
whether beauty or virtue held the supremacy. But least by this happy estate
Orlanio should be too much puffed up with prosperity, Fortune sparing him the
mate, yet gave him a slender check, to warn him from security, for before
his daughter came to the age of fourteen years, his wife dyed, leaving him
not more sorrowful for the loss of her whom he most entirely loved, then
careful for the well bringing up of her whom he so dearly lyked. Knowing
that as his Court was a School of virtue to such as brideled their minds with
discreation, so it was a nurse of vice to those tender years that measured
their wills with witless affection, esteeming liberty as perilous to the
stay of youth, as precious to the state of age, and that nothing so soon
allured the mind of a young maid to vanity, as to pass her youth without
fear in security. Feared with the consideration of these premises, to avoid
the inconveniences that might happen by suffering Castania to lead her life in
lawless liberty, he thought it best to choose out some virtuous Lady to
keep her company, who might direct her course by so true a compass, and
level her life by so right a line, that although her young years were very
apt to be entangled in the snares of vanity, yet by her counsel and
company, she might steddelye tread her steps in the trace of virtue, and
none he could find more fit for the purpose then a certain old Widdowe,
called Madame Melytta, honored for her virtuous life throughout all Alexandria,
who being sent for to the Court, he saluted on this manner.

MAdame Melytta (quoth he) the report of thy honest conditions, and the
renown of thy virtuous qualyties are such, as thereby thou have not only
purchased great praise, but won great credit throughout all the Country.
Insomuch that I incensed by this thy singular commendation, I have selected
thee as the only woman to whom I mean to commit my chiefest treasure, I
mean Melytta, my Daughter Castania, to whom I will have thee be both a
companion and a counselor, hoping thou will take such care to train her up in
virtue, and trace her quite from vice, to win her mind to honesty, and
weane her quite from vanity, that she in her ripe years shall have cause to
thank thee for thy pains, and I occasion to regard thee as a friend, and
reward thee for thy dilygence.

FIrst Melytta, so that she lead her life both charylye and chastely. Let her
not have her own will, least she prove too wilful, nor too much liberty,
least she become too light. The Palm tree pressed down, grows
notwythstanding but too fast. The Herb Spattania, though trodden on, grows
very tall, and youth although stricktlye restrained will prove but too
stubburne.

The vessel sauoureth always of that lycour wherewith it was first seasoned,
and the mind retayneth those qualyties in age wherein it was trained up in
youth. The tender twigge is sooner broken then the strong branch, the young
stem more brittle then the old stock, the weak Bramble shaken with every
Wind, and the wavering will of youth tossed with every puff of vanity,
ready to be wracked in the waves of wantonness, unless it be cunningly
guided by some wise and wary Pylot.

Then Melytta, youth is so easily intrapped with the alluring train of foolish
delights, and so soon entangled with the trash of pernicious pleasures, suffer
not my daughter to pass her time in idleness, least happily being taken at
discouert, she become a careless captive to security (for when the mind once
floteth in ye surging seas of idle conceits, then the puffes of voluptuous
pleasures, and the stiffeling storms of unbridled fancy, the raging blasts of
alluring beauty, and the sturdy gale of glozing vanity, so shake the ship of
recklesse youth, that it is daily in doubt to suffer most dangerous
shipwreck. But let her spend her time in reading such ancient authors as may
sharpen her wit by their pithie sayings, and learn her wisdom by their
perfect sentences. For where nature is vicious, by learning it is amended, and
where it is virtuous, by skill it is augmented. The stone of secret virtue is
of greater price if it be bravely polished, th gold though never so pure of
himself, has the better color if it be burnished, and the mind though
never so virtuous, is more noble if it be enriched with the gifts of learning.
And Melytta for recreation sake, let her use such honest sportes as may drive
away dumps, least she be too pensive, and free her mind from foolish
conceits, y^ she be not too wanton. Thus Madame as you have heard my fatherly
advise, so I pray you give my daughter the like friendly advertisement, y^
hereafter she may have both cause to reverence thee, and I to reward thee.

Melytta having heard with attentive heed the mind of Orlanio, conceived such
joy in this new charge, and such delight in this happy chance, as with
cheerful countenance she repaid him this answer.

SIr (quoth she) although in the largest Seas are the sorest tempests, in the
broadest ways most boisterous winds, in the highest hills, most dangerous
happes, and in the greatest charge the greatest care, yet the duty which I
owe you as my Sovereign, and the love I bear you as a subject, the care I
have to please you as my Prince, and to pleasure you as a Potentate, the trust
you repose in my truth without sufficient trial, y^ confidence you put in my
conscience without sure proof, the courtesy your grace does show me
without any desert, have so inflamed the forepassed fire of duetifull
affection, and so encouraged me to encounter your graces courtesy, with
willing constancy, that there is no happ^ so hard which I would not hazard,
no danger so desperate which I would not adventure, no burden so heavy
which I would not bear, no peril so huge which I would not pass, nor no
charge so great, which both willingly and warily I would not perform. For,
since it has pleased your grace to vouchsafe so much of my simple calling, as
to assign me for a companion for your Daughter Castania, I will take such care
in the charie performaunce of my charge, and endeavor with such diligence both
to couns^ll and comfort Casta^^a, as your grace shall perceive my duty in
pleasing you, and my diligence in pleasuring her.

THE Duke hearing the friendly and faithful protestation of the good Lady
Melytta, told her that although it were great trouble for one of her age to
frame her self as a companion to such young youth, and that some care belonged
to such a charge, yet he would so counteruaile her painful labor with
princely lyberalitie, that both she and all Alexandria should have cause to
speak of his bounty.

MElytta thanking the Duke for such undeserved courtesy, setting her householde
affairs in good order, repaired to the Court as speedely as might be. But
leaving her with Castania, again to Cwydonius.

Who now being aryued at Alexandria, pinched with poverty and distressed with
want, having no coin left wherewith to counteruaile his expenses, thought it
his best course, if it were possible, to compass the Dukes service, repairing
therefore to the Court, he had not stayed there three days before he found
fit opportunity to offer his service to Orlanio, whom very duetifully he
saluted on this manner.

TIE report (right worthy Prince) of your incomparable courtesy and pearlesse
magnanimity, is so blazed abroad throughout all Countries, by the golden
trumpe of Fame, that your grace is not more loved of your subjects which taste
of your liberal bounty, then honored of strangers, which only hear of your
princely virtue. Insomuch that it has forced me to leave my native soil, my
parents, kindred, and familiar friends, and pilgrimelyke to pass into a
strange Country, to try that by experience here, which I have heard by
report at home. For it is not (right worthy sir) the state of your Country
which has allured me (for I deem Bohemia, whereof I am, no less pleasant
then Alexandria, neither has want of living) or hope of gain intised me, for
I am by birth a Gentleman, and issued of such parents as are able with
sufficient patrimony to maintain my estate, but the desire, not only to see,
but also to learn such rare courtesy and virtuous qualities as fame has
reported to be put in practice in your Court, is the only occasion of this my
journey. Now if in recompense of this my travail, it shall please your grace
to vouchsafe of my service, I shall think my self fully satisfied, and my
pains sufficiently requited.

Orlanio hearing this dutiful discourse of Gwydonius, marking his manners, and
musing at his modesty, noting both his excellent courtesy and exquisite
beauty, was so inflamed with friendlye affection toward this young youth,
that not only he accepted of his service, but also preferred him as a
companion to his son Thesandro, promising that since he had left his Country
and parents for this cause, he would so counteruaile his dutiful desert with
favor and friendship, as he should never have cause to accuse him of
ingratitude.

Gwydonius repaying hearty thanks to the Duke for his undeserved courtesy,
being now brought from woe to weal, from despair to hope, from bale to
bliss, from care to security, from want to wealth, yea, from hellish misery,
to heavenly prosperity, behaved himself so wisely and warily, with such
courtesy in conversation, and modesty in manners, that in short time he not
hnely purchased credit and countenance with Orlanio, but was most entirely
liked and loved of Thersa^dro.

Now there remained in the Court a young knight, called Signor Valericus, who
by chance casting his glauncing eyes on the glittering beauty of Castania,
was so fettered in the snare of fancy, and so entangled with the trap of
affection, so perplexed in the Laborinth of pinching love, and so inchaunted
with the charm of Venus Sorcerie, that as the Elephant rejoices greatly at
the sight of a rose, as y^ bird Halciones delights to view ye feathers of the
Phoenix, and as nothing better contenteth a Roe buck, then to gaze at a red
cloth, so there was no object that could allure the wavering eyes of Valericus,
as the surpassing beauty of Castania, yea, his only bliss, pleasure, joy,
and delight, was in feeding his fancy with staring on the heavenly face of
his Goddess. But alas her beauty bredde his bane, her looks, his loss,
her sight his sorrow, her exquisite perfections, his extreme passions, that as
the Ape by seeing the Snaile, is infected, as the Leoparde falls in a trance
at the sight of the Locust, as the Cockatrice dies with beholding the
Chrisolito, so poor Valericus was pinched to the heart with viewing her comely
countenance, was griped with galding grief, and tortured with insupportable
torments, by gasing upon the gallant beauty of so gorgeous a dame. Yea, he
so framed in his fancy the form of her face, and so imprinted in his heart
the perfection of her person, that the remembrance thereof would suffer him
take no rest, but he passed the day in dolor, the night in sorrow, no minute
without mourning, no hour without heaviness, that falling into pensive
passions, he began thus to parle with himself.

Why how now Valericus (quoth he) art thou haunted with some hellish hagge, or
possessed with some frantike fury, art thou enchanted with some magical charm,
or charmed with some bewitching Sorcerie, that so suddenly thy mind is
perplexed with a thousand sundry passions, alate free, and now fettered, alate
swimming in rest, and now sinking in care, erewhile in security, and now in
captivity, yea, turned from mirth to mourning, from pleasure to pain, from
delight to despite, hating thy self, and loving her who is the chief cause
of this thy calamity Ah Valericus, have thou forgot the saying of Propertius,
that to love howsoever it be, is to loose, and to fancy how charie so ever
thy choice be, is to have an ill chance, for Love though never so fickle, is
but a Chaos of care, and fancy, though never so fortunate, is but a mass of
misery, for if thou inioye the beauty of Venus, thou shall find it small
vauntage, if thou get one as wise as Minerua, thou may put thy winninges in
thine eye, if as gorgeous as Juno thy accounts being cast, thy gain shall be
but loss: yea, be she virtuous, be ^he cha^t, be she courteous, be she
constant, be she rich, be she renowned, be she honest, be she honorable, yet
if thou be wedded to a woman, think thou shall find in her sufficient vanity
to counteruaile her virtue, that thy happiness will be matched with heaviness,
thy quiet with care, thy contentation with vexation: that thou shall sow seed
with sorrow, and reap thy corn with sadness, that thou shall never live
without grief, nor dye without repentance, for in matching with a wife there
is such mischifes, and in marriage such miseries, that Craterus the Emperor
wishing some sinister Fortune to happen upon one of his foes, prayed unto the
Gods, that he might be married in his youth, and dye without issue in his age,
counting marriage such a combersome cross, and a wife such a pleasant plague,
that he thought his foe could have no worse torment, than to be troubled with
such noisome trash. Oh Valericus, if the consideration of these premises be
not sufficient to persuade thee: if the sentence of Propertius cannot quench
thy flame, nor the saying of Craterus cool thy fancy: call to mind what
miseries, what mischiefs, what woes, what wailings, what mishappes, what
murders, what care, what calamities have happened to such, as have been
besotted with the balefull beauty of women, enjoying more care than
commodity, more pain than profit, more cost than comfort, more grief than
good: yea, reaping a tun of dross, for every dram of perfect gold.

What careless inconstancy ruled Eriphila? what currish cruelty reigned in
Philomela? how incestruous a life lead Aeuropa? and how miserable was that man
that married Stheuolea? What gains got Tereus in winning Progne? but a
loathsome death for a little delight. Agamemnon in possessing the beauty of
Crecida, caused the Grecian army most grievously to be plagued. Candaules was
slain by his murdering wife, whom so intyrely he loved. Who was thought more
happy than the husband of Helena, and yet who in time less fortunate? What
hapless chances insued of the chastity of Penelope? what broils in Rome by
the virtue of Lucretia? the one caused her sutours most horriblye to be slain,
and the other that Tarquin and all his posterity were rooted out of their
Regal dignities. Phaedra in loving killed her haples son Hippolitus, and
Clitemnestra in hating slew her loving husband Agamemnon. Alas Valericus, how
dangerous is it then to deal with such Dames? which if they love, they procure
thy fatal care: and if they hate thee, thy final calamity.

But ah blasphemous beast y^ I am, thus recklesly to rail and rage without
reason, thus currishly to exclayme against those without whom our life though
never so luckly, should seem most loathsome, thus Tymon like, to condemn
those heavenly creatures, whose only sight is a sufficient salve against all
hellish sorrows: is this right, to conclude generallye of particular
premises, is it Justice to accuse all for the offense of some, is it equity
to blame the stay of virtuous women, for the state of vicious wantons? Do
thou think Valericus to shake off the shackles of fancy with this folly? or
to eschew the bait of beauty, by breathing out such blasphemy? No, no,
assure thy self, that these thy raging reasons, will in time be most
rigorouslye revenged, that the Gods themselves will plague thee for braying out
such injurious speeches. Alas, Love wanting desire, makes the mind desperate:
and fixed fancy bereaved of hope, tourneth into furye. The loyal faith I
bear to Castania, and the loathsome fear of her ingratitude, the deep desire
which inforceth my hope, and the deadlye despair which infringeth my hap, so
tosseth my mind with contrary cogitations, that I neither regard what I
say, to my harm, nor respect what I do, to my own hurt: yea, my senses
are so be^otted with pinching Love, and my mind so fretted with frying fancy,
that death were thrice more welcome, than thus to linger in despayring hope.

And with that, to pass away those pensive passions, he floung out of his
Chamber with his Hawke on his fiste, thinking by such sport to drive away
this melancholycke humor, which so molested his mind.

But as he was passing thorough the Court, he was luckelye incountered by
Melitta and Castania, who minding to have some sport with Valericus before he
did pass: had the onset thus pleasauntly given him by Castania.

IT is hard Signor Valericus (quoth she) to take you either without your Hawke
on your fiste, or your heart on your halfepenie, for if for recreation you be
not retriuing the Partridge with dogs, you are in solemn meditation driving
away the time with dumpes, neither caring for company to solace your sadness,
nor plesantly discoursing of some amorous Parle: which makes the Gentlewomen of
this Court think, that you are either an Apostata to Love, as was Narcyssus,
or have displayed the flagge of defiaunce against Fancy, as did Tyanaeus. If
these their surmised conjectures be true Valericus, I warn thee as a friend to
beware by other men's harms, least if thou imitate their actions, thou be
mangled with the like misery, or maimed with the like misfortune.

Valericus hearing his Saint pronouncing this sugared harmony, feeling himself
somewhat touched with this quipping talk, was so rapte in admiration of her
eloquence, and so ravished in the contemplation of her beauty, that he stood
in a maze not able to utter on^ word, until at last gathering his wits
together, he burst forth into these speeches.

MAdame (quoth he) what it pleases the Gentlewomen of this Court to surmise of
my solytarinesse I know not, but if they attribute it too curiousness, or
coyness to strangeness, or stateliness, either that I am an enemy to love,
or a foe to fancy, that I detest their bounty with Narcissus, or contempne
their beauty with Tiancus, they offer me great injury, so rashly to
conjecture of my disease, before rightly they have cast my water. But to put
your Ladyship out of doubt what is the cause of my dumpes, so it is that of
late raunging the fields, my heart (my hawke I should say Madame) houered at
such a princely pray, and yet mist of her flight, that since she has neither
prunde her self, nor I taken any pleasure. Marie if the fates should so
favor me, or fortune so shrowde me up in prosperity, that my desire might
obtain her wish, I would not only change my mourning to mirth, my dolor to
delight, and my care to security, but I would think to have gotten as rich a
pray as ever Caesar gaind by conquest.

SUrely Signor Valericus (quoth Melitta) no doubt the pray is passing princely,
since the value thereof is rated at so precious a price, and therefore we have
neither cause to condemn your Hawke of haggardnesse, for want of pruning, nor
you of foolyshnesse for want of pleasure. And if your heart (your hawke I
should say Signor Valericus) has reached farther with her eye, than she is
able to mount with her wing, although I am no skillful Fawlconer, yet I think
you had better keep her on the fist still and so feed her with hope, then let
her miss again of her flight, and so she turn tail and be foiled.

In deed Madame (quoth Valericus) your counsel is very good, for as there is
no better consect to a crazed mind, than hope, so there is no greater corasiue
to a careful man than despair, and the Fawlchoners also iumpe with you in the
same verdite, that the Hawke which misseth her pray, is doubtful to soar
aloof and prove haggard. Yet if she were so tickle, as she would take no
stand, so ramage as she would be reclaymed with no lure, I had rather happily
hazard her for the gayning of so peerless a pray, though I both lost her
and wanted of my wish: than by keeping her still in the Bynes to prove her a
kyte, or me a coward.

In deed Sir (quoth Castania), Fortune ever favors them that are valyant,
and things the more hard, the more haughty, hie and heavenly: neither is any
thing hard to be accomplished, by him that hardelye enterpriseth it. But yet
take heed that you fish not so fair, that at length you catch a Frogge, and
then repentance make you mumble up a mass with Miserere.

No Madame (quoth he) it is never seen that he which is contented with his
chance, should ever have cause to repent him of his choice.

And yet (quoth she) he that buys a thing to dear may be content with his
chaffer, and yet wish he had been more chair.

Truth Madame, (quoth Valericus) but then it is trash and no treasure, for that
which is precious is never ouerprised, and a bad thing though never so cheap
is thought too chargeable.

Oh Sir (quoth Melytta) and is it not an old saying, that a man may buy gold
too dear, and that Jewels, though never so precious may be set at too high
a price. I see if you had no better skill in manning of a Hawke, than in making
of a bargain, you would prove but an ill Fawlchoner. But since we have so
long troubled you with our talk, we will now leave you to your sport, and so bid
you farewell.

Valericus with a courteous Conge repaying their courtesy, and with a
glauncing eye giving his Goddess the doleful A dio, went solytarily into the
secret woods, where laying him down in the shade, he fell into these musing
meditations.

WHat greater prosperity (quoth he) can happen unto any earthlye wight, than
if he be crossed with care, to find a confect to cure his calamity: then if
he be pinched with pains, to get a plaster for his passions: if he be
drenched in distress, to find a means to mitigate his miserye, which I see
by proof performed in my seelye self: for the sight of my Goddess has so
salued my fore-passed sorrows, her sweet words has so healed my heavy
wounds, that where before I was plunged in perplexity, I am now placed in
felicity: where before I was oppressed with care, I am now refreshed with
comfort. O friendly Fortune, if from henceforth thou furiouslye frown upon
me, if thou daunt me with disaster mishappe, or cross me with perpetual
care, yet this thy friendlye courtesy shall be sufficient to counteruayle all
future enormityes.

But alas, I see every prosperous puff has his boisterous blaste, every
sweet has his sower, every weal his woe, every gale of good luck his
storm of sinister Fortune: yea, every commodity his discommoditie annexed:
the blood of the Uiper is most healthful for the sight, and most hurtful for
the stomach, the stone Celonites is very precious for the back, and very
perilous to the brain: the flower of India pleasant to be seen, but who so
smells to it, feels present smart: so as the joy of her presence procures
my delight, the annoye of her absence breeds my despite: yea, the ^eare that
she will not repaye my love with lyking, and my fancy with affection, that she
will not consent to my request, but rather means to stiffle me with the raging
storms of repulse, and daunt me with the doom of deadly denialles, so
fretteth my hapless mind with hellish fury, that no plague, no pain, no
torment, no torture can worse molest me, than to be distressed with this
dreadful despair.

Alas, her calling is too high for me to clymbe unto, her royal state is far
above my reach, her haughty mind is too lofty for me to aspyre: no doubt if
I offer my suit unto her she will prove like the Stone of Silicia, which the
more it is beaten the harder it is: or like the spices of Ionia, which the more
they are pounded the less savor they yield, like to the Isiphilon, which
yields forth no juice though never so well bruised: so, though I should with
never so great devotion offer up at her Shrine, prayers, promises, sighs,
sobbes, tears, troth, faith, freedom, yea, and my heart it self, as a pledge
to plead for pity, yet she would make so small account of these my cares, and
as little regard my ruth and ruin, as Eriphila did her faithful friend
Infortunio.

But oh vilde wretch that I am, why do I thus with out cause condemn
Castania, why do I accuse her of cruelty, in whom reigns nothing but
courtesy? why do I appeach her of coyness, in whom bounty shows small
curiousness?

How frie^dly, how familiarly, yea how faithfully did she talk with me, what a
cheerful countenance did she carry toward me, what sudden glaunces,
what lovely looks, which no doubt are signs that though she repulse me at the
first, she will not refuse me at the last: though she be straight in words, she
will not be strange in mind: though she give me some bitter pills of denial,
it shall be but for the better trial. And shall I then being fed with this
hope prove such a meacocke or a milkesoppe as to be feared with the
tempestuous Seas of aduersitye, when as at lenghth I shall arrive at the Haven
of happy estate: shall I dread to have my ship shaken with some angry
blastes, hoping to be safelye landed on the shore, and so have my share of
that, which the showers of shrewde Fortune for a time has denied me. No, no,
Dulcia non meruit, qui non gustauit amara. He is not worthy to suck the
sweet, which has not first sauoured the sower: he is not worthy to eat the
kernel which has not cracked the shell, he deserves not to have the crown
of victory, which has not abidde the brunt of the Battle: he meriteth not
to possess the pray, whih will not willyngly take some part of the pain:
Neither is he worthy of so heavenly a Dame as Castania, that would not
spend the most precious blood in his body, in the pursuit of so peerless a
piece.

VAlericus thus mittigating his pain with the mild medicine of hope, and
rooting out the dead flesh of despair with the Plaster of trust, determined
to stryke on the Stythe while the iron was hot, and to pursue his purpose
while his Mystresse was in her good mood. And therefore leaving his sport for
this time, hied him to the Court in have: where insinuating himself into the
society of the Ladies and gentlewomen, he showed himself in sport so
pleasant, in talk so witty, in manners so modest, in conceits so cunning, in
parle so pithie, and in all his conversation so comely, that whereas before he
was specially loved of none, now he was generally lyked of all: insomuch that
for a time there was no talk in the Court but of the Metamorphosis of
Valericus mind. Who often times determining in plain terms to present his
suit to Castania, when he came to the point, fear of offense and dread of
denial, disappointed his purpose, that he remained mute in the matter: but at
last perceiving delaie bred danger, seeing his mistress sit alone in his
presence, houering between fear and hope, he began the assault with this
march.

MAdame (quoth he) for that I see you sitting thus solitary in dumps* I am
the bolder to prease in place, although the most unworthy man to supply it.
Hoping you will pardon my rudeness for troubling thus rashly your musing
meditations, and count my company the less offensive in that I see you busied
with no such seryous matters whereunto my presence may be greatly prejudicial.
Cyneas the Philosopher, Madame, was of this mind, that when the Gods made
beauty, they skipt beyond their skill, in that they framed it of greater force
then they themselves were able to resist, if then there is none so wise or
worthy whom beauty cannot wrack, nor none issued of such princely birth,
whom beutie cannot bend, though I have been entangled with the snare of fancy,
and have listened to the lure of beauty, I am the more to be borne with, and
the less to be blamed. For I must of force confess Madame, that the gifts
of nature so abundauntly bestowed upon you, your excellent beutie and exquisite
virtue, have so scaled the walls of my fancy, and sacked the fort of my
freedom, that for my last refuge I am forced to appeal unto your courtesy,
as the only medicine which may cure my intolerable disease. Nay incurable I
may well call it, for (I speak with tears outwardly, and drops of blood
inwardly) unless the missing showers of your mercy mittigate the fire of my
fancy, the drops of your princely favor quench the flame of my affection, and
the guerdon of your good will give a sovereign Plaster for my secret sore, I
am like to pass my life in more misery, then if I had taken the infernal
torments. But I hope it is not possible, that out of a Sugered Fount should
distill a bitter stream, out of a fragraunt flower a filthy sap, and from
such divine beauty should proceed hate and hellish cruelty.

It is Madame your beauty which has wrought my woe, and it is your bounty
which must work my weal. It is your heavenly face which has deprived me of
liberty, and your courteous consent must be the means to redeem me from
captivity: for as he that eats of the Briane leaf, and is infected, can by
no means be cured, unless he taste of the same root: As he which is
wounded of the Porcuntine, can never be healed unless his wounds be washed
with the blood of the same beast, as there is nothing better against the
stingof a Snake, then to be rubbed with an Adders slough, and as he which is
hurt of the Scorpion seek a salve from whom he received the sore, so Love
only is remedied by Love, and fancy by mutual affection: You madame must
minister the medicine, which procured the malady, and it only lies in your
power to apply the plaster which inferred the pain.

Therefore I appeal to your good grace and favor, and at the bar of your
beauty I humbly hold up my hands, resting to abide your sentence, either of
consent unto life, or of denial unto death.

CAstania hearing this solemn discourse of Valericus, was driven into a maze
with this unlooked for motion, musing that he would so far ouershoote
himself, as to attempt so vnlikelye a match, and therefore with disdainefull
countenance she gave gim this daunt.

AS your present ariuall Signor Valericus, does not greatly prejudice my
muses, so I think it will as little profit your motion, and as your company
pleases me regarding the person, so it much misliketh me, respecting the
parle: that your countes being once cast, you shall find your absence might
have more pleasured you, and better contented me. For it is impossible
Valericus to call the Fawlcon to that Lure wherein the pens of a Camelion are
pricked, because she does deadly detest them, it is hard to train the Lion
to that trappe which sauoureth of Diagredium, because he loatheth it. And it is
as impossible to persuade me to enter league with fancy, which am a mortal
foe to affection, and to vow my service to Venus, which am already addicted
to Diana. No, no sir, I mean not to love least I live by the loss, nor to
choose, least my skill being small I repent my chance. She that is free and
willinglye runs into fetters is a fool, and who so becomes captive without
constraint, may be thought either wilful or witles. It is good by other men's
harms to learn to beware, and to look before a man does leap, least in
skipping beyond his skill, he light in the mire. Who so considers the
fickleness of men's affections, and the fleeting fondness of their fading
fancy, who carefully looks at the lyghtnesse of their love, and marketh the
inconstancy of their wavering mind, who reads the records which make
mention of their deep dissemblinges, faithless protestations, false vows,
perjured promises, fained love, and forged flattery: how poor Ariadne was
abused, how Medea was mocked, how Dido was deceived, how Oenone was rejected,
and how Phillis was forsaken, and yet would be allured to the train with such
filthy scraps, I would count her chance too good, were her choice never so
bad. But leaving these necessary doubts, Valericus, I tell you for troth, if
I meant to love, it is not you I mean to like, if affection forced me, it is
not your person I mean to fancy, your patrimony is not sufficent to
counteruaile my parentage, nor your bringing up my birth, and therefore I would
wish you to sow the seed of your suit in a more fertile soil, for in me you
shall find no grafts of grant to grow, nor no consent to be cropped, for I
neither like of your unlikely love, nor mean not to be framed to your fancy.

Valericus being pushed with this Pike, thought it a sign of small courage to
yield at the first foine, and therefore looking more narrowly to his ward, and
gathering himself within his weapon, he stood to his tackeling with this
reply.

MAdame (quoth he) if you condemn me of folly for climing a staff to high,
or accuse me of fondness for laying my love on a person of such princely
parentage, if I seem to make an ill market in cheaping such precious chaffer,
as the price thereof is far above my reach, yet my offense is too small to
bear any weighty penance, since where the fault proceeds of love, there
the pardon ensues of course, but your beauty shall bear all the blame, as
the only spur of this my rash enterprise. For as it is impossible for the
iron to resist the operation of the Adamant, or the sily straw the virtue of
the sucking Ieat, so as impossible it is for a loner to withstand the brunt of
beauty, to freeze if he stand by the flame, or to pervert the laws of
Nature. So that madame if you kn^we what a breach your beauty has made into
my breast, and how deepelye I have shrined the Idol of your person in my
happelesse heart, I assure my self though my person and parentage, my birth
and bringing up be far unfit for such a mate, yet you would deem my love
and loyalty to deserve no less. Loialtie I call it madame, for as all things
are not made of one mould, so all men are not of one mind, as the Serpentine
po^der is quickly kindled, and quickly out, so the Salamander stone once set on
fire can never be quenched, as the soft Wax is apt to receive every
impression, so the hard metal never changes form without melting. Jason
was never so trouthlesse as Troilus was trusty, Paris was never more fickle
then Pyramus was faithful, Aeneas was never so light as Leander was faithful:
And sure Madame, I call the Gods to witness, I speak without faining, that
since your beauty and virtue either by fate or fortune is so deeply shrined in
my heart, if it please you to accept me for your slave or servant, and admit
me so far into your favor, as that I may freely enjoy the sight of your
sweet face, and feed my fancy in the contemplation of your beauty, in liewe
thereof I will repaie such duetifull service, as the betrothed faith of Erasta
to his Persida, shall not compare with the love of Valericus and Castania.

CAstania hearing these perplexed passions proceed from woeful Valericus,
pricked forward to take some remorse of his torments, felt within her mind
a careful conflict between fancy and the fates: love and the destinies,
fancy persuaded her to take pity of his pai^es, the fates forced her to give
him the repulse, Love wished her to return his good will with gain, the
destinyes drove her to deny his request, tossed thus with contrary
cogitations, at last she burst forth into these doubtful speeches.

VAlericus, as I am not altogether to reward thy good will with hate, so I
cannot repaie it with love, because fancy denies me to like: to marie I mean
not, to retain servant I may not. Marie to let thee either to love, or
look, take this for an answer, I neither can nor will.

And with that she went her way, leaving Valericus greatly daunted with this
doubtful answer, with fear and hope so fiercely assailed, that being left
alone, he began thus to consider of his amorous conceits.

IF ever woeful creature had cause to complain his woeful case, then
undoubtedly may I preace for the foremost place, for there is no sorrow more
sower, no torment more terrible, no grief more grievous, no heaviness more
hurtful, then to have desire requited with despite, and good will with hate,
then to like upon hope of courtesy, and to find nothing but hate and hellish
cruelty.

Alas poor Valericus, is thy true love thus triflinglye accounted off, is
this the guerdon for thy good will? Does thy deep desire merit no better
desert, then have thou no choice, but either to dye desperatelye, or else to
live loathsomelye? Why fond fool, do thou count her cruel, that at the
first gives not a free consent? Do thou think her coye that comes not at
the first call, would thou have the match made at the first motion? She
that is won with a word, will be lost with a Wind, the Hawke that bates at
every cast of the Lure, will never be steadfast on the stand, the woman that
frames her will to every wish, will prove but a wild wanton. No, no,
Valericus, let not her denials daunt thee, let not the sower taste of her talk
quat thy queasie stomach, conster all things at the best, though her censure
was very severe, yet she knitte up her talk with a courteous close. The
hound which at the first default gives over the chase, is called but a curre.
The Knight that finding the first encounter combersome, gives over the quest,
is counted but a coward, and the lover that at the first denial is daunted
with despair, is neither worthy to obtain his desire, nor enjoy his desert.
And with that he floung out of his Chamber, both to avoid the melancholy
which tormented his mind, and see if he could have a sight of his Goddess.

But Castania altogether unwilling to parle with her new patient, kept her
self out of his sight, which Valericus espying, was no whit amazed, but like a
valiant Soldier gave the fort a fresh assault with a new kind of battery,
seeking to obtain that with writing, which he could not gain with words, and
therefore speedely framed a letter to this effect.

Signor Valericus to the Lady Castania, health.
THere is no creature (madame Castania) so bereaved of reason, or deprived of
sense, which being oppressed with direful calamities, finds not by mere
instinct of nature, a present medicine for his malady, man only excepted,
who by reason of this want, may iustlye accuse the injurious Gods of
injustice. The Tiger though never so deadly wounded tastes the root of
Tamariske, and is presently cured: The Dear being stricken though never so
deep, feeds on the herb Dictamum, and forthwith is healed: the Lion
salueth his sickness by eating the Sea woolfe, and* the Unicorne recouereth
his health by swallowing up the buddes of a Date tree. But man being crossed
with care, or oppressed with grief, pinched with fancy, or perplexed with
Love, finds no Herb so wholesome, no medicine so mild, no Plaster so
perfect, nor no Salve so sovereign, which by their secret virtues can appease
his passions. Which madame I know by proof, and now speak by experience,
for your divine beauty and secret virtue, the perfection of your body and
the bounty of your mind, has kindled such a flaming fire in my hapless
heart, that by no means it may be quenched, but will turn my body into
dry earth and sinders, unless by the drops of your pity it be speedelye
redressed. Then Madame your beauty is my bale, let it be my bliss, since it
has wrought my woe, let it work my weal, and let not my faithful service
and loiall love be recompensed with such rigorous refusalls. Strive not for my
life, since you have my liberty, seek not my death, since you are the Saint
to whom I offer up my devotion. But good madame, let the sweet Balm of your
benevolence salve the sore which so painefully afflicts my careful
conscience, and with the deaw of your grace redeem him from most hellish
misery, whose life and death stands in your answer, which I hope shall be
such as belongs to the desert of my love, and the show of your beauty.

Yours if he be Don Valericus.


VAlericus having thus finished his letter, sent it with as much speed as
might be by his Page to Castania, who finding her at convenient leisure, with
most reverent duty delivered it. Castania at the first sight coniecturing the
contents with scorneful looks and disdainful countenance unripped the
seals, where seeing and reading his deep devotion, she perceived that his
affection was no less in deed, than he professed in word, she
notwithstanding would take no remorce of his torment, but to drive him more
into doleful dumpes, she returned him this dampe.

Castania, to Signor Valericus.
AS it is impossible (Signor Valericus) to strain moist licour out of the dry
flint, to procure flaming heat in that which already is nipped with chilling
cold, to force the sturdie streams to run against their common course, so as
hard it is to win unwilling love, either with tears, for truth. For if thy
birth and patrimony could counteruaile my parentage, if my Father were
content to knitte up the knotte, yet neither his command nor thy entreaty
should not make me to choose without my own love or liking. Since then thou
art the man, whom I rather loath than like, cease from thy suit, make a
virtue of necessity, and assuage the flame thy self, which no other will
quench. By importunate persisting in thy purpose where no hope is, thou
proouest thy self rather a desperate sotte than a discreet soldier. To
hoppe against the Hill, is extreme fondness, to strive against the stream
mere follye, then Valericus avoid the one and eschew the other: for if thou will seek to gain my good will,


thou shalt turn the endless stone with Sisiphus, and therefore take my
nay for an answer. For if I would I can not, and if I could I will not. And
so farewell.

No way yours, Castania.


VAlericus having received this rigorous Letter from ruthlesse Castania, seeing
with what great disdain she rejected his dutiful devotion, and how with coye
countenance and lowering looks she rewarded his loyal love, he began with
reason somewhat to repress his rage, and with wisdom to redress his
witless follye, for comparing her cruelty with his own courtesy, and her
wilful disdain with his willing duty, his disordinate desire began not
only to decay, but his extreme love turned to extreme hate, in so much that
forced with despite, he sent her in revenge these raging lines.

Valericus the despised, to despitefull Castania.
DIogenes being demanded why so extreamelye he hated women, answered,
because (quoth he) they be women: so if thou ask of me why so rudely I rail
against thy recklesse folly, I answer, because thou art Castania, whose
merciless mind is so misledde with ingratitude, and whose currish nature is
foiled with careless inconstancy, that like Menechmus Supreptus his wife,
thou do not begin to love, ere again thou seek t^ hate. Thou playest
Castania like the young Eagles, which being hatched up by the Bird Osyphaga,
never seek to pearke on loftye Mountes, but to sit in durtye Dales, and like
the greedy kyte


which leaves the sweet flesh, to pray on the stinking carrion. But why do
I so far forget my self? Is she to be blamed that leaves her choice to
have a better chance, or is the Fawlchon to be accused of bastardie, that
leaves the Starlyng to pray on the Lark? No: and no doubt such is thy case,
for if it be true that all speaks, or at the least suspecteth, thou art like
by thy lovers Parentage to become a great Potentate: for if arms be the
bewrayer of ancient discentes, no doubt he is come of an old house.

Yea, thy Father Orlanio may rejoice if he live to see the day that his
Daughter shall be so well wedded as to such a wranglyng Wisarde. But Pasiphae
preferred a Bull before a King, and Venus a smeered Smith before Mars the God
of Battle. Tush, Psomneticus was Father to Rhodopes Children, whosoever
begatte them, and that Cloak is of a course spinning, that cannot keep off
the rain. Farewell.

Living he hopes to revenge thy injuries. Woeful Valericus.


CAstania no sooner had read these despitefull lines of Valericus, but her
mind fried with the flames of fury, and her breast boiled with raging wrath,
in such sort, that she could not be in quiet nor take any rest, she busied her
self so carefully in studying with what kind of revenge she might best wreake
her wrath upon him, and requite his spiteful speeches. At last womanlike,
she found her tongue the best wepon, and with that she plagued him in this
sort.

Castania to Valericus, neither health nor good hap.
THE Mastiffe Dog Valericus, can never queste like a Spaniell, but he must
always bark like a Curre, it is natural for the Pie to chatter, for the Iaye
to iangle, and for thee to rail and rage like a frantic fool. Dooest thou
(think Valericus) by brauling like a beggar to become a king, or by thy
moodlesse follye to obtain my favor, no, as I know thy knauerie, so I pass
not for thy bravery: neither can those vaunts stand for payment, where the
party is prickte for a peevish paltring patch. It is no marvel if thy doggish
letters sauoure of Diogenes doctrine, for in troth thou art such a Cinicall
kind of Dun^e, that thy fond felicity is in biting bitterly those, whom
otherwise thou can not revenge. In deed gentle Balaams Ass, if I had been
so light as to have loved you, I might iustlye have been accused to have been a
Curre or a Kystrell, for in faith she that feeds her fancy on thy face, may
only reap this profit to fill her eyes full with the figure of a fool. For
my lovers Arms Valericus they are imblased in such a coat, as it is hard for
thee to controwle. But I know thou boastest y^ thou have gotten thy Antiquity
by conquest, and keep thy Letters patentes in the beggars bor^. Thus adieu
Sir Dunce, the more you mislike me, the better I love my self.

Thy detested foe, Castania.


VAlericus his heart was so hardened with hate, as he was nothing dismayed with
this rigorous reply, but thought himself half satisfied, that he had thus

kindly touched her to the quick, praying the Gods, that since it was not in his
possibility to make any sufficient revenge, they would by some sinister means
requite her cruelty. But leaving him to his dumpes, at last to Gwydonius, who
besides the beauty of his body, and the bounty of his mind (whereat all
Alexandria wondered, had by good government and perfect practice, obtained such
a dexterity in all things, as in feats of arms no man more forward, in
exercise none more active, in play none more polliticke, in parle none more
pleasant, amongst his ancients very wise, amongst the youthful who more
merry: so that there was no time, person, nor place, whereto he aptly applied
not himself: insomuch that he entered into such favor and familyaritie with
Thersandro and Castania, that he was the only man whose company they desired
to enjoy. But especially Castania, who by casting a gazing glaunce some time
upon the beauty of Gwydonius, felt a certain restraint of liberty in her
affections, an alteration of mind, and as it were a civil assault within her
self: but having small practice in the pangs of love, she could not
conjecture the secret cause of these her soda^^e passions, thinking that as it
was a toye lyghtlye taken, so it would as lightly be left: and upon this still
she rested, conceiving only an ordinary kind of liking toward Gwydonius.

Who bathing thus in the streams of bliss, and safely harbored in the haven
of happiness, wanting nothing which might content his mind, either for
pleasure or profit, thought it a point of mere folly, either to seek or wish
for more than enough, knowing that to strain further than the sleeue would
stretch, was but to make the arm bare, and to skippe beyond a man's skill, was
to leap, but not to know where to light: to avoid therefore hastiness in
hazarding, he fell a slumber in the careless seat of securite.

But as it is impossible for a man to sleep by the Uiper and not be
inuenomed, to gaze upon the Cockatrice and not be infected, to stare upon the
Sun and not be dazeled, to look upon Medusas head and not be transformed,
to wade in the waves and not be drenched, to handle coals and not be
scorched, so it was as impossible for young Gwydonius to gaze upon the beauty
of Castania and not be galled, to fire his eyes upon her feature and not be
fettered, to see her virtuous qualyties and not be inueigled: for her
courtesy had so incountered him, her modesty had so amazed him, and her
charie chastity so inchaunted him, that whereas he came to Orlanio his Court
free from affection, he was now become a seruyle Slave to Fancy, before a
foe to Lust, now a friend to Love: yea, he felt such an alienation of his
senses, and such a strange Metamorphosis of his mind, as reason was turned
to rage, mirth to mourning, joy to annoye, delight to despite, weal to woe,
bliss to bale: in fine, such contrary passions so perplexed this doubtful
Patient, as maugre his face, he yielded the Fort to fancy, and pulde in the
former flagge of defiaunce, entreated for truce, and began to enter parle
with Cupide on this manner.

O Gwydonius (quoth he) what strange chance, nay, what rare change, what
sollempne motion, nay, what sudden madness, what foolish frenzy, or rather
what frantic affection has possessed thee?

Is thy lawless liberty turned to a slavish captivity? Is thy freedom
fettered? Are thy senses besotted? Is thy wit inueygled? Werte thou of late a
defier of Venus, and art thou now a defender of vanity. Did thou of late
renounce beauty as a foe, and will thou now embrace her as a friend. Is this
the careful keeping of thy Fathers commandment, or is this thy diligent
duty in observing the counsel of thy old Sire Clerophontes? Have thou so
soon forgotte his fatherlye precepts, or committed to oblyuion his friendlye
advertisement? Did he carefully warn thee to beware of Love, and will thou
carelessely wedde thy self to Lust? Did he show thee what poisoned ban^ is
hidden under the painted baits of beauty, and will thou be haled to the hook?

O hapless case: nay rather, if the charye charge thy Father gave thee, will
be no constraint, if his counsel will not command thee, if his warning will
not make thee wary, nor his advice be thy advertisement: yet let imminent
perils, and ensuing dangers be a precious preservative against future
calamities. Consider with thy self Gwydonius, what difference is between
freedom and bondage, between liberty and captivity, mirth and mourning,
pleasure and pain, rest and care, happiness and heaviness: and so far
does he which is free from affection differ from him which is fettered in
fancy.

Why but Gwydonius, why do thou thus recklesly rage against reason? Why
do thou thus fondly exclayme against thine own welfare? Why do thou
condemn thy self of that crime whereof thou art not guyltie.

Thy Father warned thee to beware of fickle fancy, but this thy lyking is
firm affection. His counsel was to persuade thee from lewd lust, but not
from lawful love, from vanity, not from virtue: yea, his will was to wish
thee from lykeing such a lewd minion, who had neither birth, wealth nor virtue,
but a little fading beauty to be either her credit or thy countenance, not to
warn thee from loving such a chaste maiden, nay a peereles Princess, whose
birth may countenance thy calling, whose power may promote thee, whose livings
may enrich thee, whose virtue may advance thee: yea, in obtaining whom, thou
shall gain both honor, and perhaps the inheritance of a Dukedom.

Do thou think then Gwydonius in winning so worthy a piece, to purchase
thy Fathers displeasure, nay assure thy self he will not only be content
with thy chance, but he will think thou have run a happier race, than
Hyppomanes did in winning Atlanta. Content with thy chance? Why Gwydonius art
thou so fond a fool, as to count the Castle conquered, that as yet thou have
not compassed: to suppose the City sacked, which thou have not beseeged: to
think the bulwark beaten, which as yet thou have not battered: or to count
the Lady won, whom as yet thou have not wooed. Nay Gwydonius, if thou weigh
thy case in the equal Ballaunce, thou have more cause of fear than of hope,
of doubt than of assurance, of myssing thy pretense, than of obtaining thy
purpose.

The Fawlchon ( Gwydonius seldom perketh with the Merlyne, the Lion seldom
lodges with the Mouse, the Heart seldom feeds with the Pricket, Aquila non
capit Muscas, and a Dame endued with Nobility, vouchsafes not to match with a
man of mean Gentilitie. Of mean Gentilitie Gwydonius? yea truly, for
Castania rather thinks thee sprung of some poor peasaunt, than of any
princely personage.

Besides, alas Fortune her self denies me any such favor, my good will as
yet has deserved no such gwerdon, my desire is far above my deserts, my
ambition above my condition, and the poor stay of wandering Gwydonius far
unfit for the princely state of worthy Castania. But put case she did will as
I did, wish that she were pricked in ye same vein, caught in the same snare,
trapped with the like train, and fired with the like fancy, yet the Duke her
father will neither condescend to her mind, nor consent to my motion, neither
think well of her liking nor of my love, nay if he should but once hear of
such recklesse folly, as he has wrought my promotion, so he would work my
confusion, as he has been my friend, so he would be my foe, and in troth
Gwydonius not without cause, for art thou so void of virtue, or vowed to vice,
so nursed up in vanity, or nusled up in villainy, as to requite his
liberality with such disloialtie, to return the trust which he reposeth in
the^ with such treason. Tush, Love is above Lord or Law, friend or faith.
Where Love leads, no master is made account off: no king cared for, no
friend forced off, no duty respected, but all things done according to the
quality y^ is predominant. Why Gwydonius, what doubts are these that thou thus
dreamest on? Why do thou cast beyond the Moon, and fear before thou art in
danger to fall: knowing that Love and Fortune desires not them that are
dastards, nor cares not for them that are cowardes. The Captain that retireth
from the walls before he has the repulse, shall never return a conqueror,
the Soldier that faints before the battle be fought, shall never vaunt
himself of victory. He that fears every tempest is not fit to be a
trauailer. He that doubts every wave shall never prove a perfect Pylot, and
he that in love dreadeth every chip of mischance, may well encounter, but
never obtain the conquest.

Since then Gwydonius, hardy venturing is a sign of happy victory, sound out
the march with the trumpet of trust, begin the assault, give the onset. Lay
the battering pieces of love, against the bulwark of beautye, and no doubt thy
success shall be such as thou shall triumph with Caesar and say, Veni, Vidi,
Vici. And art thou so presumptuous fond fool, as to promise thy self the
conquest, know thou not that the path of love is perilous. And with that he
fell into such melancholic passions, such contrary cogitations, such
doubtful thoughts, such fearful supposes, that as he which cateth of the
Goorde root loses his memory, and as the Elephaunt when he eats of the
Helitropion leaf, is then very sleepie, so Gwydonius was so perplexed with
these unacquainted passions, that contrary to his custom he had driven
mirth into mourning, pleasant conceits into painful cares, laughing into
lowering, singing into sorrow, as being thus besotted to solace himself, he
went into a Park adjoining to the Dukes Palace, where sitting under the shade
of a beech tree, leaning his head on his hand, he lay as one in a slumber.
But Fortune willing somewhat to favor this young Nouice, brought it so to
pass, that Tersandro, Valericus, Castania and Melytta, with diverse other
gentlemen, were for recreation sake, raunging in ye same Park, who espying
ghostly Gwydonius ^itting as one in a trance, Castania passing before the
rest, pulling him by the sleeue, drove him thus out of his dumpe.

WHy how now Gwydonius (quoth she) are you dreaming or doubting, or is your
mind musing upon some metaphusicall motions, that you sit thus as a man half
mortified, your solemn iesture makes me remember the picture of Pigmalion,
which once I saw portrayed out by a skillful painter, who leaning his head on
his Marble mistres, (that so unfeignedly he loved) sat with his^eyes as one in
a slumber, having his face notwythstanding so bedewed with brinish tears, as
his outward plaintes did sufficiently bewraie his inward passions. In truth
Gwydonius I had taken thee for Pigmalion, if thou had had tears as thou
were in a trance, for thou do not greatly differ from him neither in
countenance nor color, well if it were but a dream Gwydonius, that thus
combred thy conscience, or a doubt that made thee thus dumpish, I will divine
the one if it be not to dark, or decide the other, if it be not too secret,
marie if the case be combersome, I leave it to the judgment of these Gentlemen.

GWydonius wakened out of his musing slumber with this sugured harmony, seeing
before his eyes his gorgeous Goddess, the very Saint, at whose shrine he was
offering up scalding sighs, far fetched sobbes, plaintes, prayers, and
protestations, was so appalde with her presence, that as the Basiliske loses
his senses with the sight of a naked man, as the Torteise seeing the North
star is benumbed, as the Hermeline looking on the stone Echites is greatly
amazed, so Gwydonius seeing the incomperable beauty of his best beloved
Castania, was so astonished, yea, so inchaunted with the rare perfection of
this heavenly Pallas, that as one besotted he sat senseless, not being able
to utter one word, until at length revived with the view of her cheerful
countenance, he repaide her with this pleasant answer.

MAdame (quoth he) whereas iestingly you say, that at the first sight you had
taken me for perplexed Pigmalion by my pitiful plaintes and careful
countenance, but that I wanted trickeling tears to decypher my sorrow, I
answer, that woe may very well be without watrie wailinges, for when the
Stone Garatides fryeth without, it freezeth within, the Germaunder leaf, when
it is most full of moisture, looks then most dry, where the stream is most
deep, there it is most still, and where is the smallest show of tears, there
is the greatest sign of sorrow. And also I call the heavens to witness, that
when you wakened me out of my dream by your divine eloquence, I took you
either for beauty to be Venus, for comeliness to be Pallas, or for port and
honor to be Juno, so that both your presence and courtesy daunted my mind,
your presence in dazeling my eyes so suddenly with so solemn a sight, your
courtesy, in that your Ladyship without curiosity would vouchsafe to talk
with so mean a Gentleman. But Madame, since that I perceive your skill in
navigations to be great, in that you made so cunning a conjecture, and without
any great aiming, so rightly hitte the mark, to put you out of doubt, I
confess I was both in a dream and a doubt, wherein since it pleases your
honor to take so much pain, I will crave your aid to divine the one, and
decide the other.

The Dream.
I Was walking (Madame Castania) in my dream, (as I supposed) solitarily by
the sea side, where, as I took delight to see the Dolphins leap (which as the
Mariners say is a sign of imminent tempest) I forthwith espied a rock in the
sea, whereupon stood a Lady araied with roabes of burnisht gold* so formed
and framed, so adorned and decked with the gifts of Nature, as at the first I
took her to be Thetis, that had so gorgeouslye clad her self, to welcome
home her lover and Lord Neptunus. But viewing her countenance more narrowly, I
perceived her to be a mortal creature (though unworthy such divine beauty
should be shrouded in the substance of an earthly carcass) which so inflamed
my affection, so fired my fancy, and sp kindled my desire, that the torments
of Tantalus, the torture of Ixion, the sorrow of Sisiphus, were not half
comperable to the perplexed passions that pinched my hapless heart, when I
saw all hope cut away from inioying this earthly Goddess, the sea which
compassed the rock was so deep and dangerous, the cliffes so steep-downe and
fearful, as to descend was no less danger then death it self, thus as I
surged in grief, and wandered up and down in woe, I spied a bridge a far
off, whereby was a passage to the rock, which sight so salued my forepassed
sorrow, and so revived my daunted mind, as I was driven into an ecstasy for
joy, to see so good means to enjoy my wished desire. Coming to the bridge, I
found it built of glass so cunningly, and so curiously, as if Nature her self
had sought to purchase credit by framing so curious a piece of workmanship. But
yet so slenderly, as ye least weight was able to pash it into innumerable
pieces, and underneath the bridge did run so terrible a sea, such bouncing
billows, such tumbling waves, such fearful surges, such roaring stremes,
such hideous goulfs, as it made the passage seem a thousand times more
perilous. This terrible sight was such a cooling Card to my former conceits,
as hope was turned to fear, bliss to bale, and supposed happiness to assured
heaviness. And yet my fancy was not quenched, but rather far the more
inflamed, my desire was not diminished, but augmented, and my liking no less,
but rather enlarged, so that to live in love without hope was loathsome, to
seek redress was loss of life, to want my wish was horror, to enjoy my will
was hell, to live in care without comfort was calamity, to seek for cure was
more the misery, not to possess ye pray was hellish danger, to venture for
the prize was haples death. Thus crossed with cares, and daunted with such
diverse doubts, desperate hope so repulsed direful fear, y^ encouraged by
ventrous desire, I had either obtained my wish, or wanted of my will, if your
Ladyshippe had not so suddenly wakened me out of my slumber. Thus madame
Castania, you have heard my dream, now the doubt is, whether it had been better
to have ventured upon the brickle bridge, and so either desperately to have
ended cares with death, or else valiantly to have inioyed desire with renown,
or still like a fearful dastard to have ended my days in lingering love with
myserie.

Castania hearing the surmised dream of Gwydonius, both smelled the fetch, and
smiled at the folly of this young youth, knowing that these fantastical
visions and presupposed passions, would in time (if he took not heed) prove
but too true, to prevent therefore such imminent perils, she nipt her young
nouice on the pate with this parle.

GWydonius (quoth she) I have listened to thy drousie dream, with deep
devotion, by so much the more desirous attentively to hear it, by how much
the more I find it strange and wonderful: yea, so strange as if I my self
had not wakened thee out of thy slumber, I would either have thought it a
fained vision, or a fantastical invention, but since these Gentlemen here
present and mine own eyes are witnesses, and thine own tongue a testimony of
thy talk, suffice I believe it, though I can not divine it: to give a verdit
where the evidence is not understood is vanity, to yield a reason of an
unknown case is mere folly, and to interpret so strange a dream without
great practice is but to skip beyond my skill, and so lay fast in the mire. Yet
least I might seem to promise much and perform nothing, I will decide your
doubt if you please to take my doom for a censure.

It is a saying Gwydonius, not so common as true, that the hasty man never
wantes woe, and that he which is rash without reason, seldom or never
sleeps without repentance. To venture amiddest the Pikes when perils cannot
be ^schewed, is not fortitude but folly, to hazard in dangers, when death
ensues is not to be worthily minded, but wilfully moved. Virtue always
consists between extremities, that as too much fearfulness is the sign of
a quaking coward, so too much rashness betokens a desperate Ruffian.
Manhood Gwydonius consists in measure and worthynesse, in fearing to hazard
without hope. But to give a verdite by thine own voice, I perceive thou art
guilty of the same crime, for when the bricklenesse of the Bridge portended
death, and the surging Seas inferred loss of life, yet desire drove thee to
adventure so desperate a danger. Better it is Gwydonius to live in grief,
then to die desperatelye without grace: better to choose a lingering life in
misery, then a speedy death without mercy, better to be tormented with
hapless fancy then with hellish fiends, for in life it is possible to
repress calamity, but after death never to redress misery. Tully Gwydonius
in his Tusculans questions, discoursing of the happiness of life and
heaviness of death, says, that to live we obtain it of the loving Gods, but
to die, of the unlucky destinies: meaning hereby, that life though never so
loathsome, is better then death, though never so welcome: whereby I conclude
Gwydonius, that to live carfully, is better then to die desperately.

Gwydonius perceiving that Castanias parle was nothing to the purpose, and that
she touched not that point whereof he desired most to be absolved, but meant
to shake him off with a flee^elesse answer, began to draw her to the
Trappe with this train*

MAdame Castania (quoth he) I confess that rashness never reigns without
repentance, nor hasty hazarding without hapless harms, that he which
aduentureth desperate dangers is a fool, and he that passes inevitable
perils is worse then an Ass: Yet from these so general rules Madame, I
exempt these particular exceptions, namely Love and Necessity, which two are
tied wtin no bonds, nor limited within no law, for whom ye devil drives he
must needs run, be the passage never so perilous: and whom Love or Necessity
forces, he must venture be the danger never so desperate: for as there is no
enterprise so easy which to an unwilling man seems not very hard to be
achieved, so there is no encounter so combersome where will wishes, that
seems not passing easy to be performed, now this will is with nothing
sooner pricked forward, then either with the force of Love, or sting of
necessity. So that whosoever aduentureth in a danger, though never so
desperate, is not to be blamed, if enforced by fancy, or encouraged by
affection, and especially where the peril is in possibilytie to be passed
without death, and in the performaunce thereof, the possession of such a prise
as the passionate person more esteems then lands, limbs, or life it self,
be it never so sweet. In which case madame my cause consists. For the Lady
who was an heavenly object to my glasing eyes, was so beautified with the
gifts of nature, and so perfectly pollished with more then natural
perfection, that with the only view of such divine beutie, my senses were so
besotted, my wit and will so inueigled, my affection so inflamed, and any
freedom so fettered, yea, Love already had made so great a breach into the
bulwark of my breast, that to obtain so gorgeous a Goddess, I thought death
no danger, though never so direful, nor loss of life no torment, though
never so terrible.

In deed Gwydonius quoth Thersandro, I agree with thee in this point, that
there is no carpet Knight so cowardly that would not pass most perilous pikes
to possess so lively a Dame as thou do decypher, nor no dastard so daunted
with dread which would not greatly endanger himself to enjoy so lovely a
damsel, in y^ fruition of whom consists nothing but joy, bliss, rest,
contentation of mind, delight, happiness, yea, all earthlye felicity.

And yet Sir (quoth Gwydonius) your sister Castania condemns me of follye, in
ventring for so precious a price, when as hope persuaded me, that no hazard
could be haples, and assured me that Love and Fortune favors them that are
bold: that the Gods themselves seeing my perplexed passions, would of pity
defend me from those perilous dangers. For if Theseus by Divine power were
aided against the force of the monstrous Minotaure, or if Jason, who
constrained with a covetous desire to obtain the golden Fleece, arryuing at
Colchos, was preserved by the Gods, from the dint of the deadly Dragons, no
doubt Jupiter himself would either have made the staggering bridge more
strong (considering that no hope of wealth, no desire of riches, no greediness
of gain, no love of lucre, but beauty her self was the victory I meant to
vaunt of,) or else if I had sowsed in the roaring Seas, he would have
provided some happy Dolphin, that Arion like, I might arrive at the desired
Rock: and then my dangers should have been turned into delight, my perilles
into pleasures, my hazarding into happiness: yea, I should have possessed that
heavenly paragon, and enjoyed the love of that louelye Venus, whose only
sight were a sufficient salve, against all fore-passed sorrows.

Stay there Master Gwydonius (quoth the Lady Melytta) for I see to grant one
false proposition, is to open a door to innumerable absurdities, and that by
suffering you too long, of these supposed premises, you will infer some
cauillyng conclusion to your former reasons: thus I replye. That I confess
necessity to have no law, but I grant not the same of Love: for if it be
lawless, it is lewd: if without lymittes, lascivious: if contained within no
bounds, beastlye: if observed with no order, odious: so that lawless Love
without reason, is the very Lodestone to ruth and ruin.

Since then Master Gwydonius as your self affirm, this was the prick that
pusht you into peril, how can the effect be good, when the cause was naught,
or how can you clearkly defend your desperate motion, proceeding of such a
fond and foolish occasion. But it was the perfection of her comelye person,
her exquisite feature, and rare beauty, that so kindled thy desire, and so
bewitched thy senses: for, who is so fearful that beauty will not make
bold? who so doubtful, that beauty will not make desperate? yea, what so
hard that a man will not hazard, to obtain so divine a thing, as beauty.

Oh Gwydonius, have thou not heard the Fish Remora lystening to the sound of
a Trumpet is caught of the Fishers, that while the Porcupine stands staring
at the glymmering of the stars, he is ouer-taken with dogs, that the Dear
gazing at the bow is stricken with the bolte, that the Leoparde looking at the
Panthers painted skin is taken as a pray, and that he which takes too much
delyght to gaze upon beauty, is oftentimes galled with grief and misery.
Yea, his pleasure shall infer such profit, and his good will such gain, as
if he reapte the beautiful apples of Tantalus, which are no sooner touched, but
they turn to ashes.

Beauty Gwydonius, no sooner flourishes but it fades, and it is not fullye
ripe before it begin to rot: it no sooner blossometh but it withers, and
scarcelye being touched it stayneth, like to the Guyacum leaf, that has the
one half parched, before the other half be perfect: to the Bird Acanthis,
which hatched white, yet tourneth black at the first storm: or like to the
Stone Astites, that changes color with the only breath of a man.

If then Gwydonius, Beauty be so fading, so fickle, so momentarie, so moving,
so withering, so waning, so soon passed, and so soon parched: is this the
Jewel, which you count more dear than life? and the Iemme which you think
worthy to be purchased with the danger of death? No doubt Gwydonius, if you
won the victory, you might vaunt of a great Conquest, and if your long hope
were repayed with a great hap, it should be much like to his, which
thinking to embrace Juno, caught nothing but a vanishing cloud.

You do well Madame (quoth Castania) to put an If, in it, because he that
vaunteth of victory before he has won the field, may prove himself a
fool: he that bragges of gains before the accounts be cast, may perhaps
put his winnings in his eyes: and he that blows the Mort before the fall of
the Buck, may very well miss of his fees: so he that counts himself a speeder
before he be a wooer, shows himself a vain person or a vaunting patch.

Might it not be I pray you Master Gwydonius, that passing the bridge scaping
the dangerous seas, and happily arriving at the desired Rock, yet you might
miss of your purpose? Yes forsooth: for many a man bends his bow, y^ never
kills his game, lays y^ strap y^ never catches the foul, pitcheth the Net
that never gets the fish, and long time are heavy wooers that never prove
happy speeders.

So perhaps Gwydonius you might be crossed with a chippe of the same
mischaunce, and the gorgeous Dame whom you adore for a Goddess might repaye
your liking with loathing, your love with hate, your good will with despite and
your fixed fancy with small affection, either that she lyked you too little,
or loved another too much. All these doubts Gwydonius are carefullye to be
cast, and wisdom it is to fear the worst, and find the best: but you Sir
like a lusty champion, think a Lady won at the first look, and the good
will of women gained at the first glaunce, thinking the Gods themselves are to
be accused of injustice, if they be not ayders to your enterprise, insomuch
that if in ventring over the perilous passage, you had by disaster Fortune
fallen into the dangerous Seas, you doubted not but that Jupiter would have
sent a Dolphin, that Arion like you might escape the fearful surges: but
Gwydonius be not so ventrous, least though you harp very long, you get not
the like hap. These premises considered, if my censure might stand for a
sentence, I deem it better to be counted a dastardly coward, than a desperate
caitife, better to forsake your Goddess, than your God, better to live pinched
with a few momentarie passions, than with desperate death to destroy both soul
and body: for there is no sore such which in time may not be salued, no care
such which cannot be cured, no fire so great which may not be quenched, no
love, liking, fancy, or affection, which in time may not either be repressed,
or redressed.

Valericus hearing this rough replye of Castania, supposed that although she
leuelled at Gwydonius, yet she shot at him, and fearing the fort should be too
much shashaken with this fearce assault, he stiffly defended the walls with
this fresh Alarm.

MAdam quoth he, I se you will sit nigh the walls ear you be thrust out for a
wrangler, and that you will speak against your own conscience, but you will
have the conquest: for my own part Madame, howsoever I seem to like it, I
will not say I mislike it, but I am sorry you Madame Melitta should so
blasphemouslye imblaze the Arms of beauty, and so recklesselye rail against
the sacred laws of love: sake heed^ for crossing Cupid so crabbedlye, for
though he forgive and forget, Venus is a woman, and will s^eke revenge.

Valericus (quoth she) take no care what danger I incur for speaking the
truth, if I chance to be harmed, it is mine own mishap, and for Venus
revenge I care for it the less because I fear it not: if I speak against my
self, you may see I am the fitter to be a Judge, because I am not partial,
nor have any respect of persons.

These quippes Madame (quoth Gwydonius) are nothing to the purpose, therefore
in the behalf of my self and beauty thus I answer. That as there is nothing
that so soon procures a man to loath as deformity, so there is nothing which
sooner persuades a man to love than beauty, for the most precious stone is
chosen by the most glystering hiew, the purest gold by the most perfect
color, the best fruit by the brauest blossoms, and the best conditions by
the sweetest countenance, so that where beauty raineth, there virtue
remains, and under a fair face rests a faithful heart. Since then beauty
and bounty cannot be parted, what man is he so brutish, whom the least of
these will not make to break or bend?

And whereas you condemn me of vanity for vaunting before the victory, I say,
that if fortune had so favored me, that I had gained the presence of my
Goddess, I would never have doubted to have obtained my desire: for if she had
seen the desperate danger which I adue^tured, and the fearful perilles
which I passed for her sake, she could not but of conscience, repaye my love
with unfeigned loyalty, and my good will with treble gain. And in troth I
think it impossible, that such heavenly beauty should be eclypsed with
crueltye, and such perfect comeliness be blemesht with curious coyness.

Why Gwydonius (quoth she) do thou call it cruelty, not to condiscende to
the request of every one that wooeth, or do thou term it coyness not to
yield to the assault of every flattering Lover, then in my judgment it were
good for every woman to be both cruel and coye, that by cruelty she might
avoid the train of trothlesse wooers, and by coyness ^schewe the troop of
faithless suitors.

And so Madame (quoth Valericus) she should reap small comfort and less
credit.

Tush Signor Valericus (quoth Gwydonius) it pleases her thus merelye to jest,
whereas I know she does account more of a courteous Dame, than of a curyous
Damsel, and that her Ladishippe so detesteth the name of crueltye, that she
would be loath to be thought to have a mind deuoyde of mercy. And in troth
to leave these particular instaunces, women in general, or for the most part,
are bountiful, courteous, sober, chaste, demure, not imbrued with vice, but
endued with virtue: so that by how much women's bodies are weaker than men's, by
so much their minds are more strong and virtuous.

What Gwydonius (quoth she) do you think to be a freeman in Wales, for
offering a leeke to Saint Dauie, or to bring Pan into a fools Paradise, by
praising his Pipe.

Not so Madame (quoth he) but I hope in extollyng a Soldiers life to have
Saint George to my friend, and in giving verdit with Venus to gain her good
will, and to reap the reward that Paris had for his censure.

Marie sir (quoth Castania) if you have no better gettings, you may gain long
enough, and yet live by the loss: for in obtaining one friend, you shall reap
two foes as Paris did, who was more plagued by Pallas and Juno, than pleasured
by flattering Venus.

And yet Madam (quoth he) his mishap shall not make me to beware: for if Venus
would grant me but one Lady in the world, whom most entirely I love, I would
neither respect Pallas, Juno, nor Diana her self, were she never so
despitefull.

Yes but you would (quoth she) if she pinched you but with Acteons plague, to
pester your head with as many horns as a Har^. It would cause you conjecture
your new Mistress were too much given to the game, or that thou were come from
Cornetto by descent.

Tush Madame (quoth he) do you count Acteons hap such a great harm, the only
sight in seeing Diana naked, was a recompense for all his ensuing sorrows, and
if my self might inioye my wish, and obtain the heavenly Dame that so heartily
I desire, the plague of Acteon, nay ye griping grief^, ye ghostly spirits do
suffer, should not counteruaile the joy I should conceive in inioying so
peerless a Jewel.

Truly (quoth Thersandro) thou art worthy Gwydonius to be a chapman, that thou
bids so well for thy chaffer, and in my mind she is not in Alexandria, who for
her beauty is so to be loved, or at ye least would deem thee not worthy to be
liked. But leuing these amorous discourses, let us hye us in have to the Court,
least in tarrying Orlanio misse^ us, and so we be shent. The company obaying
the mind of Thersandro, passed as speedely as might be to the Pallaice, where
being arrived, they departed every man to his own lodging.

Castania had no sooner conveyed her self closely into her chamber, but her
mind was moved with a thousand sundry motions, and she felt such a cruel
conflict in her hapless heart, by the assault of diverse contrary passions,
that how stoutly so ever she defended the walls, she found her force too weak
to resist the rage of so recklesse a tyrant. Now the prayers Valericus powered
forth came to effect, now Venus meant to be revenged for the cruelty she used
to her valiant Captain Valericus, who so valiantly had fought under the flagge
of affection, and yet could by no means prevail. For Castania hearing the
sugured Eloquence, which so sweetlye flowed from the sappie wit of Gwydonius,
framing in her fancy the form of his face, and printing in her heart the
perfection of his person, was so entangled in the snares of Love, as she
could by no reason redress her misery, but will she, nyll she, fell into
these bitter complaints.

ALas witless wretch (quoth she) that I am, what fiery flames of fancy do
fry within me? what desire, what lust, what hope, what trust, what care, what
despair, what fear, what fury? that to be payned with these perplexed
passions, to me that never felt the force of them before, is no less dolor
than death it self, be it never so dyrefull. O Gods, where are now become
those loftye looks I used to Valericus? Where is the disdaynefull dealings,
the coye countenaunces, the curyous congies, the causeless cruelty?

Yea, the hard heart, which so rigorouslye rejected the love of him which so
entirely liked me. Could I, fond fool that I am, valiauntly withstand the
assaults of a worthy Gentleman, and shall I cowardly yield to an unknown
stranger: did I loath him whose parentage was little inferior to mine, and
shall I love another of base and vild birth: did I disdain to look at the
lure, and shall I now stoop without stall, come without call: yea, and to such
an empty fist, O lawless Love, O witless will, O fancy, fraught full of
frenzy and fury. Alas, if I should be so careless as to consent to this
frantic toie, what will they say, that praised me for my virtue? will they
not as fast dispraise me for my vanity, will not my father fret, my kinsfolk
cry out, my friends be sorry, my fo^s and especially Valericus, laugh me to
scorn, and triumph of this my mishap: yea, will not all y^ world wonder to see
me alate given to chastity, and now shake hands with virginity, to yield my
dearest jewel and chiefest treasure into ye hands of a straggling stranger,
who came to my fathers court without countenance or coin, wealth or worship,
credit or calling: yea, who by his own report is but a person of small
parentage. Seek then Castania to assuage this flame, and to quench this fire,
which as it comes without cause, so it will consume without reason. For the
greatest flow has the soonest ebb, the sorest tempest has the most sudden
calm, the hottest love has the coldest end, and of the deepest desire often
times ensues the deadlyest hate: so that she which settles her affection with
such speed as she makes her choice without discreation, may cast her corn she
knows not where, and reapes she wots not what, and for her hasty choosing,
may perhaps get a heavy bargain. Alas, I know this counsel is good, but
what then? can I deny that which the destinies have decreede, is it in my
power to pervert that which the Planets have placed? can I resist that which is
stirred up by the stars? No, what need I then make this exclamation, since I
am not the first nor shall not be the last whom the frantike frenzy of
flickering fancy, has with more wrong and greater vauntage piteously
oppressed. What though Gwydonius be not wealthy, yet he is wise, though he be
not of great parentage, yet he is of comelye personage, it is not his coin
that has conquered me, but his countenance, not his vading riches, but his
renowned virtues, and I far more esteem a man then money: I but the Duke my
father is not so base minded as to bestow me upon so mean a Gentleman, he
never will consent that poor Gwydonius should enjoy y^ which he hops some
pearlesse prince shall possess. What then? shall I prefer my Fathers weal
before mine own will, his liking before mine own love? no, no, I will choose for
my self whatsoever my choice be. Why but perchance Gwydonius will no more
esteem thee then thou did Valericus, and repay thee with as small fancy as
thou him with affection. Tush, doubt it not Castania, thou art y^ dame which he
so deciphered in his dreme, thou art y^ Venus which he saw in his vision, y^
art y^ goddess, whose beauty has so bewitched him, y^ art y^ jewel to
possess, y^ which there is no hap so hard which he would not hazard, no danger
so desperate which he would not adventure, no burden so heuie which he would not
bear, nor no peril so huge which he would not pass. And shall not then
Gwydonius be my servant, since I am his Saint, shall not I like him which loves
me, since he is my joy, shall I not inioye him? Yes, Gwydonius is mine, and
shall be mine in despite of the fates and Fortune.

Castania having thus pitifully powered out her plaints would gladly have given
Gwydonius intelligence (with modesty if she might) of her good will toward
him, and god knows how feign Gwydonius would have discovered his fervent
affection, if too much fear had not astonished him, and too great bashfulnes
stayed her. She therefore houering between fear and hope, perseuered so long
in his pensive passions and careful cogitations, y^ by covert concealing of her
inward sorrow, the flame so furiously fried within her, that she was
constrained to keep her bed. Whereupon Melytta coniecturing the cause of her
care by y^ color of her countenance, thought to sift out the occasion of her
sorrow, y^ by this means she might apply a medicine to her malady, and
finding fit opportunity, she brake with her in this wise.

Madame Castania (quoth she) since I have by y^ Duke your father been assigned
to you as a companion, I have in such loving wise both comforted and counseled
you, as I hope you have just cause to say y^ I have most carefully tendered your
estate, for perceiving how willing you were to follow my direction, I counted
your wealth my weal, your pleasure my profit, your happiness my joy, and
your prosperity my felicity. Which friendly care if it were not to be
considered, if I should show you what great sorrow I sustain by your
heaviness, you would judge my words to proceed either of folly or flattery,
but if your sore be such as it may be salued, if your care may be cured, if
your grief may be redressed, or your malady mitigated by my means, command me
good Castania in what I may to pleasure thee, and thou shall find me so charely
to perform my charge, as my willing mind shall evidently bewray my well
meaning. I see Castania, of late, such a strange Metamorphosis in thy mind,
as for pleasant conceits thou do use pensive cogitations, thy cheerful
countenance is changed into lowering looks, thy merry devises into mournful
dumps, and yet I cannot conjecture no cause of this sudden alteration. If want
of riches should work thy woe, why thou swimst in wealth, if loss of friends?
thou have infinite of noble pare^tage, which loves thee most entirely. If thou
meanest no longer to lead a single life, no doubt thy father will provide thee
of such a princely match, as shall content thee for his person, and
countenance thee with his parentage. But if in all these supposes I have mist
the mark, and have not touched the case of thy calamity, unfold unto me
Castania what the pain is that thus does pinch thee, and assure thy self, I
will be so secret in thy affairs, as ever Lampana was to her Lady Cleophila.

Castania hearing this friendly discourse of Melytta, thought for all this fair
gloss ye text might be to intricate, and that these painted speeches would
prove but rotten pillars, fearing therefore the fetch, and doubting the worst,
if she bewraie her mind, she framed her this answer.

MAdame (quoth she) the incomperable courtesy and unfeigned friendship which
since your first coming I have found in you by experience, will neither suffer
me to suspect your Ladyshippe of flattery, nor my self willingly to be
accused of ingratitude, for your diligence has been so great, and my deserts
so small, that if I might but live to requite some part of your good will, it
were the second felicity I look for in this life. But touching the pensive
passions which thus diversely perplexed me, I answer, that as he which is
wounded of the Bores tuske, if his sore take air is very hardly healed, as
he which stricken with a Scorpion if his wound take wind can never be cured: so
madame, many inward maladies carry this nature, that if they be once
discouered^ they are far the more hardly recovered, that it is better to
conceal them with grief, then reveal them in hope of relief.

Not so Castania, your principle is not true, for if your passions proceeded of
love, which of all other inward sores requires greatest secrecy, yet
undoubtedly y^ more it is discovered, the sooner it is cur^d, for as the sto^e
of Armenia being covered with sand, burns most extremely, and no sooner
takes air but it cools, so the fiery flames of love raked up in silence,
fry most furiously, but being by discourse dis^losed, they soon convert from
flame to fume and smoke. Wherefore good Castania impart unto me the matter which
does import thee so near, and I swear unto thee by the sacred rites of
Caeres, which is so honored in Alexandria, that if thou do love where thy
friends do not like, and thy wish be contrary to their will, yet I will seek
all means possible to redress thy sorrow.

Alas good mada^^e, rather then you should think me so incredulous or
suspicious, as not to believe your oath, or doubt of your secret dealing, I will
without delay make you privy to the cause of my pain, what peril so ever I
incur by revealing it. So it is Melytta, that the perfection of Gwydonius,
his exquisite qualities, and excellent virtues have fiercely assaulted the fort
of my fancy, as I am perforce constrained to resign my liberty captive unto
his courtesy, and to make his person the prison of my heart. This lucklesse and
unlikely love madame, is the cause of my care, and the sum of my sorrow, this
frantike affection has driven my drouping heart to show forth these drousy
looks, this is it which has made me an enemy to my self, a foe to all good
company, and to delight in nothing but sorrow and solitariness: yea, this is
the sore, which if in time it be not salued, will prevent by death all other
miseries.

And is this (quoth Melytta) the pain that so greatly perplexeth you, is this
the ^^re which so co^bers thy conscience? is this the danger which drives thee
into such deep distress? Do thou think so supersti^iously of Gwydonius,
or so abiectly of thy self, y^ thou deemest this (...) impossible to be
brought to pass: no, no, doubt not Castania, I my self dare absolutely
promise thee, that thy love shall sort to such happy success, as thou thy
self do seek for.

And with that Melytta stayed by a sudden sight she had of y^ Saint that
Castania so heartily served, for Gwydonius was entering in at the chamber door
with a dish of delicates, which Orlanio hearing his Daughter was sick, had
sent her. Melytta seeing y^ Cupid began to favor the cause of his clients, in
giving them such fit opportunity to discover their cares went her way, leaving
Gwydonius y^ first man to play his part in this tragical Comedy, who seeing
his goddess thus surprised with sickness, was so galled with grief, so
pinched with hellish passions, and so tortured with extreme torments, y^ his
color began to change, and he fetched a deep sigh or two, which Castania
hearing, she perceived without touching his pulses, the cause of these his sudden
passions. In fine, such melancholic motions so amazed his mind, that he was
almost mute in his message, yet at length encouraging himself, he presented it
unto her in this wise.

Madame (quoth he) the Duke your Father hearing of your sudden sickness, in
token of his fatherly affection, amongst all his dainties, has sent you this
dish, which he thinks most meet for your diet, wishing your Ladyship to let no
doubtful motions distress your mind, nor no careful thoughts cumber your
conscience, for you shall lack nothing if you reveal to him your want, which
either your will or wish can desire. And truly madame, to manifest my willing
duty (if the prayers of a poor Gentleman may be heard of the heavenly Gods)
I wish that before you taste of this food, it may turn to Nectar, whereby not
only your sickness should be salued, but your divine beauty and virtue
according to desert should be crowned with immortality.

Castania perceiving with what seruent affection Gwydonius uttered these
words, began to cheer up her self, in hope y^ her good will should not be
repaied with ingratitude, taking therefore the present at his hands, and liking
it never the worse for his sake that brought it, she returned him this reply.

Gwydonius (quoth she) as I have cause most reverently to accept of my fathers
loving courtesy, and to repay his natural affection with most dutiful
obedience, so I have cause to thank thee for thy pains, and to think well of
thee for thy wish, promising in recompense of thy good will, if in any respect
I may pleasure thee, to seek and sue to my father for preferment.

Madame, I account the performance of my message no pain, but pleasure, and I
think my self as much honored by this office, and thrice more happy the^ if
I should in Ganimedes place present the cup to Jupiter. But Madame, since that to
stop the stream, is to make the flood flow more fiercely, to repress the
fire, is to make it flame more furiously, and to restrain the force of love,
is to kindle a greater flame, least too long delaie should breed too great
danger, and by concealing my sorrow I should make the sore incurable, I thought
good either presently to hear the courteous sentence of my life, or the cruel
doom of my death. So it is Madame, that too long gasing upon the beams of
your heavenly beauty, and to narrowlye construing over your virtuous
conditions, I remain so caught in the snare of your bounty, and so thralled in
the thridde of your virtue, that the stay of my life hangs in your hands,
either to drive me down to hellish misery, or to hoist me up to heavenly
felicitye. For although I have not heretofore by duetifull service made
manifest the loyalty of my love, yet since I first framed in my fancy (as in
a mirror) the shape of your surpassing beauty, my heart has been crossed
with such cruel Camizados for your sake, as if with the Target of hope, I had
not withstoode the furious force of such raging furies, I had by despair been
dashed against most dangerous rocks. Since the^ Madam y^ sight of your sweet
face has fast fettered my fancy in the linkes of love, as without your means
I can neither be redressed nor released: I humbly desire you neither to resist
the motion of my well meaning, nor to reject the devotion of my good will, but
to accept your poor Gwydonius as a faithful servant.

Castania hearing diligently the faithful discourse of distressed Gwydonius,
perceiving by his sighs the pinching sorrow of his thoughts, and seeing him to
fast fettered in folly, on a sudden to give her the slip, had that she
desired, and now her loving looks was turned to lowering glances, her
delightful courtesy, to disdainful coyness, and she thought to repaie the
sweet meat wherewith before she feds him, with most sour sauce, not that she
misliked of his love, for it was the only thing she desired, but to make him
the more fervent in affection, uttering these or such like words to her self
secretly.

And is not Castania the victory most accounted of, where the conquest is most
doubtful? is not the castle which abides the longest battery thought the
richest booty, are not those pearls which are scarcely found and hardly
gotten, ever of the greatest value, what so is gained by p^rill, is thought
always precious, hardly come by, warily kept. The Maid that by long suit and
much travail is obtained, by how much the more she was hard in the winning, by
so much the more she will be sweet in the wearing, she which in her virginity
is charie of her chastititie, in her marriage will be as wary of her honesty,
therefore I will qualify ye hot love of Gwydonius with a cold potion, and with
that she made him this waspish answer.

Why Gwydonius, shall the old Proverb be verified in thee, that the Priest
forgets himself that ever he was a Clearke, that too much (...) breeds
contempt. I see well if Appelles that cunning Painter suffer the greasy Sowter
to take a view of his curious work he will grow so malapert, as to meddle with
his picture: if the proud Centaure Ixion be bidden to the Feast of the Gods, no
less then Juno her self will suffice him for his choice.

Set a beggar on horseback they say, and he will never alyght. Extol one of
base stock to any degree of dignity, and who so proud and haughty. I speak
this Gwydonius to thy reproof: is thy stomach alate waxen so queasie, that no
diet will down but my Fathers own dish? will no meanor mate suffice thee,
unless thou match with a Prince? is there no Lady will like thee, but my love?
is there no courser Dame to covet, unless thou court unto me? Did my Father
promote thee to this thou art from the state of a beggar, and will thou now
presume to be my better? Hau^ my looks been so loving, my rountenaunce so
courteous, my glaunces so full of good will, as to promise so much as thou do
presume? No: but one only countenance in a servile mind (...) too much
encouragement. Do thou think Gwydonius; that I account so meanelye of my
person; as to match with a man of thy pi^ch (...) I so (...) ^^acke my credit,
as to c^mber my self with one of the calling? Shall I so stayne my state, as
to stoop to thy lure? No: where is thy coin to maintain my coun^enaunce?
Where is thy wealth to uphold my worship? Where is thy patrimony to
counteruayle my personage? But put ^ase I accepted of thy suit: d^^^t thou
think ever to gain my fathers good will? do thou think it is p^ss^b^e to
compass his consent? do thou hope ever to take him in such a vain as he
will be willing to give his verdit on thy side. No Gwydonius, but if he were
privy to this thy presumption, he would repaye thy follye with too much fury,
he would vnplume thee of all his feathers, that like Aesops Crow thou might
receive the reward of thy rashness. If therefore thou love thine own welfare
keep thy self within thy bounds, and strive not farther than thy sleeue will
stretch, least in climing too high, thou catch the sorer fall.

Castania having thus sharply shaken up my young youth Gwydonius, thought she
had given him a sufficient cooling Card: but he no whit dismayed with this
denial, like a lusty champion entered piece mele with her in this wise.

Madame (quoth he) the poor shoemaker was not blamed for viewing Appelles
picture, but because in finding fault he went beyond his shoe: the Centaure
Ixion was not reproved for his familiarity with Juno as he was a guest, but
in that his suit tended to the sackeing of her honesty: familiarity never
breeds contempt in a good mind, neither am I to be accused of y^ crime, for
the most servile slave in Alexandria (I call the heavens as witnesses of my
words) does not with more loving duty reverence and honor your person and
parentage, then does your poor servant Gwydonius. Well Madam though my nature
and nurture be such in your sight, as they bewray my bringing up and birth to
be so base, as if I mean to draw my descent, I must (as you say) imblaze mine
arms in the beggars coat, yet thus much I answer in respect of my parents
and without arrogancy thus far I stand on my pantuffles, that the credit I
have in your Fathers Court, is not coequal with the calling I have in my own
country, if I did not count it more great credit and honor, in that I have
sometime inioyed a courteous countenance of your sweet self, since my coming.
But if I were the most famous Prince in the world, I so esteem your divine
beauty and exquisite virtue, as I would think my self far unworthy to
possess such heavenly perfection: which if I could obtain, the displeasure
of your Father could no whit discourage me, his thundering threats could no
whit amaze me: no, death it self could never daunt my mind, were it never so
despitefull. But who (say you) can lay their love where is no desert, and where
want breeds a flat denial?

Ah Castania, Nature by her secret motion, has indu^d all creatures with some
perfect qualities, to supplye that what which breeds misliking. The Moule
deprived of sight has a wonderful hearing, the Hare being very fearful is
most swifte, the fish having no ears, has most clear eyes: so though want of
dignity disgrace me, though want of coin discountenaunce me, though lack of
wealth impaires my credit, yet Nature has given me such a loyal and loving
heart, as I hope in the perfection of that, she has supplied the want of all
the rest: so that Madame though I want coin I do not want constancy, though I
have no lands, yet I lack not loyalty, though I want wealth, yet I want not
will to end my life to do you good, or spend my time to do you service.

GWydonius having thus pithely replied, drove Castania into a great doubt,
whether she should presentlye consent to his demand, or still drive him off
with delays, whether she should yield the fort at the first skirmish, or stand
to the doubtful event of battle: at length least she should digress from the
course of womankinde, she thought best to deny that she most of all desired,
and therefore then gave him this answer.

GWydonius (quoth she) in what state you came to my Fathers Court I know, what
you are by descent I know not, nor I care not, and if I did, it auayl^th not,
but this I say, that it is hard taking of Foul, when the net is discryed,
and ill catching of Fish, when the hook is bare: impossible it is Gwydonius to
infer belief, where no credit will be given, and to deceive her that spieth
thy fetch: when the string is broken, it is hard to hit the white, and when a
man's creditte is called in question, persuasions can little prevail. It is a
religion amongst lovers to swear and forswear, to promise mountains and
perform moulhilles, to be ripe without and rotten within, to carry a rustie
blade in a velvet scabberde, and a silver Bell with a leaden clapper. Therefore
Gwydonius I had rather mistrust too soon, than mislyke too late, I had rather
fear my choice than rue my chance, I had rather stop at the brimme, than at
the bottom: for the signet being set, it is too late to break the bargain,
and fancy being once fixed, it is too late to reclayme affection. For the love
of a woman is like the Oil of Flynt, which being once congealed will never be
dissolved, like the Diamonde, which being once rubbed with the gum of a Pine
tree, will never be broken: so if I fancy any, since I mean not to fleet, it
shall be such a one, as I need not repent me.

And whereas you say Gwydonius, that in despite of Fortune, Nature has given
you a loving heart, I my self surely did never deem any less, but thought
you of the crew of those lovers that love too much, having as many Ladies as
they have wits, and that is not a few, who count that every face must have a
new fancy, and if they see a thousand the^ must be all viewed with a sigh,
which considered Gwydonius, I mean not to like nor to love neither you nor any
other.

AND shall then Madame (quoth he) my merit be repayed with no ^eede, shall my
good will be requited with no gain? shall I have in lieu of my love no liking?
will you so swar^e from justice, as not to give every one according to his
desert? at the least recommpence? not desire with despite, and hearty love
with loathing hate, for as the Poet says. Quis enim succenset amanti.

Well Gwydonius, as I will not be thy privy friend, so I will not be thine
open foe, and as I cannot be so courteous as to requight thee for thy pains, so
I will not be so cruel as to despite thee for thy presumption, and whereas
thou crauest gains for thy good will, I am content to remain thy unwilling
debtor.

Yet Madame (quoth he) where the debt is confessed, there remains some hope of
recovery, for though y^ creditor be never so unwilling to pay the debt being
due, he shall by constraint of law and his own confession, (^augre his ^ace)
be forced to make restitution.

Truth Gwydonius (quoth she) if he commence his action in a right case, and the
plea he puts in, prove not imperfect. But yet take this by the way, it is hard
for that plaintiff to recover his costs, where the defendant being Judge sets
down the sentence.

Gwydonius feeling himself pincht to the quick with this pretty quip made no
further reply, but l^st his l^ng tarying might breed suspicion, wishing his
Mistres welfare, took his leave very solempnly and sorrowfully, of Castania,
who seeing him gone and her self alone, began thus to muse and meditate upon
the sharp aunsweres she had given her best beloved Gwydonius.

WHy Castania,what frantic follye has made thee thus far to forget thy self.
Is the bird enticed to the s^rappe by the ^^ew of the nets, is the Fox
allured to the ^^al^^ by the (...) of the trappe, will the Mouse ^^^ch under
that Ensign, where the Cat proclaymeth her self Captain? will the silly Dove
lay her eggs in the Fawlchons neast? or is it the means to have him to thy
friend, whom with bitter blows thou do rebuke: is there no other call for
courtesy but cruelty? do thou find no fitter means to obtain a
reasonable request but by a rigorous repulse? or is it the nature of women to
defy that outwardly which they most desire inwardly, to loath that in their
mouth, which they love in their mind, to reiecte that with their hand, which
they most willingly would receive in their heart? Do thou think Castania to
draw Gwydonius to thy desire, by detesting him? Do thou think to allure
him to thy love, by loathing him? Do thou suppose to win him to thy will
by these waspish aunsweres? No: and what, do thou know what peril will
ensue of this repulse, what danger will follow of this denial? Is it like he
will put it up patiently? No sure, either look to have his extreme love
turned to extreme hate, or that he will persist no longer in the pursuit of
his purpose. Oh would to God Gwydonius, thou were again to begin thy demand,
and I to frame mine answer: then would I salve thy sores with sweet strops,
not with cutting corasiues: then would I mittigate thy malady with easy
medicines, not with pinching playsters: then would I comfort thee with consent,
not daunt thee with denyalls. But alas, had I wist now comes too late, and
therefore Castania if thou have made a fault, seek to make amends, and
recompense this his injury with most frie^dly courtesy.

And with that came Melitta, who comforting Castania, passed away the rest of
the day in parle.

But Gwydonius, who all this while had a flea in his ear, was driven into a
quandarie with the taunting quips of his Mistress, fearing that although his
accounts were great, his gains should be little, and though he made a very
long harvest, yet he should reap but a very small croppe, thinking that under
such sower speeches, a sugared mind could not be contained: yet at last entering
into deeper consideration with himself, he fell into these terms.

But by the sweet (quoth he) how should we know the sower: but by the black
how should we know the white: he never greatly accompteth of prosperity which
has not been before pinched with adversity: which perchance Castania means
to make me try by experyence, thinking to feed me first with bitter broaths,
that her after dainty fare may more delight me: to daunt me with the raging
storms of denial, that the calm of her consent may more content me: to make
me taste the bitter pills of annoy, that hereafter I may enjoy the greater joy:
for the chilling cold of Winter makes the sprowting spring time seem far
more pleasant, the parching heat of Summer, makes the cool shade more
delightful, and the frowning looks of Castania, will make her smiling
countenance seem more cheerful. Then cease not Gwydonius to pursue thy suit
with endless pain, either to enjoy her courtesy, or taste of her cruelty, to
thy great happiness or extreme heaviness.

GWydonius thus like a valiant champion, never amazed with any chip of
misfortune, never feared to give the assault for all the first repulse, but
only sought opportunity how he might in close combat once again encounter
with Castania, vowing either to return with some sign of victory, or else to put
lim and life in hazard. But fortune meaning plesantly to sport with this young
nouice, would never minister such fit occasion, y^ he might have solitary
access to his gods, for Castania of pretended purpose so warely avoided his
company, and with such disdainful looks so rejected his duty, as Gwydonius
was constrained to seek his course, by a new compass, delyuering unto one of
her maids a friendly letter to this effect.

Disdayned Gwydonius to his desired Castania, Health.
WHo so tastes (Madame Castania) of the River Licos in India, feels such a
continual flame to fry and fret his intrayles, as it is more torture than to
be tormented with the hellish-furies, and this grief can never be
redressed, but with drinking the blood of his dearest friend. And as he that is
venomed by the Phalanga, feels such painful passions, as he runs mad, and
is only cured by the means of most harmonious music: so Madame, the furious
heat of fancy, does so scorch and scale my hapless heart, and does
perplexe me with such hellish pangues, as death it self were thrice more
desired, than thus to drive my days in dolor. And I have so greedely
swallowed up the sugared poison of your divine beauty, as through the
extremity of pinching grief, which so direfully distresseth me, I rest as one
distract from his senses, not possible to obtain a cure for this my calamity,
unless with the deaw of mutual affection you mitigate my malady, or with the
pleasant harmony of your musical consent, you appease my misery.

Since then Madam my care proceeds from your beauty, let my sore be cured by
your bounty, since the perfection of your person has wrought my bane, let the
effect of your courtesy procure my bliss, and reject him not so rigorously,
which respe^^^th you so reverently. Loath him not so hatefully, which loves
you so heartely: nor repaie not his dutiful amity, with such deadly enmity.
The pike fatally prosecuteth the fish Mugra, as his mortal foe, and yet seeing
him snared on the fishers hook, he speedely shreddeth the line in sunder, to
deliver him, the Snake most deadly detesteth the field-mouse, and yet she
heapeth up in her hole store of provision to prevent her enemies penury: and
shall then madame, your cruelty so far exceed these senseless creatures?
shall your rigor be so void of reason, as to requite your friend with pain?
when they repaie their foes with pleasure, to drive your friends into
distress, when they redeem their foes from danger, no madame, I hope you will
not counteruaile my constancy with such discurtesie, nor so recklesly regard
your poor Gwydonius, whose love and loyalty is so great, that as the stones
which are found in the river Lyncestis, the louder the wind blows, and the
deeper they are drencht in the water, the more they burn and blaze: so the
more you seek to cool my fancy with disdain, the more my affection is
kindled with desire, the more you loath, the more I like: the greater despair
you drive me into by denialls, the greater hope, (encouraged by constancy) I
have to obtain my request, in which fervent affection, I mean to remain
without change, craving in liewe of this my loyalty, that you will speedely
send the messenger of present consolation, to him which pineth away, and is
yours only, and ever.

Still in hope, Gwydonius.


CAstania having received this Letter from her assured friend Gwydonius,
although she perceived by the contents that his love was not counterfeit, but
constant: not light, but loyal: not floting, but faithful: and that she
should not find him immutable in prosperity, which was so permanent in
adversity. Yet (whether it were for coyness in consent, or chariness of
choice I know not) she once again thought to sound him more deeper, to keep
out still the flagge of defiaunce, and to spend one Uollee of shot in the face
of her enemy, to see if a hot skirmish would make him fly the field. And if
like a valiant soldier he did manfully march on, and not refuse the brunt of
the battle, she would then resign the fort of her freedom into his hands,
and yield up the bulwark of her breast, which so long he had battered, that
triumphauntly he might set up Trophies in sign of a most victorious conquest.
To put therefore the matter in question, she returned him this answer.

Castania to Gwydonius which hops in vain, health.
Master Gwydonius, your Letter being more hastily received then heartely
read, I perceive by the contents, that you are still perplexed with your
pensicke passions, and that your disease is incurable, for if your pains may be
appeased, or your malady mittigated by no medicine, but by my means, you are
like either to pay your due unto death, or still to linger in distress. My
cunning is too small to enterprise the composition of any secret simples, and
my calling too great to become a Physician to such a paltering pacient, so that
I neither can nor will cure another man's harm by mine own mishap. To love
him whom I cannot like, were but to wreast against mine own will, to flatter
him whom I mean not to fancy, is but a mere trick of extreme follye. What
the cause is Gwydonius, that thy good will reapes so small gain, and that so
rigorously I repaie thy love with hate, I know not, unless the constellation
of the Stars by some secret influence have so appointed it in the
calculation of our nativity. But this I am sure, that as no Serpent can abide
the smell of a hearts horn, as the Panther escheweth the company of the Ownce,
as the Uulture is mortal enemy to y^ E^le, and as it is impossible to hatch
up a Swanne in an Eagles neast, to temper Oil and Pitch together in one
vessel, to mix the blood of a Lion and a Woolfe in one bowl, and to procure
amity between the Fawlcon called Tilo, and the Fox, so hard is it to procure
me by ruthful request to be thy friend, which am by instinct of nature thy
protested foe, and as hard to win me to thy wife, who so little likes of thy
love, that the very remembrance of thy person makes me fall into most hateful
passions. Cease the^ Gwydonius to condemn me of cruelty, and leave off at
last to appeal to my courtesy, for thou shall always be sure to feel the
one, and never to find the other. Yet least thou should accuse me of
ingratitude, though I cannot inwardly mittigate thy misery, yet I will
outwardlye teach thee to apply such plasters (as if the experience of them
prove true) shall greatly appease thy pain. Pliny Gwydonius reports, that
he which drinks of the river Auerna, cools and mortifieth his affections,
but if the water be touched by any means before it be drunk, the virtue
thereof is of no value. He that wears the feathers of the Bird Ezalon about
him, shall ever be fortunate in his love, but if they be not pulde when the
Sun is eclipsed, they are of no force: and to conclude, there is nothing that
sooner drives away amorous conceits, the^ to rub y^ temples of thy head with
ye sweat of an Ass, which if you can perform it, as no doubt you may put it
in practice, I hope you shall be redressed from your intolerable grief, and I
released from such an importunate suit.

Forced by the destinies still to deny thee, Castania.


Gwydonius having viewed and reuiewed over this Letter, seeing y^ rigorous
resolution of his mistres, could by no means be removed, and that a most
severe sentence was pronounced against him by a most injurious Judge, was
driven into a doubt whether he should still with plaints sue for pity, or
else blasphemously exclaim against her brutish cruelty, whether he should
bewraie his parents and parentage to the Duke and her, or still stand to the
doubtful chance of Fortune, to pursue his purpose still with plaints, her
hellish cruelty persuaded him: to blaspheme against her, the sincerity of his
lou^ would not let him: to bewraie his birth, diverse dangers might ensue: to
stand to the chance of Fortune, was still to hazard without hope: combred thus
with diverse cogitations, at last he determined to break up the battery, and
to lay too an (...) hold, but to return with as much speed as might be to
his father Clerophontes Court, there by absence to mittigate the malady which
so grievously molested him: yet he thought before his departure to give her a
friendly farewell, that might both confirm his constancy, and condemn her
cruelty, which he framed to this effect.

Gwydonius to Castania, prosperous (...) in all her affairs.
I Mean not, most merciless mistress, any longer so s^e for mercy, nor with
pitiful plaints to trouble your patience, since to stir that which the
Stars has ^^a^ed, is to strive against the stream, and to force that which
the fates have framed, is to covet to be counted a fool, but as one whom
fortune means to make a myr^^ur of misery, and over whom Venus her self
means to (...) ^s of a most hapless vassal, I sorrowfully send you this
fainting farewell, as a faithful token of my fervent affection, for seeing
neither my person can please, nor my living like you, nor my base calling
content you, nor I my self reap any guerdon for my good will, to avoid the
remembrance of these passions, which renew my pains, and to assuage the rigor
of my raging love, I purpose as speedely as wind and weather will permit me, to
abandon ye place of your abode, not incensed by fury, as one in despite, but
enforced by ye rage of fancy to deprive my self of al delight, either to
consume in solitary cares without compassion, or by absence to mittigate some
part of my martyrdom: for to hope still I see is but to heap woe upon
wretchedness, and care upon calamity Yet madam thus much I say, y^ Dido queen
of Carthage loved Aeneas, a banished exile, and a straggling stranger. Enphinia
daughter to the king of Corinth, and he^^e apparent to his crown, who for her
feature was famous throughout all the East Countries, vouchsafed to apply a
sovereign plaster to the furious passions of Acharisto, her fathers bondsman.
The duchess of Malphey chose for her husband her servant Vl^ico, and Venus,
who for her surpassing beuty was canonized for a Goddess, disdained not the
love of limping Vulcan, they mada^e respected the man, and not their money,
their wills, and not their wealth, their love, not their livings, their
constancy, not their coin: their person, not their par^n^age: and the inward
virtue, not ye outward (...). But you are so addicted to the opinion of Danae,
y^ mind, my bitter speeches were written with my hand, not wrought with my
heart, my denial was only for the better trial, and those rigorous repulses
were either to rip up thy fained fancy or fervent affection, for if thou had
retired at the first foil, I would have thought thy fancy but a flash, ready
to be quenched with the least mis^ing deaw of misfortune. But since thou have
kept thy course so rightly by thy compass, amidst most dangerous rocks, and
have stood to thy tackling against all the blustering blasts of fortune.
Assure thy self in liew of this thy love, thou have not heretofore found me
so disdainful, as hereafter thou shall find me dutiful, neither did I ever
reject thee so currish lie, as I will accept thee courteously, being ready to
restore the injury I have offered thee, with any courtesy that thou may
either honestly require, or I justly afford. But alas Gwidonius what courtesy
shall I ever be able to show thee, that may counteruaile thy kindness? How
entirely shall I love thee to requite thy loyalty? what duty can be a due
recompense to this thy good will: yea, if I by any means can quit this thy
love, I never doubt to be deemed ungrateful while I live: Thy worthy
constancy (Gwydonius) has won the castle which many have besieged, and thou
have obtained yt which diverse have sought to gain: yet it is not the shape of
thy beauty, but the hope of thy loialtie which entiseth me, not thy fair
face, but thy faithful heart: not thy comely countenance, but thy modest
courtesy, not thy words, but thy virtues: not thy wealth, but thy wit: for she
that builds her fancy upon such fading subjects, tieth her love to the
inconstant wheel of fortune. And what though the Duke my father be incensed
against me, for making (in his mind) so careless a choice? What care I for
his friendship, so I have thy favor, let him fret, let my friends frown, let
liuinges be lost, hap what hap will, no mis^ing showers of m^^chanceno
boisterous blasts of adversity, no terrible tempests of disaster fortune,
shall make my constant mind in any respect to move: no torments, no travail,
no care, no calamity, no penury, no poverty, no only the loss of life
shall diminish my love, in liew whereof remain thou but constant, and in pledge
of my protested good will, have here my heart and hand, to be thine in dus^e
and a^hes.

Thine, though the Gods say no: Castania.


THis Letter being most luckelye delivered into the hands of Gwydonius, I leave
you to judge Gentlemen into what a qua^darie this young youth was brought to
see such a sudden change, and so happy a chance, as to have his hellish
bale requited with heavenly bliss, his despightfull annoy, with delightful
joy: his heaviness with happiness, and doubtful despair turned to assured
hope: to see Fortune which of late defied him as a foe, now to embrace him as a
friend, and to will that he did wish: to see his mistres cruelty turned to
courtesy, her disdain to desire, her bitter pills to sugured potions, her
stormy repulses to calm consent, and her contemptuous protestations, to most
constant promises. For if the careful captive, who by the doom of the Judge
expects each hour to die, rejoices when he hears his pardon pronounced,
no doubt Gwydonius joy could be no loss, since denial was his death, and
consent the conserve to heal his wounds: the greater care, the greater joy,
the more pain the greater pleasure, the more hellish misery the more heavenly
felicity. Yea, Gwydonius was driven into such an ecstasy for joy, that he was
in doubt, whether this letter was preferred to him in deed, or presented to
him in a Uision, whether he were wrapte into a Trance, or ravished with some
drowsy slumber: but at last perceiving it to be no fained fantasy, such a
deep desire enforced his affection, as he thought every moment a month, every
hour a year, every day a thousand, until he might freely enjoy the
presence and sight of his love and Lady Castania. Fortune meaning to advance
him to the top of her inconstant wheel, brought it so to pass, that before
the week was ended, he spied Castania walking alone in the garden: which
sudden sight so revived his senses, ye without any dread or doubt he manfully
marched on toward her, and was as hastily and heartily incountred by Castania:
who embracing Gwydonius in her arms, welcomed him with this salutation.

AS the Whale (Gwydonius) makes always sign of great joy at the sight of
the fish called Talpa Marina, as the Hynde greatly delyghteth to see the
Leoparde, as the Lion fawneth at the view of the Unicorne, and as he which
drinks of the Fountain Hypenis in Scithia, feels his mind so drowned in
delight, that no grief though never so great, is able to assuage it: so
Gwydonius I conceive such surpassing pleasure in thy presence, and such
heavenly felicity in the sight of thy perfection, that no misery though
never so monstrous is able to amaze me, no dolor though never so direful is
able to daunt me, nor no mishap though never so perilous, is able to make me
sink in sorrow, as long as I enjoy thy presence, which I count a sovereign
preservative against all careful calamities. That as he which tastes of the
herb Hyacynthus is never combred with care, and as he that wears the stone
Agathes about him, is surely defenced against all ensuing sorrrowes, so
inioying the sight of thy seemly self, and feeding mine eyes with the form
of thy feature, I think my self sufficiently shrouded against all the
tempestuous showers of sinister fortune. And to prove these my promises to be
no fained vanities but faithful verity, I commit my self, my stay, and state
into thy hands to dispose of me at thy pleasure, wishing rather to live with
thee in most distressed penury, than to linger here in most fortunate
prosperity.

GWydonius listening attentively to this sugared harmony, was so ravished with
the sight of her sweet face, and so rapt into a trance with the contemplation
of her beauty, that as the Lion tasting of the gum Arabicke becomes
senseless, as the Bull by browsing on the bark of a Juniper tree falls a
sleep, as the Camill stands astonished at the sight of a Rat: so Gwydonius
seeing in his arms the Saint whom in heart he did honor, and embracing the
Goddess whom with most deep devotion he did adore, was so amazed, that he
was not able to utter one word as witness of his happiness, until at last
gathering his wits together, he began thus to reply.

CAstania (quoth he) it is an axiom in Philosophy, that the color joined
hard to the sight, hinders the sense, the flower put into the nosethrill
stops the smelling, the Wine vessel being full, lets pass no wine though
never so well vented, the water-pot being filled to the brimme, yeeldes forth
no licour, though having a thousand holes: so where the mind is surcharged
with overmuch joy, or too much pleasure, there the tongue is both tied, and the
senses so restrained, that the heart is neither able to conceive the joy, nor
the tongue able to express the pleasure. Which Castania I now speak by
proof, and know by experience, for I am so drowned in delight by inioying
that princely Iemme, which I esteem the rarest and richest Jewel, not only
in Alexandria, but in all the world, and so puffed up in pleasure by thy
divine presence. Yea, thy faithful and unfeigned affection, the promise of thy
constancy, and the hope of thy loyalty, the report of thy chastity, and the
renown of thy modesty, the force of thy beauty, and the fame of thy virtue.
But above all thy prodigal bounty, in bestowing these heavenly perfections
on thy poor Gwydonius, being by person and parentage most unworthy to
possess them, so surcharg^th my silly heart with excessive joy, that my
tongue not being able in part to express the extreme pleasure of my mind, I
am with Phili^tion the Comicall Poet, constrained by silence to unfold that
affection, which in words the filed phrase of Demosthenes were not able to
decypher. But this assure thy self Castania, that if Juno would advance me to
be Monarch of the world, if Pallas would prefer me to exceed hautie Hercules
in valor, if Venus would present me with some princely piece of heavenly
perfection, yet would I not so gladly receive their proffers, as I do
gratefully accept the promise of thy love and loyalty. No, I account the
treasure of Croesus but trash, in respect of the guerdon of thy good will: I
account the fortune of Caesar but folly, respecting the fruits of thy favor:
I esteem the dignities of Priamus as dregs, in respect of thy divine
perfection. Yea Castania, I am so snared with thy beauty, and so entangled in
the trap of thy bounty, as I shall never leave to love thee, nor ever begin
to like any other.

IT is easy Gwydonius (quoth Castania) to purchase credit, where the party
is already persuaded, and to infer belief, where every word is counted an
Oracle. Therefore omitting these frivolous protestations, thus much I say
touching the purpose. Cecillius Metellus was wont to say, that as it was
necessary that old men should be grave in counsel, so it was expedient young
men should be secret in love, and therefore when the contract was made between
Fuluius and his daughter, he sealed up their lips with his signet, meaning
that to violate the secret conference of lovers, was to commit a second
sacrilege. I speak this Gwydonius, as one careful of thy stay and my state:
for if Orlanio my father should but once hear of our love, or suspect our
liking, it would breed thy mishap and my misery: yea, no doubt he would
speedely prevent our pretense, which would be thy care and my calamity.
Dispose our affairs at thy pleasure, but discover not our purpose, if thou
have won the castle vaunt not of the conquest, if thou have made a good
market, brag not of thy gains, lest by boasting of thy booty, thou loose
thy pray and be thought a pratler. And Gwydonius above all men beware of
Valericus, least under the shape of a friend, he prove in time thy mortal foe,
least his fained amity prove faithless enmity: that in trusting too much
without trial, thou find not treason: and then though thou repent, yet had I
wist comes too late, and so thou wish thou had never loved, and I never
liked.

TUsh Castania (quoth Gwydonius) he that is afraid to venture on the Bucke
because he is tapisht in the briers, shall never have hunters hap, and he
that puts his doubt in love for every chance, shall never have lovers luck.
Cannot the Cat catch Mice, without she have a bell hanged at her ear? Cannot
the Hobbie seize on his pray but he must check? Cannot the Spaniell retryue
the Partridge, but he must quest? and cannot we deal so warely but all the
world must wonder at it? Yes, it is a subtle bird that breeds among ye
aerin of Hawks, and a shifting Sheep that Lambs in the Foxes Den, and he
shall look narrowlye, that spies me halting. Let Orlanio not only weigh our
works, but our words, and let Valericus both deem our deeds, and divine our
thoughts, and yet I hope we will deal so secretlye in our affairs, as neither
the one shall have cause to suspect our familiarity, nor the other to detect
our affection. And therefore Castania least (if we be spyed) the time and
place give occasiou of mistrust, I will leave you as I found you, and so
farewell.

WEll these two lovers placed thus by fortune in the Pallaice of earthlye
prosperity, floated so securelye in the streams of bliss, as they thought no
chips of mischaunce might change their present happiness to future heaviness,
as long as their privy contract was kept so secret to themselves. But as they
which cannot see fire in the straw are stone blind: so he that cannot see the
flame of fancy is a fool. It is hard to cover smoke, but more hard to
conceal love, which these two Lovers in tract of time tried true. Who as
closely as they kept their cloak, yet it was most easy to epsy the lining:
for fancy secretly restrained, is like the spark covered with ashes, which at
length bursteth into a great flame. For there passed between Gwydonius such
amorous glaunces, such loving looks, such courteous congies, such
countenaunces, and such friendlye familiarity, such often meetings, such open
greetings, such sighs, such sobbes, and such strange passions, as not only
Valericus but all the Court (though they poor souls, thought to dance in a
Net and not be seen) perceived how entirelye they loved, and lyked ^ach
other. Which as it did not displease many which loved Gwydonius as their
friend, so it greatly despited Valericus which was his foe, to see one of small
countenance preferred before one of his calling, that Gwydonius should win
the Bulwark which he so long had battered: that he pitching the Field,
another should obtain the Conquest: that he laying the siege, another should
vaunt of the victory: that while he beat the Bush, another should catch the
Birds: and that the meede of his merit, should be given to one of small
deserte. Being combred with these cholaricke cogitations, and perplexed with
these despightfull passions, inflamed with wrathful fury, he fell into these
terms.

O Gods (quoth he) what courtesy is there to be found in such Kytes of
Croesus kind, or what constancy is there to be hoped for, in such dayntye
disdayning Dames? whose wavering wills and staylesse wits both wax and wane
with the Moon, whose Lunaticke minds change with every suddayne motion;
yea, whose lyghtnesse and leawdnesse is such, as they delyght with the Raven
to feed on the most loathsome flesh, with the she Woolfe to choose the
fowlest Make, with Aesops Cock to prefer the barley Corn before a most
precious pearl, and with Glaucus to make a change of his golden armor for
brazen harness.

Did not Euphinia forsake most famous Princes, and embrace a most infamous
Bondeslaue? Did not Sirichia the Princess of Denmark reiecte most
Princelye Potentates, and at last accept a poor Peasaunt? Yea, did not
Venus her self with the beetle, disdain all day to light on the most fragrant
flowers, and at night vouchsafes to lodge in a filthy cowsheard: I mean, did
she not refuse the renowned Gods, and choose a most deformed Smith.

Why, but Valericus, is it fancy that forces them to this folly? Does love
lead them? do the Destenies drive them? does beauty allure them? Is it their
countenance that constrains them? no, they are clownes: is it their person or
parentage that persuades them: no, they are pesants. But like crafty Calipsos
they think by these unequal matches to rule the roste after their own diet,
to be sovereign Mistres of their own minds, with Venus to let Vulcan
possess the tree, and Mars enjoy the fruit, to have their husbands feed the
sheep, and some other reap the fleece: under the shaddowe of his head, do
defend themselves from such heat, as would otherwise greatly scorch their
credit, to make him follow the bent of their bow, although he set the
Cuckoldes end upward. It is a simple cloak that cannot cover one from a shower
of rain, and a silly husband that is not able to father that another does
beget. But to see how these gallaunt girls, if they like not the party, what
show of shamefastness they will make, how they will vale their face with the
visour of virginity, how they will cloak themselves with the color of
continency, how charie they will be of their chastity: whereas if they
fancy, who so loose of their lips, and free of their flesh as they. But
Valericus, why do thou thus reckelessely rail and rage against womankinde.
It is not Castania that thus crosses thee with care, but Gwydonius that
breeds thy grief. It is not she that infers thy sore, but he that
procures thy sickness.

She is not the means of thy maladye, but he the hinderer of thy medicine.
She is not the worker of thy woe, but he is the sower of thy sorrow. And
shall he be puffed up with prosperity, and I pressed down with misery?
shall he swim in wealth, and I sink in want? shall he bath in bliss, and I
wail in woe? shall he be pampered up with pleasure, and I pinde away with
penury? No, I will either spoil him, or spill my self, in despite of the
fates and fortune.

WHile thus Valericus sought opportunity to revenge his wrath upon guiltless
Gwydonius, Fortune minding to bewraie her immutabilitie, brought it so to
pass, that whereas Orlanio was accustomed to pay a yearly tribute to the
duke of Metelyne, which surmounted to the sum of thirty thousand Ducats,
either wilfully or unwittingly he withheld this debt, which Clerophontes
claimed as his due, insomuch that being demanded by Embassage for ye payment
of this tribute, he flatly answered, that he would not from hence forth
disburse one denier, and he was sorry that in paying it heretofore he proved
himself such a fool. Whereupon Clerophontes being fraught with raging fury,
was so incensed against Orlanio, that taking counsel of his nobilytie, he
determined with as much speed as might be, to wage battle against him, and
to obtain that by constraint, which he denied him of courtesy. As thus he was
musing with himself whom he should appoint Captain general of his army,
because he meant not in proper person to abide the hazard of the battle, the
rem^mbraunce of his son Gwydonius, came into his mind, which not only
amazed him, but so molested him, as he was driven into most distressed dolor,
now he called to mind his merciless cruelty in correcting his faults, and
his moodlesse rigor in rebuking his folly: ^owe he bewailed his long absence,
and wished his speedy presence: yea, he was so diversely perplexed, as he began
thus dolorously to discourse with himself.

Alas (quoth he) now I see the saying of Cicero to be true, that who so
wilfullye peruerteth the laws of nature, seems to proclaim himself an
enemy to the Gods: for that Nature never framed any thing amiss, wherein I
have most grievously offended: For in beastly rage I have surpassed the brute
beasts, and in cruelty the senseless creatures: I have been more deuoyde of
pity then the fowls of the air, and more unnatural then the Fishes of the
Sea. The Bird called Apis Indica, seeing the venomous Uiper ready to devour
her young ones in the neast, presents her self to death, to preserve them
from destruction. The Eagle is so careful over her young, that if it hap by
her default one of them do perish, she willinglye wounds her self in many
places with her own beak. The Lion so lovingly fostereth up her Whelps, that
she never tastes of the pray until they be fullye satisfied. The Fox is
so careful over her cubbes, that she willingly falls into the Hunters
hands to defend her young from harm. But I vilde wretch, (as though I had
drunk of the River Lincestis in Bohemia, which presently tourneth whatsoever
it touches into stones. In steed of friendly courtesy, have abused mine own
son with frowning cruelty, in liew of mercy I have brought him to misery,
the fatherlye affection I have showed him, has been raging fury: yea, my
rygorous Nature, nay rather my unnatural rage has been such toward him,
as he lives a bannished exile in a strange Country, perhaps pinched with
penurye, oppressed with poverty, wandering in the wild Desartes, in danger
of devouring, in peril of spoiling, afflicted not only with the malady of
the body, but the misery of the mind: so that no doubt he wishes that I
had never been Father to such a son, or he never son to such a Father.

Alas what joy can I now enjoy, when I want my only joy? What comfort
can I have to see my child in calamity? What pleasure can I take while
he toyleth in penury, who now in mine age should be the staff whereon to
stay, that by his valiant courage and warlike prowess (wherewith from his
infancy he has been indewed) might defend me from mine enemies, and
revenge me of my foes. But alas I lament too late, the calm comes out of
time, when the Ship already has suffered shipwreck, and these pitiful
plaintes little prevail, where the patient is already pushed into peril. No,
no, my rage has been too great, to hear of his hasty return, my perverse
fury has been such, as he dare not abide my presence: and surely my sorrow
is too great ever to be salued.

And with that Clerophontes start up, minding to revenge these his cholarike
cogitations by bloody battle, upon the confines of Alexandria, and
therefore in great have mustered all his men, made great provisions for the
war, and caused his Navy to be rigged, for that he meant to conueie his
army by sea into Alexandria.

While thus there was no word through the whole Dukedom of Meteline but
war, war, and no news but of the cruel conflicte that should ensue
between the two Dukes. Certain Merchauntes of Alexandria, which then road in
the Haven, durst not go a shore to sell their commodities, but as fast as
Wind and weather would serve them, highed them out of the harbor, and coasted
speedely into their own country: where they no sooner arrived, but they made
report thereof to Orlanio, who driven into a dumpe with this noisome news,
whether he doubted of the puissant power of Clerophontes, who was such a
worthy warrior, and in battle so bold, that no man durst abide him, or
whether he feared his own force was not able to resist the fury of his raging
enemy. He presently summoned all his Lords to a Parliament, where after some
conference, it was concluded, that Thersandro should be sent Ambassador to
Metelyne to parle of peace with Clerophontes, which determination was no whit
deferred, but with as much speed as might be, the bark wherein he should
pass was provided, the charge of the Embassage was given him, and he
accompanied with a train of brave Gentlemen, departed.

But if this news was doleful to Orlanio, no doubt it was death it self to
Gwidonius, who hearing that his Father would bend his force against the place,
wherein he was. Saw all possibility taken away from obtaining his purpose.
For he feared death if he were known to Orlanio, and he doubted despightfull
hate at the least if he bewraide himself to Castania. Which double dolor so
distressed him, as he felt himself diversely perplexed with dumpish passions,
his mirth was turned to mourning, his pleasant conceits, to painful
cogitations: his wanton toys, to wailing thoughts, now he abondoned all good
company, and delighted only in solytarie life, the wilesome woods were his
wished walks, and the secret shades the covert he chiefly coueted. In fine, he
seemed rather a Tymon of Athens, then a Gentleman of Alexandria, so that all
the Court meruailed at this so sudden a change: but especially Castania, who
co^iecturing his doleful heart by his drousy looks, was astonished at this his
strange state, casting in her mind whether she had given him any cause of this
care, or whether by her occasion he was crossed with this calamity. But alas
poor soul, howsoever she aimed she mist ye mark, for Gwydonius felt his
disease so secret, as he knew none could but himself divine the cause of
his malady, which no doubt was such, that it would have inferred present
death, if he had not hoped for some happy news by Thersandro.

Who no sooner luckely arrived at Metelyne, but Clerophontes was certified, that
the Dukes son of Alexandria was come to impart with his grace some weighty
matters of importance. Now at this instaunt when the message was brought him,
his Daughter Lewcippa was by, who (as the Nature of women is, desirous to see
and be seen) thought she would both hear the parle, and view the person of
this young Ambassador, and therefore found fish on her fingers, that she might
stay still in the chamber of presence, whether presently Thersandro was sent
for, who courteously and curiously doing his obysaunce to the Duke, delivered
his Embassage in this manner.

WHere-as (ri^ht worthy sir) O^lanio, the Duke of Alexandria, more unwittingly
then wil^ully denied certain tribute, which he confesses both he and his
predeces^ours have paid to you and your aun^est^urs. Hearing that heerevppon
your grace meanet^ rather to wage battle, then to loose any part of your
due although he fears not your force, as one able every way to withstand it,
nor passes of your puissaunce, as a Potentate sufficient to resist your power.
Yet, the care he has of his subjects safety, and the love he has to
preserve the life of his commons, the regard he has to pay and perform that
which conscience and custom requires, and lastly, meaning with Tully,
Iniquissimam pacem iustissimo bello anteponere. He has sent me both to sue
for conditions of peace, and to pay the tribute, which if your grace shall
refuse, of force he must put his hope in the hazard of Fortune.

THersandro having thus pythelye performed his charge, Clerophontes told him
that upon a sudden he would not dispatche so weighty a matter, but meant
first both to consulte and take counsel of his Nobles: which done, within
three days he should have an answer. In the mean time he commanded
Lucianus the Steward of his house, very courteouslye to entreat both
Thersandro and his train, and to feast them with such sumptuous fare, as they
might have cause most highly to extol his magnificence.

But leaving Clerophontes to consult with his learned counsaylours, and
Thersandro to company with the lusty Courtiers, again to Lewcippa, who while
this young youth was telling of his ^ale, never markte the matter, but the man,
nor regarded not the parle, but respected the person: never noted the contents,
but viewed his countenance: In such sort, that she was so scorched with the
fire of fancy, and so scalded with the flame of affection, so bewitched with
his beauty, and so inueagled with his bounty, as he was the only man that
made her check at the pray, bate at the Lure, and wyllingly yield to the
first assault of fancy. And on the other side, Fortune so favored, that
Thersandro printing in his heart the perfection of Lewcippas person, felt his
freedom so fettered by the view of her heavenly face, and so snared in the
beams of her amorous glaunces, that he wished that either this discention had
never grown, or that he had not been the deliverer of the message, for he
felt his heart already so ouergrowen with good will toward this young
Princess, as no salve but her self was able to mittigate his sorrow, no
medicine but her courte^^e was able to cure his calamity, and he thought to
prefer his suit to his professed foe, was folly: to linger still in love,
was death and misery: to seek for help at her hands, neither would the
present state permit him, nor time suffer him to prosecute his purpose:
daunted with these diverse doubts to avoid the melancholic motions that
molested his mind, he presently went from his lodging to the Court, that by
company he might drive away these dumpes, where he found in the great
chamber diverse Ladies and Gentlemen, passing away the time in pleasant
parle, amongst whom was that pearelesse Paragon, princely Lewcippa: who (after
due reverence done to the Gentlewomen in general) was singled out by
Thersandro, and courted in this wise.

MAdame (quoth he) if any creature has just occasion to accuse either Nature
or the Gods of injustice, man only has the greatest cause to make this
complaint, for there is none either so deprived of reason, or deuoide of sense,
which by some natural instinct does not skilfully presage of perils before
they come, and warily prevent ere they be past.

The Goats of Lybia know certainelye when the Canicular days begin,
wherein commonly they fall blind, and therefore by eating the herb
^olopodium they prouidentlye prevent their disease. When the Lion leaves his
Lawnes, and raungeth in foreign Deserts, he always foresheweth a drought.
When the Fish called V^anascapos sinketh down to the bottom of the Sea, he
bewrays great tempests to be imminent. But man is so far from this
secret foresight, that not only he cannot divine of these ensuinge
dangers, but rather wilfullye or willing, pusheth himself into most manifest
perils, which madame, I speak, as feeling my self distressed with this want.
For if I had been endued with this sacred prescience, perfectly to presage of
ensuing perilles, I had not ben crossed with such cares as I am like to incur,
nor had cause to repent this my present arrival. But since lack of such
skill has procured my loss, and that when the hurt is had it is too late to
take heed, though revealing of my mishappe cannot heal my misery, nor
repeating of my pains redress my sorrow: yet, I mean to participate my
passions to your good grace, that though you cannot or will not mittigate my
malady, yet you may pity my estate, which will somewhat ease my heaviness.
I came to your Fathers Court madame, a free man of Alexandria, and am like to
return a captive of Metelyne, I arrived deuoyde of care, and am like to
depart, drenched with calamity: I landed free from affection, but fear to
pass hence fraught with fancy: my charge was only to parle of peace, but my
chance is to discourse of passions. Yea, your beauty has so fettered my
freedom, and so snared my heart in the linkes of your love, that it shall
never be raced out by any sinister means of Fortune, although I see it is
almost impossible to obtain it.

For I doubt our parents are like to proclaym^ themselves professed foes, and
the urgent necessity of my affairs, forces me to depart so speedelye, as
want of time will not suffice to make trial of my love, whereby I might claim
a sufficient guerdon for my good will: yet howsoever the matter shall hap,
whether my hope be void, or my hap be vain, I mean madame to remain yours
for ever.

Lewcippa took such delight in hearing Thersandro discourse so lovingly, as
she could scarely keep her countenance from bewraying the pleasure she
conceived in this parle, seeing that her love was requited with lyking, and her
fancy incountered with the like affection. Yet least Thersandro should think
her too courteous if she should come at the first call, and very light of love,
to like at the first look, she framed him this answer.

SIr (quoth she) if of your suit for conditions of peace there ensue no better
success than the revealing of your passions shall reap pity at my hands,
or if the entreaty for truce be as lightly respected by my Father, as either
your person or petition is regarded by me, you are like to carry home cold
news to your country, and to vaunt that you bad fair, but bought little:
that your Harvest was long, but your corn not worth the cropping: that your
venture was much, but your gains such, as if your winnings prove no better, you
are like to live by the loss. For sir, do you suppose me so sottish, as to
think every one that flatters does fancy, or so addicted to self love, as
by a few filed phrases to be brought into a fools Paradise: knowing that it is
the fashion of men by their fained subtlety to deceive our faithful
simplicity. No, for if you mean to counterfaite, take this for a rule, it is
ill halting before a creple. But sir, this your sudden liking bewrayes y^
lightness of your love, this your fond affection, imports the fickleness of
your fancy: for soon hot, soon cold? easily inflamed, as quickly quenched:
like to the Apples of Arabia, which begin to rot, ere they be half ripe. And
if I meant to love, had I none to like but my Fathers foe? should I desire him
whom my Father does detest? And if I should so far forget mine own stay,
or my Fathers state, as to consent, it were impossible either to appease his
wrath, or to get y^ grant of his good will, so yt to desire y^ which I can
never enjoy, were to drive my self wholly into despair, which would smally profit
you, and greatly displeasure me, and therefore cease to sue for that, which
may^ well ^e wished, but never obtaiued.

Thersandro although he heard Lewcippa decide the case sufficiently, yet he was
so wilful, that he would not take her doom for a verdite, but returned her
this replye.

MAdame (quoth he) where in liew of hate there insueth love, it is always the
sign of the greater affection: and that it is a thing either confirmed by the
Fates, or appointed by the Gods. Tereus the Prince of Thra^e, being sent by his
Father to defy Pand^on the king of Athens, was enamoured of his daughter
Progne, whereby between the Parents in steed of fatal enmity, there insued
friendly amity. When as the bloody wars between Atis the King of Libia,
and Lycabas the Prince of Assure was most hot, young Admetus being sent
Ambassador into Libia, was so stricken in love with Alcest, only Daughter to
his fathers foe, and she repaying his lyking with such loyalty, as death it
self could never dissolve their amity. If madame, these premises may
persuade you to take pity of my passions, or these examples induce you, not
to let the hatred of our parents be a hindrance of our love, whether your
father reject me as a foe, or accept me as a friend, I doubt not but the
destinies will drive the bargayne through, in despite of them and fortune.

Sir (quoth she) I confess Progne poor wench loved Tereus, but how wretchedly
did he reward her loyalty? and Scylla was enamored of Mino^ her fathers foe,
but how tyrannously did he repay her love with treachery, Tarpeia betrayed the
Tower of Rome to one of the Sabynes whom she most entirely loved, but the meede
of her merit was extreme misery. Shall I then Therfandro see the train and
yet fall into the trappe, shall I spy the nets, and yet strike at the stale?
shall I see the mishap, and yet wilfully incur the mischaunce, no I mean not
for an inch of joy, to reap an ell of annoy, for a moment of mirth a month of
misery, for a dram of pleasure, a whole pound of pain, and by procuring mine
own delight to purchase my fathers death and destruction. But let this suffice
Thersandro to signify how I pity thy passions, and think well of thy person,
that if my Fathers will might be framed to my wish, if he would condescend as I
would consent, thou only art the man who in the way of marriage should dispose
of me at thy pleasure. But since the frowning state of Fortune denies our love to
have such happy success, hope well, and rest upon this point, that I will
always like thee as a friend, though not love thee as my pheere.

AS Thersandro was ready to replye, and to seal up the bargain of their love
upon her sweet lips, Clerophontes came in, who marred all their market, and
turned their sweet to sower, for he gave Thersandro his answer before
Lewcippa, which was this.

That he neither meant to accept of the conditions of peace, nor to receive the
tribute, but to claim his due by the doubtful event of battle. That he
shortly pretended in person to visit Orlanio, and within the walls of
Alexandria to demand his debt, and that he would bestow his Fathers Dukedom
upon a Lord of his called (...) in dowry with his Daughter Lewcippa.

Thersandro was nothing amazed with the first part of the message, but when he
heard how Clerophontes meant presumptuously both to deprave him of his
ly^ing, and deprive him of his Love, he was so puffed up with wrath and
chollar, as hap what hap would, he fell into these terms.

I Remember (quoth he) that Caligula the Emperor providing a mighty army to
subdue great Britain, when he was come to the Sea, ready to post over his
Soldiers in his Navy, he left off his endless enterprise, and set them to
gather Cockles. Siphax boldly boasting that he would bestow the kingdom of
Numidia upon his second Son, was by Massinissa overthrown, and sold as
captive to the Romans. I dare not sir infer comparisons, because they be
odious, nor apply the examples, since time and place forbids me: but this I say,
that to fish before the net, is always counted folly, and to vaunt before the
victory, is but vanity. Yea, and if I had as good right to your Daughter
Lewcippa, as I have to the supposed Dowry which you assign her, I would in
despite of Lucianus and the devil himself, dispose her at my pleasure.

Clerophontes hearing the cholaricke conclusion of Thersandro could scarcely
bridle his frantic fury from raging without reason against this young youth,
yet somewhat mittigating his mood, he breathed out these cruel threatenings.

IF the law of Arms (quoth he) did not both safely protect thee, and surely
forbid me to hurt thee in y^ thou art a messenger, I would with such severity
chastise these thy presumptuous speeches, as thou should learn hereafter to
answer with more reverence: yet I wysh thee not to stand too stiff upon this
point, least if thou be so recklesse as to break the bonds of reason, I be so
forgetful as to pass the lymits of the law. Thou have received a determinate
answer for the Embassage, and there I charge thee this present day to depart
out of my Dominions.

Thersandro fearing the tyranny of this cruel Clerophontes, presently passed
out of the Chamber of Presence, taking his leave of Lady Lewcippa, only with
loving looks, which she requited with such glaunces of good will, as they were
sufficient signs what insupportable sorrow she received by his so sudden
departure: yet knowing that her fancy was incountred with mutual affection,
she drove away the mystie clouds of despair, hoping that the Gods seeing
their faithful amity, would take pity of their passions, and in time redress
their misery.

But Thersandro having with speed dispatchte his affairs (all his train being
set aboard, and they coasting the straights with a luckie gale) was so combred
with care, and so ouer-growen with grief, that he passed no hour, minute, nor
moment, without woeful waylyng, sorrowful sobs, and far fetched sighs, so
that the Gentlemen his companions, supposing that he was thus painfully
perplexed for fear of Clerophontes pu^ssance, began both to comfort and
encourage him not to doubt or dread the force of the enemy, since his father
was able to repulse him, without any danger to himself, or any great damage
to his subjects. But these their persuasions could no whit prevail to assuage
his passions, this their encouragement could not cure his care.

But as there is no greater bane to the body, than trouble of the mind: so
Thersandro so long continued in these pensive passions, and careful
cogitations, concealing his grief so covertly, which so much the more
furiously flamed within him, that he was constrained to keep his Cabin till
his arrival at Alexandria.

Where being set on shore, and presently conveyed to the Court, he remained
for the space of three days, so strangely perplexed, as he was not able to
make report of his message: which so griped Orlanio with such inspeakable
grief, as he wished rather to have died valiantly with the force of his enimye,
than to put the health of his son in hazard by passing so perilous a
journey. But Thersandro seeing that sorrow would not salve his sore, but rather
increase his sickness: that mourning would not appease his malady, but rather
augment his misery: began to take heart at grass, and within few days began
to recover his former health. And then he declared to his Father, what he had
in charge from Clerophontes, how he meant speedely to wage war against him, and
by force of arms to drive him out of his Dukedom, which he had already
promised to one Lucianus in dowry with his Daughter. Orlanio hearing this
proud presumption of this bragging Duke, thought the greatest barkers were not
always the sorest biters, and that it was far more easy with words to
obtain the victory, than with deeds to attain the Conquest. Yet, least he
might be taken at unawares, he made a general muster throughout all his
Dominions, providing in every place necessary munition for the defense of his
Country. And assembling his Nobility to give their verdite, who were fittest
to be Captains in this skirmish: after some consultation had in this cause,
they concluded, that since Clerophontes meant to join battle in his own
person, that likewise he should be General of the field, and Gwydonius who
surpassed all the rest in martial exploites, should be Lieuetenant, and conduct
the army, which he no sooner heard but he was tormented with inspeakable
grief, he began to pull down his Peacockes feathers, to hang his wings, and
cry creake: every man hoping to win fame was merry, but he alone mourning:
every man laughed, and he alone lowred: insomuch, that he was generallye
suspected to be a fearful cowarde, and that dread of danger drove him into
these doleful dumpes. But as they rashly coniectured the cause of his sorrow,
so they mist the nature of his sickness: for Gwydonius seeing that of this
cruel conflict his calamity should ensue, and that this bloody broyle would
breed his bane, he fell into such solitary surmises, and such musing
meditations, that Valericus his open friend and yet his secrette foe, sought
by sundry means to search out the cause of his care, but not being able to
wring out any thing, either by flattering promises or fained protestations, he
ceased from his importunate suit. But froward fortune brought it so to pass,
that Valericus coming by the chamber of Gwydonius, heard him thus desperately
discoursing with himself.

ALas (quoth he) I see the Sun being at the highest declineth, the Sea being
at full tide ebbeth: calm continues not long without a storm, neither is
happiness had long without heaviness, bliss without bale, weal without woe,
mirth without mourning. For who a late so floated in the floods of felicity as
I, which now by the sinister means of frowning fortune am sowsed in the seas
of sorrow, exalted alate to the highest degree of happiness, am now driven to
the greatest extremiti^ of evil: alate puffed up with prosperity, and now
pushed down with adversity: yea, alate placed in Paradise, and now plunged in
perplexity.

Oh Gwydonius, if thy fathers friendlye precepts might have persuaded thee, if
his advice had been thy advertisement, and thou had carefully kept his
counsel, then by his fore-warning thou had been fore-armed against all
mishap and misery. The force of fickle fancy had not then given thee the
foil, love had not so lightly procured thy loss, nor the painted show of
beauty had not so soon procured thy bane. My bane? Why fond fool, beauty
has bred my bliss, fancy has not given me the foil, but has yielded me
the fort: Love has not wrought my loss, but requited me with treble gain.

Has not Castania requited my love with loyalty, and repayed my good will
with mutual affection? Is she not my Saint and I her servant? Are we not
contracted together by love, and shall continue together by law? May I not
dispose of her in the way of marriage at my pleasure? Yes, but what then, the
more is my grief, and the greater is my care. For if her presence procures my
delight, will not her absence breed my despite? If her consent preserved my
life, will not her contempt infer my death? Yes. For alas sin^e the destinies
mean to dissolve that fancy has decreed, since the frowning fates seek to
unloose that which love has linked, since froward fortune means to break the
bonds wherein beauty has bound us, since these bloody broiles will cause
Castania (where before she accepted me for a friend) now to reiecte me for
a foe: What better luck can I look for, then a loathsome life, or what
better hap can I hope for, than horror and heaviness? Yea, which way so
ever I turn me I see nothing but woe and wretchedness. For if Orlanio
perceived our liking, how would he storm at our love? If he knew my chance,
how would he fret at his Daughters choice? Would he ever consent, that
Castania should match with so mean a mate, that her princely personage should
be disgraced with my base parentage, that her calling should be crazed with my
slender countenance: no, he would no doubt first banish me out of all his
dominions. Tush Gwydonius, would God this were the worst, and then thou
might hope in time by some means to redress this doubt. But if Orlanio
should know thou were heir apparaunt to the Dukedom of Metelyne, and only
son to Clerophontes, his fatal foe, what torment were there so terrible,
which thou should not try? What pain so pinching, which thou should not
pass? What hap so hard which thou should not hazard? Yea, what death so
direful, which at his cruel hands thou should not suffer? And what if
Castania were privy to thy state, do thou think her so constaunt as to
consent to her Fathers foe? do thou think she would wish the sons weal,
when the Father wishes her mishap? No, assure thy self if thy state be once
known, that Castania will most deadly detest thee, which will be more grievous
to thee then death it self, be it never so terrible. Since then Gwydonius, thou
must shortly either go in arms against thine own father, or else loose both
thy love and thy life, let not delaie breed danger, but strike on the stith
while y^ iron is hot, Castania has promised to forsake both Father, friends,
and her own country, to pass where and when it pleases thee, she doubts no
dangers, she forces of no misfortune, she cares for no calamity, she
passes for no perils, so she enjoy thy desired company, and therefore as
speedely as may be, conueie her closely into y^ confines of Metelyne, before
either she know thy stay or thy state. And shall I so practice her with
policies? shall I so sift her with subtlety? shall I put so little trust in
her troth? and so small confidence in her constancy? as to co^ceale from her
any secret? No, come woe, come wretchedness, come death, come danger, hap
what hap will, I will presently impart unto her my present state, and my
pretended purpose.

Valericus hearing this doubtful discourse of Gwydonius, was driven into an
ecstasy for joy, to see that he had found such fit means whereby he might not
only purchase the Dukes favor, aspire unto honor and dignity, but also
obtain the love of Castania, for he meant speedely to prevent the pretense of
Gwydonius by unfolding to the Duke the sum of his secret purpose, assuring
himself, that after Orlanio knew his parents and parentage, that he was son
and heir to Clerophontes, no price though never so precious, no ransom
though never so rich, might redeem him from the most despightfull death that
could be devised. And of these premises he inferde this conclusion, that the
cause be taken away the effect fails, that Gwydonius being rejected, he
should be received: that he being despighted with hate, he should be
requited with love, and upon this hope he went presentlye to bewraie this
matter to Orlanio, whom he found with his son Thersandro, and diverse other
noble men consulting what course they had best take against Clerophontes, whom
Valericus saluted in this wise.

PLato (right worthy Prince) that grave and wise philosopher, whose sentences
in all ages have been holden as most divine Oracles, portrayeth out in the
books of his Common wealth, the picture of a perfect Citizen, whose liniaments
being first leuelled, he tricketh up with these colors, that he love his
Prince loyallye, keep the laws carfully, and defend his Country valyantly,
in which three points (says he) consists the chiefest duty of a trusty
subject: this saying of Plato thoroughly considered, and calling to mind the
sundry good tournes which without desert your grace has bestowed upon me, I
thought if I should not repaye your favor with faithfulness, and your trust
you repose in me with inviolable troath, I might be counted a vicious vassal,
deuoide of all virtue, a treacherous Citizen, rather then a trusty subject, a
careless slave, then a careful Gentleman: yea, a graceless monster, misled
with ingratitude. I am come (right worthy Sir) not to betraie my foe, but to
bewraie my friend, not to discover the fault of my enemy, but to disclose his
offense, which lives with me in perfect amity, in whose company hitherto
has been all my joy, pleasure and delight: but since his pretense is greatly
prejudicial to your graces person, I thought to prefer your profit before
mine own pleasure, and the commodity of my country before mine own private
contentation. So it is that Gwydonius, whom your grace has honored, and all
the Court esteemed, is son and heir to Clerophontes, the Duke of Metelyne,
who by the peevish policy of his Father, under the pretense of service, is
purposed to procure your fatal death, and the final destruction of your
Dukedom. And the better to perform this devilish practice, he has
contracted himself to my Lady Castania, who blinded with his beauty, and
inueagled with his wit, has consented, not only to keep his counsel to
your confusion, but also closely to convey her self with him into his
Country. Which pretense if your grace does not speedely prevent, you shall
find that delaie breeds danger, and that procrastination in perils is but
the mother of mishap.

And have I (quoth Orlanio) brought up the Bird that will pick out mine own
eyes? Have I fostered up the Serpent in my bosom that will breed my bane?
Have I given her life that seeks to yield me death? Have I cherisht her
being young, and will she consume me being older: was there none to choose
but Gwydonius, nor none to love but the son of her fathers foe? Will she
prefer her lust before my life, her private pleasure, before the safety of
my person? Well, as she forgets the duty of a child, so I will forget the
natural affection of a Father, and therefore Valericus, go speedely with these
noble men to Gwydonius chamber, and apprehend him, that I may requite his
hateful treachery with most hellish torments. And Thersandro, see you that
Castania be closely kept until we have caught the traitor, least she
understanding that their devise is disclosed, she save her self by flight.

Valericus having this commission given him from the Duke, made no delay, but
passed to Gwydonius lodging with as much speed as might be: but Fortune who
after every chip of mischaunce, sends some lot of good luck, and after
every storm of adversity, sends a quiet calm of prosperity, so carefully
provided to free Gwydonius from mishap, that he was newlye gone toward
Castania, to impart unto her this his pretense, but before he came to her
chamber, he was incountred by Thersandro, who stearnly taking Gwydonius by the
bosom, pulling out his Rapier, commanded him as a traitor to stand, or else
without any farther doom he should feel the dint of death.

Gwydonius amazed with this sudden motion, stood as one in a trance, neither
being able to defend himself with word or weapon, but yielded himself into y^
hands of Thersandro, who shakt him up with these bitter speeches.

THou traitorous wretch (quoth he) as it is impossible for the flame so closely
to be covered, but it will be spied, so it is impossible, but that treason,
though never so secret, should in tract of time be disclosed, which now by
experience is verified in thee, for although thou have hitherto falsely fained
thy self to be a stranger of a foraine nation, thou art now known to be
son and heir to Clerophontes that cruel tyrant my Fathers foe, by whose
peevish policy thou had not only brought the common wealth to confusion, but
did pretend to be prejudicial to my fathers person, if thy deadly practice
and devilish purpose had not by Valericus his means ben prevented. Have thou
ben so trained up in treachery, or is thy mind so spotted with villainy, as to
repaie my Fathers good will with such barbarous ingratitude, and to devise his
destruction which simply foresought thy preferment. Yea, to counsel my sister
Castania, not only to consent to thy desire, but to my fathers death? Is this
the manner of Metelyne? or the custom of thy country, to be such cosoning
counterfaits? Well, since I have happily attached thee as a traitor, and as a
villainous rebel, both transgressing humane and divine laws, thou shall abide
the pain and punishment due to such devilish offenders. Now let thy cruel
sire Clerophontes free thee from those torments that thou art like to suffer
for thy treachery, and let the Lords of Metelyne deliver thee from his hands,
who means in most miserable wise to martyr thee. Yea, let thy Concubine
Castania, who is like for her graceless disobedience to sippe of the same
sorrow, see if her tears will now prevail to move Orlanio to pity. No, if
Jupiter himself sent Mercury to mittigate his mood, neither the authority
of the one, nor the eloquence of the other might prevail to pacif^e his fury.

GWydonius seeing that not only his purpose was prevented, and his secrets
disclosed, but that also Valericus most villanously had accused him and
Castania of that which they never so much as once imagined, was so perplexed,
and driven into such dumpes, as he seemed by ^^lence ^o a^erre that which
Thersandro had alleged, yet at last he began thus to reply.

THersandro (quoth he) as I mean not to affirm that which is false, so I will
not deny that which is true, but come dolor, come death, come misery, come
martyrdom, come torture, come torments, I will neither accuse my self
iniustly, nor excuse my self by perjury. I confess Thersandro that I am
son and heir to the Duke of Meteline, and contracted to thy sister Castania,
that Clerophontes is my father by the law of nature, and Castania my wife by
the league of love, but that I either pretended or purposed to be prejudicial
to Orlanios person, or y^ Castania was counseled or ever consented to her
Fathers confusion, I not only deny, but I will prove by combat, that
Valericus most villanously does accuse us of that whereof we are altogether
sacklesse.

WHy Gwydonius, (quoth he) will thou seek to prove thy self loial, when the
hearers deem thee a liar, or to make a trial of thy troth, when thy words can
have no trust? Do thou think my fathers fury will suffer thee to fable?
Do thou think his wrathful rage will abide thy reasons, or that he will be
so patient as to hear thee plead thine own cause? No, if thou were as clear
from these crimes alleged against thee by Valericus as I am, yet in that thou
art son to Clerophontes, the coin of Croesus, and kingdoms of Caesar, were
not sufficient ransom to redeem thee from death. But Gwydonius, since thy
health hangs in my hands, and thy life or death is in my power, I will
neither be so bloody minded as to breed thy bane, nor so cruel, as to be
the cause of thy confusion. The guerdon Gwydonius I crave for this my good
will, and the recompense I claim for this courtesy, is: that when thou come
to Metelyne, thou certify thy sister and my love and Lady Lewcippa, that for
her sake I have procured thy safety, that her perfection has preserved thee
from peril, the love I bear her has saved thy life, the duetifull devotion I
owe unto her, has redeemed thee from death and danger. And in token of this
my unfeigned affection, I will lift my hand against none that comes from
Metelyne, but against Lucianus only.

Before Thersandro was able fullye to unfold his mind, or that Gwydonius had
time to yield him thanks for the sauegard of his life, they heard a great
noise, which made Gwydonius fly, and Thersandro hie him hastily to Castanias
lodging. Now the company which came, was Orlanio himself, who certified by
Valericus that Gwydonius could not be found, laid not only watch and ward
throughout all his Dukedom to attach him, but went in proper person with his
Guard to apprehend Castania, and lay her in close prison, whom he found all
blubbered with tears, for that she had understood the cause before of her
brother* Thersandro: Orlanio no sooner spied her thus weeping, but he raged
against her in this wise.

Has the force of love, nay rather the fury of lust (vild wretch) so blinded
thy understanding, that to accomplish it thou passest not to pervert both
humane and divine laws. Does lascivious affection and fleshly fancy so
furiously fry within thee, as thou would procure thy fathers death to
purchase thy devilish desire? Could no rules of reason, no prick of
conscience, no respect of honesty, no fear of God, nor dread of man, prohibit
thee from pretending such a monstrous mischief, as to conclude with my mortal
foe to work my fatal confusion. The young Storkes so tender the old ones in
their age, as they will not suffer the^ so much as to (...) to get their own
living. The Bird called Apis Indica, being young, seeing the old ones through
age grown so weak, as they are not able to wa^e their wings, carri^ them
continually from place to place on their backs: these savage creatures have but
only sense, and are obedient, thou have both reason and sense, and art more
unnatural, these brute beasts are most dutiful to their parents, and thou a
reasonable creature art most disobedient to thy Father: yea, contrary both to
the laws of Nature and nurture, thou seek to bath thy hands in his
guiltless blood, and without care or conscience to commit most cruel
murder, which is so hateful to all things, as the senseless plants and
stones most deadlye detest such villainy. The Olive tree so hatefully abhors
a Parracide, that who so being guilty of that crime, attempteth to plant it,
does not only himself presently perish, but the tree forthwith wayneth and
wythereth. The stone Epistrites so loatheth this offense, counting it a fact so
repugnaunt to nature, that it will not vouchsafe to be worn by a murderer. And
shall I then let thee live who^ the senseless creatures do so deadly loath.
No, this hand which cherisht thee being a child shall now chastise thee being
such a cursed caitife. And with that he drew out his Fawlcon ready to have
slain her. But that Thersandro kneeling down, desired him that he would not so
in his fury forget himself, as without the sentence of the law put her to
death, but to commit her to ward until the wars between him and Clerophontes
were happily ended, and then upon more straight examination, if she were found
faulty, to assign her a punishment due for such an offense. Orlanio somewhat
pacified with his sons persuasion, commanded that presently she should be
carried to prison, and the Lady Melytta with her, as an actor also in this
Tragedy. And that with all speed they should post the country for the
attaching of the traitor Gwydonius.

Who after that he parted from Thersandro, seeing before his eyes the terror
of torments, and the hellish horror of death, was driven forward so with the
dread of danger, and fear of imminent perils, that knowing perfectly the
coast of the Countrry, he passed so secretly and speedely, as he was not so
much as once descried by the Posts that pursued him, but escaped safely^ out of
the Dukedom of Alexandria. Being now without the dint of the Dukes danger,
seeing that although he had escaped himself, yet he had left his Love and
Lady Castania in hazard of her life, he began thus to exclaim against his
own folly.

AH Gwydonius (quoth he) what folly have thou committed by this thy fearful
flight, what careful calamity is like to ensue of this thy cowardice in
avoiding Scylla thou art fallen into Cha^ibdis, in preventing one danger thou
art like to be plagued with a thousand discommodities. Had it not been better
for thee to have died in Alexandria with honor than to live here with shame
and reproach, to have suffered mishap with Castania then to linger here in
misery? Do thou think that she will ever count of such a prating Paras^te,
as will love her in prosperie and leave her in adversity, as prefers his
own safety before her security, his life before her love, and draws
himself out of danger to leave her in distress? No, she will contempne thee
as a coward, more fit to be a mate to some country ^^nt, than a ^atch for such
a courtly Princess, she will think thy greatest faith was but fained
fickleness, thy forged love was but filthy lust, thy promises was but
periuries, and that thy greatest amity was but most dissembled enmity: so
that of a professed friend she will become thy professed foe, her desire will
turn to despite, and her love to most hellish hate.

Why alas, would my pain have pleased her, would my martyrdom have contented
her mind, had my peril procured her profit, or my care her commodity. Nay,
rather would not my danger have been her death, my mishap her misery, my
torture her torments, and my fatal destiny her final destruction. By saving
my life in time we may enjoy our love, but by death no hope had been left
for obtaining our desire: so that I assure my self, Castania will rather
allow of my policy by preventing perilles by flight, than mislyke of my
practice in procuring mine own safety. And upon this point I rest, hoping
that the Gods seeing how unjustly Valericu; has accused us, will in tract of
time rid us from blame and reward him with shame.

GWydonius was not more distressed with dolor than poor Castania was combred,
with care to see so strange a chance and so sudden a change, that she who of
late was a royal Princess, was now a ruthful prisoner, that her freedom was
turned to fettars, her dignity to misery, and her happy stay to a most
hellish state: that after floods of tears which fell from her Crystal eyes,
she burst forth into these terms.

ALas (quoth she) what poor Damsel was ever driven into such doubtful
distress? what Princes was ever perplexed with such doleful passions? what
maid was ever crossed with such mishap? nay what creature ever was clogged
with the like calamity? Have the spightfull destinies decreed my destruction,
or ye peruers^ Planets conspired my bitter bane? Does froward fortune mean to
make me a mirror of her mutabilitie, or is this the reward that Cupid
bestows upon his Clyents? Is every one that does fancy maimed with the like
misfortune, or is love always accompanied with such hapless luck? Alas no,
for their love is lawful, and mine leawd and lascivious: their fancy is fixed
upon virtue, and mine upon vanity, they make their match with consent of
their parents, and I my market without my fathers counsel: so that I am like
in choosing such chaffre, to chop and change and live by the loss: yea, to
buy repentance at an unreasonable rate. Had it not been better for thee
Castania, to have condiscended to the requests of Valericus, then consented to
the suit of Gwydonius: to have liked thine own countryman, than loved a
straggeling stranger: to have satisfied thy self with assurance, than
vainly to fish for hope?

Truth, but what then? can the straw resist the virtue of the pure Iet? can
the flax resist the force of the fire? can a lover withstand the brunt of
beauty? freeze, if he stand by the flame: pervert the laws of nature, or
eschew that which is framed by the fates, or fly from the force of fa^cie? No,
for who so escapes the deadlye darts of Cupid, shall be scorched with his
fire, and she that with the deaw of chastity quenches this flame, shall be
o^er-taken with his wings: so that to seek by flight to eschew affection, is
foolishly to enterprise that which can never be achieved.

But alas, if I must needs lend a listening ear to the allurements of love,
was there none to like but thy Fathers foe? Now fond fool could thou show
him courtesy, that intendes to repaye thee with cruelty? How could thou
choose the son to thy mate, when the father seeks thy misery? It is not
possible to mix the blood of a Bull and a Bear together in one vessel. The
Lions whelps will never company with the young Wolves: the Fawlchons called
Pelagrae will never fly with the young Lauaretes, and if the eggs of a Crow
and a Curlewe be put in one neaste, they both forthwith burst in sunder,
because there is such^ ancient enmity between the old ones. And will thou
then be so wilful to love him whom thy Father does loath, or so perverse as
to place thy self in that Parentage, where there is such mortal hatred
between y^ Parents? will thou so far forget the duty of a child, as more
to respect thy fatal enemy, than regard thy natural father? But why vilde
wretch do I thus fondely fable, though Clerophontes be my fathers foe, yet
Gwydonius is my faithful friend: though the one seek to procure my pain,
the other seeks to purchase my pleasure: though the old sire strives to
subvert my fathers state, yet the son never sought to be preiudicall to his
person: although that perjured parasite Valericus has most unjustly accused
him of treachery. Shall I then hate him who has always honored me? shall I
work his woe that wishes my weal? shall I be his bane, who has bred my
bliss? shall I detest him, which serves me with most deep devotion? No, I
here heartely powr^ out most pitiful plaints to the Gods to preserve my
Gwydonius from peril, and that Fortune may so favor him as he may pass out of
Alexandria without death or danger. What though I here in prison pine in pain,
what though I sink in sorrow, what though I be distressed with grief, and
oppressed with misery, what though I be crossed with care, and combred with
calamity? Tush, let my Father fret and fume in his fury, let my brother rage
and rail, let that traitor Valericus triumph, and all the Country most
bitterly curse me: yea, let them martyr me most miserablye, let them torment me
most terribly, yet direful death shall not fear me, as long as I know
Gwydonius is deuoyde of danger. For I hope though fortune frown, though the
destinies deny it, though y^ fates forswear it, yea though the Gods
themselves say no, yet in time we shall have such happy success, as the
loyalty of our love, and the cleerenesse of our conscience by the law of
Justice do deserve. And therefore Gwydonius shall be the Planet whereby to
direct my doings, he shall be the star shall guide my compass, he shall be
the haven to harbor in, and the Saint at whose shrine I mean to offer my
devotion.

Castania having thus discoursed with her self, she determined when the
wars were ended, if she could have no hope to enjoy the love of Gwydonius,
to confess her faults, and to sue for mercy at the bar of her Fathers
courtesy, not that she meant to live without Gwydonius, or to love or like any
other, but to prolong her days in dolor, that she might most rigorously
revenge the villainy of Valericus, and by bathing in his blood she might both
satisfy her self and signify to Gwydonius how entirely she loved and lyked
him. But leaving her perplexed with these passions, again to Clerophontes.

Who frying still in his frantic fury, was not any whit persuaded to
conclude peace with Orlanio, but having mustred his men, as speedely as might
be, imbarkt them, and with a luckie gale arrived at the coast of Alexandria,
where the borderers not able to abide his force, were constrained to save
themselves by f^ight. But he as a man having exiled from his heart both piety
and pity, bathed his hands in guiltless blood fiering every fort, battering
down every bulwark, sacking each City, racing down the walls to the
ground, and commanding his soldiers upon pain of most grievous punishment,
not to have any respect of persons, neither to regard the hoarie hairs of the
aged Citizens, nor the tender years of the sucking Infants, but to imbrue
their blades with the blood of all men, of what degree soever.

Orlanio hearing how Clerophontes had invaded hy^ dominions, and with what
barbarous cruelty he had murdered his subjects, having also intelligence
by his Scowtes, that his army was passing huge, the better to resist the
furious force of his enemy, hired out of other Countries, a great multitude
of Mercenarie Soldiers, so that he gathered a marvelous great host, wherein
was an infinite number endued with great skill, and long experience.

Furnished thus sufficiently both with men and munition like a wise and wary
Captain, seeing that he no way else might resist the puissaunt power of so
mighty a Prince, determined without further delay to meet him and to give
him present battle, having marvelous affiaunce in the approved manhood and
virtue of his Soldiers.

Clerophontes likewise being of such a valiant and invincible courage, as he
seemed from his infancy to be vowed to Mars and martial affairs, manfully
marched forward to meet with his enemies, which he performed so speedely, that
within few days, both the Armies were within view, which Clerophontes seeing,
he began to encourage his soldiers on this sort.

ALthough most trusty subjects (quoth he) I neither doubt of your prowess,
nor have cause to fear your manhood, as having mine Army fraught with the
most courageous Captains, and boldest bloods of Metelyne, yet I wish you to
consider how desperately we have adventured upon the Conquest of this Dukedom,
which if we atchieue, we shall not only gain perpetual fame and renown, but
reap such riches and treasure, as shall sufficiently counteruaile our travail.
But to obtain this victory we must behave our selves valiantly, neither
dreading any danger though never so desperate, nor doubting any peril though
never so fearful. Before our face we have our enemies, behind our backs the
surging seas, so that fight we must, but fly we cannot: in being courageous we
win the field, and return conquerours: in proouing cowards, we both loose
our lives and the conquest: if we foil our foes we return with triumph, if we
faint and fly we have no hope of safety, but death and desperation is
imminent. Be then hardy to hazard, and valiant to venture amiddest the prease
of your enemies, that daunted with your valor they may be forced to fly, and
we both triumph and enjoy the treasure.

CLerophontes having thus louinglye encouraged his soldiers, Orlanio on the
other side seeing his men began to fear the force of the enemy, and were
amazed with such a monstrous multitude, pricked them forward with this Parle.

THat mighty Monarch Alexander y^ great, who for his martial exployts, was a
mirror to all his posterity, whose prowess was such as he daunted Darius, and
by his invincible courage made a conquest of the whole world: hearing on a time
one of his Captains to demand what multitude was in their enemies camp,
answered, that it was not the point of a good soldier to inquire how many the
enemies were, but where they were, meaning that to fear the multitude is rather
the sign of cowardice, then a toke^ of courage. Which saying I wish you
carefully to consider, y^ the huge army of Clerophontes neither amaze your
minds, nor abate your valor, since y^ the equity of our cause does more the^
counteruaile his company. He inuadeth our realm without reason, and we defend
but our own right: he cruelly seeks to deprive us of freedo^, and we
lawfully do maintain our own liberty. He tirannously strives to make us
bondslaues, and we fight to free our selves from captivity. If he prevail let
us look for no pity, but that we shall be murdered without mercy, we shall
see before our face our wives ravished, our daughters defloured, our parents
put to death, our children slain, our goods spoiled, our City sacked, and our
selves brought to utter ruth and ruin. Since then we are placed between two
extremities, eito possess our own with plenty, or to pass our lives in
penury: let us valiauntly venture whatsoever we gain, let us fight without
fear: for better it is to die with honor, than to live with shame.

BY that time Orlanio had ended his Oration, the Armies met in a Plain, within
thirty leagues of Alexandria. Where both of them ordering (as became good
Captains) their people, there began in the break of the day, the most cruel
and terrible battle that erst was heard of, considering the number on both
parts, their experience and policy, with the valiant prowess and courage of
the Captains. Thus continued they in fight, even almost until eeuen, with
meruaylous slaughter on both sides, the victory yet doubtful, till in the
end the Alexandrians began to faint and fly, more oppressed with the excess
of the multitude, than distressed for want of manhood, for there were two and
forty thousand slain, but not one taken prisoner, and of Clerophontes
company eight and twenty thousand slain, and six hundred mortally wounded.
This monstrous massacre and fearful slaughter, so amazed the minds of these
two Captains, that for the better burying of the dead, and healing of them
which were hurt, they concluded a truce between them for fifteen days, in
which time Orlanio sent Ambassadors to parle of peace with Clerophontes, but in
vain: for he was resolved either valiantly to die in the field with glory, or
to inioye the Dukedom of Alexandria with renown. Yet as a worthy Prince,
preferring the security of his soldiers before the safety of his own person,
he offered them the combat, which Orlanio to avoid the effusion of blood, most
willingly accepted. Now it was agreed and concluded between the^, that two
champions might be chosen, who by the dint of the sword should stint the
strife between these two armies. If he of Metelyne remained victor, then
Orlanio should not only pay his former tribute, but deliver up his Dukedom
into the hands of Clerophontes. But if y^ Alexandrians obtained y^ conquest, y^
Duke of Metelyne should peaceably depart the country, release the tribute, and
also resign his state, and become a subject to Orlanio. And for the better
keeping and confirming of these conditions, they presentlye dispatched
Ambassadors to Fernandus the king of Bohemia, to entreat his majesty that he
would vouchsafe to become judge in the combat, who for that he wished well to
both these dukes, granted to their requests, and with as much speed as might
be, came to Alexandria. But in the mean time there was some difference about
the champions. For Clerophontes said, that since in loosing the field, consisted
the loss of living, life, and liberty, and in getting y^ victory, the gain
of a Dukedom, he would in proper person fight the combat and try the chance
of Fortune, and therefore made a challenge to Orlanio. But he finding himself
far unfit to resist his furious force, refused it. Yet promising, that none
unless he were descended of Nobility should enter the lists, wherewith
Clerophontes was very well contented. Now while this truce continued, which
was prolonged for thirty days, it was lawful for them of Alexandria to come
and view the camp of Metelyne, and for the Metelynes to go and see the
City. Whereupon Clerophontes desirous to see Orlanio and his Court, went
only accompanied with his guard to Alexandria, where he was most royally
entertained, and sumptuously feasted by Orlanio, both of them remitting the
rigor of their malice, till it should be showed in effect, by reason of
their manhood. But as soon as Thersandro and the other Lords saw Clerophontes,
y^ he was rather a monster then a man, having each lim so strongly couched,
each part so proportioned, so huge of stature, and so fierce of countenance,
they were so dau^ted with the sight of his person, as they almost feared to
come in his presence, saying: that thereof the boldest bloods in Alexandria
were not able to abide the force of Clerophontes. Who now peaceably departing
to his host, left Orlanio as greatly perplexed for asse^bling his nobility
together, amongst whom he appointed the champion should be chosen. They not
only with one consent withstood his command, but began to murmr and mutine
against him, condempning him of folly that he would so unadvisedly commit his
own state, and there stay to the doubtful hazard of one man's hap. Orlanio seeing
y^ it was now no time to chastise this their presumption, unless he meant to
raise civil dissension in the city, which were the next way to confirm the
enemy, and breed his own confusion, he disse^bled his cholar and began to
work a new way. For first he freed Castania out of prison, the^ made general
proclamation throughout his Dukedom, y^ what Lord so ever wtin his land would
try the combat with Clerophontes, if he remained victor in the conquest, he
would not only give him his daughter Castania to wife, let him possess
peaceably the Dukedom of Metelyne as her dowry, but be content to acknowledge
him as his liege, and pay him tribute, as he was wont to Clerophontes.

While he lingered and listened how this proclamition would prevail, Castania
hearing this severe sentence and doleful doom pronounced, seeing that should
not only be forced to forsake Gwydonius, but be constrained to match in
marriage with one whom she should neither love nor like, burst forth into
these bitter complaints.

A Alas (quoth she) how pinching a pain it is to be perplexed with diverse
passions, what a noisome care it is to be combred with sundry cogitations,
what a woo it is to hang between desire and despair, and what a hell it is to
houer between fear and hope. For as to him which is assured to die, death is
no dolor, in that he perfectlye knows there is no salve can cure his sorrow,
so to him which fears to die, and yet hopes to live, death were thrice more
welcome, then to linger in such doubt. In which cursed case alas my case
consists, for as out of the river Cea in Sicillia bursteth most fearful
flames, and yet the stream is passing cold, neither is the water able to
quench the fire, nor the fire cause the water to be hot, so the heat of
hope flameth out of the chilling fountain of fear, and yet the force of the
one is not able to assuage the vehemency of the other, but still my heavy
heart is diversely assailed with them both. If my Father Orlanio win the
conquest, I doubt my desire shall never have happy success, if Clerophontes
triumph as victour, I greatly fear his cruelty is such, as I shall not
escape most hapless death. And yet again I hope that then my own Gwydonius
will accept me for his, and with triumphant arms embrace me. But alas, will
Clerophontes suffer him to match with his mortal so, will he not rather prevent
it by my peril? Yes no doubt, if he return with triumph, my Father shall serve
him as a subject, my brother shall become his vassal, my friends shall be
forlorn, my City sacked, and my native Country brought to utter confusion.
And shall I for the love of a stranger wish these strange stratagemmes?
Shall I to feed mine own fancy, and content my lustinge mind, wish my
Fathers death, my Brothers bane, my friends mishap, my Countries confusion, and
perhaps my own misery. For though Gwydonius loved me when our parents were
friends, he will not now like me being foes: but to revenge the injuries my
Father offered him, will subtly seek to sack my honor and honesty, and so
triumph of my shame and discredit. Had I not better pray my Father may win
the combat, and then shall I bath in the streams of bliss, and flow in the
floods of felicity, then shall I dread no danger, no fear, no perils: then
shall I see my father, friends, and Country, flourish in most happy
prosperity: then shall I enjoy some jolly Gentleman, who will love me being
young, and cherish me being old, and possess the Dukedom of Metelyne for my
dowry. And can thou Castama be so ungrateful, as to will his woe which
wishes thy weal, to desire his destruction which prays for thy prosperity?
can thou be so covetous as to ^rau^ that for thy possession, which is thy
Gwydonius patrim^nie, or so suspicious as to accuse him of treachery, which
has been but to trusty: to count him a counterfaite, which has always been
constant? No, come what come will, let froward fortune favor whom she please,
so I may joy and safely enjoy my only joy Gwydonius.

As Castania had thus ended her complaint, Gwydonius who all this while lurked
about the borders of Alexandria, heard what success Orlanios affairs had with
his Father Clerophontes, how very few or none at all durst try the combat
with him, that his love and Lady Castania was the prise that he should get
that gained the conquest. Which things considered, supposing y^ Castania had
cast him off, and that she played, out of sight out of mind, by a secret and
trusty messenger, he presented her with this Letter.

Gwydonius to Castania health.
THE pure spice Castania the more it is pounded, the sweeter smell it yields,
the Camomill increases most being trodden on, the Palm tree the greater
weight it bears, the straighter it grows, the stone Terpistetres the more
it is beaten the harder it is, and loyal love is not weakened by the storms
of adversity, but rather far the more fortified by the froward state of
frowning fortune: which Madame I speak by proof and experience, for since I
have sipped of the sower dregs of sorrow, and been pestered with the bitter
pills of penury, since sinister fortune has crossed me with mishaps, and
disaster fates have driven me down to misery, my fancy has so furiously
assaulted my mind, and affection has so incessantly battered the bulwark of
my breast, as y^ sparks of love which were kindled in me in prosperity, are
turned to fierce and fiery flames by adversity. So that madame, your presence
did not before procure me such pleasure, as your absence does pain, neither
was I so drowned in delight in frequenting your company, as I am drenched with
despite by leading my life in sorrowful calamity. Alas Castania what
unspeakable grief has tormented me? what direful dolor has distressed
me? what hellish horror has hunted me? yea, what woe and wretchedness has
wracked my wits, since thou have been proclaimed a pray to him whosoever
wins the prise in the combat. How often have I wished that I might be the
champion to make the challenge, that I might venture my life to purchase thy
liberty, that my death might redeem thee from danger.

But alas, I see to wish is in vain, to to crave of the Gods, that thy
Father should vaunt of the victory, is but to wish that your love should
have hapless success: to pray that Clerophontes should return with
conquest, thou will deem I desire thy friends misfortune, thus assailed with
diverse doubts, I drive off my days in dolor: hoping howsoever fortune
froune, that the fates will assign us a perfect calm of permanent felicity,
for this sturdie storm of pinching misery.

Thine ever, exiled Gwydonius.


CAstania having received this Letter, seeing that no sinister chance of
fortune was able to change y^ fixed fancy of Gwydonius, conceived such assured
hope in his constancy, as now she thought his troth was filed with no spot of
treachery, that his faith was quite deuoide of flattery, and that whatsoever
chanced, she might safely repose her stay and state in his loyalty. Insomuch
that to drive out the evil opinion which she thought her brother Thersandro
had conceived of Gwydonius conspiracy, she secretly showed him the Letter,
which after he had read over and carefully construed every clause, he began
both to detect and detest the villainy of Valericus, desiring his sister
Castania that she would earnestly persuade Gwydonius in disguised apparel
speedelye to repair to her lodging, promising with solemn vows and sacred
oaths, not to be prejudicial to his person: Castania affying greatly in her
brothers faith, and desirous to have a sight of her loving Gwydonius, returned
him these few lines.

Castania to Gwydonius, prosperity.
WHo so tastes Gwidonius of the herb Mely, Sophilos is never tormented with
the sting of adversity, and she that wears the stone Mephites about her,
never soroweth at sinister fortune, who so fancieth without faining never
proves fickle, and she that loves loyally may well be crossed with calamity,
but never justly accused of inconstancy. Account thy Castania good Gwydonius
to be in the same predicament, for let disaster mishap drive me down to most
deadlye misery, let the cruel fates compass me with cursed care, let fortune
and the destinies conclude my confusion, yet it shall not diminish my fancy,
but rather increase my affection. I will still in weal, in woe, in bale, in
bliss, in mirth and misery, say I love, and it is only Gwydonius. For shall
our fancy be such as it shall be foiled with misfortune: no, but as Thetis
changing into many shapes, at last returned into her own form, so into what
mishap I be driven by misery, yet I will stand in mine old state in despite
of ye fates and fortune. Come therefore Gwydonius to the court in disguised
apparel, but without care, for thou shall find me so trusty, as my troth
shall be without spotte, and thy health without hazard. Thus wishing thy
courtesy to conster well of my constancy, I bid thee farewell.

Thine or not her own, constant Castania.


GWidonius having carefully construed over y^ contents of this loving letter,
although ye rigor of Orlanio might have given him sufficient cause of
suspision, yet ye cleerenes of his own conscience and the love he bare to
Castania, would not suffer him either to suspect any treason, or to doubt of
any deceit, but determined without any delay to put the saftie of his person
and the sauegard of his life into her hands. But leaving him to bring his
purpose luckely to pass, again to Orlanio.

Who seeing that his proclamation could not prevail, and that his nobles
preferred their own safety before his security, was perplexed with such
hellish passions, and griped with such pinching grief, as the Ghoasts
tormented with gri^^y fiends felt no such hapless fury. To fight with
Clerophontes, he felt his strength far unfit to resist his force, to deny
the combat he neither could^ nor would, although he brought himself to
confusion, and his children to captivity, so that howsoever he turned
himself, he saw before his face death and despair, woe and wretchedness,
mishap and misery. Combred thus with this curelesse care, and sitting
solitarily in sorrow, seeing the dismal day drew on, and hearing that Fernandus
the king of Bohemia was lately landed, he fell into more furious passions,
until he was driven out of his dumps by his son Thersandro, who perceiving
his father thus dolefully daunted, he began most lovingly to comfort him,
promising that since none durst venture to deal with Clerophontes, he himself
would fight y^ combat, and either worthelye win the conquest with renown, or
manfully die in the field with honor.

Orlanio hearing the bold courage of this new champion, felt his sorrow
somewhat salued by this proffer, persuading himself y^ his son was better
able to abide ye brunt then he, and hoping that the Gods would favor the
equity of the cause, and assuredly by justice grant him the victory. Resting
I say upon this hope, and thanking Thersandro for his natural affection, and
praising him for his noble courage, he presentlye went to meet Fernandus,
whom he most princely entertained, conducting him very royally into Alexandria,
where he most sumptuously feasted him and all his train. But as they passed
away the time in pastime and pleasure, so poor Thersandro spent the day in
dolor and the night in sorrow. For although to comfort his Father he made
light of the combat, and valiauntly offered himself to try the chance of
Fortune, yet seeing his enemies force far to exceed his feeble strength, he
began to faint, although like a worthy Gentleman he covered his dreadful
courage with a desperate countenance, raunging up and down the fields to
drive away his melancholy, where by chance in disguised apparaile he met
Gwydonius, to whom after some Parle past between them, he bewrayed the whole
state of the matter, how he was to enter combat with Clerophontes, and that
he doubted greatly of the event of the victory, fearing the force of his
Father, and fainting at his own imbecilitie. Which Gwydonius hearing he made
this short answer.

THersandro (quoth he) it is vain with long talk to pass away the time when
delay breeds danger, and folly to hope for fair weather when the air is
ouercast with clouds: leaving off therefore all oaths to confirm my faith,
thus much to the purpose. If it please thee to trust me without trial, and to
give any confidence to my words, I here promise both to make manifest my
loyal love to Castania, and to repay thy courtesy, that I will, resembling
thy person, and disguised in thy armor, enter combat with my father
Clerophontes, either intending by winning the victory to obtain my will, or
by loosing the conquest to want my wish: if this my proffer please thee, I will
pass privily to yt Court, if not good Thersandro, let me go as I came.

Thersandro commending the subtle devise of Gwydonius carried him as covertly
as could be to Castania, to whom he was (...) more welcome than soon come,
remaining closely in her closet till ye next morning. Castania (...) nothing of
their pretense. Fernandus ^ing of Bohemia the next day being gone with all
his (...) place appointed for the combat. Orlanio, Castania, and all the Lords
of Alexandria, clad in mourning attire followed him, thinking this dismal day
should be the ^^te of their destruction. And (...) thirfting after blood, and
glory^ng in the hope of his supposed conquest, stood in the (...) foe. To
whom Gwydonius his (...) furnished with the armor of Thersandro, presented
himself* Who seeing, that forced by the fond allurements of love, he was to
fight, not with his mortal foe, but with his natural father, he fell into these
doubtful dumpes.

Alas poor Gwydonius (quoth he) how art thou combred with diverse cogitations,
what a cruel conflict do thou sinde in thy mind between love and loyalty,
nature and necessity? who ever was so wilful, as willingly to wage battle
against his own father? who so cruel as to enter combat with his own sire?
Alas, duty persuades me not to practice so monstrous a mischief: but the
devotion I owe to Castania drives me to perform the deed, were it thrice
more dangerous or desperate. The honor I owe to my Father makes me faint for
fear, but once to imagine so brutish a fact: the love I owe to Castania
constrayneth me to defend the combat if Jupiter himself made the challenge.
And is not (fond fool) necessity above nature, is not the law of love above
King or Keyzar, Father or Friends, God or the Devil? Yes. And so I mean to
take it: for either I will valiantly win the conquest and my Castania, or lose
the victory, and so by death end my miseries.

With that the trumpets sounded, and Gwydonius lustely leaping into the lystes,
fell presentlye into furyous fight with his father, driving not only Fernandus
and Orlanio, but also both the armies into a great doubt, for although
Clerophontes most cruelly prosecuted him, yet he always received the strokes,
but never so much as once returned one blow, till at last looking aloft, and
spying Castania, his courage so increased, that all fear set aside, he
carelessely flang away his sword and shield and ran upon his Father, not
only tearing from him his target, but vyolently casting him upon the ground,
and speedely unlacing his Helmet, offered to cut off his head with his own
sword: but Clerophontes crying out confessed himself captive, and granted his
enemy the conquest. Whereupon they of Alexandria, gave a mighty showte, and
Fernandus and Orlanio came down ready to carry Clerophontes captive to the
City. But Gwydoni^s* first demanded of Orlanio if he was content to
perform that which he promised by proclamation, to whom Fernandu^ answered
that both he would and should or else as he was his friend so he would be his
foe. Gwydonius hearing this faithful assertion of the King, pulling down his
beauer, began to speak in this manner.

I Let thee Orlanio (quoth he) and the worthy king of Bohemia to know, that I
am Gwydonius, son and heir to this conquered Clerophontes, who for the love
of thy Daughter Castania have not spared contrary to the law of nature, to
fight with mine own Father, hoping the destinies by my means have decreed,
not only of fatal foes to make you faithful friends, but to finish up our
love, which otherwise could not have been performed.

I have won Orlanio my Fathers Dukedom by victory, and thy Daughter by
conquest, the one I had before by inheritance and the other by love, yet I
would willingly have thy good will, which if thou grant, I hope my father will
both pardon my offense and think well of my proffer.

Clerophontes kissing and embracing Gwydonius, told him his care was half
cured, in that such a good Captain had won the Conquest. Fernandus and
Orlanio stood astonished at this strange Tragedy, doubting in whether they
dreampt of such a rare device, or saw it effect. At last Orlanio as one wakened
out of a trance, with trickeling tears embraced Clerophontes, honoring him
as his Sovereign, and promising not only to give Castania to Gwydonius, but
also half his Dukedom in dowry. Clerophontes thanking him for his courtesy,
consented most willingly to this motion, so that before Fernandus departed, the
marriage between Gwydonius and Castania, Thersandro and Lewcippa, was most
sumptuously solemnized.

EINIS.
The Debate between Folly and Love, Translated out of French by Robert
Green, Master of Arts.
The Argument.
IVpiter made a great Feast, at the which all the Gods were commanded to be
pre^^^ (...) Love and Folly arrive at one Instant at the gate of the Palla^ce,
which was shut, having nothing open but the wicket. Folly seeing Love ready to
enter in, passes before, which repulse drives Love into choler. Folly
avouches that of right she ought to be the foremost. Whereupon they enter
into disputation of their power, dignity and superiority. But Love not able
to get the conquest by words, takes his bow in hand and shoots at her, but
in vain, for Folly became invisible, and in despite pulls out Cupids eyes.
And for to cover this deformity, shadoweth his face with a veil, so (...) by
the Destinies* that it was not possible to take it away. Venus complains of
Folly unto Jupiter, who appoints Appollo and Mercury to plead (...) of these
two Clients, whose discourse being heard, (...) pronounces his sentence.

Folly. I Fear greatly that I shall be the last at the Feast of Jupiter, where
all the Gods no doubt do attend me. And yet me think I see the Son of Venus
which is as late as ^. I will pass^ before him, least they call me sluggish and
sloathfull.


Love. WHat fool is this that repulseth me so rudely? take heed least have
make wast, and that thy rashness cause thee not cry Peccaui.


Folly. Oh sir, blame me not though I make have, for I go before to tell the
Gods, that you come at leisure.


Love. Nay, that which is easily begun, is not always lightly ended: for
before thou escape me, I will revenge this thy injurious jesting.


Folly. Let me go fond Love and stay me not, for as it is a shame to quarrel
with a woman, so it is more discredit to take the foil.


Love. The foil. What boasting brags be these? who has ever adventured to
despise me, much less to defy me? But do thou know what I am.


Folly. Thou art Cupid the Son of Venus.


Love. How dare thou then vaunt thy self against me, which how little so
ever I be, am the most redoubted of all the Gods.


Folly. Thy words are great whatsoever thy works be, but tell me, what or
wherein lies this thy great power.


Love. The heavens and the earth fond fool are witnesses of my words, there
is no place where I have not left Trophies in sign of triu^ph. Look into
heaven, and demand if any of the Gods have escaped my hands? Begin with old
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Apollo, and end with the Demigods, Satyrs, Fawnes, and
Siluanes: Nay, the Goddesses themselves will not shame to confess somewhat.
Look upon the earth, and see if thou can find one, which has not ben foiled
by my means. Behold in the furious Seas, how Neptune and his Tritons do yield
me obeysaunce. Yea, and lastly look into Hell it self, if I have not forced
Pluto that infernal Prince, to steal away Proserpina the daughter of Ceres.
And to the end, thou doubt not with what engines I have achieved these
victories, behold this Bow and these Arrows only, which have won me these
worthy Conquests. I have no need that Vulcan do temper my tools. I am not
accompanied with the Furyes and Harpies, to cause me to be feared before the
Combat. I have not to do with Charyots, Soldiers, Captains, men of arms,
nor great troops of Horsemen, without the which mortal men cannot triumph.
No, I have no other counsel, munition, nor aid, but my self. When I see
mine enimyes in the Field, I present my self with my Bow, and let fly my
Boltes, and the victory is always gotten at the first stroke.


Folly. I excuse thy youthful years poor Cupid, or else I would blaze thee
for the most presumptuous patche in the world. It seems by thy vain
vaunting that every one holds his life of thy mercy, and that thou art the
only Lord and Soueraygne both in Heaven, Earth, the Sea, and Hell. But many
things are spoken which are never believed.


Love. And art thou so hard of belief, to deny that which every one
confesses.


Folly. I have not to do with other men's opinions: but this I am sure, that it
is not by thy force and prowess, that so many miracles are wrought in the
world, but by my industry, by my means, and by my diligence, although thou
know me not. But if thou do continue long in this thy choler, I will let
thee understand that thy bow and thy arrows whereof thou vauntest so much,
are more weak than wax, if I bend not the one, and temper the other.


Love. Do thou think by this scoffing to pacify mine anger, or by
contemptuous threatening to quallyfie my choler. Have thou ever (fond fool)
handled my bow, or directed my boltes? Is it thy prowess and not my force
which perfourmeth such valiant Conquestes? But since thou regardest me and
respectest my force so little, thou shall presently feel the proof thereof.


Folly makes her self invisible, so that Love cannot hit her. Love. But where
art thou become? How have thou escaped me? This only is the straungest case
that ever chanced unto me. I had thought that amongst all the Gods I only
could have made my self invisible. But now I see I am deceived.


Folly. Did not I tell thee before, that thy bow and thy arrows are of no
force, but when it pleases me, and that by my means thou always obtainest
the conquest. Marvel not if I be invisible, for if I list the eyes of the
Eagle or of the Serpent of Epidawrus, cannot epsy me, for Camelion like I take
the shape of them with whom I do remain.


Love. Truly as I conjecture thou art some Sorceresse, or some Inchauntresse,
some Circe, some Medea, or some Fayrie.


Folly. Well, since thou do thus recklesly rail upon me, know that I am a
goddess as thou art a God, my name is folly: I am she which raises thee up,
and casts thee down at my pleasure. Thou vnloosest thy bow, and let
fly thine arrows in the air, but I place them where it pleases me. Thou
do address thy self against Jupiter, but he is of such puissaunce, that if
I both guided not thy^ hand, and tempered thy arrow, thy feeble force could
little prevail against his prowess. Indeed you did force Iup^ter to love,
but I caused him to change himself into a Swanne, into a Bull, into Gold,
into an Eagle. Who caused Mars and thy mother Venus to be taken in bed
together by the limping cuckolde Vulcan, but I? If Paris had done no other
thing but loved Helena, Sparta had never rejoiced, nor Troy ben brought to
ruin. But did not I cause him to go to Menelaus under color of Embassage,
to Court unto his wife to lead her away by force, and after to defend his
unjust quarrel against all Greece? Who had spoken of the love of Dido, if he
had not devised to go a hunting, that she might have the better commodity to
communicate with Aeneas, that by such private familiarity he might not be
ashamed to take from her that which long before most willingly she would have
given him. I believe no mention had been made of Artemizia, if I had not
caused her drink the cynders of her husbands dead carcass, for else who had
known whether she had loved her husband more then other women. The effect and
issues of things always make them to be praised or dispraised. If thou make
men to love, yet I am often times the chiefest cause. But if any strange
adventure or great effect chances, in that thou have no part, but the only
honor belongs unto me. Thou rulest nothing but y^ heart, the rest I govern:
yea, I lead thee, I conducte thee, and thine eyes serve thee to no more use
then the beams of the Sun to a blind man. But to the end thou know me
from hence forth, and that thou may give me thanks for conducting thee
carefullye: Behold now how greatly thine eyes do profit thee.


Folly puts out Cupids eyes. Love. Alas Jupiter, O my mother Venus, what
avails it to be thy son so feared, so redoubted, both in heaven and in
earth, if I be subject to be injured as the most vile slave in the world:
Alas, have I thus lost mine eyes by an unknown woman.


Folly. Take heed sond fool another time to rail upon those who perhaps
are of more force and puissaunce then thou. Thou have offended the Queen of
men, thou have outraged her who governs the heart, the brain, and the mind:
Under whose shadow every one once in his life shroudeth himself, and there
remains either long or short time according to his merit, thou have
displeased her who procures thy renown, thou have contempned her who has
advanced thee, and therefore has this misfortune fallen upon thy head.


Love. Alas, how is it possible for me to (...) her whom I never knew, or to
reverence that person whom before I never saw: but if thou have borne me such
great good will as thou say, pardon this my offense, and restore me my sight.


Folly. To restore thee thine eyes is not in my power, but I will cover the
place to hide the deformity.


Folly covers Cupids face with a Scarf, and gives him wings. And in liew of
this hapless luck, thou shall have these wings which shall carry thee whether
thou will wish

Love. But where had thou this veil so ready to cover my deformity.


Folly. It was given me as I came hither, by one of the destinies, who told me
it was of that nature, that if it were once fastened, it could never be unloosed.


Love. How unloosed? am I then blind for ever? O vile and traitorous wretch,
could it not suffice to pull out mine eyes, but to take away the means, that
the Gods cannot restore them, now I see the sentence verified on my self, that
it is not good to take a present at the hand of an enemy. O cruel destinies,
O cursed day: shall not the heavens, the earth, and the seas have cause to
wail, since love is blind. But why do I complain here in vain, it is
better for me to sue to the Gods for reuengement.


The second discourse.
Love goe^^ from the Palace of Jupiter, lamenting to himself his mischief.
Love. Alas in what miserable case am I, what can either my bow or mine
arrows avail me, now can I not cause whom I (...) ^oue, but without respect
of persons, every one is in danger of my darts. Hitherto I have only caused
dainty damsells and young youths to love, I did choose out the brauest bloods,
and the fairest and most well featured men: I did pardon vile and base persons,
I excused the deformed creatures, and let old age remain in peace. But now
thi^king to hit a young gallaunt, I light upon some old ^^^ting lecher: in
steed of some brave Gentleman, I strike some filthy foul lurden. And it shall
happen (I d^^bt) that they shall be most fortunate in their love, so that by
patrimony, presence, or wealth, they shall soonest win the favor of women,
and by this means my kingdom shall come to ruin, when men see in it such
disorder and evil government.


Venus having long sought Cupid, now meets him. I have carefully long sought
thee my dear son, meruailing what the cause should be that thou have not
been present at the banquet of Jupiter. Who is greatly incensed against thee,
not only for thy absence, but for the complaints which are (...) out against
thee by sundry poor artificers, laboring men, pesaunts, slaves, hand maids,
old men, and toothlesse aged women, crying all unto Jupiter, that they love,
thinking themselves greatly injured in this respect, that the passion which is
proper to worthy and noble men, should be inflicted upon them which are of the
base and vildest sort.


Love. Had not the great misfortune which is chanced unto me happened, I had
neither been absent from the banquet, nor these grievous complaints had not
been inferred against me.


Venus. Why? and art thou hurt? Who has thus veiled thine eyes.


Love. Folly has not only pulled them out, but also has put this band
before mine eyes, which can never be taken away.


Venus. O cursed enemy of all wisdom, O hapless wretch, unjustly called a
Goddess, and more unrightly termed immortal, have thou deprived me of my
chiefest delight and felicity. O disaster love, O dissolute mother, O woeful
Venus. who see thy son, thy joy, and only care, thus cruelly deprived of
his sight. Well, since thy mishap is so great, I vow that every one that
shall love (what favor or happy success so ever he shall have) shall not be
without some care, trouble, or calamity, that he vaunt not himself to be
more happy then the son of Venus.


Love. Cease off good mother from these sorrowful complaints, and redouble not
my grief by these your dolorous discourses, suffer me to bear mine own
misfortune, and wish not evil unto them which shall be my subjects.


Venus. Well, let us then go to Jupiter, and complain of this cursed
inchauntresse.


The third discourse.
Venus. If ever thou had pity of my plaintes, most just Jupiter, when thou
saw me labor to save my son Aeneas from the fury of the raging Seas, and
to defend him from other dangers, in the which he was present at the siege of
Troy. If my tears for the death of my dear Adonis moved thee to compassion.
The surpassing sorrow that I do conceive for the great injury offered to
Cupid, I hope shall move thee to pity. If tears would suffer me I would
bewraie the cause of my sorrow, but behold my son in what plight he is, and
thou shall easily perceive the cause of my complaint.


Jupiter. Alas my dear daughter, what do these tears prevail, know
thou not what fatherly affection I have always borne thee, what do thou
distrust that I will not succor thee, or that I cannot.


Venus. No, I neither doubt the one, nor distrust the other, I only demand
justice against Folly, the most outrageous fury in the world, which has thus
grievously abused Cupid.


Folly. Most mighty and sovereign Jupiter, behold I am here ready to
answer to Venus complaints, and to debate my right against Cupid.


Jupiter. Folly, I will neither accuse nor excuse thee, until I have heard the
defense of the one, as well as the plaint of the other, least I should be
thought parciall, neither for the more avoiding of injustice in the matter, will
I suffer you to plead your own causes, but Venus choose you one of the Gods,
and Folly take you an other.


Venus. I choose Appollo to defend my cause.


Folly. And I Mercury to maintain my right.


Jupiter. Then Apollo and Mercury, prepare your selves to plead well in your
clients cases, and Apollo since you take the plaintiefes part, let us hear
what you can say.


Apollo. THe common people, right sovereign Jupiter (although their minds be
sotted and almost se^celes, yet they have al way had love in such sacred
estimation, y^ they have carefully rewarded the^ with the titles of honor and
dignity, which have excelled in y^ holy affection, esteeming this only virtue
(if so rightly it may be termed) sufficient of a man to make one a God. The
Scithians for this cause canonized Pilades and Orestes, erecting temples unto
the^, and calling the^ the Gods of amity. Castor and Pollux were made immortal
by this means, not in y^ they were brothers, but in y^ (which is rare) their
love was inviolable. How has fame blazed abroad y^ love of David and
Ionathas, y^ amity of Pithias and Damon, and of Titus and Gysippus. But y^
better to make manifest y^ force of love and amity, I will allege the saying
of Darius, who opening a Pomgranat, being demanded whereof he would have as many
as there were grains within, answered, of Zopyres: this Zopyre was his faithful
friend, by the means of whom he conquered Babylon. I remember also a certain
Syrian demanding a maid in marriage, and being willed to show of what wealth
he was, said that he had no other riches but two friends, esteeming himself
rich enough with such possessions to crave y^ daughter of a great lord in
marriage. Did not love cause Ariadne save Theseus life, Hyperminestra redeem
Linceus from danger, and Medea free Jason from peril? Have not many poor
soldiers ben advanced to high dignities by y^ means of love? yea, does not all
pleasure and profit proceed to man by love, causing him to look with an amiable
countenance, to speak pleasantly, and to be curious in his ieastures, although
by nature he be dull, sottish, and of a fierce look. What causes a man to go
brave and fine in his apparel, seeking every day new fashions, but love? What
procures Gentlewomen to have their hair frizeled, crisped, and embrodered
with gold, to be dressed after the Spanish, French, or Italian fashion, but
Love. Painting their faces if they be foul, with lively colors. But if they
be fair, they so carfully keep their beauty from the parching heat of
Summer, from the chilling cold of Winter, from Wine, rain, and age, as they
remain almost ever young, not so much as forgetting to have their shoes made
fine and neat (because the curiousness of men is such, as they leave not to
look from the crown of the head to the soale of the foot) to have their
iemmes, jewels, ouches, ringes, perfumed gloves, and what not? In fine, what
beauty or bravery is in the apparel either of man or woman, all proceeds
of Love. Shall I say that Music was only invented by love, yea truly, for
either it mittigateth the passions wherewith men are perplexed, or else
augmenteth their pleasure, so that daily they invent diverse kinds of
instruments, as Lutes, Citrons, Uiolls, Flutes, Cornets, Bandoras, whereon
they play Madrigalis, Sonnettes, Pauins, Measures, Galiardes, and all these in
remembrance of Love, as he for whom men do more then for any other. What
causes men to just, tourney, run at tilt, and combat, but love? Who caused
Comedies, shows, Tragedies and Masks to be invented, but Love. Whereof comes
it that men delight to rehearse their amorous chances and strange passions,
and to relate them to their companions: some praising the courtesy of his
Lady, another condempning his mistress cruelty: yea, recounting a thousand
mishappes which happen in their loves: as Letters disclosed, evil reports,
suspicious jealousy, sometimes the husband coming home sooner, than either
the lover would, or the wife does wish: sometimes coniecturing without cause,
and other times believing nothing, but trusting upon his wives honesty. To be
short, the greatest pleasure after love, is to tell what perilous dangers are
passed. But what makes so many Poets in the world, is it not Love? the which
seems to be the plain song whereon all Poets do descant: yea, there is few
which write upon any serious matter, but they close up their work with some
amorous clause, or else they are the worse accepted. Ovid has celebrated the
fame of Cupid, Petracke and Virgil, Homere and Liu^us, Sapho, yea and that
severe Socrates wrote somewhat of his love Aspasia.

Tush, who rightly can deny, that Love is not the cause of all the glory,
honor, profit and pleasure which happens to man, and that without it he
cannot conuenientlye live, but shall run into a thousand enormities.

All this happy success came by Love, as long as he had his eyes, but now
being deprived of his sight, and accompanied with* Folly, it is to be feared,
nay certainly to be believed, that he shall be the cause of as many
discommodities, mischiefs and mishaps, as hethertoo he has been of honor,
profit, and pleasure. The noble men which loved their inferiors, and the
subjects which dutifully served their Lords, shall be meruailously changed by
the means of folly, for the master shall love his servant only for his
service, and the servant his master only for commodity. Yea, there is none
so addicted unto virtue, but if once he love, he shall presently commit some
foolish touch: and the more straight and firm love is, the greater disorder
there shall be by the means of Folly. There will return into the world more
then one Biblis, more then one Semyramis, then one Myrrha, then one Canace,
then one Phaedra. There shall be no place in the world unspotted. The high
walls and tre^lissed windows, shall not keep the Nuns and Uestall Uirgins
in sauegard. Old age shall turn her aged affections into fond fancies and
wanton desires.

Shame shall live as an exile. There shall be no difference between the Noble
and the pesaunt, between the Infidel and the Moore, the Turk and the Jew,
the Lady, the Mistress and the hand-maide. But there shall ensue such a
confused inequality, that the fair shall not be matched with the well featured,
but shall be often times joined with foul and deformed persons Great Ladies and
noble Dames shall fall in love with them whom before they would disdain to
accept as their servants. And when the loyal and faithful Lovers, have long
languished in the love of some beautiful Dame, whose mutual good will they
have gained by deserte: then Folly will cause some fickle and false flatterer,
to enjoy that in one hour, which in all their life they could not attain. I
pass over the continual debates and quarrels that shall ensue by Folly,
whereof shall spring wounds, massacres, and most fearful murders. And I
greatly fear that whereas Love has invented so many laudable sciences, and
brought forth so many commodities, that now he will bring great idleness
accompanied with ignorance, that he will cause young Gentlemen to leave feats
of arms, to forsake the service of their Prince, to reject honorable studyes,
and to appplye them selves to vain songs and sonnets, to chambring and
wantonness, to banketting and gluttony, bringing infinite diseases to their
bodies, and sundry dangers and perils to their persons, for there is no more
dangerous company than of Folly.

Behold O sovereign Jupiter the mischiefs and miseries that are like to
ensue, if Folly be appointed companion to Love. Wherefore I in the person of
all the Gods beseech, your Majesty to grant that Love may not be joined with
her, and that Folly may grievously be punished for the outrage she has done to
Cupid.


As soon as Apollo had ended his Oration, Mercury in defense of Folly
begins to speak in this wise. Mercury. WHereas (right worthy Jupiter)
Apollo has with his painted eloquence set out the praises of Love, and has
sought with his filed phrases to discredit Folly, I hope when your Majesty
shall throughlye hear the cause decyded, you will commend his Eloquence, more
than his reasons. For it is not unknown unto you and all the Gods, that Folly
is no whit inferior unto Love, and that Love should be of no force without
her, neither could his kingdom endure without her help, aid and counsel. I
pray you call to remembrance how Folly incontinently after Man was placed in
Paradise, began most imperiously to rule, and has ever since continued in
such credit, as never any Goddess had the like, reigning and ruling amongst
men, from time to time, from age to age, as the only Princess of the world.
Insomuch that who have been more honored than fools. Who was more subject unto
Folly, than Alexander the great. which feeling himself to suffer hunger and
thirst, to be subject to sorrow and sickness, not able to keep himself from
drunkenness, yet would be honored for a God.

What kind of people has been in greater credit than Philosophers, and who
more fools? Did not Aristotle most foolishly dye for sorrow, because he knew
not the ebbing and flowing of the sea? Did not Crates in casting his treasure
into the sea, commit a wise deed? What folly showed Empedocles, by his
strange conjectures? what say you to Diogenes tun, and to Aristippus
flattery? Who so thoroughly considers their opinions, shall find them subject
to the state of Folly. How many other sciences are there in the world, which
are altogether foolish, and yet the professors of them had in high reputation
amongst men. They which are Calculators of Natiuities, makers of charecters,
casters of figures, are they not Friars of this fraternity. Is it not Folly to
be so curious, as to measure the heaven, the height of the stars, the breadth
of the earth, and the deapth of the sea, and yet the professors hereof are
highly esteemed, and only by the means of Folly. Nay, how could y^ world
continue, if the dangers, troubles, calamities and discommodities of marriage,
were not covered by folly.

Who would have coasted the seas if Folly had not ben his guide? to commit
himself to the mercy of y^ wind the waves, to live in danger of fearful
surges, and and perilous Rocks, to traffic with savage and barbarous
people, only incensed by the means of Folly. And yet notwithstanding by this
means the common wealth is maintained, knowledge and learning augmented, the
properties of herbs, stones, and birds beasts, perfectly searched out. What
Follye is it most daungerously to pass into the bowels of ye earth to dig for
iron, and seek for gold? How many Arts and occupations should be driven out of
the world, if Folly were banished? truly the most part of men should either beg
for want, or dye for hunger. How should so many Advocates, Procurators,
Sergeaunts, Atturneyes, Scriueners, Imbroderers, Painters, and Perfumers live,
if Lady Folly were utterly exiled. Has not Folly invented a thousand devices
to draw a man from idleness, as Tragedies, Comedies, Dancing schools,
Fencing houses, wrestling places, and a thousand other foolish sports.

Has she not made men hardy and venterous to fight with Lions, Boares and
Bulls, only to gain honor, and to pass other in folly. What did Antonie
and Cleopapatra when they straue who should spend most in beastly banketting?
What caused Caesar lament that he had not begun to trouble the world^in that
age, wherein Alexander had conquered the greatest part? Why did diverse seek to
fill up the valleys, to make plain the mountains, to dry up rivers, to make
bridges over the sea, as Claudius the Emperor did? What made Rhodope build the
Pyramides, and Artemisia frame the sumptuous sepulcher? but Folly. In fine,
without this Goddess man should be careful, heavy, and whollye drowned in
sorrow: whereas Folly quickens his spirit, makes him sing, dance, leap,
and frame himself altogether to pleasure. It is not possible that Love should
be without the daughter of youth, which is Folly. For Love springs of sudden
and sundry causes, by receiving an Apple, as Cydippe: by looking out at a
Window, as Scylla: by reading in a Book, as the Lady Frauncis Rymhi: some
fall in love by sight, some by hearing, but all living in hope to obtane their
desires. And yet some have loved without any natural cause, as Pigmalion, who
fell in Love with his marble picture, and I pray you what Sympathia could there
be between a lively youth, and a dead stone, what was it then but Folly that
kindled this flame? what forced Narcissus to fall in Love with his own
shadow, but Folly. Yea, what adventure is passed in love without Folly.

For the Philosophers define Folly to be a deprivation of Wisdom, and
Wisdom is altogether without passions: of the which when Love shall be void,
then no doubt the sea shall be without waves, and the Fire without heat.

Consider but a young man which only places his delight in amorous
conceiptes, decking, dressing, and perfuming himself most delicately, who
passes out of his lodging, fraught with a thousand sundry fancies, accompanied
with men and pages, passing to the place where he may have a sight of his
Mistres, obtaining for his travel no gain but perhaps some amorous glaunce,
making long suits, spending his time and his treasure, consuming his wit, and
wasting his wealth, and yet reaping nothing but disdain and discredit. But if
it chance that his Mistress condescend unto his requests, she appoynteth him
to come at some suspicious hour, which he cannot perform without great
peril. To come with company, were to bewray his secrets: to go alone, most
dangerous: to go openly, too manifest: so that he must pass disguised,
sometime like a woman, other times like a peasant or some vilde person, scaling
the walls with ladders, clyming up to the windows by cords: yea, continually
in danger of death, if Follye did not hold him up by the hand. It is not also
unknown unto you how many sundry passions do perplexe the poor passionate
Lovers, all which proceed of Folly, as to have ones heart separated from
himself, to be now in peace and than in war, now covering his dolor,
blushing one while and looking pale another, fraught wholly with fear, hope
and shame, seeking that carefully which he seems to fly, and yet doubtfully
dreading not to find it, to laugh seldom, to sigh often, to burn in cold, and
freeze in heat, to be crossed altogether with co^traries, which be signs not
only of folly but of phre^sie. Who shall excuse Hercules, handling so carefully
the distaffe of Omphale, or Solomon for combring himself with so many
Concubines, Annibal in submitting himself to his love, Aristotle in obeying
Hermia, and Socrates in yielding to Aspasia, and many other which we see daily
to be so blinded, as they know not themselves, and what is the cause hereof
but folly, so that we see that it is she which makes love to be so feared and
^^doubted, it is she that honors him, exalts his name, and causes him to
be counted as a God. Further, whosoever loves must apply himself to the
affection of his mistress, although it be contrary to his natural
constitution, if he be quiet, wise and discreet, yet if his lover please to
have him change his state, he must turn his stearn and hoise his sail to go
with another wind, Zethius and Amphion could not agree, for because the
delight of the one was a despite to the other, until Amphion left his
music. If the Lady whom thou love be covetous, thou must change thy self
into gold, and so fall into her bosom, if she be merry, thou must be
pleasant, if sullen, thou must be sad. All the servants and suitors to
Atlanta were hunters, because she delighted in that sport. Many Gentlewomen to
please their lovers which were Poets, left the rock and the needle, and took
in hand pens and books: now tell me if these strange Metamorphosis be not
mere points of folly? Do you think that a soldier which goes to the
assalt, marketh ye trenches, thinks of his enemies, or of a thousand
harguebushes, whereof every one is sufficient to destroy him? No, he only
hops to win the conquest, and does not so much as once imagine the rest. He
which first invented sailing, doubted not of the perilous dangers: and he
that plays, never thinks to become a looser, yet are they all three in
danger to be slain, drowned, and undone. But what then? they neither do see
nor will see what is hurtful unto them. So we must conjecture the like of
lovers, for if they did see the dreadful dangers, and the fearful perils
wherein they are, how they be deceived and beguiled, they would never honor
love as a God, but detest him as a devil, and so should the kingdom of love
be destroyed, which now is governed by ignorance, carelessness, hope, and
blindness, which are all the handmaides of folly. Remain^ in peace then fond
love, and seek not to break the ancient league which is between thee and
folly. For if thou do, thy bow shall be broken, thy darts shall be of no
force, Contemtaeque faces et sine luce ^acent.


When Mercury had finished the defense of Folly, Jupiter seeing the Gods to be
diversely affected, that some held with Cupid, and some with Folly, to decide
the doubt he pronounced this sentence. FOr the difficulty and importance of
this difference and diversity of opinions, we have remitted the deciding of it
until three times seven times, and nine ages be past, in y^ mean while we
straightly command you to live friendly together, without offering injury one
unto another. And Folly shall guide and conduct blind Love whether she seems
best, and for the restoring of his eyes, after we have spoken with the
Destinies it shall be decreed.


FINIS.
AT LONDON Printed by T. East, for William Ponsonby. 1584.


