GREENES CARD OF FANCY.

Wherein the Folly of those carpet Knights is deciphered, which guiding their
course by the compass of Cupid, either dash their ship against most dangerous
Rocks, or else attain the haven with pain and peril.

Wherein also is described in the person of Gwydonius a cruel Combat between
Nature and Necessity.

By ROBERT GREEN, Master of Art, in Cambridge.

At London Printed by H. L. for Mathewe Lownes, and are to be sold at his shop
in Paules-churchyard 1608.

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable, Edward de Vere Earl of Oxenford, Vicount Bulbeck,
Lord of Escales and Badlesmire, and Lord great Chamberlain of England: Robert
Green wishes long life with increase of Honor.
THat poor Castilian Frontino (Right Honorable) being a very unskillful
Painter, presented Alphonsus, the Prince of Aragon, with a most imperfect
picture, which the king thankfully accepted, not that he liked the work, but
that he loved the art. The paltering Poet Cherillus, dedicated his duncing
Poems to that mighty Monarch Alexander, saying that he knew assuredly if
Alexander would not accept them in that they were not pithie, yet he would not
utterly reject them, in that they had a show of Poetry. Caesar often times
praised his soldiers for their will, although they wanted skill: and Cicero as
well commended stammering Lentulus for his paynfull industry, as learned
Laelius for his passing eloquence. Which considered (although wisdom did will me
not to strain further then my sleeue would stretch) I thought good to present
this imperfect Pamphlet to your Honors protection; hoping your Lordship will
deigne to accept the matter in that it seems to be prose, though something
unsavory for want of skill, and take my well meaning for an excuse of my
boldness, in that my poor will is not in the wane, whatsoever this imperfect
work do want. The Emperor Traian was never without suitors, because so
courteously he would hear every complaint. The Lapidaries continually
freque^ted the Court of Adobr indinus, because it was his chief study to
search out the nature of stones. All that courted Atlanta were hunters, and
none sued to Sapho but Poets. Whersoeuer Mecaenas lodges, thither no doubt
will scholars flock. And your Honor being a worthy favorer and fosterer of
Learning, has forced many through your exquisite virtue, to offer the first
fruits of their study at the shrine of your Lordships courtesy. But though
they have waded far and found mines, and I gadded abroad to get nothing but
Mites, yet this I assure my self, that they never presented unto your honor
their treasure with a more willing mind, than I do this simple trash: which I
hope your Lord hip will so accept. Resting therefore upon your Honors wonted
clemency, I commit your Lordship to the Almighty. *

Your Lordships most dutifully to command, ROBERT GREEN.

TO THE GENTLEMEN Readers, health.
AN blowing upon an Oten pipe a little homely Music, and hearing no man
dispraise his small cunning, began both to play so loud, and so long, that
they were more weary in hearing his music, than he in showing his skill; till
at last to clawe him and excuse themselves, they said his pipe was out of tune:
So Gentlemen, because I have before time rashly reached above my pitch, and yet
your courtesy such as no man has accused me, I have once again adventured
upon your patience; but (I doubt) so far, as to be rid of my folly, you
will at the last say, as Augustus said to the Grecian, that gave him often times
many rude verses: Thou have need (quoth he) reward me well; for I take more
pains to read thy works, than thou to write them. But yet willing to abide
this quip, because I may counteruaile it with your former courtesy, I put my
self to your patience, and commit you to the Almighty. Farewell. *

Robert Green.

AD LECTOREM in laudem Authoris.
PVllulaten stirpi similis speciosa propago
Aureolusque novo revirescit ramus amoris
Vere: (tuo vereiam VERE dicandus honori:)
Ista salus Iuueni, Comiti sit gloria nosse,
Accepisse decus: Comites vbi passibus aequis
Ales amor virtusque sagax decurrere norunt.
Ventilat iste faces, restinguit at illa furentes
Taedas. Nec taedet Puerisic taedia caeci
Fallere, qui caecis conuoluit viscera flammis.
Ergo refer grates qui deuitare cupisti
Spumosos Veneris fluctus, scopulosque minaces
Qui fragilem tumidis cymbam mersisse procellis
Possent. Hac iter est, hac dirige, tutior ibis.
Richardus Portingtonus.

THE CARD OF FANCY.
THere dwelled in the City of Mitylene, a certain Duke called Clerophontes,
who through his prowess in all martial exploits wared so proud and tyrannous,
using such merciless cruelty to his foreign enemies, and such moodlesse
rigor to his native Citizens, that it was doubtful whether he was more feared
of his foes for his cruelty, or hated of his friends for his tyranny: yet as
the worst weed springs up more bravely then the wholsommest herb, and as
the crookedst tree is commonly laden with most fruit, so this rigorous duke
was so favored and fostered up by fortune, his estate being so established
with honor, and so beautified with wealth, so decked with the Diadem of dignity,
and endued with fortunate prosperity, having in wars such happy success
against his foes, and in peace such dutiful renerence of his friends,
(although more for fear than favor) as he seemed to want nothing that either
fortune or the fates could allow him, if one only sore which bred his
sorrow, could have been salued. But this grief so galled his conscience, and
this cursed care so cumbred his mind, that his happiness was greatly
surcharged with heaviness, to see the cause of his care could by no means be
cured. For this Clerophontes, was endued with two children, the one a daughter
named Lewcippa, and the other a son called Gwydonius: this Lewcippa, was so
perfect in the complexion of her body, and so pure in the constitution of her
mind, so adorned with outward beauty, and endued with inward bounty, so
polished with rare virtues and exquisite qualities, as she seemed a seemly
Venus for her beauty, and a second Vesta, for her virginite: yea, Nature and
the gods had so beuntifully bestowed their gifts upon her, as same herself was
doubtful whether she should make greater report of her excellent virtue, or
exquisite beauty. But his son Gwydonius, was so contrary to his sister
Lewcippa, (though not in the state of his body, yet in the stay of his mind)
as it made al men marvel how two such contrary stemmes could spring out of
the self same stock: His personage indeed was so comely, his feature so well
framed, each limb so perfectly couched, his face so fair, and his countenance
so amiable, as he seemed a heavenly creature in a mortal carcass.

But his mind was so blemished with detestable qualities, and so spotted with
the stain of voluptuousness, that he was not so much to be commended for the
proportion of his body, as to be condemned for the imperfection of his mind.
He was so endued with vanity, and so imbrued with vice, so nursed up in
wantonness, and so nulled up in wilfulness, so careless to observe his
fathers command, and so retchlesse to regard his counsel, that neither the
dread of Gods wrath, nor the fear of his fathers displeasure, could drive him
to desist from his detestable kind of living. Nay, there was no fact so
filchy, which he would not commit, no mischief so monstrous, which he would
not enterprsse: no danger so desperate, which he would not adventure: no
peril so fearful, which he would not perform: nor no action so devilish,
which he would not execute. So immodest in his manners, so rude in his
gestures, yea and so prodigal in his expenses, as mines of gold were not able
to maintain such witless prodigality. This loathsome life of Gwydonius, was
such a cutting corasiue to his Fathers careful conscience, and such a hapless
clog to his heauic heart, that no joy could make him enjoy any joy, no mirth
could make him merry, no prosperity could make him pleasant: but abandoning all
delight, and avoiding all company, he spent his doleful days in dumps and
dolors, which he uttered in these words.

NOw (quoth he) I prove by experience, the saying of Sophocles to be true,
that the man which has many children shall never live without some mirth, nor
die without some sorrow: for if they be virtuous, he shall have cause whereof to
rejoice, if vicious, wherefore to be sad: which saying I try performed in
myself: for as I have one child which delights me with her virtue, so I have
another that despights me with his vanity, as the one by duty brings me joy,
so the other by disobedience breeds my anoy: yea as the one is a comfort to my
mind, so the other is a fretting corasiue to my heart: for what grief is
there more griping, what pain more pinching, what cross more combersome, what
plagne more pernicious, yea, what trouble can torment me worle, then to see my
son, mine heir, the inheritor of my Dukedom, which should be the pillex of my
parentage, to consume his time in roysting and riot, in spending and spoiling,
in swearing and swashing, and in following wilfully the fury of his own
frantike fancy. Alas, most miserable and lamentable case, would to God the
destinies had decreed his death in the swaddling cloutes, or that the fates had
prescribed his death in his infancy. Oh that the day of his birth had been
the day of his burial, or that by some sinister storm of fortune he had been
stifled on his mothers knees, so that his untimely death might have prevented
my ensuing sorrows, and his future calamities: for I sie that the young fry
will always prove old frogs, that the crooked twig will prove a crabbed tree,
that the sower bud will never be sweet blossom, how that which is bred in the
bone will not easily out of the flesh, that he which is careless in youth,
will be less careful in age, that where in prime of years vice reigns,
there in ripe age vanity remains. Why Clerophontes, if thou see the sore,
why do thou not apply the salve? and if thou do perceive the mischief,
why do not prevent it with medicine? take away the cause and the effect
fails: if Gwydonius be the cause of thy ruth, cut him off betimes, least he
bring thee to ruin: better had thou want a Son then never want sorrow.
Perhaps thou will suffer him so long, til he fall sick of the Father, and then
he will not only seek thy lands and living, but life and all, if thou prevent
not his purpose: yea, and after thy death he will be through his lascivious
life the over throw of thy house, the consumer of thy Dukedom, the wrack of
thy Commonweal, and the very man that shall bring the state of Mitylene to
mischief and misery. Since then thy Son is such a sink of sorrows, in whose
life lies hid a loathsome mass of wretched mishaps, cut him off as a
graceless graft, unworthy to grow out of such a stock. Alas Clerophontes,
shall thou be so unnatural as to seek the spoil of thine own child, will thou be more savage then the brute Beasts in committing such cruelty? no,
alas, the least misfortune of our children does so move us, that as the
Spider feels if her web be pricked but with the point of a pin, so if they
be touched but with the least trouble, we feel the pains thereof with
pricking grief to pinch us. Why has not Nature then caused love to ascend as
well as to descend, and placed as dutiful obedience in the child, as loving
affection in the father: and with that he fetched such a deep sigh, that it was
a sign of the extreme sorrow he conceived for his sons witless folly. But
as he was ready again to enter into his doleful discourse, to aggranate his
grief the more, and increase his care, certain complaints were brought him by
sundry Citizens, of the outrageous behavior of his Son Gwydonius, which
being attentively heard he in great choler called for his son, against whom
he thundered out such threatening reproaches, laying before his face the misery
that would ensue of such recklesse mischiefs, and promising that if he
directed not his course by a new compass, and leuelled his life by a new line,
he would not only repay his folly with the penalty of the law, but also by
consent of his commons, disinherite him of his Dukedom: that Gwydonius,
greatly incensed with the severe censure of his father, broyling with furious
rage, sturdily burst forth into these stubborn terms.

SIr, (quoth he) if Terence his Menedemus were alive, and heard these your
fond and fantastical reasons, he would as readily condemn you of
crabbednesse, as he accused Chremes of currishnesse: for as he by too much
austeritie procured his sons mishap, so you by too much severity seek to
breed my misfortune. You old men most iniustly, or rather injuriously, measure
our staylesse mood by your stayed minds, our young years by your hoary
hairs, our flourishing youth by your withered age, thinking to direct our
doings by your doatings, our wills by your wits, our youthful fancies by your
aged affections, and to quench our fiery flames by your dead coals and
cinders: yea, supposing that the Leueret should be as skillful in making of a
head, as the old Hare, that the young Cubs should as soon tapish, as the old
Fox, that the young Fry should as well avoid the net as the old Fish, and that
the young wantons should be as wary as the old wisards. But this sir, is to
make fire frost, to change heat to cold, mirth to mourning, singing to
sadness, pleasure to pain, and to tie the Ape and the Bear in one tedder.
Since then young stemmes will not be set on a withered stock, that the young
twig lies not under ye old tree, that the toyish conceits of youth are unfit
for the testie cogitations of age: I mean for your satisfaction and my solace,
to depart fram the Court, and to spend my days in travel.

Clerophontes no sooner heard this determination of his son Gwydonius, but
his sorrow was half salued, and his care almost cured, thinking that by
travel he should either end his life, or amend his lewdness, and therefore
both heartned and hastened his son in this his new course, least delay might
breed danger, or time by some toy cause him turn his tippet, furnishing and
finishing all things necessary for his sons journey: who ready to go (more
willing to travel, than his father to entreat him) had this friendly farewell
given him by Clerophontes.

Son (quoth he) there is no greater doubt which does more deeply distress
the mind of a young man, then to determine with himself what course of life
is best to take: for there is such a confused Chaos of contrary conceits in
young wits, that whiles they look for that they cannot like, they are lost in
such an endless labyrinth, as neither choice nor chance can draw them out to
their wished desires: for so many veins so many vanities: if virtue draws
one way, vice drives another way: as profit persuades them, so pleasure
prouokes them: as wit weighs, will wresteth, if friends counsel them to
take this, fancy forces them to choose that: so that desire so long hanges in
doubt, as either they choose none, or else chance on the worst. But in my
opinion, the fittest kind of life for a young gentleman to take (who as yet
has not subdued the youthful conceits of fancy, nor made a conquest of his
will by wit) is to spend his time in travel, whearin he shall find both
pleasure and profit: yea, and buy that by experience, which otherwise with all
the treasure in the world he cannot purchase. For what changes vanity to
virtue, staylesse wit to stayed wisdom, fond fantasies to firm affections,
but travel: what represseth the rage of youth, and redresseth the witless
fury of wanton years, but travel: what turns a secure life to a careful
living, what makes the foolish wise, yea, what increases wit and augmenteth
skill, but travel? insomuch that the fame Ulysses won, was not by the ten
years he late at Troy, but by the time he spent in travel. But there is
nothing Gwydonius, so precious, which in some respect is not perilous, nor
nothing so pleasant which may not be painful: The finest Gold has his
dross, the purest wine his lees, the brauest Rose his prickles, each sweet
has his sower, each joy his annoy, each weal his woe, and cuerie delight his
danger.

So travail, Gwydonius, is a course of life very pleasant, and yet very
perilous, wherein thou may practice virtue if thou take heed, or purchase
discredit if thou be careless: where thou may reap renown if thou
be virtuous, and gaint reproach if thou be vicious: whereout do spring
wisdom and folly, freedom and bondage, treasure and trash, fame and
discredit, honor and shame, according to the disposition of him which either
uses it to his profit, or abuses it to his discemmoditie. Since then thou
shall bear sail in such perilous Straightes, take heed lest thou dash thy
Ship against most dangerous Rocks. It is a saying Gwydonius, not so common as
true, that he which will hear the Sirens sing, must with Vlysles, tie himself
to the mast of the ship, least happily he be drowned. Whosoever means to be a suter
to Circes, must take a Preseruatine, unless he will be enchanted.

He that will fish for the Torpedo, must anoint his hand with the oils of
Nemiphar, least he be charmed, and whosoever means to enter combat with vanity,
must first surely defense himself with the target of virtue, unless he mean
to be a captive to care or calamity. I speak this Gwydonius by experience,
which afterward thou shall know by proof: for in travel thou shall find such
subtle Sirens, as will endanger thee, such sorcering Circes, as will inchaunt
thee, such poisoned Torpedos, as will not only charm thy hand, but thy heart,
if by my experience and other men's perils thou learn not to be ware. First
Gwydonius, be not too sumptuous, least thou seem prodigal, nor to covetous,
least they count thee a niggard: for by spending in excess, thou shall be
thought a vain glorious fool, and by too much sparing, a covetous pelant. Be
not wilful in thy doings, that they count thee not witless; nor too rash,
that they think thee not deuoid of reason: be not too merry, that they count
thee not immodest; nor too sober, least they call thee sullen, but show thy
self to be an old man for thy gravity, and a young youth for thy actiuitie: so
shall all men have cause to praise thee for thy manners, and commend thee for
thy modesty. Be not too curious Gwydonius, yt they deem thee not proud, nor too
courteous, least they call thee counterfaite. Be a friend to all, and a foe to
none, and yet trust not without trial, nor commit any secret to a friendly
stranger, least in too much trust lie treason, and thou be forced by repentance
to cry Peccaui. The sweetest Musk is sower to be tasted, the finest Pills
most bitter to be chewed, and the flattering friend most tickle being tried:
then beware least fair words makes fools feign, and glozing speeches cause
Had I wist to come too late. Lend not, Gwydonius, a listening ear to the alarums
of Love, nor yield not thy freedom to the assault of lust, be not dazeled with
the beams of sading beauty, nor daunted with the desire of eeuery delicate
damsel: for in time such bliss will prove but bane, and such delightful joy,
but despightfull annoie. Lust Gwydonins will prove an enemy to thy purse, and
a foe to thy person, a canker to thy mind, and a corasiue to thy conscience, a
weakner of thy wit, a molester of thy mind, a besofter of thy senses, and
finally, a mortal bane to all thy body; so that thou shall find pleasure the
pathway to perdition, and lusting Love the load stone to ruth and ruin. Seek
not then Gwydonius, greedily to devour that bait, wherein thou know a
hurtful hook to be hidden: frequent not that pleasure which will turn so
thy poison, nor covet that company which will convert to thy confusion, least
through such folly thou have cause in time to be sad, and I to besorrowfull.
Now Gwydonius that thou have heard the aduertisment of a loving Father, follow
my advise as a dutiful child: and the more to bind thee to perform my former
precepts, that this my counsel be not drowned in oblivion, I give thee this
ring of gold wherein is written this sentence, Praemonitus, Praemunitus. A
poesy pretty for the words, and pithie for the matter, short to be rehearsed,
and long to be related; inferring this sense, that he which is forewarned by
friendly counsel of imminent dangers, is forearmed against all future mishap
and calamity, so that he may by forewarning prenent perils if it be possible,
or if by sinister fortune he cannot esehew them, yet he may bear the Cross
with more patience and less grief. Keep this King Gwydonius carefully, that
thou may show thy self to respect thy own case, and regard my counsel:
and in so doing thou shall please me, and pleasure thy self.

CLerophontes, having thus ended his discourse, embracing his son with
fatherly affection, and giving him his blessing, went secretly into his
Chamber, the more to cover his grief which he conceived for his sons
departure: unwilling his son should perceive by his sorrow how unfeignedly he
both liked and loved him.

Well: Gwydonius, having taken his leave of his Father, furnished both with
counsel and coin, with advise of wisdom and aid of wealth, passed on his
journey very solemnly, until he was past the bounds of his Fathers Dukedom:
and then as merry as might be, he traveled by the space of seven weeks
without any residence, until he came to a City called Barutta, where
(whether he were delighted with the situation of the place, or deluded with
the persuasion of some Parasiticall persons) he securely settled himself by
the space of a whole year: in which time he so carelessly floated in the seas
of voluptuousness, and so recklesly raunged in licentious and lawelesse
liberty, thinking himself a peasant if he were not prodigal, counting
nothing comely, if not costly, nothing seemly if not sumptuogs, using such
monstrons excess in all his actions, that the Citizens of Barutta noted him
for a myrrour of immoderate life, and a very pattern of witless prodigality:
yea, his excessive expenses daily so mercased, that mines of gold had not bin
sufficient to maintain his pompons magnificence; insomuch, that the Magistrate
of Barutta. not only marvelled where he had coin to counteruaile his
expenses, but also began to suspect him either for some skillful Alcumist, or
that he had some large commission to take up those purles that fell into lapse,
for want of sufficient defense: whereupon being called before the Magistrates
and strictly examined what trade he used, why he stayed so long in the City,
and how he was able to maintain so princely a port as he carried: Gwydonius,
unwilling to have them privy to his parentage, began to coin a scuse, yet not
so cunningly but he was trapt in his own talk, and so cast in prison, where he
lay clogged with care and deuoid of comfort, having not so much as one trusty
friend, amongst all those trothlesse flatterers which in prosperity had so
frequented his company: the ingratitude of whom so perplered his molested
mind, as surcharged with sorrow, he burst forth into these terms.

ALas (quoth he) now have I bought that by hapless experience, which if I had
been wise, I might have got by happy counsel: Now am I taught that with pain
and peril, which if selfeloue had not besotted my senses, I might have learned
with profit and pleasure, that in the fairest Sands is most fickleness, out
of the brauest Blossom most commonly springs the worst fruit, that the
finest flower seldom has the best smell, that the most glistering stone has
oftentimes the least virtue, and that in the greatest show of good will, lies
often times the smallest effect of friendship, in most flattery least faith, in
the fairest face the falsest heart, in the smoothest tale the smallest truth,
and in the sweetest gloses, most lower ingratitude: Yea, I see now (quoth he)
yt in trust lies treason, that fair words make fools fain, and that the state
of these fained friends are like to the Marie-gold, which as long as the Sun
shines opens her leaves, but with the least cloud begins to close, like
the Violets in America, which in summer yield an odoriferous smell, and in
winter a most pestilent favor: so these Parasites in prosperity profess
most, but in adversity perform least: when Fortune favors, they laugh,
when she frowneth, they lowre; at eueryfull sea they flourish, but at every
dead Neape they fade: like to the fish Palerna, which being perfectly white in
the calm, yet turns passing black at every storm: to the trees in yt deserts
of Africa, that flourish but while the South wind bleweth, or to the
Celedonie stone, which retains his virtue no longer than it is rubbed with
gold.

Since then Gwydonius (quoth he) thou finds such falsehood in friendship, and
such faithless deeds in such painted speeches, shake off these fawning curs
with the flag of defiance, and from henceforth try ere thou trust I, but
(quoth he) it is too late to apply the salve when the sore is incurable, to
cry alarm when the City is ouerrunne, to seek for covert when the storm is
past, and to take heed of such flattering mates, when already thou art
deceived by such fawning merchaunts: now thou will cry Cave when thy coin is
consumed, and beware when thy wealth is wracked: when thou have nothing whereof
to take charge, thou will be charie, and when folly has already given thee a
mate. thou will by wisdom seek to avoid the check: but now thou tryest it
true that thy father foretold thee, that so long thou would be careless,
as at last repentance would pull thee by the sleeue, and then Had I wist would
come too late.

Well Gwydonius, since that which is once past can never be recalled again, if
thou have by folly made a fault, seek by wisdom to make amends, and heap not
care upon care, nor add not grief to sorrow, by these pitiful complaints,
but cheer up thy self and take heart at grass, for the end of woe is the
beginning of weal, and after misery always insueth most happy felicity.

Gwydonius having thus dolorously discoursed with himself, remained not above
ten days in prison, but that the Senate taking pity of his case, and seeing
no accusations were inferred against him, set him free from his purgatory, and
gave him good counsel, that hereafter he should beware by such witless
prodigality to incur such suspicion. Theseus never triumphed more after he
had escaped the danger of the perilous Labyrinth, than poor Gwydonius did
when he was set free from this pernicious Limbo: now the bitterness of bondage
made his freedom seem far more sweet, and his danger so happily escaped,
caused his delivery seem far more delightful. Yet he conceived such
discurtesie against the Citizens, for repaying his liberal good will with such
loathsome ingratitude, that the next morning he departed from Barutta, not
stored with too much money for molesting his mind, nor ouercharged with coin
for cumbering his conscience with too much care: but having remaining of all
his treasure only that ring which his father gave him, traveled very
solemnly toward Alexandria.

Where at that time there reigned a certain Duke named Orlanio, who was so
famous and fortunate, for the peaceable government of his Dukedom,
administering justice with such sincerity, and yet tempering the extreamitie
of the law with such lenity, as he both gained the good will of strangers in
hearing his virtue, and won the hearts of his subjects in feeling his bounty,
counting him unworthy to hear the name of a Sovereign, which knew not
according to desert, both to cherish and chastise his subjects.

Fortune and the fates willing to place him in the palace of earthly
prosperity, endowed him with two children, the one a son named Thersandro,
and the other a daughter called Castania, either of them so adorned with the
gifts of Nature, and be antifled with good nurture, as it was hard to know
whether beauty or virtue held the supremacy. But least by this happy estate
Orlanio should be too much puffed up with prosperity, Fortune sparing him the
mate, yet gave him a slender check, to warn him from security: for before
his daughter came to the age of fourteen years, his wife dyed, leaving him
not more sorrowful for the loss of her whom he most entirely loved, than
careful for the well bringing up of her whom he so dearly liked: Knowing
that as his Court was a school of virtue to such as bridled their minds with
discretion, so it was a nurss of vice to those tender years that measured
their wills with witless affection, esteeming liberty as perilous to the
stay of youth, as precious to the state of age, and that nothing so soon
allureth the mind of a young maid to vanity, and to pass her youth without
fear in security. Feared with the consideration of these premises, to avoid
the inconveniences that might happen by suffering Castania to lead her life in
lawless liberty, he thought it best to choose out some virtuous Lady to
keep her company, who might direct her course by so true a compass, and
leuel her life by so right a line, that although her young years were very apt
to be entangled in the snares of vanity, yet by her counsel and company,
she might steadily tread her steps in the trace of virtue: and none he could
find more fit for the purpose, than a certain old widow, called Madame
Melytta, honored for her virtuous life throughout all Alexandria, who being
sent for to the Court, he saluted on this manner.

MAdame Melytta (quoth he) the report of thy honest conditions, and the
renoume of thy vertuons qualities are such, as thereby thou have not only
purchased great praise, but won great credit throughout all the Country. In
so much that, incensed by this thy singular commendation, I have selected thee
as the only woman to whom I mean to commit my chiefest treasure: I mean,
Melytta, my daughter Castania, to whom I will have thee be both a companion
and a counselor, haping thou will take such care to train her up in virtue,
and trace her quite from vice, to win her mind to honesty, and weane her
quite from vanity, that she in her ripe years shall have cause to thank thee
for thy pains, and I occasian to regard thee as a friend, and reward thee for
thy diligence.

FIrst Melytta, see that she lead her life both charily and chastely. Let her
not have her own will, least she prove too wilful: or too much liberty,
least she become too light. The palm tree pressed down, grows
notwithstanding but too fast. The heath Spattania, though trodden on, grows
very tall: and youth although strictly restrained, will prove but too
stubburne.

The vessel sauoureth always of that licour wherewith it was first seasoned
and the mind retains those qualities in age wherein it was trained up in
youth. The tender twig is sonner broken than the strong branch, the young stem
more brittle than the old stock, the weak bramble shaken with every wind,
and the wanering will of youth tossed with every paste of vanity, ready to
be wracked in the waves of wantonness, unless it be cunningly guided by some
wise and wary Pilot.

Then Melytta, since youth is so easily entrapped with the alluring train of
foolish delights, and so soon entangled with the trash of pernitions pleasure,
suffer not my daughter to pass her time in idleness, least happily being
taken at discouert, she become a careless captive to security: for when the
mind once floateth in the surging seas of idle conceits, then the puffes of
voluptuous pleasures and the stifling storms of unbridled fancy, the raging
blastes of alluring beauty, and the sturdie gale of glozing vanity, so shake
the Ship of recklesse youth, that it is daily in doubt to suffer most
dangerous shipwreck. But let her spend her time in reading such ancient
authors as may sharpen her wit by their pithie sayings, and learn her wisdom
by their perfect sentences. For where nature is vicious, by learning it is
amended, and where it is virtuous by skill it is augmented. The stone of secret
virtue is of greater price if it be bravely polished, the gold though never so
pure of it self has the better color if it be burnished, and the mind
though never so virtuous, is more noble if it be enriched with the gifts of
learning. And Melytta, for recreation sake, let her use such honest sports as
may drine away dumps, least she be too pensive, and free her mind from foolish
conceits, that she be not too wanton.

Thus (Madame) as you have heard my fatherly advise, so I pray you give my
daughter the like friendly advertisement; that hereafter she may have both
cause to reverence me, and to reward thee.

Melytta having heard with attentive heed the mind of Orlanio, conceived such
joy in this new charge, and such delight in this happy chance, as with
cheerful countenance she repayed him this answer.

SIr (quoth she) although in the largest seas are the forest tempests in the
broadest ways most boisterous winds, in the highest hills, most dangerous
happes, and in the greatest charge the greatest care: yet the duty which I owe
you as my Sovereign, and the love I bear you as a subject, the care I have to
please you as my Prince, and to pleasure you as a Potentate, the trust you
repose in my truth without sufficient trial, the confidence you put in my
conscience without sure proof, the courtesy your Grace does show me without
any desert, have so inflamed the forepassed fire of dutiful affection, and so
encouraged me to encounter your Graces courtesy, with willing constancy, that
there is no hap so hard which I would not hazard, no danger so desperate which
I would not adventure, no burden so heavy which I would not bear, no peril
so huge which I would not pass, no charge so great, which both willingly and
warily I would not perform. For, since it has pleased your Grace to
vouchsafe so much of my simple calling, as to assign me for a companion for
your daughter Castania, I will take such care in the charie performance of my
charge, and indenour with such diligence both to counsel and comfort
Castania, as your Grace shall perceive my duty in pleasing you, and my
diligence in pleasuring her.

THe Duke hearing the friendly and faithful protestation of the good Lady
Melytta, told her that although it were great trouble for one of her age to
frame her self as a companion to such young youth, and that some care belonged
to such a charge, yet he would so counternalle her painful labor with
princely liberality, that both she and all Alexandria should have cause to
speak of his bounty.

MElytta, thanking the Duke for such undeserved courtesy, setting her household
affairs in good order, repaired to the Court as speedily as might be. But
leaving her with Castania, again to Gwydonius: who now being arrived in
Alexandria, pinched with poverty, and distressed with want, having no coin
left wherewith to counteruaile his expenses, thought it his best course, if it
were possible, to compass the Dukes service: repairing therefore to the court
he had not stayed there three days before he found fit opportunity to offer
his service to Orlanio, whom very dutifully he saluted in this manner.

THe report (right worthy Prince) of your incomparable courtesy and pearlesse
magnanimity is so blazed abroad throughout all Countries, by the golden trumpe
of Fame, that your Grace is not more loved of your subjects which taste of your
liberal bounty, than honored of strangers, which only hear of your princely
virtue. Insomuch that it has forced me to leave my native soil, my parents,
kindred, and familiar friends, and pilgrimlike to pass into a strange Country,
to try that by experience here, which I have heard by report at home. For it is
not (right worthy Sir) the state of your Country that has altured me (for I
deem Bohemia, whereof I am, no less pleasant than Alexandria) neither has
want of living or hope of gain intised me, for I am by birth a Gentleman, and
issued of such parents as are able with sufficient patrimony to maintain my
estate: but the desire, not only to see, but also to learn such rare courtesy
and virtuous qualities as fame has reported to be put in practice in your
Court, is the only occasion of this my iourny. Now if in recompenee of this
mytrauaile, it shall please your Grace to vouchsafe of my service, I shall think
my self fully satisfied, and my pains sufficiently requited.

Orlanio, hearing this dutiful discourse of Gwydonius, marking his manners,
and musing at his modesty, noting both his excellent courtesy, and exquisite
beauty, was so inflamed with friendly affection toward this young youth, that
not only he accepted of his service, but also preferred him as a companion to
his son Thersandro, promising that since he had left his Country and Parents
for this cause, he would so counteruaile his dutiful desert with favor and
friendship, as he should never have cause to accuse him of ingratitude.

Gwydonius repaying hearty thanks to the Duke for his undeserved courtesy,
being now brought from woe to weal, from despair to hope, from bale to
bliss, from care to security, from want to wealth, yea, from hellish misery,
to heavenly prosperity, behaved himself so wisely and warily with such
courtesy in conversation, and modesty in manners, that in short time he not
only purchased credit and countenance with Orlanio, but was most entirely
liked and loved of Thersando.

Now, there remained in the Court a young knight, called Signior Valericus, who
by chance casting his glancing eyes on the glittering beauty of Castania, was
so fettered in the snare of fancy, and so entangled with the trap of
affection, so perplered in the Labyrinth of pinching love, and so enchanted
with the charm of Venus Sorcerie, that as the Elephant reioiceth greatly at
the sight of a Rose, as the Bird Halciones delights to view the feathers of
ye Phoenix, and as nothing better contenteth a Ro-Buck, than to gaze at a red
cloth; so there was no object that could allurc the wavering eyes of Valericus,
as the surpassing beauty of Castania: yea, his only bliss, pleasure, joy, and
delight, was in feeding his fancy with staring on yt Heavenly face of his
goddess. But alas her beauty bred his bane, her looks his loss, her sight
is sorrow, her exquisite perfections, his extreme passions, that as the Ape by
seeing the Snaile is infected, as the Leopard falls in a trance at the sight
of the Locust, as the Cockatrice dies with beholding the Chrisolito, so poor
Valericus was pinched to the heart with viewing her comely countenance, was
griped with galling grief, and tortured with insupportable torments, by gazing
upon the gallant beauty of so gorgeous a dame: yea, he so framed in his fancy
the form of her face, and so imprinted in his heart the perfection of her
person, that the remembrance thereof would suffer him to take no rest, but he
passed the day in dolor, the night in sorrow, no minute without mourning, no
hour without heaviness, that falling into pensive passions he began thus to
parle with himself.

Why how now Valericus (quoth he) art thou haunted with some hellish hagge, or
passessed with some frantike fury? art thou inchaunted with some magical
charm, or charmed with some bewitching Sorcerie, that so suddenly thy mind is
perplexed with a thousand sundry passions, alate free, and now fettered, alate
swimming in rest, and now sinking in care, erewhile in security, and now in
captivity, yea turned from mirth to mourning, from pleasure to pain, from
delight to despite, hating thy self, and loving her who is the chief cause
of this thy calamity. Ah Valericus, have thou forgot the saying of Propertius,
that to love, howsoever it be, is to lose; and to fancy, how charie so ever
thy choice be, is to have an ill chance? for Love though never so fickle is but
a Chaos of care; and fancy, though never so fortunate, is but a mass of
misery: for if thou enjoy the beauty of Venus, thou shall find it small
vantage: if thou get one as wise as Minerua, thou may put thy winnings in
thine eye, if as gorgious as Juno, thy accounts being cast, thy gain shall be but
loss: yea, be she virtuous ^e she chaste, be she courteous, be she constant, be
she rich, be she renowned, be she honest, be she honorable, yet if thou be
wedded to a woman, think thou shall find in her sufficient vanity to
counteruaile her virtue, that thy happiness will be matched with heaviness,
thy quiet with care, thy contentation with vexation: that thou shall sow seed
with sorrow, and reap thy corn with sadness, that thou shall never live
without grief, nor die without Repentance: for in matching with a Wife there
are such mischiefs, and in marriage such miseries, that Craterus the Emperor
wishing some sinister fortune to happen upon one of his foes, prayed unto the
gods that he might he married in his youth, and die without issue in his age,
counting marriage such a cumbersome cross, and a Wife such a pleasant plague,
that he thought his foe could have no worse torment, than to be troubled with
such noisome trash. Oh Valericus, if the consideration of these premises be
not sufficient to persuade thee: if the sentence of Propertius cannot quench
thy flame, nor the saying of Craterus cool thy fancy, call to mind what
miseries, what mischiefs, what woes, what wailings, what mishaps, what
murders, what care, what calamities have happened to such, as have beell
besotted with the balefull beauty of women, enjoying more care than
commodity, more pain than profit, more cost man comfort, more grief than
good: yea, reaping a tun of dross for every dramm of perfect gold.

What careless inconstancy ruled Eriphila? What currish cruelty reigned in
Philomela? How incestuous a life led Aeuropa? and how miserable was that man
that married Sthuolea? What gains got Tereus in winning Progne, but a
loathsome death for a little delight. Agamemnon in possessing the beauty of
Cresida, caused the Greeian army most grievously to be plagued. Candaules was
slain by his murdering wife, whom so entirely he loved. Who was thought more
happy than the husband of Helena, and yet who in time less fortunate? What
hapless chances insued of the chastity of Penelope? What broiles in Rome by
the virtue of Lucretia? The one caused her suitors most horribly to be slain,
and the other that Tarquine and all his posterity were rooted out of their
regal dignities. Phaedra in loving killed her hapless son Hippolitus, and
Clitemnestra in hating slew her loving husband Agamemnon. Alas Valericus, how
dangerous is it then to deal with such dames, which if they love, they procure
thy fatal care: and if they hate thee, thy final calamity?

But ah blasphemous beast that I am! thus recklesly to rail and rage without
reason, thus currishly to exclaim against those, without whom our life though
never so luckie, should seem most loathsome? thus Tymon like, to condemn those
heavenly creatures, whose only sight is a sufficient salve against all hellish
sorrows: Is this right, to conclude generally of particular premises? Is it
justice to accuse all for the fault of some? Is it equity to blame the stay
of virtuous women, for the state of vicious wantons? Do thou think
Valericus to shake off the shackles of fancy with this folly? Or to eschew
the bait of beauty, by breathing out such blasphemy? No, no, assure thy
self, that these thy raging reasons, will in time be most rigerously renenged,
that the gods themselves will plague thee for braying out such injurious
speeches. Alas, Love wanting desire, makes the mind desperate: and fixed
fancy bereaved of love turns into fury. The loyal faith I bear to
Castania, and the loathsome fear of her ingratitude, the deep desire which
inforceth my hope, and the deadly despair which infringeth my hap, so tosseth
my mind with contrary cogitations, that I neither regard what I say, to my
harm; nor respect what I do, to my own hurt: yea, my senses are so belotted
with pinching love, and my mind so fretted with frying fancy, that death were
thrice more welcome, than thus to linger in despairing hope.

And with that to pass away those pensive passions, he flung out of his
chamber with his Hawke on his fist, thinking by such sport to drive away this
melancholy humor, which so molested his mind.

But as he was passing through the Court, he was luckily encountered by
Melytta and Castania, who minding to have some sport with Valericus before he
did pass: had the onset thus pleasantly given him by Castania.

II is hard Signor Valericus (quoth she) to take you either without your Hawke
on your fist, or your heart on your halfepenie: for if for recreation you be
not retriuing the Partridge with dogs, you are in solemn meditation driving
away the time with dumpes, neither caring for company to solace your
sadness, norpleasantlie discoursing of some amorous Parle: which makes the
Gentlewomen of this Court think, that you are either an Apostata to love, as
was Narcissus, or have displayed the flagge of deffance against Fancy, as did
Tyanaeus. If these their surmised conjectures be true, Valericus, I warn thee
as a friend to beware by other men's harms, least if thou imitate their
actions, thou be mangled with the like misery, or maimed with the like
misfortune.

Valericus hearing his Saint pronouncing this sugered harmony, feeling
himself somewhat touched with this quipping talk, was so rapt in admiration of
her eloquence, and so ravished in the contemplation of her beauty, that he
stood in a maze not able to utter one word, until at last gathering his wits
together, he burst forth in these speeches.

MAdame (quoth he) what it pleases the gentle women of this court to sormise
of my solitarines I know not: but if they attribute it to curiousnes, or
coinesse, to strangeness or stateliness, either that I am an enemy to love,
or a foe to fancy, that I detest their bounty with Narcissus, or contemn
their beauty with Tiancus, they offer me great injury so rashly to conjecture
of my disease, before rightly they have cast my water. But to put your Ladyship
out of doubt what is the cause of my dumpes, so it is, that of late raunging
the fields, my heart (my hawke I should say Madame) houered at such a
princely pray, and yet mist of her flight, that since she has neither pruned
her self, nor I taken any pleasure. Marie if the fates should so favor me,
or fortune so shroud me up in prosperity, that my desire might obtain her
wish, I would not only change my mourning to mirth, my dolor to delight, and
my care to security, but I would think to have gotten as rich a pray as ever
Caesar gained by conquest.

SVrely Signor Valericus (quoth Melytta) no doubt the pray is p^^^ing
princely, since the value thereof is rated at so preciou^ a price, and therefore
we have neither cause to condemn your hawk of haggardnes, for want of pruning,
nor you of foolishness for want of pleasure. And if your heart (your Hawke I
should say, Signior Valericus) has reached farther with her eye, than she is
able to mount with her wing, although I am no skillful Fawlkner, yet I think
you had better keep her on the fist still, and so feed her with hope, than let
her miss again of her flight, and so she turnetaile and be foiled.

Indeed Madame (quoth Valericus) your counsel is very good, for as there is
no better confect to a crazed mind, than hope, so there is no greater corasiue
to a careful man, than despair, and the Falkners also iumpe with you in the
same verdite, that the Hawke which misseth her pray, is doubtful to foare
aloof and prove haggard. Yet if she were so tickle, as she would take no
stand, so ramage as she would be reclaimed with no lure, I had rather happily
hazard her for the gayning of so peerlesse a pray, though I both lost her, and
wanted of my wish, than by keeping her still in the Bines, to prove her a kite,
or me a coward.

Indeed Sir (quoth Castania) Fortune ever favors them that are valiant: and
things the more hard, the more haughty, high and heavenly: neither is any
thing hard to be accomplished, by him that hardily enterpriseth it. But yet
take heed that you fish not so fair, that at length you catch a Frogge, and
then repentance make you mumble up a mass with Miserere.

No Madame (quoth he) it is never seen that he which is contented with his
chance, should ever have cause to repent him of his choice.

And yet (quoth she) he that buies a thing too dear, may be content with his
chaffer, and yet wish he had been more charie.

Truth Madame (quoth Valericus) but then it is trash and no treasure, for that
which is precious is never ouerprised, and a bad thing though never so cheap,
is thought too chargeable.

Oh Sir (quoth Melytta) and is it not an old saying, that a man may buy gold
too dear, and that jewels though never so precious, may be set at too high a
price? I see if you had no better skill in manning of a Hawke, than in making
of a bargain, you would prove but an ill Faulkner. But since we have so long
troubled you with our talk, we will now leave you to your sport, and so bid
you farewell.

Valericus with a courteous Conge, repaying their courtesy, and with a
glauncing eye giving his goddess the doleful A dio, went solitarilie into the
secret woods, where laying him down in the shade, he fell into these musing
meditations:

What greater prosperity (quoth he) can happen unto any earthly wight, than
if he be crossed with care, to find a confect to cure his calamity: than if he
be pinched with pains, to get a plaster for his passions: if he be drenched
in distresss, to find a means to mitigate his misery? which I see by proof
performed in my seely self: for the sight of my goddess have so salued my
forepassed sorrows, her sweet words has so healed my heavy wounds, that
where before I was plunged in perplexity, I am now placed in felicity: where
before I was oppressed with care, I am now refreshed with comfort. O friendly
fortune, if from henceforth thou furiously frown upon me, if thou daunt me
with disaster mishappe, or cross me with perpetual care, yet thus thy
friendly courtesy shall be sufficient to counteruaile all future enormities.

But alas, I see every prosperous puff has his boisterous blaste, every
sweet has his sower, every weal his woe, every gale of good luck, his
storm of sinister fortune: yea, every commodity his discommoditie annexed:
the blood of the Viper is most healthful for the sight, and most hurtful for
the stomach, the stone Celonites is very precious for the back, and very
perilous to the brain: the flower of India pleasant to be seen, but whosoever
smells to it, feels present smart: so as the joy of her presence procures
my delight, the annoy of her absence breeds my despite: yea, the fear that
she will not repay my love with liking, and my fancy with affection, that she
will not consent to my request, but rather means to stifle me with the raging
storms of repulse, and daunt me with the doom of deadly dentals, so fretteth
my hapless mind with hellish fury, that no plague, no pain, no torment, no
torture can worse molest me, than to be distressed with this dreadful despair.

Alas, her calling is too high for me to climb unto, her royal state is
far above my reach, her haughty mind is too lofty for me to aspire: no
doubt if I offer my suit unto her, she will prove like the stone of Silicia,
which the more it is beaten, the harder it is: or like the spices of Ionia,
which the more they are pounded the less savor they yield; like to the
Isiphilon, which yields forth no juice though never so well bruised: so,
though I should with never so great devotion offer up at her Shrine, prayers,
promises, sighs, sobs, tears, troth, faith, freedom, yea, and my heart it
self, as a pledge to plead for pity, yet she would make so small account of
these my cares, and as little regard my ruth and ruin, as Eriphila did her
faithful friend Infortunio.

But oh vile wretch that I am! why do I thus without cause condemn Castania?
Why do I accuse her of cruelty, in whom reigns nothing but courtesy? Why do
I appeach her of coinesse, in whom bounty shows small curiousness?

How friendly, how familiarly, yea, how faithfully did she talk with me, what
a cheerful countenance did she carry toward me, what sudden glaunces,
what lovely looks? which no doubt are signs, that though she repulse meat
the first, she will not refuse me at the last: though she be straight in
words, she will not be strange in mind: though she give me some bitter
pills of denial, it shall be but for the better trial. And shall I then
being fed with this hope prove such a mecocke, or a milkesop, as to be feared
with the tempestuous seas of adversity, when as at length I shall arrive at the
haven of happy estate? shall I dread to have my ship shaken with some angry
blastes, hoping to be safely landed on the shore, and so have my share of
that, which the showers of shrewd Fortune for a time have denied me? No, no,

Dulcia non meruit, qui non gustavit amara.

He is not worthy to suck the sweet, which has not first sauoured the
sour: he is not worthy to eat the kernel which has not cracked the shel, he
deserves not to have the crown of victory, which has not abid the brunt of
the battle: he meriteth not to possess the pray, which will not willingly
take some part of the pains: Neither is he worthy of so heavenly a Dame as
Castania, that would not spend the most preti^us blood in his body, in the
pursuit of so peerless a piece.

VAlericus thus mitigating his pain with the mild medicine of hope, and
rooting out the dead flesh of despair with the plaster of trust, determined
to strike on the Stith while the iron was hot, and so pursue his purpose while
his mistress was in her good mood. And therefore leaving his sport for this
time, highed him to the court in haste: where insinuating himself into the
society of the Ladies and Gentlewomen, he showed himself in sport so
pleasant, in talk so witty, in manners so modest, in conceits so cunning, in
parle so pithie, and in all his conversation so comely, that whereas before he
was specially loved of none, now he was generally liked of all: insomuch that
for a time there was no talk in the Court but of the Metamorphos^s of Valericus
mind. Who oftentimes determining in plain terms to present his suits to
Castania, when he came to the point, fear of offense, and dread of denial,
disappointed his purpose, that he remained mute in the matter: but at last
perceiving delay bred danger, seeing his mistress sit alone in his presence,
houering between fear and hope, he began the assault with this march.

MAdame (quoth he) for that I see you sitting thus solitary in dumps, I am
the bolder to prease in place, although the most unworthy man to supply it.
Hoping you will pardon my rudeness for troubling thus rashly your musing
meditations, and count my company the less offensive in that I see you busied
with no such serious matters whereunto my presence may be greatly prejudicial.
Cyneas the Philosopher, Madam, was of this mind, that when the gods made
beauty, they skipt beyond their skill, in that they framed it of greater force
than they themselves were able toresist. If then there is none so wise or
worthy whom beauty cannot wrack, nor none issued of such princely birth whom
beauty cannot bend, though I have been entangled with the snare of fancy, and
have listened to the lure of beauty, I am the more to be borne with, and the
less to be blamed. For I must of force confess Madame, that the gifts of
nature so abundantly bestowed upon you, your excellent beauty and exquisite
virtue, have so scaled the walls of my fancy, and sacked the fort of my
freedom, that for my last refuge I am forced to appeal unto your courtesy, as
the only medicine which may cure my intolerable disease. Nay incurable I may
well call it, for (I speak with tears outwardly, and drops of blood inwardly)
unless the mizling showers of your mercy mittigate the fire of my fancy, the
drops of your princely favor quench the flame of my affection, and the
guerdon of your good will give a sovereign plaistor for my secret sore, I am
like to pass my life in more misery, than if I had taken the internal
torments. But I hope it is not possible, that out of a sugered Fount would
distill a bitter stream, out of a fragrant flower a filthhy sap, and from such
divine beauty should proceed hate and hellish cruelty.

It is Madame, your beauty which has wrought my woe, and it is your bounty
which must work my weal. It is your heavenly face which has deprived me of
liberty, and your courteous consent must be the means to redeem me from
captivity: for as he that eats of the Brain lease, and is infected, can by
no means be cured, unless he tastes of the same root: as he which is wounded
of the Porcupins, can never be healed unless his wounds be washed with the
blood of the same beast: as there is nothing better against the stinging of a
Snake, than to be rubbed with an Adders slough, and as he which is hurt of the
Scorpion seeks a salve from whom he received the sore, so love only is
remedied by love, and fancy by mutual affection: you Madame, must minister
the medicine, which procured the malady, and it only lies in your power to
apply the plaster which inferred the pain.

Therefore I appeal to your good grace and favor, and at the bar of your
beauty I humbly hold up my hands, resting to abide your sentence, either of
consent unto life, or denial unto death.

CAstania hearing this solemn discourse of Valericus, was driven into a maze
with this unlooked for motion, musing that he would so far ouershoote
himself, as to attempt so unlikely a match, and therefore with disdainful
countenance she gave him this daunt:

AS your present arrival Signor Valericus does not greatly preindice my
muses, so I think it will as little profit your motion: and as your company
pleases me regarding the person, so it much misliketh me, respecting the
Parle: that your counts being once cast you shall find your absence might have
more pleasured you, and better contented me. For it is impossible Valericus, to
call the Fawlcon to that Lure wherein the pens of a Chameleon are pricked,
because she does deadly detest them, it is hard to train the Lion to that
trappe which sauoureth of Diagredium, because he loatheth it. And it is as
impossible to persuade me to enter league with fancy, which am a mortal foe
to affection, and to vow my service to Venus, which am already addicted to
Diana. No, no sir, I mean not to love, least I live by the loss, nor to
choose, least my skill being small, I repent my chance. She that is free and
willingly runs into fetters is a fool, and whosoever becomes captive without
constraint, may be either thought wilful or witless. It is good by other men's
harms to learn to beware, and to look before a man does leaps, least in
skipping beyond his skill, he light in the mire. Whosoever considers the
fickleness of men's affections, and the fleeting fondness of their fading
fancy, who carefully looks at the lightness of their love, and marketh the
inconstancy of their wavering mind, who reads the records which make
mention of their deep dissembling, faithless protestations, false vows,
perjured promises, feigned love, and forged flattery: how poor Ariadne was
abused, how Medea was mocked, how Dido was deceived, how Oenone was rejected,
and how Phyllis was forsaken, and yet would be allured to the train with such
filthy scraps, I would count her chance too good, were her choice never so
bad. But leaving these necessary doubts, Valericus, I tell you for troth, if I
meant to love, it is not you I mean to like: if affection forced me, it is not
your person I mean to fancy, your patrimony is not sufficient to counteruaile
my parentage, nor your bringing up my birth, and therefore I would wish you to
sow the seed of your suit in a more fertile soil, for in me you shall find
no grafts of grant to grow, nor no consent to be cropped, for I neither like
of your unlikely love, nor mean not to be framed to your fancy.

Valericus being pushed with this pike, thought it a sign of small courage to
yield at the first foyne, and therefore looking more narrowly to his ward, and
gathering himself within his weapon, he stood to his tackling with this reply:

MAdame (quoth he) if you condenm me of folly for climbing a staff too high,
or accuse me of fondness far laying my love on a person of such princely
parentage, it I seem to make an ill market in cheaping such precious chaffer,
as the price thereof is far above my reach, yet my offense is too small to
bear any weighty penance, since where the fault proceeds of love, there the
pardon insueth of course, but your beauty shall bear all the blame, as the
only spur of this my rash enterprise. For as it is impossible for the iron
to resist the operation of the Adamant, or the silly straw the virtue of the
sucking teat, so as impossible it is for a lover to withstand the brunt of
beauty, to freeze if he stand by the flame, or to pervert the laws of Nature.
So that Madame if you knew what a breach your beauty has made into my
breast, and bow deeply I have shrined the idol of your person in my hapless
heart, I assure my self though my person and parentage, my birth and bringing
up be far unfit for such a mate yet you would deem my love and loyalty to
deserve no less. Loyalty I call it Madam; for as all things are not made of
one mould, so all men are not of one mind: as the Serpentine powder is quickly
kindled, and quickly out, so the Salamander stone once set on fire can never
be quenched: as the soft ware is apt to receive every impression, so the hard
metal never changes form without melting. Jason was never so tr^uthlesse as
Troylus was trusty: Paris was never more fickle then Pyramus was faithful:
Aeneas was never so light as Leander was faithful And sure Madame, I call the
gods to witness, I speak without faining, that since your beauty and virtue
either by fate or for time is so deeply shrined in my heart, if it please you
to accept me for your slave or servant, and admit me so far into your
favor, as that I may freely enioie the sight of your sweet face, and feed my
fancy in the contemplation of your beauty; in liewe thereof, I will repaie
such dutiful service, as the betrothed faith of Erasta to his Persida, shall
not compare with the love of Valericus and Castania.

CAstania hearing these perplexed passions proceed from woeful Valericus,
pricked forward to take some remorse of his torments, felt within her mind a
careful conflict between fancy and the fates, love and the destinies: fancy
persuaded her to take pity of his pains, the fates forced her to give him
the repulse: love wished her to return his goodwil with gain, the destinies
drove her to deny his request: tossed thus with contrary cogitations, at last
she burst forth into these doubtful speeches.

VAlericus, as I am not altogether to reward thy goodwill with hate, so I
cannot repaie it with love, because fancy denies me to like: to marry I mean
not, to retain servants I may not. Marie, to let thee either to love, or
look, take this for an answer, I neither can nor will.

And with that she went her way, leaving Valericus greatly daunted with this
doubtful answer, with fear and hope so fiercely assailed, that being left
alone, he began thus to consider of his amorous conceits.

IF ever woeful creature had cause to complain his woeful ease, then
undoubtedly may I preace for the foremost place: for there is no sorrow more
sower, no torment more terrible, no grief more grievous, no heaviness more
hurtful, than to have desire requited with despite, and good will with hate,
then to like upon hope of curtesse, and to find nothing but hate and hellish
cruelty.

Alas poor Valericus, is thy true love thus triflingly accounted of, is this
the guerdon for thy good will? Deoth thy deep desire merit no better desert,
then have thou no choice, but either to dye desperately, or else to live
loathsomly? Why fond fool do thou count her cruel, that at the first gives
not a free consent? Do thou think her coie that comes not at the first
call, would thou have the match made at the first motion? She that is won
with a word will be lost with a wind, the Hawke that bates at every cast of
the Lure, will never be steadfast on the stand, the woman that frames her
will to every wish will prove but a wild wanten. No, no, Valericus, let not
her denials daunt thee, let not the sower taste of her talk quat thy queaste
stomach, conster all things at the best, though her censure was very severe,
yet she knit up her talk with a courteous close. The hound which at the first
default gives over the chase, is called but a curre. The Knight that finding
the first encounter combersom, gives over the quest, is counted but a coward,
and the lover that at the first denial is daunted with despair, is neither
worthy to obtain his desire, nor to enjoy his desert. And with that he flung
out of his Chamber, both to avoid the melancholy which tormented his mind, and
see if he could have a sight of his goddess.

But Castania altogether unwilling to parle with her new patient, kept herself
out of his sight: which Valericus espying, was no whit amazed, but like a
valiant soldier gave the fort a fresh assault with a new kind of battery,
seeking to obtain that with writing, which he could not gain with words, and
therefore speedily framed a letter to this effect.

Seignor Valericus, to the Lady Castania, health.
THere is no creature (Madame Castania) so bereaved of reason, or deprived of
sense, which being oppressed with direful calamities, finds not by mere
instinct of nature, a present medicine for his malady, man only excepted, who
by reason of this want, may justly accuse the injurious gods of injustice. The
Tiger though never so deadly wounded, tastes the root of Tamariske, and is
presently cured: The Dear being strooken, though never so deep, feeds on the
herb Dictamnum, and forthwith is bealed: the Lion salueth his sickness by
eating the Sea Woolfe, and the Unicorn recouereth his health by swallowing up
the buds of a Date tree. But man being crossed with care, or oppressed with
grief, pinched with fancy, or perplexed with love, finds no herb so
wholesome, nor medicine so mild, no plaster so perfect, nor no salve so
sovereign, which by their secret virtues can appease his passions. Which
Madame, I know by proof, and now speak by experience: for your divine beauty
and secret virtue, the perfection of your body and the bounty of your mind,
has kindled such a flaming fire in my hapless heart; that by no means it may
be quenched, but will turn my body into dry earth and cinders, unless by the
drops of your pity it be speedily redressed. Then Madame, since your
beauty is my bale, let it be my bliss: since it has wrought my woe, let it
work my weal, and let not my faithful service and loyal love be recompensed
with such rigerous refusals. Strive not for my life, since you have my
liberty, seek not my death, since you are the Saint to whom I offer up my
devotion. But good Madame, let the sweet Balm of your benevolence salve the
sore which so painfully afflicts my careful conscience, and with the deawe
of your grace redeem him from most hellish misery, whose life and death
stands in your answer, which I hope shall be such as belongs to the desert
of my love, and the show of your beauty.

Yours, if he be Don Valericus.


Valericus having thus finished his Letter, sent it with as much speed as
might be by his Page to Castania, who finding her at convenient leisure, with
most reverent duty delivered it. Castania at the first sight coniecturing the
contents, with scornful looks and disdainful countenance unripped the seals,
where seeing and reading his deep devotion she perceived that his affection
was no less in deed, than he professed in word: she notwithstanding would
take no remorse of his torment, but to drive him more into doleful dumpes, she
returned him this damp.

Castania, to Signior Valericus.
AS it is impossible (Signor Valericus) to strain moist licour out of the dry
flint, to procure slaming heat in that which already is nipped with chilling
cold, to force the sturdie streams to run against their common course, so as
hard it is to win unwilling love, either with tears or truth. For if thy birth
and patrimony could counteruaile my parentage, if my Father were content to
knit up the knot, yet neither his command nor thy entreaty should make me to
choose without my own love and liking. Since then thou art the man whom I
rather loathe than like, cease from thy suit, make a virtue of necessity, and
assuage the flame thy self which no other will quench. By importunate
persisting in thy purpose where no hope is, thou prouest thy self rather a
desperate sot than a discreet souldsour. To hop against the hill is extreme
fondness, to strive against the stream, mere folly: then Valericus, avoid
the one, and eschew the other, for if thou will seek to gain my good will,
thou shall turn the endless stone with Sisiphus, and therefore take my nay
for answer. For if I would I cannot, and if I could I will not. And so
farewell.

No way yours, Castania.


VAlericus having received this rigorous Letter from ruthlesse Castania, seeing
with what great disdain she rejected his dutiful devotion, and how with coy
countenance and lowering looks, she rewarded his loyal love, he began with
reason some what to repress his rage, and with wisdom to redress his
witless folly: for comparing her cruelty with his own courtesy, and her
wilful disdain with his willing duty, his disordinate desire began not only
to decay, but his extreme love turned to extreme hate, insomuch that forced
with despite, he sent her (in revenge) these raging lines.

Valericus the despised, to despightfull Castania.
DIogenes being demanded why so extremely he hated women, answered, because
(quoth he) they be women: so if thou ask of me why so rudely I rail against
thy recklesse folly, I answer, because thou art Castania, whose merciless
mind is so misledde with ingratitude, and whose currish nature is foiled with
careless inconstancy, that like Menechmus Subreptus his wi^e, thou do not
begin to love ere again thou seek to hate. Thou plaiest, Castania, like the
young Eagles, which being hatched up by the bird Osyphaga, never seek to peark
on lofty Mounts, but to sit in durtie Dales, and like the greedy kite which
leaves the sweet flesh, to pray on the stinking carrion. But why do I so
far forget my self? Is she to be blamed that leaves her choice to have a
better chance? or is the Faulcon to be accused of bastardie, that leaves the
starling to pray on the Lark? No: and no doubt such is thy case: for if it be
true that all speaks, or at the least suspecteth, thou art like by thy lovers
parentage to become a great Potentate: for if arms be the bewrayer of ancient
descents, no doubt he is come of an old house. Yea, thy father Orlanio may
roioyce if he live to see the day that his daughter shall be so well wedded
as to such a wrangling wisard. But Pasiphae preferred a Bull before a King, and
Venus a smeared Smith before Mars the god of battle. Tush, Psomneticus was
father to Rhodopes children, whosoever begat them: and that cloak is of a
course spinning, that cannot keep off the rain. Farewell.

Living he hopes to revenge thy injuries. Woeful Valericus.


CAstania no sooner had read these despitefull lines of Valericus, but her
mind sried with the flames of fury, and her breast broyled with raging wrath,
in such sort, that she could not be in quiet nor take any rest, she busied her
self so carefully in studying with what kind of revenge she might best
wreake her wrath upon him, and requite his spiteful speeches. At last
womanlike, she found her tongue the best weapon, and with that she plagued him
in this sort.

Castania, to Valericus, neither health nor good hap.
THe Mastiffe Dog (Valericus) can never quest like a Spaniell, but he must
always bark like a Curre: it is natural for the Pie to chatter, for the Iaye
to iangle, and for thee to rail and rage like a frantike fool. Dooest thou
think (Valericus) by brawling like a beggar to become a King, or by thy
moodlesse folly to obtain my favor? no, as I know thy knavery, so I pass not
for thy bravery: neither can those vaunts stand for payment, where the party
is pricked for a peevish paltering patch. It is no marvel if thy doggish
Letters savor of Diogenes doctrine: for in troth thou art such a Cinicall kind
of dunce, that thy fond felicity is in biting bitterly those, whom otherwise
thou can not revenge. Indeed, gentle Balaams As^e, if I had been so light
as to have loved you, I might justly have been accused to have been a curre
or a Kistrell: for in faith she that feeds her fancy on thy face, may only
reap this profit, to fill her eyes full with the figure of a fool. For my
lovers arms, Valericus, they are imblazed in such a coat, as it is hard for
thee to control. But, I know thou boastest that thou have gotten thy
antiquity by conquest, and keep thy Letters patents in the beggars box.
Thus adieu sir dunce: the more you mislike me, the better I love my self.

Thy detested foe, Castania.


VAlericus his heart was so hardened with hate, as he was nothing dismayed with
this rigorous reply, but thought himself half satisfied, that he had thus
kindly touched her to the quick, praying the gods, that since it was not in his
possibility to make any sufficient revenge, they would by some sinister means
requite her cruelty. But leaving him to his dumps, at last to Gwydonius, who
besides the beauty of his body, and the bounty of his mind (whereat all
Alexandria wondered) had by good government and perfect practice, obtained such
a dexterity in all things, as in feats of arms no man more forward, in
exercise none more active, in play none more politic, in parle none more
pleasant: amongst the Ancients very wise, amongst the youthful who more
merry? so that there was no time, person, nor place, whereto aptly he applied
not himself: insomuch that he entered into such favor and familiarity with
Thersandro and Castania, that he was the only man whose company they desired
to enjoy. But especially Castania, who by casting a gazing glaunce sometime
upon the beauty of Gwydonius, felt a certain restraint of liberty in her
affections, an alteration of mind, and as it were a civil assault within her
self: but having small practice in the panges of love, she could not
conjecture the secret cause of these her sudden passions, thinking that as it
was a toye lightly taken, so it would as lightly be left: and upon this, still
she rested, conceiving only an ordinary kind of liking toward Gwydonius.

Who bathing thus in the streams of bliss, and safely harbored in the haven
of happiness, wanting nothing which might content his mind, either for
pleasure or profit, thought it a point of mecre folly either to seek or wish
for more than enough, knowing that to strain further than the sleeue would
stretch, was but to make the arm bare, and to skippe beyond a man's skill, was
to leap, but not to knew where to light: to avoid therefore hastiness in
hazarding, he fell a slumbering in the careless seat of security.

But as it is impossible for a man to sleep by the Viper and not be
inuenomed, to gaze upon the Cockatrice and not be infected, to stare upon the
Sun and not be dazeled, to look upon Medusas head and not be transformed,
to wade in the waves and not be drenched, to handle coalss and not be scorched:
so it was as impossible for young Gwydonius to gaze upon the beauty of Castania
and not be galled, to six his eyes upon her feature and not be fettered, to
see her virtuous qualities and not be inueigled: for her courtesy had so
encountered him, her modesty had so amazed him, and her chary chastity so
inchaunted him, that whereas he came to Orlanio his Court free from affection,
he was now become a servile slave to fancy; before a foe to lust, now a friend
to love; yes, he felt such an alienation of his senses, and such a strange
Metamorphosis of his mind, as reason was turned to rage, mirth to mourning,
joy to annoy, delight to despite, weal to woe, bliss to hale: in fine, such
contrary passions so perplexed this doubtful Patient, as maugre his face he
yielded the forte to fancy, and pulled in the former flagge of defiance,
entreated for truce, and began to enter parle with Cupide on this manner.

O Gwydonius (quoth he) what strange chance, nay what rare change, what
solemn motion, nay, what sudden madness, what foolish frenzy, or rather
what frautike affection has possessed thee? Is thy lawless liberty turned to
a slavish captivity? Is thy freedom fettered? Are thy senses besotted? Is thy
wit inueigled? Were thou of late a defier of Venus, and art thou now a defender
of vanity? Did thou of late renounce beauty as a foe, and will thou now
embrace her as a friend? Is this the careful keeping of thy fathers
commandment? Or is this thy diligent duty in observing the counsel of thy
old sire Clerophontes? Have thou so soon forgot his fatherly precepts, or
committed to oblivion his friendly advertisement? Did he carefully warn she
to beware of love, and will thou carelessly wed thy self to lust? Did he show
thee what poisoned bane is hidden under the painted baytes of beauty, and will thou be haled to the hook?

O hapless case: nay rather, if the chary charge thy father gave thee, will
be no constraint, if his counsel will not command thee, if his warning will
not make thee wary, nor his advise be thy aduisement: yet let imminent perils,
and ensuing dangers be a precious preservative against future calamities.
Consider with thy self Gwydonius, what difference is between freedom and
bondage, between liberty and captivity, mirth and mourning, pleasure and
pain, rest and care, happiness and heaviness: and so far does he which is
free from affection, differ from him which is fettered in fancy.

Why but Gwydonius, why do thou thus recklesly rage, against reason? Why
dooest thou thus fondly exclaim against thine own welfare? Why dooest thou
condemn thy self of that crime whereof thou art not guilty?

Thy Father warned thee to beware of sickle fancy: but this thy liking is firm
affection. His counsel was to persuade thee from lewd lust, but not from
lawful love, from vanity, not from virtue: yea, his will was to wish thee
from liking such a lewd minio^, who had neither birth, wealth, nor virtue, but
a little fading beauty to be either her credit or thy countenance, not to
warn thee from loving such a chaste maiden, nay, a peerlesse Princess, whose
birth may countenance thy calling, whose power may promote thee, whose liuinges
may enrich thee, whose virtue may advance thee: yea, in obtaining whom, thou
shall gain both honor, and perhaps the inheritance of a Dukedom.

Do thou think then Gwydonius, in winning so worthy a piece, to purchase
thy fathers displeasure? nay assure thy self he will not only be content
with thy chance, but he will think thou have run a happier race, than
Hyppomanes did in winning Atlante. Content thee wc thy chance. Why Gwydonius,
art thou so fond a fool, as to count the Castle conquered, that as yet thou
have not compassed: to suppose the City sacked, which thou have not besieged:
to think the Bulwark beaten, which as yet thou have not battered: or to count
the Lady won, whom as yet thou have not wooed? Nay Gwydonius, if thou weigh
thy case in the equal balance, thou have more cause of fear than of hope; of
doubt than of assurance, of missing thy pretense, than of obtaining thy purpose.

The Faulkon (Gwydonius) seldom pearketh with the Merline, the Lion seldom
lodges with the Mouse, the Heart seldom feeds with the Pricket, Aquila non
capit Muscas, and a Dame endued with Nobility, vouchsafes not to match with a
man of mean gentility. Of mean gentilitie Gwydonius? Yea truly, for Castania
rather thinks thee sprung of some poor peasant, than of anyprincely
personage.

Besides, alas, Fortune her self denies me any such favor: my good will as
yet has deserved no such guerdon, my desire is far above my deserts, my
ambition above my condition, and the poor stay of wandering Gwydonius, far
unfit for the princely state of worthy Castania. But put case she did will as I
did, wish that she were pricked in the same vein, caught in the same snare,
trapped with the like train, and fired with the like fancy, yet the Duke her
father will neither condescend to her mind, nor consent to my motion, neither
think well of her liking nor of my love: nay if he should but once hear of
such recklesse folly, as he has wrought my promotion, so he would work my
confusion, as he has been my friend, so he would be my foe, and in troth
Gwydonius, not without cause. For art thou so void of virtue, or vowed to vice,
so nursed up in vanity, or nulled up in villainy, as to require his liberality
with such disloyalty, to return the trust which he reposeth in thee, with
such treason. Tush, Love is above Lord or Law, friend or faith. Where Love
leads, no master is made account of, no king cared for, no friend forced of,
no duty respected, but all things done according to the quality that is
predominant. Why Gwydonius, what doubts are these that thou thus dreamest on?
Why do thou cast beyond the Moon, and fear before thou art in danger to
fall? knowing that Love and fortune desires not them that are dastards, nor
cares for them that are cowardes. The Captain that retyreth from the walls
before he has the repulse, shall never return a conqueror, the Soldier
that faints before the battle be fought, shall never vaunt himself of
victory. He that fears every tempest is not fit to be a trauailer. He that
doubts every wave shall never prove a perfect Pilot, and he that in love
dreadeth every chip of mischaunce, may well encoounter, but never obtain the
conquest. Since then Gwydonius, hardy venturing is a sign of happy victory,
sound out the march with the trumpet of trust, begin the assault, give the
onset. Lay the battering pieces of Love, against the bulwark of beauty, and
no doubt thy success shall be such as thou shall triumph with Caesar and say,
Veni, Vidi, Vici. And art thou so presumptuous fond fool, as to promise thy
self the conquest? know thou not that the path of love is perilous? And
with that he fell into such melancholy passions, such contrary cogitations,
such doubtful thoughts, such fearful supposes, that as he which eats of
the Goorde root loses his memory, and as the Elephant when he eats of the
Helitropion leaf, is then very sleepie; so Gwydonius was so perplexed with
these unacquainted passions, that contrary to his custom he had driven mirth
into mourning, pleasant conceits into painful cares, laughing into lowering,
singing into sorrow: and being thus besotted, to solace himself he went into a
Park adjoining to the Dukes Palace, where sitting under the shade of a Beech
tree, leaning his head on his hand, he lay as one in a slumber. But Fortune
willing somewhat to favor this young nouice, brought it to pass, that
Thersandro, Valericus, Castania, and Melytta, with diverse other Gentlemen,
were for recreation sake ranging in the same Park: who espying ghostly
Gwydonius, sitting as one in a trance, Castania passing before the rest,
pulling him by the sleeue, drove him thus out of his dump.

Why how now Gwydonius (quoth she) are you dreaming or doubting, or is your
mind musing upon some metaphysicall motions, that you sit thus as a man half
mortified? Your solemn gesture makes me remember the picture of Pigmalion,
which once I saw portraied out by a skillful Painter, who leaning his head on
his Marble mistres (that so unfeignedly he loved) sat with his eyes as one in a
slumber, having his face notwithstanding so bedewed with brutish tears, as his
outward plaints did sufficiently bewray his inward passions. In truth
Gwydonius, I had taken thee for Pigmalion, if thou had had tears, as thou
were in a trance; for thou do not greatly differ from him neither in
countenance nor color: well if it were but a dream Gwydonius, that thus
cumbred thy conscience, or a doubt that made thee thus dumpith, I will divine
the one if it be not too dark, or decide the other if it be not too secret:
marry if the case be cumbersome, I leave it to the judgment of these
Gentlemen.

GWydonius, wakened out of his musing slumber with this sugared harmony, seeing
before his eyes his gorgeous goddess, the very saint, at whose shrine he was
offering up scalding sighs, far fetched sobs, plaints, prayers, and
protestations, was so appald with her presence, that as the Basilisk loses his
senses with the sight of a naked man, as the Toretoise seeing yt North star is
benumbed, and as the Hermeline looking on the stone Echites is greatly amazed;
so Gwydonius seeing the incomparable beauty of his best beloved Castania, was
so astonished, yea so enchanted with the rare perfection of this heavenly
Pallas, that as one besotted he sat senseless, not being able to utter one
word; until at length revived with the view of her cheerful countenance he
repaid her with this pleasant answer.

MAdame (quoth he) whereas iestingly you say, that at the first sight you had
taken me for perplexed Pigmalion by my pitiful plaints and careful
countenance, but that I wanted trickling tears to decipher my sorrow; I answer,
that woe may very well be without watery waylings: for when the stone Garatides
fryeth without, it freezeth within, the Germander leaf when it is most full of
moisture, looks then most dry, where the stream is most deep there it is
most still, and where is the smallest show of tears, there is the greatest
sign of sorrow. And also I call the heavens to witness, that when you
wakened me out of my dream by your divine eloquence, I took you either for
beauty to be Venus, for comeliness to be Pallas, or for port and honor to
be Juno, so that both your presence and courtesy daunted my mind; your
presence in dazeling my eyes so suddenly with so solemn a sight, your courtesy,
in that your Ladyship without curiosity would vouchsafe to talk with so mean
a Gentleman. But Madame, since that I perceive your skill in divination to be
great, in that you made so cunning a conjecture, and without any great aiming,
so rightly hitte the mark; to put you out of doubt, I confess I was both in a
dream and a doubt, wherein since it pleases your honor to take so much pain,
I will crave your aid to divine the one, and decide the other.

The Dream.
I Was walking (Madame Castania) in my dream (as I supposed) solitarily by the
Sea side, whereas I took delight to see the Dolphines leap, (which as the
Mariners say, is a sign of imminent tempest) I forth with espied a rock in
the Sea, whereupon stood a Lady arrayed with roabes of burnisht gold, so
formed and framed, so adorned and decked with the gifts of Nature, as at the
first I took her to be Thetis, that had so gorgeously clad her self, to
welcome home her lover and Lord Neptunus. But viewing her countenance more
narrowly, I perceived her to be a mortal creature (though unworthy such
divine beauty should be shrouded in the substance of an earthly carcass)
which so inflamed my affection, so fired my fancy, and so kindled my desire,
that the torments of Tantaius, the torture of Ixion, the sorrow of Sisyphus,
were not half comparable to the perplered passions that pinched my hapless
heart, when I saw all hope cut away from inioying this earthly goddess, the
sea which compassed the rock was so deep and dangerous, the cliffes so
steep-down and fearful, as to descend was no less danger then death it
self: thus as I surged in grief, and wandered up and down in woe, I spied a
bridge afar off, whereby was a passage to the rock: which sight so salued my
forepassed sorrow, and so revived my daunted mind, as I was driven into an
extaste for joy, to see so good means to enjoy my wished desire. Coming to
the bridge, I found it built of glass so cunningly and so curiously, as if
nature her self had sought to purchase credit by framing so curious a piece of
workma^ship. But yet so sle^derly, as ye least weight was able to pash it into
innumerable pieces, and underneath the bridge did run so terrible a sea, such
bouncing billows, such tumbling waves, such fearful surges, such roaring
streams, such hideous gulfes, as it made the passage seem a thousand times
more perilous. This terrible sight was such a cooling card to my former
conceits, as hope was turned to fear, bliss to bale, and supposed happiness
to assured heaviness. And yet my fancy was not quenched, but rather far the
more inflamed, my desire was not diminished, but augmented, and my liking no
less, but rather enlarged; so that to live in love without hope was loathsome:
to seek redress was loss of life: to want my wish, was horror: to enjoy my
will, was hel^ to live in care without comfort, was calamity: to seek for cure,
was more than misery: not to possess the pray, was hellish danger: to venture
for the prize, was haples death. Thus crossed with cares, and dau^ted with such
diverse doubts, desperate hope so repulsed direful fear, that encouraged by
ventrous desire, I had either obtained my wish, or wanted of my will, if your
Ladyship had not so suddenly wakened me out of my slu^ber. Thus Madame
Castania, you have heard my dream: now the doubt is, whether it had been
better to have ventured upon the brittle bridge, and so either desperately to
have ended cares with death, or else valtantly to have enjoyed desire with
renown, or still like a fearful dastard to have ended my days in lingering
love with misery.

Castania, hearing the surmized dream of Gwydonius, both smelled the fetch,
and smiled at the folly of this young youth, knowing that these fantastical
visions and presupposed passions, would in time (if he took not heed) prove
but too true: to prevent therefore such imminent perils, she nipt her young
nouice on the pate with this parle.

GGydoniu^ (quoth she) I have listened to thy drousie dream, with deep
devotion; by so much the more desirous atttentiuely to hear it, by how much
the more I find it strange and wonderful: yea, so strange, as if I my self
had not wakened thee out of thy slumber, I would either have thought it a
fained vision, or a fantastical invention: but since these Gentlemen here
present, and mine own eyes are witnesses, and thine own tongue a testimony of
thy talk; suffice I believe it, though I cannot divine it: to give a verdite
where the evidence is not understood, is vanity: to yield a reason of an
unknown case, is mere folly: and to interpret so strange a dream without
great practice, is but to skip beyond my skill, and to lie fast in the mire.
Yet, least I might seem to promise much and perform nothing, I will decide your
doubt, if you please to take my doom for a censure.

It is a saying Gwydonius, not so common as true, that the hasty man never
wants woe, and that he which is rash without reason, seldom or never sloepeth
without repentance. To venture amidst the Pikes when perilles cannot be
eschewed, is not fortitude but folly: to hazard in dangers, when death
insueth, is not to be worthily minded, but wilfully moved. Virtue always
consists between extreamities, that as too much fearfulness is the sign of
a quaking coward, so too much rashness be tokeneth a desperate Ruffian. Manhood
Gwydonius consists in measure and worthiness, in fearing to hazard without
hope. But to give a verdit by thine own voice, I perceive thou art guilty of
the same crime: for when the brittlenesse of the bridge portended, and the
surging seas inferred loss of life, yet desire drove thee to adventure so
desperate a danger.

Better it is Gwydonius, to live in grief, then to dye desperately without
grace: better to choose a lingering life in misery, then a speedy death without
mercy: better to be tormented with hapless fancy, then with hellish fiends:
for in life it is possible to repress calamity, but after death never to
redress misery. Tully Gwydonius in his Tusculans questions, discoursing of the
happiness of life and heaviness of death, says, that to live we obtain it
of the loving gods, but to dye, of the unlucky destinies: meaning hereby, that
life though never so loathsome, is better then death, though never so welcome:
whereby I conclude Gwydonius, that to live earefully, is better then to die
desperately.

Gwydonius perceiving that Castanias parle was nothing to the purpose, and that
she touched not that point whereof he desired most to be absolved, but meant to
shake him off with a sleeuelesse answer, began to draw her to the Trap with
this train.

MAdame Castania (quoth he) I confess that rashness never reigns without
repentance, nor hasty hazarding without hapless harms, that he which
aduentureth desperate dangers is a fool, and he that passes inevitable perils
is worse then an Ass: yet from these so general rules, Madame, I exempt these
particular exceptions, namely Love and Necessity, which two are tied within no
bounds, nor limited within no law, for whom the devil drives he must needs
run, be the passage never so perilous: and whom Love or Necessity forces,
he must venture be the danger never so desperate: for as there is no
enterprise so easy, which to an unwilling man seems not very hard to be
achieved, so there is no encounter so cumbersome where will wishes, that
seems not passing easy to be performed: now this will is with nothing
sooner pricked forward, than either with the force of love, or sting of
necessity. So that whosoever aduentureth in a danger, though never so
desperate, is not to be blamed, if enforced by fancy, or encouraged by
affection; and especially where the peril is in possibility to be passed
without death, and in the performance thereof, the possession of such a prize
as the passionate person more esteems than lands, limbs, or life it self, be
it never so sweet. In which case (Madame) my cause consists. For the Lady who
was an heavenly object to my gazing eyes, was so beautified with the gifts of
nature, and so perfectly polished with more than natural perfection, that with
the only view of such divine beauty, my senses were so besotted, my wit and
will so inueigled, my affection so inflamed, and my freedom so fettered: yea,
love already has made so great a breach into the bulwark of my breast, that
to obtain so gorgious a Goddess, I thought death no danger, though never so
direful, nor loss of life no torment, though never so terrible.

Indeed Gwydonius, (quoth Thersandro) I agree with thee in this point, that
there is no carpet Knight so cowardly, that would not pass more perilous
pikes to possess so lively a Dame as thou do decipher, nor no dastarde so
daunted with dread, which would not greatly endanger himself to enjoy so
lovely a damsel, in the fruition of whom consists nothing but joy, bliss,
rest, contentation of mind, delight, happiness, yea, all earchly felicity.

And yet Sir (quoth Gwydonius) your Sister Castania condemns me of folly, in
venturing for so precious a prize; when as hope persuaded me, that no hazard
could be hapless, and assured me that Love and Fortune favors them that are
bold: that the gods themselves seeing my perplexed passions, would of pity
defend me from those perilous dangers. For if Theseus by Divine power, were
aided against the force of the monstrous Minotaure; or if Jason, who
constrained with a covetous desire to obtain the golden Fleece, arriving at
Colchos, was preserved by the gods, from the dint of the deadly Dragons, no
doubt Jupiter himself would either have made the flaggering bridge more strong
(considering that no hope of wealth, no desire of riches, no greediness of
gain, no love of luere, but beauty her self was the victory I meant to vaunt
off) or else if I had sowled in the roaring Seas, he would have provided some
happy Dolphin, that Arion like, I might arrive at the desired Rock: and then my
dangers should have been turned into delight, my perils into pleasures, my
hazarding into happiness: yea, I should have possessed that heavenly paragon,
and enjoyed the love of that lovely Venus, whose only sight were a sufficient
salve against all forepassed sorrows.

Stay there, Master Gwydonius, quoth the Lady Melytta: for I see, to grant one
false proposition, is to open a door to innumerable absurdities, and that by
suffering you too long, of these supposed premises you will infer some
cauilling conclusion to your former reasons: thus I reply, That I confess
necessity to have no law, but I grant not the same of Love: for if it be
lawless, it is lewd: if without limits, lascivious: if contained within no
bounds, beastly: if observed with no order, odious: so that lawless Love
without reason, is the very Load stone to ruth and ruin.

Since then Master Gwydonius, as your self affirm, this was the prick that
pusht you into peril, how can the effect be good, when the cause was naught?
or how can you clarkely defend your desperate motion, proceeding of such a fond
and foolish occasion. But it was the perfection of her comely person, her
exquisite feature, and rare beauty, that so kindled thy desire, and so
bewitched thy senses: for who is so fearful, that beauty will not make
bold? who so doubtful, that beauty will not make desperate? yea, what so hard
that a man will not hazard, to obtain so divine a thing, as beauty.

Oh Gwydonius, have thou not heard that the Fish Remor^ listening to the sound
of a Trumpet is caught of the Fishers, that while the Porcupine stands
staring at the glimmering of the stars, he is overtaken with dogs, that
the Dear gazing at the bow is stricken with the bolt, that the Leopard looking
at the Panthers painted skin, is taken as a pray, and that he which takes
too much delight to gaze upon beauty, is oftentimes galled with grief and
misery? Yea, his pleasure shall infer such profit, and his good will such
gain, as if he reapt the beautiful apples of Tantalus, which are no sooner
touched, but they turn to ashes.

Beauty, Gwydonius, no sooner flourishes but it fades, and it is not fully
ripe before it begin to rot: it no sooner blossometh, but it withers, and
scarcely being touched it staineth, like to the Guyacum leaf, that has the one
half parched, before the other half be perfect: to the bird Acanthis, which
hatched white, yet turns black at the first storm: or like to the stone
Astites, that changes color with the only breath of a man.

If then Gwydonius, beauty be so fading, so fickle, so momentary, so moving,
so withering, so waning, so soon passed, and so soon parched: is this the
Jewel, which you count more dear than life? and the Gemme which you think
worthy to be purchased with the danger of death? No doubt Gwydonius, if you
won the victory, you might vaunt of a great conquest, and if your long hope
were repayed with a great hap, it should be much like to his, which thinking to
embrace Juno, caught nothing but a vanishing cloud.

You do well Madame (quoth Castania) to put an If, in it, because he that
vaunteth of victory before he has won field, may prove himself a fool:
he that brags of gains before the accounts be cast, may perhaps put his
winnings in his eyes: and he that blows the Mort before the fall of the Buck,
may very well miss of his sees: so he that countes himself a speeder before
he be a wooer, shows himself a vain person or a vaunting patch.

Might it not be I pray you Master Gwydonius, that passing the bridge, scaping
the dangerous seas; and happily arriving at the desired Rock, yet you might
miss of your purpose? Yes forsooth: for many a man bends his bow, that
never kills his game, lays the strap that never catches the foul,
pitcheth the Net that never gets the fish, and long time are heavy wooers
that never prove happy speeders.

So perhaps Gwydonius, you might be crossed with a chip of the same mischance,
and the gorgious Dame whom you adore for a Goddess, might repaie your liking
with loathing, your love with hate, your good will with despite, and your fixed
fancy with small affection, either that she liked you too little, or loved
another too much. All these doubts Gwydonius, are carefully to be cast, and
wisdom it is to fear the worst, and find the best: but you sir, like a
lusty champion, think a Lady won at the first look, and the good will of
women gained at the first glance, thinking the Gods themselves are to be
accused of injustice, if they be not ayders to your enterprise, insomuch that
if in ventring over the perilous passage, you had by disaster Fortune fallen
into the dangerous Seas, you doubts not but that Jupiter would have sent a
Dolphin; that Arion like, you might escape the fearful surges: but Gwydonius
be not so ventrous, least though you harp very long, you get not the like
hap. These premises considered, if my censure might stand for a sentence, I
deem it better to be counted a dastardly coward, than a desperate caitife,
better to forsake your Goddess, than your God, better to live pinched with a
few momentarie passions, than with desperate death to destroy both soul and
body: for there is no sore such, which in time may not be salued, no care such
which cannot be cured, no fire so great which may not be quenched, no love,
liking, fancy, or affection, which in time may not either be repressed, or
redressed.

Valericus hearing this rough reply of Castania, supposed that although she
leuelied at Gwydonius, yet she shot at him: and scaring the fort should be too
much shaken with this fierce assault, he stiffly desended the walls with this
fresh alarm.

Madame (quoth he) I see you will sit nigh the walls creyou be thrust out for
a wrangler, and that you will speak against your own conscience, but you will
have the conquest: for my own part Madame, howsoever I seem to like it, I
will not say I mislike it, but I am sorry you Madame Melytta should so
blasphemously imblaze the arms of beauty, and so recklesly rail against the
sacred laws of love: take heed for crossing Cupid so crabbedly; for though he
forgive and forget, Venus is a woman, and will seek revenge.

Valericus (quoth she) take no care what danger I incur for speaking the
truth. If I chance to be harmed, it is mine own mishappe, and for Venus
revenge I care for it the less, because I fear it not: if I speak against my
self, you may see I am the fitter to be a Judge, because I am not partial,
nor have any respect of persons.

These quips Madame (quoth Gvvydonius) are nothing to the purpose: therefore in
the behalf of my self and beauty, thus I answer; That as there is nothing
that so soon procures a man to loath, as deformity, so there is nothing
which sooner procures a man to love than beauty: for the most precious stone
is chosen by the most glistring hew, the purest gold by the most perfect
color, the best fruit by the brauest blossoms, and the best conditions by the
sweetest countenance: so that where beauty reigns, there virtue remains,
and under a fair face rests a faithful heart* Since then beauty and bounty
cannot be parted, what man is he so brutish, whom the least of these will not
break or bend?

And whereas you condemn me of vanity in vaunting before the victory, I
say, that if Fortune had so favored me, that I had gained the presence of my
Goddess, I would never have doubted to have obtained my desire: for if she had
seen the desperate danger which I adventured, and the fearful perils which
I passed for her sake, she could not but of conscience, repaie my love with
unfeigned loyalty, and my good will with trobble gain. And in troth I think
it impossible, that such heavenly beauty should be eclipsed with cruelty,
and such perfect comeliness be blemished with curious coyness.

Why Gwydonius (quoth she) do thou call it cruelty not to condescend to the
request of every one that wooeth? or do thou term it coyness, not to
yield to the assault of every flattering lover? Then in my judgment, it were
good for every woman to be both cruel and coie, that by cruelty she might
avoid the train of trothlesse wooers, and by coyness eschew the troop of
faithless suitors.

And so Madame (quoth Valericus) she should reap small comfort and less
credit.

Tush Signor Valericus (quoth Gwydonius) it pleases her thus merrily to jest,
whereas I know she does account more of a courteous dame, than of a curious
damsel, and that her Ladyship so detesseth the name of cruelty, that she
would be loath to be thought to have a mind deuoid of mercy. And in troth to
leave these particular instances, women in general, or for the most part, are
bountiful, courteous, sober, chaste, demure, not imbrued with vice, but endued
with virtue: so that by how much women's bodies are weaker than men's, by so much
their minds are more strong and virtuous.

What Gwydonius, (quoth she) do you think to be a free man in Wales. for
affering a Leeke to Saint Dauie, or to bring PAN into a fools Paradise by
praising his Pipe?

Not so Madame (quoth he) but I hope in extolling a soldiers life to have
Saint George to my friend, and in giving verdit with Venus, to gain her good
will, and to reap the reward that Paris had for his censure.

Mary sir (quoth Castania) if you have no better gettings you may gain long
enough, and yet live by the loss: for in obtaining one friend, you shall reap
two foes, as Paris did, who was more plagued by Pallas and Luno, than pleasured
by flattering Venus.

And yet Madame (quoth he) his mishap shall not make me to beware: for if
Venus would grant me but one Lady in the world, whom most entirely I love, I
would neither respect Pallas, luno, nor Diana her self, were she never so
despitefull.

Yes but you would (quoth she) if she pinched you but with Acteons plague, to
pester your head with as many horns as a Heart: It would cause you conjecture
your new mistress were too much given to the game, or that you were come from
Cornet^o by descent.

Tush Madame (quoth he) do you count Acteons hap such a great harm? she
only sight in seeing Diana naked, was a recompense for all his ensuing
sorrows: and if my self might enjoy my wish, and obtain the heavenly dame
that so heartily I desire, the plague of Acteon, nay, the griping griefs the
ghostly spirits do suffer, should not counteruaile the joy I should conceive
in inioying so peerlesse a jewel.

Truly (quoth Thersandro) thou art worthy Gwydonius, to be a Chapman, that
thou bidst so well for thy chaffer: and in my mind she is not in Alexandria,
who for her beauty is so to be loved, or at the least would deem thee not
worthy to be liked. But leaving these amorous discourses, let us hie us in have
to the Court, least in tarying, Orlanio miss us, and so we be shent. The
company obeyi^^ the mind of Thersandro, passed as speedily as might be to the
Palace, were being arrived, they departed every man to his own lodging.

Castania had no sooner conuried her self closely into her chamber, but her
mind was moved with a thousand sundry motions, and she felt such a cruel
conflict in her happelesse heart by the assault of diverse contrary passions,
that how stoutly soever she defended the walls, she found her force too weak
to resist the rage of so recklesse a tyrant. Now the prayers Valericus powered
forth came to effect, now Venus meant to be revenged for the cruelty she used
to her valiant captain Valericus, who so valiantly had fought under the flagge
of affection, and yet could by no means prevail. For Castania hearing the
sugared eloquence, which so sweetly flowed from the sappie wit of Gwydonius,
framing in her fancy the form of his face, and printing in her heart the
perfection of his person, was so entangled in the snares of love, as she could
by no reason redress her misery, but will she, nil she, fell into these bitter
complaints.

ALas witless wretch (quoth she) that I am, what flry flames of fancy do
fry within me? What desire, what lust, what hope, what trust, what care,
what despair, what fear, what fury? That to be pained with these perplexed
passions, to me that never felt the force of them before, is no less dolor
than death it self, be it never so direful. O gods, where are now become those
lofty looks I used to Valericus? Where is the disdainful dealings, the coy
countenances, the curious congies, the causeless cruelty, yea the hard heart,
which so rigorously rejected the love of him, which so entirely liked me?
Could I fond fool that I am, valiantly withstand the assaults of a worthy
Gentleman, and shall I cowardly yield to an unknown stranger? Did I loath him,
whose parentage was little inferior to mine, and shall I love another of base
and vile birth? Did I disdain to look at the lure, and shall I now stoop
without stall, come without call, yea and to such an empty fist* O lawless
Love, O witless will, O fancy, fraught full of frenzy and fury! Alas if I
should be so careless as to consent to this frantike toie, what will they say,
that praised me for my virtue? Will they not as fast dispraise me for my
vanity? Will not my father fret, my kinsfolks cry out, my friends be sorry,
my foes and especially Valericus, laugh me to scorn, and triumph of this my
mishappe? Yea, will not all the world wonder to see me alate given to
chastity, and now shake hands with virginity, to yield my dearest jewel and
chiefest treasure into the hands of a straggling stranger, who came to my
fathers court without countenance or coin, wealth or worship, credit or
calling: yea, who by his own report is but a person of small parentage, Seek
then Castania to assuage this flame, and to quench this fire, which as it
comes wthout cause so it will consume without reason. For the greatest flow
has the soonest ebb, the sorest tempest has the most sudden calm, the
hottest love has his coldest end, and of the deepest desire often times insueth
the deadliest hate: so that she which settles her affection with such speed
as she makes her choice without discretion, may cast her corn she knows not
where, and reapes she wot not what, and for her hasty choosing, may perhaps
get a heavy bargain. Alas, I know this counsel is good, but what then? Can I
deny that which the destinies have decreed? Is it in my power to pervert that
which ye Planets have placed? Can I resist that which is stirred up by the
Stars? No: what need I then make this exclamation? sich I am not the first
nor shall not be the last, whom the frantike frenzy of flickering fancy, has
with more wrong and greater vantage pitiously oppressed. What though Gvvydonius
be not wealthy, yet he is wise: though he be not of great parentage, yet he
is of comely personage. It is not his coin that has conquered me, but his
countenance: not his vading riches, but his renowned virtues, and I far more
esteem a man than money. I, but the Duke my father is not so base minded, as to
bestow me upon so mean a gentleman, he never will consent that poor Gwydonius
should enjoy that which he hops some peerless Prince shall possess. What
then? Shall I prefer my Fathers will before mine own will, his liking before
mine own love? no, no, I will choose for my self whatsoever my choice be. Why
but perchance Gwydonius will no more esteem thee than thou did Valericus, and
repay thee with as small fancy, as thou him with affection. Tush, doubt it not
Castania, thou art the dame which he so deciphered in his dream, thou art
that Venus which he saw in his vision, thou art that Goddess, whose beauty
has so bewitched him thou art that jewel to possess, the which there is no
hap so hard which he would not hazard, no danger so desperate which he would
not adventure, no burden so heavy which he would not bear, nor no peril so
huge which he would not pass. And shall not then Gwydonius be my servant,
since I am his Saint? shall not I like him which loves me? since he is my joy,
shall I not enjoy him? yes, Gwydonius is mine, and shall be mine in despite of
the fales and fortune.

Castania having thus pitifully powered out her plaints, would gladly have given
Gwydonius intelligence (with modesty if she might) of her good will toward
him, and God knows how fain Gwydonius would have discovered his fervent
affection, if too much fear had not astonished him, and too great bashfulnes
stayed her. She therefore honering between fear and hope, perseuered so long in
her pensive passions and careful cogitatio^s, that by covert concealing of her
inward sorrow, the flame so furiously fried wthin her, yt she was constrained
to keep her bed. Whereupon, Melytta coniecturing the cause of her care by the
color of her countenance, thought to fifth out the occasion of her sorrow, that
by this means she might apply a medicine to her malady, and finding fit
opportunity, she brake with her in this wise.

Madams Castania (quoth she) since I have by the Duke your father been
assigned to you as a companion, I have in such loving wise both comforted me
counseled you, as I hope you have just cause to say, that I have most
carefully tendered your estate: for perceiving how willing you were to follow
my direction* I counted your wealth my weal, your pleasure my profit, your
happiness my joy, and your prosperity my felicity. Which freindly care if it
were not to be considered if I should show you what great sorrow I sustain by
your heaviness, you would judge my words to proceed either of folly or
flattery: but if your sore be such as it may be salued, if your care may be
cured, if your grief may be redressed, or your malady mitigated by my means,
command me good Castania, in what I may to pleasure thee, and thou shall find
me so charily to perform my charge, as my willing mind shall evidently bewray
my well meaning. I see Castania, of late, such a strange metamorphosis in thy
mind, as for pleasant conceits thou do use pensive cogitations, thy
cheerful countenance is changed into lowering looks, thy merry devises into
mournful dumps, and yet I cannot conjecture the cause of this sudden
alteration. If want of riches should work thy woe, why, thou swimst in wealth:
if loss of friends, thou bast infinite of noble parentage, which loves thee
most entirely. If thou meanest no longer to lead a single life, no doubt thy
father will provide thee of such a princely match, as shall content thee for
his person, and countenance thee with his parentage. But if in all these
supposes I have miss she mark, and have not touched the case of thy calamity,
unfold unto me Castania, what the pain is that thus does pinch thee, and
assure thy self I will be so secret in thy affairs, as ever Lampana was to
her Lady Cleophila.

Castania hearing this friendly discourse of Melytta, thought for all this
fair gloss, the text might he too intricate, and that these painted speeches
would prove but rotten pillars: fearing therefore the fetch, and doubting yt
worst, if she bewray her mind, she framed her this answer.

MAdame (quoth she) the incomparable courtesy and unfeigned friendship which
since your first coming I have found in you by experience, will neither suffer
me to suspect your Ladyship of flattery, nor my self willingly to be accused
of ingratitude: for your diligence has been so great, and my deserts so
small, that if I might but live to requite some part of your good will, it were
the second felicity I look for in this life. But touching the pensive
passions which thus diversely perplexed me, I answer that as he which is wounded
of the Bores tusk, if his sores take air is very hardly healed, as he which
is stricken with a Scorpion, if his wound take wind can never be cured: so Madam
many inward maladies carry this nature, that if they be once discovered, they
are far ye more hardly recovered, that it is better to conceal them with
grief, than reveal them in hope of relief.

Not so Castania, your principle is not true: for if your passions proceeded of
love, which of all other inward sores requires greatest secrecy, yet
undoubtedly the more it is discovered, the sooner it is cured. For as the stone
of Armenia being covered with Sand, burns most extremely, and no sooner
takes air, but it cools: so the fiery flames of love raked up in silence,
fry most suriously; but being by discourse disclosed, they soon convert from
flame to fume and smoke. Wherefore good Castania impart unto me the matter
which does import thee so near, and I swear unto thee by the sacred rites of
Ceres, which is so honored in Alexandria, that if thou do love where thy
friends do not like, and thy wish be contrary to their will, yet I will sake
all means possible to redress thy sorrow.

Alas good Madame, rather than you should think me so incredulous or
suspicious, as not to believe your oath, or doubt of your secret dealing, I
will without delay make you privy to the cause of my pain, what peril soever
I incur by revealing it. So it is Melytta, that the perfection of Gwydonius,
his exquisite qualities, and excellent virtues, have so fiercely assaulted the
fort of my fancy, as I am perforce constrained to resign my liberty captive
unto his courtesy, and to make his person the prison of my heart. This
lucklesse and unlikely love, Madam, is the cause of my care, and the sum of my
sorrow, this frantike affection has driven my drooping heart to show forth
these drousie leekes, this is it which has made me an enemy to myself, a foe
to all good company, and to delight in nothing but sorrow and solitariness:
yea, this is the sore, which if in time it be not salued, will prevent by death
all other miseries.

And is this (quoth Melytta) the pain that so greatly perplexeth you? Is this
the care that so cumbers your conscience? Is this the danger which drives you
into such deep distress? Do you think so superstitiously of Gwydonius, or so
abiectly of your self, that you deem this matter impossible to be brought to
pass? no, no, doubt not Castania, I my self dare absolutely promise thee,
that thy love shall sort to such happy success, as thou thy self do seek
for.

And with that Melytta stayed by a sudden sight she had of that Saint that
Castania so heartily served: for Gwydonius was entering in at the chamber dear
with a dish of delicates, which Orlanio hearing his Daughter was so sick, had
sent her. Melytta seeing that Cupid began to savor the cause of his Clients, in
giving them such fit opportunity to discover their cares, went her way,
leaving Gwydonius the first man to play his part in this tragical comedy, who
seeing his goddess thus surprised with sickness, was so gallen with grief,
so pinched with hellish passions, and so tortured with extreme torments, that
his color began to change, and he fetched a deep sigh or two, which Castania
hearing, she perceived without touching his pulses, the cause of these his
sudden passions. In fine, such melancholic motions so amazed his mind, that
he was almost mute in his message, yet at length encouraging himself, he
presented it unto her in this wise.

Madame (quoth he) the Duke your Father hearing of your sudden sickness, in
token of his fatherly affection, amongst all his dainties, has sent you this
dish, which he thinks most meet for your diet, wishing your Ladyship to let no
doubtful motions distress your mind, nor no careful thoughts cumber your
conscience: for you shall lacks nothing if you reveal to him your want, which
either your will or wish can desire. And truly Madame, to manifest my willing
duty (if the prayers of a poor Gentleman may be heard of the heavenly Gods) I
wish that before you taste of this feed it may turn to Nectar, whereby not
only your sickness should be salued, but your divine beauty and virtue
according to desert should be crowned with immortality.

Castania perceiving with what fernent affection Gwydonius uttered those
words, began to cheer up her self, in hope that her good will should not be
repaied with ingratitude: taking therefore the present at his hands, and
liking it never the worse for his sake that brought it, she returned him this
reply.

Gwydonius (quoth she) as I have cause most reverently to accept of my fathers
loving courtesy, and to repay his natural affection with most dutiful
obedience, so I have cause to thank thee for thy pains, and to think well of
thee for thy wish, promising in recompense of thy good will, if in any respect I
may pleasure thee, to seek and sue to my father for preferment.

Madame, I account the performance of my message no pain, but pleasure, and I
think my self as much honored by this office, and thrice more happy than if I
should in Ganimedes place present yt cup to Jupiter. But Madame, since yt to
stop the stream, is to make the flood flow more fiercely, to repress the
fire, is to make it flame more furiously, and to restrain the force of love,
is to kindle a greater flame, least too long delaie should breed too great
danger, and by concealing my sorrow I should make the sore incurable, I
thought good either presently to hear the courteous sentence of my life, or the
cruel doom of my death. So it is Madame, that too long gazing upon the
beams of your heavenly beauty, and too narrowly construing over your virtuous
conditions, I remain so caught in ye snare of your bounty, and so thralled in
the threede of your virtue, that the stay of my life hangs in your hands,
either to drive me down to hellish miscrie, or to boist me up to heavenly
felicity. For although I have not heretofore by dutiful service made manifest
the loyalty of my love, yet since I first framed in my fancy (as in a
mirror) the shape of your surpassing beauty, my heart has been crossed with
such cruel Camizados for your sake, as if with the Target of hope I had not
wi^hst stood the furious force of such raging furies, I had by despair been
dashed against most dangerous rocks. Since then Madame, the sight of your
sweet face has fast fettered my fancy in the links of love, so as without
your means I can neither be redressed nor released: I humbly desire you neither
to resist the motion of my well meaning, nor to reject the devotion of my good
will, but to accept your poor Gwydonius as a faithful servant.

Castania hearing diligently the faithful discourse of distressed Gwydonius,
perceiving by his sighs the pinching sorrow of his thoughts, and seeing him so
fast fettered in folly, on a sudden to give her the slip had that she
desired: and now her loving looks were turned to lowering glances, her
delightful courtesy, to disdainful coinesse, and she thought to repaie the
sweet meat wherewith before she fed him, with most sour sauee: not that she
misliked of his love, for it was the only thing she desired, but to make him
the more fervent in affection, uttering these or such like words to her self
secretly.

And is not (Castania) the victory most accounted of, where the conquest is
most doubtful? Is not the Castle which abides the longest battery, thought
the richest booty? Are not those pearls which are scarcely found and hardly
gotten, ever of greatest value: whatso is gained by peril, is thought always
precious, hardly come by, warily kept. The maid that by long suit and much
travel is obtained, by how much the more she was hard in the winning, by so
much the more she will be sweet in the wearing: she which in her virginity is
charie of her chastity, in her marriage will be as wary of her honesty:
therefore I will qualify the hotloue of Gwydonius with a cold potion, and with
that she made him this waspish answer.

Why Gwydonius, shall the old Proverb be verified in thee, that the Priest
forgets himself that ever he was a clarke, that too much familiarity breeds
contempt? I see well if Apelles that cunning painter suffer the greasy Souter
to take a view of his curious work, he will grow so malapert, as to meddle
with his picture: if the proud Centaure Ixion be bidden to the feast of the
Gods, no less than Juno her self will suffice him for his choice.

Set a beggar on horseback they say, and he will never alight. Extol one of
base stock to any degree of dignity, ^^d who so proud and haughty? I speak
this Gwydonius to thy reproof: is thy stomach alate waxen so queasie, that no
diet will down but my fathers own dish? Will no meaner mate suffice thee,
unless thou match with a Princess? Is there no Lady will like thee, but my
love? Is there no courser Dame to covet, unless thou court unto me? Did my
father promote thee to this thou art, from the state of a beggar, and will thou
now presume to be my better? Have my looks been so loving, my countenance so
courteous, my glaunces so full of good will, as to promise so much as thou do
presume? No: but one only countenance in a servile mind is too much
encouragement. Do thou think Gwydonius, that I account so meanly of my
person, as to match with a man of thy pitch? Shall I so far crack my credit,
as to cumber my self with one of thy calling? Shall I so strain my state, as
to stoop to thy lure? No. Where is thy coin to maintain my countenance?
Where is thy wealth to uphold my worship? Where is thy patrimony to
counteruaile my personage? But put case I accepted of thy suit do thou
think ever to gain my fathers good will? Do thou think it is possible to
compass his consent? Do thou hope ever to take him in such a vain, as he
will be willing to give his verdite on thy side? No Gvvydonius: but if he were
privy to this thy presumption, he would repaie thy folly with too much fury,
he would vnplume thee of all his feathers, that like Aesops Crow thou might
receive the reward of thy rashness. If therefore thou love thine own welfare,
keep thy self within thy bounds, and strive not farther than thy sleeue will
stretch, least in climing too high, thou catch the sorer fall.

Castania having thus sharply shaken up my young youth Gwydonius, thought she
had given him a sufficient cooling Card: but he no whit dismayed with this
denial, like a lusty champion entered pell-mell with her in this wise.

Madame (quoth he) the poor shoemaker was not blamed for viewing Apelles
picture, but because in finding fault he went beyond his shoe: the Centaure
Ixion was not reproved for his familiarity with Juno as he was a guest, but in
that his suit tended to the sacking of her honesty: familiarity never breeds
contempt in a good mind, neither am I to be accused of that crime: for the most
servile slave in Alexandria (I call the heavens as witnesses of my words) does
not with more loving duty reverence and honor your person and parentage, than
does your poor servant Gwydonius. Well Madame, though my nature and nurture be
such in your sight, as they bewray my bringing up and birth to be so base, as
if I mean to draw my descent, I must (as you say) imblaze mine arms in the
beggars coat, yet thus much I answer in respect of my Parents, and without
arrogancy thus far I stand on my pantofles, that the credit I have in your
fathers Court, is not coequall with the calling I have in mine own Country,
if I did not count it more greater credit and honor, in that I have sometime
enjoyed a courteous countenance of your sweet self since my coming. But it I
were the most famous Prince in the world, I so esteem your divine beauty and
exquisite virtue, as I would think my self far unworthy to possess such
heavenly perfection: which if I could obtain, the displeasure of your Father
could no whit discourage me, his thundering threats could no whit amaze me:
no, death it self could never daunt my mind, were it never so despightfull.
But who (say you) can lay their love where is no desert, and where want breeds
a flat denial?

Ah Castania, Nature by her secret motion has endued all creatures with some
perfect qualities, to supply yt want which breeds misliking. The Moule deprived
of sight has a wonderful hearing: the Hare being very fearful is most swift:
the Fish having no ears, has most clear eyes: so though want of dignity
disgrace me, though want of coin discountenance me, though lack of wealth
impaires my credit, yet Nature has given me such a loyal and loving heart, as
I hope in the perfection of that, she has supplied the want of all the rest:
So that Madam though I want coin, I do not want constancy, though I have no
lands, yet I lack not loyalty, though I want wealth yet I want not will to end
my life to do you good, or spend my time to do you service.

GWydonius having thus pithily replied, drove Castania into a great doubt,
whether she should presently consent to his demand, or still drive him off
with delays, whether she should yield the fort at the first skirmish, or
stand to the doubtful event of battle: at length least she should digress
from the course of woman kind, she thought best to deuie that she most of all
desired, and therefore then gave him this answer.

GWydonius (quoth she) in what state you came to my fathers Court I know,
what you are by descent I know not, nor I care not, and if I did it avails
not: but this I say, that it is hard taking of Foul, when the net is descried,
and il catching of fish, when the hook is bare: impossible it is Gwydonius, to
infer belief, when no credit will be given, and to deceive her that spieth thy
fetch: when the string is broken, it is hard to hit the white, and when a man's
credit is called in question, persuasions can little preuatle. It is a religion
amongst lovers to swear and forswear, to promise mountains, and to perform
moule hills, to be ripe without and rotten within, to carry a rusty blade in a
velvet scabberd, and a silver bell with a leaden clapper. Therefore Gwydonius, I
had rather mistrust too soon, than mistike too late, I had rather fear my
choice than rue my chance, I had rather stop at the brim, than at the bottom:
for the signet being set, it is too late to break the bargain, and fancy being
once fixed it is too late to reclaim affection. For the love of a woman is like
the Oil of Flint, which being once congealed will never be dissolved: like the
Diamond, being once rubbed with the gum of a Pine tree, will never be broken:
so if I fancy any, since I mean not to fleet, it shall be such a one, as I need
not repent me.

And whereas you say, Gwydonius, that in despite of Fortune, Nature has given
you a loving heart, I my self surely did never deem any less, but thought you
of the crew of those lovers that love too much, having as many Ladies as they
have wits, and that is not a few, who count that every face must have a new
fancy, and if they see a thousand they must be all viewed with a sigh: which
considered Gwydonius, I mean not to like nor to love neither you nor any other.

ANd shall theu Madame (quoth he) my merit be repayed with no meede? Shall
my good will be requited with no gain? shall I have in lieu of my life no
liking? will you so swaru^ from justice, as not to give every one according to
his desert? at the least, recompense not desire with despite; and hearty love,
with loathing hate: for as the Poet says: Quis (...) succenset amanti?

Well Gwydonius, as I will not be thy privy friend, so I will not be thine
open foe, and as I cannot be so courteous as to requite thee for thy pains, so I
will not be so cruel as to despite thee for thy presumption, and where as
thou crauest gains for thy good will, I am content to remain thy unwilling
debtor.

Yet Madame (quoth he) where she debt is confessed, there remains some hope of
recovery: for though the creditor be never so unwilling to pay the debt being
due, he shall by constraint of law and his own confession, (maugre his face)
be forced to make restitution.

Truth Gwydonius (quoth she) if he commence his action in a right case, and
the plea he puts in, prove not imperfect. But yet take this by the way, it is
hard for that plaintiff to recover his costs, where the defendant being
Judge, setsdowne the sentence.

Gwydonius feeling himself pincht to the quick with this pretty quip, made
no further reply: but least his long tarrying might breed suspicion, wishing
his Mistress welfare, took his leave very solemnly and sorrowfully, of
Castania, who seeing him gone and her self alone, began thus to muse and
meditate upon the sharp answers she had given her best beloned Guydonius.

Why Castania, what franlike fully has made thee thus far to forget thy
self? Is she ^ird inti^^d to the strap by the show of the nets, is the For
allured to the train by the view of the trap? will the Mause march under that
Ensign, where the Catte proclaims her self Captain? will the siltie Dove
lay her Eggs in the Fawlcons neast? or is it the means to have him to thy
friend, whom with bitter blows thou do rebuke? is there no other call for
courtesy, but cruelty? do thou find no fitter means to obtain a
ceasonable request, but by a rigorous repulse? or is it the nature of women to
defy that outwardly which they most desire inwardly, to loath that in their
mouth, which they love in their mind, to reject that with their hand, which
they most willingly would receive in their heart? Do thou think Castania,
to draw Gwydonius to thy desire, by detesting him? Do thou think to allure
him to thy love, by loathing him? Do thou suppose to win him to thy will by
these waspish answers? No: and what, do thou know what peril will ensue of
this repulse, what danger will follow of this denial? Is it like he will put
it up patiently? No sure, either look to have his extreme love turned to
extreme hate, or that he will persist no longer in the pursuit of his purpose.
Oh would to God Gwydonius, thou were again to begin thy demand, and I to
frame mine answer: then would I salve thy sores with sweet strops, not with
cutting corasiues: then would I mitigate thy malady with easy medicines, not
with pinching plasters: then would I comfort thee with consent, not daunt thee
with denials. But alas, Had I wist now comes too late: and therefore Castania,
if thou have made a fault, seek to make amends, and recompense this his
injury with most friendly courtesy.

And with that came Melytta: who comforting Castania, passed away the rest of
the day in parle.

But Gwydonius, who all this while had a flea in his ear, was dr^^en into
aquandarie with the tauting qu^p^ of his mistress, fearing that although his
accounts were great, his gains should be little; and though he made a very
long harvest, yet he should reap but a very small crop, thinking that under
such sour speeches, a sugared mind could not be contained: yet at last
entering into deeper consideration with himself, he fell into these terms.

But by the sweet (quoth he) how should we know the sower? but by the
black, how should we know the white? he never greatly accounts of
prosperity which has not been before pinched with adversity: which
perchance Castania means to make me try by experience, thinking to feed me
first with bitter broaths, that hereafter dainty fare may more delight me: to
daunt me with the raging storms of denial, that the calm of her consent may
more content me: to make me taste the bitter pills of annoy, that hereafter
I may enjoy the greater joy: for the chilling cold of winter makes the
sprowting spring time seem far more pleasant, the parching heat of summer,
makes the cool shade more delightful, and the frowning looks of Castania,
will make her smiling countenance seem more cheerful. Then cease not
Gwydonius, to pursue thy suite with endless pain, either to enjoy her
courtesy or taste of her cruelty, to thy great happiness or extreme heaviness.

GWydonius thus like a valiant Champion, never amazed with any chip of
misfortune, never feared to give the assault for all the first repulse, but
only sought opportunity how he might in close combat once again encounter
with Castania; vowing either to return with some sign of victory, or else to
put limme and life in hazard. But fortune meaning pleasantly to sport with this
young nouice, would never minister such fit occasion, yt he might have solitary
access to his goddess. For, Castania of pretended purpose so warily avoided
his company, and with such disdainful looks so rejected his duty, as
Gwydonius was constrained to seek his course by a new compass, delivering unto
one of her maids a friendly Letter, to this effect.

Disdained Gwydonius to his desired Castania, health.
Whosoever tastes (Madam Castania) of the river Licos in India, feels such a
continual flame to fry and fret his entrails, as it is more torture than to
be tormented with the hellish furies, and this grief can never be redressed,
but with drinking the blood of his dearest friend. And as he that is venomed
with the Phalanga, feels such painful passions, as he runs mad, and is
only cured by means of most harmonious Music: So Madame, the furious heat
of fancy, does so scorch and scalde my hapless heart, and does perplexe me
wish such hellish pangues, as death it self were thrice more desired, than
thus to drive my days in dolor. And I have so greedily swallowed up the
sugared poison of yourdinine beauty, as through the extremity of pinching
grief, which so direfully distresseth me, I rest as one distract from his
senses, not possible to obtain a cure for this my calamity, unless with the
deawe of mutual affection you mitigate my malady, or with the pleasant
harmony of your musical consent, you appease my misery.

Since then Madam, my care proceeds from your beauty, let my sore be cared by
your bounty: since the perfection of your person has wrought my bane, let the
effect of your courteste procure my bliss, and reject him not so rigorously
which respects you so reverently: loath him not so hatefully, which loves
you so heartily: nor repay not his dutiful amity, with such deadly enmity.
The pike fatally prosecuteth the fish Ma^gra, as his mortal foe, and yet
seeing him snared on the fishers hook, he speedily shreddeth the line in
sunder, to deliver him: the Snake most deadly detesteth the field mouse, and
yet she heapeth up in her hole store of provision to prevent her enemies
penury: and shall then Madame, your cruelty so far exceed these senseless
creatures? shall your rigor be so void of reason, as to requite your friend
with pain, when they repaie their foes with pleasure? to drive your friends
into distress, when they redeem their foes from danger? no Madame, I hope you
will not counteruaile my constancy with such discurtesie, nor so recklesly
regard your poor Gwydonius, whose love and loyalty is so great, that as the
stones which are found in the River Lyncestis, the louder the wind blows,
and the deeper they are drencht in the water, the more they burn and blaze: so
the more you seek to cool my fancy with disdain, the more my affection is
kindled with desire: the more you loath, the more I like: the greater despair
you drive me into by denials, yt greater hope, (encouraged by constancy) I
have to obtain my request: in which fervent affection, I mean to remain
without change, craving in liewe of this my loyalty, that you will speedily
fend the messenger of present consolation, to him which pineth away, and is
yours only and ever.

Still in hope, Gwydonius.


CAstania having received this Letter from her assured friend Gwydonius,
although she perceived by the co^tents that his love was not counterfeit, but
constant: not light, but loyal: not floting, but faithful: and that she
should not find him immutable in prosperity, which was so permanent in
adversity; Yet (whether it were for coyness in consent, or chariness of
choice I know not) she once again thought to sound him more deeper, to keep
out still the flagge of destance, and to spend one Vollee of shot in the face
of her enemy, to see if a hot skirmish would make him fly the field. And if
like a valiant soldier he did manfully march on, and not refuse the brunt of
the battle, she would then resign the fort of her freedom into his hands,
and yield up the bulwark of her breast, which so long he had battered, that
triumphantly he might set up Trophies in sign of most victorious conquest. To
put therefore the matter in question, she returned him this answer.

Castania to Gwydonius, which hops in vain, health.
MAster Gwydonius, you Letter being more hastily received then heartily read, I
perceive by the contents that you are still perplexed with your pen-sicke
passions, and that your disease is incurable: for if your pains may bes
appeased, or your malady mitigated by no medicine but by my means, you are
like either to pay your due unto death, or still to linger in distress. My
cunning is too small to enterprise the composition of any secret simples, and
my calling too great to become a Physician to such a paltering patient, so that
I neither can nor will cure another man's harm by mine own mishap. To love him
whom I cannot like, were but to wrestle against mine own will, to flatter him
whom I mean not to fancy, is but a mere trick of extreme folly. What the
cause is Gwydonius, that thy good will reaps so small gain, and that so
rigorously I repaie thy love with hate, I know not, unless the constellation
of the Stars by some secret influence have so appointed it in the calculation
of our natiuety. But this I am sure, that as no Serpent can abide the smell of
a Hearts horn, as the Panther escheweth the company of the Ownce, as the
Vulture is mortal enemy to the Eele, and as it is impossible to hatch up a
Swan in an Eagles neast, to temper Oil and Pitch together in one vessel, to
mix the blood of a Lion and a Woolfe in one bowl, and to procure amity
between the Fawlcon called Tilo, and the Fox, so hard is it to procure me by
ruthful request to be thy friend, which am by instinct of nature thy professed
foe; and as hard to win me to thy Wife, who so little likes of thy love, that
the very remembrance of thy person makes me fall into most hateful passions.
Cease then Gwydonius, to condemn me of cruelty, and leave off at last to
appeal to my courtesy: for thou shall always be sure to feel the one, and
never to find the other. Yet least thou should accuse me of ingratitude,
though I cannot inwardly mitigate thy misery, yet I will outwardly teach thee
to apply such plasters (as if the experience of them prove true) shall greatly
appease thy pain. Pliny, Gwydonius, reports, that he which drinks of the
river Aucrna, cools and mortifieth his affections; but if the water be touched
by any means before it be drunk, the virtue thereof is of no value. He that
wears the feathers of the bird Ezalon about him, shall ever be fortunate in
his love, but if they be not pulled when the Sun is eclipsed, they are of no
forer: and to conclude, there is nothing that sooner drives away amorous
conceits, then to rub the temples of thy head with the sweat of an ass: which
if you can perform if, as no doubt you may put it in practice, I hope you
shall be redressed from your intolerable grief, and I released from such an
importunate suit.

Forced by the destinies still to deny thee, Castania.


GWydonius having viewed and reusewed over this Letter, seeing the rigorous
resolution of his mistress couldby no means be removed, and that a most
severe sentence was pronounced against him by a most injurious Judge, was
driven into a doubt whether he should still with plaints sue for pity, or else
blasphemously exclaim against her brutish cruelty, whether he should bewray
his parents and parentage to the Duke and her, or still stand to the doubtful
chance of fortune, to pursue his purpose still with plaints: her hellish cruelty
persuaded him to blaspheme against her: the sincerity of his love, would not
let him to bewray his birth: diverse dangers might ensue: to stand to the chance
of Fortune, was still to hazard without hope: combred thus with diverse
cogitations, at last he determined to break up the battery, and to lay too an
invincible hold, and to return with as much speed, as might be to his father
Clerophontes Court, there by absence to mitigate the malady which so grievously
molested him: yet he thought before his departure to give her a friendly
farewell, that might both confirm his constancy, and condemn her cruelty,
which he framed to this effect.

Guydonius to Castania, prosperous success in all her affairs.
I Mean not, most merciless mistress, any longer to suefor mercy, nor with
pitiful plaints to trouble your patience, since to stir that which the
Stars has stayed, is to strive against the stream, and to force that which
the Fates have framed, is to covet to be counted a fool: but as one whom
Fortune means to make a myrrour of misery, and over whom Venus herself means
to vaunt as of a most hapless vassal, I sorrowfully send you this fainting
farewell, as a faithful token of my fervent affection: for seeing neither my
person ca^ please, nor my living like you, nor my base calling content you, nor
I myself reap any guerdon for my good will; to avoid the remembrance of
these passions, which renew my pains, and to assuage the rigor of my raging
love, I purpose as speedily as wind and weather will permit me, to abandon
the place of your abode, not incensed by fury, as one in despite, but
enforced by the rage of fancis, to deprive myself of all delight, either to
consume in solitary cares without compassion, or by absence to mitigate some
part of my martyrdom: for to hope still, I see is but to heap woe upon
wretchedness, and care upon calamity. Yet Madame, thus much I say, that Dido
Queen of Carthage loved Aeneas, a banished exile, and a straggling stranger.
Euphinia daughter to the king of Corinth, and heir apparent to his crown, who
for her feature was famous throughout all the East Countries, vouchsafed to
apply a sovereign plaster to the furious passion of Acharisto, her fathers
bondsman. The duchess of Malphey chose for her husband her servant Vlrico: and
Venus, who for her surpassing beauty was canonized for a goddess, disdained
not the love of limping Vulcan. They madame, respected the man, and not their
money, their wills, and not their wealth: their love, not their livings: their
co^stancy, not their coin: their person, not their parentage: and the inward
virtue, not the outward value. But you are so addicted to toy^ opinion of
Danae, that unless Jupiter himself be shrouded in your lap, under the shape
of a shower of gold, he shall have the repulse, for all his deity: seeing then
it is not in my poor power, either to perform or practice it, I cease off to
seek for impossibilities: promising in what coast or Country so ever I shall
remain, to have my heart wholly dedicated to your divine beauty and virtue,
both by duty and service, and so commending my health to the gods, I bid you
farewell.

Yours, while he is Gwydonius, sans espoier.


CAstania having received this letter from Gwydonius, perceiving the constant
mind of the young Gentleman, that these his protestations were not vanity, but
verity: not trifling, but troth: no signs of fleeting fancy, but of a firm
affection: standing a while in a dumpe, at last she fell into this discourse.

I now (quoth she) both see and try by experience, that there is no fish to
fickle, but will come to the bayt: no Do so wild, but will stand at the gaze:
no Hawke so haggard, but will stoop at the lure: no Niesse so ramage, but will
be reclaimed to the Lunes: no fruit so fine, but the Caterpiller will consume
it: no Adamant so hard but will yield to the file, no metal so strong, but
will bend to the stamp: no maid so free, but love will bring her to bondage
and thraldom. And do I call it bondage, fond fool, to be bound unto beauty?
is it slavery to be subject unto virtue? is it thraldom to live in league
with him who will like me in my youth, and love me in my age, in whom I shall
find nothing but pleasure and contentation? who will be the haven of my
happiness, wherein I may rest: and the port of my prosperity wherein I may be
safe harbored from the tempests of froward fortune, and shroud meee from the
bitter blasts of bale? Shall I repent me, since my bargain is good? or complain
of the loss of liberty, since I have a change for far more worthy chaffer?
Shall I grudge when the gods are agreed? or defer it, when the destinies
drive it? or frown at it, since fortune frames it? No: Gwydonius, is my Saint,
and him will I serve; he is my joy, and him will I enjoy. He has laid the
siege, and he shall sack the City: he has abode the battery, and he shall
have the bulwark of my breast: he has fought the combat, and he shall be
victor in the conquest. For I cannot be so unnatural, to reward his love with
loathing: so without reason, to defraud him of his right: so devilish, for his
deep desire to give him a doleful dish of despair. No, no, I have settled
with my self, that if ever I marry, Gwydonius shall be the man I will match
with. And therefore as I have driven him off with delays, and fed him with
folly, so now I will send him a settled answer of my good will and favor: as
I have given him cutting corrasiues, so I will send him confects of comfort. As
I have been fearful to show my liking for the better trial: so now I will
be bold to show my love in token of a better trust. And with that she wrote
him a Letter to this effect.

Castania to Gwydonius, wishing him such happy success, as either fortune or
the fates can allow him.
PLato, Gvvidonius, being demanded why he would never condescend to requests
of his most dearest friends, without great entreatie and long suite, answered,
ye things lightly granted (though never so costly) are smally accounted of:
which saying Gvvidonius, I take as a sufficient excuse for my folly: for my
straightness in words was no strangeness in mind, my bitter speeches were
written with my hand, not wrought with my heart, my denial was only for thy
better trial, and those rigorous repulses were either to rip up thy fained
fancy, or seruent affection: for if thou had retired at the first foil, I
would have thought thy fancy but a flash, ready to be quenched with the least
misling deaw of misfortune. But since thou have kept thy course so rightly by
thy compass, amidst most dangerous rocks, and have stood to thy tackling
against all the blustering blastes of Fortune; Assure thy self, in lieu of
this thy love, thou have not heretofore found me so disdainful, as
hereafter thou shall find me dutiful, neither did I ever reject thee so
currishly, as I will accept thee courteously, being ready to restore the injury
I have offered thee, with any courtesy that thou may either honestly
require, or I justly afford. But alas Gwydonius, what courtesy shall I ever
be able to show thee, that may counteruaile thy kindness? How entirely shall I
love thee to requite thy loyalty? What duty can be a due recompense to this
thy good will? yea, if by any means I can quit this thy love, I never doubt to
be deemed ungrateful while I live. Thy worthy constancy (Gvvidonius) has
won the castle which many have besieged, and thou have obtained that which
diverse have sought to gain: yet it is not the shape of thy beauty, but the
hope of thy loyalty, which entiseth me: not thy fair face, but thy faithful
heart: not thy comely countenance, but thy modest courtesy: not thy words, but
thy virtues: not thy wealth, but thy wit: for she that builds her fancy upon
such fading subjects, tieth her love to the inco^stant wheel of Fortune. And
what though the duke my father be incensed against me, for making (in his
mind) so careless a choice? What care I for his friendship, so I have thy
favor? let him fret, let my friends frown, let livings be lost, hap what hap
will, no misling showers of mischa^ce, no baysterous blasts of adversity, no
terrible tempest of disaster fortune, shall make my constant mind in any
respect to move: no torments, no travail, no care, no calamity, no penury,
no poverty, no, only the loss of life, shall diminish my love: in lieu whereof
remain thou but constant, and in pledge of my protested good will, have here
my heart and hand, to be thine in dust and ashes.

Thine, though the Gods say no, Castania.


THis Letter being most luckily delivered into the hands of Gwydonius, I leave
you to judge Gentlemen into what a quandarie this young youth was brought, to
see such a sudden change, and so happy a chance, as to have his hellish bale
requited with heavenly bliss, his despightfull annoy, with delightful joy:
his heaviness with happiness, and doubtful despair turned to assured hope:
to see Fortune which of late deffed him as a foe, now to embrace him as a
friend, and to will that he did wish: to see his mistress cruelty turned to
courtesy, her disdain to desire, her bitter pills to sugered potions, her
stormy repulses to calm consent, and her contemptuous protestations, to most
constant promises. For if the careful captive, who by the doom of the Judge
expects each hour to die, rejoices when he hears his pardon pronounced,
no doubt Gwydonius joy could be no less, since denial was his death, and
consent the conserve to heal his wounds: the greater care, the greater joy:
the more pain, the greater pleasure: the more hellish misery, the more
heavenly felicity. Yea, Gwydonius was driven into such an ecstasy for joy,
that he was in doubt, whether this Letter was preferred to him indeed, or
presented to him in a vision: whether he were rapt into a trance, or ravished
with some drowsy slumber: but at last perceiving it to be no fained fantasy,
such a deep desire enforced his affection, as he thought every moment a
month, every hour a year, every day a thousand, until he might freely
enjoy the presence and sight of his love and Lady Castania. Fortune meaning to
advance him to the top of her inconstant wheel, brought it so to pass, that
before the week was ended, he spied Castania walking alone in the garden:
which sudden sight so revived his senses, that without any dread or doubt, he
ma^fully marched on toward her, and was as hastily and heartily incountred by
Castania: who embracing Gwydonius in her arms, welcomed him with this
salutation:

As the Whale (Gwydonius) makes always sign of great joy at the sight of the
fish called Talpa Marina, as yt Hind greatly delights to see the Leopard, as
the Lion fawneth at the view of the Unicorn, and as he which drinks of the
Fountain Hipenis in Scythia, feels his mind so drowned in delight, that no
grief though never so great, is able to assuage it: so Gwydonius I conceive
such surpassing pleasure in thy presence, and such heavenly felicity in the
sight of thy perfection, that no misery though never so monstrous, is able to
amaze me, no dolor though never so direful, is able to daunt me, nor no
mishappe though never so perilous, is able to make me sink in sorrow, as long
as I enjoy thy presence, which I count a sovereign preservative against all
careful calamities. That as he which tastes of the herb Hyacinthus is never
combred with care, and as he that wears the stone Agathes about him, is
surely defenced against all ensuing sorrows: so enjoying the sight of thy
seemly self, and feeding mine eyes with the form of thy feature, I think my
self sufficiently shrouded against all the tempestuous showers of sinister
fortune. And to prove these my promises to be no fained vanities but faithful
verity, I commit my self, my stay, and state into thy hands, to dispose of
me at thy pleasure, wishing rather to live with thee in most distressed
penury, than to linger here in most fortunate prospeperitie.

Gwydonius listening attentively to this sugared harmony, was so ravished with
the sight of her sweet face, and so rapt into a trance with the contemplation
of her beauty, that as the Lion tasting of the gum Arabicke becomes
senseless, as the Bull by browsing on the bark of a Juniper tree falls
asleep, as the Camel stands astonished at y^ sight of a Rat: so Gwydonius
seeing in his arms the Saint whom in heart he did honor, and embracing y^
Goddess whom with most deep devotion he did adore, was so amazed, that he was
not able to utter one word, as witness of his happiness, until at last
gathering his wits together, he began thus to reply:

CAstania (quoth he) it is an axiom in Philosophy, that the color joined
hard to the sight, hinders the sense: the flower put into the nosethrill,
stops the smelling: the Wine vessel being full, lettes pass no Wine,
though never so well vented: the waterpot being filled to the brim yeeldes
forth no licour, though having a thousand holes: so where the mind is
surcharged with overmuch joy, or too much pleasure, there the tongue is both
tied, and the senses so restrained, that the heart is neither able to conceive
the joy, nor the tongue able to express the pleasure. Which, Castania, I now
speak by proof, and know by experience: for I am so drowned in delight by
enjoying that Princely Gemme, which I esteem the rarest and richest Jewel,
not only in Alexandria, but in all the world, and so puffed up in pleasure by
thy divine presence: Yea, thy faithful and unfeigned affection, the promise of
thy constancy, and the hope of thy loyalty, the report of thy chastity, and
the renown of thy modesty, the force of thy beauty, and the fame of thy
virtue: But above all thy prodigal bounty, in bestowing these heavenly
perfections on thy poor Gwydonius, being by person and parentage most
unworthy to possess them, so surchargeth my silly heart with excessive joy;
that my tongue not being able in part to express the extreme pleasure of my
mind, I am with Philistion the comicall Poet, constrained by silence to
unfold that affection, which in words the filed phrase of Demosthenes were not
able to decipher. But this assure thy self Castania, that if Juno would
advance me to he Monarch of the world, if Pallas would prefer me to
exceed hautie Hercules in valor, if Venus would present me with some princely
piece of heavenly perfection, yet would I not so gladly receive their proffers,
as I do gratefully accept the promise of thy love and loyalty. No: I account
the treasure of Cioesus but trashe, in respect of the guerdon of thy good will:
I account the fortune of Caesar but folly, respecting the fruits of thy
favor: I esteem the dignities of Priamus as dregs, in respect of thy divine
perfection. Yea, Castania, I am so snared with thy beauty, and so entangled in
the trappe of thy bounty, as I shall never leave to love thee, nor ever begin
to like any other.

IT is easy Gwydonius (quoth Castania) to purchase credit, where the party
is already persuaded, and to infer belief, where every word is counted an
Oracle. Therefore omitting these frinolous protestations, thus much I say
touching the purpose. Cecillius Metellus was wont to say, that as it was
necessary that old men should be grave in counsel, so it was expedient young
men should be secret in love: and therefore when the contract was made between
Fuluius and his daughter, he sealed up their lips with his signet, meaning
that to violate the secret conference of loners, was to commit a second
sacrilege. I speak this Gwydonius, as one careful of thy stay, and my state:
for if Orlanio my father should but once hear of our love, or suspect our
liking, it would breed thy mishap and my misery: yea, no doubt he would
speedily prevent our pretense, which would be thy care and my calamity. Dispose
our affairs at thy pleasure, but disouer not our purpose: if thou have won
the Castle, vaunt not of the conquest: if thou have made a good market, brag
not of thy gains: least by boasting of thy booty, thou loose thy preie, and
be thought a pratler. And Gwydonius, above all men beware of Valericus, least
under the shape of a friend, he prove in time thy mortal foe, least his fained
amity prove faithless enmity: that in trusting too much without trial,
thou find not treason: and then though thou repent, yet Had I wist comes too
late, and so thou wish thou had never loved, and I never liked.

TVsh Castania, (quoth Gwydonius) he that is afraid to venture on the Buck,
because he is tapisht in the briers, shall never have hunters hap, and he
that puttes his doubt in love for every chance, shall never have lovers luck.
Cannot the Catte catch Mice, without she have a bell hanging at her ear?
Cannot the Habbie seize on his preie, but he must check? Cannot the Spaniell
retriue the Partridge, but he must quest? And cannot we deal so warily but
all the world must wonder as it? Yes, it is a subtle bird that breeds among
the aerin of Hawks, and a shifting sheep that lambs in the Foxes den, and
be shall look narrowly that spies me halting. Let Orlanio not only weigh our
works, but our words, and let Valericus both deem our deeds and divine our
thoughts, and yet we hope I will dealt so secretly in our affairs, as neither
the one shall have cause to suspect our familiarity, nor the other to detect
our affection. And therefore Castania, least (if we be spied) the time and place
give occasion of mistrust, I will leave you as I found you, and so farewell.

Well, these two lovers placed thus by Fortune in the palace of earthly
prosperity, floated so securely in the streams of bliss, as they thought no
chippes of milchance might change their present happiness to future
heaviness, as long as their privy contract was kept so secret to themselves.
But as they which cannot see fire in the straw are stone blind: so he that
cannot see the flame of fancy is a fool. It is hard to cover smoke, but more
hard to conceal love: which these two lovers in tract of time tried true. Who
as closely as they kept their cloak, yet it was most easy to epsy the
lining: for fancy secretly restrained, is like the spark covered with ashes,
which at length brusteth into a great flame. For there passed between
Gwydonius such amorous glaunces, such loving looks, such courteous congies,
such countenances, and such friendly familiarity, such often meetings, such
open greetings, such sighs, such sobs, and such strange passions, as not onele
Valericus, but all the Court (though they poor souls thought to dance in a
Net and not be seen) perceived how entirely they loved and liked each other.
Which as it did not displease many which loved Gwydonius as their friend, so it
greatly despighted Valericus which was his foe, to see one of small countenance
preferred before one of his calling, that Guydonius should win the bulwark
which he so long had battered: that he pitching the field, another should
obtain the conquest: that he laying the siege, another should vaunt of the
victory: that while he beat the bush, another should catch the birds, and
that the meede of his merit, should be given to one of small desert. Being
cumbred with these choleric cogitations, and perplexed with these
despightfull passions, inflamed with wrathful fury, he fell into these terms:

O Gods (quoth he) what courtesy is there to be found in such Kites of Cressids
kind? Or what constancy is there to be hoped for in such dainty disdaining
Dames? Whose wavering wills and stailesse wits both wax and wane with the
Moon, whose lunatike minds change with every sudden motion: yea, whose
lightness and lewdness is such, as they delight with the Raven to feed on
the most loathsome flesh, with the she Woolfe to choose the soniest Make, with
Aesops Cock to prefer the Barley Corn before a most precious Pearl, and with
Glaucus to make a change of his golden armor for brazen Harness.

Did not Euphinia forsake most famous Princes, and embrace a most infamous
bondslaue? Did not Sirithia the Princess of Denmark reject a poor peasant?
Yea, did not Venus her self, with the Beetle, disdain all day to light on the
most fragrant flowers, and at night voutchsafeth to lodge in a filthy
cowsheard: I mean, did she not refuse the renowned Gods, and choose a most
deformed Smith?

Why, but Valericus, is it fancy that forces them to folly? Does love lead
them? Do the destinies drive them? Does beauty allure them? Is it their
countenance that constrains them? No, they are clownes: Is it their person or
parentage that persuades them? No, they are peasants. But like crafty
Calipsos, they think by these unequal matches to rule the roast after their
own diet, to be sovereign mistresses of their own minds, with Venus to let
Vulcan possess the tree, and Mars enjoy the fruit, to have their husbands seed
the sheep, and some other reap the fleece: under the shadow of his head, to
defend themselves from such heat as would otherwise greatly scorch their
credit, to make him follow the bent of their bow, although he set the
Cuckoldes end upward. It is a simple cloak that cannot cover one from a
shower of rain, and a silly husban^ that is not able to father that another
does beget. But to see how these gallant girls if they like not the party,
what show of shame fastness they will make, how they will vale their face
with the visour of Virginity, how they will cloak themselves with the color
of continency, how chary they will be of their chastity: whereas if they
fancy, who so loose of their lips, and free of their flesh as they? But
Valericus, why do thou thus recklesly rail and rage against womankinde? It
is not Castania that thus crosses thee with care, but Gwydonius that breeds
thy grief. Is it not she that infers thy sore, but he that procures thy
sickness. She is not the means of thy malady, but he the hinderer of thy
medicine. She is not the worker of thy woe, but he is the sower of thy
sorrow. And shall he be puffed up with prosperity, and I pressed down with
misery? Shall he swim in wealth, and I sink in want? Shall he bathe in
bliss, and I wail in woe? Shall he be pampered up with pleasure, and I pinde
away with penury? No, I will either spoil him, or spill my self, in despite
of the fates and fortune.

While thus Valericus sought opportunity to revenge his wrath upon guiltless
Gwydonius, fortune minding to bewray her mutability, brought it so to pass,
that whereas Orlanio was accustomed to pay a yearly tribute to the Duke of
Mitylene, which surmounted to the sum of 30000. Ducats, either wilfully or
willingly he withhelde this debt, which Clerophontes claymed as his due,
insomuch that being demanded by Embassage for the payment of this tribute, he
flatly answered, that he would not from henceforth disburse one denyer, and he
was sorry that in paying it heretofore he proved himself such a fool.
Whereupon Clerophontes being fraught with raging fury, was so incensed against
Orlanio, that taking counsel of his Nobility, he determined with as much speed
as might be, to wage battle against him, and to obtain y^ by co^straint,
which he denied him of courtesy. As thus he was musing with himself whom he
should appoint captain general of his army, because he meant not in proper
person to abide the hazard of the battle, the remembrance of his son
Gwydonius came into his mind, which not only amazed him, but so molested him,
as he was driven into most distressed dolor: now he called to mind his
merciless cruelty in correcting his faults, and his moodlesse rigor in
rebuking his folly: now he bewailed his long absence, and wished his speedy
presence: yea, he was so diversely perplexed, as he began thus dolorously to
discourse with himself:

ALas (quoth he) now I see the saying of Cicero to be true, that who so
wilfully peruerteth the laws of nature, seems to proclaim himself an enemy
to the gods, for that Nature never framed any thing amiss, wherein I have most
grievously offended: for in beastly rage I have surpassed the brute beasts
and in cruelty, the senseless creatures: I have been more deuoyd of pity
than the Fowls of the air, and more unnatural than the Fishes of the sea. The
Bird called Apis Indica, seeing the venomous Viper ready to devour her young
ones in the neast, presents her self to death, to preserve them from
destruction The Eagle is so careful over her young, that if it hap by her
default one of them do perish, she willingly wounds her self in many places
with her own beak. The Lion so lovingly fostereth up her whelps, that she
never fasteth of the preie until they be fully satisfied. The Fox is so
careful over her cubbes, that she willingly falls into the Hunters hands
to defend her young from harm. But I vile wretch, as though I had drunk of
the River Lincellis in Bohemia, which presently turns whatsoever it touches,
into stones. In stead of friendly courtesy have abused mine own son with
frowning cruelty, in lieu of mercy I have brought him to misery: the fatherly
affection I have showed him, has been raging fury: yea, my rigorous nature,
nay rather my unnatural rage has been such toward him, as he lives a
banished exile in a strange Country, perhaps pinched with penury,
oppressed with poverty, wandering in the wild desartes, in danger of
devouring, in peril of spoiling, afflicted not only with the malady of the
body, but the misery of the mind: so that no doubt he wishes that I had
never been Father to such a son, or he never son to such a Father.

Alas what joy can I now enjoy when I want mine only joy? What comfort can I
have to see my child in calamity? What pleasure can I take while he toyleth
in penury, who now in mine age should be the staff whereon to stay, that by
his valiant courage and warlike prowess (wherewith from his infancy he has
been indewed) might defend me from mine enemies, and revenge me of my foes. But
alas, I lament too late: the calm comes out of time, when the Ship has
suffered already Stipwrack, and the pitiful plaintes little prevail, where
the Patient is already pushed into peril. No, no, my rage has been too great
to hear of his hasty return, my perverse fury has been such, as he dare
not abide my presence: and surely my sorrow is too great ever to be salued.

And with that Clerophontes start up, minding to revenge these his choleric
cogitations by bloody battle upon the confines of Alexandria, and therefore in
great have mustered all his men, made great provision for the war, and caused
his Navy to be rigged, for that he meant to co^ney his army by sea into
Alexandria.

While thus there was no word through the whole Dukedom of Mitylene, but
war, war, and no news but of the cruel conflict that should ensue
between the two Dukes; certain Merchantes of Alexandria, which then road in
the Haven durst not go a shore to sell their commodities, but as fast as
wind and weather would serve them, highed them out of the harbor, and
coasted speedily into their own Country: where they no sooner arrived, but
they made report thereof to Orlanio, who driven into a dumpe with this noisome
news, whether he doubted of the puissant power of Clerophontes, who was such a
worthy warrior, and in battle so bold, that no man durst abide him, or
whether he feared his own force was not able to resist the fury of his raging
enemy; He presently summoned all his Lords to a Parliament, where after some
conference, it was concluded that Thersandro should be sent Ambassador to
Mitylene to parle of peace with Clerophontes: which determination was no whit
deferred, but with as much speed as might be, the Bark wherein he should pass
was provided, the charge of the Embassage was given him, and he accompanied
with a train of brave Gentlemen, departed.

But if this news was doleful to Orlanio, no doubt it was death it self to
Gwydonius, who hearing that his father would bend his force against the place,
wherein he was, saw all possibility taken away from obtaining his purpose,
for he feared death if he were known to Orlanio, and he doubted despightfull
hate at the least, if he bewrayed himself to Castania. Which double dolor so
distressed him, as he felt himself diversely perplexed with dumpish passions,
his mirth was turned to mourning, his pleasant conceits, to painful
cogitations: his wanton toys, to wayling thoughts: now he abandoned all good
company, and delighted only in solitary life, the wildesome woods were his
walks, and the secret shades the covert he chiefly coueted. In fine, he
seemed rather a Tymon of Athens, than a Gentleman of Alexandria, so that all
the Court marueiled at this so sudden a change, but especially Castania, who
coniecturing his doleful heart by his drousie looks, was astonished at this
strange state, casting in her mind whether she had given him any cause of
this care, or whether by her occasion he was crossed with this calamity. But
alas poor soul, howsoever she aimed, she mist the mark, for Gwydonius kept
his disease so secret, as he knew none could but himself divine the cause of
his malady: which no doubt was such, that it would have inferred present
death, if he had not hoped for some happy news by Thersandro:

Who no sooner luckely arrived at Mitylene, but Cleropho^tes was certified that
the Dukes son of Alexandria was come to impart with his Grace, some weighty
matters of importance. Now at this instant when the message was brought him,
his daughter Lewcippa was by, who (as the nature of women is, desirous to see
and be seen) thought she should both hear the parle, and view the person of
this young Ambassador, and therefore found fish on her fingers, that she might
stay still in the chamber of presence, whither presently Thersandro was sent
for, who courteously and curiously doing his obeylance to the Duke, delivered
his Embassage in this manner:

Whereas (right worthy sir) Orlanio, the Duke of Alexandria, more unwittingly
then wilfully denied certain tribute, which he confesses both he and his
predecessors have paid to you and your ancestors: Hearing that hereupon your
Grace means rather to wage battle, then to lose any part of your due,
although he fears not your force, as one able every way to withstand it, nor
passes of your puissance, as a Potentate sufficient to resist your power: Yet,
the care he has of his subjects safety, and the love he has to preserve the
life of his Commons, the regard he has to pay and perform yt which conscience
and custom requires: and lastly meaning with Tully, Iniquissimam pacem
iustissimo bello anteponere. He has sent me both to sue for conditions of
peace, and to pay the tribute: which if your Grace shall refuse, of force he
must put his hope in the hazard of Fortune.

THersandro having thus pithily performed his charge, Clerophontes told him
that upon a sudden he would not dispatch so weighty a matter, but meant first
both to consult and take counsel of his Nobles: which done, within three
days he should have an answer. In the mean time he commanded Lucianus the
Steward of his house, very courteously to entreat both Thersandro and his
train, and to feast them with such sumptuous fare, as they might have cause
most highly to extol his magnificence.

But leaving Clerophontes, to consult with his learned counsailours, and
Thersandro to accompany with the lusty Courtiers, again to Lewcippa, who
while this young youth was telling of his tale, never marked the matter, but the
man: nor regarded not the parle, but respected yt person: never noted the
contents, but viewed his countenance: In such sort, that she was so scorched
with the fire of fancy, and so scalded with the flame of affection, so
bewitched with his beauty, and so inueigled with his bounty, as he was the
only man that made her check at the pray, bate at the lure, and willingly
yield to the first assault of fancy. And on the other side, Fortune so
favored, that Thersandro printing in his heart the perfection of Lewcippas
person, felt his fredome so fettered by yt view of her heavenly face, and so
snared in the beams of her amorous glaunces, that he wished that either this
dissension had never grown, or that he had not been the deliverer of the
message: for he felt his heart already so ouergrowen with good will, toward
this young Princess, as no salve but her self was able to mitigate his
sorrow, no medicine but her courtesy was able to cure his calamity, and he
thought to prefer his suit to his professed foe, was folly: to linger still
in love, was death and misery: to seek for help at her hands, neither would
the present state permit him, nor time suffer him to prosecute his purpose:
daunted with these diverse doubts, to avoid the melancholic motions that
molested his mind, he presently went from his lodging to the Court, that by
company he might drive away these dumpes: where, he found in the great
Chamber diverse Ladies and Gentlewomen, passing away the time in pleasant
parle, amongst whom was that peerlesse Paragon, princely Lewcippa: who (after
due reverence done to the Gentlewomen in general) was singled out by
Thersandro, and courted in this wise.

MAdam (quoth he) if any creature has just occasion to accuse either nature or
the gods of injustice, man only has the greatest cause to make this complaint:
for there is none other so deprived of reason, or deuoyde of sense, which by
some natural instinct does not skilfully presage of perils before they come,
and warily prevent ere they be past.

The Goats of Lybia, know certainly when the Canicular days begin, wherein
commonly they fall blind, and therefore by eating the herb Polypodium, they
prouidently prevent their disease. When the Lion leaves his Lawnes, and
raungeth in foreign desartes, he always foresheweth a drouth. When the Fish
called Vranoscopos sinketh down to the bottom of the Sea, he bewrays great
tempests to be imminent. But man is so far from this secret foresight, that
not only he cannot divine of these ensuing dangers, but rather wilfully or
willingly, pusheth himself into most manifest perils: which Madame, I speak,
as feeling my self distressed with this want. For if I had been endued with
this sacred prescience, perfectly to presage of ensuing perils, I had not been
crossed with such cares as I am like to incur, nor had cause to repent this
my present arrival. But since lack of such skill has procured my loss, and
that when the hurt is had it is too late to take heed, though revealing of my
mishap cannot heal my misery, nor repeating of my pains redress my sorrow,
yet I mean to participate my passions to your good grace, that though you
cannot or will not mitigate my malady, yet you may pity my estate, which will
some what ease my heaviness. I came to your Fathers Court Madam, a free man of
Alexandria, and am like to return a captive of Mitylene: I arrived deuoyd of
care, and am like to depart drenched with calamity: I landed free from
affection, but fear to pass hence fraught with fancy: my charge was only to
parle of peace, but my chance is to discourse of passions. Yea, your beauty
has so fettered my freedom and so snared my heart in the linkes of your love,
that it shall never be raced out by any sinister means of Fortune, although I
see it is almost impossible to obtain it.

For I doubt, our Parents are like to proclaim themselves professed foes, and
the urgent necessity of my affairs forces me to depart so speedily, as want
of time will not suffice to make trial of my love, whereby I might claim a
sufficient guerdon for my good will: yet howsoever the matter shall hap,
whether my hope be void, or my hap be vain, I mean Madame to remain yours
for ever.

Lewcippa took such delight in hearing Thersandro discourse so lovingly, as
she could scarcely keep her countenance from bewraying the pleasure she
conceived in this parle, seeing that her love was requited with liking, and her
fancy incountred with the like affection. Yet, least Thersandro should think
her too courteous if she should come at the first call, and very light of
love, to like at the first look, she framed him this answer:

SIR (quoth she) if of your suit for Conditions of peace there ensue no better
success than the revealing of your passions shall reap pity at my hands,
or if the entreaty for truce be as lightly respected by my Father, as either
your person or petition is regarded by me, you are like to carry home cold
news to your country, and to vaunt that you bad fair, but bought little,
that your Harvest was long, but your corn not worth the cropping: that your
venture was much, but your gains such, as if your winning prove no better, you
are like to live by the loss. For sir, do you suppose me so sottish, as to
think every one that flatters does fancy, or so addicted to self love, as
by a few filed phrases to be brought into a fools Paradise? knowing that it is
the fashion of men by their fained subtlety to deceive our fathfull
simplicity? No, for if you mean to counterfaite, take this for a rule, it is
ill halting before a creeple. But sir, this your sudden liking bewraies the
lightness of your love: this your fond affection, importes the sicklenesse of
your fancy: for soon hot, soon cold: easily inflamed, as quickly
quenched: like to the Apples of Arabia, which begin to rot, ere they behalf
ripe. And if I meant to love, had I none to like but my Fathers foe? should I
desire him whom my Father does detest? And if I should so far forget mine
own stay, or my Fathers state, as to consent, it were impossible either to
appease his wrath, or to get the grant of his good will. So that to desire that
which I can never enjoy, were to drive my self wholly into despair, which
would smally profit you, and greatly displeasure me: and therefore cease to
sue for that, which may well be wished, but never obtained.

Thersandro although he heard Lewcippa decide the case sufficiently, yet he
was so wilful that he would not take her doom for a verdite, but returned
her this reply.

MAdame (quoth he) where in lieu of hate there insueth love, it is always the
sign of the greater affection: and that it is a thing either confirmed by the
Fates, or appointed by the Gods. Tereus the Prince of Thrace, being sent by his
father to defy Pandion the king of Athens, was enamoured of his daughter
Progne, whereby between the Parents in steed of fatal enmity, there insued
friendly amity. When as the bloody war between Atis the king of Libia, and
Lycabas the Prince of Assure, was most hot, young Admetus, being sent
Ambassador into Libia, was so stricken in love with Alcest, only Daughter to
his fathers foe, and she repayed his liking with such loialtie as death it
self could never dissolve their amity. If Madame, these premises may persuade
you to take pity of my passions, or these examples induce you, not to let the
hatred of our parents, be a hinderance of our love, whether your father
reject me as a foe, or accept me as a friend, I doubt not but the destinies
will drine the bargain through, in despite of them and fortune.

Sir (quoth she) I confess, Progne poor wench loved Tereus, but how
wretchedly did he reward her loyalty? and Scilla was enamoured of Minos her
Fathers foe, but how tyrannously did he repay her love with treachery?
Tarpeia betrayed ye Tower of Rome to one of the Sabines whom she most entirely
loved, but the meede of her merit was extreme misery. Shall I then
Thersandro see the train and yet fall into the trap? shall I spy the nets,
and yet strike at the stale? shall I see the mishap, and yet wilfully incur
the mischance? no, I mean not for an inch of joy, to reap an ell of annoy,
for a moment of mirth, a month of misery: for a dram of pleasure, a whole
pound of pain, and by procuring mine own delight, to purchase my fathers
death and destruction. But let this suffice Thersandro to signify how I
pity thy passions, and think well of thy person, that if my Fathers will
might be framed to my wish, if he would condescend as I would consent, thou
only art the man who in the way of marriage should dispose of me at thy
pleasure. But since the frowning state of Fortune denies our love to have such
happy success, hope well, and rest upon this point, that I will always like
thee as a friend, though not love thee as my pheere.

As Thersandro was ready to reply, and to seal up the bargain of their love
upon her sweet lips, Cleropho^tes came in, who marred all their market, and
turned their sweet to sour: for he gave Thersandro his answer before
Lewcippa, which was this; That he neither meant to accept of the conditions of
peace, nor to receive the tribute, but to claim his due by the doubtful event
of battle: That he shortly pretended in person, to visit Orlanio, and within
the walls of Alexandria to demand his debt, and that he would bestow his
fathers Dukedom upon a Lord of his called Lucianus, in dowry with his
daughter Lewcippa.

Thersandro was nothing amazed with the first part of the message: but when he
heard how Clerophontes meant presumptuously both to deprave him of his living,
and deprive him of his love, he was so puffed up with wrath and choler, as
hap what hap would, he fell into these terms.

I remember (quoth he) that Caligula the Emperor, providing a mighty army to
subdue great Britain, when he was come to the sea, ready to post over his
soldiers in his Navy, he left off his endless enterprise, and set them to
gather Cockles. Siphax boldly boasting that he would bestow the kingdom of
Numidia upon his second son, was by Massinis^a overthrown, and sold as
captive to the Romans. I dare not sir infer comparisons, because they be
odious, nor apply the examples, since time and place forbids me: but this I
say, that to fish before the net, is always counted folly, and to vaunt before
the victory, is but vanity. Yea, and if I had as good right to your daughter
Lewcippa, as I have to the supposed dowrte which you assign her, I would in
despite of Lucianus and the devil himself, dispose her at my pleasure.

Clerophontes hearing the cholerike conclusion of Thersandro, could scarcely
bridle his frantike fury from raging without reason against this young youth:
yet somewhat mitigating his mood, he breathed out these cruel threatenings.

IF the law of arms (quoth he) did not both safely protect thee, and surely
forbid me to hurt thee in that thou art a messenger, I would with such
severity chastise these thy presumptuous speeches, as thou should learn
hereafter to answer with more reverence: yet I wish thee not to stand too
stiff upon this point, least if thou be so recklesse as to break the bonds
of reason, I be so forgetful as to pass the limits of the law. Thou have
received a determinate answer for the Embasse, and here I charge thee this
present day to depart out of my dominions.

Thersandro fearing the tyranny of this cruel Clerophontes, presently passed
out of the chamber of Presence, taking his leave of Lady Lewcippa, only with
loving looks, which she requited with such glaunces of good will, that they
were sufficient signs what insupportable sorrow she received by his so sudden
departure: yet knowing that her fancy was incountered with mutual affection,
she drove away the mystie clouds of despair, hoping that the Gods seeing
their faithful amity, would take pity of their passions, and in time
redress their misery.

But Thersandro having with speed dispatched his affairs (all his train being
set aboard, and they coasting the straights with a luckie gale) was so combered
with care, and so ouer-growne with grief, that he passed no hour, minute, nor
moment, without woeful wailing, sorrowful sobs, and far fetched sighs: so that
the Gentlemen his companions, supposing that he was thus painfully perplexed
for fear of Clerophontes puisance, began both to comfort and encourage him,
not to doubt or dread the force of the enemy, since his father was able to
repulse him, without any danger to himself, or any great damage to his
subjects. But these their persuasions could no whit prevail to assuage his
passions, this their incoragement could not cure his care.

But as there is no greater bane to the body, than trouble of the mind: so
Thersandro so long continued in these pensive passions and careful
cogitations, concealing his grief so covertly, which so much the more
furiously flamed within him, that he was constrained to keep his Cabin till
his arriual at Alexandria. Where being set on shore, and presently conveyed to
the Court, he remained for the space of three days so strangely perplexed, as
he was not able to make report of his message: which so griped Orlanio with
such inspeakeable grief, as he wished rather to have died valiantly with the
force of his enemy, than to put the death of his son in hazard by passing so
perilous a journey. But Thersandro seeing that sorrow would not salve his
sore, but rather increase his sickness: that mourning would not appease his
malady, but rather augment his misery: began to take heart at grass, and
within few days began to recover his former health. And then he declared to
his father what he had in charge from Clerophontes, how he meant speedily to
wage war against him, and by force of arms to drive him out of his Dukedom,
which he had already promised to one Lucianus in dowry with his daughter.

Orlanio hearing this proud presumption of this bragging Duke, thought ye
greatest barkers were not always the sorest biters, and that it was far more
easy with words to obtain the victory, than with deeds to attain the
conquest. Yet, least he might he taken at unawares, he made a general muster
throughout all his Dominions, providing in every place necessary munition for
the defense of his Country. And assembling his Nobility to give their verdit,
who were fittest to be Captains in this skirmish; after some consultation had
in this cause, they concluded, that since Clerophontes meant to ioyn battle
in his own person, that likewise he should be General of the field, and
Gwydonius who surpassed all the rest in martial exploits, should be
Lieutenant, and conduct the army, which he no sooner heard but he was
tormented with inspeakable grief, he began to pull down his Peacockes
feathers, to hang his wings, and cry creake: every man hoping to win fame was
merry, but he alone mourning: every man laughed and he alone lowred: insomuch
that he was generally suspected to be a fearful cowarde, and that dread of
danger drove him into these doleful dumps. But as they rashly coniectured the
cause of his sorrow, so they mist the nature of his sickness: for Gwydonius
seeing that of the cruel conflict his calamity should ensue, and that this
bloody broyle would breed his bane, he fell into such solitary surmises, and
such musing meditations, that Valericus his open friend, and yet his secret
foe, sought by sundry means to search out the cause of his care: but not
being able to wring out any thing, either by flattering promises, or fained
protestations, he ceased from his importunate suit. But froward fortune brought
it so to pass, that Valericus coming by the chamber of Gwydonius, heard him
thus desperately discoursing with himself.

Alas (quoth he) I see the Sun being at the highest declineth, the Sea
being at the full tide ebbeth: calm continues not long without a storm,
neither is happiness had long without heaviness, bliss without bale, weal
without woe, mirth without mourning. For who alate so floated in the floods of
felicity as I, which now by the sinister means of frowning fortune am sowsed
in the seas of sorrow, eralted alate to the highest degree of happiness, am now
driven to the greatest extremity of evil: alate puffed up with prosperity,
and now pushed down with adversity: yea, alate placed in Paradise, and now
plunged in perplexity.

Oh Gwydonius, if thy Fathers friendly precepts might have persuaded thee, if
his advice had been thy advertisement, and thou had carefully kept his
counsel, then by his fore-warning, thou had been forearmed against all
mishap and misery, The force of fickle fancy had not then given thee the
foil, Love had not so lightly procured thy loss, nor the painted show of
beauty had not so soon procured thy bane. My bane? Why fond fool, beauty
has bred my bliss: fancy has not given me the foil, but has yielded me
the fort: Love has not wrought my loss, but requited me with treble gain.

Has not Castania requited my love with loyalty, and repaied my good will
with mutual affection? Is she not my Saint, and I her servant? Are we not
contracted together by love, and shall continue together by law? May I not
dispose of her in the way of marriage at my pleasure? Yes, but what then? The
more is my grief, and the greater my care. For if her presence procures my
delight, will not her absence breed my despite? If her consent preserved my
life, will not her contempt infer my death? Yes. For alas, since the
destinies mean to dissolve that fancy has decreed, since the frowning fates
seek to unloose that which love has linked, since froward fortune means to
break the bonds wherein beauty has bound us, since these bloody broils
will cause Castania, (where before she accepted me for a friend) now to reject
me for a foe: What better luck can I look for than a loathsome life, or what
better hap can I hope for than horror and heaviness? Yea, which way so ever I
turn me I see nothing but woe and wretchedness. For if Orlanio perceived our
liking, how would he storm at our love? If he knew my chance, how would he
fret at his Daughters choice? Would he ever consent, that Castania should
match with so mean a mate, that her Princely personage should be disgraced
with my base parentage, that her calling should be crazed with my slender
countenance: no, he would no doubt first banish me out of all his dominions.
Tush Gwydonius, would God this were the worst, and then thou might hope in
time, by some means to redress this doubt. But if Orlanio should know thou were
heir apparent to the Dukedom of Mitylene, and only son to Clerophontes his
fatal foe what torment were there so terrible, which thou should not try?
What pain so pinching, which thou should not pass? What hap so hard, which
thou should not hazard? Yea, what death so direful, which at his cruel
hands thou should not suffer? And what if Castania were privy to thy state,
do thou think her so constant as to consent to her Fathers foe? Do thou
think she would wish the sons weal, when the Father wishes her mishap?
No, assure thy self if thy state be once known, that Castania will most
deadly detest thee, which will be more grievous to thee than death it self,
be it never so terrible. Since then Gwydonius, thou must shortly either go in
arms against thine own Father, or else lose both thy love and thy life, let
not delay breed danger, but strike on the stith while the iron is hot.
Castania has promised to forsake both father, friends, and her own Country,
to pass where and when it pleases thee, she doubts no dangers, she
forces of no misfortune, she cares for no calamity, she passes for no
perils, so she enjoy thy desired company: and therefore as speedily as may be,
convey her closely into the confines of Mitylene, before either she know thy
stay or thy state. And shall I so practice her with policies? Shall I so sifte
her with subtlety? Shall I put so little trust in her troth, and so small
confidence in her constancy, as to conceal from her any secret? No, come woe,
come wretchedness, come death, come danger, hap what hap will, I will
presently impart unto her my present state, and my pretended purpose.

Valericus hearing this doubtful discourse of Gvvydonius, was driven into an
ecstasy for joy, to see that he had found such fit means, whereby he might
not only purchase the Dukes favor, aspire unto honor and dignity, but also
obtain the love of Castania: for he meant speedily to prevent the pretense of
Gwydonius, by unfolding to the Duke the sum of his secret purpose, assuring
himself, that after Orlanio knew his parents and parentage, that he was son
and heir to Clerophontes, no price though never so precious, no ransom though
never so rich, might redeem him from the most despitefull death that could be
devised. And of these premises he inferd this conclusion, that if the cause be
taken away, the effect fails: that Gwydonius being rejected, he should be
received: that he being despighted with hate, he should be requited with
love: and upon this hope he went presently to bewray this matter to Orlanio,
whom he found with his son Thersandro, and diverse other noble men
consulting what course they had best take against Clerophontes, whoms Valericus
saluted in this wise.

PLato (right worthy Prince) that grave and wise Philosopher, whose sentences
in all ages have been holden as most divine Oracles, portraieth out in his
books of his Common wealth, the picture of a perfect Citizen: whose liniaments
being first leuelled, he tricketh up with these colors, that he love his
Prince loyally, keep the laws carefully, and defend his Country valiantly,
in which three points (says he) consists the chiefest duty of a trusty
subject: This saying of Plato thoroughly considered, and calling to mind the
sundry good turns which without desert your Grace has bestowed upon me, I
thought if I should not repaie your favor with faithfulness, and your trust
you repose in me with inviolable troth, I might be counted a vicious vassal
deuoide of all virtues, a treacherous citizen, rather then a trusty subject, a
careless slave, then a careful gentleman: yea, a graceless mo^ster, misled
with ingratitude. I am come (right worthy sir) not to betray my fo, but to bewray
my friend, not to discover ye falt of my enemy, but to disclose his offense
which lives with me in perfect amity, in whose company hitherto has been
all my joy, pleasure and delight: but since his pretense is greatly
prejudicial to your Graces person, I thought to prefer your profit before mine
own pleasure, and the commodity of my country, before mine own private
contentation. So it is, that Gwydonius, whom your Grace has honored, and all
the Court esteemed, is son and heir to Clerophontes the Duke of Mitylene.
who by the peevish policy of his Father, under the pretense of service, is
purposed to procure your fatal death, and the final destruction of your
Dukedom. And the better to perform this devilish practice, he has
contracted himself to my Lady Castania, who blinded with his beauty, and
inueigled with his wit, has consented not only to keep his counsel to your
confusion, but also closely to convey her self with him into his Country.
Which pretense if your Grace does not speedily prevent, you shall find that
delay breeds danger, and that procrastination in perils is but the mother of
mishap.

And have I (quoth Orlanio) brought up the bird that will pick out mine own
eyes? Have I fostered up the Serpent in my bosom that will breed my bane?
Have I given her life, that seeks to yield me death? Have I cherisht her
being young, and will she consume me being older? Was there none to choose
but Gwydonius, nor none to love, but the son of her fathers foe? Will she
prefer her lust before my life? her private pleasure, before the safety of
my person? Well, as she forgets the duty of a child, so I will forget the
natural affection of a father, and therefore Valericus go speedily with these
noble men to Gvvydonius chamber, and apprehend him, that I may requite his
hateful treachery with most hellish torments. And Thersandro see you that
Castania be closely kept until we have caught the traitor, least she
understanding that their devise is disclosed, she save her self by flight.

Valericus having this commission given him from the Duke, made no delay, but
passed to Gvvidonius lodging with as much speed as might be: but fortune who
after every chip of mischance, sends some lot of good luck, and after
every storm of adversity, sends a quiet calm of prosperity, so carefully
provided to free Gwydonius from mishap, that he was newly gone toward
Castania, to impart unto her this his pretense: but before he came to her
chamber, he was encountered by Thersandro, who stearnly taking Gvvydonius by
the bosom, pulling out his rapier commanded him as a traitor to stand, or
else without any farther doom he should feel the dint of death.

Gvvydonius amazed with this sudden motion, stood as one in a trance,
neither being able to defend himself with word or weapon, but yielded
himself into the hands of Thersandro, who shakt him up with these bitter
speeches.

THou traitorous wretch (quoth he) as it is impossible for the flame so closely
to be covered, but it will be spied: so it is impossible, but that treason,
though never so secret, should in tract of time be disclosed, which now by
experience is verified in thee: for although thou have hitherto falsely fained
thy self to be a stranger of a foreign nation, thou art now known to be
son and heir to Clerophontes that cruel tyrant my Fathers foe, by whose
peevish policy thou had not only brought yt common wealth to confusion, but
did pretend to be prejudicial to my Fathers person, if thy deadly practice
and devilish purpose had not by Valericus his means been prevented. Have thou
been so trained up in treachery, or is thy mind so spotted with villainy, as
to repay my fathers good will wc such barbarous ingratitude, and to devise his
destruction which simply foresought thy preferment? Yea, to counsel my sister
Castania, not only to consent to thy desire, but to my fathers death? Is this
the manner of Mitylene, or the custom of thy country, to be such coosening
counterfaites? Well, since I have happily attached thee as a traitor, and as a
villainous rebel, both transgressing human and divine laws, thou shall abide
the pain and punishment due to such devilish offenders. Now let thy cruel
sire Clerophontes, free thee from those torments which thou art like to suffer
for thy treachery, and let the Lords of Mitylene deliver thee from his hands,
who means in most miserable wise to martyr thee. Yea, let thy Concubine
Castania, who is like for her graceless disobedience, to sip of yt same
sorrow, see if her tears will now prevail to move Orlanio to pity. No, if
Jupiter himself sent Mercury to mitigate his mood, neither the authority of
the one, nor the eloquence of the other might prevail to pacify his fury.

GWydonius seeing that not only his purpose was prevented, and his secrets
disclosed, but that also Valericus most villanously had accused him and
Castania of that which they never so much as once imagined, was so perplexed,
and driven into such dumpes, as he seemed by silence to auerre that which
Thersandro had alleged, yet at last he began thus to reply.

THersandro (quoth he) as I mean not to affirm that which is false, so I will
not deny that which is true: but come dolor, come death, come misery, come
martyrdom, come torture, come torments, I will neither accuse myself
unjustly, nor excuse myself by perjury. I confess Thersandro, that I am
son and heir to the Duke of Mitylene, and contracted to thy sister Castania,
that Clerophontes, is my father by the law of nature, and Castania my wife by
the league of love: but that I either pretended or purposed to be prejudicial
to Orlanios person, or that Castania was counseled or ever consented to her
fathers confusion, I not only deny, but I will prove by combats that Valericus
most villanously does accuse us of ye whereof we are altogether sacklesse.

Why Gwydonius, (quoth he) will thou seek to prove thyselfe loyal, when the
hearers deem she a liar? or to make a trial of thy troth, when thy words can
have no trust? Dooest thou think my fathers fury will suffer thee to fable?
Dooest thou think his wrathful rage will abide thy reasons, or that he will be
so patient as to hear thee plead thine own cause? No, if thou were as clear
from these crimes alleged against thee by Valericus as I am: yet in that thou
art son to Clerophontes, the coin of Croesus, and Kingdoms of Caesar, were not
sufficient ransom to redeem thee from death. But Gwydonius, since thy health
hangs in my hands, and thy life or death is in my power, I will neither be
so bloody minded as to breed thy bane, nor so cruel, as to be the cause of
thy confusion. The guerdon Gwydonius I crave of this my good will, and the
recompense I claim for this courtesy, is that when thou come to Mitylene,
thou certify thy sister and my love and Lady Lewcippa, that for her sake I
have procured thy safety, that her perfection has preserved thee from peril,
the love I bear her has saved thy life, the dutiful devotion I owe unto her,
has redeemed thee from death and danger. And in token of this my unfeigned
affection, I will lift my hand against none that comes from Mitylene, but
against Lucianus only.

Before Thersandro was able sullie to unfold his mind, or that Gwydonius had
time to yield him thanks for the safeguard of his life, they heard a great
noise, which made Gwydonius fly, and Thersandro hie him hastily to Castanias
lodging. Now the company which came, was Orlanio himself, who certified by
Valericus that Gwydonius could not be found, laid not only watch and ward
throughout all his Dukedom to attache him, but went in proper person with his
Guard to apprehend Castania, and lay her in close prison, whom he found all
blubbered with tears, for that she had understood the cause before of her
brother Thersandro: Orlanio no sooner spied her thus weeping, but he raged
against her in this wise.

Has the force of lone, nay rather the fury of lust (vile wretch) so blinded
thine understanding, that to accomplish it, thou passest not to pervert both
humane and divine laws? Does lascivious affection and fleshly fancy so
furiously fry within thee, as thou would procure thy fathers death to
purchase thy devilish desire? Could no rules of reason, no prick of
conscience, no respect of honesty, no fear of God, nor dread of man, prohibit
thee from pretending such a monstrous mischief, as to conclude with my mortal
foe to work my fatal confusion? The young Storkes so tender the old ones in
their age, as they will not suffer them so much as to fly to get their own
living. The bird called Apis Indica, being young, seeing yt old ones through
age grown so weak, as they are not able to wave their wings, carry them
continually from place to place on their backs: these savage creatures have but
only sense, and are obedient, thou have both reason and sense, and art more
unnatural: these brute beasts are most dutiful to their Parents, and thou a
reasonable creature art most disobedient to thy father: yea, contrary both to
the laws of nature and nurture, thou seek to bathe thy hands in his
guiltless blood, and without care or conscience, to commit most cruel
murder: which is so hateful to all things, as the senseless plants and
stones most deadly detest such villainy. The Olive tree so hatefully abhors
a Parasite, that who so being guilty of that crime, attempteth to plant it,
does not only himself presently perish, but the tree forthwith waneth and
withers. The stone Epistrites, so loatheth this offense, cou^ting it a fact
so repugnant to nature, that it will not vouchsafe to be worn by a murderer.
And shall I then let thee live, whom the senseless creatures do so deadly
leath? No, this hand which cherisht thee being a child, shall now chastise thee
being such a cursed caitife. And with that he drew out his Fa^ichon ready to
have stain her, but that Thersandro kneeling down, desired him that he would
not so in his fury forget himself, as without the sentence of the law put her
to death, but to commit her toward, until the wars between him and
Clerophontes, were happily ended; and then upon more straight examination, if
she were found faulty, to assign her a punishment due for such an offense.
Orlanio, somewhat pacified with his sons persuasion, commanded that presently
she should be carried to prison, and the Lady Melytta with her, as an actor
in this Tragedy. And that with all speed they should post the country for
the attaching of the traitor Gwydonius. Who after that he parted from
Thersandro, seeing before his eyes the terror of torments, and the hellish
horror of death, was driven forward so with the dread of danger, and fear of
immine^t perils, that knowing perfectly the coast of the Country, he passed so
secretly and speedily, as he was not so much as once descried by the Posts
that pursued him, but escaped safely out of the Dukedom of Alexandria. Being now
without the dint of the Dukes danger, seeing that although he had escaped
himself, yet he had left his love and lady Castania in hazard of her life,
he began thus to exclaim against his own folly.

AH Gvvidonius (quoth he) what foltie have thou committed by this fearful
flight, what careful calamity is like to ensue of this thy cowardice? in
avoiding Scilla thou art fallen into Charibdis, in preventing one danger, thou
art like to be plagued with a thousand discommodities. Had it not been better
for thee to have died in Alexandria, with honor, than to live here with shame
and reproach, to have suffered mishappe with Castania, then to linger here in
miseris? Do thou think that she will ever count of such a prating Parasite,
as will love her in prosperity, and leave her in adversity, as prefers his
own safety before her security, his life before her love, and draws
himself out of danger to leave her in distress? No, she will contemn thee as
a cowarde, more fit to be mate to some country slut, than a match for such a
courtly Princess, she will think thy greatest faith was but fained
fickleness, thy forged love was but filthy lust, thy promises were but
periuries, and that thy greatest amity was but most dissembled enmity: so
that of a professed friend, she will become thy professed foe, her desire will
turn to despite, and her love to most hellish hate.

Why, alas, would my pain have pleased her, would my martyrdom have contented
her mind, had my peril procured her profit, or my care her commodity? Nay,
rather would not my danger have been her death, my mishap her misery, my
torture her torments, and my fatal destiny her final destruction. By saving
my life in time we may enjoy our love, but by death no hope had been left for
obtaining our desire: so that I assure my self, Castania will rather allow of
my policy by preventing perils by flight, than mislike of my practice in
procuring mine own safety. And upon this point I rest, hoping that the Gods
seeing how unjustly Valericus has accused us, will in tract of time rid us
from blame, and reward him with shame.

Gwydonius was not more distressed with dolor, than poor Castania was combred
with care, to see so strange a chance, and so sudden a change, that she who
of late was a royal Princess, was now a ruthful prisoner, that her freedom
was turned to fetters, her dignity to misery, and her happy stay, to a most
hellish state: that after floods of tears which fell from her crystal eyes,
she burst forth into these terms.

Alas (quoth she) what poor Damsel was ever driven into such doubtful
distress? What Princess was ever perplered with such doleful passions? what
maid was ever crossed with such mishappe? nay, what creature ever was clogged
with the like calamity? Have the spightfull Destinies decreed my destruction,
or the perverse Planets conspired my bitter bane? Does froward fortune mean to
make me a mirror of her mutabilitie, or is this the reward that Cupid bestows
upon his Clyents? Is every one that does fancy, maimed with the like
misfortune, or is Love always accompanied with such hapless luck? Alas no;
for their love is lawefull, and mine lewd and laseiuious: their fancy is fixed
upon virtue, and mine upon vanity: they make their match with consent of
their Parents, and I my market without my Fathers counsel? so that I am like
in choosing such chaffer, to chop and change and live by the loss: yea, to buy
repentance at an unreasonable rate. Had it not been better for thee Callania,
to have condescended to ye requests of Valericus, than consented to the suite
of Gwydonius? to have liked thine own Country man, than loved a straggling
stranger: to have satisfied thy self with assurance, than vainley to fish for
hope? Truth, but what then? Can the straw resist the virtue of the pure Ie^?
Canth flax resist the force of the fire? Can a lover withstand the brunt of
beauty? freeze, if he stand by the flame? pervert the laws of Nature, or
eschew that which is framed by the fates, or fly from the force of fancy? No,
for who so escapes the deadly darts of Cupid shall be scorched with his fire,
and she that with the dew of chastity quenches his flame, shall be
overtaken with his wings: so that to seek by flight to eschew affection, is
foolishly to enterprise that which can never be achieved.

But alas, If I must needs lend a listening ear to the allurements of love,
was there none to like but thy Fathers foe? How, fond fool, could thou show
him courtesy, that intendes to repay thee with cruelty? How could thou
choose the son to thy mate, when the Father seeks thy misery. It is not
possible to mix the blood of a Ball and a Bear, together in one vessel. The
Lions whelps will never company with young Woolues: the Faulcons called
Pelagrae, will never fl^e with the young ^euerets: and if the Eggs of a Crow
and a Curle we be put in one nest, they both forthwith burst in sunder, because
there is such ancient enmity between the old ones. And will thou then be so
wilful to love him whom thy father does loath, or so perverse as to place thy
self in that parentage, where there is such mortal hatred between the
Parents? Will thou so far forget the duty of a child, as more to respect
thy fatal enemy, than regard thy natural Father? But why vile wretch do I
thus fondly fable? though Clerophontes be my Fathers so, yet Gwydonius is my
faithful friend: though the one seek to procure my pain, the other seeks to
purchase my pleasure: though the old Sire strives to subvert my Fathers state,
yet the son never sought to be prejudicial to his person, although that
perjured Parasite Valericus has most unjustly accused him of treachery. Shall
I then hate him who has always honored me? Shall I work his woe that wishes
my weal? Shall I be his bane, who has bred my bliss? Shall I detest him
which serves me with most deep devotion? No, I here heartily power out most
pitiful playntes to the gods to preserve my Gwydonius from peril, and that
fortune may so favor him as he may pass out of Alexandria, without death or
danger. What though I here in prison pine in pain? What though I sink in
sorrow? What though I be distressed with grief and oppressed with misery? What
though I be crossed with care, and cumbered with calamity? Tush, let my father
fret and fume in his fury, let my brother rage and rail, let that traitor
Valericus triumph, and all the Country most bitterly curse me, yea, let them
martyr me most miserably, let them torment me most terribly, yet direful
death shall not fear me, as long as I know Gwydonius is deuoyde of danger.
For I hope though Fortune frown, though the destinies deny it, though the
fates forswear it, yea, though the gods themselves say no, yet in time we
shall have such happy success, as the loyalty of our love, and the
clearness of our conscience by the law of justice do deserve. And therefore
Gwydonius shall be the Planet whereby to direct my doings, he shall be the
star shall guide my compass, he shall be the haven to harbor in, and the
Saint at whose shrine I mean to offer my devotion.

Castania having thus discoursed with her self, she determined when the wars
were ended, if she could have no hope to enjoy the love of Gwydonius, to
confess her falts and to sue for mercy at the bar of her fathers courtesy:
not that she meant to live without Gwydonius, or to love or like any other, but
to prolong her days in dolor, that she might most rigorously revenge ye
villainy of Valericus, and by bathing in his blood she might both satisfy her
self, and signify to Gwydonius how entirely she loved and liked him. But
leaving her perplexed with these passions, again to Clerophontes.

Who frying still in his frantike fury, was not any whit persuaded to conclude
peace with Orlanio, but having mustered his men, as speedily as might be,
imbarkt them, and with a lucky gale arrived at the coast of Alexandria, where
the borderers not able to abide his forces, were constrained to save themselves
by flight. But he as a man having exiled from his heart both piety and pity,
bathed his hands in guiltless dloud, firing every fort, battering down every
bulwark, sacking each City, racing down the walls to ye ground, and
commanding his soldiers upon pain of most grievous punishment, not to have any
respect of persons, neither to regard the hoarie hairs of the aged Citizens,
nor the tender years of the sucking infants, but to imbrue their blades with
ye blood of all men, of what degree soever.

Orlanio hearing how Clerophontes had invaded his dominions, and with what
barbarous cruelty he had murdered his subjects, having also intellegence by
his scowts, that his army was passing huge, the better to resist the furious
force of his enemy, hired out of other Countries a great multitude of mercenary
Soldiers, so that he gathered a marvelous great host, wherein was an
infinite number endued with great skill and long experience.

Furnished thus sufficiently both with men and munition; like a wise and wary
Captain, seeing that he no way else might resist the puissant power of so
mighty a Prince, determined without further delay to meet him and give him
present battle, having marvelous affiance in the approved manhood and
virtue of his soldiers.

Clerophontes likewise being of such a valiant and invincible courage, as he
seemed from his infancy to be vowed to Mars and martial affairs, manfully
marched forward to meet with his enemies: which he performed so speedily, that
within few days, both the armies were within view: which Clerophontes seeing,
he began to encourage his soldiers on this sort.

ALthough most trusty Subjects (quoth he) I neither doubt of your prowess,
nor have cause to fear your manhood, as having mine army fraught with the most
courageous Captains, and bouldest bloods of Mitylene, yet I with you to
consider how desperately we have adventured upon the conquest of this Dukedom,
which if we atchieue, we shall not only gain perpetual fame and renown, but
reap such riches and treasure, as shall sufficiently counteruaile our travail.
But to obtain this victory we must behave our selves valiantly, neither
dreading any danger though never so desperate, nor doubting any peril though
never so fearful. Before our face we have our enemy, behind our backs the
surging seas; so that fight we must, but fly we cannot: in being courageous
we win the field and return conquerours: in proving cowards, we both lose
our lives and the conquest: if we foil our foes, we return with triumph: if
we faint and fly, we have no hope of safety, but death and desperation is
imminent. Be then hardy to hazard, and valiant to venture amidst the prease of
your enemies, that daunted with your valor, they may be forced to fly, and we
both triumph and enjoy the treasure.

CLerophontes having thus lovingly encouraged his soldiers, Orlanio on the
other side seeing his men began to fear the force of the enemy, and were
amazed with such a monstrous multitude, pricked them forward with this parle.

THat mighty Monarch Alexander ye great, who for his martial exploites was a
mirror to all his posterity, whose prowess was such, as he dau^ted Darius,
and by his invincible courage made a conquest of the whole world: hearing on a
time one of his Captains to demand what multitude was in their enemies camp,
answered, that it was not the point of a good soldier, to inquire how many the
enemies were, but where they were: meaning that to fear the multitude is
rather the sign of cowardice, than a token of courage. Which saying I wish you
carefully to consider; that ye huge army of Clerophontes neither amaze your
minds, nor abate your valor, since that the equity of our cause does more than
counteruaile his company. He inuadeth our realm without reason, and we
defend but our own right: he cruelly secketh to deprive us of freedom and we
lawfully do maintain our own liberty. He tyrannously strives to make us
bondslaues, and we fight to free our selves from captivity. If he prevail let
us look for no pity, but yt we shall be murdered without mercy, we shall see
before our face our wives ravished, our daughters defloured, our parents put to
death, our children slain, our goods spoiled, our City sacked, and our selves
brought to utter ruthe and ruin. Since then we are placed between two
extremities, either to possess our own with plenty, or to pass our lives in
penury: let us valiantly venture whatsoever we gain, let us fight without
fear: for better it is to die with honor, than to live with shame.

BY that time Orlanio had ended his Oration, the armies met in a plain, within
thirty leagues of Alexandria. Where both of them ordering (as became good
Captains) their people, there began in the break of the day the most cruel
and terrible battle that erst was heard of, considering the number on both
parts, their experience and policy, with the valiant prowess and courage of
the captains. Thus continued they in fight, even almost until Even, with
marvelous slaughter on both sides, the victory yet doubtful, till in the end
the Alexandrians began to faint and fly, more oppressed with the excess of
the multitude, than distressed for want of manhood: for there weretwo and
forty thousand slain, but not one taken prisoner, and of Clerophontes company
eight and twenty thousand flaine, and six hundred mortallis wounded. This
monstrous massacre, and fearful slaughter, so amazed the minds of these two
Captains, that for the better burying of ye dead, and healing of them which
were hurt, they concluded a truce between them for fifteen days, in which
time Orlanio sent Ambassadors to parle of peace with Clerophontes, but in
vain: for he was resolved either valiantly to die in the field with glory,
or to enjoy the Dukedom of Alexandria with renown. Yet as a worthy Prince
preferring the security of his soldiers before the safety of his own
person, he offered them the combat, which Orlanio to avoid the effusion of
blo^ud, most willingly accepted. Now it was agreed and concluded between them,
that two champions might be chosen, who by the dint of the sword should stint
the strife between these two armies. It he of Mitylene remained victor, then
Orlanio should not only pay his former tribute, but deliver up his Dukedom
into the hands of Clerophontes. But if the Alexandrian obtained the conquest,
the Duke of Mitylene should peaceably depart the Country, release the tribute,
and also resign his state, and become a subject to Orlanio. And for the better
keeping and confirming of these conditions, they presently dispatched
Embassaders to Fernandus ye king of Bohemia, to entreat his Majesty that he
would vouchsafe to become judge in the combat: who for that he wished well to
both these Dukes, granted to their requests, and with as much speedes might
be, came to Alexandria. But in the mean time there was some difference about
the champio^s: for Clerophontes said, that since in losing ye feld consisted the
loss of living, life, and liberty, and in getting the victory the gain of a
Dukedom, be would in proper person fight the combat, and try the chance of
Fortune, and therefore made a challenge to Orlanio. But her finding himself
fair unfit to resist his ^uri^us force, refused it. Yet premising, that none
unless he were descended of Nobility, should enter the l^sts, wherewith
Clerophontes was very well contented. Now while this truce continued, which was
prolonged for thirty days, it was lawful for them of Alexandria to come and
view the camp of Mitylene, and for the Mitylenes to go and see the City.
Whereupon, Clerophontes desirous to see Orlanio and his Court, went only
accompanied with his guard to Alexandria, where he was most royally
entertained, and sumptuously feasted by Orlanio, both of them remitting the
rigor of their malice, till it should be showed in ^ffect, by reason of their
manhood. But as soon as Thersandro and the other Lords saw Clerophontes,
that he was rather a monster than a man, having each limme so strongly c^^ched,
each part so proportioned, so huge of stature. and so fierce of countenance,
they were so daunted with the sight of his person, as they almost feared to
came in his presence, saying: that three of the boldest bloudes in Alexandria
were not able to abide the force of Clerophontes. Who now peaceably departing
to his host, left Orlanio as greatly perplexed for assembling his nobility
together, amongst whom he appointed the champion should be chosen. They not
only with one consent withstood his command, but began to murmr and mutine
against him, co^demning him of folly that he would so unadvisedly commit his
own state and their stay to the doubtful hazard of one man's hap. Orlanio
seeing that it was now no time to chastise this their presumption, unless he
meant to raise civil dissension in the city, which were the next way to
confirm the enemy, and breed his own confusion, he dissembled his choler,
and began to work a new way. For first he freed Castania out of prison, then
made general proclamation throughout his Dukedom, that what Lord so ever
within his land would try the combat with Clerophontes, if he remained victor
in the conquest, he would not only give him his daughter Castania to wife,
let him possess peaceably the Dukedom of Mitylene as her dowris, but be
content to acknowledge him as his liege, and pay him tribute, as he was wont to
Clerophontes.

While he lingered and listened how this proclamation would prevail, Castania
hearing this severe sentence, and doleful doom pronounced, seeing that she
should not only be forced to forsake Gwydonius, but be constrained to match in
marriage with one whom she should neither love nor like, burst forth into these
bitter complaints.

Alas (quoth she) how pinching a pain is it to be perplexed with diverse
passions, what a noisome care it is to be cumbred with sundry cogitations,
what a woe it is to hang between desire a^^ despair, and what a hell it is to
houer between fear and hope? For as to him which is assured to die, death is
no dolor, in that he perfectly knows there is no salve can cure his sorrow, so
to him which fears to die, and yet hopes to live, death were thrice more
welcome than to linger in such doubt. In which cursed case alas my care
consists: for as out of the river Cea in Sicilia but flesh most fearful
flames, and yet the stream is passing cold, neither is ye water able to
quench the fire, not the fire cause the water to be hot; so the heat of hope
flameth out of the chilling fountain of fear, and yet the force of the one is
not able to assuage the vehemence of the other, but still my heavy heart is
diversely assailed with them both.

If my father Orlanio win yt conquest, I doubt my desire shall reuer have happy
success: if Clerophontes triumph as victor, I greatly fear his cruelty is
such, as I shall not escape most hoplesse death. And yet again, I hope that
then my own Gwydonius will accept me for his, and with triumphant arms
embrace me. But alas, will Clerophontes suffer him to match with his mortal
foe, will he not rather prevent it by my peril? Yes no doubt: if he return
with triumph my father shall serve him as a subject, my brother shall become
his vassal, my friends shall be forelorne, my City sacked, and my native
Country brought to utter confusion. And shall I for the love of a Stranger
wish these strange Stratagems? Shall I to feed mine own fancy, and content
my lusting mind, wish my Fathers death, my Brothers bane, my Friends mishap,
my Countries confusion, and perhaps my own misery? For though Gwydonius
loved me when our Parents were friends, he will not now like me being foes:
but to revenge the injuries my Father offered him, will subtly seek to sack
mine honor and honesty, and so triumph of my shame and discredit. Had I not
better pray my Father may win the combat, and then shall I bathe in the
streams of bliss, and flow in the floods of felicity, then shall I dread no
danger, no fear, no perils: then shall I see my father, friends, and
Country, flourish in most happy prosperity: then shall I enjoy some iollie
Gentleman, who will love me being young; and cherish me being old, and
possess the Dakedome of Mitylene for my down. And can thou Castania be so
ungrateful, as to will his woe which wishes thy weal? to desire his
destruction which prays for thy prosperity? Can thou be so covetous as to
crave that for thy possession, which is thy Gwydonius patrimony? or so
suspicious, as to accuse him of treachery, which has bin but too trusty: to
count him a counterfaite, which has always been constant? No, come what come
will, let froward Fortune favor whom she please, so I may joy and safely
enjoy my only joy Gwydonius.

As Castania had thus ended her complainte, Gwydonius who all this while lurked
about the borders of Alexandria, heard what success Orlanio^ affairs had with
his Father Clerophontes, how vary fews or none at all durst try the combat
with him, that his love and Lady Castania was the prise that he should get
that gained the conquest. Which things considered, supposing that Castania had
cast him off, and that she played, Out of sight, out of mind, by a secret and
trusty messenger, he presented her with this Letter.

Gwydonius to Castania, health.
THe pure spice, Castania, the more it is pounded, the sweeter smell it yields:
the Camomill increases most being trodden on: the Palm tree the greater
weight it bears, the straighter it grows: the stone Terpistretes, the more
it is beaten, the harder it is, and loyal love is not weakened by the storms
of adversity, but rather far the more fortified by the froward state of
frowning Fortune: which Madame I speak by proof and experience: for since I
have supped off the sour dregs of sorrow, and been pestered with the bitten
pills of penary, sin or sinister fortune has crossed me to the mishaps, and
disaster fates have driven me down to misery, my fancy has so furiously
assaulted my mind, and affection has so incessantly battered the bulwark of
my breast, as the sparks of Jove which kindled in me in prosperity, are turned
to fierce and fiery flames by adnorsitie. So that Madam, your presence did not
before procure me such pleasure, as your absence does pain, neither was I so
drowned in delight, in frequenting your company, as I am drenched with
despite, by leading my life in sorrowful calamity. Alas Castania, what
unspeakable grief has tormented me? what direful dolor has distressed
me? what hellish horror has haunted me? yea, what we and wretchedness
has wracked my wits, since thou last been proclaimed a prey to him whosoever
wins the prise in the combat? How often have I wished that I might be the
Champion to make the challenge, that I might venture my life to purchase thy
liberty, that my death might redeem thee from danger?

But alas, I see to wish is in vain: to crave of ye geds, that thy father
should vaunt of ye victory, is but to wish that our love should have hapless
success: to pray that Clerophontes should return with conquest, thou will
deem I desire thy friends misfortune. Thus assailed with diverse doubts, I
drive off my days in dolor: hoping howsoever fortune frown, that the fates
will assign us a perfect calm of permanent felicity for this sturdie storm of
pinching misery.

Thine, ever exiled Gwydonius.


CAstania having received this Letter, seeing that no sinister chance of
fortune was able to change the fixed fancy of Gwydonius, conceived such
assured hope in his constancy, as now she thought his troth was filed with no
spot of treachery, that his faith was quite deuoide of flattery, and that
whatsoever chanced, she might safely repose her stay and state in his
loyalty. Insomuch that to drine out the evil opinion which she thought her
brother Thersandro had conceived of Gwydonius conspiracy, she secretly showed
him the Letter: which after he had read over, and carefully construed every
clause, he began both to detect and detest the villainy of Valericus, destring
his sister Castania that she would earnestly persuade Gwydonius in disguised
apparel speedily to repair to her ledging, promising with solemn vows and
sacred oaths, not to be prejudicial to his person: Castania affying greatly
in her brothers faith, and destrous to have a fight of her loving Gwydonius,
returned him these few lines.

Castania, to Gwydonius, prosperity.
Whoso tastes Gwydonius of the heard Mely Sophilos is never tormented with
the sting of aduersttie, and she that wears the stone Mephites about her,
never sorroweth at sinister fortune, who so fancieth without faining never
proves fickle, and she that loves loyally may well be crossed with calamity,
but never justly accused of inco^stancy. Account thy Castania good Gwydonius to
be in ye same predicament: for let disaster mishap drive me down to most deadly
misery, let the cruel fates compass me with cursed care, let fortune and the
destinies conclude my confusion, yet it shall not diminish my fancy, but
rather increase my affection. I will still in weal, in woe, in bale, in
bliss, in mirth and misery, say I love, and it is only Gvvidonius. For shall
our fancy be such as it shall be foiled with misfortune? no, but as Thetis
changing into many shapes, at last returned into her own form, so into what
mishap I be driven by misery, yet I will stand in mine old state in despite
of the fates and fortune. Come therefore Gwydonius to the Court in disguised
apparel, but without care: for thou shall find me so trusty, as my troth
shall be without spot, and thy health without hazard. Thus wishing thy courtesy
to conster well of my constancy, I bid thee farewell

Thine, or not her own, constant Castania.


GWydonius having carefully construed over the contents of this loving Letter,
although the rigor of Orlanio might have given him sufficient cause of
suspicion, yet the cleerenesse of his own conscience, and the love he bare to
Castania, would not suffer him either to suspect any treason, or to doubt of
any deceit, but determined without any delay to put the safety of his person
and the safeguard of his life into her hands. But leaving him to bring his
purpose luckily to pass, again to Orlanio.

Who seeing that his proclamation could not prevail, and that his Nobles
preferred their own safety before his security, was perplexed with such
hellish passions, and griped with such pinching grief, as the Ghostes
tormented with grisly fiends, felt no such hapless fury. To fight with
Cleropho^tes, he felt his strength far unfit to resist his force: to deny
the combat, he neither could nor would, although he brought himself to
confusion, and his children to captituitie: so yt howsoever he turned himself,
he saw before his face death and despair, woe and wretchedness, mishap and
misery. Combred thus with this curelesse care, and sitting solitarily in
sorrow, seeing the dismal day drew on, and hearing that Fernandus ye king of
Bohemia was lately landed, he fell into more furious passions, until he was
driven out of his dumpes by his son Thersandro: who perceiving his father
thus dolefully daunted, he began most lovingly to comfort him, promising that
since none durst venture to deal with Clerophontes, he himself would fight
the combat, and either worthlly win the conquest with renown, or manfully die
in the field with honor.

Orlanio hearing the bold courage of this new champion, felt his sorrow
somewhat salued by this profer, persuading himself that his son was better
able to abide the brunt than he, and hoping that the Gods would favor the
equity of the cause, and assuredly by justice grant him the victory. Resting
I say, upon this hope, and thanking Thersandro for his natural affection, and
praising him for his noble courage, he presently went to meet Fernandus, whom
he most princely entertained, conducting him very royally into Alexandria,
where he most sumptuously sealled him and all his train. But as they passed
away the time in pastime and pleasure, so poor Thersandro spent the day in
dolor, and the night in sorrow. For although to comfort his father he made
light of the combat, and valiantly offered himself to try the chance of
fortune, yet seeing his enemies force far to exceed his feeble strength, he
began to faint, although like a worthy Gentleman he covered his dreadful
courage with a desperate countenance, raunging up and down the fields to drive
away his melancholy: where by chance in disguised apparel he met Gvvidonius,
to whom after some parle past between them, he bewrated the whole state of the
matter, how he was to enter combat with Clerophontes, and that he doubted
greatly of the event of the victory, fearing the force of his Father, and
fainting at his own unbecillitie. Which Gwydonius hearing, he made this short
answer.

THersandro (quoth he) it is vain with long talk to pass away the time when
delay breeds danger, and folly to hope for fair weather when the Air is
ouercast with clouds: leaving off therofore all oaths to confirm my faith,
thus much to the purpose. If it please thee to trust me without trial, and to
give any confidence to my words, I here promise both to make manifest my
loyal love to Castania, and to repaie thy courtesy; that I will, resembling
thy person, and disguised in thy armor, enter combat with my father
Clerophontes, either intending by winning the victory to obtain my will, or
by losing the conquest to want my wish: if this my profer please thee, I will
pass privily to the Court: if not, good Thersandro, let me go as I came.

Thersandro, commending the subtle devise of Gwydonius, carried him as
covertly as could be to Castania, to whom he was far more welcome, than
soon come, remaining closely in her closet til the next morning. Castania
notwithstanding knowing nothing of their pretense, Fernandus king of Bohemia,
the next day being gone with all his Nobility to the place appointed for the
combat; Orlanio, Castania, and all the Lords of Alexandria, clad in mourning
attire followed him, thinking this dismal day should be the date of their
destruction. And Clerophontes as a balefull wretch thirsting after blood, and
glorying in the hope of his supposed conquest, stood in the listes, expecting
his fatal foe. To whom Gwydonius his sonns furnished with the armor of
Thersandro, presented himself. Who seeing, that forced by the fond allurements
of Love, he was to fight, not with his mortal foe, but with his natural
father, he fell into these doubtful dumps:

Alas poor Gwydonius (quoth he) how art thou combred with diverse cogitations?
what a cruel conflict do thou find in thy mind between love and
loyalty, nature and necessity? who ever was so wilful, as willingly to wage
battle against his own father? who so cruel as to enter combat with his
own sire? Alas, duty persuades me not to practice so monstrons a mischief:
but the devotion I owe Castania, drines me to perform the deed, were it
thrice more dangerous or desperate. The honor I owe to my father, makes me
faint for fear, but once to imagine so brutish a fact: the love I owe to
Castania, constrayneth me to defend the combat, if Jupiter himself made the
challenge. And is not (fond fool) necessity above nature? is not the law of
love above King or Keyzar, Father or Friends, God or the devil? Yes. And so I
mean to take it: for either I will valiantly win the conquest and my
Castania, or lose the victory, and so by death end my miseries.

With that the Trumpets sound, and Gwydoniu; lustily leaping into the lists,
fell presently into furious fight with his Father, driving not only Fernandus
and Orlanio but also both the armies into a great doubt. For although
Clerophontes most cruelly prosecuted him, yet he always received the strokes,
but never so much as once returned one blow: til at last looking aloft, and
spying Castania, his courage increased, that all fear set aside, he carelessly
slang away his sword and shield, and ran upon his Father, not only tearing from
him his Target; but, violently casting him upon the ground and speedily
unlacing his helmet, offered to cut off his head with his own sword: but
Clerophontes crying out confessed himself captive, and granted his enemy the
conquest. Whereupon they of Alexandria, gave a mighty showt, and Fernandus and
Orlanio came down ready to carry Clerophontes captive to the City. But
Gwydonius first demanded of Orlanio if he was content to perform that which he
promised by proclamation: to who^ Fernandus answered, that both he would and
should; or else as he was his friend, so he would be his fo. Gwydonius hearing
this faithful assertion of the King, pulling down his heauer began to speak
in this manner.

I Let thee Orlanio (quoth he) and the worthy king of Bohemia to know, that I
am Gwydonius, son and heir to this conquered Clerophontes, who for the love
of thy Daughter Castania, have not spared contrary to the law of nature to
fight with mine own Father; hoping the destinies by my means have decreed not
only of fatal foes to make you faithful friends, but to finish up your love,
which otherwise could not have been performed.

I have won Orlanio my Fathers Dukedom by victory, and thy daughter by
conquest: the one I had before by inheritance, and the other by love, yet I
would willingly have thy good will, which if thou grant, I hope my father will
both pardon my offense, and think well of my proffer.

Clerophontes kissing and embracing Gwydonius, told him his care whas half
cured, in that such a good captain had won the conquest. Fernandus and
Orlanio stood astonished at this strange Tragedy, doubting whether they dreamt
of such a rare devise, or saw it in effect. At last Orlanio, as one wakened out
of a trance, with trickling tears embraced Clerophontes, honoring him as his
sovereign, and promising not only to give Castania to Gwydonius, bus also
half his Dukedom in dowry. Clerophontes thanking him for his courtesy,
consented most willingly to this motion: so that before Fernandus departed, the
marriage between Gwydonius and Castania, Thersandro and Lewcippa was most
sumptuously solemnlzed.

FINIS.
The Debate between Folly and Love, translated out of French by ROBERT GREEN,
Master of Arts.
The ARGUMENT.
IVpiter made a great Feast, at the which all the gods were commanded to be
present. Love and Folly arrive at one instant at the gate of the palace, which
was shut having nothing open but the wicket. Folly seeing Love ready to enter
in, passes before: which repulse drives Love into choler. Folly avouches
that of right she ought to be the foremost. Whereupon they enter into
disputation of their power, dignity and superiority. But Love not able to get
the conquest by words, takes his bow in hand and shoots at her; but in
vain: for Folly became invisible, and in despite pulls out Cupids eyes. And
for to cover this deformity, shadoweth his face with a veil, so framed by the
Destinies, that is was not possible to take it away. Venus complayneth of Folly
unto Jupiter, who appoints Apollo and Mercury to plead the case of these two
Clients: whose discourse being heard, he pronounces his sentence.

FOLLY. I Fear greatly that I shall be the last at yt feast of Jupiter, where
all the gods (no doubt) do attend me. And yet me think I see the son of Venus
which is as late as I. I will pass before him, least they call me sluggish and
slothful.


Love. What soole, is this that repulseth me so rudely? Take heed least
haste make waste, and that thy rashness cause thee not to cry Peccaui.


Folly. Oh sir, blame me not though I make haste: for I go before, to tell the
gods that you come at leisure.


Love. Nay, that which is easily begun, is not always lightly ended: for
before you escape me, I will revenge this thy injurious jesting.


Folly. Let me go fond Love, and state me not: for as it is a shame to
quarrel with a woman, so it is more discredit to take the foil.


Love. The foil? What boasting brags be these? Who has ever adventured to
despise me, much less to defy me? But do thou know what I am?


Folly. Thou art Cupid, the Son of Venus.


Love. How dare thou then vaunt thy self against me? which how little so
ever I be, am the most redoubted of all the gods.


Folly. Thy words are great whatsoever thy works be: but tell me, what or
wherein lies this thy great power?


Love. The heavens and the earth (fond fool) are witnesses of my words, there
is no place where I have not left Trophies in sign of triumph. Look into
heaven, and demand if any of the gods have escaped my hands. Begin with old
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Apollo, and end with the demi gods, Satyrs, Fawnes,
and Syluans: Nay, the goddesses themselves will not shame to confess somewhat.
Look upon the earth, and see if thou can find one which has not been
foiled by my means. Behold in the furious Seas, how Neptune and his Tritons
do pield me obeisance. Yea, and lastly look into Hell it self, if I have not
forced Pluto that infernal Prince, to steal away Proserpina the daughter of
Ceres. And to yt end thou doubt not with what engines I have achieved these
victories, behold this bow and these arrows only, which have won me these
worthy conquests. I have no need that Vulcan do temper my tools. I am not
accompanied with the Furies and Harpies, to cause me to be feared before the
combat. I have not to do with Chariots, Soldiers, Captains, men of arms,
nor great troops of Horsemen, without the which mortal men cannot triumph. No,
I have no other counsel, munition, nor aid, but my self. When I see mine
enemies in the field, I present my self with my bow, and let fly my boltes,
and the victory is always gotten at the first stroke.


Folly. I excuse thy youthful years poor Cupide, or else I would blaze thee
for the most presumptuous patch in the world. It seems by thy vain vaunting,
that every one holds his life of thy mercy, and that thou art the only Lord
and Soueraign both in Heaven, Earth, the Sea, and Hell. But many things are
spoken which are never believed.


Love. And art thou so hard of belief, to deny that which every one confesses?


Folly. I have not to do with other men's opinions: but this I am sure: that it
is not by thy force and prowess, that so many miracles are wrought in the
world, but by my industry, by my means, and by my diligence, although thou
know me not. But if thou do continue long in this thy choler, I will let
thee vnderst^nd, that thy bow and thy arrows whereof thou vauntest so much,
are more weak than wax, if I bend not the one and temper the other.


Love. Do thou think by this skoffing to pacify mine anger, or by
contemptuous threatening to qualify my choler? Have thou ever (fond fool)
handled my bow, or directed my bolts? Is it thy prowess and not my force
which performs such valiant conquests? But since thou regardest me, and
respectest my force so little, thou shall presently feel the proof thereof.


Folly makes her self invisible, so that Love cannot hit her. Love. But where
art thou become? How have thou escaped me? This only is the strangest case
that ever chanced unto me. I had thought that amongst all the gods I only
could have made my self invisible. But now I see I am deceived.


Folly. Did not I tell thee before, that thy bow and thy arrows are of no
force, but when it pleases me, and that by my means thou always obtainest the
conquest? Marvel not if I be invisible: for if I lift the eyes of the Eagle
or of the Serpent Epidaurus, cannot epsy me; for Chameleon like, take the
shape of them which whom I do remain.


Love. Truly as I conjecture, thou art some Sorceresse, or some Enchauntresse,
some Circe, some Medea, or some Fairie.


Folly. Well, since, thou do thus reclesly rail upon me, know that I am a
godesse as thou art a god: my name is Folly* I am she which raises thee up,
and casts thee down at my pleasure. Thou vnloosest thy bow, and leftest
fly thine arrows in the air: but I place them where it pleases me. Thou
do address thy self against Jupiter: but he is of such puissance, that if
I both guided not thy hand, and tempered thy arrow, thy feeble force could
little preuail against his prowess. Indeed thou did force Jupiter to love,
but I caused him to change himself into a Swan, into a Bull, into Gold, into an
Eagle. Who caused Mars and thy mother Venus to be taken in bed together by the
limping cuckold Vulcan, but I? If Paris had done no other thing but loved
Helena, Sparta had never rejoiced, nor Troy been brought to ruin. But did not
I cause him to go to Menelaus, under color of Embassage, to Court unto his
wife, to lead her away by force, and after to defend his unjust quarrel
against all Greece? Who had spoken of the love of Dido, if he had not devised
to go a hunting, that she might have the better opportunity to communicate
with Aeneas, that by such private familiarity he might not be ashamed to take
from her that which long before most willingly she would have given him. I
believe no mention had been made of Artemisia, if I had not caused her drink
the cynders of her husbands dead carcass: for else who had known whether she
had loved her husband more than other women? The effect and issues of things
always makes them to be praised or dispraised. If thou make men to love, yet
I am often times the chiefest cause. But if any strange adventure or great
effect chances, in that thou have no part, but the only honor belongs unto
me. Thou rulest nothing but the heart, the rest I govern: yea, I lead thee, I
conduct thee, and thine eyes serve thee to no more use than the beams of the
Sun to a blind man. But to the end thou know me from henceforth and that
thou may give me thanks for conducting thee carefully, behold now how
greatly thine eyes do profit thee.


Folly puts out Cupids eyes. Love. Alas Jupiter, O my mother Venus, what
avails it to be thy son so feared, so redoubted, both in heaven and in
earth, if I be subject to be injured as the most vile slave in the world?
Alas, have I thus lost mine eyes by an unknown woman?


Folly. Take heed fond fool another time to rail upon those, who perhaps
are of more force and puissaunce than thou. Thou have offended the Queen of
men, thou have outraged her, who governs the heart, the brain, and the
mind; under whose shadow every one once in his life shrowdeth himself, and
there remains either long or short time according to his merit: thou have
displeased her who procures thy renown, thou have contemned her who has
advanced thee, and therefore has this misfortune fallen upon thy head.


Love. Alas! how is it possible for me to honor her whom I never knew, or to
reverence that person whom before I never saw: but if thou have borne me
such great good will as then say, pardon this my offense, and restore me my
sight.


Folly. To restore thee thine eyes is not in my power: but I will cover the
place, to hide the deformity.


Folly covers Cupids face with a Scarf, and gives him wings. And in lieu
of this hapless luck, thou shall have these wings which shall carry thee
whither thou will wish.

Love. But where had thou this veil so ready to cover my deformity?


Folly. It was given me as I came hither by one of the Destinies: who told me
it was of that nature, that if it were once fastened, it could never be unloosed.


Love. How unloosed? Am I then blind for ever? O vile and traitorous wretch,
could it not suffice to put out mine eyes, but to take away the means that the
gods cannot restore them? Now I see the sentence verified on my self, that it
is not good to take a present at the hand of anenemy. O cruel destinies, O
cursed day! shall not the heavens, ye earth, and the seas have cause to wail,
since Love is blind? But why do I complain here in vain? it is better for me
to sue to the Gods for reuengement.


The second Discourse.
Love goes from the palace of Jupiter, lamenting to himself his mischief.
Love. Alas in what miserable case am I? what can either my bow or mine arrows
avail me? now can I not cause who^ I list to love, but without respect of
persons, every one is in danger of my darts. Hitherto I have only caused
dainty damsels, and young youths to love, I did choose out the brauest bloods,
and the fairest and most well featured men: I did pardon vile and base persons,
I excused the deformed creatures, and let old age remain in peace. But now,
thinking to hit a young gallant, I light upon some old doting lecher: in
stead of some brave Gentleman, I strike some filthy lurden. And it shall
happen (I doubt) that they shall be most fortunate in their love; so yt by
patrimony, presence, or wealth, they shall soonest win the favor of women,
and by this means my kingdom shall come to ruin, when men see in it such
disorder and cuill government.


Venus having long sought Cupid, now meets him. I Have carefully long sought
thee my dear son, maruelling what the cause should be that thou have not
been present at the banquet of Jupiter: Who is greatly incensed against thee,
not only for thy absence, but for the complaints which are powered out against
thee by sundry poor artificers, laboring men, peasants, slaves, handmaids,
old men, and toothlesse aged women, crying all unto Jupiter, that they love;
thinking themselves greatly injured in this respect, that the passion which is
proper to worthy and Noble men, should be inflicted upon them which are of the
base and vilest sort.


Love. Had not the great misfortune which is chanced unto me happened, I had
neither been absent from the banquet, nor their grievous complaints had not
been inserred against me.


Venus. Why? And art thou hurt? Who has thus veiled thine eyes?


Love. Folly has not only pulled them out, but also has put this band before
mine eyes, which can never be taken away.


Venus. O cursed enemy of all wisdom, O hapless wretch, unjustly called a
goddess, and more unrightly termed immortal, have thou deprived me of my
chiefest delight and felicity? O disaster love, O dissolute mother, O woeful
Venus, who see thy son, thy joy, and only care, thus cruelly deprived of
his sight. Well, since thy mishappe is so great, I vow that every one that
shall love (what favor or happy success soever he shall have) shall not be
without some care, trouble, or calamity, that he vaunt not himself to be more
happy than the son of Venus.


Love. Cease off good mother from these sorrowful complaints, and redouble not
my grief by these dolorous discourses, suffer me to bear mine own
misfortune, and wish not evil unto them which shall be my subjects.


Venus. Well, let us then go to Jupiter, and complain of this cursed
inchantresse.


The third Discourse.
Venus. It ever thou had pity of my plaintes, most just Jupiter, when
thou saw me labor to save my son Aeneas from the fury of the raging
seas, and to defend him from other dangers, in the which he was present at the
siege of Troy: If my tears for the death of my dear Adonis moved thee to
compassion: The surpassing sorrow that I do conceive for the great injury
offered to Cupid, I hope shall move thee to pity. If tears would suffer me,
I would bewray the cause of my sorrow: but behold my son in what plight he is,
and thou shall easily perceive the cause of my complaint.


Jupiter. Alas my beer daughter, what do these tears prevail? know
thou not what fatherly affection I have always borne thee? what do thou
distrust that I will not succor thee, or that I cannot?


Venus. No, I neither doubt the one, nor distrust the other, only demand
justice against Folly, the most outrageous Fury in the world, which has
thus grievously abuted Cupid.


Folly. Most mighty and sovereign Jupiter, behold I am here ready to answer
to Venus complaints, and to debate my right against Cupid.


Jupiter. Folly, I will neither accuse nor excuse thee, until I have heard the
defense of the one, as well as the plaint of the other, least I should be
thought partial: neither, for the more avoiding of injustice in the matter,
will I suffer you to plead your own causes, but Venus choose you one of the
Gods, and Folly take you another.


Venus. I choose Apollo to defend my cause.


Folly. And I Mercury, to maintain my right.


Jupiter. Then Apollo and Mercury prepare your selves to plead well in your
clientes cases: and Apollo since you take the plaintifes part, let us hear
what you can say.


Apollo. THe common people, right soueraign Jupiter, although their minds be
sotted, and almost senseless, yet they have always had love in such sacred
estimation, that they have carefully rewarded them with the titles of honor and
dignity, which have excelled in that holy affection, esteeming this only
virtue (if so rightly it may be termed) sufficient, of a man to make one a
God. The Scythians for this cause canonized Pilades and Orestes, erecting
temples unto them, and calling them the Gods of amity. Castor and Pollux were
made immortal by this means, not in that they were brothers, but in that
(which is rare) their love was inviolable. How has same blazed abroad ye love
of David and Jonathan, the amity of Pythias and Damon, and of Titus and
Gisippus? But the better to make manifest the force of love and amity, I will
allege the saying of Darius, who opening a Pomgranate, being demanded whereof
he would have as many as there were grains wtin, answered, of Zopyres: this
Zopyrus was his faithful friend, by the means of whom he conquered Babylon. I
remember also a certain Syrian demanding a maid in marriage and being willed
to show of what wealth he was, said that he had no other riches, but two
friends; esteeming himself rich enough with such possessions to crave the
daughter of a great Lord in marriage. Did not love cause Ariadne save Theseus
life, Hyperminestra redeem Linceus from danger, and Medea free Jason from
peril? Have not many poor soldiers been advanced to high dignities by the
means of love? Yea, does not all pleasure and profit proceed to man by love,
causing him to look with an amiable countenance, to speak pleasantly, and to
be curious in his gestures, although by nature he be dull, sottish, and of a
fierce look? What causes a man to go brave and fine in his apparel, seeking
every day new fashions, but love? What procures Gentlewomen to have their
hair frizled, crisped, and embrodered with gold, to be dressed after the
Spanish, French, or Italian fashion, but Love? Painting their faces, if they be
foul, with lively colors. But if they be fair, they so carefully keep their
beauty from the parching heat of summer, from the chilling cold of Win^ter,
from the wind, rain, and air, as they remain almost ever young, not so much
as forgetting to have theirshooes made fine and neat (because the curiousness
of men is such, as they leave not to look from the crown of the head to the
sole of the foot) to have their gemmes, jewels, ouches, rings, perfumed
gloves, and what not? In fine, what beauty or bravery is in the apparel,
either of man or woman, all proceeds of Love. Shall I say that Music was
only invented by love, yea truly: for either it mitigateth the passions
wherewith men are perplexed, or else augmenteth their pleasure, so that daily
they invent diverse kinds of instruments, as Lutes Citrons, Violls, Flutes,
Cornets, Banderas, whereon they play Madrigalls, Sonnetts, Pauins, Measures,
Galliardes, and all these in remembrance of Love, as he for whom men do more
than for any other. What causes men to just, tourney, run at tilt, and
combat, but Love? Who caused Comedies, shows Tragedies and Maskes to be
invented, but Love? Whereof comes it that men delight to rehearse their
amorous chances and strange passions, and to relate them to their companions?
some praising the courtesy of his Lady, another condemning his mistress
cruelty: yea, recounting a thousand mishappes which happen in their Loves: as
Letters disclosed, evil reports, suspicious jealousy, sometimes the husband
coming home sooner than either the lover would, or the wife does wish:
sometimes coniecturing without cause, and otherwhiles believing nothing, but
trusting upon his wines honesty. To be short, the greatest pleasure after Love,
is to tell what perilous dangers are passed. But what makes so many Poets in
the world, is it not Love? The which seems to be the plain song whereon all
Poets do descant: yea, there are few which write upon any serious matter,
but they close up their work with some amorous clause, or else they are the
worse accepted. Ovid has celebrated ye fame of Cupid, Petrarke and Virgill,
Homer and Liuius, Sappho, yea, and that severe Socrates wrote somewhat of his
love Aspasia. Tush, who rightly can deny, that Love is not the cause of all
the glory, honor, profit, and pleasure which happens to man, and that without
it he cannot conveniently live, but shall run into a thousand enormities?

All this happy success came by Love, aslong as he had his eyes: but now
being deprived of his sight, and accompanied with Folly, it is to be feared,
nay certainly to be believed, that he shall be the cause of as many
discommodities, mischiefs and mishaps, as hitherto he has been of honor,
profit, and pleasure. The noblemen which loved their inferiors, and the
subjects which dutifully served their Lords, shall be marueilously changed by
the means of Folly: for the master shall love his servant only for his
service, and the servant his master only for commodity. Yea, there is none
so addicted unto virtue, but if once he love, he shall presently commit some
foolish touch: and the more straight and firm Love is, the greater disorder
there shall be by the means of Folly. There will return into the world more
than one Biblis, more than one Semyramis, than one Myrrha, than one Canace,
than one Phaedra. There shall be no place in the world unspotted. The high
walls and trellissed windows shall not keep the Nuns and Vestall Virgins
in safeguard. Old age shall turn her aged affections into fond fancies and
wanton desires. Shame shall live as an exile. There shall be no difference
between the noble and peasant, between the Infidel and the Moore, the Turk
and the Jew: the Lady, the Mistress, and the handmayd. But there shall ensue
such a confused inequality, that the fair shall not be matched with the well
featured, but shall be often times joined with foul and deformed persons. Great
Ladies and noble Dames shall fall in love with them whom before they would
disdain to accept as their servants. And when the loiall and faithful lovers
have long languished in the love of some beautiful Dame, whose mutual good
will they have gained by desert; then Folly will cause some fickle and false
flatterer to enjoy that in one hour, which in all their life they could not
attain. I pass over the continual debates and quarrels that shall ensue by
Folly, whereof shall spring wounds, massacres, and most fearful murders.
And I greatly fear that whereas Love has invented so many laudable sciences,
and brought forth so many commodities, that now he will bring great idleness,
accompanied with ignorance, that he will cause young Gentlemen to leave feats
of arms, to forsake the service of their Prince, to reject honorable studies,
and to apply themselves to vain songs and sonnets, to chambering and
wantonness, to banqueting and gluttony, bringing infinite diseases to their
bodies, and sundry dangers and perils to their persons: for there is no more
dangerous company than of Folly.

Behold O sovereign Jupiter, the mischiefs and miseries that are like to
iusue, if Folly be appointed companion to Love. Wherefore I, in the person of
all the gods, beseech your Majesty to grant that Love may not be joined with
her, and that Folly may grievously be punished for the outrage she has done to
Cupid.


As soon as Apollo had ended his Oration, Mercury in the defense of Folly
began to speak in this wise. Mercury. VVHeras (right worthy Jupiter) Apollo
has with his painted eloquence set out the praises of love. and has sought
with his filed phrases to discredit Folly, I hope when your Majesty shall
thoroughly hear the cause decided, you will commend his eloquence more than his
reasons. For it is not unknown unto you and all the gods, that Folly is no
whit inferior unto Love, and that love should be of no force without her,
neither could his Kingdom endure without her help, aid, and counsel. I
pray you call to remembrance how Folly inco^tinently after man was placed in
Paradise, began most imperiously to rule, and has ever since continued in such
credit, as never any goddess had the like; reigning and ruling amongst men,
from time to time, from age to age, as the only princess of the world:
Insomuch that who have been more honored than fools? Who was more subject
unto folly than Alexander the great: which feeling himself to suffer hunger
and thi^st, to be subject to sorrow and sickness, not able to keep himself
from drunkenness, yet would be honored for a God.

What kind of people has been in greater credit than Philosophers, and who
more fools? Did not Aristotle most foolishly did for sorrow, because he know
not the ebbing and flowing of the sea? Did not Crates in casting his treasure
into the Sea, commit a wise deed? What folly showed Emped^cles, by his
strange conjectures? What say you to Diogenes tun, and to Aristippus
flattery? Whosoever thoroughly considers their opinions, shall find them subject
to the state of folly. How many other sciences are there in the world, which
are altogether foolish? and yet the professors of them had in high reputation
amongst men. They which are Calculators of Natiuities, makers of Characters,
casters of figures, are they not friars of this fraternity. Is it not folly
to be so curious, as to measure the heaven, the height of the stars, the
breadth of the earth, and the depth of the sea? and yet yt professors hereof
are highly esteemed, and only by the means of folly. Nay, how could the world
continue, if the dangers, troubles, calamities, and discommodities of marriage
were not covered by folly? Who would have coasted the seas if folly had not
been his guide? To commit himself to the mercy of the wind and the waves, to
live in danger of fearful surges, and perilous rocks, to traffic with
savage and barbarous people, only incensed by the means of Folly. And yet
notwithstanding, by this means the Commonwealth is maintained, knowledge and
learning augmented, the properties of herbs, stones, Birds, and beasts,
perfectly searched out. What folly is it most daungerously to pass into the
howels of the earth to dig for iron, and seek for gold? How many arts and
occupations should be driven out of the world if Folly were banished? Truly
the most part of men should either beg for want, or die for hunger? How should
so many Advocates, Procurators, Sergeants, Atturneis, Scriueners, Imbroderers,
Painters, and Perfumers live, if Lady Folly were utterly exiled? Has not
folly invented a thousand devices to draw a man from idleness, as Tragedies,
Comedies Dancing schools, fencing houses, wrestling places, and a thousand
other foolish sports?

Has she not made men hardy and venturous to fight with Lions, Bores, and
Bulls, only to gain honor and to pass other in folly? What did Antonie and
Cleopatra when they straue who should spend most in beastly banqueting? What
caused Caesar lament that he had not begun to trouble the world in that age,
wherein Alexander had conquered the greatest part? Why did diverse seek to
fill up the valleys, to make plain the mountains, to dry up Rivers, to make
Bridges over the Sea, as Claudius the Emperor did? What made Rodope build the
Pyramides, and Artemisia frame the sumptuous sepulcher, but Folly. In fine,
without this Goddess, man should be careful, heavy, and wholly drowned in
sorrow: whereas Folly quickens his spirits, makes him sing, dance, leap,
and frame himself altogether to pleasure. It is not possible that love should
be without the daughter of youth, which is Folly. For Love springs of
sedaine and sundry causes, by receiving an apple, as Cidippe: by looking out
at a window, as Scilla: by reading in a Book, as the Lady Francis Rimhi:
some fall in love by sight, some by hearing, but all living in hope to obtain
their desires. And yet some have loved without any natural cause, as
Pigmalion, who fell in love with his Marble picture: and I pray you what
Sympathy could there be between a lively youth and a dead stone? what was it
then but folly that kindled this flame? What forced Narcissus to fall in love
with his own shaddowe, but Folly? Yea, what adventure is passed in love
without Folly? For the Philosophers define Folly to be a deprivation of
wisdom, and wisdom is altogether without passions: of the which when love
shall be void, then no doubt, the Sea shall be without waves, and the fire
without heats.

Consider but a young man which only places his delight in amorous conceits,
decking, dressing, and perfuming himself most delicately, who passes out of
his lodging fraught with a thousand sundry fancies, accompanied with men and
Pages, passing to the place where he may have a sight of his Mistress,
obtaining for his travel no gain but perhaps some amorous glance, making long
suits, spending his time and his treasure, consuming his wit, and wasting his
wealth, and yet reaping nothing but disdain and discredit. But if it chance
that his Mistress condescend unto his requests, she appoints him to come at
some suspicious hour, which he cannot perform without great peril. To come
with company, were to bewraie his secrets: to go alone, most dangerous: to go
openly, too manifest: so that he must pass disguised, sometime like a woman,
other times like a peasant or some vile person, scaling the walls with
ladders, climbing up to the windows by cords: yea, continually in danger of
death, if Folly did not hold him up by the hand. It is not also unknown unto
you how many sundry passions do perplexe the poor passionate Lovers, all
which proceed of Folly: as to have ones heart separated from himself, to be
now in peace and then in war, now covering his dolor, blushing one while,
and looking pale another, fraught wholly with fear, hope, and shame, seeking
that carefully which he seems to fly, and yet doubtfully dreading not to
find it, to laugh sildome, to sigh often, to burn in cold, and freeze in
heat, to be crossed altogether with contraries, which be signs not only of
folly, but of frenzy. Who shall excuse Hercules, handling so carefully the
distaste of Omphale, or Solomon for combring himself with so many Concubines,
Anniball in submitting himself to his Love, Aristotle in obeying Hermia, and
Socrates in yielding to Aspasia, and many other which we see daily to be so
blinded, as they know not themselves: and what is the cause hereof, but folly?
so that we see that it is she which makes Love to be so feared and redoubted,
it is she that honors him, exalts his name, and causes him to be counted
as a God. Further, whosoever loves, must apply himself to the affection of
his mistress, although it be contrary to his natural constitution: if he be
quiet, wise, and discreet, yet if his lover please to have him change his
state, he must turn his stearne, and hoise his sail, to go with another
wind. Zethius and Amphion could not agree, for because the delight of the one
was a despite to the other, until Amphion left his Music. If the Lady whom
thou love be covetous, thou must change thy self into gold, and so fall
into her bosom: if she be merry, thou must be pleasant: if sullen, thou must
be sad. All the servants and suitors to Atlanta were hunters, because she
delighted in that sport. Many Gentlewomen to please their lovers which were
Poets, left the rock and the needle, and took in hand pens and books: now
tell me if these strange Metamorphoses be not mere points of folly? Do you
think that a Soldier which goes to the assault, marketh the trenches,
thinks of his enemies, or of a thousand harguebushes, whereof every one is
sufficient to destroy him? No, he only hops to win the conquest, and does
not so much as once imagine the rest. He which first invented sailing, doubted
not of the perilous dangers: and he that plays, never thinks to become a
looser, yet are they all three in danger to be slain, drowned, and undone.
But what then? they neither do see, nor will see what is hurtful unto them. So
we must conjecture the like of lovers: for if they did see the dreadful
dangers, and the fearful perits wherein they are, how they be deceived and
beguiled, they would never honor love as God, but detest him as a Devil, and
so should the kingdom of love be destroyed, which now is governed by ignorance,
carelessness, hope and blindness, which are all the handmaids of Folly.
Remain in peace then fond Love, and seek not to break the ancient league
which is between thee and Folly. For if then do, thy bow shall be broken,
thy darts shall be of no force, Contemptque iacent and sine luce faces.


When Mercury had finished the defense of Folly, Jupiter seeing the gods to be
diversely affected, that some held with Cupid, and some with Folly, to decide
the doubt he pronounced this sentence: FOr the difficulty and importance of
this difference and diversity of opinions, we have remitted the deciding of it
until three times seven times and nine ages be past: in the mean while we
straightly command you to live friendly together, without offering injury one
unto another. And Folly shall guide and conduct blind Love whither she
seems best: and for the restoring of his eyes, after we have spoken with the
Destinies, it shall be decreede.


FINIS.
AT LONDON, Printed for Matthew Lownes. 1608


