A Notable Discovery of Coosenage. Now daily practiced by sundry lewd persons,
called Connie-catchers, and Crosse-byters. Plainly laying open those
pernicious sleights that has brought many ignorant men to confusion. Written
for the general benefit of all Gentlemen, Citizens, Aprentises, Country
Farmers and yeomen, that may hap to fall into the company of such coosening
companions. With a delightful discourse of the coosnage of Colliers.

Nascimur pro patria. By R. Green, Master of Art^^



LONDON Printed by Thomas Scarlet for Thomas Nelson. 1592.

To all my good friends he^lth.
AS Plato (my good friends) traveled from Athens to Egypt, and from thence
through sundry clymes to increase his knowledge: so I as desirous as ^ee to
search the deapth of those liberal Arts w^erein I was a profess^ur, left my
study in Wh^ttington College, and traced the country to grow famous in my
faculti^, so that I was so expert in the Art of Cony-catching by my continual
practice, Newgate builded by one Wittington
that that learned Philosopher Jack Cuttes, whose deep insight into this
science had drawn him thrice through every jail in England, meeting of me at
Maidstone^ gave me the bucklers, as the subtlelest that ever he saw in that
quaint and mystical form of Foolo^ophie: for if ever I brought my Conny but
to crush a pot of ale with me, I was as sure of all the crowns in his
purse, as if he had conveyed them into my proper possession by a deed of
gift with his own h^nde.

At Dequoy, The names o^ su^he gam^s as Con^i^^tchers use.
Mumcha^nce Catch-dolt, Our le bo^rse, Non est pos^ible, Du^ch Noddie, or
Irish one and thirtie^ none durst ever make compare with me for excellenc^^ but
as so many heads so many wits, so some that would not stoop a farthing at
cards, All the money in their purse.
would venterall the byte in their boung at dice. Therefore had I cheates for
the very sise, of the squariers, langrets, gourds, stoppe-dice, high-men,
low-men, and dice barde for all aduauntages: that if I ^etcht in any no^yce
either at tables, or any other game of hazard, I would be sure to strippe him
of all that his purse had in Esse, or his credyt in Posse, ere the simple
Connie and I parted.

When neither of these would serve, I had consorts that could verse, nippe, and
fo^st, so that I had a superficial sight into every profitable fa^ultie.
Insomuch that my principles grew authentical, and I so famous, that had I not
been crossed by those two peevish Pamphlets, I might at the next Midsommer have
worn Doctor Stories cappe for a favor. For I traveled almost throughout all
England, admired for my ingenious capacity: till coming about Exceter, I
began to exercise my art, and drawing in a Tanner for a tame Conie, as soon as
he had lost two shillings he made this reply. Sirrah, although you have a
livery on your back, and a cognizance to countenance you withal, and bear
the port of a Gentleman, yet I see you are a false knave and a Conny-catcher,
and this your companion your setter, and that before you and I part I Will prove.

At these words Conny-catcher and Setter, I was driven into as great a maze,
as if one had dropped out of the clouds, to hear a pesant cant the words of art
belonging to our trade: yet I set a good face on the matter and asked him what
he meant by Cony-catching. Marry (q. he) although it is your practice, yet I have
for 3. pence bought a little Pamphlet, that has taught me to smoke such a
couple of knaves as you be. When I heard him talk of smoking, my heart waxed
cold, and I began to gather into him gently. No no sir (q. he) you cannot verse
upon me, this book has taught me to beware of cros-biting: And so to be
brief he used me courteously, and that night causd the Constable to lodge me
in prison, and the next morning I was carried before the Justice, where
likewise he had this cursed book of Cony catching, so that he could tell the
secrets of mine art better then my self: whereupon after strict examination I
was sent to the jail, and at the Sessions by good hap and some friend that my
money procured me, I was delivered. As Soon as I was at liberty, I got one of
these books, and began to toss it over very devoutly, wherein I found one art
so perfectly anotomized, as if he had been practitioner in our faculty forty
winters before: then with a deep sigh I began to curse this R. G. that had
made a public spoil of so noble a science, and to exclaim against that
palpable ass whoso^uer, that would make any pe^-man privy to our secret
sciences. But see the sequel, I smoothered my sorrow in silence, and away I
trudged out of Devonshire, and went toward Cornwall, and coming to a simple
Alehouse to lodge, I found at a square table hard by the fire half a doozen
country Farmars at cards. The sight of these penny-fathers at play, drove me
straight into a pleasant passion, to bless fortune that had offered such sweet
opportunity to exercise my wits, and fill my purse with crowns: for I counted
all the money they had, mine by proper interest. As thus I stood looking on them
playing at cros-ruffe, one was taken reuoking, whereat the other said, what
neighbor will you play the cony-catcher with us? no no, we have read the book
as well as you. Never went a cup of small bear so sorowfully down an
Ale-knights belly in a frosty morning as that word stroke to my heart, so that
for fear of trouble I was fain to try my good hap a^ square play, at which
fortune favoring me I wan twenty shillings, and yet do as simply as I could,
I was not only suspected, but called Conny-catcher and crosse-biter.

But away I went ^ith the money, and come presently to London, where I no
sooner arriu^d amongst the crew, but I heard of a ^econd part worse then the
first, which ^aue me into such a great choller^ that I began to enquire what
this R^ G. should be. At last I learned that he was a scholar, and a Master
of Arts, and a Conny-catcher in his kinde^ though not at cards, and one that
favored good fellows, so they were not palpable offenders in such desperate
laws: whereupon reading his books, and surueying every line with deep
judgment, I began to note folly in the man, that would strain a Gnat, and
let pass an Elephant: that would touch small scapes^ and let gross
faults pass without any reprehension. Insomuch that I resolved to make an
Apology, and to answer his libellous inuectiues, and to prove that we
Conny-catchers are like little flies in the gras^e, which live: or little
leaves and do no more harm: whereas ^here be in England other professions
that be great Conny-catchers and caterpillars, that make barraine the field
wherein they bai^e.

Therefore all my good friends vouch of my pains, and pray for my proceedings,
for I mean to have about with this R. G. and to give him such a veny, that he
shall be, afraid hereafter to disparage that mystical science of
Conny-catching: if not, and that I prove too weak for him in sophistry, I
mean to borrowe Will Bickertous blade, of as good a temper as Morglay King
Arthures sword was, and so challenge him to the single combat: But desirous to
end the quarrel with the pen^e if it be possible, hear what I have learned
in Whittington College.

Yours in cards and dice Cu^bert cony-catcher.

THE ART OF CONNI-CATCHING.
THere be requisite effectually to act the art of Conny-catching. three
several parties, the Setter, the Uerser, and the barnacle. The nature of the
Setter, is to draw any person familiarly to drink with him, which person they
call the conie, and their method is according to the man they aim at: if a
gentleman, merchant, or apprentice, the cony is the more easily caught, in that
they are soon induced to play, and therefore I omit the circumstance which
they use in catching of them. And because the poor country farmer or yeoman
is the mark which they most of all shoot at, who they know comes not empty to
the Term. I will discover the means they put in practice to bring in some
honest, simple, and ignorant me^ to their purpose. The coni-catchers apparelled
like honest ciuel Gentlemen, or good fellows, with a smooth face, as if butter
would not melt in their mouths, after dinner when the clients are come from
Westminster hall, and are at leisure to walk up and down Paul's, Fleet street,
Holborne, the strond, and such common hanted places, where these coos^ing
companions attend only to spy out a pray, who as they see a plain country
fellow well and cleanly apparelled, either in a coat of home spu^ ru^^et, or of
freeze as the time requires, and a side pouch at his side, there is a conie,
says one. At that word out slies the Setter, and ouertaking the man begins to
salute him thus: sir, God save you, you are welc^me to London, how does all our
friends in the country, I hope they be all in health? The country man seeing
a man so courteous he knows not, half in a brown study at this strange
salutation, perhaps makes him this answer: sir al our friends in the country
are well, thanks be to God, but truly I know you not, you must pardon me. Why
sir, says the setter, gessing by his tongue what country man he is, are ye
not such a countryman? if he say yes^ then he creeps upon him closely, if he
say no, then straight the setter comes over him thus. In good sooth sir, I know
you by your face, and have bin in your companis before, I pray you (if without
offense) let me crave your name and the place of your abode. The simple man
straight ^els him where he dwells, his name, and who be his next neighbors and
what country Gentlemen dwell about him. After he has learned all of him, then
he comes over his fallows kindly, sir, though I have bin somewhat bold to be
inquisitiue of your name, yet hold me excused, for I took you for a friend of
mine, but since by mistaking I have made you slack your business, well drink a
quart of wine or a pot of ale together, if the fool be so ready as to go,
then the conie is caught, but if he smackes the setter, and smells a rat by his
clawing, and will not drink with him, then away goes the setter, and
discourses to the verser yt name of the man, the parish he dwells in, and what
Gentlemen are his near neighbors, with that away goes he^ and crossing the
man at some turning, meets him full in the face, and greets him thus. What
goodman Barton, how fare all our friends about you? you are well met, I have the
wine for you, you are welcome to town. The poor Country man hearing himself
named by a man he knows not, maruels, and answers that he knows him not, and
craves pardon. Not me g^^dman Barton, have you forgot me? why I am such a man's
kinsman, your neighbor not far off, how does this or that good Gentleman my
friend? good Lord that I should be out of your remembrance, I have bin at your
house diverse times. Indeed sir, says the Farmer, are you such a man's kinsman,
surely sir if you had not challenged acquaintance of me, I should never have
known you, I have clean forgotten you, but I know the good gentleman your
cosyn well, he is my very good neighbor. And for his sake says the verser,
well drink ere we part, happily the man thanks him, and to the wine or ale
they go, then ere they part they make him a conie, and so feret claw him at
cards, that they leave him as bare of money as an ape of a tail. Thus have the
filthy fellows their subtle fetches, to draw on poor men ^o fall into
their coosning practices. Thus like consuming moths of ye commonwealth, they
pray upon the ignorance of such plain souls as measure all their own
honesty, not regarding either conscience, or the fatal revenge that's
threatened for such idle and licentious persons, do but employ al their wi^s to
overthrow such as with their handy thrift satisfy their hearty thirst: they
preferring cosenage before labor, and choosing an idle practice before an honest
form of good living. Well, to the method again of taking up their conies. If
the poor countrima^ smoke them still, and will not stoup unto either of their
lures: then one, either the verser, or the setter, or some of their crew, for
there is a fraternity betwixt them, steps before the cony as he goes, and
lets drop twelve pence in the high way, that of force the conny must see it.
The countriman spying the shilling, makes not dainty, for quis nisi mentis
inops oblatum respuit aurum, but stoupeth very mannerly and takes it up: then
one of the conny catchers behind cries half part, and so chalengeth ^alfe of
his finding, the countriman content offreth to change the money, nay faith friend
says the verser, it is il luck to keep found money, well go spend it in a pottle
of wine, or a breakefast, dinner or supper, as the time of day requires: if the
cony say he will not, then answers the verser, spend my part: if still the cony
refuse, he takes half and away. If they spy y^ countriman to be of a having
and covetous mind, then have they a further policy to draw him on: another
that knows the place of his abode, meets him and says, sir, well met. I
have run hastily to overtake you, I pray you dwell you not in Darbishire, in
such a village? yea marry do I friend says the cony, then replies the verser,
truly sir I have a suit to you, I am going out of town, and must send a
letter to the parson of your parish, you shall not refuse to do a stranger such
favor, as to carry it him, happily, as men may in time meet, it may lie in my lot
to do you as good a turn, and for your pains I will give you xii.d. The poor
cony in mere simplicity says, sir, I Will do so much for you with all my heart,
where is your letter? I have it not good sir ready written, but if I may entreat
you to step into some tauern or alehouse, well drink the while, and I will write
but a line or two: at this the conny stoupes, and for greedines of the money,
and upon courtesy goes with the setter unto the tauern^ As they walk they
meet the verser, and then they all three go into the tauern together.

See Gentlem^n what great Logicians these conny catchers be, that have such
rhetorical persuasions to induce the poor countriman to his confusion, and
what variety of vilanie they have to strip the poor farmer of his money. Well,
imagine the cony is in the tauern^ then ^its down the verser, saying to the
setter, what sirrah, will thou give me a quart of wine, or shall I give thee
one? well drink a pint says the setter, and play a game at cards for it^
respecting more the sport, then the loss, content quoth. the verse^, go call for a
pair, and while he is gone to fetch them, he says to the cony, you shall see
me^ fetch over my young master for a quart of wine finely, but this you must do
for me when I cut the cards, as I will not cut above five of, mark then of all the greatest pack which is undermost, and when I bid you call a card for me,
name that, and you shall see well make him pay for a quart of wine straight:
truly says the cony, I am no great plaier at cards, neither do well
understand your meaning: why quoth. he it is thus. I Will play at mumchance, or
decoy, he shall shuffle the cards and i will cut, now either of us must call a
^ard, you shall call for me, and he for himself, and whose card comes ^^rst
winnes, therefore when I have cut the cards, then mark the nethermost of the
gr^atest heap that I set upon the cards which I cut off, and ever call that
for me. O now says the cony I understand you, let me alone, I warrant you i will
fit your turn, with that in comes the Setter with his cards, asking at what
game they shall play, why says the verser at a new game called mumchance, that
has no policy nor knauerie, but plain as a pikestaffe, you shall shufle^ and
i will cut, you shall call a card, and this honest man a stranger almost to us both,
shall call another for me, and which ^f our cards comes first shall win: content
says the setter, that is but mere hazard, so be shufles the cards, and the
verser cuts off some four cards, and then taking up the heap to set upon them,
gives the cony a glance of the bottom card of that heap and says, now sir,
call for me. The cony to blind the setters eyes, asks as though he were not
made privy to the gam^, what, shall I cut? what card says the verser? why
what yo^ will, either heart, spade, club or diamond, cotecard or other. O is it
so says the conny, why then you shall have the four of hearts which was the card
he had a gl^unce of^ and says the setter (holding the cards in his hand and
turning up the uppermost, as if he knew not well ^he game) i will hau^ the knave of
trumps, nay says the verser there is no trump, you may call what card you will:
then says he il^ have the ten of spades, with that he draws^ and the four of
hearts comes first: well says the setter, it is but hazard, mine might have come
as well as yours, five is up, I ^eare not the set: so they shuffle and cut, but
the verser winnes. Well ^aith the setter, no butler will cleave on my bread:
what not on^ draught among five, Drawer a fresh pint, i will have another bout
with you: but sir I believe, says he to the cony, you see some card, that it
goes so cross with me. I says the c^ny, I hope you think not so of me, it is
but hazard and chance, for I am a mere stranger to the game, as I am an
honest man I never saw it before.

Thus this simple cony closes up smoothly to take the versers part, only for
greedi^es to have him win the wine: well quoth. the setter, then i will have one cast
more, and to it they go, but he loses al, and begins to chafe in this
manner: were it not quoth he, that I care not for a quart of wine, I could
swear as many oaths for anger, as there be hairs on my head, why should not
my luck be as good as yours, and fortune favor me as well as you? what not one
called card in ten cuts, i will forswear the game for ever. Chafe not man quoth. the
verser, since we have your quarte of wine i will show you the game, and therewith
discourses all to him, as if he were ignorant of it. The setter, as simply as
if the Knave were ignorant ^aith, ye marry I thought so, you must needs win
when he knows what card to call. I might play long enough before I got a set.
Truly quoth. the cony it is a pretty game, for its not possible for him to lose that
cuts the cards, the other that shufles may lose S. Peter's cope if he had it.
Well, i will carry this home with me into the country, and win many a pot of al^
with it. A fresh pint says the verser, and then well away: but seeing sir you
are going homewarde, i will learn you a trick worth the noting, that shall win you
many a pot in the winters nights: with that he culs out ^he ^our Knaves, and
pricks one in the top, one in the midst, and one in the bottom. Now sir says
he, you see these three Knaves ppparantlie, thrust them down with your hand,
and cut where you will, and though ^hey be so far asunder, il^ make them all
come together. Lets see that I pray you says the cony, me thinks it is
impossible. So the verser draws, and all the three knaves come in one heap:
this he does once or twice, then the cony wonders at it, and offers a pint of
wine to be taught it. Nay says the verser i will do it for thanks, and therefore
mark where you have taken out the four knaves, lay two together above, and draw
up one of them that it maybe seen, then prick the other in the midst, and the
third in ye bottom, so when any cuts, cut he never so warily, 3. knaves must of
force come together, for the bott^m knave is cut to lie upon both the upper
knaves. I marry says the setter, but the three knaves you showed come not
together. True said the verser, but one among a thousand mark not that, it
requires a quick eye, a sharp wit, and a reaching head to spy at the first.
Gramercie for this trick says the cony, i will dominere with this among my
neighbors Thus do the verser and the setter seem friendly to the Cony, offering
him no show of cosenage, nor once to draw him in for a pint of wine, the more
to shadow their villainy, but now begins the sport: as thus they sit tippling
comes the Barnacle and thrustes open the door, looking into the room where they
are, and as one bashful steps back again saying, I cry you mercy gentlemen, I
thought a friend of mine had been here, pardon my boldness: no harm says the
verser, I pray you drink a cup of wine with us and welcome: in comes the
barnacle, and taking the cup, drinks to the cony, and then says, what at cards
gentlemen? were it not I should be offensive to the company, I would play for a
pint til my friend come I look for. Why sir says the verser, if you will sit
down you shall be taken up for a quarte of wine: with all my heart says the
barnacle, what will you play at, Primero, primo visto, Sant, one and thirty,
new cut, or what shall be the game? Sir says the verser I am but an ignorant man
at cards, and you have them at your fingers end, i will play with you at a game
that has no deceit, called mumchance at cards, and it is thus: you shall
shufle, and i will cut, you shall call one card, and this honest yeoman shall call
another for me, and which of our cards comes first shall win, here you see is no
deceit, and at this i will play. No truly says the Conie, me thinks there can
be no great craft in this. Well says the barnacle for a pint of wine have at
you: so they play as before, five up, and the verser winnes. This is hard luck
says the barnacle, and I believe the honest man spies some card in the bottom,
therefore I will make this, always to prick the bottom card: content says the
verser: and the cony to cloak the matter saith^ sir, you offer me injury to
think that I can call a card, when I neither touch them, ^hufle, cut, nor draw
them. Ah sir says the barnacle, give losers leave to speak: well, to it they
go again, and then the barnacle knowing the came best, by chopping a card
winnes two of the five, but lets the verser win the set: then in a chaf^ he
swears it is but his il luck, and he can see no deceit in it, therefore he will
play xii.d. a cut. The verser in content, and wins ii. or iii. s. of the
barnacle, whereat he chafes and says, I came bether in an il hour, but i will
win my money again, or lose al in my purse, with that he draws out a purs with
some three or four pound and claps on the board: the verser asks the conie
secretly by signs if he will be his half, he says yea, and straight seeks
for his purse. The Barnacle shufles the cards throwlie, and the verser cuts as
before, the barnacle, when he has drawn one card says, i will either win
something or lose something, therefore i will vie and reuie every card at my
pleasure til either yours or mine come out, therefore xii.d. upon this card, my
card comes first. No says the verser, and says the Connie I durst lay xii.d.
more. I hold it says the barnacle: so they vi^ and reuie til some ten
shillings be on the stake: and then next comes forth the versers card that the
conie called, and so the barnacle los^th. This flesheth the conie, the swee^nes
of gain makes him ^ro^ike, and none more ready to vie and reuie then he. Thus
for three or four times the barnacle loses. At last to whet on the conie he
strikes his chopped card and wins a good stake: away with the witch cries the
barnacle, I hope the cards will turn at last. Much thinks the conie, it was but a
chance you asked so right one of the five that was cut off, there was forty to
one on my side, and i will have you on the lurch anon. So still they vie and reuie
and for once that the barnacle winnes, the conie gets five: at last when they
mean to shave the conie clean of al his coin, the barnacle chafeth, and upon
a pawn boroweth money of the tapster, and swears he will vie it to the
uttermost. Then thus he^ chops his card to cros-bite the conie: he first looks
on the bottom card, and shufles often, but still keeping that bottom card, which
he knows to be uppermost, then sets he down the cards, and the verser to
encourage the conie, cuts off but three cards, whereof the barnacles card must
needs be the uppermost. Then he shows the bottom card of the other heap cut
off to the connie, and sets it upon the barnacles card which ^e knows, so that
of ^orc^ the card that was laid vpermost must come forth first, and then the
barnacle calls that card. They draw a card, and they ye barnacle vies, and the
countriman vies upon him: for this is ye law^ as often as one vies or reuies, the
other must see it, else he loses the stake. Well at last the barnacle plies it
so, that perhaps he vies more money then the conie has in his purse. Upon
this the conie knowing his card is the third or fo^rth card, and that he has
forty to one against the barnacle, pawnes his rings if he have any, his
sword, his cloak, or else what he has about him, to maintein the vie: and
when he laughs in his sleene, thinking he has fleest the barnacle of all, then
the barnacles card comes forth, and strikes such a cold humor to his heart,
that he^ sits as a man in a trance, not knowing what to do, and sighing while
his heart is ready to break, thinking on the money that he has lost. Perhaps
the man is very simple and patient, and whatsoever he thinks, for fear goes
his way quiet with his loss while the Connicatchers laugh and divide the
spoil, and being out of doors, poor man, goes to his lodging with a heavy
heart, pensive and sorrowful, but too late, for perhaps his state did depend
on that money, and ^o he, his wife and children, and his family, are brought
to extreme misery. Another perhaps more hardy and subtle, smokes the
connicatchers, and smells cosenage, and says they shall not have his money
so, but they answer him with braues, and though he bring them before an
officer, the Knaves are so favored, that the man never recouereth his money,
and he is let slip unpunished.

Thus are the poor conies robbed by these base minded Caterpillars: thus are
seruingmen often entised to play, and lose all: thus are prentises induced to be
connies, and so are cosened of their masters money: yea young gentlemen,
merchants, and other, are fetched in by these damnable rakehels, a plague as ill
as hell, which is, present loss of money, and ensuing misery. A lamentable
case in England when such vipers are suffered to br^ede, and are not cut off
with the sword of justice. This enormity is not only in London, but now
generally dispersed through all England, in every Shire, City, and Town of
any receipt, and mani^ complaints are heard of their egregious cosenage. The
poor farm^^ simply going about his business, or unto his att^rneis chamber, is
caught up and cosened of all: the seruingman sent with his Lords treasu^e,
loses ofttimes most part to these worms of the commonwealth: the prentise
having his masters money in charge, is spoiled by them, and from an honest
servant, either driven to run away, or to live in discredit for ever. The
gentleman loses his land, the merchant his stock, and al to these abominable
conicatchers, whose means is as il as their living, for they are al either
wedded to whores, or so addicted to whores, that what they get from honest me^,
they spend in bawdie houses among harlots, and consume it as vainlie as they
get it villanouslie. Their ears are of adamant, as pittiles a^ they are
treacherous, for be the man never so poor, they will not return him one penny
of his loss. I remember a merry jest done of late to a welchman, who being a
mere stranger in London, and not well acquainted with the English tongue,
chanced amongst certain conicatchers, who spying the gentleman had money, they
so dealt with him, that what by signs and broken English, they got him in for
a conie, and fleest him of every penny that he had, and of his sword: at last
the man smoakt them, and drew his dagger upon them at Ludgate, for therabout
they had caught him, and would have stabd one of them for his money, but people
stopped him, the rather because they could not understand him, though he had a
card in one hand, and his dagger in the other, saying as well as he could, a
card, a card, mon dien. In the mean while the conicatchers were got into paul's,
and so away, The welchman followed them seeking there up and down in the church
^til with his naked dagger and the card in his hand, the gentlemen maruele what
he meant thereby: at last one of his countrymen met him, and enquired the cause
of his choler, then he told him how he was cosened at cards, and robbed of al his
money, but as his loss was voluntary, so his seeking for them was mere
vanity, for they were stepped into some blind al^hous^ to divide the shares.
Near to S. Edmondsburie in Suffolk, there dweit an honest man a shoemaker, who
having some xx. marks in his purse, long in gathering, and neerelie kept, came
to the market to buy hides, and by chance fell amongst Conicat^hers, whose
names I omit because I hope of their amendment. This pain Countriman draw^n in
by these former devises, was made a cony, and stripped of his xx. mark, to his
vn^^ing: the Knaves escaped, and he went home a sorrowful man. Soon after one of
these co^icatchers was taken for a suspected person, and laid in Bury gaole^
the sessions coming, and he produced to the bar, it was the poor shomakers
fortune to be there, who seeing this rogne arrained, was glad, and said nothing
to him^ looking what would be the issue of his appearance. At last he was
brought before the Justices to be examined of his life, and being demanded
what occupation he was, said none, what profession then are you of, and how
live you? Marry quoth ^e I am a gentleman, and live of my ^rends. That's a lie
quoth. the shomaker, under correction of the worshipful of the bench, you have a
trade, and are by your art a conicatcher. A Conicatcher said one of the
Justices and smiled, is he a warriner fellow, can thou tell whose warren he
keepeth^ No sir your worship mistaketh me, he is not a warriner, but a
conicatcher. The bench, that never heard this name before, smiled, attributing
the name to the man's simplicity, thought he meant a warriner: which the poor
man seeing, answered, ye some conies this fellow caught were worth xx. mark a
piece, for proof quoth. he. I am one of them, and so discourst the order of the
art, and the baseness of the cosenage: whereupon the Justices looking into his
life, judged him to be whipped: the shomaker desired he might give him his
payment, which was granted. When he came to his punishment the shomaker laughed
saying, it is a mad world when poor Conies are able to beat their catchers: but
he lent him so friendly lashes, that almost he made him pay an ounce of blood
for every pound of silver. Thus we see how the generation of these vipers
increase, to the confusion of many honest men, whose practices to my poor power
I have discovered and set out, with the vilainous s^eights they use to intray
ye simple, yet have they clokes for the rain, and shadows for their vilani^s,
calling it by the name of art or law: as conicatching art, or conicatching law.
And hereof it rises, that like as law, when ye term is truly considered,
signifies the ordinance of good men, established for ye commonwelth, to
repress vicious living, so these conicatchers turn the cat in the pan, giving
to vile patching shifts^ an honest and godly title, calling it by the name of
a law, because by a multitude of hateful rules, as it were in good learning,
they do exercise their villani^s to the destruction of sundry honest persons.
Hereupon they give their false conueyance the name of Connycatching law, as
there be also other laws: as high law, sacking law, ^^gging law, cheting law,
and barnardes law. If you mar^el at these mysteries and queint words, consider,
as carpenters have many terms familiar enough to their prentises, that other
understand not at all, so have the connycatchers not without great cause, for a
falsehood once detected, can never compass the desired effect. Therefore will I
presently acquaint you with the signification of the terms in a table. But
leaving them til time and place, coming down Turnmill street the other day, I
met one whom I suspected a connycatcher, I drew him on to the tauern, and after
a cup of wine or two, I talked with him of the manner of his life, and told him
I was sorry for his friends sake, that he took so bad a course as to live upon
the spoil of poor men, and specially to deserve the name of conny-catching,
dissuading him from that base kind of life, that was so ignominious in the
world, and so loathsome in the sight of God, Tut sir, quoth he, calling me by my
name, as my religion is small, so my devotion is less, I leave God to be
disputed on by divines, the two ends I aim at, are gain and ease, but by what
honest gains I may get, never comes within the compass of my thoughts.
Though your experience in travel be great, yet in home matters mine is more:
yea I am sure you are not so ignorant, but you know that few men can live
uprightly, unless they have some pretty way more then the world is witness to to
help themselves withal. Think you some lawyers could be such purchasers if al
their pleas were short, and their proceedinges justice and conscience? that
offices would be so dearly bought, and the buyer so soon enriched, if they
counted not pillage an honest kind of purchase? or think you that men of handy
trades make all their commodities without falsehood, when so many of them are
become daily purchasers? nay what will you more? who so has not some sinister
way to help^ himself, but follows his nose always straight forward, may well
hold up the head for a year or two, but the third he must needs sink, and
gather the wind into beggars haven: therefore sir, cease to persuade me to the
contrary, for my resolution is to beat my wits, and busis my brains to save
and help me, by what means so ever I care not so I may avoid the danger of the
law. Whereupon seeing this conny-catcher resolved in his form of life, leaving
him to his lewdnes I went away, wondering at ye baseness of their mind^, that
would spend their time in such detestable sort. But no marvel, for they are
given up into a reprobate sense, and are in religion mere at heists, as they
are in trade flat dissemblers, if I should spend many sheets in deciphering
their shifts, it were friuelous, in that they be many and full of variety, for
every day they invent new tricks, and such queint devises as are secret, yet
passing dangerous, that if a man had Argus eyes, he could scant pry into the
bottom of their practices. Thus for the benefit of my country I have briefly
discovered the law of conycatching, de^^ring all Justices, if any such coseners
light in your precinct, even to use summum ius against them, because it is the
basest of all villainies. And that London prentices, if they cha^^^ in such
conycatchers company, may teach them London law, that is, to defend the poor
men that are wronged, and learn the caterpillars the high way to newgate, where
if Hind favor the^ with the heauies^ (...) in the house, and give them his
vnkindest entertainment, (...) doubt his other pety sins shall be half
pardoned for his labor: but I would it might be their fortune to happen into
Nobles northward in white chapel, there in faith round Robin his dep^^^^ would
make them, like wretches, feel the weight of his heau^^^^ fetters. And so
desiring both honorable and worshipful, as well Justices as other officers, and
all states, from the Prince to the beggar, to rest professed enemies to these
base-minded conny-catchers, I take my leave.

Nascimur pro patria.
A Table of the words of Art used in effecting these base villainies. Wherein is
discovered the nature of ever term, being proper to (...) but to the
Professors thereof.
1 High law robbing by the highway ^ide. 2 Sacking law l^cherie. Cheting law
play at false dice. 3 Cros-biting law cosenage by wh^res. 4 Conycatching law
cosenage by cards. 5 Uersing law cosenage by false gold. 6 Figging law cutting
of purses and picking of pockets. ^ Barnards law a drunken cosenage by cards.
These are the eight laws of villainy, leading the high way to infamy.
In high Law The Thief is called a High lawier. He that sets the Watch, a
Scrippe^ He that stands to watch, an Oak He that is robbed, the Martin When he
yields, stouping
In sacking Law The Bawd if it be a woman, a Pand^r The Bawd, if a man, an
Apple squire The whore, a Commodity The whore house, a Trugging place
In cheating law Pardon me Gentlemen, for although no man could better then my
self discover this law and his terms, and the name of their Cheats,
^arddice, Flats, Forgers, Langre^s, Gourds, Demies, and many other, with their
nature. and the crosses and contraries to them upon advantage, yet for some
special reasons, herein I will be silent.
In Cros-biting law The whore, the Traffic The man that is brought in, the
Simpler The villains that take them, the Cros-biters
In Coni-catching law The party that takes up the Connie, the Setter He that
plaieth the g^^ne, the Uerser He that is coosned the Connie He that comes in to
them, the Barnackle The ^^^le that is won, Purchase
In Uersing law He that brings him in, the Uerser The poor Country man, the
Coos^^ And the dr^nkard that comes in, the Suff^er
In Figging law The Cutpurse, a Nix He that is half with him, the Snap The
knife, the Cuttle bo^ng The pick pocket, a Foist He that faceth the man, the
Stale Taking the purse, Drawing Spying of him, Sm^aking The purse, the Bong The
money, the Shells The Act doing, st^iking
In Bernards law He that fetches the man the Taken He that is taken, the
Co^^^^ The la^ded man the Uerser The dronken man the Barnard And he that makes
the fray, the Rutte^:

Cum multis aliis qua nunc praescribere longum est.
These quaint ^ermes do these ^ase arts use to shado^ their villainy withal
for^ mul^a la^ent qu^ non patent, obscuring their filthy crafts with these
fair colors, that the ignorant may not epsy what their subtlety is: but
their end will be like their beginning, hatched with Cain, and consumed with
Iadas: and so bidding them adue to the devil, and you farewell to God, Iend.
And now to the art of Cros-biting.

The art of Cros-biting.
THe Cros-biting law is a public profession of shameless cosenage, nuxt with
incestuous whoredoms, as (...) as was practiced in Gomorha or Sodom, though
not after the same unnatural manner: for the method of their mischievous art
(with blushing chekes and trembling heart let it be spoken) is, that these
villainous vipers, unworthy the name of men, base roagues (yet why do I term
them so well) being outcasts from God, vipers of the world, and an excremental
reuersion of sin, does consent, nay constrayn^ their wines to yield the use of
their bodies to other men, that taking them together, he may cros-bite the
party of all the crowns he can presently make, and that the world may see
their monstrous practices, I will briefly set down the manner.

They have sundry prays that they call simplers, which are men fondly and
wantonly given, whom for a penalti^ of their lust, they fleece of all that ever
they have: some merchants, prentices, seruingmen, gentlemen, yeomen, farmers,
and all degrees, and this is their form: there are resident in London and the
suburbs, certain men attir^d like Gentlemen, brave fellows, but basely
minded, who living in want, as their last refuge, fall unto this cros-biting law
and to maintein themselues^ either marry with some stals whore, or else forsooth
keep one as their fre^d: and these persons be commonly men of the eight laws
before reh^ars^d: either high Lawiers, Uersers, N^ps, Conny-catchers, or such
of the like fraternity. These when their other ^rades ^ail, as the Cheater,
when he has no cousin to grime with his stop dice, or ye high lawier, when he
has no set match to ride about, and the Nip when there is no term, fair,
nor time of great assembly, then to maintain the maine chance, they use the
benefit of their wives or friends, to the cros-biting of such as lust after
their filthy enormities: some simple men are drawn on by subtle means,
which never in^ended such a bad matter. In summer euenings, and in the winter
nights, these traf^ckes, these common truls I mean, walk abroad either in
the fields or str^^tes that are commonly hanted, as stales to draw men into
h^ll, and a far of, as attending applesquires, ce^taine cross-biters stand
aloof, as if they knew them not: now so many men so many affections. Some
unruly mates that place their content in lust, letting slip the liberty of
their ^ies on their painted faces, f^ede upon their unchaste beauties, till
their hearts be set on fire: then come they to these minions, and court them
with many sweet words: alas their loves needs no long suits, for they are
forthwith entertained, and either they go to the ^auerne to s^ale up the match
with a pottle of Ipocras, or straight she carries him to some bad place, and
there picks his pocket, or else the Cross-biters comes swearing in, and so
outface the dismayed companion, that rather then he would be brought in
ques^ion, he would disburse all that he has present. But this is but an easy
^osnage. Some other meeting with one of that profession in the street, will
question if she will drink with him a pint of wine, their trade is never to
refuse, and if for manners they do, it is but once: and then scarce shall they
be warm in the room, but in comes a terrible fellow, with a side hair^ and a
^car^full beard, as though he were one of Polyphemus cut, and he comes frowning
in and says, what have thou to do^ base knaue-to carry my sister or my wi^e
to the tauern by his ownes you whore, it is some of your companions, I will have
you both before the Justice, Deputy, or Constable, to be examined. The poor
seruingman, apprentise, farmer, or whatsoever he is, seeing such a terrible
huffe snuff, s^rearing with his dagger in his hand, is fearful both of him
and to be brought in trouble, and therefore speaks kindly and courteously unto
him, and desires him to be content he meant no harm. The whore, that has
tears at command, falls a weeping, and cries him mercy. At this submission of
them both he triumphs like a bragard, and will take no compassion: yet a last,
through entreaty of other his companions coming in as strangers, he is
pacified with some forty shillings, and the poor man goes sorrowful away,
sighing out that which Solomon has in his proverbs, A shameless woman has honey
in her l^ppes, and her throat as sweet as honey, her throat as soft as oil: but
the end of her is more bitter then Aloes, and her tongue is more sharp then a
two edged sword, her feet go unto death, and her steps lead unto hell.

Again these ^ruls when they have got in a no^ice, then straight they pick his
purse, and then have they their crosbiters ready, to whom they convey the money
and so offer themselves to be searched: but the poor man is so outfaced by
these cros-biting Russians, that he is glad to go away content with his
loss, yet are these easy practices. O might the Justices send out spials in
the night, they should see how these street walkers wiliet in rich guarded gowns,
queint periwigs, rufs of the largest size, quarter and half deep, gloried
richly with blew starch, their cheeks died with surfuling water, thus are they
trickt up, and either walk like stales up and down the stre^ts, or stand like
the devils Siquis at a tauern or alehouse, as if who should say, if any be so
minded to satisfy his ^ilthie lust, to lend me his purse, and the devil his
soul, let him come in and be welcome. Now sir comes by a country farmer,
walking from his inn to perform some business, and seeing such a gorgeous
damzell, he wondering at such a brave wench stand staring her on the face, or
perhaps does but cast a glance, and bid her good speed, as plain simple
swains have their lusty humors as well as others: the trull straight beginning
her exordium with a smile, says? how now my friend, what want you, would you
spe^^^e with any body here? If the fellow ^aue any bold sp^^it, perhaps he
will offer the wine, and then he is caught, it is enough: in he goes, and they
are chamberd: then sends she for her husband, or her friend, and there either
the farmers pocket is stripped, or else the cros-biters fall upon him, and
threaten him with bride will and the law: then for fear he gives them all in
his purse, and makes them some bill to pay a sum of money at a certain
day. If the poor Farmer be bashful, and passes by one of these shameless
strumpets, then will she verse it with him, and claim acquaintance of him,
and by some policy or other fall aboard on him, and carr^e him into some
house or other: if he but enter in at the doors with her (though the poor
Farmer never kis^ her) yet then the cros-biters, like vultures, will pray upon
his purse, and rob him of every penny. If there be any young gentleman that
is a nouice and has not seen their trains, to hi^ will some common filth
(that never knew love) feign an ardent and honest affection, till she and her
cros-biters have verst him to the beggars estate. Ah gentlemen, merchants,
yeomen and farmers, let this to you all, and to every degr^e else, be a caveat
to warn you from lust, that your inordinate desire be not a mean to impouerish
your purses, discredit your good names, condemns your souls, but also that
your wealth got with the sweat of your brows, or left by your parents as a
patrimony, shall be a pray to those coosning cros-biters^ Some fond men are
so far in with these detestable trugs, that they consume what they have upon
them, and find nothing but a Neapolitan favor ^or their labor. Read the
seventh of Salomons proverbs, and there at large view the description of a
shameless and impudent curtizan: yet is there an other kind of cros-biting which
is most pestilent, and that is this. There lives about this to^ne certain
householders, yet mere shifters and coosners, who learning some insight in the
civil law, walk abroad like parators, sumners and informers, being none at
all either in office or credit, and they go spying about where any merchant, or
merchants prentise, citizen, wealthy farmer, or other of credit, either
accompany with any woman familiarly, or else has gotten some maid with
child, as men's natures be prone to sin, straight they come over his fallows
thus: they send for him to a tavern, and there open the matter unto him, which
they have cunningly larned out, telling him he must be presented to the Arches,
and the scitation shall be peremptorily served in his parish church. The party
afraid to have his credit cracked with the worshipful of the City, and the
rest of his neighbors, and grieuing highly his wife should hear of it,
straight takes composition with this cosner for some twenty marks, nay I
heard of forty pound cros-bitten at one time, and the^ the cosning informer or
cros-biter promises to wipe him out of the book, and discharge him from the
matter, when it was neither known nor pre^ented: so go they to the woman, and
fetch her off if she be married, and though they have this gross sum, yet often
times they cros-bite her for more: nay thus to they fear citizens, prentises
and farmers, that they find but any way suspicious of the like fault. The
cros-biti^g ba^ds, for no better can I term them, in that for lucre they
conceal the sin, and smoother up lust, do no! only enrich themselves mightily
thereby, but also discr^dite, hinder, and prejudice the court of the Arches,
and the Officers belonging to the same. There are some pore blind patches of
that faculty, that have their Tene^ents purchased, and their plate on the
boorde very solemnly, who only get their gains by cros-biting, as is before
rehearsed. But leaving them to the deep insight of such as be appointed with
justice to correct vice, again to the ^^ue of my former Cros-biters, whose see
simple to live upon, is nothing but the following or common, dishonest and idle
truls and thereby maintain themselves brane, and the strumpets in handsome
furniture. And to end this act with an English demonstration, i will t^ll you a
pretty tale of late performed in bishopsgatestreet: there was there five
trafficques, pretty, but common hufwiues, that stood fast by a tauern door,
looking if some pray would come by for their purpose, anon the eldest of them
and most experienced in that law, named Mal B. spyed a master of a ship coming
along. Here is a simpler quoth she, I Will verse him, or hang me. Sir said she,
God even, what are you so liberal as to bestow on us three good wenches that
are dry, a pint of wine. In faith, fayr^ women quoth. he, I was never nygard for
so much, and with that he takes one of them by the hand, and caries them all
into the tauern, there he bestowed cheer and ipocras upon them, drinking hard
til the shot came to a noble, so that they three carousing to the Gentleman,
made him somewhat tipsie, and the Et venus in vinis, ignis in igne fuit. Well,
night grew on and he would away, but this mistress Mal B. stopped his journey
thus: gentleman quoth. she, this undeserved favor of yours makes us so deeply
beholding to you, that our ability is not able any way to make sufficient
satisfaction, yet to show us kind in what we can, you shall not deny me this
request, to see my simple house before you go. The gentleman a little whitled,
consented and went with them so the shot was paid and away they go: without
the tauern door stood two of their husbands, I.B. and I.R. and they were made
privy to the practice. Home goes the Gentleman with these jolly huswiues
stumbling, and at last he was welcome to M. mals house, and one of the three
went into a chamber, and got to bed, whose name was A.B. after they had chatted
awhile, the Gentleman would have been gone, but she told him that before he
went he should see all the rooms of her house, and so led him up into the
chamber where the party lay in bed. Who is here said the gentleman: marry says
mal a good pretty wench sir, and if you be not well lie down by her, you can
take no harm of her: Dronkennes desires lust, and so the Gentleman begins to
dally, and away goes she with the candle and at last he put off his clothes and
went to bed: yet he was not so drunk but he could after a while remember his
money, and feeling for his Purse all was gone, and three lynkes of his whistle
broken off: the sum that was in his purse was in gold and silver twenty
nobles. And thus he was in a maze though his head were al laden, in comes I.B.
the good man of the house, and two other with him, and he speaking somewhat
loud, Peace Husband quoth she, there is one in bed, speak not so loud. In
bed, says he, g^gs nownes, i will go see, and so will I says the other: you shall
not says his wife, and strove against him, but up he goes, he and his
cros-biters with him, and seeing the gentleman in bed, out with his dagger, and
asked what base villen it was that there sought to dishonest his wife: well, he
sent one of them for a Constablt, and made the gentleman rise, who half drunk
had that remembrance to give fair words, and to entreat him to save his
credit: but no entreaty could serve, but to the Counter he must, and the
Constable must be sent for: yet at last one of them entreated that the
gentleman might be honestly used, and carried to a tavern to talk of the matter
til a Constable came. Tut says I. B. i will have the law upon him. But the base
cros-biter at last stoupt, and to the Tauern they went, where the gentleman did
lay his whistle to pawn for money, and there bestowed as much of them as came
to ten shillings, and sat drinking, and chatting, until the next morrow. By
that the Gentleman had stolen a nap, it waxed day light, and then seeing
himself compassed with these cursed Cros-biters, and remembering his nights
usage, soberly smyling, demanded of them if they could tell who he was, the
answered no: why then, quoth he, you base cosening Rogues you shall before we
d^^ part: and with that drawing his sword, stayed them in the chamber, desiring
that the Constable might be sent for: but this bra^e of his could not dismay M.
Mall, for she had biddden a sharper brunt before, witness the time of her
martyrdom, when upon her shoulders was engraven the history of her whorish
qualities: but she replying, swore, since he was so lusty, her husband should
not put it up by no means. I will tell thee thou base cros-biting baud, quoth
he, and you coosening companions, I serve a noble man, and for my credit with
him, I refer met to the penalty he will impose on you, for by God I will make
you an example to all cros-biters ere I ends with you, I tell you villains, I
serve, and with that he nam^e his Lord. When the guilty whores and coseners
heard of his credit and service, they began humbly to entreat him to be good
to the^: then quoth he, first deliver me my money, they upon that gladly gau^
him all, and restored the linkes of his chain. When he had all, he smiled,
and swear afresh that he would torment them for all this, that the severity of
their punishment might be a ^aueat to others to beware of the like coosenage:
and upon that knock^ with his foot, and said he would not let them go til
he had a constable. Then in general they humbled themselves, so recompencing
the party, that he agreed to pass over the matter, conditionally beside,
that they would pay the sixteen shillinges h^e had spent in charges, which
they also performed. The Gentleman stepped his way, and said, you may see the
old proverb fulfilled, Fallere fallentem non est fraus. Thus have I
deciphered an odious practice not worthy to be named: and now wishing al, of
what estate soever, to beware of filthy lust, and such damnable stale^ as
draws men on to inordinate desires, and rather to spend their coin amongst
honest company, then to bequeath it to such base cros-biters, as pray upon
men, like ravens upon dead carcases, I end with this prayer, that Cros-biting
and Conny-catching may be as little known in England, as the eating of swines
flesh was amongst the Jews. Farewell.

Nas^imur pro patria.
FINIS.
A PLEASANT DISCOVERY of the cosenage of Colliars.
ALthough (courteous Readers) I did not put in amongst the laws of c^sening,
the law of Legering, which is a deceit that Colliars abuse the Commonwealth
withal, in having unlawful sacks, yet take it for a petty kind of craft or
mystery, as prejudicial to the poor as any of the other two: for I omitted
diverse other devilish vices: as, the nature of the Lift, the black art and the
Curbing law, which is the filchers and thieves that come into houses or shops,
and lift away any thing: or picklocks, or hookers at windows, although they b^
a^ species and branches to the table before rehearsed. But omitting them,
again to our law of Legering. Know therefore that there be inhabiting in and
about London, ce^t^ine caterpillars (Coll^ers I should say) that term
themselves (^mongest themselves) by the name of Legers, who for that the
honorable, the L. Mayor of the city of London, and his officers, look
straightly to the measuring of coals, do (to prevent the execution of his
justice) plant themselves in and about the Suburbs of London as Shordich, White
chapel, Southwarke, and such places, and there they have a house or yard that
has a back g^te, because it is the more convenient for their cosening purpose,
and the reason is this: the Ledger, the crafty Collier I mean, rises very
early in the morning, and either goes toward Croyden, Whetstone, Greenewich
or Romford, and there meets with Country colliers, who bring coals to serve
the m^rket: there in a forestalling m^n^er, this Ledger bargaineth with the
country colliar for his coals, and pays for them nineteen or twenty shillings
at the most, but commonly fifteen or sixteen, and there is in the lode 36
sacks: so that they pay for every couple about fourteen pence. Now having
bought (...), every sack containing full four bushels, he carries the country
colliar home to his legering place, and there at the ^ack gate causes him to
unload, and, as they say, shoot the coals down. As soon as the country
collier has dispatched and is gone, the ledger (who has three or four hired
men under him) brings forth his own sacks, which ^re long and narrow,
holding at the most not three bushels so t^^t i^ the change of every sack they
gain a bushel. Tush yet this were somewhat tolerable, although the gain and
^surie is m^^strous, but this s^fficeth not, for they fill not these sacks full
by far, but put into them some tw^ b^shels and a h^l^e laying in the mouth of
the sack certain choice coals, which they call ^ill^^s, to ma^e the sack show
fair though the re^t be al sm^ll willow cole, and h^lfe d^osse, Wh^^ they have
not thus half fill^d their sacks, but thrust co^les into them, that (...) they
L^y uppermost is best-filled, to make the greater show: then a tall (...) that
is all ragd, and d^rty (...) his legs as though he come out of the countre^
(^or they du^ty their hose and shoo^ vp^n purpose ^o make themselves (...)
country colliars.) Thus with two s^cks a peec^ they either go out at the back
(...), or steal out at the street side, and so go up and down the Suburbs, and
sell their coals in summer for fourteen and sixteen pence the couple, and in
winter for eighteen or twenty. The poor Cool^s and other Citizens that buy
the^, ^^^nke they be country Colliers that have left some coals of their load,
and would gl^dly have money, supposing (as the Statute is) they be good and
lawful (...) thus o^s^ned by the Legers, and have but two bushels and a half
for four bushels, and yet extremely rackt in the price, which is not only a
great hinderaunce to her Majesty's poor (...), but greatly prejudicial to the
master colliers, that bring sacks and measure out of the country. Then consider
(gentle Readers) wh^t a kind of cosenage these legets use, that can make of
thirty sacks, some fifty six, which I have (...) with (...) eyes, for I have
set down with my pen how many turns they have made of a load, and they made
twenty eight turns, every turn being two sacks: so that they have gotten an
intolerable gain by their false measure. I could not be silent seeing this
abuse, but thought to reveal it for my countries commodity, and to give light
to the worshipful Justices, and other her Majesty's Officers in Midlesex,
Surrey, and els-where, to look to such a gross^ cosenage as contrary to a
direct sta^ute, does defraud and impouerish her Majesty's poor commons. Well
may the Honorable and W^rshipf^l of London flourish, who carefully look to the
Country coals, and if they find not four Bushels in every sack^ sell them to the
poor as forfet, and distribute the money to such as have need, burning the
sacks, and honoring or rather dishonouring the pillery with the Colliers durty
faces: And well may the Honorable and Worshipful of the Suburbs live and
pr^sper, if they look in justice to these Legers, who deserve more punishment
then the Statute ^ppoynts them, which is whipping at a carts tail, or with
fauer the pillerie. For fuel or fiering^ being a thing necessary in a
Commonwealth, and Charcole used more then any other, the poor not able to buy
by the load, are fayn to get in their fire by the sack, and so are greatly
cosened by the retayle.

Seeing therefore the c^reful L^wes her Majesty has appointed for wealth of
her Commons, and succor of the poor, I would humbly entreat all her Majesty's
Officers to l^oke into the life of these legers, and root them out, that the
poor^ feel not the b^^t^en of their unconscionable gaynes. I heard with mine
ears a poor woman of Shordi^h who h^d bought coals of a Ledger, with weeping
tears complain, and r^yle against him in the street, in her rough eloquence
calling hi^ cose^ing knave, s^ying, It Is no m^ruel villen (quoth she) if men
compare you colliers to the devil, seeing your consciences are worser then the
devils: for he takes none but those souls whom God h^tes, and you undo the
poor whom God does love.

Wh^t is the matter good wise (quoth I) that you use such inuectiue worde^
against the Collyar. A c^lli^r sir (quoth she) he is a thee^e, and a robber of
the common people. He tell you sir, I bought of a Country collyer two sacks for
thirtee^ pence, and I bought of this knave three sacks, which cost me 22.
pence: and sir^ when I measured both their sacks, I had more in the two sacks
by 3 pecks, then I had in the three. I would (quoth she) my neighbors would
join with ^e in ^ supplication, and by God I would kneel before the Queen,
and entreat that such c^sening Colliers ^^ght not only be punished with the
bare pillery (for they have such black faces that no man knows them again,
and so are they c^relesse) but that they might leave their ears behind them
for a forfet: and if that would not mend them, that Bull with a fair halter
might root them out of the world, that live in the world by such gross and
dishonest cosenage. The Collier hearing this, w^nt smiling away, because he
knew his li^e was not looked into, and the woman wept for anger that she had not
some one by that might with justice revenge her quarrel.

There be also certain Colliers that bring coals to London in Barges, and they
be called Gripers, to these comes the Ledger, and bargains with him for his
coals, and sels by retale with the li^e cosenage of sacks as I rehearsed
before. But these mad Legers (not content with this monstrous game) do besides
mix among their other sacks o^ coals, store of s^ruff^ dust and small cole, to
their great advantage. And for proof hereof, I will recite you a matter of
truth, lately performed by a Cooke^ wi^e upon a cosening Collier.

How a Cooks wife in Lhndon did lately serve a Colliar for his cosenage.
IT chanced this summer that a load of coals came forth of Kent to
Billingsgate, and a ledger bought them, who thinking to deceive the citizens, as
he did those in the Suburbs, furnished himself with a couple of sacks, and
comes up S. Mary hill to s^ll them. A Cooks wife bargaynd with the Collier for
his coals, and they agreed upon fourteen pence for the couple: which done, he
carried in the coals and shot them: And when the wi^e saw them, and perceiving
there was scarce five bushels for eight, she calls a little girl to her, and
bade her go for the Constable: for thou cosening rogue, quoth she, (speaking to
the Collier) I will teach thee how thou shall cos^n me with thy false sackes,
howsoever thou do others, and I will have thee before my L. Mayor, with that
she caught a spit in her hand, and swore if he offered to stir, she would
therewith broach him. At which word the collier was amazed, and the fear of
the Pillery put him in such a fright, that he said he would go to his bote, and
return again to answer whatsoever she durst object against him, and for
pledge thereof (quoth the Collier) keep my sacks, your money, and the coals
also. Whereupon the woman let him go: but as soon as the Collier was out of
doors, it was needelesse to bid him run, for down he gets to his Bote and
away he thrustes from Billinsgate, and so immediately went down to Wapping,
and never o^t^r durst return to the Cooks wi^e, to demand either money,
sacks, or coals.

H^^ a flax^wi^e in London s^ru^d a coos^^ng Collier.
NOw Gentlemen by your leave, and hear a merry jest. There was in the Suburbs
of London a Flax-wife that wanted coals, and seeing a Lege^ come by with a
couple of sacks, that had before deceived her in like sort, cheped, bargaind
and bought them, and so went in with her to shoot them in her Colehouse. As
soon as she saw her coals, she easily ghessed there was scarce six bushels,
yet dissembling the matter, she paid him for them and bad him bring her two
sacks more. The Collier went his way, and in the mean time the Flax-wife
measured the coals, and there was just five bushels and a peck. Hereupon she
called in her neighbors, being a company of women that before time had also been
pincht in their coals, and showed them the cosenage, and desired their aid to
her in tormenting the Collier, which they promised to perform: and thus it fell
out. She conveyed them into a back room (some sixteen of them) every one
having a good cudgel under her apron, straight comes the Collier and says,
Mistres here be your coals: welcome good Collier (quoth she) I pray thee
follow me into the back side, and shoot them in another room. The Collier was
content and went with her, but as soon as he was in, the good wife locked the
door and the Collier seeing such a ^^oup of wives in the room, was amazed,
yet said, God speed you all shrewes: welcome (quoth one jolly Dame) being
appointed by them all to give sentence against hi^. who so soon as the Collier
had sh^^ his sackes said: sir Collier, know that we are here all assembled
as a grand ^^^ie, to determine of thy villainies, for selling us false sacks of
coals, and know that thou art here indicted upon coosnage, therefore hold up thy
hand at the bar, and either say guilty or not guilty, and by whom thou will be tried, for thou must (...) condign punishment for the same ere thou
depart. The Collier who thought they had but iested, smiled and said, Come on,
which of you shall be my judge. M^^^^^ sir, quoth one jolly dame, that is I,
and by GOD you knave, you sha^^ ^inde I will pronounce sentence against you
severely, if you be found guilty. When the Collier saw they were in earnest,
he said, Come, come, open the door and let me go. With that five or six wives
started up and fell upon the Collier, and gave him a score of sound lambea^^es
with their cudgels, and bad him sp^ake more reverently to their principal. The
Collier feeling it smart, was afraid and thought mirth and courtesy would be
the best mean to make amends for his villainy, and therefore said he would be
tried by the verdite of the smock. Upon this they paneld a Jury, and the
flax-wife gave evidence; and because this unaccustomed Jury required witness,
she measured the co^les before the Collyers face, upon which he was found
guilty, and she that sat as principal to give judgment upon him, began as
follows.

Collier, thou art condemned here by proof of flat coosnage, and I am now
appointed in Conscience to give sentence against thee, being not only moved
thereunto because of this poor woman, but also for the general commodity of
my Country, and therefore this is my sentence: We have no pillorie for thee,
nor cart to whip thee at, but here I do award that thou shall have as many
bastinadoes as thy bones will bear, and then to be turned out of doors
without sackes or money. This sentence being pronounced, she rose up, and gave
no respit of time for the execution, but according to the sentence before
expressed, all the women fell upon him, beating him extremely, among whom he
lent some lusty buffets, but might ouercomes right, and therefore Ne Hercules
contra duos. The women so crushed him, that he was not able to lift his hands
to his head, and so with a broken pa^e or two he was paid, and like lack drum,
fair and orderly turned o^t of doors.

This was the reward that the Collier had, and I pray God all such Coll^ers
may be so serued^ and that good wiue^ when they buy such sacks, may give them
such pa^ments, and that the Honorable and Wors^ipfull of this land, may look
unto this gross ^buse of Collyers, as well for charity sake, as also for the
benefit of the poor. And so wishing Colliers to amend their deceitful and
disordred dealing^ herein, ^ end.

FINIS.

