A TREATISE of the great and general day of Judgment: Necessary for every
Christian that wishes good success to his Soul, at that great and terrible
day.

By Henry Greenwood, Master of Arts, and Preacher of the word of God.

With an addition of certain godly prayers the contents appear in the next
page.

But I say unto you, that of every idle word that men shall speak, they shall
give account thereof at the day of judgment. Mat. 12.36. Richard Bradock for
Henry Bell, dwelling on Holborn Hill: and are to be sold at his shop next the
Crosse-Keys. 1606.

The contents of the Prayers.
A short disputation between the devil and the poor soul of a christian. A
short deathbed dialogue. A prayer for the morning. A prayer for the Evening. A
thanksgiving for our late deliverance. A prayer comprehending the matter of the
last judgment. A short prayer of purpose against Satan's assaults. A short
prayer at hand upon all occasions. A prayer for all sorts.
TO THE Right Worshipful, and my very good friends, LESTRANGE MORDAVNT of
Massingham Hall, in the County of Norfolk Esquire, and M^ MARGARET MORDAVNT
his loving bedfellow, Eternal welfare, and everlasting happiness in Christ
Jesus our Lord and Savior.
Being earnestlye requested, and often entreated (Right worshippefull) by
many of my good friends, to put in printe this small Treatise of the
General day of doom, which I lately preached, and in public place delivered:
I have (being overcome with their persuasions) condescended to their earnest
demand, although very unapt and exceedingly unworthy for the penning of so
worthy a matter. Wherefore I have made choice (craving pardon for my
presumption herein) of your well disposed worship at this time (being the Alpha
of my tender and slender endeavors) to sound in your sacred cares this last and
general trumpet, and to dedicate to your worship the same: both in regard of
the demonstration of my true vnfamed, and lasting thankfulness to your benign
worship, (for says Seneca: Beneficium hominem gratu^ semper delectat, ingratum
semel: id est: A thankful man will always remember a benefit, but an
unthankful person will soon forget it) for your extraordinary Kindnesses
bestowed upon me, Absque vllo demerito, without any desert in the world: as
also in regard of the greate^ affection, good devotion, and thrice welcome
entertainment you bear to divine and spiritual tractates which appertain to
the everlasting bliss of the soul, accounting the^ blessed which bring glad
tidings of salvation. I desire therefore (idque more humillimo, in most
submissiue manner) this one thing at your worships hand, that you would
(pardoning my boldness) vouchsafe, aequi bonique consulere, to take in good
worth this simple and slender gift. Which thing if your worship shall vouchsafe
to do, it shall not only be an encouragement to my future proceedings, but
also it shall be vinculum in dissolubile, an invincible bond to tie me in all
duty, and in all love to your worship: dum memor ipse mei, du^ spiritus hos
regit artus: so long as life shall last. Thus humbly taking my leave of your
good worships (nothing doubting of the goodness of your natures in the
accepta^ce of these my first presented fruits) I commit you with yours to the
safe protection of the almighty, always begging before the throne of his most
glorious Majesty, that he would in this life, infuse his holy spirit with all
his graces into your hearts abundantly, and in the world to come, crown you
with the crown of immortal glory, and that for Christ Jesus his sake, our
Lord and only Savior, Ame^. From Sampford Magna in Essex, this 30. of April.
1606.

Your Worships in all duty for ever to command. Henry Greenewood.

A Treatise of the Great and general day of Judgment: necessary for every
Christian that wishes good success to his soul, at that great and terrible
day.
But I say unto you, that of every idle word that men shall speak, they shall
give an account thereof, at the day of judgment.

math. 12.36.
MAn in regard of the corruption of his nature, through the fall of his great
Grandfather Adam (who was the foil of Mankind, the parent of sin, and the
author of death to all his posterity, forasmuch as we were all In Iumbis
Adama, In his Ioynes) as he is subject to all sins whatsoever,, so is he
especially addicted to the sin of security and carelessness. Therefore as
Adam sleeping securely in his transgression, and hiding himself from the
presence of the Lord behind the bush, had great need of that watchbell from
God (to rouse him from the sleep of sin, and to call him again unto God,
Adam vbi es? Adam where art thou? Genesis 3.9.
So as necessary for every sinful Adamite (to raise him up from the sleep of
sin, wherein he was borne) is this notable Memento, this worthy rehearsal
of the great and terrible day of doom. But I say unto you, etc. which words
of our Savior Christ, spoken to the scribes and pharisees (who would not
believe that be wrought this miracles by the powrful spirit of God, but
slanderously and contemptuously told him to his face* ( that he did cast out
devils through Beelzebubs name. Mat. 12.24
are as much in effect, as if he had said on this manner: It account must be
rendered at the day of Judgment of every idle word that men shall speak,
then much more of blaspheamous words: But I say unto you that of every idle
word that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof at the general day of
Judgment: Ergo much more of blasphemous words as yours are, in saying, that I
cast out devils through the name of Beelzebub.

So that these words of our Savior are nothing else but a true proposition and
sound argument drawn A minore ad maius, whereby Christ does prove the
greatness of punishment that should befall the blaspheamous Pharisees, in
regard of the greatness of their sin.

In which portion of Scripture, four things necessarily must be considered.

1 The persons that must give account, who they be. 2 Of what things these
persons must give an account. 3 To whom must this account be given. 4 When
this account must be given.
The first part.
1 The persons that must give an account, they are expressed in this text in
general, to be me^. That men shall speak. Men, yea all men must give an
account, as we may read in the Epistle of Saint Paul, to the Corinthians:

2. c 1.5, 10
We must all appear before the tribunal seat of Christ, that every man may
receive according to his works. All men none excepted, of every age, of every
sex, and of every nation, rich and poor, Princes and common people, noble and
ignoble, all that have been from the beginning of the world, and shall be to
the end of the same, shall appear before Christ's Judgment seat, and give an
account, every one for himself to God: Heb. 9.2^
For; It it is appointed unto men once to die, and after that comes judgment,
As it is therefore most sure, that al men must die so it is sure, that all men
most come to judgment.

Art. 7.
This is the seventh article of our faith to believe: that Christ shall come
from heaven to judge the quick and the dead: by the dead, all those are to be
understood that shall be found dead at the second coming of Christ: by the
quick, all those are to be understood, that shall be found living at that
his second coming. Augustine in his Enchirioson to Laurentius, August.
chapter 55. says, that this article may be expounded two ways: either by
the dead (says be) may be meant those that shall be found corporally dead: and
by the quick, those that shall be found corporally living at Christ's coming:
or (says he) by the dead may be meant those, that be dead in sin,
according to that in the Gospel of Matthew: Mat. 8.22*
Let the dead bury their dead: and by the quick, those that be dead to sin,
and living by faith, according to that of the Prophet Abacucke: the just shall
live by faith. Hab^. 2.4.
But this exposition is not agreeable to the simplicity of the Creed: Yet
notwithstanding true it is, that both the godly and the wicked shall come to
judgment: for by the power of Christ all men shall be raised up: the holy
Angels with the great sound of a Trumpet shall be sent forth into all the
world, Mat. 24.31
and they shall gather together the elect, from the four quarters of the
earth, from one end of the heaven to the other: Then shall Christ separate the
elect from the reprobates, Mat 13.40
the wheat from the Tares, the come from the cheffe, the Lambs from the
Contes, the just from the unjust.

So that you see that the godly and the wicked, yea all men whatsoever, shall
appear before Christ's tribunal seat, and give an accounte of themselves, and
for themselves to the terrible Judge.

Object Ioh. 3.^8.
Ob. Some not withstanding may object against this doctrine delivered, and say:
as it to in John, That be that believes in Christ, shall not be judged, or
shall not come into judgment: and so by consequence all men shall not be
judged.

Ans. To which I answer, that judgment in that place of John, Answer.
(as in many other places of sacred scriptures) is taken for condemnation: in
which sense true it is, that be that believes in Christ Jesus, he that is
ingrafted into Christ by a true and aliuely faith, he that is flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bone, one with Christ, and Christ with him, by the
spiritual conjunction of the Church with CHRIST, this party shall not come
into judgment, s^^l. Condemnationis, that is, of Condemnation, in judgment he
shall not be confounded, condemned, or overthrown: but he shall come in
iudicium absolutionis: that is, Into the judgment of absolution: In judgment
he shall stand out, having on the white Robe of Christ's righteousness, and
being covered with the wedding garment of Regeneration. The truth of which
doctrine the Preacher affirms, saying: GOD will judge the just and the
unjust. Eccle. 3.17
The just unto salvation, and the unjust to damnation.

Seeing then that all must be brought to judgment, let no man think with
himself, that it may be possible for him to escape this dreadful day: Psalm.
139^ 8.9.
whither shall he fly from the presence of the Lord?

If he ascends up to heaven, God is there: if he go down to hell, God is
there also: if he take the wings of the morning, and she to the uttermost parts
of the sea, God will find him out there also: For God is every where: he is
in heaven by his glory: he is upon the earth by his mercy, he is in hell by
his justice: God is vbique and nulquam: he is every where by his power and
wisdom, but no where in respect of circumscription of place, being a spirit.
In earthly and terrestrial courts, a man may have his proctor; but then we
must (volentes nolentes, whether we will or no) personally appear and plead
for our selves.

In terrestrial courts, bribes many times blind the eyes of the wise, and for
a little greasing the fist of the Magistrate, many times small faults, nay (by
your leave) great and scandalous crimes may be winked at: but at this great
court of heaven, the Judge will not be partial to any: for God has no respect
of persons: Rom 2*11 Psalm. 98.9.
he will execute just judgment upon all men: as the Psalmographer speaks:
With righteousness will be judge the world, and the people with equitle.
Bribes, friends, entreaties, bowlings, cries, lamentations, nothing will then
prevail, but a pure heart, and a spirits upright: yea the damned in Hell
confess the same: a wisd. 5, 8
quid profuit nobis superbia? quid diuitiaru^ copia? what has pride profited
us? or what has the pomp of riches done us good? alas these cannot save our
souls.

Let the Atheist therefore mock God never to blasphemously: b. Act. 23, ^
let the Sadduces brag of no resurrection, no Angel, no spirit, never so
schismatically: let the Epicure slug that cursed Epitaph of Sardanapalus never
so beastly, Ede, lude, bibe, charum, praese^tibus exple delicijs animu^: post
martem nulla voluptas: that is Eat, drink, play, be merry, live in all kind of
pleasure, for after death there is no pleasure. Yet notwithstanding let all
these miserable wretches know, that there will come a day, and ye a dismal day,
wherein they shall give an account of every idle word. Alas lamentable world,
that men should thus murder their dearest darlings, I mean their souls,
which Christ has holden so dear: that men should with Esau sell their
birthright, Gen 25.33.
and heritage of heaven, for a mess of pottage of worldy pleasure: that men
should delight in wallowing ( with the sow) in the mire of sin, 2, Pet. 2.22.
and ( with the dog) in swallowing the vomit of iniquity: and so purchase to
their souls and bodies everlasting torment in the lake unquenchable: whereas
they should above all things seek the kingdom of God, and the righteousness
thereof, that they might have heavenly mansions at the great day of account.

Let every Christian therefore bewail the wickedness of this world and lament
the iniquity of these dates: least it be said of us, as of the careless and
graceless Christian, Cadit afina, and est qui sublenet, perist anima, and
nonest quirecogitat: If an ass falls under his burden, there be some that
will diligently help it up again: but if a soul perish, no man regards it.
Men are like the horse, ass, and mule that have no understanding: the more is
the good man's grief. David his eyes gushed out into rivers of water, Psalm.
^^^.^37.
because men kept not gods law. The prophet Jeremy cries out on this manner*
My belly, my belly, I am payned even at the heart; Ierem. 4:19 ^^
I cannot be quiet because my people is a foolish people, they are wife to do
evil, but to do well, they have no knowledge,

That godly Matrone Monica sai^ Augustine mother wait daily, Monica
and prayed for her son a conversion; for he was before his conversion a
Manich^e.

So likewise it is the duty of every Christian to desire the conversion of
their brethren, and to bewail their wretched estates.

Sin never more than in these our dais of the gospel, abou^ded: the gretest
part of the world at Sathauists devils in conversation, worshippers of ye ugly
beast that has seven heads and ten horns, whose badge is blasphemy: Apo. 13.16
Ephesians. ^.2.
of yt damned serpent, the prince of the air: the grand enemy of mankind, that
goes up and down like a roaring lion seeking whom he may devour. 1. Pet. 5.8.
Yea Saint John says, that Whatsoever is in the world, 1. John. 2.16.
is either the concupiscence of the flesh, or the concupiscence of the eye, or
the pride of life: hac tria pro trino numine mundus habet: this is The Trinity
which the world does worship: In stead of God the Father, God the Son, and
God the holy Ghost: the world does worship the devil, ye world and the flesh:
the concupiscence of the flesh, that is, carnal l^turye: the concupiscence of
the eye, that is, worldly covetousness and each pri^ of life, that is,
devilish ambition.

The way to hell is abroad and a wide way, and whole multitudes walk in the
same: but few there be that can find out the narrow way of an^m^t of life: the
Heathen man could say this: Plurima pessima: the most are the worst: Anst.
preciosa non sunt numer^sa, good me^ are od men: Wasps and hornets swarm, but
few painful bees are to be found, ye treasure up the honey of good works in the
hiue of their hearts, and come laden home with the same, as Virgil writes of the
Bees: At fessamulta referuns se nocte minores, crura thymo plena. No maruail
therefore, if David cried out to the Lord for help in his days: saying: Help
Lot^, help, a psalm, 12, 1
for good and godly men decay. The world therefore may be compared to the earth.
Compa.


Ask the earth, and it will tell thee, that it does afforde much matter for
base pets, but very little stuff for Gold: ask the Gardner and he will tell
thee that he has more Nettles than Rases, more Weeds than flowers, more
^rambles than Vy^: you ask thine own conscience, and it will tell thee, Note.
that there is Magna pl^itudo hominum, sed magna solisudo homorum: id est,
there is a great plenty of men, but there is a great scarcity of goodmen. A
good man is a Phoenix, he is Rara anis in terris, Inuen.
nigro^ua ^llima cyg^i A rare bird, a black ^an. We have many covetous Chur^s
that will (with the fool in the Gospel) commend their souls to Plutus that
was colled of the b^athen, Deus diuitia^, The god of riches; but more ^ly he is
D^mon diuitiarum, the devil ^f riches: and think themselves safe when they
have spoken peace to their souls on this manner: ^uk. 12.19
Soul take thy rest, for thou have goods laid up for many days: making their
chest their heaven, and their pictures their GOD. We have many Achabs,
Tyrannical extortioners, deuourers of their brethren, eating them up like
bread. Many adulterers, as appears by the great number of Bastardes in this
Realm.

Many rebellious traitors and Antichristian conspirators; as did appear the
last November.

Many conceyted Herodes, many proud Nebuchadne^rs, and many vain glorious
I^bels, many swearers, forswearers, drunhardes, mocks-go^s, many we have (in a
word) damned belboundes, cursed ce^tifes, and most miserable miscre^ts

How little do these lamentable wretches think of (...) of accoun^ how little
do they imagine of that ^ofull sentence, Go from me ye cursed etc. the Lord
grant to all men (on^ with another) his grace, that they may have this
Scripture always sas^ding in their ears. Of every idle word that men shall
speak, they shall give an account thereof at the day of judgment.

The consideration of this last day made Jerome afraid to offend: Whether I
eat or drink (says he) or whatsoever I do else, Iero.
me thinks I hear this saying sounding in mine ears, Arise ye dead, and com
to judgment: The which when I consider, it makes me quake and shake, and not
dare to committ sin, which otherwise I should have committed.

O that men would remember their end, then they should never offend: O that
men would always set before their eyes the quatno^ nonissima: the day of
death, the day of judgment, the ioys of heaven and the torments of hell: then
would not men live so loosely, but they would with all diligence work out their
salvation with fear and exembling: the which care of godliness the lord grant
to al men Thus much shall suffice for this first part of this Scripture, namely,
for the parties that shall give an account, who they be, namely all men
whatsoever. But I say unto you that of every idle word that men shall speak,
they, etc.

The second part.
2 Of what things must we give an account.

There must an account be made of many, yea of things innumerable, but
especially of these five.

1 Of the thoughts of our hearts, according to that of Salomo^, ^wis, 1, 9
there shall inquisition be made for the thoughts of the ungodly, there shall
not a wicked thought pass in judgment.

If Adam had committed but one disobedient thought in heart against Almighty
God, with full consent of will to have performed the same, and though be had
not actually broken Gods commandment: it was necessary that the se^ Adam
(who is a rayser of our ruins, the ransom for our offenses, and the restorer of
life) should come, and suffer the cortures of hell [as he did] or else we with
Adam had gone the high way to eternal (...). No marualle therefore if our
Savior Christ accounted him an adulterer, that lusted after a woman, saying.
Whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her, Mat. 5, 28,
has committed adultery with her already in his heart. It is the malicious
nature of the devil [as says Barnard] to in^ise me^ to mischief: Damorum est
mala suggerere, Bernard.
nostrum est no^ consentire. It is the property of the devil to entice and
suggest men to evil, and it is our parts, not to consent to his inticements,
but to resist them ma^fully, according to that of Peter. 1. Pc. 5.9
VVho^ resist ye steadfast in faith. The devil outwardly by the world, and
inwardly by the corruption of our nature, does daily allure us to sin: Now if
we consent to those his wicked motions [whether we perform them outwardly in
art, yea or no] before God we have committed the sin: according to that of
John* Job. 3.15
He that hates his brother is a manslayer: because in will, in wish, and in
desire be has already slain him, although be does not bring it into outward
act, either for fear of the law of man in that case, or for want of just and
^e opportunity for the effecting thereof. Yea the sin of thought, the sin
conceived in the heart of man, is not only a sin, but it is the root and
beginning of all sins whatsoever: for it is not that which goes into man, Mat.
15.11
that defiles him, but that which comes out of him, that is, that which
proceeds from the heart of man.

The Devil first suggesteth after suggestion, The la^er of sin.
comes cogitatio^: after cogitation follows affection: after affection,
follows delectation: after delectatio^ follows consent: (Now is the sin of
thought fully committed:) after consent, follows operation: after operation
follows custom after custom follows desperation: after desperation follows
defending of sins committed after defending of sins committed, follows
vaunting, boasting, and glorying in sin, which is next to damnation it self:
thus the heart is the fountain, from whence springs all sin whatsoever.

Yet have we not many wicked ones in this world, that think the sin of heart
eye her to ^ee no sin at all, or else, but asmall sin, that shall never be
brought in question at the day of account? But let al these know, that as of
every idle word, so of every wicked and sinful thought conceived and nourished
within the heart of man, with full consent to the performance of the same (for
there is no sin that can be committed without consent had) men, yea all men
must give an account.

I give all men therefore (to the good of their souls) this good counsel of
Solomon, Keep thine heart with all diligence, Prou. 4.23.
for thereout comes life: if thou keep it not diligently and warily,
therout will proceed death* I mean, sin whose wages is death, om. 6 23
The heart is a mill, alwais grinding either good corn or bad, either good
thoughts or bad: therefore keep it diligently for thy souls sake; let it
meditate in the law of god day and night, abandon all wicked motions, that at
the day of judgment thou may be pure bread, and fine manches, for the bread
of life, Christ Jesus his table in heaven: the Lord grant this to me the
writer, thee the reader, and to every hearer of it.

2 We must give an account of our words.

Word.
Of every idle word that men shall speak etc. Diverse of the learned writers have
diversely commented of this idle word, what it should be: one affirming one
thing, another another thing. Therefore I will (in a word) set down the opinions
of some of the^, not inco^gruent, neither disagreeable to the holy Scripture.

Greg.
Gregory says, that Verbum otiosum est, quod iusta necessitate, and pia
v^^atate caret: That is (says he) an idle word which is spoken either without
just necessity, or godly profit.

Jerome ^
Jerome says, that Verbumotiosu^ est quod sine v^elitate loquent^ vel
audie^tis profertur, that is [saith he] an idle word which is spoken either
without edification of the hearer; or speaker.

Basil.
Basil. Omne verbu^ quod non cond^is ad propositam vtilitatem, vanu^ ^st and
otiosum, that is, Every word, which belongs not to an intended profit, is a
vain and an idle word.

Master John Calvin says, Calv.
that Sermo otiosus pro inutili sumitur, qui nihil aedificationis vel fructus
affert: id est, an idle word is taken for a word unprofitable, for a word that
brings with it no fruitful edification. So that from these descriptions of
holy men. I do describe an idle word on this manner.

Verbum otiosum est, quod ad bonam rem non pertinet: quod non facit ad gloria^
dei vinentis: quod mutile est and infrugiferu^: quod nec loquente^ nec
audiente^ aedificat: id est, An idle word is that which does not appertain to
a proposed profit; which tends not to the glory of the everliving God: which
is unprofitable and unfruitful: which edifieth neither the bearer, nor the
speaker. If then (good brethren in christ Jesus) so great account must be
given, of every idle, vain, and fruitles word; what account (think ye) shall
be given for swearing, cursing, banning and blaspheaming?

What account shall the swearer give, that has not one word in his mouth but it
is guarded with an execrable oath?

How common (alas) this sin of swearing is, who knows not? for the small
infants and tender children in our streets have cursed outhes Ad vnguem At
their fingers end, yea at their tongues end too. What account shall the cursing
and ^anning tongue give, that Cruelly, Disdainfully, Psalm, 31.1^
and Despightfully speaks against his neighbor? What account shall the
blaspheamous person give, that speaks contemptuously of God, and says that
Christ did cast out Devils through the name of Ecclzaeb^b? 1. Pet 4.18.
If the just shall scarce be saved, where shall the sinner appear: If account
must be made of every idle word, Lord, what account shall they make, that rappe
and vomiteous blasphemies against the terrible Judge of Heaven and Earth?

As men think and fondly imagine, that the sin of thought (unless it proceed
into outward act) is but a small sin: so likewise do they imagine of idle
words, that they are but small sins, and a small account for them shall be
given.

But let all the world know, that no sin can be said to be small in respect
of it own nature: for the least sin that can be committed in the world, is
so weighty as, without repentance had, it will sink the sinner down to the
bottomless pit of Hell. Yet not withstanding an idle word in respect of other
sins, may be said to be a small sin: yet as small as it is, it is able to
damme the soul for ever.

Well therefore says Petrus Damianus sermon secu^do de vitio linguae: Pet. Dami
Audiut lingua vaniloqua, audiat otiosa linguae, au diat and panescat,
intelligat and pethorrescat sententia^ horribilem, extremique iudicis terrorem
etc. that is, Hear o vain babbling tongue, hear ^o idle tongue, hear and
tremble, understand, and quake, at the hearing of the terrible day of
judgment: he that has hands to slay, has he not cates to heare^ he says,
that of every idle word that men shall speak; they shall give an account
thereof at the day of judgment:

Although an idle word be a small sin in respect of greater sins, yet
nevertheless an innumerable company of idle words, co^gested, accumulated, and
heaped up together, they will make a nighty sin. Quid peuna lenius? quid milt^
breuius? What is lighter then a feather? and what is shorter tha^ the seed
^ill? Yet notwithstanding an innumerable company of feathers truffed up
together, will break ye po^ters back. Exo. 8, 2.4.
Small were the gnats that troubled Pharao, yet they being innumerable over came
proud Pharao and all the power of Egypt. An hour is but a short time, but D^m
horae horae co^tinua successiona congeritur: While on hour by continual
succession is added to another, the whole course of our lives is finished Quid
sax^ durius, quid aqua liquidius? What is harder then a stone, and what is
softer then the water? Yet a wise man says, Poet.
^ita cauat lapidem, consimitur an^us vsu: that is, Water by continual drops
does eat up the stone, and a Ring by continual use is worn in pocces. So an
idle word, although it be but a small sin, yet many a little makes a mickle,
many of them heaped up together make an intolerable lump.

At has been, is, and ever will be the fond nature of man, to imagine sin
a great deal lesser than indeed it is. A man would think that Adam (through
the devils suggestion, Genesis 3.6.
and through the abuse of his own free will) Eating of the forbidden fruit, had
committed but a small trespass: yet he was guilty of everlasting torment for
the same. A man would think, Nu. 15.36.
that that poor man had committed but a small sin in gathering chips (of mere
necessity) on a Sabbath day: yet he was by the law stoned for his labor. A
man would think that Peter had given his master good counsel, Mat. 16.22 23.
(when as Christ told him that he must go to Jerusalem, and there suffer many
things:) saying, Master favor thy self, and go not: yet he was called
Satan for his labor. Act. 5.35.
A man would think that Ananias and Saphira had committed but a small sin,
when as they did detain part of the Apostles money, for fear of afterclaps,
and protested the contrary with a lie: yet they died both suddenly at the feet
of Peter. So a man would think, that an idle word were but a small sin yet
Christ says here, that a great account must be made for the same; For by
thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou shall be condemned.
Ma. 11.3.5
Seeing this is true, it behooves every man to set a watch before the door
of his lips, and to keep his tongue from idle and evil words, that he may
obtain that blessedness: Eccl. 14.8
blessed is he that has not fallen by the words of his mouth.

3 We must give an account of our works: Works. 1. cor. 5.10 Ecle. 12.14
as it appears to the Corinthians: We must all appear before the judgment
seat of Christ, and there receive according to our works. Again the Preacher
says: that God will bring to judgment, every work, with every secret thing,
whether it be good or evil. He that has lived in sin shall receive the
reward of sin, which is death and damnation; and he that has lived in faith
and amendment of life, shall receive a crown of glory, which the Lord will give
him at that day.

It is the duty therefore of every Christian to labor and endeavor with all
diligent carfulness to live toell, that at the day of judgment, he may speed
well. (...) been vmore, that is, live well, should be the delightsome poesy,
and sweet perfumed Nosegay of every christian: thus live well, that thou may
die well, and after death eternally speed well, obtaining that blessedness,
Blessed are they that die in the Lord.

4 We must give an account of our Goods.
how we have gotten them whether justly, or unjustly: how we have spent them,
whether we have clothed the naked with them, or whether we have made naked the
clothed for them. how we have disposed them, least there be any debate for
them after we be gone: therefore Esaias telling Ezekia that he should not live
but die, says: Esaias. 38.1
Dispone domum tuam, etc. Set thine house in order, for thou must not live but
die. How then shall those griping vultures make an account, that have by
oppression undone their brethren? The world is grown so hard bearted, that men
will rather suffer their brethren to starve in the streets, than to succor or
relieve them: the dogs shall have the remnant of the rich man's Table, Iuk 16
21.
before poor Lazarus shall have one crumme that falls from the same. How
shall these flinty hearts look for one dram of mercy at the day of
judgment? Let the^ look with what measure they have measured to others, it
shall be measured to them again: let them know that it they will stop their
ears at the cry of the poor, they shall cry themselves, and shall not be
heard: if they will be partakers with the Saints of the ioys of heaven, their
brethren must be partakers with them of their wealth on earth: for this is to
treasure up treasures in heaven, to layout their treasures on earth.

Let men therefore so use their temporal goods, and worldly riches, as they
may at the day of account receive a crown of immortal glory.

5 We must give an account of the time wherein we live, Time.
and of our several vocations, how we have employed our selves in the same.

Says Bernard: Omne tempus tibi impensum requiretur a te, Ber.
qualiter fuerit expensum: id est. All the time that God has given thee, shall
be required at thy hands, how thou have spent it: Whether in the service of
God or in the service of Satan.

The Prince must give an account, how he has governed his kingdom: whether
he has (as it becomes Gods vicegerent) mildly, lovingly, and carefully
trained his subjects up in the worship of GOD: or as a bloody Nero, and
hard-hearted Tyrant cruelly oppressed them. The ministers of the word of God
(who have taken upon them curam animarum, the charge of souls) must give an
account, how they have be haued themselves in their ministry: whether they
have preached Christ for Christ, that is, for the conversion of sinners to
Christ, or (as hirelings) for lucre and gain of worldly trash: whether they
have fed their flocks carefully, or fed upon their flocks couetously. The
Magistrate must give an account, how he has behaved himself in his
magistracy: whether he has sought the maintenance of virtue, and the
confusion of vice: or has (his eyes being blinded with silver scales)
maintained iniquity, and oppressed the innocent. The householder, how he has
gouerne^ his family: whether in reading of holy Scriptures, and prayer, to the
praise and glory of God; or in reading of foolish fables, in gaming, dicing,
playing, swearing and such like. Yea every man must give an accounte of the
time spent in his several calling, from the highst to the lowest. Let every
Christian therefore beware of mispend^ng his time, living in security loosly,
and of loosing his time securely, and carelessly: for there will come a day when
for every hour of thy life thou shall give an account, how thou have spent it:
according as Solomon tells the careless liver: Rejoice O young man in thy
youth, cheer thy heart in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of
thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: but know that for all these
things GOD will bring thee to judgment. Time lost can never be recovered,
the hour past cannot be recalled: time is painted like an old man having a
lock of hair on the former part of his head, but balde on the hinder part;
to signify, that men should lay hold of time coming, and make much of it when
they have it: for being once gone, it can never be recovered. Aug.
Augustine confesses that he spent his time idly when he stood gazing and
looking on a Spider, how thee caught a fly in her net: But alas, men in these
days do not only spend their time in idleness (which is a shameful fault
amongst Christians) but also in all manner of evil: Amos 6.^
They put off from them the evil day, namely the day of death and judgment,
and boldly approach to the seat of iniquity: a matter much to be lamented.

Let every Christian therefore have a care of the expense of time, least (had I
wist) comes too too late: for the damned in hell if they had this favor of
God, to live on the earth again, and to have hell broken loose (which they
shall never have granted) they would live so strictly, as they might be
Chronicled for admirable spectators to the whole world. Exemp.
It is the duty therefore of every man, to imitate that person, that vigilant
person, that carried always about with him in his pocket a little clock, and
when he heard it sound, he would instantly examine himself how he had spent
that hour: thus should Christians examine themselves, that they may never be
examined of the Lord, judge themselves that they may never be judged of the
Lord, and account with themselves, that they may never be brought to an account
of the Lord. Thus much for the second part of this text, namely, of what
things we must give an account.

But I say unto you, of every idle word, etc. Before I speak of the third
parts of this text, namely of the Judge, to whom we must give an account, I
think very necessary to speak of a few things, which being well considered,
we may be able to abstain from idle words, and shall have the less account
to make at that day. Three things therefore there are, which being performed,
we shall abstain from idle words.

1 A man must consider what he speaks 2 To whom he speaks. 3 When he
speaks.
1 What he speaks: Quid
Peter tells us what we ought to speak in his first Epistle: 1. Pc. 4.11
Jf any man speak let him speak as the words of God. Again Paul to the
Ephesians says: Epes. 4.29
Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is
good to the use of edifiing, that it may minister grace to the hearer. So that
we ought to speak above all things of God and his word, of good and honest
matters, if we will show our selves to be true Christians, and abstinent from
idle words. We should say with David, Psalm. 34.1.
I will always give thanks to the Lord, his praise shall be in my mouth
continually. Job. 27.4.
We should resolve with Job and say: My lips surely shall speak no
wickedness, and my tongue shall utter forth no deceipte: then shall we use our
tongues to that purpose, to which they were created.

The tongue in Hebrew is called: Kebod: id est, gloria Glory; because it is an
instrument to sing forth the glory of God upon earth. If we use our tongues to
this purpose, then may we truly say with the Poet, Lingua quid melius? Poet.
What is better then the tongue? But if it be abused to the dishonor of
Almighty God, if it be an untamed member, uttering out idle, and evil words:
then may we conclude with the Poet, and say, Lingua quid p^es eadem? What is
worse than the tongue?

Let every Christian therefore show himself (as he professes) a Christian in
his speech: Mat. 12.3^
For out of the abundance of the heart, the mouth speaks. Even as the heart
stands affected, so is the speech of every man: For Lingua est mentis
interpres: the tongue is the interpreter of the mind: the chaste man speaks
chastely and honestly, the wanton speaks lewdely and luxuriously: the envious
person speaks bitingly and bitterly. Even as by his speech a man may be
known what countriman he is: so a man by his speech may be known to what
kingdom he belongs.

There are three kingdoms and men by their talk may be known to which of these
they belong. There is, 1. Three kingdoms.
Prouincia coelestis, the kingdom of heaven: and the speech of this country is
praising of God, talking of his word, giving of thanks for the great
benefits we have received, and speaking of divine and heavenly matters: he
therefore that speaks on this manner ( Id que non hypocritice that is, Not
hipocritically. For Simulata sanctitas, duplex inquitas: counterfeit holiness
is double ungodliness) surely appertains to the kingdom of heaven.

2 There is prouincia terrestris: the and the sp^ach of this country is talking
of terrene end earthly matters ^^ozling with ye mole in the Cranies terrarumque
poris, and in the pores of the earth, quite contrary to the nature of man: Ovid.
for Os homini sublime dedit (says the Poet) coelumque tueri inssit: God gave
man a lofty face, and bad him look aloft, and hold up his head toward heaven.
According to that of John: Qu^de terra est, de terra loquitur: He that is of
the earth, speaks of the earth. Job. 3.31. 1. John. 4.5
And again, They are of the world, therefore speak they of the world.

3 There is prouincia infernalis: The kingdom of Hell: and the language of
this country is, swearing, forswearing, cursing, banning and blaspheming: if
therefore thou see such a one, it is to be feared that he belongs to the
province of hell. Thou therefore that would belong to Gods thrice blessed
kingdom, thou that would abstain from idle words, and so have the less
account to make; thou must beware what thou speak, thou must talk of God and
of his word, of holy and heavenly matters.

2 He that would abstain from idle words, must consider, to whom he speaks:
if he speaks to a fool, be must use few words, for he spends his
breath in vain: if he speaks to a froward and contentious person, he must
use mild and gentle words: or else be takes the bellows to quench the fire:
if he speaks to a wise man, he must use no vain Cautologies, or needless
repetitions: for frustra fit per plura, quod fires potest per paucior^t. It is
in vain to use many words, when we may as well be conceived in few. If these
things be not considered, we may (yea speaking of divine and holy matters)
offend in idle words.

3 If we would abstain from idle words, we must also consider when to
Solomon: Eccles. 3.^
There is a time to speak, and a time to hold ones peace. Says one: there is
a time when something may be spoken, and there is a time when nothing may be
spoken, but there is no time when all things may be spoken. These three things
well considered of us, we shall abstain from idle words, and have the less
accounte to make at the day of judgment. Again every Christian, as he ought
to imitate Christ in all things, so he ought to imitate him in his words:
Gregory says, that Omnis Christi actio nostra debet esse instructio, id est,
Every action of Christ ought to be to us an example of imitation. Greg.
Christ had three things in his words worthy of consideration, which we must
likewise labor to have, if we will abstain from idle words.

1 He had veritatem in verbis: truth yea he reports of himself in John:
that he is, via, voritas, John. 14.6
and vita: the way, the truth, and the life. He therefore that speaks truth
to his neighbor, shows himself to be the child of Christ Jesus, the
fountain and origo of al truth: but he that speaks ^asings: and utters
forth lies, shows himself to be the child of the devil, the author and
original of all lies. vt in verbis: profit in his words: as he spoke truly, so
he spoke profitably: he never spoke one idle or unprofitable word throughout ye
whole course of his life, which was above 32 years. 3 Christ had moderame^ in
verbis A mean in his word^ the never was in words excessi^e, and when just and
necessary occasion was offered, he was never deficient, but Lady mean I
mean golden virtue drew forth his well contrived words out of the rich
content of his euer-flowing heart, He fulfilled that saying of Jesus the son of
^h: the words of the wise are weighed in a balance. ^cclesiasti 21.25.


In these three things should every one imitate Christ Jesus, and then we
should abstain (as he did) from idle, vain, frivolous, and unprofitable
words, for which a great account must be given: the which imitation of Christ,
the Lord for Christ his sake, grant to all men, that they being like unto him
may be received to reign with him, and his holy Angels in the thrice happy
heavens at that day, Amen.

But I say unto you, Text
that of every idle word that men shall, etc.

3 To whom this account must be given: The third part.
although in this scripture the Judge is not expressly mentioned, yet
notwithstanding quod subintelligitur non d^est: that which is understood is
not wanting: and therefore not to be omitted.

This Judge therefore before whose tribunal seat all mankind must appear, it
is Christ: for he was anointed of his father into a triple office: to be a
Priest after the order of Melchisedech. to be a Prophet after the order of
David: to be a King after the order of Solomon. Therefore Christ, as he is king
over all in heaven and earth, is this judge before whom we must all appear:
the truth of this is evident in the Epistle of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
We must all appear before the tribunal seat of Christ, 2. Cor. 5.10
etc. We read also in John, that the father iudgeeth no man, but he has
committed all judgment to his son. And in Matthew it is written, that all
power is given to Christ in heaven and in earth. John. 5, 22 Math. 28.18. Ps.
2.7.8.9
This was prophesied of him in the Psalm. Thou art my son, this day have I
begotten thee: ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance, and the ends of the earth for thy possession: thou shall crush
them with a Scepter of iron, and break them in pieces like a potters vessel.
And again in another place: Sit thou at my right hand, Psalm. 110, 1
until I make thine enemies thy footstool. Yea, it is an article of our
faith, to believe that Christ shall come again to judge the quick and the
dead.

Judge,
Christ is therefore the judge: yea he is the vorus Index, a right Judge: for
this word Index, that is Judge, is as much as ius dicens: id est One that
speaks justice: and Iudice: that is, to judge, is as much as, ius dice: to
speak justice, and iudicium, that is, judgment is as much as iurisdicium, if I
may so term it, that is a just and right speech.

So Christ being an vprighte judge maintains justice in judgment: he is a
judge that will use no partiality, but will reward every man according to his
works: he is a judge that has no respect of persons. Rom* 2, ^
Men in this world may fitly be compared to actors of a Comedy upon a stage:
Whereto one acts yt part of a Prince, another of a Duke, another of an Earl,
another of a noble man, another of a Gentleman, another of a Magistrate,
another of a merchant, another of a countrima^, another of a servant: one
acts one part, one another; and so long as they are upon the stage, so long
there is respect [according to their parts] one of another amongst them: but
when the Comedy is ended, and the stage pulled down, then there is no such
respect amongst them: yea many times he that played the basest part, is the
best man.

So likewise, so long as men art sundry parts upon the stage of this earth,
that is, so long as men do live in several vocations, so long there is
respect amongst men, and that worthily: but when as the Come die shall be
ended, that, is, the day of doom shall come upon all men, when as the stage
shall be pulled down, that is, the earth shall be changed (for the earth
shall never be brought ad non ens, to nothing; but only the corruptiue
qualities shall be consumed:] then shall there be no respect of persons
amongst men: yea it may be that the poor man shall be greater before God
than the rich man. Yea and Besides all this, upon the earth GOD has no
respect of persons [although there be respect amongst men) but every man
shall receive according to his works, the Prince as well as the subject, the
rich as well as the poor.

If a Judge then should come into a city, and should judge the greatest part
of the city to death, sparing no man, nec precio, nec prece, neither by bribes
nor entreaties, would not every man in that City be in great perplexity and
fear? so fear this Judge, who shall come with thousands of Angels in great
Pomp, Majesty, and Glory, into the city of this world, and judge the
greatest part of mankind to death, and damnation, sparing no man, neither
pretto, nor prece, neither by bribes, nor yet by entreaties, a Judge that will
use no partiality, A Judge that is able to destroy both body and soul in hell
are for evermore: fear this judge, Iam. 4.12.
this terrible Judge, this just Judge, this strict Judge, that will not suffer
one idle word to escape in judgment: thou that have offended this Judge by thy
manifold transgressions, thou that have deserved for them everlasting torments
in the pit of hell, fear him: quake and tremble before him at the hearing of
this hard saying: But I say unto you, that of every idle words that men shall
speak, they shall give account thereof at the day of judgment.

If Paul a chosen vessel, and a faithful servant of Jesus Christ, was afraid
of this judgment: if the just and vprighte man Job cried out and said: Job.
31.14
Quid agam, quo me conuertam cum venerit dominus ad iudicandum? What shall I
do, O whither shall I tu^ne me, when the Lord comes to judgment? Hil^ion.
If blessed Hilary (who from the fourteenth year of his age served the Lord in
singleness of heart, and in sincerity of life to his lives end) was afraid of
this day: as it appears by his speech upon his deathbed: Egredere anima,
agredere: quid times? quid dubitas? that is, Go forth O soul, go forth, why
art thou afraid? why doubtest thou? thou have served Christ these seventy
years, and art afraid now to depart? If these holy men were afraid of this
terrible day: how ought thou (O sinner) that art defiled with sin from top
to toe, that have not served thy God (as thou ought) one day in 70. years,
how ought thou to quake and tremble? 1 Pc. 4.18
if the just shall scarce be saved, where shalt thou (poor wretch) appear?

Ex. 16.18.
If the people of Israel trembled at the presence of God on mount Sinai, when
the Lord gave unto them his law, and (as a Scheolemaister,) read a lecture to
all the world: how terrible will his presence be when he shall come and exact
this lecture at thy hands, how thou have conned the same? Apo. 1.17 Dan. 8.17


If John and Daniel, at the sight of a mild Angel, fell upon the earth as dead:
how shall thou (poor sinner) endure the presence of this terrible judge? If
Haman could not abide the angry countenance of King Ahasuerosh: how shall thou
(O wicked man) abide the angry countenance of this frowning judge? If Adam,
Hest. 7.6. Genesis 3.8.
for the commission of one sin, ran from god in great fear, and hid
himself behind the bush: whither shall thou (O sinful Adamite that haste
committed as many sins as stars in sky, as hairs on head and sands by
sea. Immo horum numerus numero non clauditur vllo: Yea the number of them is
not to be numbered) whither (I say) shalt thou desire to run? and where
shalt thou wish to hide thy self from this terrible judge? O (says
Augustine) mallent impii esse in inferno, quam videre faciem irati indicis; The
wicked had rather be tormented in hell, than see the face of this fearful
judge. Aug.
Then shall thou cry to the mountains: Cadite super me: Fall upon me: Apoc.
6.16
and to the hills: Abscondite me a facis sedentis super thronum, and ab ir a
agni: id est, Hide me from the face of him that sits upon the throne, and
from the wrath of the Lamb.

Then shall the book be opened, videlicet, the evidence of thy works in this
life, recorded freshly in the testimonye of thine own conscience, and in the
true and infallible memory of Gods eternal wisdom: then shall thy sins be
set in order before thine eyes: Psalm. 50.21 Psalm. 50.4. Romans 2.15.
heaven and earth shall witness, against thee, yea thine own conscience shall
condemn thee: and conscientia est mill testes: Thy conscience is a thousand
witnesses to condemn thee. The Devil shall plead hard (most pitiful
wretch) for thy soul and body, accusing thee on this manner: O iudex
iustissime, O most just judge, thou have in the abundance of thy love
suffered many torments of hell upon the Cross at Golgotha, for the redemption
of this wretch: thou have offered him (times innumerable) redemption,
justification, and endless happiness: yet nevertheless he has despised
thee, and hated thy instruction, and has chosen rather to follow me, then
thee, rather to walk in iniquity after my example, then in holiness of life
after thine, he has chosen to be my servant, rather than thine: therefore
what remains, but that thou should refuse him, that refused thee, and that
I should receive him to everlasting torments, that has hitherto served me.

When thou (poor soul) shalt here this pitiful Plea, and confess the same
to be too true, what shall become of thee, or whither shall thou turn thee
for comfort? Alack, alack, thou shall have no hope of salvation: for above
thee, thou shall see the judge angry with thee for thy sins, and the blessed
Angels rejoicing and laughing at thy destruction: benethe thee, thou shall see
hell open, and the fierye furnace ready to receive thee to torment: on thy
right hand shall be thy sins accusing thee: on thy left hand the devils
ready to execute Gods judgments upon thee: within thee shall lie thy
conscience gnawing: without thee the damned crew bewatling: on every side fire
burning: and then shall thou receive this lamentable sentence: Go from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire, Mat, 25 41
which is prepared for the devil and his Angels: Goc*
Every one of these words are able to cut thy heart a sunder. Go from me:
hitherto I have been a Father to thee: I have bestowed many comfortable
benefits upon thee: I have had great care of thee: but now go from me into
torments inexpressible: where thou shall cry unto me, but I will not beer
thee: in torment shall thou lie comfortless: in hell thy torment shall be
endless: I will put a gulf between thee and me, to make thy torments
remediless: thou shall be dying always, yet never dead: thou shall seek
death, Apoc. 9.6. Luke 6.25.
but never find it: thou shall be burning always, yet never burnt to death:
thy meat shall be griping hunger, and famine intolerable: Psalm. 11.6. Mat.
13.4^
thy drink shall be lakes of fire and brimstone: thy music shall be
howling and roaring of crying Devils, and weeping, wayling, and gnashing of
teeth.

Ye cursed: Ye Cur^
thou have been called hitherto by renowned and glorious titles: as Prince,
Duke, Noble, Reverend, Master, etc.

but now thou shall have an other title: thou shall be called cursed: cursed
shall thou be of God, whose curse is panarum inflictio: id est punishment:
cursed shall thou be of all the blessed Angels in heaven: whose curse is
conscientiae cruciamen, id est vexation of thy conscience; cursed shall thou
be of all the devils in hell, whose curse is poenarum executio, id est: the
execution of thy punishment prescribed; according to that of the poet; Minos
examen, Radamanthus dat cruciamen; tertius heu frater tertia iura tenet: id
est, One devil rippeth up thy examination, another devil tormenteth thee, the
third is not behind to add one torment to another upon thee. Cursed moreover
shalt thou be of all the damned crew, whose curse, is poenarum aggrauatio, id
est: the augmentation of thy torment: thus cursed shall thou be of all things
for evermore. Jnto everlasting fire: O miserable torment! there were some
comfort to the damned soul, if these torments should have end: but that shall
never be: O miserable wretch, thou shall be bound hand and foot, and cast
into this everlasting fire, Into euerl. fire. Mat. 22.13
in respect of which fire, all earthlye elementall fire is but as fire painted
on a wall; thy torments shall be endless, easelesse and remediless.

Which is prepared.
Which is prepared for the devil and his Angels: Heaven was prepared for
thee, and not Hell: thou were borne to glory, and not to torment; but because
thou have chosen to follow the Devil and not me, therefore, Go from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire which is prepared for the devil, and thee his
wicked Angel; where thou shall lie weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of thy
teeth for evermore.

The consideration of these things should stir up every Christian to look
about him, to be careful and circumspect to all his ways, that he tread
not his shoe awry at any time, that he offend not this fearful judge, in any
thing: that at this day of judgment he may find him a gentle and loving
Lamb, and not a Lion of Judah: for as to the wicked this judge is terrible, so
to the godly he is a friendly and a welcome Judge: as to the wicked the day of
judgment is a day of desolation, a day of clouds and blackness; so to the
godly, Zeph, 1.15
it is a day of redemption, yea the godly shall leap for joy at that day, and
for the coming of that eternal day, Apoc. 6.9 10.
the blessed spirits in heaven cry out saying: how long Lord? and the blessed
ones upon earth desiring the coming of this day also; saying with Paul,
Cupimus dissolui and esse cum Christo, id est, Phil. 1.23. Apoc. 22.
We desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ; and praying with John,
Veni Domine Jesus; Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Let every Christian therefore so lead his life, that it may go well with him
at that day; What if J have all the world, Math.
and loose my soul at that day, what does it profit me.

If a man be called to appear before some earthly judge, he will have an
especial care to array himself in the best manner he may, and to be have
himself accordingly, that he may be the better accepted of him: So every
Christian against the day of judgment, when he must appear before the king
of Kings, and judge of all the world, must have an especial care to put on
the wedding garment of Christ's righteousness and regeneration, least he be
sent packing to Hell with the wicked and all those that forget God.

(...) 2.
Mordecay, because he went basely in sackcloth, could not be permitted to come
into the Kings palace: and do thou think (whatsoever thou art) that thou
shall be admitted into ye glorious Palace of the King of heaven, having on the
stinking, defiled, and abominable garment of impurity, and the menstruous
cloth of iniquity? no, no, the Lord will spue thee out of his mouth a
stinking carkas stinketh not to before men, as a polluted sinner in the
nostrells of almighty God.

Nebuchadnezzar would have no children in his Palace, but those that were
wise and beautiful: Dan. 4.
and do thou think, that the King of heaven and earth will have any fools,
that is sinners (for the sinner is called a fool in the Scripture: the foo^e
^ath said in his heart, Psalm. 14.1.
there is no God) to dwell with him in his Palace? or do thou think that
any ugly person shall be suffered there? that is any sinner (for the sinner is
an vglye and abominable thing in the sight of God), no: the Lord will
entertain none into his kingdom, but such as are beautiful, shining in
holiness, purity, and righteousness, as the portalls of the burnisht sun:
such as are without spot or wrinckle, Omnino ad imaginem suam: altogether like
unto him: holy as he is holy, pure as he is pure: such will the Lord have in
his kingdom to sing Halleluiah: Salvation and glory, and honor, Apo. 19.1.
and power be to the Lord our God.

Therefore as the thief is exceeding provident, and very careful how he may
answer the Judge at the bar: and as in earthlye courts men will be very
careful to provide an answer against they be called: yea and will make some
friend to the judge, that they may speed the better: So likewise every
Christian soul should carefully provide a good answer against he be
cited by the Apparitour death, to appear before Christ at the general Court
of Heaven: And that then it may go well with him, let him get some friend to
move the judge in his behalf, as he tendereth the welfare of his dear soul:
and who must that friend be? Not Mary, nor Peter, but it must be Christ
Jesus, that sits at the right hand of his father in glory, and makes daily
intercession for the sins of the whole world. Get him for thy Proctour (who
offers himself to al) and then happy shall thou be: the devil shall not
prevail against thee: for Christ has broken his head: the gates of Hell shall
not prevail against thee, for Christ has conquered them: and death shall not
bold thee captive, for christ has overcome it: P. 44.15.
Happy art thou that art in such a case, yea blessed art thou, if thou have
the Lord for thy God:

Thus much for the third pare of this Text namely, of the judge, to whom we
must give an account. Text.


But I say unto you, that of every idle word, etc.

4 When we shall give an account: it is said here: at the day of judgment:

The time, when this great and general day shall be, cannot be known of mortal
man: yea it is not for man to know of it: as we may read in ye Acts: It is not
for you to know the times and seasons, Act. 1, 7. Mark, 13
which God has put in his own power: yea Christ himself knows not of this
day: 32.
But of that day and hour (says Marke] knows no man, no, not the Angels
which are in heaven, neither the Son himlelfe, save the Father: id est:
Christ according to his humane nature knows not of it, but according to his
divine nature, he knows of it, as well as God the Father: for he is coequall
with God the Father in knowledge, wisdom, and in all things whatsoever: yea
he knew of this day before the foundation of the world was laid, yea he
himself shall sit judge at ye day.

God will not have us know of this day, when it shall be, for these three
causes,

1 To prove and try our patience, faith, and other virtues: to see whether
we will put our whole trust and affiance in him, although we ^^^^e not the
time of our dissolution.

2 To bridle our curiosity and peevish inquisition after such (too high)
matters: Arist.
qua supra nos, nihil ad nos: that which is above our capacity, we ought not
to meddle withal.

3 To keep us in continual watchfulness: for if we knew certainly the day
of death and judgment, surely it would be a great and forcible motive to
draw us to a loose, negligent, and secure kind of life. Mat. 24.42.
Watch therefore (says the Evangelist) because ye know not when your Master
will come. For these three causes the Lord will not have us know of the time of
judgment,

Although (my beloved in Christ) we know not the certainetie of the time of
this day: yet nevertheless we must know, that this great and general day
cannot be far off, both according to the prophesies of holy Fathers, as also
to the truth of holy Scriptures.

Augustine, in his book upon Genesis against the Manichees, says, that the
world should last six ages: the first from Adam to Noah: the second from
Noah to Abraham: the third from Abraham to David: the fourth from David to the
transmigration of Babylon: the fifth from the transmigration of Babylon, to the
coming of Christ in the flesh: the sixth from the coming of Christ in the
flesh to his coming again to judgment. So that according to his prophecy
we live in the last age, which last age, 1 Ioh. 2.28
^ called of John hora extrema or hora nouissima the last hour^: but how long
this last hour does last, he yt is a and o the first and the last, the
everlasting God alone does know.

The Hebrews they boast of the prophecy of Eliah, Eliah.
a great man in those da^e^ he prophesied that the world should last 6000,
year^s 2000, before the law 2000, under the law: and 2000 from Christ to
Christ.

If this his prophecy holds true, the world cannot last 400 years for since
Christ his coming in the flesh, it was 1606. at Christ's tide last have,
according to the computation of the Church from time to time. But leaving men
and coming to the Scripturs, which cannot err, for Humanu^ est errare: Man
may, yea and does many times err.

1. Co. 10.11
Saint Paul says, to the Corinthians: We are they upon whom the ends of the
world are come. If therefore the ends of the world were come upon the^ that
lived above 1560. years ago, then surely doomes day cannot now possibly be far
off.

Iam. 5.9.
James likewise says: Behold the Judge stands before the door.

Mat. 3.2
John Baptist preached repentance to the Jews, saying: repent for the kingdom
of heaven is at hand.

So that by these places of Scripture it is evident, that the general day of
Judgment is at hand: as also by the signs and tokens which should go before
this day immediately, of which many, yea almost all are already fulfilled.

Moreover we must (dear brethren] know that there is a twofolde judgment: the
one called a particular judgment the other called a general judgment.

Death what
1 The particular judgment is exercised and executed upon every man
immediately after death, which is segregatio anima a corpore: a separation of
the soul from the body.

Of this particular judgment we may read in the Epistle to the Hebrews: It
is appointed unto men, that they shall once die, Heb. 9.27. 2 Es. 14.25
and after that comes judgment. And though the general Judgment comes
not these 4000. years, yet particular judgment comes at the day of our death:
and look as we at the day of our death shall be found, so shall we be judged:
and as we then shall be judged, so shall we be judged at the general judgment.

2 The general iudgement^ (of which this Scripture speaks) is exercised and
executed upon all men together by Christ: who shall by his power raise all
those up again that have been dead from the beginning of the world, to that
time: and they shall be presented all together (being again united to their
soules] before Christ's tribunal seat, who shall come down in a cloud from
heaven, in great majesty and glory, with thousands of blessed Angels attending
upon him: and he shall give sentence upon all in general: the wicked shall be
cast into everlasting fire, and the godly he shall carry up with him into
caelum Empiraeum, the third and highest heaven, (where he now in body
reigns and remains) there to reap joys unspeakable for evermore,

But some man may obiecte and say, why (I pray you) shall there be a general
judgment, when as all are judged in the particular judgment? what shall thee
be two judgments executed? There shall notwithstanding the particul^r) be a
general judgment, Ans.
and that for three causes.



2 In the particular judgment, ye soul only is either rewarded or punished:
but then both soul and body either shall be rewarded with joys, or punished
with torments.

3 There shall be a general judgment. to declare to all the world assembled
then together, the just judgment of god: that he has justly saved the
godly* and iu^ly condemned the wicked: yea the uery wicked themselves shall
confess no less.

By reason of this general judgment, some light brain heretics their be ye
say, that there is no particular judgment at al, and that the soul immediatl^
after death is not judged: for whereas it is said hodie mecu^eris in paradiso,
Luke. 23.43.
to day shalt thou be with me in paradise, the speech of our savior to the
thief they take that word hodie id est, to day for 1000 years; and bring for
proof hereof that place of ye Psalmist A thousand years in thy sight are as
yesterday, Psalm. 90.4.


But to answer them: this place of Scripture is not so to be understood, Ans.
as that a thousand years should be taken for a day; or a day for a thousand
years: for he says not: a thousand years are a day: but a thousand years
in the sight of God, that is, in respect of the eternity and euerlastingnesse
of god, are as a day: It is therefore spoken on this manner to express the
eternity of God, as if he should say: a thousand years with man in respect
of the eternity of God, are but as a day: for as many as are, have been, and
ever shall be the days of man, so many thousand, yea so many thousand
thousands years is the eternity of God: he is-and-the first and the last,
before all beginnings, and shall never have ending.

Genesis ^.17:
Again, they allege that place of Genesis; In that day that thou eatest thereof
(namely of the forbidden fruit) thou shall die the death.

Now (says the heretic) that day they died not, Ob.
but lived many hundred years after: therefore by a day is understood many
hundred years.

Ans.
But I answer that, that day (wherein Adam did eat of the forbidden fruit) even
that day did he dye: that is, that day by sin he was separated from God:
then the which separation no death is greater; Aug.
for Vt vita corporis est anima, ita vita animae est deus; toll anima^, perit
corpus: toll deu^, moritur animae; id est, As the soul is the life of the
body, so God is the life of the soul; take away the soul, the body dies;
take away God, the soul is dead; So that Adam that day died in soul, being
separated from the Lord; yea that day Adam was made subject to death in this
life, and in the life to come; that day he had the beginnings of death seasing
upon him, for he was presently cast out of Paradise into the ragged world, he
was cursed and all his posterity, yea he should have gone to hell, had not the
second Adam broken the head of the subtle serpent that enticed him to sin.
Yea, the thief upon the cross had Paradise that day in soul, in which he
suffered in body; although he had it not in so full measure, as he shall at
the general day, when his soul shall take unto it the body again; hodie, to
day thy soul with my soul shall be in Paradise, that is, in my fathers
kingdom. Where is now the heretic that confounds particular judgment?

Where is now the Epicure, that thinks there is no judgment at all?

Where is now the ignorant Papist that dreameth of Purgatory? and he that
fondly thinks that there is Limbus patrum, and Lymbus puerorum? and where are
these that imagine of a place of ab^ade, between Heaven and Hell? I turn them
all together to the Hebrews for Wisdom in this point: Heb. 9.27:
where they shall find that after death the soul of man is judged.

Phil. 1.23:
Would Paul have so earnestly desired to have been dissolved, if he should not
presently have bin with Christ He says, that in this world we see in a glass
darkly: 1 Co. 13.11 Exo. 33.23
We see but Gods back ports as Moses did, that is, but a little of the sailour
of God: But then that is, after this life ended we shall see god face to face:
that is, we shall have the full fruition of him.

Luke 16.22
We read of Dives and Lazarus, that after death the one was judged to heaven,
the other to hell: which is a Parable to signify the truth of this particular
judgment.

Eccle. 12.7
And (to conclade this point) we read in Solomon: that the dust returns to the
earth from whence it came, and the spirit to God ^h^ gave it.

So that we may learn from hence the uncertainty of the day of judgment. Well
says Bernard: The use: hereof, Ber.
Nihil certius morte, hora mortis nihil inocentius: that is, Nothing is more
certain than death, and there is nothing more uncertain than the hour of
death.

Let every Christian therefore (that wishes the salvation of his soul at the
day of death and judgment) beware of security and careless living: let no man
defer repentance, and amendment of life, least death come when he i^d^eth
not for it, and so (being unprepared he be cast into hell fire.

The old world had 120. Genesis 6.3. Ion^s 1.4 Pl. 95.10.
years to repent in: N^n^e had 40. days to repent in: Israel had 40. years
to repent in; but thou (O man) know not how long thou have to live: thou
haste no lease o^ thy life: thou art here to day, and gon^ to morrow: when the
hours of thy life be ended, and the glass outrunne, thou must away: death
wastes for thee in every place, and at all times: therefore waste thou for it
plaing as the five wise virgins, Mat. 25.4
that had the candle of faith burning in the lamps of their hearts, nourished wc
the oil of love and works,

Jerusalem, because she could not be brought to repentance, she was
destroyed: many hundred thousands of her children were famish^e to death:
Iosephu.
and many hundred thousands taken captive by Titus Vespatian the Roman
Emperor: many cast to wild beasts and devoured,

The children of Israel, because they were a stiffenecked people, and a
froward generation, and would not be brought to repentance: how many
thousands of them lay slain in the wilderness? 600000. males; except Joshua
and Caleb.

The old world, because they would take no warning, Genesis 7.23.
and could not be brought to amendment of life: the flood drowned them all,
except faithful Noah and his godly family. And except thou repentest, thou
likewise shall perish: according to that of Luks: Except ye repent, ye shall
all likewise perish: beware therefore and repent betimes: Foelix quem faciunt
aliena pericula cautum, Happy is he, Luke 13, 3
whom other men's harms do make to beware.

Refuse no good motions knocking at the door of thy heart, but entertain them
willingly; according to the counsel of Augustine; Aug.
If he offers thee grace to day (says he) take it, make much of it: for
thou know not whether he will offer the same to morrow: Make no long
tarrying to turn to the Lord, Ecclesiasticus. Poet.
and put not off from day to day; the longer thou remainest in thy sin, the
harder it is for thee to repent: for Qui non est hedie, cras minus aptus erit:
If thou be not fit to amendment to day, thou will be less fit to morrow.
Therefore while ye lord speaks to thee, make him answer: while he calls
unto thee, let there be an echo in thine heart, as was in the heart of David:
seek ye my face: thy face Lord will seek: and while it is said to day, Psalm.
27.9.
harden not thine heart. In no case therefore defer thy repentance: for the day
of death and judgment is uncertain; as says Chrysostom: Poenitenti veniam
spospondit, sed viuendi in crastinu^ non spospondit: Chrysostom.
that is, the Lord has promised pardon to him that repents, but to live till
tomorrow, he has not promised.

But some there be in the world, that will say; Object.
(the more it is to be lamented) I am young. I will live a while after my
hearts desire, and in my old age I will repent me of my sins; for God has
promised (who will be as good as his word. Eze. 18.21 22.
) At what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sins from the bottom
of his heart, J will put all his wickedness out of my remembrance, says the
Lord.

And will pray to the Lord for forgiveness of their sins, Aug.
as Augustine said before his conversion: Ignosce (pacer) ignosce mihi: at noli
modo: Forgive me my sins, but not now: let me sin in my youth, and pardon
me in mine age: thus they would desire to die the death of the righteous: but
they would not live ye life of the righteous: but let these graceless persons
(that thus defer repentance) beware of two things.

1 Let them beware of sudden death: Let them take heed, least they be cut
off in the midst of their sins, as Jobs children in the midst of their
bauquetting and ryoting were soddaynely slain by the fall of the house: Job.
1.18.
and as the flood came unlooked for, and drowned the old world.

Liuis reports a fearful example of sudden death: Liuie.
says he, there were two old men that frequented two harlots, and presently
upon the face committed they both died suddenly: the one was thrust through
with a dagger: the other died suddenly of an Apoplerie: which is a disease
ingendered of abundance of gross humors, which do fill those vessels and
receptories of the head, from whence comes feeling and moving of the body,
Galen.
as says Galene, and therefore they that have this disease, are deprived of
all sense, feeling and moving.

Let every Iustie yonker and desperate ruffian set this fearful example
before his eyes.

Again, the young man dies, as soon as the old: the Lambs skin is brought
to the market, as well as the old^ crones: August.
true is that saying of Augustine: vita dum crescit, decrescit: vita mortalis,
and mors vitalis: id est life while it increases, decreaseth: life is dying,
and death is living.

2 Let all men that refuse the mercy of GOD, and defer their repentance know;
that repentance is not theirs at command: but it is the great mercy of GOD: and
it is to be feared, that they that have refused it offered, when they would
have it, they shall go without: according to that country Proverb: If you
will not when you may; when you will, you shall have nay: And it is commonly
seen, that qualis vita, finis eta: as a man lives, commonly be dies: he that
will live without repentance, must look to die without repentance.

Though God spared the thief at the last gasp, yet set no man presume of
that: for that was a medicine against desperation, and not a matter of
imitation: says one: God spared one, that no man might despair: he spared
but one, that no man might presume.

Let every man therefore (in the fear of God) without all delay, seek for
amendmente of life: Let them as ( Gregory wishes) Plangere plangenda Bewail
their sins that ought to be lamented: Rom, 6, 13.
and as they have given their members, as weapons of unrighteousness to
iniquity: so let them now give them as weapons of righteousness to holiness.
Repent (dear brethren) betimes; Viue de^ gratus, Poet.
tote mundo tumulatus: crimine mundat us semper transire paratus; that is Live
unto God a thankful wight, and to the world die; cleanse thy self from
wickedns, always ready hence to fly.

Play the wise steward, lay up treasures in heaven for thy soul: imitate the
Pismire which gathers in Summer, whereby she may live in winter.

Demasc.
Damascene reports an excellent History touching this purpose: says he
There was a country where they chose their king of the poorest and basest sort
of the people, and upon any dislikement taken, they would depose him from his
throne, and exile him into an Island, where he should be starued to death: Now
one wise fellow (considering hereof) sent money before into that Ila^d, into
which he should be banished, and when he was banished, he was received into ye
island with great triumph. So against thou be banished by death from this
world, without penny or farthing, (for naked thou came, and naked thou must
go) thou must provide whils thou art in this life, whereby thou may live in
heaven hereafter,

Let nothing therefore make thee defer thy amendment, but whilst Christ
calls thee, run unto him. Put on Ieromes resolution who said: If my mother
wete hanging about my neck, Ieromes
if my brethren were on every side, howling and crying, and if my father were
on his bare knees, kneeling before me to detain me in their wicked and
sinful course of life, what would J do? I would shake off my mother to the
ground I would despise and hate all my kindred and kinsfolks, and I would
tread and trample my Father under my feet, thereby to fly to Christ when he
calls me.

So should thou resolve the amendment of life. The Lord of Heaven for his
sweet Son Christ Jesus his sake, graune to th^r (dear Reader) and me, to
both of us, his holy Spirit that we may stand unblameable before the Judge, at
that great and general day: that we (being clothed with the long white Robes
of righteousness,) may be in the number of those to whom it shall be said
then: Come ye blessed children of my father, inherit the kingdom which was
prepared for you from the beginning of the world. Grant this ^eer father for
thy dear sons sake, Christ Jesus our only Lord and Savior: To whom with
thee and the holy spirit we ascribe all power, glory, and dominion, and stag
Halleluiah to thee, (O blessed Trinity) for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
A short disputation between the devil and the poor soul of a Christian.
Satan. THou have been a great Sinner.


Soul. Yes: but I am not so.


Satan. Thou art damned for that thou haste done.


Soul. No: thou lie Satan: God has promised otherwise to all that believe,
repent, and amend.


Satan. Thou beleeuest not, as thou say thy self.


Soul. Yes, I believe, and I desire to believe bettter: holiness of desire
does seal Gods favor to me.


Satan. Thy heart is hard, and so are al theirs whom god has rejected.


Soul. No satan, make the worste of it thou can, it is but a soul trance
for a time; the holy ghost remains; for I feel him still.


Satan. Do not thou see that god has taken thee in hand, and has laid a
heavy judgment upon thee?


Soul. God indeed has like a merciful father taken me in hand, to make me
a new creature: and like a loving father to correct me: but his mercy will he
never take from me, and no wrathful Judgment shall be toward me.


Satan. Every Pulpit rings of thee, and every part of scripture proclaims
thee to be mine,


Soul. The Lord reprove thee, satan, for this Slander: for all scriptures
and Pulpits tell me, I am gods dearly bought


Satan. Show me Gods seal for that, or else thou art mine.


Soul. I can weep for sin, and I hate sin in my self and others; and I
love virtue and the virtuous: which are the Arms of Christ in his seal, and
I find my heart foremost in his place marching on to heaven.


Satan. This thou did, but now thou haste left thy first love.


Soul. Thou haste said enough for me, the love of God is like himself
unchangeable, his guiftes and calling are without repentance, once Love and
never hate, as once Loved and never hated.


Satan. Thou have confessed, that thou haste no such feeling in Prayer and
Sermons, as in times past.


Soul. What gaynest thou by that? for in Christ's wooing days I was showed the
riches of his grace, but though I see not that daily, so highly to inflame me;
yet Christ is never the poorer, neither do I cease to love him: show me any one
of gods elect, that feels his love at al times alike: it is not the manner of
graces working, thou have no skill in graces affairs.


Satan, There is some matter I warrant thee against thee, that God hears not
thy prayer when thou call upon him, as thou confessest.


Soul. I know thou markest my confession, but the more I confess against my
self, the more I magnify Gods mercy.


Satan, But tell me, why God will not hear the prayer?


Soul. Satan God hears my prayer: but his delight is to hear the prayers of
his Children often, therefore he does delay.


Satan. God cares not for such a wretch as thou art.


Soul. The more wretch I am in thy sight, and also in mine own, the more
amiable I am to him; and so avoid satan, and speak no more.


A short deathbed Dialogue.
Satan, DEath is come, and I must have thee


Soul. Death is welcome, but thou shall go without me: here are others to
carry me, Christ my redeemer has sent his Angels for me.


Satan. Death will carry thee to Hell.


Soul. No: he must carry me no whither, but end me: the Angels must carry
me to mine own place. I have evidence to show, which I will not vouchsafe to
show thee: therefore avoid. Lord Jesus that have bought me, take me; I do
here surrender my self to thee, Amen. Speak not a word more but let thine
eyes be closed up in silence.


Morning prayer.
O Lord, That blessest thy service to thy servant: Bless us in this part of
thy service, prayer and thanksgiving to thee: and Because none are to meddle
with any part of thy service but thy called servants, good Lord bestow that
grace upon us that we feel more and more our effectual Calling, before we
presume to come near thee and because each duty is to be done, by, and in the
name of thy son: we confess that till our ingraftment into him by grace and
the apprehe^sion of faith through thy spirit our effectual calling does not
appear, so that if we want faith, thy spirit we must not intrude our selves
into thy sight, but our attenda^ce is upon the devil, and thou will not part
service with him.

O Lord in the weakness of faith we presume, accept of us, be in the midst of
us thou have strongly us called to obedience, in this and all other things by
word and work it is a dept therefore to be rendered hear of us: Lord receive
it; we confess our sins have driven us far away, they are many and great,
thy Curse is the due of them: to our shame we confess, we have been warned,
and yet since warning, against our knowledge and conscience, of forgetfullnes
weakness, and sometime of frowardness, we have of our natural inclination as
lightly esteeming thee, and thy law transgressed and offended Now Lord, albeit
we can destroy our selves, yet we Cannot save our selves; we entreat thy
Rich mercy for our pardon, and our savior Jesus Christ for our full
satisfaction. Lord in that mercy pardon us, and in Jesus christ be contented
and well ple-wt us: and for former conceived displesurs forget the^, and in the
multitude of thy co^passions remove the^, with sin of al kinds ye cause of
them; and so justice being answered, thy wrath appeased, and hell gates shut,
and a conquest assured; Let us walk in ye comfort of this peace, yea in
holiness and assurance of it: and as we have lost all by yt life and rule of
sin, so we pray yt let us find our selves restored by the death and captivity
of sin, let our understanding be lightened: let our memory be sound; let our
wills be holy: let our affection be honest, let our conscience be tender and
ready to every good exhortation: let our apetites be sober: let us be free from
bondage to prophanenes, in all our faculties, in all our lives, at all times,
and in all places: let us persevere, strive and overcome. Let us be armed and
watch, let us hear, read, and pray; let us meditate and study in thy love: let
all sad motions and passions be examined, and if ill suppressed: let us resign
al our bodies and souls holiness unto thy service. Let us not want that we
ought to have: let us not have yt we ought to want, or that is good to be
wanting. Lord let us show mortification in all our behavior. Let ye life of
righteousness appear in all our actions, inward and outward, secret and open.
Let us Regard our callings, and the duties belonging to the same. Let us have
grace to find out all the sound and peculiar Evidence of thy kingdom: let us
determine to keep thy word, let us vow it, whatsoever stands in the way: O
Lord be our keeper in our ways, this day and for ever: look from heaven upon
thy whole Church, and every member of it militant, that has need of the
prayers of thy saints, especially this part of it where we live: and above
every particular member, Lord let it please thee to regard our Sovereign Lord
the Kings Majesty, with his Queen, the noble Prince of Wales their Son, with the
residue of that Royal issue: have an eye dear Father to his Majesty's
honorable privy Council, to council them, and to the trusty nobility to
sanctify them: and to all subordinate maiestrates of City and Cuntry, to be
the God of gods among them, and to stir them up to stand in the gap, and to
take thy part against the Devil and his; and to animate them and bless them
hereunto, and to guide them. Let thy word have a free passage: let all lets be
removed, let the pillar and cloud of protection further it night and day^
Act. 16.
Let all that are able and willing to help in Macedonia be called in, and
countena^ced: let knowledge heal painfulnes, and a godly life appear in all
thy ministers. Let hearing and obedience meet in all thy people, because few
preferred by thee do prefer thee before their chief joys O Lord turn their
hearts as they belong to thee, let general consideration he had of the
benea^ts thou bestowest, to move the hearts of al high and low, to put to hand
to help thee against Anti-christe and the devil: and let the corrections of
thy hand, especially that heavy rod and stroke of the pestilence, continued
and greatly spread through the kingdom this four years, be stayed; let there
be an humiliation proportionable, general and earnest, true and unfeigned, and
without delay; Least thy angel, have his commission enlarged, not only to
kill hundreds, but thousands; as not long since, not only thousands, but
millions: O Lord stop yet the mouth of our chief crying sins: in the house of
David, in the house of Natha^, in the house of Levy, in all the howses of
Judah, let a search be made good Lord for Achan and for Jonas: that our state
may be calm, and the Epha sent into Shinnar. Lord help thy church in all
places, and in all things: let Babylon fall, let the Jews come on, let all
them be as Meroz that have ill will, and no good will to Sion, Amen.

Evening Prayer.
O Rich God, infinite in all goodness; we presume again to resort to that
ouerflowing fountain: Lord turn us not away, though we be fools, like thy
servant Gedeons Army, that we cannot tell the fittest way to take in the
sweetness of thy goodness; yet accept of our weakness, because that good mind
and heart we have, thou art the author of it: thou have called and beckned us
to thee, now we are come to know thy good pleasure, and to beg from thy
liberality what shall please thee: thy do^e of mercy is ever open to thy
saints, and thou fittest as Abraham at the door, to entertain poor, weary,
and heavy laden ones: and we know thou hastest to meet us, to do us good, like
a good God according to thy accustomed goodness: we are therefore confidently
comforted yt in this, that the least soule-whispering of an adopted child, is
as odours to thee, though it be silly and as the chattering of Ezechiah. O Lord
we willingly confess to thy praise, that thou have heard our prayers offered
to thee in the morning, we have through thy mercy fared well this day in soul
and body, not withstanding the spite of Satan, the malice of our sin, the
pestilent enmity of corrupt nature, and the envy of the world, and the deceits
of others among whom we dwell: O provident and kind Lord and Father, we have
brought thee for it, the best Lamb of our flock, even all hearty praise and
thanks, and purpose of better service that we can, and this dipped and drenshed
in heartmelting, and in Jesus Christ's merit and reconcilement: we beseech
thee, testify thy acceptance by addition of mercy in detraction and
multiplication of it: and let us obtain the taste and feeling of this, this
night following, and all our life time repent thee not: go forward with us for
Christ's sake, regard not the outstartings of soul or body against thy mind, in
thy presence: but let thy right hand of infinite compassion cast them (as a
millstone) into the deepes of our Christ's satisfaction, and attonemente, and let
our evidence be alwais kept by grace from dimnesse or blurres of our weakness,
that our saluations enemies may not so much as dare to dispute with us, about
our pardon and election. O Lord let thy spirit watch within us: let thy
ministering spirits attend without and about us, being poor heyrs of salvation.
What Satan has purposed. confound it, what sin has deserved, prevent it:
what thy merciful majesty sees to be good, let us have it for Christ's sake:
let our sleep be quiet and not excessive; let our health be continued, hold
thy hand over us, let no commission be granted against us, let every thing be
set in order, because our date is uncertain, and the place of our end unknown,
if our lease of life last till morning: in that shall appear to us that thou will bestow another day of grace upon us. O Lord we promise before thy
Majesty, that we will by thy grace strive to the uttermost period of our
strength to serve thee Lord; remember us, let us see a besome, made and put in
a strong hand for the wicked and wickedness, and let us see still the vine
planted by thy own hand to flourish, and all the walls of it to stand, and not
to fall, nor the least breach to be made: let it not be said that the Fore
shall with going upon it cursh it. O Lord to this end preserve our captain the
Kings majesty, and all about him for ever; and keep his heart in thy hand, and
the hearts of all Christian Kings, governors and people, that a joyful succes
may be seen to thy true religion and church among us, and in all the world: and
so with humble thanks we cease. To thee be all honor and glory for evermore.
Amen. Amen.

A thanksgiving for our late deliverance.
O Lord, it is good to give praises unto thy name, praise is comely, but thou
art so infinite in deseets, that our praises are all short; yet being true, and
new according to fresh and admirable benefits received, they are as incense to
thee: but when praises are not rendered in the due place, it provoke thee to
fury, yea to swear, that we shall perish for all them hereafter: and in wrath
thou will say, that which perishes let it perish: I will never put to hand to
help: O Lord justly may thou say so to us, for we have him wo^derfuly
preserved by thee, as Israel in Pihahiroth, as David in the Prophets school,
as Daniell in the Lions den, we have seen the axe lie at the root of our
greatest Cedars, as thou would have them no covering for us any longer: but
let the sun and stars to pearce with us as by withering Jonas Gourd: O Lord
often have thou bewrayd the malice of the popish crew, and the veno^ of all
that brood, that for the time we have been swallowed up with thy goodness, and
in ye soul rauishment we have promised, but after not paying our vows for
sin, thou have bin wors combred with us then before: good Lord upon our
confession grant us remission, and merciful acceptance; if thou studest true
thankfulness but in ten or a few. Lord receive it, and regard not the rest: let
the righteous deliver the rest, and so take all glory that can be given thee
from all the bra^ds that have bin pulled out of ye fire, and let al address
themselves to bring presents to thee that art to be fears, and so let our king
be kept with his and thine.

A prayer comprehending the matter of the last judgment.
O Blessed Christ Jesus, hasten to the last work of thy mediation, to
judgment, yea the last judgment: and because that cannot be till thou haste
sealed all thy elect, with the seal of Gods iron; O Lord hasten that work:
and to this end power thy spirit plentifully upon ministers and people, work
every good work that may further the building of thy Church, let all Christian
Kings cast their crowns before the Lamb, and be willing to lick the dust of
thy saints seet: let them be devoured with a zeal of thy glory, let thy word
spread into more countries and nations; let Babylon fall, let it be a cage of
unclean birds, let not the noise of a mil be heard any more in her. Let ye
Jews be graffed in again, as thou have promised, even all thy elect among
them, let prayers be made for them: Lord hear thou in heaven, the place of thy
habitation, and let all thine have grace to think of the last trumpet, sounded
to wake the dead: Let us remember the change of heaven and earth, and that fire
shall consume them. Let us Resolve, here is no place of any long abode: Lord
let us not defer and put of our repentance; for thou will come and will not
carry: and as a thief will thou steal upon the reprobates, when they are either
^leeping or beating their fellows. O Lord, let it please thee that we may take
heed of the company and conversation of the ungodly, or of any never so
nearly united unto us in the flesh: Because lord thou know, that then two
shall be in a bed, one taken and another refused, and that thou have said, that
it shall be then a blessed state to be found doing our duties: blessed christ
that shall come in glory, to judge both quick and dead, at thy appearance and
in thy coming: thy seat is said to be great, to contain such a personage of
Majesty; no greatness shall appear to be comparable to thine: and as thou art
great, so thy throne is white; for every one shall have justice of thee. O
Lord let us take mercy while the date of it lasts: for then the da^e of it
will be out, and Justice without partiality must take place: O Lord arm us in
the time of mercy, that we may stand in ye day of Justice, when the wicked yt
now ^augh, shall too late weep: when the heaven and earth in their present but
shall run away, and never be found again in ye fashion: O good lord what
wretches are we then to stand upon merit, when as the sun is not clear in thy
sight, especially considering no Evasion can be made from thy presence without
change, which shall be to late: and our merciful christ, our greatness now if we
be found ill, will not profit us, but hurt us and increase our judgment:
neither our smalnes will excuse us, or accuse us to harm us; but we must all,
of al sorts, and degrees and sexes stand and hold up hand at thy hat: O sweet
Jesus let it please thee, that we may use our greatness to thy glory, to good
and not to harm; our smalnes with comfort, and contentednes. O lord though we
may cover our sins before men, and find a friend in court: yet we pray thee
good Jesus, let us remember yt we must answer in thy court, when it shall be
too late to entreat. O Lord awake us and make us mindful of our account before
that we be called for, and seeing most great god al sesecrets must then be
known or pronounced pardoned, O good lord let us have grace from thee to confess
our secret sins, and to take heed of such: for thou keep a depte book. Lord
let us find speedily thy deep book Rased, thy word answered, and the book of
life to have our names; that when they shall be opened in the great day of thy
judgment, they may be no terror to us. Good Christ let us prepare our
witnesses, and make ready our answer without delay, for we know not what will
be to morrow. O lord we confess, we ca^ have no less then 4 sufficient
witnesses, thy word, thy spirit, our conscience, and the conscience of our
neighbors jointly. Let us be sure of these, to stop the mouth of all hellish
Enimity, and to seal up to us pardon and reco^ciliation in Jesus Christ: Let
us judge our selves, that our Judgment may quickly be passed over; that after
we may judge, and not be judged. O lord we know before, that we must hear
justice mercilesly, if we repent not: if we turn not, we must be turned out,
if we will not come in time, we must fearfully go with out time, O Lord let us
bethink us of our estate, and be sure of our peace with thee; else our doting
will quickly appear; for we are every moment within the compass of death, and
the prison of hell. O Lord, happy are toades before Reprobates, for death fully
ends the^: but death does keep the wicked, to restore them and bring them out
again to judgment, O Lord let us see thee angry, let us see thee pleased;
and so let not thy wrath, death, nor the last judgment terrify us. Let thy
church our king and state be blessed: Let Sions ilwillers be either converted,
or confounded: send out in thy bottomless mercies a reuocation of the commission
gone out against the people of this nation: By virtue whereof many die, and
many poor widows, and poor orphans cry: lord work what thou will, and take
what thou wol^est, and be pacified. Lord al thy afflicted servants make moan to
thee, Lord hear in heaven, and send comfort to the earth and it shall bring up
hearty praise to thee by Jesus Christ. Amen.

A short prayer of purpose against Satan's assaults.
MY loving and most pitiful father, who in Jesus Christ and for his sake have
called me to thee, and by grace I am come to thee, Now blessed father I find
stronger enmity then before, and find such a combination between Satan and
my nature, with the world against me, that my weakness is ready to yield: good
father seeing that now this rage of assault seems to be for thy sake: I thy
poor child do beseech thee to manage thy own cause, and make thy part good
against these enemies of thine in all their forcible assaults, and let them
all know, they have to deal with thee, and so defend thy glory and this poor
soul of mine that comes trembling to creep under thy wings, and desires to
cast lively thy sweet favor, and never to be drawn from thee: she we thy
self for Christ's sake, and let me not be blinded in judgment, nor so weak in
faith, that I should be deluded, thy Majesty dishonored, the enemy incoraged,
or thy little ones dismayed; free me therefore good father from all these
dangerous perplexities, that in patience, faith, and true Godliness I may run
my race, and fight a good fight and conquer, that I lose not my Crown for
Jesus Christ's sake. Amen.

A short prayer at hand upon all occasions.
O Christ, I believe, help my unbelief: I am told from thee, that Satan is
conquered, sin is killed, hell is shut; this wrath is pacified, curse and law
are fully answered, and no peril can possibly befall me: Good Christ let me not
only see it, but lively and joyfully apprehend it, and so stablish me and
mortisse me into thy self unchangeably, against wind and storm, and all that
the Dragon can cast out of his mouth: and so I the least of thine, with many
thy dear children, will praise thee for ever. Amen.

A prayer for all sorts.
O Lord hear us, and look mercifully upon us, thou have promised it, and
commanded us to ask it: perform thy promise, and help us in asking for thy
sons sake: Thou have been gracious, and thy mercy endures, we have been
ungracious, and our sins continue, let thy wrath provoked be pacified, let
thy justice stirred be stayed, and satisfied, in Jesus Christ our mediator:
Pity us, and pardon us: we believe, help our unbelief: resolve us, and
peswade us, remove all dangerous doubts from us, as old Adam lived and ruled
when thou were provoked, so let it die and be subject, now thou art pacified:
let us be lightened by thy word, let us be affected with it, let us have it in
high estimation, and let us follow it in our conversation, let it be our sword
against the devils temptation, let us conquer in Christ Jesus, let a god
conscience Judge us, Let a continual watch keep us, Let the power of thy
spirit arm us: Let our weakness never grow to wilfulness, let thy spirit never
forsake us, leave us not ouerlong, though thou tri'st us, set security aside,
shake of our drowsinesse, quicken our deadness, soften our hardness, quench
all the fiery darts of Satan in us, let us look back to our former state, and
to our present state: let our heart grieve that it can be no more grieved, let
our souls joy be in Christ thy son let us glad our selves in the holy ghost.
let us be given to reading, hearing and meditation, let us resort to the
company of thy saints, let us loath the company of the wicked, let us be lowly
conceited in our selves, let us think reuerendly of al thy children, let us
rest in thee, our good father-watch us by night, guide us by day, bless us in
both with al ours, publikly and privately: protect thy gospel and church,
prevent thy foes at home and abroad for Jesus sake: amen.

Finis.

