TWO TREATIses of the comforting of an afflicted conscience, written by M.
Richard Greenham, with certain Epistles of the same argument.

Heereunto are added two Sermons, with certain grave and wise counsels and
answers of the same Author and argument.

Imprinted at London by Richard Bradocke, for Robert Dexter, and are to be
sold at the sign of the Brazen Serpent in Paul's Churchyard, 1598.

To the right worshipful S. Drue Drurie Knight. H. C. wishes increase of all
heavenly virtues.
IT has been the continual practice (Right worshipful) of the most faithful
stewards and dispencers of the mysteries of God; not only to spend the time of
their pilgrimage, inplanting and watering those parts of Gods vineyarde,
wherewithal it has pleased him to charge them for the present, but also (as
much as in them lay) to help, and set forward the growth of them, even unto
the day of their perfection. Amongst many other, our present author M. Richard
Greenham, may bet set with the forwardest in this rank. A man, into whose
praises if I should enter, I should either be injurious to his desert, or
tedious, especially unto you, in whose memory he does yet most lively remain.
But amongst many excellent gifts which were so plentyfully powered out upon this
man of God, not any one did more shine either to the glory of God, or his
commendation amongst men, then that especial gift he had to the raising up of
the consciences of those who from ^he sense of their infirmitieswere
discouraged and cast down. And left this extraordinary gift, should with his
d^cease die in the grave with him, he left in writing unto us, among many
things something also of that argument, which after his death, with more speed
then diligence was sent unto the press. The same now being brought unto me to
be prepared for the second impression; the common good of those, who from these
holy labors might raise unto them selves a sovereign comfort for their
oppressed consciences; as also the reverent regard I had unto the blessed
memory of the deceased Author, encouraged, or rather enforced me to look more
carefully unto it, and finding the former edition very defective, to endeavor
the correction of it, which is thus as you see obtained, and the volume thus
far increased by such written coppies of the like argument, as were ministered
unto me. All which, I am imboldened to present unto your W. favor and
protection; partly for the unfeigned love you bare unto the root from whence
they sprang, and partly also for that interest you had in them by the former
dedication. May it please your worship therefore to accept the^, as the poor
remainder of that hope, which in the Authors life time promised more unto us,
then the Lord has thougt us worthy to enjoy. Thus commending your W. and
yours to the tuition of the almighty, I humbly take my leave.

Your worships in all duty to command. H. C.

To the Reader.
OUR life, says the Apostle, is a warfare, and every day we are more or less
to incou^ter with our adversary. And therefore is the Church of God upon earth
called Militant, because the members thereof are pressed soldgiers, standing
continually upon their guard, knowinge, that their enemy is an old wily
Serpent, and a fierce ravenous Lion, continually seeking whom he may devour.
But amongst many snares he has laid to intrappe the soul of man, either
presuming too much of himself, or derogating too much from the graces of the
spirit in him, this is not the meanest, that he labors, to divide the
kingdom against it self, and to use men as his instruments for their own
destruction. For well he knows, that where cumming in his own likeness, he
should seem odious and be valiently resisted; there, masked under a veil of
humility, he may more secretly incroch upon the fearful spirit; and if the
Lord does not put the bitt into his mouth, to curb him with, he may at length
display his banners in the heart. But we have a valiant leader, let us stick
unto him, even Jesus Christ the righteous, who is a Serpent also lift up in the
wilderness to cure all whose hearts are scorched with the venomous heat of the
fiery serpent; who is a Lion of the Tribe of Judah, ^ ^mightie prince, and the
king of peace, who shall subdue all things under him that he may be all in
all. I might here enter into a large discourse, but in this argument this
present book is so copious, as I doubt (gentle Reader) whether thou shall
find any want; much less of that which I am able to afforde thee. Only it
had been to be wished the Author of these Treatises, had himself suruiued to
the publishing of them, that the same might have come more full and perfect
into thy hands. But since it has pleased the Lord, for cause best known unto
himself, to bereave his Church in this land, of so excellent a pillar, there
remaneth nothing for us, but to submit ourselves unto his providence, and to
take up that complaint of Elisha for Elias, when he was taken from him into
heaven. My Father, my Father, the Charet of Israel and the horsemen thereof.
But to return unto our selves, thou art to be entreated, courteous reader, to
take in good part these few things at this time, and to make thine use of them,
till some other (the only true coppies whereof are yet in the hands of his
friends) may be obtained of them. Amongst which there are many things of diverse
arguments worthy thy knowledge, and of good profit unto the direction of a
Christian life; Of which I have thought good to set down unto thee a brief
catolog, that thou may know: that as our Authors labors in the ministry of
the gospel, were exceeding great in that part of the Church which was
committed unto him, so as he might, he was not unmindful of posterity, but
careful to leave a remembrance of himself in some profitable instructions for
those that should come after. Farewell.

Thine in the Lord. H. C.

1 A large Treatise of the Sabbath. 2 A Catechism. 3 A Treatise of contract 4
Of the resurrection of the dead* 5 Of the last judgment. 6 Of zeal. 7 Of
humlity and honor* 8 Of anger. 9 Of murmuring. 10 Of a good name. 11 Of lying.
12 Of the necessity of the word preached. 13 Of keeping the heart above all
things. 14 Of the kingdom of heaven compared unto a pearl. 15 Of the coming
of the holy Ghost. 16 Of rejoicing in the Cross of Christ. 17 A great number
of grave and wise counsels and answers, gathered by Master John Hopkins and
others that attended him for that purpose.
An Epigrame to the Reader.
THE thirsty soul, that faints in the way,
Or hunger-bit for heavenly food does long:
The wearied Heart, that pants all she way
Oppressed with fears, and home-bread griefs among;
The blinded eye, that hunt's the shining ray,
Or mind enthralde, through Satan's wily wrong:
Let hither fare for comfort in their need;
For smothered flames a greater fire will breed.
Here silver streams shall quench thy boiling heat,
And honey dewes thy hungry stomach fill,
Here sweet Repose with Comfort shall entreat
Thy wounded breast to cure with busy skill,
Hence fetch thy ransom howsoever great,
A mine of treasures are in this fair hill;
From whose hye top thy scaled eyes may see
A glorious light that shall enlighten thee.
The streams are blood, the dew is bread from heaven
The Rest and Comfort are celestial joys;
The ransom from the cross was freely given,
The light is faith, which darkness all destroys.
Thrice happy man that guides his steps so even,
As his pure light no gloomy dark annoyes.
His ransomed soul aeternall joys shall win
When timelye death shall blessed life begin.
H. C.

A MOST SVVEET Comfort for an afflicted Conscience.
It is thus written, Prouerb^. 18.14. The Spirit of a man will sustain his
infirmity: But a wounded Spirit who can bear it?


THis Scripture is not only worthy to be graven in steel with the pen of an
Adamant, and to be written in letters of gold; but also to be laid up
registered by the finger of God his spirit in the tables of our hearts. Which
sentence briefly speaks thus much unto us, that what trouble befalls a man
(his mind being unappalled) he will indifferently bear it out; but if the
spirit of a man be once troubled and disma^ed, he cannot tell how to be
delivered. And no marvel; for if the mind of man be the fountain of
consolation, which ministers comfort unto him in all other troubles; if that
become comfortless, what shall comfort it? If it be void of help, when shall
it be helped? If the eye which is the light of the body be darkness, how
great is that darkness? If the salt which ^auoreth all things be unsavory,
for what is it good? If the mind which sustaineth all troubles be troubled,
how intolerable is that trouble? To show this the better, I will first declare
how great a punishment of God this wound of conscience is: Secondly I will
teach how this trouble of mind may be prevented and avoided: Lastly I will set
down how Gods children faling in some measure into this affliction of ^pirite,
may be recovered out of it.

For the first, the grieuousnesse of this malladie is seen, either by some due
consideration of the persons that have felt it; or by some wise comparison made
between this grief of mind, and other outward griefs incident unto a man.

The persons in whom we may consider this wound of spirit, are either merely
natural men, or such as be renewed by the spirit of God: The men merely
natural are either the Heathen such as never knew God in Christ, or carnal
professors, such as have not professed Christianity aright. If we look among
the Hearhen, how many of them have willingly gone under poverty, and have
been content to unburden themselves of all worldly treasures? How have some of
them (whilst their minds were unappalled) suffered imprisonment, exile, and
extreme tortures of body; rather than they would betray their Countries? How
many of them have devoured many injuries, and borne outward troubles, with
some ease and with no resistance, whilst their minds were at liberty? And
yet look not into the meanest, but the best and most excellent men among them,
even their wise Philosophers, sweet Orators, and exquisite Poets; who in
bearing and forbearing thought the chiefest point of virtue to consist; and
ye shall see, when once some great distress of mind did wound them, some
would make an end of it by preparing a Cup of deadly poison; some would
violentlye and voluntarily run on the enemies pikes: some would throw down
themselves from hie Mountains; some would not stick to stabbe most
monstrously their own bodies with Daggers, or such like instruments of death:
all which men would seem to have great courage in sustaining many harms, so
long as their minds were not ouermastred. But when their divine and supreme
Essence (which they accknowledged to be God) did by his power cross and
ouerturne their witty devises and headstrong attempts, so as without hope of
remedy they were hampered in pensiuenes and sorrow of mind: then not being
able to turn themselves under so heavy a burden, they shrunk down, and by
violent death would rid themselves of that disquietnes and impatience of
their troubled minds.

But let us come nearer; and whether we behold the Papists, or the family of
love, or the common sort of Christians, we shall see they will pass quietly
through many afflictions, whether for that they have a spirit of slumbering
and numbnes cast upon them; or whether because they have brawned themselves
through some senseless blockishnes as men hewn out of hard Oaks, or graven
out of marble stones I know not: But yet when the lord shall let loose the cord
of their consciences, and shall set before their faces their sins committed;
see what fearful ends they have, whilst some of them by hanging themselves,
some by casting themselves into the water, some by cutting their own throats
have rid themselves out of these intolerable griefs. Now wherein is the
difference that some die so sencelesly, and some dispatch themselves so
violently? Surely the one feeling no sin, depart like brutish swine; the
other surcharged with sin, die like barking Dogs.

But let us come to the children of God, who have in some degree felt this
wound of mind; and it will appear both in the members and in the head, of
all burdens to be a thing most intolerable to sustain a wounded conscience.
And to begin with, let us set in the first rank Job, Job.
that man of God commended unto us by the holy Ghost for a myrrour of patience;
who although for his riches he was the welthiest man in the land of Huz; for
his authority, might have made afraid a great multitude; and for his substance
was the greatest of all the men in the East: Yet when the Shabeans came
violently and took away his cattle; when the fire of God falling from heaven,
burnt up his sheep and his servants; when the Caldeans had taken away his
Camels; when a great wind smote down his house upon his children; although
indeed he rent his garments, which was not so much for impatience, as to
show that he was not senceles in these evils: Yet it is said that he
worshipping blessed the name of the Lord, saying: Naked came I out of my
mothers womb, and naked shall I return thither: The Lord gives and the
Lord takes away, blessed be the name of the Lord.

But behold when at the strange conference of his comfortless friends, his
mind began to be aghast, which was not so in all his former trial, when his
conscience began to be troubled, when he saw the Lord fasten in him sharp
arrows, and to set him up as a Butte to shoot at; when he thought God caused
him to possess the sins of his youth, this glorious pattern of patience
could not bear his grief: he was heavy, and now may commend, the Image of
a wounded spirit, to all that come after. David, David.
a man chosen according to the Lords own heart: Ezekiah, Ezekiah.
a pure worshipper of God, and careful restorer of true Religion; Jeremiah,
Jeremiah.
the Prophet of the Lord, sanctified and ordained to that Office before he
was formed in his mothers womb, were rare and singular in the graces and
favor of God: yet when they felt this wound pearcing them with grief of
heart, they were as Sparrowes mourning, as Cranes chattering, as as pellicans
casting out fearful cries, they thought themselves as in the grave, they
wished to have dwelt solitary; they were as bottels parched in the smoke, they
were as Doves mourning, not able without sighs and groans to utter their
words, their hearts cloue to the dust, and their tongues to the roof of their
mouths.

But above all; (if these were not not sufficient to persuade us in this
doctrine) there remains one example, whom we affirm to be the perfect
anatomy of an afflicted mind. This is the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ the
Image of the father, Christ Jesus.
the head of the body, the myrrour of all graces, the wisdom, righteousness,
holiness, and redemption of all the Saints, who sustained the Cross even from
his youth upward: and besides poverty, baseness, hunger, did willingly go
under the great trouble of contempt and reproach, and that among them where he
should have had a right deserved honor, in respect of the doctrine he taught
them, and in regard of the manifold miracles be wrought among them; as the
healing of the sick, the giving sight to the blind, the restoring of life to
the dead: This unkindness nevertheless, did not so much strike into him. But at
what time he was set as a Sacrifice for all, when he was to bear our
infirmities and carry our sorrows, at what time he was plagued and smitten of
God, humbled and wounded for our transgressions, when he should be broken for
our iniquities, and the chastisement of our peace was upon him; then he cried
out; My soul is heavy even unto the death: Then he prays, Lord if it he
possible, let this Cup pass from me: But how prays he? even with
sweating; how sweateth he? even drops of blood; how long prays he? Three
times; when ends his agony? not until he was dead; What said he being
ready to depart? My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me.

Was this for his humane death, as some have imagined? No no, wicked men have
died withthout complaint, whose patience then might seem to exceed his; it
was his suffering in his humane Spirit, which incountred with the wrath of
God, his Godhead suppressing it self for a while: he suffered indeed many
torments in body, but much more heuily did the wrath of God lie upon his
soul.

If this consideration of an afflicted spirit in these examples do not
sufficiently show what a grievous thing it is to sustain a wounded conscience:
Let us proceed to the comparing of this with other evils, which fall into the
nature of man. There is no sickness but Physic provides for it a remedy,
there is no fore but Surgery will afford it a salve; Friendship helps
poverty; There is noe imprisonment, but there is hope of liberty; Suite and
favor recover a man from banishment; Authority and time wear away reproach:
But what Physic cures? what Chirurgerie salueth? what riches ransometh? what
countenance bears out? what authority asswageth? what favor relieueth a
troubled Conscience? All these banded together in league, (though they would
conspire a confederacy) cannot help this one distress of a troubled mind; And
yet this one comfort of a quiet mind does wonderfully cure, and comfortably
assuage al other griefs whatsoever. For if our assistance were as an host of
armed soldiers; If our frinds where the Princes and the Governors of the
earth; If our possessions were as large as between the East and the west; If
our meat were as Manna from heaven; If our apparel were as costly as the
Ephod of Aaron; If every day were as glorious as the day of Christ's
resurrection; yet if our minds be appalled with the judgments of God, these
things would little comfort us. Let experience speak; If a troubled mind
impareth not health, dries not up the blood, wastes not the marrowe, pineth
not away the flesh, consumes not the bones, if it makes not all pleasures
painful, and shortneth not the life; surely no wisdom can council it, no
counsel can advise it, no advise can aswage it, no asswagement can cure it, no
eloquence can persuade it, no power can overcome it, no Scepter will affray it,
nor inchaunter can charm it. And yet on the contrary, if a man languish in
sickness, so his heart be whole, and is persuaded of the health of his soul, his
sickness does not grieve him: If a man be reproched, so he be p^ecious in the
sight of God and his Angels, what loss has he? If a man be banished, and yet
doubts not that heaven is his Country, and that he is a Citizen among the
Saints, it does not appall him: If a man be in trouble, and finds peace of
conscience, he will quietly digest his trouble. But if the mind be troubled,
who dares meet with the wrath of the Lord of Hoasts? who can put to silence
the voice of desperation? who will step out and make agreement with the hells
to spare us; who dare make a covenant with the Devil, that he would not lay
claim unto us? If then a good Conscience helps all evils, and all other
benefits in this life, in themselves cannot help a troubled conscience; we se
it true in proof; which here is in proverb; The spirit of a man will sustain
his infirmity: But a wounded Spirit, Who can bear it?

Again, in all other afflictions we may have some comfort against sin; this
is ever accompanied with the accusation of sin. A man may be sick,
reproched, impouerished, imprisoned, and banished; and yet in all these have a
clear conscience; his own heart telling him that there is noe special cause
of these crosses in him, but that he may suffer them for the trial of his
faith, or for righteousness sake and well doing. But when the spirit is wounded,
there is still a guiltines of sin, and when a man's spirit is troubled, he
suspecteth all his ways, he fears al his sins, he knows not what sin to
begin with; it breeds such hurly burlyes in him, that when it is day he wishes
for night; when itis night he would have it day, his meat does not norish him;
his dreams are fearful to him, his sleep oftimes forsakes him; If he
speaks, he is little eased; if he keeps silence, he boileth in disquietnes
of heart; the light does not comfort him, the darkness does terify him.

To prosecute our comparisons; where al other evils are the more tolerable,
because they be temporal, and pursue us but to death: this not being cured
ends not in death, but becomes eternal. For even the heathen men thought
that death was the end of all misery: the persuasion whereof made them (being
in some misery) to make an end of themselves, and hasten their own death; as
Satan does make many now a days to do, who are ignorant of the hell, which
is a place of far greater pains than any they can suffer in this world
whatsoever. Howebeit a tormented conscience, if before it was begun, is now
continued; or if it was not before, now begins and never ends world
without end. For though true it is, that sickness, poverty, imprisonment or
banishment have ended their term in death; yet a wounded heart which was
temporal in this life, is now eternal after this life: that which before
death was in hope recouerable, is after death made incurable and unrecoverable.
It is good therefore to consider, if even in this life the torment of
conscience be so fearful; how much more grievous it is to sustain it in
hell, where that is infinite, which here is finit; where that is unmeasurable,
which here is mesurable: where is the sea of sorrow, whereof this is but a drop,
where is the flame of that fire, whereof this is less then a spark.

But to shut up this argument: Some there have been who through out all their
life time, have been free from all other troubles, so as either they felt them
not at all, or else in very small measure, and by that means never knew what
outward trouble meant. As for example, some men there have been, who for
sickness never knew there headeach; for poverty, never knew what want
meant; who for discredit, were never evil spoken of; who ever put far from
them the evil day of the Lord; who made a league with death as it were, and
a covenant with hell; who thought they could crucify every cross, rather tha^
come vnderany cross: yet they could never escape a wounded conscience, either
in this life, or in the life to come. True it is, that Gods Children by faith
and repentance do often escape it, but the wicked, and such as are borne unto
it, as to their sure inheritance; the more they fly from it, the more it
pursues them. If we have transgressed the Civil Laws, the Judge by bribes may
be corrupted; if a man have committed some capital offense, by flying his
Country he may escape the Magistrates hands: but our consciences telling us
that we have sinned against God; what bribe shall we offer? or whether shall
we fly? whether shall we go from his spirit? or whether shall we go from
his presence? If we ascend into heaven, is not he there? If we lie down in
hell is he not there? If we fly to the utmost parts of the sea, is he not
there also? There needs no apparitor to summon us, there needs no Bailey
arraunt to fetch us; there needs noe accuser to give in against us: sin will
arrest us, and lies at the Door, our own Conscience will impannell a Quest
against us; our own hearts will give in sufficient Evidence, and our own
iniquity will plead us to be guilty to our own faces.

Thus we se both by the experience of the^ that have suffered the wound of the
spirit, and by the comparinge of it with other evils, what a weight most
grievous and burden intolerable it is to have a tormented conscience.

Now let us show how we may prevent; and by what means Gods children falling
into some degrees of it, The second part of the first division.
(for if it rage in extremity it is an evil unrecoverable) may safely and
quietly be delivered from it. And here a just complaint is to be taken up, and
it is a wonder to be marked (if we may wonder at Gods works) that we se many so
careful and watchful to avoid other troubles, and so few or none take any
pains to escape the trouble of mind which is so grievous. We se men loving
health and loathing sickness, in diet temperat, in sleep moderate, in Physic
expert, skilful to purge, and to avoid such corrupt humors, which in time may
breed (though presently they do not bring forth) some dangerous sickness: yet to
avoid the diseases of the soul, no man abateth his sleep, no man abridgeth his
diet, no man prepares Physic for it; no man knows when to be full, and when
to be empty; how to want and how to abound. Others carried away with the love
of riches, and very ^ly to fall into poverty; will not stick to rise early, to
take sleep lately, to fare hardly, to tear and taw their flesh in labor by
land and by water, in fair and foul wether, by rocks and by sands, from far
and from near: and yet to fall into Spiritual decaies, to avoid the poverty
of conscience no man takes such pains; as though salvation and peace of
mind, were not a thing worthy the laboring for. Some ambitiously hunting
after honor, and not easily digesting reproaches, behave themselves neither
sluggishly nor sleepely; but are active in every attempt, by love and by
counsel, by prudence and prowess, by wit and by practice, by labor and
learning by cunning, and diligence to become famous, and to shun a civil
reproach: yet to be glorious in the sight of God and his Angels, to fall
before the heavens, and in the presence of the Almighty to be covered with
shame and confusion of Conscience, we make none account, as they, who neither
use any means to obtain the one, nor avoid those occasions which may bring
the other.

Others unwilling to come within the reach and danger of the Law, that they
may escape imprisonment of body, or confiscation of goods; will be painful
in penal statutes, skillful in every branch of the civil law, and especially
will labor to keep themselves from treasons, murders, fellonies, and such
like offenses deserving the punishment of death: yet when the Lord God
threatens the seazure both of soul and body, the attaching of our spirits,
the confiscating of our consciences, the banishing of us from heaven, the
hanging of us in hell, the suspending of our salvation, the adiudging of us to
condemnation for the breach of his Commandments no man searches his eternal
Law; noe man cares for the Gospel: neither the sentence of everlasting
diuorsement from the Lord, neither the covenant of reconciliation is esteemed
of us.

And to reach our Complaint one degree father. Behold, the more we seek outward
pleasures and to avoid the inward trouble of mind, the more we have and run
into it; and suddenly plunge our selves in a wonded spirit ere we be aware.
Who posteth more to become rich who hops less to be come poor than the
merchant man? who aduentureth great treasures, who hazardeth his goods, who
puts in ieoperdie his life; and yet suddenly he either rusheth upon the rock
of hardness of heart, or else is swallowed up of the gulf of a desparing
mind: from which afterward he cannot be delivered with a ship full of gold.
Woeful proof has confirmed, how some men (wholly set on pleasures, such as
could not away to be sad, and hedged up always of godly sorrow) have had their
tables made snares; and even their excess of pleasures, has brought excess
of sorrows: and whilst they labored to put the evil day far from them;
they have used such follies as have been the most bitter and speedy hang-men
of their fearful and trembling consciences.

There be some of another sort, who never dreaming of a troubled mind, have
had their hearts set on nothing but how they might get some great fame and
renown; and therefore have slipped into such vain glorious attempts, and foul
flatteries, as they have not only lost the peace of their Consciences, but also
fallen most deeply into reproachful shame, which they sought to shun.

Now as the peace of conscience and joy of mind is such a treasure, as the
eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, nor the tongue expressed; but
passes all understanding. So the wounded spirit is such as the eye has not
seen it, the ear has not heard it, nor the tongue uttered, but passes all
understanding. And as they only know what the peace of mind means, that
feel it; so they alone can in truth speak of a troubled mind, that have
tasted of it by experience.

Bet let us show what way is to be used to keep us from this wound of the
Spirit. How we may be preserved from the wound of Conscience.
It is the use of Physic, as to cure us of diseases when we are fallen into
them; so to preserve us from sickness before it has taken hold of us: it is
the power of the word, as to assuage the trouble of Conscience, when it does
once press us; so to prevent it before it has overtaken us. It is a chief
point of worldly wisdom not to tarry for the use of Physic until we be
deadly sick; but to be acquainted with GODS merciful preseruations to defend
us from it; likewise it is a chief policy of a godly Christian, not only to
seek comfort when the agony is upon him, but also to use all good helps to
meet^ with it before it comes. And we condemn them of folly, who will not as
well labor to keep themselves out of debt, as to pay the debt when they owe
it: so it is a madness not to be as circumspect to avoid all occasions, which
may bring trouble of mind upon us; as we would be provident to enter
every good way which may draw us out of this trouble, when we have once
entered into it.

The remedies preservative; are first the searching of our sins, and then the
examining of our faith.

The serching of our sins, is either the due acknowledging of our sins, or
the true sense and feeling of our sins. The acknowledging of our sins, is
either of those that be past, whether we have unfeignedly repented us of them:
or of those which be present, whether we be truly grieved for them.

Thirdly of those secret corruptions, which in the course of our life are
likely to come, whether we are reverently afraid of them and resolve to
suppress them with all our endeavor.

Concerning sins past, we must call to mind the sins done of old, in our
youth, in our middle age, in our old age; that we judging our selves may not
be judged of the Lord; that accusing of our selves, Satan have noe occasion
to accuse us; and throwing down our selves before the Lord, he may lift us up.
For many going quietly away, and sleeping in carnal security (not
withstand-the sins of their youth) and neglecting to make conscience of their
sins done long ago; suddenly have fallen into such horror o^ mind, that
(the violent remembrance of all their sins surcharging them) they have been
overwhelmed.

This Examination does then rightly proceed, when it is reaches to the
errors of this life, and to the sins of our youth; because many men (even
from their childhood, by a civil righteous life) having escaped gross sins,
wherewith the world could never charge them, have notwithstanding carried the
burden of their secret, sins done in their youth. David (Psalm. 25.7.)
prays the Lord, not to remember the sins of his youth; Job (23.6. the man
of God) confesses that the Lord writing bitter things against him made him to
possess the iniquities of his youth. What, shall we think that David or Job
were given to notorious wickedness in their youth? No, they knew they were
subject to youthful wantonness and vnstaiednes of their affections; which
though it did not burst out, yet it made them less careful to glorify GOD;
which loosenes the way to leaudnes; which weakness, the way to strange
vanities; which wantonness, the way to open wickedness, is even in the best of
Gods Children in the days of their youth: which being afterward in the time
of their regeneration, brought (as it were) to judgment, and laid before
their consciences, does cause them to repent.

But here is a thing to be blushed at, which makes men's ears to tingle when
they hear it; that many men (far noe doubt from this true repentance) can
largely indeed discourse of the things done in their youth; but in such a
bravery, with such boastings, and pleasing of themselves in the remembrance of
them; as besides that they provoke others to sin in the like, and set
themselves a flat Backe-byas against Repentance and this Christian
examination; they seem to renew the decayed colors of their old sins,
with the fresh suite of their second pleasures therein. But alas what pleasure
have they in those things, whereof they have noe profit? what profit have they
those things whereof they should be ashamed? Nether in this streine can we
forget the madness of them, who may seem to step one degree farther toward
this examination of sin than did the former; by thinking that the leaving of
sin, and repenting of sin is all one. Against these both daily experience
and the word of God does sufficiently declame. Iosep^s brethren ( Jacob his
sons) who devised evil against their brother, put him into the pit, and
sold him unto strangers; did cease from this cruelty: but yet they are not
read to have remembered their sins with any remorce, until thirteen years
after the sin was committed; as we may see in the process of the History.
David had left his sins of murder and adultery (as thinking all quiet and
well) the space of a whole year; after which time (being admonished by the
Prophet Nathan) he repented of it. And experience has tried in many that have
had some working of God in them, that though they left their sins many years
ago, yet because they repented not truly for them, they have rebounded up on
them with terrible sights and feafull visions, to humble them, and to bring
them to serious examination of them, being done and left long since. Examples
whereof we need not fetch from far, seeing so many preachers as are
acquainted with fearful spirits will give witness hereof. The fruit of which
amazed minds for sins already left, is ours, to beware of sins which are to
come: And that other men's harms may teach us blessed wisdom, let us labor
not only to leave sin, which one may do for profit, for fear, for praise,
or for werisomnes; but also to repent of it for conscience sake.

This Examination of our sins past, must be partly of those that we
committed before our calling, and partly of those which were done after our
calling. Every man (especially having his reason reformed by the word of God)
will grant an examination of the life, before our true knowledge of God in
Christ, to be most needful: But it may be some will think that we need not
be so precise in the searching of those sins, which were after our knowledge.
But seeing of all other sins these bite sorest, and pierce deepest, for that
they are agrauated with all the mercies of God going before, and Sin is then
most sinful, when after we know the truth, after we have been delivered
from sin, after we have been enlightened with the grace of God, we have
fallen into it: I think that an examination most specially ought to be had of
these sins. Wherefore to iterate our former examples in a new matter, as we
may see the former kind of examining of our sins before our calling, in the
sons of Jacob; so we have a pattern of the latter in the practice of the
Prophet David, who at the hearing of his sin was so troubled in his spirit,
that he could not rest in the Prophets speech telling him his sin was forgiven
him, but still was disquieted, as one utterly forsaken of God and could find no
comfort of Gods spirit in him. For as it fares often with sores, it comes to
pass in sins we are loath to have our wounds often grated upon, we cannot so
well away to have our sores rifled, seared, and lanced; but fed with healing
salues: so we are hardlye brought to have our consciences ground, or our
sins ransacked, sifted, searched, and ripped up; but would still have them
plaistered with sweet promises, and bathed in the mercies of God: whereas it
is far safer before incarnatiue and healing Medicines, to use corrosiue and
mundifying waters, without which though some sores may seem to close and
skin up a pace, yet they prove worse, and being rotten still at the coare;
they have above a thin skin, and underneath dead flesh. In like manner, we
would cloak, we would hide and cover our sins, as it wear with a Curtain;
but it is more sound Surgery to prick and pierce our Consciences with the
burning iron of the Law, and to cleanse the wound of the Soul by sharp
threatenings, least that a skin pulled over the Conscience for a while, we
leave the rottten corruption, uncured underneath; and so we be constrained to
cry out of our sins openly. As it is a folly then to disemble our soars
whilst they be curable, and after to make them known when they be grown
incurable; so it is as great folly to dissemble our sins whilst they may be
remedied, and so after be constrained with shame to blaze them abroad when thy
are remediless. But of this by the way, because we shall more largely touch
it in the last part to come.

It is sufficient to commit sin before knowledge, but after some good light
of the spirit to sin, breeds either hardness of heart, or a troubled
spirit; both which we shall avoid, if in truth we be careful to watch over
our affections, and beware that after our delivery we fall not into sin
gain.

Several men subject to several sins, have their several checkes in their
conciences: some are overcome with wrath, and yet after the moodie fit they can
tell that the wrath of man does not accomplish the righteousness of God; some
are subject to lust, and afterward they say, it profits them nothing. Some
are given to a continual course of vanity, who notwithstanding can say, that
man's l^fe has another end, some slip deeply into worldliness, and yet they
be often wakened with most terrible checkes of conscience. Well, blessed are
they whose hearts be truly grieved; and let them beware that make ^aliance
with sin: for either hardness of heart will overtake them, or a troubled
conscience will confound them. Wherefore it comes to pass, that many spending
their bodies on lust, lament that ever they so abused their strength; many
given too much to the pleasure of this life, had grief come upon them, to
remember how they have spent Gods graces, lauished his good gifts, and misspent
their time; or else, if they have not this grief, they fall into voluptuousnes
and draw such a thick skin upon their hearts, as will cause the strongest
denouncings of Gods judgments to rebound, be they driven on never so hard.
And sure it is the sin of this world, that men being controled in their
consciences, whilst they are a praying, and feel a secret charge laid
against them, to beware of guile in buying and selling; either have these
cheeks less and less, and so they grow to be profane; or else afterward
they are wonderfully wounded, that they have been so worldly, so greadely
pursuing earthly things; so coldly procuring heavenly things. Thus even our
privy thoughts (not profited by) are breeders of farther trouble.

Now the remedy against this trouble is, willingly and wittingly not to
cherish sin, Remedy.
to wish that the minister should touch our most privy and secret sins, to
be glad privately to be admonished, to profit by our enemies when they do
reproach us: and rather to desire (in such a case) to be humbled than to suffer
our selves to be flattered. This trying of our selves must yet strech it self
farther, not only to the committing of evil, but also to the omitting of good.
As when (after some good working and feeling of the spirit,) we begin to fight
and conflict with our own consciences saing; though I must pray, I must have
time also to provide for my family; if I go so to hear the word of God,
surely I shall be in danger to loose this profit; if I thus attend upon the
exercises of religion, I shall be cut short in the use of my pleasures.
Wherefore it shall be good to search our hearts, not only in the careless
not using of the means; but also in the negligent watching over the fruits of
the means: saying to our selves in this manner; I have heard a Sermon, but
(alas) without any feeling or working upon my affections; I have been
praying, but with no power of the spirit; I have received the Sacrament, but
without those joys glorious and unspeakable, which I was wont to taste of. I
saw the Discipline of the Church executed, but without any fear of sin at
all in my self, or compassion to the member censured.

And here I dare from my own observation assuredlye affirm, that outward
sins have not been at some times so grievous to Gods children; as that they
have sometimes used the means with little reverence and with less fruit. And
no marvel, we shall see many men at some times, not so much grieved for their
sickness it self, as for that that they have either willingly neglected the
means which might have preserved their health, or that they have abused the
Physic that might have restored their health to them again: in like manner
(I say) it fares with them, who either irreverently have refused the means,
which should keep their souls from surfeiting: or else unthankfully have
abused those helps, which might have recovered them again. From hence it
comes, that some men are as much grieved for not using their good gifts to
the benefit of Gods Church, as others are troubled for pestering the Church
with unprofitable corruptions; or as we shall see a rich man sometimes as much
humbled for not giving money to the poor, which he might have done; as for
heaping up riches falselie, which he ought not to have done. And thus, many
(having received good gifts and graces from the Lord) are seasoned and
sanctified by afflictions; whereby they are taught to put their gifts in ure,
and to offer their service to Christ: and others are forced to hide their
gifts, which cannot be without some decay of Gods glory, without offense to
the weak, without the loss of many souls, which otherwise might be won to
the gospel, and without strengthening the hand of the adversary to slander
our dark and dumb profession. All which things will in the end bring
terror of mind: because if the Lord cannot work upon us by taking away
goods, friends, credit, wife, children, or such like, to bring us to
Repentance; he will surely whippe our naked consciences, he will enter even
into our very entrails, and pierce our secret boweles.

As we must examine our selves thus for sins of time past, and present, so
must we use this practice in sin to come: and this is very needful. For
were it so, that our life and conversation were such, as neither before not
after our calling, man could justly accuse it: Yet the hidden corruption of our
nature, may threaten some heinous downfall in time to come. Which has made
men of very good report and conversation to hang down their heads, and fear
their secret hypocrisy, as that which may break forth to the shame of all
their former life, in time to come.

But because we forgatte to speak of them, that in the examining of their
lives past, are much grieved for the want of sincerity, and for privy
vaineglorie in themselves; let us before we go to the searching of our hearts
in sin to come, speak somewhat of this. Men troubled for this privy pride
are either touched, or not touched. If the veyle of sin was so great in them,
that it hid Christ from them; it is the good will of God, that by this sight of
their most secret sins they should come to see the righteousness that is in
Christ Jesus; and so they shall the better be kept from being Iusticiarie
Pharisees. For when being a long time well brought up, and leading a civil
life, the Devil would persuade us of some inherent righteousness in us; It is
the wisdom of our God to touch us with the conscience of most hidden
corruptions, as also to certify and make known unto us, that even for our
birth there was a secret seed of sin in us, which (without the Lord watching
over us) would surely have broken forth to his dishonor.

As for them which have had some woorking in them, and yet are often plunged
with sore distresses this trouble comes to them for two especial causes,
either for some hypocrisy, that they did more in show than in truth; wherefore
the Lord brings the^ back again to see their corrupt proceedinges, and that
they may know all their religion to be but hypocrisy, and all their
righteousness to be but unrighteousness: or for the abusing of their knowledge,
in that they made it but a mask to iuggle in, and that they made their
affections to fight with their own judgments. We must remedy this, by not
thinking of our selves above that which is meet, and by laboring to embrace
the truth in truth. And here let us note, that many of Gods Children accuse
themselves of hypocrisy, when indeed they offend not in it for the most
righteous persons are their own greatest accusers. And yet the accusation does
iustlye arise from some fault on their parts: for though they have done things
in truth, yet because with truth they labored not to see their secret
corruptions, in some other matters, they sustain this trouble of mind. So that
there is nothing harder tha^ to sist and search our hearts to the bottom, whether
we respect our sins past or our sins present, whether we look to our privy
pride, hidden wants, or secret corruptions. And to return from whence we
digressed, to the examination of our hearts, in sins to come: Return to sins to
comes.
let us observe that in Gods children there is such a iealousy, as they tremble
at the very first motions and quake at the least occasion of sin, although
because vice will sit in residence very near unto virtue, there may be in them
sometime too much scrupulousnes This fear causes the dearest of the Saints
of God to reason on this sort; O Lord, I see now many excellent in gifts, and
constant in profession for a long time, whose end has not answered their
beginnings, whose deaths were not like to their lives. This is true, whether
we look into the word or into the world: and it is a thing that may much
humble us. For though we may remember what we have been, and know what we
are; yet who can tell what may come unto him hereafter.

Oh that the serious meditation hereof would dwell long upon our consciences:
that with an holy iealozie we might prevent the sin that is to come. But
alas, there be some venture some knights, which think it no masterie to offer
themselves to masking, minstrelsie and dancing, nor to run into quarrels,
braules and contentions, as though they had their ears, their eyes, their
hands and their feet in their own power, and at commandment to use and
govern as themselves list.

Howbeit, GODS Children better fenced with his grace, than those bold buxzards
are afraid of these occasions: as knowing full well, that their eyes may
soon be provoked to lust, their ears may quickly listen unto unchaste
delights, their hands may suddenly strike a deadly blow, and their feet may
easily be snared in carnal pleasures.

Beware O man, be circum^pect O woman that thou prostitute not thy self to
too much liberty: for although in coming to such lascivious and contentious
places thou did purpose none evil; yet for thy ventring without warrant,
thou may be over thy shoes in sin, and plunged in some wicked attempt over
head and ears, ere thou be aware. And because vice is so confine unto
virtue, beware also of superstition: for still the enemy labors either to
make thee too hardy in sin, or else he will cause thee to be too fearful
and superstititious; either he will puff thee up with presumption, or assault
thee with desperation. To these tentations our nature is very pliable: first to
presumption, as may appear by our common speech; tush, the Preacher is but a
man as I am, I am sure he has infirmities as others have; we are no Angels,
our nature is corrupt, we are but flesh, I am sure you would not have us Gods.
Thus the Devil comes to tempt; but he apparrelleth himself in another suit
when he comes to accuse: and then of a ^lie he makes an Elephant, of the
very smallest prick of a pin, a gloabe of the whole earth: of a moale hill a
mountain^: and presses silly souls with fears and terrors, that they know
not how to wind out themselves. If he cannot bring them to make no conscience
where they should make conscience, he will labor to bring them to make
conscience where they need make no conscience. He cares not whether thou will
be remiss or superstitious, so thou be one of them. If he cannot get you to
follow the Epicurisme of the world, as Libertines in diet and apparel; he
will make you so precise as to think it a heinous sin, to eat one bit of
meat, or to wear one ragge of cloth more than for necessity. How needful
therefor it is to sail which an even course, we may conjecture by other
things which will bewray the corruption of our nature.

In the time of a plague we shall see some will be so bold, that without any
lawful calling or godly warrant, they will rush into places infected; and then
falling sick, their conscience pricks them for their tempting of God by an
unadvised boldness, in the hour of their death.

Others plunged as deeply in a quite contrary extremity, are too fearful
when they do but hear of the sickness; and for very fear have been
brought to deaths door, only by imagining themselves to have been infected,
when they have been most free, who ofteneimes have even died, and that without
any natural cause that ever could be known, but only through immoderate
fear* and the judgment of God coming upon them for their infidelity and
unbelief. Thus it is with us in Christianity, in that as well the oppressing
our selves with too much fear to be overcome, as the carnal security, in not
fearing to be overcome, may bring sin upon us. God his children must labor
for a measure, and that must be sought for in the word, which will teach them
how they shall neither decline on the right hand, nor on the left; but will
guide them in the narrow way, showing in every thing what is the virtue,
what is the vice; what is the mean, what is the extreme.

Among many Examples, let us consider of zeal, Zeal.
a most precious virtue in Christianity, so long as it is free from the
extremities. Otherwise if we be cold in zeal, it is a sin on the left
hand: if we be zealous without knowledge, it is preposterous, and becomes
a sin on the right hand.

But can we not come to some perfection? No, if you understand it for an
absolute vnspottednes; albeit to that perfection which the Scripture takes for
soundness, truth, and sincerity of heart, which is void of careless
remissnes, we may come. Neither does the Lord deal with us after our sins,
nor reward us after our iniquities: in whose eyes the most glorious actions of
men, are but as waters flowing purely from the Conduit, but defiled by passing
through a filthy channel: Wherefore although we have our imperfections, let us
not seek to be more righteous than we can be; saying for every error of this
life, Oh, I am none of God his sons, I am none of his daughters: for I cannot
find that perfection in me which is to be required: But let us comfort our
selves in the truth of our hearts, and singlenes of our de^ires to serve God,
because he is God; and so we shall be accepted of God.

I speak this to this end, that poor souls might have comfort, and know
that is they abhor sin as sin, if they examine themselves for it, if they
groan under it, if they mislike themselves for it, if they fear to fall into
it; the Lord will not pursue them with the rigor of his law, but will give
them the sweetness of his promises; they are no more under the ^urse, but
under grace.

But further to enforce our Exhortation, to avoid too scrupulous a fear,
which hinders the true examination of our hearts: let us think that it
happens in the spiritual conflict as in civil wars. We read that many
Cities lying in great security, have suddenly both been assaulted and
overthrown; as also, how some Countries (too much negligen^e in the means)
through an excessive fearefullnes, have encouraged their enemies with more
greedy violence to pray upon them. With which kind of stratagems our
adversary the devil being well acquainted; does often practice this policy.
If he see us without all fear too quietly to rest in our selves, he thinks
his assault must needs be the stronger, because our resistance is the weaker.
Again, if he discrieth in us a cowardly fear and fainting of heart, before
we once begin to join battle with him; he will set upon our immoderate
fear, and as villainously as suddenly stab us to the heart, and make a present
spoil of us.

Common practice does farther teach us, that when we can hear the word without
all trembling at God his judgments, when we can pray without all fear before
the Majesty of God, when we can come to the Discipline of the Church without
all reverence of the ordinance of the Lord; all is in vain. Again, let us
hear with too much trembling, and we shall learn nothing; let us pray with
too servile a fear, and our worshipping of God will be without all comfort and
vnchearfull. Thus if we neither lessen sin, that is sin indeed; neither
make sin of that which is not sin in truth, it is good to proceed to this
threefolde examination and to lay the edge of this doctrine more near our
affections, because many will be found in this ripenes of knowledge and
barrennes of conscience, to speak, dispute and declame of al these things
very skilfully, which flickring in the circumference of the brain, and not
sitting at the ground of the heart, do seal up a more just sentence of
condemnation against them. To help this evil with, we must meditate deeplier
of the Law and of the Gospel, together with the appurtenances of them both,
that finding our selves far from Gods blessings promised to the keepers of
the law, and seeing our selves nere to the curses due to the breakers of the
Law, we may raise up some sense of sin in our selves. Yet herein we must not
stay our foot, but give a farther stride: for whereas many by a diligent view
of the law, have come to the sense of sin in themselves, and saw plainly
their own condemnation: yet because they labored not to se their guiltiness
acquitted by the remission of sin in Christ, they plunged themselves into a
bottomless sea of sorrows. Others having passed these degrees, and hitherto
made these steps to avoid the wound of Conscience; have come also too short,
and missed of the mark: when because besides the sense of sins pardoned by
the death of Christ, they felt not also the virtue of his passion crucifying
sin in them, but saw that with the remission of sin was not joined the
mortification of sin; they feared that there was no forgiunesse for them, but
still languishing with sorrow, they thought themselves to stand charged with
their former guiltines. Yea and which is more for that such men have not truly
been instructed, nor surely have been grounded in the doctrine of Christ's
death and resurrection; that is for that they saw not as well power flowing
from his death to slay sin in them, as virtue to pardon sin in them; for
that they felt not as well strength to Sanctification, streaming from the
rising again of Christ, as they were persuaded of justification and
righteousness therein: They have line still bleeding at the heart, in such sort,
as the wound of grief could hardly or never be staide and staunched.
Wherefore let us strengthen our weak souls with this sixe-fold coarde of
consolation, against these bitter assaults. Let us first labor to know sin,
then to sorrow for sin, after to feel

Now let us hasten to the third part of our division; The third part of the
first division.
to show how Gods children being fallen into this wound of spirit may be
helped out of it: which (God willing) we will also perform, after we have
answered a necessary objection; which (in the former part) might seem to
encounter against us. There is no man but will grant, that David, Job, and
others of the Saints of God, had a sight of their sins, a sorrow for their
sins, and a taste of the remission of their sins: how then comes it to
pass, that these men were so troubled in mind? To this I answer, that their
trouble so befell them, either for failing in some of these former things; or
else they were rather afflicted for trial of their faith, than for punishing of
sin in them. And therefore be it always provided, that we think not every
conflict of Conscience, continuallye and chiefly to be for the pursuing of
our sins: but sometimes and principally, that it comes for the trial of
our faith: and yet secondarily, or less principally, for the scourging of
sin, as we may see in Job.

Whereupon let all men be admonished, when they see good men thus humbled and
thrown down in mind, to lay their hands on their mouths from saying;
Surely these men are but hypocrites, doubtless these men be great sinners, the
Lord has found out their hypocrisy. For good reason there is, that such
silence should be used: for that the Lord may as well make trial of their
faith, as take punishment on their sins. For if such affliction should always
and chiefly be sent for sin, then it should follow that all others as they
exceeded them in sin, should also exceed them in the punishment of sin.

But now coming to the saluing of this soar, Salve of this sore.
I shall seem very strange in my cure: and so much the more be wondered at,
by how much in manner of proceeding I differ from the most sort of men herein.
I am (...) to us and uncertain.

To them which are troubled with such blind griefs, whereof they can see no
reason, as often it happens to Gods Children in secret providence, who
either never knew God, or else had but a general knowledge of him: I answer,
that as I deny not Physic to be ministered, if it in part proceed from a
natural cause; so I require the word especially to show the principal and
original cause to begin in the soul. And this I do the rather, because I
would have wisdom both in considering the state of the body if need so
require; and in looking chiefly to the ^oule, which so few think of. If a
man troubled in Conscience come to a Minister, it may be he will look all to
the soul and nothing to the body; if he come to a Physician, he only
considers of the body, and neglects the soul. For my part, I would never
have the Physicians counsel severed, nor the Ministers labor neglected;
because the soul and body dwelling together, it is convenient, that as the
soul should be cured by the word, by prayer, by fasting, by threatening, or by
comforting; so the body also should be brought into some temperature, by
Physic, by purging, by diet, by restoring, by music, and by such like
means; providing always that it be done so in the fear of God, and wisdom
of his spirit, as we think not by these ordinary means to smoother or smoke
out our troubles; but as purposing to use them as preparatiues, whereby both our
souls and bodies may be made more capable of the spiritual means to follow
after.

As we require these things to be the matter of our Ministry in such a
perplexity; so we would wish the persons ministering to be men learned and of
sound judgment, wise, and of Godly experience, meek and of most loving
spirits. For when the troubled patient shall be well persuaded of our
knowledge and discretion, and there with all shall perceive us to come in
tender and loving affection, I think an entrance is made, and all prejudice
is taken away, so as we may the more freely work upon the Conscience; first
bringing them to the sight of sin, as to some cause of their trouble. Herein
we must labor to put away all confusion and blindness of sorrrowe,
endeavoring by wisdom to bring the parties wounded to some certain object and
matter of their trouble; and so draw out of them the confession of some
several especial, and secret, sin; I say several and secret sin, because
I know, how many (through a palpable blindness or disordered discerning of
sin) talk nothing so much as of sin; and yet they either can not discry
several sins, or they will not be brought to acknowledge their secret
sins: whereof the one proceeds of the ignorance of the Law of God, and the
other of self love, which makes us loath even in our travel of mind* to
shame our selves.

Now that the confession of particular sins is requisite, it may appear by the
two and thirtieth Psalm, Psalm. 32.
wherein (being a Psalm of instruction, concerning the forgiveness of
sins) the Prophet (by his own experience) teaches us, that he could find
no relief of his sickness, until he had remembered, and made confession of his
sins.

What? shall we think that the Prophet of God (taught so wonderfully by the
word and by the spirit) did not see his sins before? Be it far from us.
Rather let us know that he had not severally and perticularly ripped up his
sins before the Lord, in a several confession of them. Which though the
Lord knows far better than we our selves: yet such kind of sacrifice is
most acceptable unto him.

Now if in this trouble the person humbled can not come to the particular sight
of sin in themselves; it is good to use the help of others unto whom they
may offer their hearts to be gaged and searched, and their lives to be
examined more deeply, by hearing the several Articles of the law laid open
before them; whereby they may try the whole course of their actions. For (as
we said before) the grosest hypocrites will generally complain of sin; and
yet deal with them in particular points of the particular precepts, and
prove them in the applying of things to be done or not done to their own
consciences; and we shall see many of these poor souls tossed too and fro,
now floting in joys, now plunged in sorrows, not able to distinguish one sin
from another.

Now when we shall see the wound of the spirit to arise of any certain and
known sin, it is either for some sin already committed, wherein we lie; or
else for some sin as yet not committed, but whereunto we are tempted. For the
former: It pleases God oftentimes to bring old sins to mind, when we had not
thoroughly repented of them before; that so (as it were) represe^ting the^ to
us afresh, we might fall into a more misliking of the^. And yet herein is not
all, to mislike our selves for some perticulars, although it be good to be
occupied about some especial sins: for as it is not sufficient for the
avoiding of hypocrisy, to see sin generally: so it is not enough to escheue
the deceiueablenesse of the heart, ever to be poring busily in one particular,
and to be forgetful of our great and general sins. But let us learn by the
particulers to pass to the generals. When any such one sin then does pursue
thee, rest not only therein, but say thus rather to thy self; Oh Lord, is
this one sin so grievous? and does my God punish this one sin so sorelie?
How great then should be my punishment, if thou should (O Lord) so deal
with me for all my other sins.

Let us labor to have a sense both of general and of particular sins, least
in time our grief pass away without fruit; whilst that not being displeased
as well with one sin, as with another; we either look to superficially to
general, and not to particulars; or else too superstitiously observe
particulers and not the generals.

Concerning those sins whereunto we are tempted; as when a man is moved to
think blasphemously of God the father, o^ to doubt wether there be a Christ
or no, or to imagine grosely of the holy Ghost, or to deny GOD, or to doubt of
the Trinity; or to be moved to murder, aduouterie, or such like: in which
temptations he feels Gods spirit to cheke him for them, so as he knows not
in this case what to do, for that on the one side he dares not listen
willingly to these fearful and monstrous temptations; and on the other side,
he fears least in time by long, suit he might fall into them, or at the least
for that he sees not how to be delivered from them: I suppose these motions
are not so much to be disputed with, as we by them are to be provoked to more
instant and extraordinary zeal of prayer.

Surely these are dangerous temptations, and therefore are not to be kept
close; which our nature will easily incline unto: but perticularly are to be
confessed of us. For the Devil will come sometime to thee, to keep thee still
in a general acknowledgeing of sin, and urge thee on this manner; Surely thou
must needs do this sin, thou see thou can have no ease, until thou
have consented, thou art ordained to it: the reason why thou art thus
incessantly tempted, is because thou do not thus take thy pleasure. Go too,
deny God, believe not his word: it is but a policy to keep men in awe;
Religion is no such matter as men make it. Thus for fear of yielding on the
one hand, and for shame of disclosing the tentations on the other hand; many
men have pined away, and almost have been overcome by them. If we should
disclose this (say these men) what would people say of us? They would count us
Atheists, they would think us the wickedst men in the world. Well for our
instruction and consolation herein; Let us learn that these kinds of
tentations, are either corrections for some sins past, or punishments for
some sin present, or forwarners of some sin to come. We shall see many tempted
to adultery, who (no doubt) cannot be brought to commit it; and yet because in
their youth they have committed it, and not repented of it, it comes to them
again. The like may be observed in theft, in gluttony, and in other
tentations, which are not so much sent unto us, presently to overcome us, as to
put us in mind, that some time heretofore we having been over come with them,
should now repent for them. So^e time a man shall lie in some sin, whereof
when he will not be admonished, neither by the public nor private means,
and then some other strange tentation shall fall upon him, differing from that
wherein he presently lies, to admonish him of that other sin. As when a
worldling shall be tempted to adultery, a thing which he has noe desire to do;
yet it is to make him look to his worldlines, whereof he has so strong and
through a lyking: Whereat if then he will not be awaked, he may suddenly fall
into that too, and so by the punishment of GOD, in punishing one sin with
another, both his sins shall be to his great shame laid open, and one
sin shall make known another. Sometime also it comes to pass, that one
shall be tempted with such a sin, as neither heretofore, nor presently he
has given any liking or entertainment unto; and yet the Lord by it may
forewarne him how he may fall into it hereafter, as also to show that he has
stood al his former life, rather by the grace of God than by the strength of
flesh and blood. Wherefore when thou art moved to doubt of God, of Christ, of
the word, or of justification, do not so much stand wondering at these strange
tentations, as think with thy self that it is the mercy of God by them, to
cause thee better to discern of those tentations in others: when thou shall
have observed with fear and trembling how they make their first entry into a
man's heart, how they gather strength, how they agree with our corrupt nature,
in what degrees they come to some growth, how the spirit of God does resist
them, what be the means best to prevail against them. And thus if thou make
thy profit by them, thou shall so wonderfully search and descrie by several
veins, the body, age and slight to of these tentations in others, by an holy
experience which God has taught thee in others, that besides that thou shall
lay forth men's secret corruptions, as if thou wast in their bosoms; thou
shall be able also by the seed of sorrow in thy self, to begette an
unspeakable joy in others, who in time may be tempted as thou now art.

Think moreover and besides, that such is the efficacy of sin, that they
who are now noe Papists, Heretics, Adulterers, or Thieves, may for their
secure contemning and foolish passing over of these tentations sent unto them,
suddenly, shortly after fall into them; because they would not seek to make
some use of them, nor confess before the Lord both their pronenesse and
worthiness to fall into them. But if we will humble our selves in such
tentations, and learn by them meekely to discern the corruptions of our
hearts, we shall not only persently deliver our selves from peril, but be
also further enabled to assist others herafter, in the l^ke danger.

But some will oppose against these things which we have delivered: Do you
think it a remedy to cast down them that are already humbled? This is rather
to be a Butcher than a builder of a man's conscience. To whom I answeere, that
I desire Preachers to be Builders, and not Butchers; and it is one thing
generally to apply, and another perticularly to lay the medicine unto the
wound* it is good to begin with searching first, and to purge the sore by the
vinegar of the Law, and after to supple it with the oil of the Gospel. Both
which must be done in wisdom, using them to some in greater, to some in
lesser measure. For as some having nothing but a decay of nature, and no
mortal humor, need rather restoratiue, than purging medicines: So some rather
troubled for some spiritual wants, than for grosser sins, need not so much
the sharp threatenings of the Law, as the sweet promises of the Gospel. But
if the body, through some extraordinary repletion has gotten some great
surfeit, not so much to the weakening of nature, as to the threatening of
imminent death, and therefore requires rather some strong purgation, than
comfortable and cordial medicines: then the soul brought almost to deaths
door with some extraordinary sin, is rather to be boared and pierced with
the denouncing of Gods judgments than otherwise. But because we would deal
more plainly and less confusedly, it is good in our access to afflicted
consciences, to lay these two grounds. First, we must persuade the persons
humbled, that their sins are pardonable and their sores curable: And after,
that this visitation is not so much a sign of Gods wrath and anger, as a seal
of his mercy and favor, in that it is not either blind or barren, but
plentiful in good effects, and fruitful in Godly issues. The former how
needful it is, the experience of so many almost as have bin thrown down, is
a sufficient witness; who have had this as a tagge tied to their tentations that
never any were so plagued as they, none ever had the like temptations. The Lord
will surely make an end of the^ in some strange and unknown tentation.
Wherein they are notvnlike unto men fallen into some dangerous disease, who
thinking to be without the fadome of the Physicians skill, and not to be within
the compass of things recou^rable, add a second and sorer grief unto their
former.

Wherefore as these men seem to be half healed, when any man of knowledge can
be brought, who by experience has cured the like malady in like degrees in
others: So, then the sorrowful souls are not a little by hope refreshed and
strengthened to look for some ease, when they see none other tentation to have
overtaken them, than such as having fallen into the nature of man, have found
mercy at the hands of God, that he might be feared. This ground work
framed; it is good to build up and repair the decayed joy of the mind, partly
by the Law, to make a preparatiue for these joys; if the mind not truly
humbled, is not fit truly to be comforted: and partly by the gospel, if the
conscience kindly thrown down, is become a fit subject to aply the sweet
promises of God in Jesus Christ unto it. And here again, to answer them that
deny the law wholly, or at all to be used, when we would breed comfort in
one: I demand whether if it be necessary to maintain the righteousness of
Christ, it be not also as necessary to preserve the righteousness of the Law?
Seeing the righteousness of the Law, of us not fulfilled, will draw us unto the
righteousness of Christ to us imputed: And since the righteousness of Christ to us
imputed, is never thoroughly and truly esteemed, until we se the righteousness
of the law of us to be unperformed. Again if our Savior Christ did foreshew
his Disciples, that the first work of the holy Ghost at his coming, should be
to convict the world of sin, to make men know, that without Jesus Christ
their is nothing but sin, and then, that he should rebuke the world of
righteousness, that they might see how Christ dyed not for his own sin, but
for the sins of others: I see not why it should not be very convenient,
first to lay open the righteousness of the law, that men may see their sins;
and then the righteousness of Christ; that men may see their sins discharged in
him. Besides, where the Lord says by his Prophet. At what time soever a sinner
does repent of his sins from the bottom of his heart, I will put all his
wickedness out of my remembrance: it may well be gathered that there must be a
sound sorrow for sin go before; and then true joy of sins pardoned, may the
more freely by virtue of his promise be both hoped for, and looked for afterward.
Moreover, seeing all the promises of God in the gospel are commended unto us
under the title and tenor of restoring sight to the blind, hearing to the
deaf, strength to the Lame, health to the Sick, and life to the Dead; it is
manifest, not only that there is noe disease of the soul which Christ cannot
heal: but also that we must first find our selves blind, deaf, dumb,
lame, sick and dead, before he will meddle with us; because they that are
whole need not the Physician, and he came to call sinners, not the Righteous
to repentance. Now, to do this in wisdom, by neither pressing the conscience
too severely, nor releasing the conscience more unadvisedly, it shall be a safe
way, to use the well tempered speech of the Apostle to the sorcerer; Repent,
that if it be possible, thy sin may be forgiven thee. Where he does not
wholly discourage him, because it may be his sin may be pardoned; neither
yet too boldly encourage him, in that without repentance, he shows it
altogether impossible to be pardoned.

And that we be not too preposterous in our consolations, let us be warned by
the blasphemous speech of that detestable Arian, who of late years was put to
death at Norwich. This hellish heretic, a little before he should be
executed, An Arian executed at Norwich.
afforded a few whorish tears asking whether he might be saved in Christ or
no? When one told him, that if he truly repented, he should surely not
perish: he brake out most monstrously into this speech: Nay, is your Christ so
easily to be entreated indeed, as you say? Then I defy him, and care not for
him. Oh how good a thing had it been not to have cast this precious stone to
this swine? Oh how safe had it been to have dealt more bitterly, and to have
dwelt more vehemently on the conscience of this caytife?

Now to attain some discretion in curing this wounded spirit, we must learn
wisely to judge, both of the person afflicted, and of the nature of his
affliction. First, we may note whether it be a man or a woman, because we may
urge more fearfully the use of the law to a man, as being the stronger
vessel. And as Satan knew the woman to be most easy and frameable to be
wrought upon, at his first temptation: so is he not ignorant that she is the
weaker party to sustain any temptation now. Then let us consider, whether
they that are thus humbled have knowledge or no? Because, if they have no
knowledge they think trouble of mind to be so strange a thing, as never any
before had it: if they have knowledge, then Satan is ready to accuse them of
the sin against the holy Ghost, as though every sin done against knowledge,
were a sin of presumption. Further, we are to enquire, how strong or weak
they are, that if they be sorely stricken we cease to humble the^ any further,
if they be not sufficiently wounded then to touch the^ with some deeper sense
of sin. Also we must be circumspect, to find out whether by nature they are
more fearful and melancholy or no: As also, whether they be usual sinners, or
have fallen once of infirmity; that so upon their disposition and inclination we
may build our speeches the better. To these it is good to add the
consideration of the persons age, estate and ability: as if the party be
troubled for worldlines, whether he be not a great householder: if he complain
of uncleanness, whether he be not a young man and unmarried: if he be humbled
with covetousness, whether he be not old: because diverse countries, callings,
ages, conditions and estates of men, have their diverse and peculiar sins,
which we must rightly discern. Howbeit of what sex soever they are men or
women, of what complexion soever the are, of what knowledge to discern sin, of
what degree of commiting sin; of what age, authority, wealth, estate, or
condition soever they are, it is good to mark that there be many, who are more
troubled for the vexation and disquietnes of their mind being distempered,
then for the vileness and horriblenes of their sin committed; who are wounded
more with the fear of shame, with the fear of being mad, or with the fear
of running out of their wits, than with the conscience of sin. Which thing
if we find in them, it is our part to travel with them, that they make a less
matter of the outward shame, and more conscience of the inward sin. Neither
must we here forget to make a distinction between our speeches used to the
humbled in the very time of their extreme agony and burning a gue of their
trobles, and those speches which we use to them the fit being past; because
the one and former requires more consolation and less exhortation, the other
and latter would have us more abundant in admonishing, and more sparing in
comforting, when we may wisely admonish them to beware of sin, which so
procured their own woe. In this breathing time, it is also expedient to exhort
them, that for some season until they shall find greater power of
regeneration, they would tie themselves to some holy orders, and godly vows,
whereby they may either be furthered in mortifying some special sin; which
for that they could find no power against it, did most grieve them, or
strengthened in some special grace, the want whereof did also wound them.

But before we launch deeper into this sea of particular tentations, and
begin to found the dangerous passages of natural corruption, and original
sin, the troublesome froath whereof, does almost ouerwhelme many poor
pilgrims it; shall be good to give this caution, that both in these and in the
former troubles, men would be still again admonished, patiently to bear with
a wounded spirit, albeit it fall out so, that they be somewhat pettish, seeing
the holy Ghost speaks so favorably of them, saying: A wounded Spirit who can
bear? And surely our practice in other things, by the law of equity, may
urge this at our hands. For if men by the light of reason can see it to be a
duty convenient, not furiously to control, but meekely to suffer, and wisely
to put up the unadvised speeches of a man distempered in brain, by reason of
some burning ague, or such like violent and vehement sickness: we may easily
gather even by the same rule of reason, not so severely to censure the
impatient speeches of him, who by reason of some parching Fever of the spirit,
is disquieted in all parts of his mind, and has all the veins of his heart
(as it were in a spiritual agony) vexed. Wherefore both unsavory for want of
godly wisdom, and uncharitable for want of Christian love, are their
murmuring obtrectations which say, what? Is this the godly man? Is this he
that is so troubled for his sins? Why! see how pettish he is, nothing can
please him: no body can satisfy him. Consider, O man, if thou can bear
with a frail body, that thou must much more bear with a frail mind.
Consider O man that this his pettishnes does more wound him to the heart, than
any injury thou could press him with. And therefore seeing he afflicts
his own soul for it, thou need not add any thing to his affliction, and
to exasperate his grievous smart. Consider that it is a blessed thing
mercifully to bethink us of the estate of the needy, and that to rub a fresh
wound, and to streine a bleeding sore, is nothing else, but with Jobs friends
to bring a new torment, where there is no need of it. If the wise father does
rather pity than rebuke his child, when by reason of sickness the appetite is
not easily pleased: even so, if we purpose to do any good with an afflicted
mind, we must not be austere in reprehending every infirmity, but pitiful in
considering of it tender frailty. Neither do I speak this to nourish
pettishnesse in any, but would have them to labor for patience, and to seek
for peace, which though they find not at the first, yet by prayer they must
wait on the Lord, and say; Lord, because there is mercy that thou may be
feared: I will wait upon thee, as the eye of the servant waits upon the hand
of his Master. I will condemn my self of folly, and say, Oh my soul, why art
thou so heavy? Why art thou so cast down within me? Still trust in the Lord,
for he is thy health and thy salvation.

FINIS.
Another short Treatise belonging to the Comfort of an afflicted Conscience.
IN all afflictions Gods children must look unto the end: They are to desire
to profit by them, and in them to seek the way of perfect comfort and
consolation: which that they may find, they must know that the afflictions of
the godly last but a while; they serve them but for salues and medicines; the
end of them is always happy. In them they are not only preserved, and
purified from many sins: but also much beautified with the Image of Jesus
Christ, who is the eldest Son in the house of God. Again the cross of true
Christians is the sweet and amiable call of God unto repentance, in that he
puts us in mind thereby to bethink us of our debts: because we are given
to think the day of payment is yet far of; yea we fall a sleep until our
turn be ended, and whilst God lengtheneth our days waiting for our
repentance, we never think of our sins until the hour come wherein we
perish with shame. The best meeting then with the Lords visitation, is without
delay and in syncerity to pray for our sins to be pardoned. For therefore
does the Lord oftentimes shackle us the more with the chains of his
chastisements, because we are more careful to be unburdened of our sickness,
then to be freed from our sin: which we the rather are loath to confess,
because we would not be espied, to be in the wrath of God. Others there be
that nearing of their sins in the time of their afflictions, will acknowledge
indeed their infirmities to be the mother of such a brood: yet they have no
true remorse to restrain themselves from sin, because they have but a
confused conceit thereof, and though their ship be never so much tossed and
turmoyled, yet think they not that God holds the stern. These men if God
bear with them, do as it were settle in their lees, and are as it were soked
in their sins. For prosperity is a drunkenness, to cast our selves into a
dead sleep, and when the Lord sets us alone, we cease not to sooth up our
selves, bearing our selves in hand, that we are in Gods favor, and that he
loves us, because he scourges us not. And thus retchles we are whilst we
measure Gods love according to our sense and humor. Wherein we be wray our
ignorance of the exercise of the cross, in that affliction is the mother of
humility, humility breeds repentance, and repentance obtains mercy. Some
also there are who usually whilst the fearful judgment of God is before
their eyes, either in themselves or in others, have a few glancing motions,
and starting cogitations of their sins and of Christ his passion: yet at all
other times their minds are so clasped up from thinking of temptations, and
their hearts so locked up from foreseeing or forethinking of judgments, that
they feel no godly sorrow. They mock the mourning days of the elect, as of
them that be of a melancholy nature; they make a sport of sin, as little
remembering the sting which will either prick them to the heart blood most
fearfully in the hour of death, or meet the^ with gryping agonies in the day
of their visitatio^ more speedily. But happily they think they have given good
testimony and word of their repentance and remembrance of God, when they give
one deep sigh and away, and pass over Gods heavy indignation as over burning
coals. So that whilst the Lord in prosperity affords large peniworthes of
his love unto them, they dally with his Majesty, and make a sport of his mercy.
All which imperfections may be better corrected, if in our deepest rest with a
reuerente and humble fear of gods judgments, we did wait for the day of our
trial, and prepare our selves to the lords visitations, as they who by the
writing of their own conscience do acknowledge themselves by just title to be
fosterers thereof: for the feeling of Gods mercy must come from the sight of our
misery by sin; which being pardoned, we shall soon have our infirmities
heled. Wherefore let us first learn to cleanse our souls from sin, and then to
sustain the sores of our body. Sure it is that if we have suffered our hearts
to be harrowed with the rake of Gods judgments, (as occasion from the Lord
has been given) that we are become soft and well exercised in the fear of
God: we shall come to the feeling of our sins, the sense whereof; if it bring as
it were a sickness to the body and a corsey to the soul, it is an undoubted
earnest of our regeneration, and happy are we if we find our selves so diseased
and troubled with our sins, that we can hardly (being in the skirmish and
agony) make any difference between the motions to any evil, and the consent
unto the same: for oftentimes evil motions do so possess the souls of gods
children, sucking down so strongly in the^ that though they weep, pray, and
meditate (which be the last means and remedies to ease and cure them) yet
though they feel them with irksomenes and loathsomenes, as we feel sickness in
our bodies: yet those motions will be continually in them without diminishing,
the delight only excepted. Wherefore for our comfort herein, we are not to
martyr our selves with disquietnes of mind, because we are so pestered,
thronged with wicked motions and assaults, but rather let us quiet our selves,
and not suffer our selves to be hindered with sickness either of body or mind: by
means whereof we should become more unprofitable to our selves, and the whole
church of God. For the godly shall not be so freed from sin, but that they
shall be assalted with evil motions, suspicions, delusious, vain fan ti^^^s and
imaginations; the body of sin shall never be from us so long as we live. For
the scome thereof is almost continually boiling and wallopping in us, foming out
such filthy froth and stinking savor into our minds, that it is not only
detestable to the mind regenerate and renewed by the spirit of God, but also
it would make abashed the very natural man, to look into so loathsome a stye
of sin, and sink hole of iniquity. Yea it makes us often to quail, and if it
were possible, it would corrupt the very part regenerate. For mighty is the
power, and raging is the strength of sin: Neither for all this must we cease to
sorrow for our sins, nor despair on the other side, although our sorrow be
but small. For if we be sorrowful for the hardness of our hearts, if we can be
grieved for that we are no more grieved for our sins, if we can but sigh and
groone because we feel our iniquities; it is so much a greater comfort unto
us, as it is a greater testimony that our hearts are not altogether hardened:
so that if we feel ^orrowe indeed, although we weep not, yet we may gather
comfort, considering that this sorrow is for sin with a love and hunger after
righteousness: yea if our assaults be distrust, pride, arrogance, ambition,
envy, concupiscence, as who^e as the fire in the furnace all our days, and
though Satan lays out oil in great measure and out of measure, that it is
the wonderful mercy of the Lord that we stand; and though our prayers be dull
and full of wearisomenes, if the striving and strayning of our selves to
goodness be so hard, that we know not whether we strive for fear of
punishment or for love of so good a Father: yet if we feel this in our selves
that we would feign love the Lord, and be better, and being wearied and tired
with our sins, long gladly to enjoy the peace of righteousness, and desire to
please God in a simple obedience of faith; then let us comfort our selves;
there is no time to late to repent in. For he comes quickly to Christ
(although in the hou^e of death) that comes willingly, and in a desire of a
better life: howsoever sin and Satan at that time would especially persuade
him. For as the humming Be having lost her sting in an other, does still
notwithstanding make a fearful and grievous noise by her often buzzing about
us, but is nothing able to hurt us: so sin and death, having lost their stings
in Christ Jesus, do not cease at all, even in the height of the parching heat
of our consciences, to make a murmuring: and with furious storms of
temptations to terrify us and our consciences, albeit they can never sting us.
Wherefore if Satan charge our consciences with sin (if we can feel the things
a little before mentioned, in our consciences) let us bid him, not tell us what
we have been, but what we would be. For such we are by imputation as we be in
affection, and he is now no sinner, who for the love he bears to
righteousness, would be no sinner. Such as we be in desire and purpose, such we
be in reckoning and account with God, who gives that true desire and holy
purpose to none but to his children whom he justifies. Neither undoubtedly can
the giltines of sin break the peace of our conscience, seeing it is the
work of an other who has commended us as righteous before God, and saved us.
It must indeed be confessed, that our own works will do nothing in the matter
of justification, which from Christ, and in Christ is freely given unto us: it
must be granted that in our selves we are weaker then that we can resist the
least sin, so far of is it, that we can encounter with the law, sin,
death, hell and Satan: and yet in Christ we are more then conquerers over them
all. When the law accuses thee because thou have not observed it; send it to
Christ and say, there is a man that has fulfilled the law: to him I cleave, he
has fulfilled it for me, and has given the fulfilling of it unto me; I have
nothing to do with thee, I have another law which strikes thee down, even the
law of liberty which through Christ has set me free. For my conscience which
henceforth serves the law of grace, is a glorious prince to triumph over thee.
If sin come and would have thee by the throat, send it to Christ, and say, as
much as thou may do against him, so much right thou shall have against me.
For I am in him, and he in me: wherefore (O sin) I am righteous through my
Christ, which is a condemning sin, to condemn thee which art a condemned
sinner. If death creep upon thee and attempt to devour thee, say unto it,
Christ has overcome thee, and opened to me the gates of everlasting life: thou
would have killed him, with the sting of sin, but the same being of no
force, thy purpose (O death) has failed, and he being my life, is become thy
death. If Satan sommon thee to answer for thy debts, send him also to Christ
and say, that the wife is not suable, but the husband: enter thine action
against Christ mine husband, and he will make thee a sufficient answer: who
then shall condemn us? or what judge shall daunt us? sith God is our judge and
accquited us? and Christ was condemned, and justifies us? he is our judge that
wills not the death of a sinner; he is our man of law who to excuse us,
suffered himself to be accused for us. O gluttonous hell where is thy defense?
O cruel sin, where is thy tyrannous power? O ravening death where is thy
bloody sting? O roaring Lion, why do thou freete and foame? Christ my law
fights against thee O law, and is my liberty. Sin against thee O sin,
and is my righteousness: Christ against thee O devil, and is my savior? Death
against thee O death and is my life. Thou did desire to paue my way to the
burning lake of damned souls: but contrary to thy will, thou art constrained
to lift up the ladder whereby I must ascend into the new Jerusalem. Wherefore if
we shall find our selves forsaken of God, so as we perceive nothing but matter
of despair, let us still hold our own; and in the certainty of our faith stay
our selves, since Christ is given us of God that he might extinguish sin,
triumph over the law, vanquish death, overcome the devil, and destroy hell,
for our only comfort and consolation. But peradventure some will say, my faith
is weak and cold, and my conscience is as a ^laming lamp and burning
furnace: I fear the Lord will still pursue me with his wrathful
indignation: Thou do well to fear, but fear and sin not.

For fear which subdueth the security of the flesh, is in all most requisite,
in that the weaker we are in our selves, the stronger we are in God. But that
fear is dangerous, which hinders the certainty of faith, in that it
incourageth our enemy more fearcely to set upon us; when we (coming into the
camp) will cast away our armor especially which should defend us. Comfort thy
self, the Lord will not quench the smoking flax, nor break the bruised reed,
he looks not on the quantity but on the quality of our faith. For as a good
mother does not reject her child because through some infirmity it is weak,
feeble and not able to go alone, but rather does pity and supporte it least
peradventure it should fall, and recompenseth that with more motherly affection,
which in her child is wanting by occasion: in like manner the Lord God our
most gracious father does not cast us off, because through our imperfections we
are unable or afraid to draw nearer to the throne of grace; but rather
pitieth us, and seeing us a far of desirous to come unto him, meets us by
the way, and by grace and strength of his own hand, directs our steps unto
his kingdom. And as he which freely purposes to give a wedge of gold, will not
withdraw his gift because the hand of him that should receive it, is weak,
troubled with the gout, palsy, or leaprosie, so that by any means, though in
great weakness, he be able to hold it: even so the Lord purposing in free
mercy to bestow on us an immortal weight of glory, will not deprive us of
it, though many filthy blemishes have poluted and weakened or faith, so that in
any small measure we be able to take hold of his promises* neither are we ^o
look on our faith which the Gospel has called us unto, because we never
believe as we ought; but rather on that which the Gospel offers and gives,
that is on Gods mercy and peace in Christ: in whose lap if we can lay our
heads with Saint John, then we are in felicity, security, and perfect
quietness. Contrariwise there be some, who (notwithstanding that a tormented
conscience is a stinging Serpent, that it were much better that all the
creaturs rose up against us, every one bringnig their bane; then once to come
before the dreadful face of God) are so blockish that they are wholly resolved
into hardness. If they be pricked with sickness, they cry alas; if they be
pinched with poverty thy can complain: but as for the torment of mind they
cannot skill of it: And eue^ to talk of abrused, co^trite and broken heart, is a
strange language. For proof whereof our consciences are rocked aslepe so that
not one amongst a thousand knows what it is to be pressed and harrowed with
the rake of Gods judgments. But blessed are they that to their own salvation
feel this in their bodies, whilst sin may be both punished and purged. For
though God spare us for a time, yet we know what he keeps for our end.
Wherefore it is the best for us to run to the Lord in this life with a
troubled mind, least we tarry till the Lord have locked us up with the heavy
fetters of desperation, when he shall sommon us to the bar of his judgment,
in the sight of his Angels, and impannelling the great inquest of his Saints
against us, shall denounce our fearful and final sentence of eternal
condemnation, for we see many that have been careless and have made good
cheer all their life long, yea, and when men have labored to make them feel
the judgments of God, they have turned all to mockery, but whose iolytie the
Lord has so abated when they draw toward death, that in stead of resting
and sporting (whereunto they had been given) they have felt the terror of
death, hell, and damnation, and lapping up their joys in final desperation,
have forced out cursinges against their filthy pleasures. Wherefore if we in
the tempest of our temptations will sail a right course, neither shrinking nor
slipping into the gulf of desperation, neither battering our bark against the
rock of presumption; Let us in a contrite spiri^e cry unto the Lord: Have
mercy upon me, heal my soul for I have sinned against thee, forgive all mine
iniquities, and heal all mine infirmities. Thou healest those that are broken
in heart and byndest up their soars: why art thou cast down my soul, and
why art thou disquieted within me, wait on God, for I will yet give him
thanks, he is my present help, and my God. Yet my soul keep thou silence
before God, of him comes my salvation, he is my strength, therefore I shall
not much be moved, his mightines is enough to give me courage, yea and shall be
even when I am forlorn, I know that the diminishing of my body, goods,
friends, or any other thing is a calling of me, to that which never shall
diminish nor decay, I believe that my Lord and my God allureth me daly thither;
that I might not doubt that when my body is laid in the grave, and there
consumed as it were to nothing, yet notwithstanding my soul resting in the
bosom of the Lord, shall return unto me and shall rise to glory: even as it
(resting in this life, in the mercies of Christ) did rise to grace verily I
see, and that with joy, that my flesh must go to decay for look what freshnes
soever was in it, it diminished day by day. And I need not go far to seek
for death, for I feel not so small an infirmity in my body, but the same is
unto me a messenger of dissolution. Yet for all this I shall see my God, and
when I am covered in the belly of the grave with mouldes, I am assured, that he
will reach me his hand to lift me up again to the beauty of his inheritance:
so that this small cottage and shed of leaves, being brought to the grave,
shall be carried into an incorruptible tabernacle. Thus communing with our own
hearts, and being still in the peace of a good conscience, concerning our
outward sufferings, we shall find that the Lord by his fatherly and loving
chastisme^ts, intends nothing more then to prove our obedience, as good
reason it is that he should, and to confirm our faith, as also is most
necessary. Howbeit still as I said, he uses a fatherly correction, that is,
in mercy, measure, and judgment. For as he strikes us down in anger for our
sins with the one hand, so he raises us up again in love for our salvation
with the other hand. For albeit his corrections be wearisome wounds to flesh
and blood, yet are they sovereign medicines to the soul and conscience,
especially when the Lord gives us that priuiuiledge of his children, that by
his holy spirit he does ouermaister us, least that finally we should be his
Judge, and he not ours. And for this cause the Lord is often times provoked to
put on (as it were) a contrary face, and to lock us up in a prison of
adversity, to restrain us from the liberty of our sins, which Satan feign
would make us violently to rush into. And surely though the wisdom of the
flesh persuades us that nothing is better then to be spared and not to be
espied when the Lord calls us to reckoning; yet the spirit showing our
desperate estate, without the sire of affliction, and boulter of adversity,
teaches us that we cannot of all the blessings of God sufficiently esteem
this, being the mother of humility, and nource of true repentance. Again, the
Lord fitteth us often by inward temptations and outward crosses, to flitte us
from the stake of security and untowardness to good works; least in time we
should loose the experience of our knowledge and faith in Christ, and seek
some easier kind of life for flesh and blood. Neither can we truly repent,
until by some cross we know this world to be a place of sorrow, and not of
mirth and delight. For so long as we make our prosperity a bulwark to beat
down all harms, we are to look for adversity to beat down the high sail
of our proud hearts, whereby we gadde after our own lusts, and leave the
anchor of peace, which is our trust in God. Let us learn^ then, when the world
begins to favor us, and we have as it were an hundredth thousand soldiers,
to bear us up; not to be secure; for there is nothing more easy for a man,
then for to make him self believe that he shall always continue in happy
estate, and think he shall die in the nest. But we must be as birds on a
bough, to remove at Gods pleasure, and that without resistance when the Lord
shall visit us. And because we are given to much to think that we have the
things in our own right, which we houlde of the free goodness of God: we are
taught in affliction how heinous unthankfulness it were to bind the Lord
continually to intertaine us in this life at so full Charge and cost, without
respect of his free and undeserved gifts: or to hold plee against, and sue
him as it were by an obligation, at whose hands we ought to beg daily; and
at whose gate we receive all our mainteinance: or to make a rent charge of all
that which he gives of his he liberality. Thus in the end we make a
chalendge of ownershippe of Gods gifts, and make account to have their
company to the grave, whereby we provoke the Lord often to prove to our
faces, that all that we have is but lent and borrowed. Let us then have such
an eye to every blow, that whenever the Lord shall lay any cross upon us,
we be ready to receive it and to yield up our bonds unto him, the condition
whereof is, that we be ready to remove whenever he pleases, knowing that
Gods providence forces us always to the best, and as most may make for the
hastening of our souls to our everlasting inheritance. Let us learn not to
recke^ without our host, and that we hold our prosperity of the Lord not in
^ee simple, but as tenants at will, that is, from day to day, resigning to God
the soueraignetie of reuoking us when it pleases him. Thus it becomes the
Lord to change our estate that we be come not snatled in the gifts of
prosperity, and become so folish as not to keep on our way to the heavenly
life. Our natural inclination is to forget that we are on earth as pilgrims;
to leap up into the clouds; and to promise unto our selves the whole course of
our lives to be in prosperity; and so long as God lets us alone at our
ease, we take our selves (as it were) to be petty Gods. But when we see our
selves shut up, and know not what will be the end of our misery, findeing our
selves to be entertained in this life but as journey men, waged for the present
day, but not knowing what will become of us the day following: we desire to
take our ^est in the bosom of Gods providence, and so much we strike our
sails the lower, when the Lord proclameth war with our secure prosperity:
which persuades us that we shall live for ever, and drives us from bethinking
us of our miseries and frail^i^s. Wherefore let us cut out our prosperity by
the pattern of humility, and in our best estate, put our selves in
readiness to suffer adversity, and when we are well, to look for worse, and
keep a good watch when God handles us most gently, that in abounding we may
foresee our wants, in health our sickness, and in prosperity our calamity:
concerning things of this life the faithful are to stand in a doubt, that
that which they hold with one hand, may be taken away with the other. We
must not think that we shall ever be shut up in a mewe, so that we should see
noe cross: but we must lay open our selves to receive stripes from the Lord,
knowing that our least cries will stay his greatest scourges. Let us love to
be assaulted, but not vnmeasurably because God will assist us. Let us look to
fall, but on our knees, because Gods hand does hold us up. Let us look to be
humbled but in mercy, because the Lord sustaineth us, and as we are as^ured
where misery hemmeth us about on every side, to have an ou^-gate in every
danger* so it is our part continually to confess before the Lord, that we
ever give new occasions that he should follow us with new punishments* and
that our sins do often shake of the wings of Gods mercy, under the which we
have been long comforted. For Gods children acknowledge themselves without
ceasing, that God has rodd^s in a readiness (though they see noe present evil)
to beat them from their sins: and bend all their care, how they may rather
suffer ad^ersitie to Gods glory, then to steep securely in prosperity unto
their own pleasure. Now when the Lord does, as it were hold us on the rack
for these causes before named, we must pray unto him, that (howsoever he
keeps us in the press) we may have a breathing while to consider our days
spent in pleasure, and to examine our unthankfulness, which shuts up the
door of Gods mercy from us. And because our afflictions are the sorer when
they come the nearer to the soul, we may with our selves conclude to hold on
the way of our thorough-^aire and though we see nothing but thorns of
temptations, and briars of evil affe^^ions, so as we must be feign to leap
over hedges, rocks, and ditches; yet must we not cease to continue in Gods
service. For if that were not, what trial and examination of our faith should
there be, wear we as in a fair medowe that we might run on a long by
the water side in a shade, and that there might be nothing but pleasure and joy
all our life time: who could vant that he had served God with good affection?
But when GOD does send us things clean contrary to our desires, that we must
be feign one while to enter into a quagmire, and another while to march upon
ragged rocks and stones; then we shall have the use of a well exexcised mind
in prayer, in repentance, and in contempt of this life. And why does the Lord
some time suffer us to pyne away, and to languishe in continuance of grief,
seeinge that he could clean rid us at the first, doubtless to this end,
that we might confess his mercy more freely, and bite of his iuststice more
sharply. Let us now learn to hold all the passions of impacientie in
bondage, both by comparing our evils which the wonderful mercies of GOD, and
our small sufferings with the intolerable conflictes of our forefathers For
there is noe greater cause of our desparing under the cross, then when Satan
persuades us: that never any were handled so roughlye, or else would bear us
in hand, that although GOD afflicted the faithful that have been before us,
yet they were not so weak as we. But let us remember that GOD has so pinched
his servants, even them whom he loved, and whose welfare was dear and
precious in his fight, and has often brought them to such extremities, as they
were not able to look up any more, not wist how to speak nor how to houlde
their peace. Wherefore least our infirmities should ouermaister us, and when
temptations are fierce upon us, we know not where to become: Let us call too
mind the Saints of God, who were constrained with sighs and groans to stoup
under the hand of GOD; whose martyrs and tormented children ought to be our
looking glasses, to the end that by them we may learn, that according as GOD
deals forth the gifts of the Spirit, thereafter does he send greater
afflictions; both to make the^ the more esteemed, and also to cast up a more
plentiful fruit of their faith. How did God deal with Abraham, Abraham
not a common man, but rather an Angel, the tenth part of whose sufferings
would make a stout heart to quail. How was David the servant of God, David.
exercised in Gods schole, who felt all Gods dar^s, and had all his arrows
shot at him. Thus it is requisite that Gods graces should not b^ idle in his
children, but set on work by afflictions, whereby they may be known in due
time and place. How did God play the Lion wi^h Ezechias, Ezechias.
who (as with paws and teeth) bruised and crushed his bones; not that we may
accuse God of crue^tie, but that we may see with what anguish the Lord does
some times exercise his children, and with what patience he does arm them: who
notwithstanding his vehement trialles, do stay them selves upon God, accusing
themselves (Mat. 7.9) I will bear the wrath of the Lord, because I have sinned
against him: and ex^using the Lord with all humblenes with David ( Psalm. 114) I
know O Lord that thy Judgments are right, and that thou have afflicted me
justly etc. It is much available to mortification and Christian patience also,
to occupy our hearts in the house of mourning even in our greatest
banqueting, and to betake our selves unto some serious meditation of
aduersi^ie, when present pleasures would most deu^rce us from the remembrance
thereof. So though we have much in possession, we shall have little in
affection and when God does most advance us, we shall fear our wantes of
humility: and ^hen esp^cially be ransacking our infirmities, when the Lord for
ou^ trial enricheth us most with his benefits. For if the Lord God by
multiplying his mercies increases our account; we are often to suspect, to
call to judgment, and to arraine our selves for the using of Gods creatures;
who often gives that in judgment, which he might deny us in mercy and often
wayneth us from some things in his love, which he might give unto us in his
anger.

FINIS.
Sweet and sure signs of Election, to them especially that are brought low.
A clearing of judgment, conceiving of the truth, and true meaning of the
Scripture making for us or against us.

A rebuking of sin inwardly, a poverty of spirit from thence, and a
mourning therefore.

A being cast dowe in our own conceit, and a meeknes to bear our punishment
thereby wrought.

An hungring after the righteousness which is in Christ, and a prising and
esteeming it above all eartly things.

A musing upon, and a desire to think and speak of heavenly things.

A conflict of the flesh and spirit, and therein by practice the power of the
spirit gettinge the upper hand.

A fowing to the spirit, by the use of the means, as of the word, prayer, etc.

A purpose unfeigned, upon strength received, of vowing ones self wholly to the
glory of God, and good of our brethren.

A resignation of our selves into Gods hands.

An expecting of the daily increase of our souls health, and our bodies
resurrection.

The forgiving of our enemies.

An acknowledging of our offenses with a purpose truly to leave them.

A delight in Gods Saints.

A desire that after death the Church of GOD may flourish and have all peace.

A spirit without guile: that is, an unfeigned purpose always to do well,
howsoever our infirmities put us by it.

FINIS.
A letter from M. Richard Greeneham to a friend of his, M. M. against hardness
of heart.
I Beseech God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ give me his holy spirit in
writing to give advice, and you in reading to receive it, Amen. Since the time
I received M. S. his letter, wherein he declared his careful compassion over
your estate, I have been not a little grieved because, partly for want of a
convenient messenger, and partly because of my manifould distractions with the
like occurrances and other weighty affairs, I have been hindered hitherto from
wrighting unto you. And albeit even still I am in the same case, yet conscience
toward God, compassion and love toward you, forces me to overcome lets
which hardly I could otherwise prevail against. And albeit I cannot write as I
would, yet of that which I shall write proceeding from the forenamed grounds I
look for some blessing from God through Jesus Christ if you will not too much
faint in faith, and yield to the adversary: yea, if you will but hope so well
of your self, as (in the fear of GOD I do write it) I hope of you. First,
whereas it seems you are sometimes grieved, because you tarried not still at
Cambridge according to mine advise, you must know I advised it not as a thing
necessary, but more convenient, as I the^ supposed, but I advised you to obey
your father, if his pleasure still continued to have you home; whereunto you
yielding, I cannot see ^owe you offended, it being your Fathers pleasure you
should so do. And who knows whether being there you might not have been
as much troubled, there being no privilege for persons and places in such
cases: And who knows whether it be the Lords pleasure, for the exsample and
instruction (and I hope the consolation) of others in the end. And albeit you
will now think that here you were nearer the more and stronger means, yet
know you and be pers^aded, that God can and does in such cases work by fewer
and weaker, according to his good pleasure: Besides, it is in our corrupt
nature to make much of such means as we cannot have, and not so to esteem
those which God does offer us, as we should; I beseech you therefore in the
name of Jesus Christ, humbly to praise God for those means he offers in
mercy unto you, and to use them in faith accordingly; and so God shall bless
you by them: And then by such conference as you may have from hence by letters,
wherein if I may stand you in any steed, rather for the good opinion you have
of me, then for any great matter I am able to perform, I shall be ready to
offer any office of love unto you as God shall enable me, and so far forth
as I shall be at any time instructed in your particular estate in some letters
sent from you by convenient messengers. That which I perceive presently by M.
S. letter is, that you are afflicted with the blindness of your mind; and
hardness of your heart, which cannot be moved either with the promises of Gods
mercies, or fear of his judgments; nor affected with the love and delight of
the things which be good, nor with the hatred and loathing of the evil. Great
cause you have of grief I confess, but no cause of despair dare I grant,
because I am persuaded that your perswation is somewhat false, partly for want
of a sound judgment of your estate, and partly for some defect of faith,
somewhat through your own default. First therefore know you for a certainty,
that this is no other tentation, than such as diverse of Gods children have
been humbled with, and afterward have had a good issue out of it: and if it
please God to move ye to credit me, I my self have known others, as deeply
this way plunged, as you can be. Remember therefore, that God is faithful, and
will not suffer you to be tempted above that which you shall be able to bear.
And yet farther to confirm you herein, 1. Cor. 10.13
the holy scriptures do record, that this way God heretofore has humbled his
own people: in whose person the Prophet Esaias lamentably complains. Esa. 63,
15.
O Lord look down from heaven, behold from thy dwelling place of thy holiness,
and of thy glory. Where is thy zeal and thy strength, the multitude of thy
mercies, and of thy compassions? They are restrained from me. And afterward;
O Lord why have thou made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our hearts
from thy fear? And in the next chapt. verse. ^
We have been alas an unclean thing, and all our righteousness is as filthy
cloutes: and we all do fade as a leaf, and our iniquities as the wind does
take us away: and there is none that calls upon thy name, neither that
stirs up himself to take hold on thee, for thou have hid thy face from us,
and have consumed us, because of our iniquities. And before. Esa. 59.10
We grope for the wall like the blind, and we grope as one without eyes, we
rore like bears, and mourn like doves. So complains Ezechias in the
bitterness of his soul; Esa. 38.14
Like a crane or a swallow so did I chatter, I did mourn as a dove: Psalm. 51.10
And when David cries, Create in me O God a clean heart, renew in me a right
spirit. Restore to me the joy of my salvation, establish me with thy free
spirit: does he not declare that his heart was unclean, his spirit cr^ked, the
joy of his salvation lost, and himself subject to ^he spirit of bondage? so
that wanting the spirit of liberty or adoption, he could n^yther cry Abba
Father, nor have any power against sin. T^us you see how Gods children may be
blinded in mind, and hardened in heart for a time, so that they feel in
themselves the grace of the holy spirit to be as it were perished and dead.
Fa^ther to relieve the infirmity of your judgment in this case, because I
know it may much distress you, you must understand that there be two kinds
of hardness of heart, the one which is not felt nor perceived; The other which
is perceived and felt; and of the former that there be two sorts, the first
(which is most fearful) when any do purposely resist the motions of Gods
spirit, and wilfully refuse the means of their salvation; of which the
Prophet Zachary speaks. 7.11. They refused to harken, and pulled away their
shoulder and stopped their ears that they should not hear: yea, they made
their hearts as an Adamant stone, least they should hear the law, and the
words which the Lord of hosts sent in his spirit by the ministry of the
former Prophets. The outrageous sin of these men, the Prophet Esaias expresses
in these their own fearful terms, Esaias. 28.15
we have made a covenant with death, and with hell, we are at a^reement: though
a scourge run over and pass through, it shall not come at us: for we have
made falshoode our refuge, and under vanity are we hidden. This was a
fearful estat^ indeed; yet for all that no man can say, but some of those
having hardened their ^eartes, might be, and were af^erward converted. The
other kind of hardness of heart which is not felt not perceived, or if
perc^iued, yet not felt; (which albeit it is less fearful, yet it is
dangerous enough) is in such, as although they wilfully resist not God^ spirit
in good means; yet securely, car^lesly and willingly they lie in sin,
without any ^emorse of i^, or true taste of good things. Such was David his
estate for the space of a year before Nathan the Prophet ame to reprove him,
and rouse him from his lulled sleep. Both these kinds I am persuaded you are
free from, otherwise than in temptation. Satan may sometimes move ye
thereunto. The other kind of hardness of heart which is perceived and felt, is
of two sorts; the one in them which are desirous of means whereby they may be
relieved, although they do find small or no ease at all in themselves for a
time.

Of this kind the Prophet Esaias (in the name of some of gods people)
complained. Esaias, 63
And such was David's state. After that Nathan had reproved him, and gods spirit
began to to work wi^h him, yet he cries out as ye heard before, of the loss
of gods graces: and when he says, that God will accept of no sacrifices be
they never so many nor precious, without a contrite heart and broken spirit; he
shows that for a time (even after the proph^t had reproved him) he wanted
both. This is your case, and therefore you are in the state of salvation; for
David was in this case, even after he had confessed his sin, and had received
absolution and pardon from God, by the ministry of Nathan, although he never
felt joy thereof, nor true grief for the other: yet because in truth of heart
he confessed his finne (as my trust is you do) and was certainly persuaded of
the pardonablenesse of i^ by gods mercy, (athough he was far off from the
feeling it, or applying it to his wofu^l conscience) his state was good, and
very well to be hoped of. And you must know and be persuaded that those things
which are written of gods saints, and namely of David and Peter, and such
others, are examples for us, if we will stay our selves upon the word of God in
the ministry of his servants, and wait upon the Lords good time, till he come
nearer unto us by his spirit: nearer I say, for he is come already unto you:
or it may be he never went from you; because to be grieved and humbled with
blindness of mind and hardness of heart, to believe certainly the truth of God
his promises in general, and to reverence the servants of God which bring the
glad tidings of salvation and to long after the comfortes, using the means of
the word and prayer, the Sacrament of the supper, and the company of gods
children, contrary to hope, under hope, yea without any present feeling: all
this is a certain argument, that gods spirit is with such, and therefore with
you. This estate although it be very grievous, yet it is never dangerous,
much less is it fearful; unless any be so wilful, that they persevere and
continue in desperate refusing al good means: unless they persevere I say,
for that through the spiritual adversary, and his forceable power, whereby God
suffers him sometime for a season to winnow them as wheat, they are so be
witched and intoxicated, that they are carried by violent force of temptation,
to wax weary of, or to refuse all means of comfort by fittes: yea, almost to
have no desire at all unto them: yea, sometimes to speak veie evil of them:
But all this is but temptation, and therefore GOD will be merciful unto them
for Christ his sake.

Thus Job cursed the day of his birth, and wished to be strangled; Jeremy
almost repented that ever he preached in the name of the Lord: both scarcely
abstain from blasphemy. David moved with the spirit of ambi^ion (though
dutifully admonished) wilfully w^nt onin numbering the people; Peter also vain
gloriously presuming of his own strength, being most wisely and effectually
preadmonished of his weakness even by our Lord Jesus, yet wittingly rusheth as
a horse into the battle and then very cowardly yields, yea doubly denies,
yea strengthens his sin with a threefold coard, and fasteneth it with
banning and cursings: and yet all these obtained mercy most bountifully. For
why? as Satan had desired to winnow them, so our Lord Jesus prayed for them,
that their faith, though it was vehemently assaulted, yet should not be
overcome; although it was battered, yet that it should not be destroyed* and
though it was oppressed, yet that it should not be extinguished. And here be
you fully persuaded, that albeit Luke. 22.31. the words seem to run as
belonging but to Peter, Vz. I have praide for thee that thy faith should not
fail; yet he prayed for the rest of the Apostles, yea for all the faithful.
For first he says not, Simon satan has desired to winnow thee: but you. Why
then says he, I have prayed for thee? Verelie because he should more
grievously offend than the rest: although their offense was very great;
therefore his and our most blessed Savior applied to him the promise, but did
not appropriate it unto him only, and restrained it from the rest. Compare with
this place. John. 17.20. and you shall see that the heavenly verity affirms;
that he prayed not only for the Apostles, but for all those that should
believe through their word: yea farther, Our lord Jesus Christ was yesterdaie,
is to day, and shall be for ever. And as the forefathers were baptized into him,
Hebr. 13.
and did eat his flesh, and did drink his blood; so was his prayer effectual
even to them under the law; much more to us under grace. And when you can find
testimony in your heart, that when you would do well, evil is present with
you, and that you do the evil you would not; then do not you it, but sin in
you, when it leads you captive. Much more when satan works with all
buffeting you, Romans ^.
assure your self that God has pity on you, that the virtue of his power
shall be perfect in your weakness. If you believe, 2. Co. 12.9
according to your faith it shall be done unto you. But you will say, you cannot
believe, that this vile and crooked hardness of your heart can be remitted and
renewed: and even this was the second point which in the former part of my
letter I gave you to understand was the cause of your excessive distress. I
beseech you, and I charge you in the name of our lord Jesus Christ, that you
will not willingly lie nor offer injury to gods spirit, nor to your self who
has received it. Tell me, what is the reason why you think you have no faith?
Verily because you have no feeling, nor any other fruits thereof, as you
think. Wel^* first then agree with me herein (as you must if you will not
disagree with the truth) that feeling is but an effect and fruit of faith; and
therefore theremay be faith without feeling, as well as thecause may be without
the effect, and the tree without any appearance of fruit, yea, of sap for a
season. And as a man sore wounded and diseased, may for a season be deprived
almost of all operations of the natural life to the outward show, and to his
own judgment and feeling; so may a spiritual man before wounded by sa^han,
and diseased by the present feeling of his sinful corruptions, specially in
temptations; that he may think, yea appear to others, that the life of the
spirit is not in him. Thus, Peter's faith did not wholly fail, (as you have
heard) or else the prayer of our Savior prevailed not. Thus when David
declared that his heart was unclean, Psalm 5.12.
and his spirit crooked or unstable; verse. 14.
and that he had lost the joy of his salvation, verse. 13.
and the spirit of liberty, or adoption: yet he prays, that God would not
take his holy spirit from him: therefore he was not deprived of the spirit
of sanctification.

Here seems to be repugnance, but there is not any: he was deprived
indeed for a time of the graces of the sanctifying spirit, but not of the
holy Ghost where with he was sanctified: which graces, as God restored unto
him, so I am persuaded he will do unto you: Yea and I doubt whether you are
deprived of them; but only that partly Melancholy, partly Satan working
therewith, make you do injury to your self, and to the graces of the spirit
in you; which I beseech you to take heed of.

But the messenger cannot stay, and therefore I cannot write as I would, either
of this, or of the remedy which you should use; which here after I will, as
God shall enable me: and I pray you let me understand (as I requested in the
beginning) of your estate in particular somewhat more, and that by this Bearer
if you can; because he is of your acquaintance, and will bring it to me
faithfully. Only I add now unto that I have written of hardness of heart
at large, that you must diligently observe the word Create, which David uses,
Psalm. 51.
declaring that he had no feeling of heart. To this join that which the
Prophet Esaias speaks in the person of GOD. I create the fruit of the lips
to be peace, peace as well to him that is far off, as to him that is near.
Therefore in faith you may as well pray, with hope to obtain, Esa 64.12
as did David: therefore say with him often, and with Gods people. O Lord, thou
art our Father: we indeed are clay, but thou art our maker, and we are the
work of thy hands etc. Know also, God can cause wolves lions, Esaias. 11.6.
leopards, etc. to dwell lovingly with lambs, calves and kids, etc. and that
which is impossible to men, is possible with God, even to cause a cable rope to
go through a needles eye; that is, to change the hard heart of the unbelieving
covetous wretched man; much more yours: yea know you that all things are
possible to him which believes. Cry then, I believe, O Lord help my
unbelief: and I dare promise you in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
you shall have your hearts hesire in goodness. Thus abruptly I must end, I
commend you to God and the word of his grace, which is able to build you up,
and give you the right of inheritance among them that are sanctified. And the
very God of peace sanctify you throughout, that your whole spirit and soul and
body may be kept blameless until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Faithful is he which has called you, which will do it. Amen. I pray you pray
for me, and I trust as I have, so I shall pray for you, and much more.

Yours in Christ Jesus to use in any need. R. G.

An other Comfortable Letter by Master R. G. to Master M.
BRother beloved in our Lord Jesus Christ, seeing you have had heretofore not
only knowledge, but also experience of Gods gracious and merciful goodness in
Jesus Christ, of your own unbelief and of Satan's subtlenes; I could marvel
why you should give such place, and not keep your ground no furer, if I were
not much acquainted with such occurrences. I know not therefore whether with
words of rebuke, or of comfort, I should seek to relieve you. Because I
cannot come unto you, my counsel and desire is, that you would come up to
London the next Term at the farthest; that so I might ask of God, to frame
my speech to your Good. In the mean season I beseech you to call unto mind
that which you cannot be ignorant of, that in the law, Leuit. 5.45.6.23.
sacrifices were offered for Gods people, not only at their first entrance
into covenant with the Lord, but also afterward many times; Leuit.
5.45.15.6.2. Nu^. 15.28.
and that not only for sins committed by ignorance but also by error, that
is, forgetfulness, frailenesse, retchlesnes, carelessness, etc. If you have not
Tremelius his translation by you, you must take heed of the english that has
ignorance, for they failed that so translated it.

It is manifest that the sin of error is there opposed against the sin
committed with an hie hand, that is to blasphemy with contempt of God, and
making his law of none effect but to be in vain. Which sin Iam sure you
are most far off from, I would you were as far off from unbelief and
distrust. That Gods children may fall after their calling into diverse foul
faults, may appear by many proofs. First, in the Law, when the Lord
speaks in his Majesty and proclaims his glory, Exodus 24.6.7.
yet in how many words commends he his mercy, and for how many several
sorts of sins. Does not Esaias the holy Prophet call the people of his days,
Esaias. 1.10.11.
the people of Gomorrha, and their Princes the Princes of Sodom? Does not he
accuse them as grievous transgressors both of the first and second Table; and
yet does afterward promise them, that though their sins were as crimson,
verse. 18.
they shall be as white as snow; though they were red like scarlet, they
shall be as woole. Does he not charge them that they were sunk deep in
rebellion, Esa. 31.6
and yet exhorts them to return unto the Lord? Yea, does he not charge them
not only with rebellion, Esa. 63.10
but also with vexing the holy spirit of God? And yet read what is written.
Pray as there you may learn, Esaias tenth. Esaias. 63.9
Chap. five, six, etc.

What, does not the holy Prophet Jeremy show, Ier. 31.18.20
that Ephraim was as an untamed Calse, etc. yet so soon as he mourned and was
ashamed of himself, does not the Lord show, that his bowels of mercy were
troubled for his estate? Does not the Lord offer mercy unto the profane and
forgetful transgressors of his holy covenant? Psalm. 50.5.22
Is not this part of the covenant made with all the sons of David in Christ
Jesus, that if they not only omitting many good things, but also commit
rebellions and iniquities, that though he may visit them, yet it shall be
with the rod of his children, and that his mercy he will not take from them,
nor break of his covenant made with them in Jesus Christ? Psalm. 89.30
Therefore remember that the holy promises, threatenings, precepts and examples
are written, that we should not sin, but if any man sin, we have an
advocate with the father Jesus Christ the just, 1. Ioh. 2, 2
and he is the reconciliation of our sins, and not for our sins only, but
for the sinnnes of the whole world. Does not the blessed Apostle Paul charge
the Corinthians whom he affirms to be rich in Christ, 1. Cor. 1.6, 7
and destitute of no spiritual gift, to be more carnal then spiritual, yet
babes in Christ, yea to be fallen Into idolatry, 1. Cor. 3.15.2.3.
committing of evil things, fornication, tempting not only of God, but of
Christ, yea murmuring against them; yet does he not herein comfort them, 1.
Cor. 10.9.13.
that no temptation has token hold on them, but such as appertains to man,
Psalm. 19.13
and that God will be merciful unto. David prays against presumptuous
sins, that they should not reign over him. Signifying though he sinned
presumptuously, yet if he did not persevere in presumption obstinately, without
desire to repent, that such sin or sins were pardonable: Now the Lords
covenant toward his in Jesus Christ is, not to deal after their sins, nor to
reward the^ after their iniquities, much less will he not regard in wrathful
displesure their infirmities. For if he should so mark what is said or done
amiss, who were then able to abide it? But with him is mercy in Jesus Christ,
that he may be feared. Therefore, lift up your hands which hang down,
strengthen your weak knees, and say unto your soul, why art thou so cast down
and unquiet within me? I will yet trust in Jesus Christ and wait upon the
merciful graces of God purchased by his merits. Consider that true humility
a rises of faith in Jesus Christ, and that is true faith that ingendreth
humility; as we may not diminish our sins, so may we not too much aggrauate
them, nor diminish Christ's merits: have evermore in your mind the example of
the prodigal son, who says not, I am not thy son, but I am no more
worthy to be called thy sons he says not let me be thy bondslaue; nay, he
says not let me be thy hired servant: but let me be as one of thy hired
servants; his father came and met him, fell on his neck, etc. So shall it come
to you good brother; I need make no more application; the holy anointing
which you have received, will bring the old mercies of God upon others and
upon your own soul unto remembrance, and lead you into all truth, which
shall be requisite for your salvation. Put your trust in the Lord, and be you
assured, believe his ministers and you shall prosper: The Lord Jesus came not
to break the bruised reed, nor to quench the smoking flax; his grace shall
be ever more sufficient for you, and his virtue shall unto the end manifest it
self in your weakness. Now therefore I beseech him to preserve your body and
soul, and spirit, unto his most glorious appearing; Faithful is he that has
called you, and promised, who will also perform it, Amen.

From my house in London in Warwick lane. Anno 1591. Feb. 24. Yours in Jesus
Christ as he ha^h been Richard Greenham.

A letter consolatory written to a friend afflicted in Conscience, for sin.
Grace and peace in Jesus Christ.
MY very good and loving friend in the Lord Jesus, I understand by M. H. who
often trauelleth into those parts, that you require of me letters of comfort
for relief of your afflicted and distressed conscience. Wherein I could be
glad to perform any deutie that is within the compass of my poor ability.
But your best and soundest comfort (as I take it) lies in those, that have
them selves been exercised with that trial: who from the comforts of Christ
that have abounded in them, are best able to comfort those that are in like
sort afflicted by the hand of God. Cor. 1, 4, 5,
Agine, I have written unto you many times of this argument: If my letters
remain with you, they may always speak for me that which I am able to say
to that point. If you require more then I have written before this* then were
it reason you should send me my former letters, that I might know where to
begin that which remains. My leisure is not great as you know, and there is
nothing whereinto I enter more unwillingly, then into this labor of writing:
Yet that you may understand that I have not altogether forgotten your old love
toward me, nor have suffered mine affection toward you utterly to decay: I
will endeavor at once as briefelye as I may to remember unto you, so far as I
can call to mind, the sum of all that I have written unto you heretofore.
The question (as I take it) that that lies in controversy between your
conscience and the enemy, is of the assurance of your salvation. Wherein I
would have you first to consider what is, or at any time past has been the
testimony of the Spirit of God unto your spirit, The testimony of the spirit.
and then I doubt not, but either from present sense of the same spirit of God
crying in your heart Abba Father, or from the remembrance of the days of old,
wherein you had a comfortable assurance of Gods favor, you shall be able to repel
the force of this temptation, considering that the holy Ghost ca^notly, that
God, whom he loves, unto the end he loves, and because his gifts and calling
(as the Apostle says) are such as whereof he does not, nor cannot repent him.
The^ consider the nature of faith; The nature of faith.
which how weak and imperfect soever it be, it cannot be denied eue^ by Satan
himself, to be faith: according to that which is said; Mar. 9 24* Mat. 17.2,
I believe Lord help thou my unbelief. And if you have faith even as a grain
of mustard seed etc. that Faith apprehends Christ Jesus in whom there is
all sufficiency of salvation, and in whom we are complete: so that whatsoever
scruple arises from our selves, Col. 2.10.
or is enforced of the enemy from any imperfection that is in us, it need not
at all to dismay us, because we save not our selves, but are saved by him, who
is made unto us from God, wisdom, righteousness, 1. Cor. 1 30.
sanctification, and redemption; that who so glories should glory in him. And
in deed there is no surer refuge when the enemy distresseth us, then
renouncing our selves to profess the only name of Christ Jesus; who died for
our sins, and rose again for our justification. Romans 4.25.
For if the enemy shall say we have sinned, our answer is, Romans 8.34.
Christ has died for us, yea is risen again, yea is ascended into heaven etc.
If he say; Romans 5.19.
we want the righteousness of the law; we must answer, Christ has fulfilled
the law, 2. Cor. 5.21.
that we by him might be made the righteousness of God. If he say we are in
nature corrupt, and therefore both unworthy and unfit for the kingdom of
heaven; we must answer him with the words of Christ himself, Ioh. 17.19.
for there sakes have I sanctified my self. Finally whatsoever shall be objected
against us by the enemy, our answer must be: that in Christ, all the
promises of God are yea, 2 Cor. 1.20. Colo. 1.^9
and in him they are Amen. That all fulness dwells in him, and that in him we
are perfected: so that we may boldly say with Saint Paul, there is no
damnation to those which are in Christ Jesus. Romans 8, 1,
If Satan his importunity and impudency will not thus be answered, we must
end all disputation with him by our selves, and send him unto Christ, who
amongst other parts of his office toward us, performs also this for us,
both before his heavenly father, and against all our adversaries, that he is
our advocate to plead and defend our cause, John, 2, 1.
which yet is not so much ours as his own; because the question is not of our
merits or satisfactions which we freely renounce, but of the merit of his
obedience, and of the value of his death unto the salvation of those that
believe in him. So shall we at once stop up the mouth of the enemy, when
refusing to plead our own cause, we refer our selves unto Christ whom we
know to be the wisdom of God, and able to answer all that can possibly be
objected against us. For seeing Satan is a wrangling and subtle sophister, it
is our furest and safest dispatch, to break of all dispute with him, and to
send him thither where he may receive his best answer; and we need not to
doubt, but he that has answered the justice of God, and canceled the
obligation that was against us before his heavenly father, will easily defeat
whatsoever the old serpent our accuser the Devil is able to allege against
us. But if we cannot so avoid his assault, but needs we must enter the
combat with him; let us take unto our selves that courage that becomes the
soldiers of Christ, and in the name of the Lord Jesus manfully oppose our
selves, knowing that he which has brought us into the battle, will both save
us and deliver us out of all dangers. Then if the enemy shall say that we
have no faith, Whether we have faith or not.
and therefore have no interest in Christ, we may answer that our believing
depends not upon his testimony, it is enough that our selves do know, and
feel by the grace of God, that we do believe. As for him, we do the rather
persuade our selves of faith, because he says that we believe not: John, 8, 44
25.
knowing that he is not only a murderer, but also a lie^ from the beginning,
and the father of lying. Now, he that was neither ashamed nor afraid to charge
God himself with untruth, will make less scruple to deal fal^ly with us,
Genesis 3.
and that therefore we utterly reiecte his witness, as the witness of a
notorious and treacherous deceauer, unworthy all credit, and whom we cannot
believe, even in the truth it self without danger. For which cause, he was so
oftentimes silenced by our Savior Christ and his Apostles, Mar. 2, 24, Act.
16, 18
even then when after his deceiuable man the bare wit^es unto the truth. Again
when the qu^stion is of our faith in Christ wether we believe in him or not, we
must beware that we stand not here upon perfection of knowledge, which in the
best Divines is imperfect: nor upon the perfection of our persuasion which in
all flesh is mingled with imperfection. It is enough for our present comfort,
and to the silencinge of our adversary, that we have a co^pitent knowledge of
the mystery of our salvation by Christ; far removed from that ignorance, and
implicit understanding, which Satan has planted in the kingdom of
Antichrist. For persuasion also, we acknowledge, that partly by the corruption
of nature, and partly by his assalts, by the grace of God it is such, as the
same is oftentimes assailed and shaken. Yet fails not* nor falls unto the
ground, but stands invincible against all his atte^pts and invasions
whatsoever. And finally, for that faith whereby we rest for our salvation upon
Christ Jesus, we glory not in our own strength but we say every one for
himself, which him in the Gospel, we believe, Lord help thou our unbelief.
For if faith be as it is in deed a repose, settling, placing and putting of our
trust and confidence for salvation in Christ whom the father has sealed: Then
we doubt not to prove against Satan, and all his instruments of inside little
that we do believe: and that the weakness of our faith which we willingly
acknowledge, and that remnant of unbelief which yet hangs upon us, is so
far off from dismaing us; that it is both a warning and motive unto us of
great force to stir us up, and to set us a work by all good means to
establish and to increase our faith wherein we find the good hand of the Lord
not to be wanting unto us: and his ears not to be shut up against our
prayers; in which we always say with the Apostles of Christ, Lord increase
our faith. If it shall be objected, that because we have not the same sense and
feeling of faith which some times we had as Satan himself could not then
deny; therefore we have now noe faith, but have utterly lost the same: we
may answer, the argument follows not: for even in many diseases of the body
it is so with them that have them, that they seame little better then dead
corses, and yet there is life in them, which hidden for a time after is
recovered and raised up again; so it is many times with the children of God,
that being ouerborne and distressed with extremity of affliction and
temptation, they seem for the time both to themselves and others, to have lost
the life and light which once they enjoyed: Yet, so it is, that when the
tempest is ouerblowne and the gracious countenance of the Lord again
begins to shine upon them, the faith which was as it were hid for the time,
takes life, and shows forth it self, and plainly proves that as the trees
when they bud in the spring time and bring fourth their fruit, ware not dead in
the winter as they seemed to be: so the faith of Gods children, springing a
fresh after the stormy winter of temptation, declares manifestly that it was
not dead when it seemed so to be, but was only respited for the time, that
afterward it might bring forth more fruit, and whereas the afflicted soul
desires nothing more then to believe, though it feel not a present operation
of comfort by faith; even that desire argues a secret sense that cannot easily
be discerned, together with assurance of better estate in time to come, Math. ^.
according to that of our savior Christ. Blessed are they that hunger and
thirst after righteousness, for they shall be satisfied: and that of the blessed
virgin* he fills the hu^gry with good things, but the rich he has sent empty
away. Also that bewaling and deploring of unbelief which is found in the
afflicted, is not only a step unto their former comfort, but a certain
proof and demonstration of the return thereof. For the Lord working by his
spirit in the hearts of his children gronings that cannot be expressed, thereby
assures them that in his good time he will hear them and grant their
requests. And so much the more we may be persuaded hereof because the love of
God toward us, as it began not of us (as S. John says, John, 5.
so it depends not upon us, but upon the truth and consta^cie of him, with
whom there is no change nor shadow of change. Again the temptation it self
from which our affliction does arise, though it have of it self a most bitter
and sharp taste, even unto the wounding of our souls near unto death: yet has
it also in it argument of comfort: the Lord himself out of darkness raising up
light unto his children. For euenby this, that Satan so busily and so fearcely
assaileth us, it does appear that as once helost his possession in us and was
cast out by one more mighty then himself which is Chirst: so now he finds no
peaceable entrance, but a strong and mighty resistance and that therefore there
yet remains such part of the former work, he could not hitherto overthrow,
nor shall be able forever, which is the secret seed of faith still sustained
and nourished by the spirit of god when we would think it were utterly
extinguished. For as the fire when it wrasteleth with the water thrown upon
it, cease not till it have overcome* so this resistance of the spirit against
the flesh, will not cease until the full victory be obtained, and satan
himself trodden under our feet. Neither is there any more sure testimony,
either of our present deliverance begun, or of our full and perfect victory in
time to come, then this, that by the word of God we do (though but weakly)
resist the tentations of the enemy, and continue in the battle against him:
mourning in deed and traualing under the bou^ then of affliction, but yet
standing upright before the enemy: so that he cannot fully prevail against
us, much less overthrow and destroy us. But here one thing must carefully be
looked unto, that we be not so far discouraged, either with want of feling, or
ouerborne with desire of that we have not, as we forget what mercy hertofore we
have received. When Job so earnestly, Job. 29.2.
and as on would think impatiently wiseth the good things he had sometimes
inioyed, he does not only express the great affection he had to be restored
unto his former estate, but also gives the atte^tiue reader to understand, a
secret work of that grace of God; from the remembrance of that which had been,
insinuating an hope of that which should be, as the eue^t it self afterward
declared which issue of his troubles S. James would have us diligently to
consider when he says. Iam. 5.
Ye have heard of the sufferings of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord.
But it fares in this case with the afflicted soul many times, as it does with
those that gredily strive for the goods of this world. Their affection of
having more is so strong, and does so violently possess and carry them, as it
not only depriueth them of the use of that they have, but also makes them
forget the same, and which is yet mo^e, protest against it, as if they had it
not at all. So the humbled and afflicted spirit, ouerborne for the time with
present grief and anguish of mind, not only uses not the comforts it has,
and cannot presently discern: but also causes an utter forgetfulness of them,
and which more is, protests against them, as if they were not: yea, (as we se
often in Job) he so complaneth of the contrary, as if the Lord had not only
forsaken his servant, but had armed himself, and did fight against him to
destroy him. Here therefore we must bridle and chastise our impatient and
murmuring spirit: and remember that of Job so far contrary to the other, Job.
that though the Lord should destroy him, yet he will trust in him. Neither
must we so much vex and unquiet our ha^ts for that we want, as labor to make
use of that we have. which though it seem little unto us for the present: yet
in truth is more then Satan by all his force is able to overcome, as may
appear unto us by that endless resistance which the spirit of god dwelling in
us makes against him. For he that so fights is not yet captive: and he that
stands in face of the enemy, and endures all his assaults, is not yet
vanquished. Yet that he holds out in so great weakness of his own, against so
strong and furious assaults of the enemy; it plainly argues, that he stands
by a greater strength then his own, by which, as he is presently preserved
that he falls not into the hand of his adversary; so need he no doubt thereby to
be finally delivered, and be crowned with victory and triumph in despite of
Satan and all he is able to work against him. But if the enemy, whose
quarrelling with us is endless, as his malice is insatiable, will not thus leave
us and give us rest: then as I said before, it is our best and safest way, at
once to end all disputation with him. And we cannot better shake him of, the^
by exercising our selves in prayer, reading, and medit^tion of the word of God,
and by diligent walking in the works and labors of our callings, for there is
no greater opportunity nor advantage that can be given unto the adversary, then
if he shall find us idle and unoccupied. If the mind be already possessed of,
and occupied in good things, it cannot so easily be trsa^ported unto that which
is evil. But if he find the house empty and fit for him, he then enters
without difficulty. In the question of faith we have comfort also from the
works and effects thereof in our selves: For as the tree is known by the
fruits, Faith proved by the fruits.
so faith wants not her fruits whereby she may be discerned. These are of
diverse sorts, sorrow for sin past, hatred of evil, care and indeauor to
avoid it both in general and in particular, the love of God and of his
righteousness; desire and care with labor and contention to please him, both in
general and particular duties. And here again we have a lawful and necessary
recorse unto the time past. For albeit we have nothing to glory in before God,
Psalm. 77.6.
when the question is of the cause of our salvation; yet the effects of this
grace and favor of God toward us in the former fruits of our faith, may
yield us noe small comfort in the time of our heaviness and of the anguish of
our spirits: here of it is that the Prophet in the psalms does so often
protest his obedience unto God, Psalm. 119
and care to do his commandments, hereof it is that Job unto the comforting
of his distressed conscience remembers the course of his former life, Job. 31.
led in the fear of God and obedience of righteousness. For although we may not
attribute any merit, unto our works, Romans 8.4
but must give the whole glory of our salvation unto Christ alone; yet our
works do witness for us, that we are the children of God, because we are
guided by his spirit and as the Apostle says, Rom, 8.10
though the body be dead in respect of sin, yet the spirit is life for
righteousness sake. Also the gracious effects of Christ himself dwelling in
our hearts by faith, are sure and certain testimonies that we are members of
his body and do belong unto him, because as branches impla^ted into him which
is the vine, we bring forth fruit according unto the nature of the vine. If it
be said we do yet sin: John. 15.^
our answer is, that that happens unto us, not from the new creature, but
from that other part yet remaining in us still subdued under sin, in which the
Lord of mercy does not esteem us, but in that new man which is fashioned
again according unto his own image. In so much as S. Paul doubts not to say,
that the sins of the faithful proceeding from the rema^der of corruption yet
abiding in the^ are not their works, Romans 7.17
but the works of the flesh which being already wounded unto death by the power
of the death of Christ, languisheth more and more, Romans 6.2.
and shall finally be abolished by death which is the end and accomplishment of
our mortification, and fully ends the battle between the flesh and the
spirit. What shall I say of the loathing of this life, Loathing of this life
etc.
and the vanity thereof, and of that desire which is in the children of God to
be dissolved and to be with Christ? Phil. 1.21.
of conte^me^t in all estates, patience in afflictions, constancy in the
truth, love toward those that love the Lord, pity toward those that are in
misery, and the desiring of the good even of their enemies and those that hate
them? Which virtues, though they bear not an equal sail, by reason of the
weakness of the flesh and of the malice and resistance of the enemy; yet are
they undoubted testimonies of our love toward God, which is not but in those
who are first beloved of him, and have tasted how good and gracious he is. If
we shall look unto the exercises of piety and of the worship of GOD,
Comfort from the exercise of piety.
though we may here (as else where) complain of our wants and defectes, yet
we shall through Gods goodness find matter of comfort. Remember therefore what
mercy the Lord has showed you in this part: which what desire and affection
you have heard the word of God. The hearing of the word.
How precious it has been unto you, above gold, even the most fine gold, how
sweet and comfortable, even above the honey and the honey comb. Remember with
what fruit of knowledge in the will of God, increase of faith in his promises,
purpose and endeavor of amendment of life, you have often times heard the
same Call to mind with what Prayer,
zeal and earnestnes of spirit you have sometimes called upon the name of God,
both publicly and privately, with others and alone by yourselfe: with what joy
and reioicing of the soul you have praised the lord for his mercies toward
his Church, and toward you self: Praising of God.
Call to mind what has been in you at any time the power of those
Sacraments, Sacraments
which are annexed as seals unto the promise of salvation by Christ, and how
far they have by the blessing of God erected your mind in hope and assurance
of his goodness toward you.

If your present discouragement resist the comfort of these meditations, it is
no new thing, that in our weakness we should after the manner of those that be
sick, disadvantage our selves of that, which might do us most good: yet
remember how injurious a thing it were, to esteem the children of God by
their present agonies and conflict of conscience, rather then by the comfort of
that estate wherein the grace of God shined plentifully upon them and in them.
For as when men are diseased it cannot thereof be concluded, that they were
never in health; so the present discomfortures of the children of God, though
they take away the sense of his mercy for a time, yet they are no repeal of
his former goodness and favor toward them, nor deny them to have been, even
in their own judgment and feeling, dear unto the Lord: and still to be,
though the storm and tempest of their present affliction suffer them not so
lively and comfortably to enjoy the same, as before. For which cause they must
with Job and David call to remembrance the comfortes of times past, Job. 29.3
Psalm. 77.6 12.
from thence to assure themselves of the return of the good hand of the Lord
in due time. I doubt not but you can be witness unto God and to your own
self, that the time has been when your comfort and assurance of Gods favor
was such, as Satan himself could not deny the testimony which then the
spirit of God did bear unto your spirit. Now the gifts and calling of God
are without repentance, Romans 8.16 Romans 11.29 John. 13.1.
and whom he loves he loves unto the end, neither does our salvation
depend upon any thing of our own: for then we should a thousand times
perish and fall before the enemy, but upon that eternal and everlasting love
of God, wherewith he has loved us in Jesus Christ before the foundations of
the world were laid: which love of his, if it has at any time been made
known unto us and apprehended of us, we have assurance greater then the
testimony of men and Angels. But you will say, that which sometimes I felt is
now gone, and in stead thereof I am perpetually opprested with the horror of
the wrath of God just against me for my sins. It is true that the power and
sense of faith is not always alike in the children of God: yet is it a false
and sophistical conclusion, suggested from him that is a liar from the
beginning, and the father of lying, to say, we feel not faith, therefore
there is no faith in us. For in many diseases of the body we have no sense of
life, and yet we live. The sun shines not in the night season, nor when it
is obscured with clouds: shall we say therefore that there is no sun, or
that it has utterly no operation? Admit also (which yet may not be
admitted) that the Lord had for a time utterly given us over: can we
conclude thereof, that he will never again be merciful unto us? Nay, he
that found us when we sought him not, will surely return unto the work
which he has begun, though he seems for a while to have forsaken it.
There is sometime as it were an ecclips of our faith, and of the feeling of the
grace of GOD toward us, but let us assure our selves, that as the Sun and
Moon do not perish in their ecclipses, nor loose their light for ever: so
in this ecclips which happens for a time unto our faith, and sense of Gods
goodness, the same shall not perish or loose his virtue for ever: but shall in
good time be restored, or rather quickened in us again, unto our further and
more assured comfort. This you have seen in many the dear children of God
whose heaviness has been known unto you, that they have not been forgotten
for ever, but that the Lord, who seemed for a while to frown upon them, did in
the end cause his most gracious and loving countenance to shine upon them
again: you have felt it in your self, that there has been an
interchangeable course of sorrow and comfort, of faith and fear, and that the
one has contially succeeded the other, that the same hand that humbled you,
did raise you up again; that he that inflicted the wound into your soul,
applied thereunto the most sweet and sovereign remedy of his grace. So
ancient and so experienced a soldiour as you are in this spiritual battle,
should now be valiant and strong unto the combat: our victory wherein, though
it be not to be hoped from the weakness of flesh, yet the experience we have
had of the goodness of God in our former troubles, ought to assure us of the
return of his helping hand in all our necessities. Shall I put you in mind of
the grace of God toward you in your comforting of others, even then when your
self have been in some discouragement? If others have received comfort from
you, raise up the same comfortes unto your self. Neither is there any cause
you should fear, least that spirit which in you was able to erect and
confirm others, should not be able to refresh and comfort your own soul. In
other things we love our ^elues too much, and do well unto our selves rather
then to others: but here many times, by the fraud of the enemy, we are made
cruel unto our own bowels, and become his abused instruments to torment our
selves: who will put a sword into the hand of his adversary to wound
himself with all? And who will strengthen his enemy that is already too
strong for him? Yet this is our folly, that we will conspire with Satan
against our selves, and arm him with weapons unto our own destruction. Saint
Peter says resist the Devil being strong in faith. 1. Pet. 5.9
We must not therefore yeald our selves unto his tyranny, 1. Ioh, 5.4 Ephe* 6,
16
nor cast away that weapon of faith by which alone we may be able to overcome.
But I will urge this argument no further. Comfort from the benefits of this
life.


I know that the benefits of this life are common for the most part, both to
the reprobate and to the elect: yet both in those which are common, there is a
great and large difference, and there are some so singular as carry with them a
stronger testimony of the favor of God, then that it may without impiety be
denied. In common benefits it holds, that as things most adverse are yet
turned unto our good: Romans 8.28
so much more the good gifts and blessings of God do carry with them a
testimony of his love and favor toward us. For as the Lord speaks unto us
in the word and by his spirit, so his good and fatherly providence toward
us, is not without voice, but foundeth aloud unto the declaration of his love:
But there are as I said some benefits so special, that the use of them is
propper only unto his children. Remember with me the first time of this
trouble and dismaying of your conscience; and remember with all how many
means the Lord has ministered unto you for your comfort. What shall I say
of those whom the Lord has put even into your bosom the more nearelie to
apply his mercy unto you, Master C. Master B. Master R. etc. all so furnished
unto your comfort, that you may well think, they were as so many hands
stretched out from heaven to supporte and strengthen your weakness withal*
if I should set my self to remember how mamy other the servants of God have
by divine providence been directed to minister comfort unto you, the number
would be innumerable: Master S, Master F. Master D. Master, B, Master G.
Master G, and almost who not, of those that have been trained and brought up
in that school. Consider how great a mercy this has been, that so many
excellent Physicians of the soul, should at several times apply themselves,
if not unto the cure, at the least unto the mitigating of your disease. I will
not examine how many and great comfortes you have received from them by word
in presence, and by letters in absence; this only I ask of you, whether you
have not known all these to bear unto you the same testimony, to speak the
same comfort, and to confirm you in the same assurance of the love of God
toward you.

Now what spirit must that be, that shall contradicte the spirit of GOD in
the mouths of so many and faithful witnesses? My good friend, mark that I
will say unto you: as the patient that is sick in body willinglye resigneth
himself unto the sentence and direction of his skillful and faithful
Physician; so must the Children of GOD in their spiritual maladies, yield
them selves, unto the physicians of their souls, so much the more because the
Lord has given unto the ministers of his Gospel the power of binding and
loosing, ^at. 18.18
both in the public ministry of his word, and also in the private
consolation of his children. I will not speak of that which is public,
although not altogether unfit unto my purpose, considering that that which is
publicly spoken as unto all, has also a particular address unto those that
are the Lords. As when the Lord says by his prophet, Blessed are all they
that mourn in Sion. Esaias.
I will for the present rest in that use of this power of binding and loosing
which is private and particular. Remember that of Saint James, Iac. 5, 15
who says that upon the prayers of the elders of the Church, the sins of the
diseased shall be forgiven him: which words can have no other sense, but that
by them shall be pronounced unto him the forgiveness of sins. A most excellent
practice whereof, we have in our Savior himself: Luke. 7. where first he
proves by argument unto Simon the Pharesie, Luke. 7, 41
that the mourning sinner was pardoned all her sins, and therefore was now no
sinner and wicked one, as he uncharitably esteemed her to be, the^ turning
himself unto the distressed soul; first says, thy sins are forgiven thee,
and afterward, thy faith has saved thee, go in peace. Wherein, though there be
some thing extraordinary in our SauiourChrist as the son of God yet is it that
power which he has communicated unto all his servants, Job. 20.23
saying whose sins you forgive, they are forgiven, etc. which is nothing else
but, whose sins upon due examination and trial of their repentance you
pronounce to be forgiven, they are forgiven. Here again remember, (my dear
friend) how many of the faithful and expert servants of Christ have examined
your estate by conference with your self, and have found all signs unto
health and salvation. Unless therefore Satan dare contradict the spirit of
GOD, speaking by the mouths of so many witnesses, he cannot say but you are
the Lords. Now for your self, I am assured that you will not, nor dare not
say, but this has been the constant testimony of all the servants of God
sent unto you; and that they were such as you had no cause to suspect their
partiality or flattery in any sort. How is it then, that the voice of so
many should not be unto you as the voice of GOD himself? Who, though he do
not speak unto us now immediately from heaven, as in some times past; yet he
speaks unto us by the mouths of his servants, his Prophets. When David
said in the horror of his soul, I have sinned against the Lord, was it
think you a small comfort that Nathan said immediately unto him, 2. Sam.
12.13.
the Lord ha^h pardoned thy sin? I will say nothing of the prayers of so
many of the servants of Christ as have commended your cause unto the Lord:
which cannot be frustrate, the Lord himself directing them to pray according
to his word, and upon the assurance of his promise. Read Job. 33.23. Job.
33.23
If there be present with him (that is with the afflicted soul, as verse 22.)
a messenger from God an interpreter (of the will of God,) such as is one of a
thousand, who may signify unto man the equity of the Lord, and entreating him
for favor shall say: Redeem thou him that he go not down into the pit, by
that redemption which I have found; when he has humbly besought the Lord, he
does graciously receive him that he may behold his face with joy, and he
restores unto man his righteousness. In which words there are many excellent
things to be noted for the comfort of those that are afflicted. The first is,
that the anguished soul finding no comfort at home and in her self, by reason
of the strength of temptation, must seek relief abroad at the hands of
those, whom God has appointed to make glad the sorrowful mind, and to give
rest unto the wearied and distressed conscience. Wherein you must consider with
all thankfulness, how great mercy the Lord has showed unto you, for I
do persuade my self; as before I have said, that since the time of your
affliction, there has not been almost one, that has had any extraordinary
gift in that kind, who by conference, writing, or otherwise, has not
bestowed some part of his travail unto your comfort. I could my self name
a great number besides those above mentioned, but your self can remember many
more: now the testimony of so many faithful servants of Christ witnessing
the grace and goodness of GOD toward you, must be as the voice of GOD
himself: who is not as man that he should lie, or as the son of man that
he should repent, or alter that which he has once testified. And if Job do
acknowledge that the comfort of one faithful witness on the behalf of GOD,
is enough to the erecting and chearing of the heauiest mind, what can Satan
say unto the testimony not of 2 or 3 witnesses which the law only requires,
but unto the testimony of 2 or 3 score, the meanest and weakest whereof, should
be able to answer in your behalf unto all that the enemy is able to object
against you. The second thing I note is, that these have not come unto you by
error or by chance, but by special address of Gods merciful providence, as
sent from the throne of grace to bind up your wound, and to minister comfort
unto your conscience. The third, that these speak not their own words nor of
themselves, but are the faithful interpreters and declarers of the will and
counsel of God, not indeed immediately from himself, but by viewing and
esteeming of the work of God, and the fruits of his grace in those that are
his. The fourth, that as they declare unto the afflicted, that favor of God
toward them which themselves are not able for the present to discern, so
they commend them by prayer unto the Lord, who has promised to hear and to
grant their requests. The fifth, that for comfort in this cause, we must pass
out of our selves, in whom there is nothing that may ease our grief, and cast
our eye and cogitation only upon Christ, in whom all fullness of salvation
does dwell, considering that this is one of the means whereby Satan does most
distress and anguish the afflicted souls, that he holds them in the
cogitation of their sins and transgressions against GOD, and suffers them
not to see, that length, breadeth, height, and depth, and to know that love of
Christ that passes all knowledge, Ephe. 3.18
that they might be filled with all the fullness of God. The sixth, that the
Lord both mercifully blesses the labors of his servants in comforting his
children, and also graciously hears their prayers and supplications made in
their behalf unto his majesty. And the last, that God in his good time
erecteth the minds of the afflicted, and opens their mouths to praise his
name, and to protest his goodness, that he has brought again their soul from
the pit, and has shined upon them with the light of life. Which effect of the
grace of GOD, because you have both seen in others, and felt in your self
many times, you have great cause to hope and expecte the return of his
comforting hand in due season, who also shall once determine these conflicting
days, and set us in that peace which shall never be interrupted, and wherein
all tears shall be wiped away from our faces for ever. Apoc. 7.18 14 13.


The malice of the enemy during this life has no end nor measure at all, and
therefore we may justly fear all extremity of attempt against us: but we
must strengthen our selves in him, who can and will enable us unto all things.

The Last and most grievous assault of satan against the afflicted, is that
he calls into doubt their election. Against the doubt of election
For, because that salvation is only of the elect, he labors by all means
to shake this ground and pillar of comfort, and if it be possible to subvert
and overthrow the same. It behooves us to take heed how we carry our
selves, as in that temptation which all others is most difficulte and
dangerous. First therefore, we must beware of that gulf wherein the enemy
hops to devour us, that we enter not into the secret and hidden counsel of
GOD. For the secrets of the Lord: are for him self: But the things that are
revealed, Deuteronomy. 29.29
are for us and our posterity after us for ^uer, as Moses; says: what then
has the Lord revealed concerning Abba Father, and stirs up in us those
gronings that cannot be expressed. sounds cheerfully unto us, that we are
beloved of GOD, redeemed be Christ, and fellow-heires with him of his fathers
kingdom. If here also the Job, Job. 31.
relieve our selves from the fruits of our faith, these what they are has
already been said. If necessity do so compel us, we must fly unto of a
sanctified mind against that part that is unregenerated: and finally, of the
new creature against the old man, and of Christ himself in us, against the
power of Satan. If he reply that this is not so, but the contrary. We may
answer, that albeit there have been many times, wherein we have had a more
present and mighty hand of the Lord upon us: yet even now Satan himself
cannot deny, but we hate sin and love righteousness: that we love God and
to our power obey his will, and fly the baits and occasions of evil:
whereof if if there were for the present no manifest and apparent effects,
(as yet by the grace of GOD there are) notwithstanding the only affection and
desire of the heart thirsting and longing after God his kingdom and
righteousness, are sufficient arguments of the work of grace begun in us,
which shall so long be continued by the good hand of our heavenly father,
until it be consummated and perfected in the life to come. For if it be God
(as the Apostle faith) that gives both the will and the deed: he that has
given us to desire to obey his will, Phil. 2.13.
will also enable us unto the doing of the same. And seeing the work of
sanctification begins in the heart, and thence flows into our whole life,
we nothing doubt but God, who has given us joy in the holy Ghost, and thereby
a love unto him, and unto his Law; will further confirm and strengthen us,
that we may be vessels of honor unto his name, and glorify the Gospel of
our profession with fruits agreeable and according thereunto. Yea the thoughts,
meditations, and desires of the heart, are deeds before God, and principal
parts of that obedience which he requires at our hands. And therefore if the
faithful man should be taken away by death, before he has done any of the
outward works of the Law; yet should not his faith be without fruits, in
that being sanctified in the inward man, he does now in soul and spirit serve
the Lord, and desires ability and opportunity, in act to do his will, and
to honor his nam^; as appeared in that penitent malefactor that died with our
Savior Christ. Luke 23.42


Another thing I am to admonish you of, that you be not as the covetous men of
the world: who so gape upon that they further desire, as they consider not but
rather forget that which they already have, and having much indeed, in there
opinion have nothing and to all purposes and uses do as well want that which
they have, as that which they have not. So it oftentimes happenneth to the
dear children of God, that whilst they look and breath after that, which
they have not yet attained unto, they forget and neglect that which they have
received, and use it not to their comfort and rejoicing as otherwise they
should. This ouerreaching and importunite of theirs, Satan abuses against
them; from the opinion of having nothing, to blind their eyes, not to see the
present grace and goodness of God toward them. It is true that the Apostle
says that in the course of Godliness and religion, Phil. 3.11.
we may not think we have attained the goal, or are come unto the end of our
raze: but, forgetting that which is behind us, and preassing on unto that
which is before, must contend (as to a mark) unto the reward of that most
high calling of God in Christ Jesus. But he speaks it not to this end, that
we should not in thankfulness acknowledge the former mercies of GOD bestowed
upon us, or not use them unto our comfort as testimonies of his love and favor
toward us: But that we may not stay in our present profiting, but add daily a
new and fresh increase; that as from a larger and greater heap of benefits, we
may more and more assure our selves, that we are beloved of God, and shall
enjoy the inheritance of his kingdom. When the Apostle says, work your
salvation etc. and labor to make your calling and election sure, though the
meaning be not, Phil. 2, 12* 2, Pet. 1, 10.
that we should put confidence of salvation in works, yet it tells us, that
the works and fruits of our faith are testifications of Gods spirit dwelling
in our hearts, more e^ident and pregnant, then that Satan himself can or dare
deny them. We may not suffer our selves to be so ouerborne of the enemy under
the color of zeal and desire to do well, as not to remember wherein the
Lord has already given us some part of well doing: not so to strive unto
that we have not, as to forget that which by his grace we already have: But
rather with all thankfulness acknowledging the goodness of God, from thence
assure our selves of the continuance and finishing of the work begun. In the
courses of the world, as slownesse gets nothing; so preposterous have
loses all. It is the subtlety and malice of the enemy, when he cannot
houlde us with himself; to hasten and push us on so fast and so headelong, as
by rashness we may fall into that which by forwardness we had escaped. Good
things to come therefore, we must hold them in hope, and pursue them in
peace: but the good we have already attained unto, we must so far rejoice and
comfort our selves in, as from thence we may be able to sustain and support
our cause against the enemy, and from that we have, to let him understand that
we doubt not of that which remains: that the Lord will both continue and
confirm the work of his own hands, and not forsake the same until it be
accomplished in his kingdom of glory. Thus I have in great have and confusedly
set down so much as presently came unto mind of those things which often
heretofore I have written unto you: humbly beseching the father of all mercy
and God of al consolation, who has anointed you with the oil of his grace,
sealed you with his spirit of adoption, and given you a sure earnest and pledge
of everlasting ^aluation, to increase upon you, and in your heart the measure
of faith, and multiply your fruits in all manner of well doing, make you
strong against the face of your enemy, and crown you with victory in the
day of battaill, that you may praise his name in the day of your deliverance,
glorify him in the whole course of your life, and finally enjoy with the rest
of his saints, that eternal kingdom of glory prepared for all those that
love and fear him. Amen.

A Sermon preached by M. Richard Greenham, upon these words.
Quench not the spirit.

1. Thessa. 5.19.
ALl the doctrine of the Scriptures may be briefly referred to these two
heads. First how we may be prepared to receive the spirit of God. Secondly,
how the spirit may be retained when we have once received it. And therefore
Saint Paul having labored to instruct the Thessalonians, in the former part of
this Epistle, how they may receive the spirit, does here teach them how to
keep and continue this spirit unto the end: and this the Apostle does by
giving them a charge and commandment, that in no wise they do quench the
spirit: thereby doubtless teaching, that as the shu^ning of evil, is the
first step unto goodness; so the ready way to continue the spirit of God in
our hearts, is to labor that it be not quenched. Now the Apostle upon great
and weighty consideration, does here deliver this precept. For first of all,
though all those be worthily and justly condemned, that never tasted of the
spirit of God: yet as our savior Christ says; A more just and fearful
condemnation is like to come upon them, that having once received it, does
afterward loose the same again. Moreover, without this spirit of God, noe
holy exercise can have his full effect: For the word works not, where the
spirit of GOD is wanting; prayers have no power to pearce into the presence of
God; the sacraments seem small and seely things in our eyes, and all other
orders, and exercises which God has granted and ordained for man, they are
unprofitable to man, where the spirit is not present to convey them into our
hearts, there to seal up the fruit of of them. Last of all, we are fit to
receive no good grace at Gods hands: nay, we do not esteem Gods graces,
when we have not the spirit to teach us to set a due price upon them: for
speak of the Law, or of the Gospel; of sin, or of righteousness: speak of
Christ, or of our redemption, and justification by him: yea, speak of that
huge, and heavy weight of glory where with the elect of God shall be crowned;
all this moves not, we are little affected therewith, unless God give us of
his good spirit, to profit by the same. The Apostle there forewith good reason,
gave this precept, and we, for many great causes, are to listen unto it,
least by any means the spirit of God be quenched in us, and so we deprive our
selves of all these fruits. Now, whereas the Apostle says, Quench not the
spirit, it may appear he speaks to those that had already received the
spirit. For, as the fire cannot be said to be quenched, where it is not: so
they cannot be said to quench or loose the spirit, which have not as yet
received it. Then know, that this precept does properly beelong to them, that
have received the spirit of God, and they especially are to make a special use
of it: for the other, it cannot profit them, unless that, as the seed lying
in the ground a long time does afterward budde and become fruitful; so this
continue in their minds, till they have tasted (in some good sort) of the
spirit of GOD, and then breed in them some carfulness that they do not
quench it. Well then, to them that have felt and found the spirit of GOD in
them, to them says Saint Paul in this place. Take heed, that ye quench not
the spirit. Of this, if we do somewhat seriouslye consider; these two
questions will offer them selves, and soon arise in our mind. First, how we
may know whether we have the spirit of God, or no: Secondly, if we have it,
whether it may be lost again or no: which if they be well and sufficiently
answered, they will doubtless give great force unto this precept. For the
first then, if we will know whether we have the spirit or no; we must surely
understand, that as he knows best that he has life, which feels it in
himself: so he best knows whether we have the spirit of God, that feels
the spirit working in him. And if we will further know, by the peculiar
working and effects of the spirit, then let us mark these. First of all, if
there be nothing in man but the nature of man; if nothing but that may be
attained by the art and industry of a man, then surely in that man, is not the
spirit of God: for the spirit is from God, it is from above, it is above
nature: and therefore the Apostle does set the spirit of God, against the
spirit of the world, when he says: we have received the spirit, not of the
world, but of God, Besides, the spirit of God is eternal, and endures for
ever: but all the doings and devises of men they perish, and in time they have
an end. Therefore though a man have wisdom with great knowledge, though in
wit and skill he pass and excel the common sort of men: yet, if from above
he have not been enlightened, if from heaven his wisdom has not been
sanctified, his knowledge shall decay, his wisdom shall wyther like grass,
he has not as yet tasted of the spirit of God, that endures for ever. And
therefore says. S. Paul: We teach the mysteries of God, which none, no not the
Princes, and the men of this world, which are above others most excellent, are
able to understand. Secondly consider, whether in he, there be any
alteration or change. For the wise men which were exper^e in nature, could
say, that in every generation there is a corruption* And we see, that the
seed sown is much changed before it grow up and bear fruit: Then needful
it is that in regeneration, there be a corruption of sin, so that as seed in
the ground, so sin in our mortal bodies may decay, that the new man may be
raised up, the spirit of God taking possession of our souls. Therefore the
Evangelist John does make this, the first work of the spirit, that it shall
rebuke the world of sin: and this so needful, that without it, there is
not the spirit of God, neither yet can Christ come and enter into that man.
Hereof it was that Christ compared the Jews to Children in the market place,
who would not dance though they were piped unto: and the reason was, because
they had not first learned with John to mourn: for they that by the preaching
of John, learned to lament their sins, and for their sins were ^pensiue in
their own souls, they received Christ, they dau^ced and did rejoice to hear
the joyful tidings of the Gospel. Therefore Christ says, That whores and
harlots entered into the kingdom of heaven (seeing they lamented their sins)
before the proud Pharisees, which were tuched with no remorce for their sins.
And for the same cause it is, that Christ calls unto him, them only, that
labor and are heavy laden: teaching, that if they find not sin to be a
heavy load and burden to them, they have not the spirit of God, neither are
they fit to receive Christ. Then to be rebuked of sin, is the first work of
the spirit; which the spirit works in us by these degrees. First it raises
up in us a great and general astonishment, by reason of all those great and
enormous sins that we have committed, and this does strike us down, it does
terrify us, and houlde us amazed woonderfully: then it deals with us more
perticularly; and besides that, it brings us unto a special grief for
special sins, it does bereave us of our chief desires, and brings us out
of conceit and liking with the best things that are in us: for, then it does
display before us the vanity and darkness of our understanding, how unfit
and unmeet we are to understand and conceive those things, that do above all
others especially concern us: then does it let us see the perverse corruption
of our judgment, that before God, and in things belonging to GOD, we be as
brute beasts, not able to discern things that differ, nor to put a sound
difference between good ad evil; then does it let us see that our reason is
unreasonable, nay, that it is hurtful unto us, a great enemy to faith, and a
great patron of infidelity and unbelief. When it comes to our affections,
it turns them vpside down, it turns our mirth into mourning, our pleasure
into painfulness, and our greatest delight into most bitter grief: If it do
proceed further, and come once to the heart, and to the stomach and courage
that is in us, then it cutteth us to the quick, then does it at once throw us
down in humility under the hand of GOD: for while we had to deal with men,
we were as stoure as any, and would not starte for the best, We had reason
to say for our selves, and courage to defend our selves against all them that
did deal with us: but now the spirit draws us into the presence of God, it
lets us see that we have to do with God, and that our strength is
weakness in respect of him. Then does our heart begin to fail us, then do
we lay our hands on our mouths, and dare not answer, nay, then do we
quickly take up our cross, because the Lord himself has done it. Behold
here how the spirit works, behold how sin is corrupted: and who so can
behold here this in himself, may assuredly say, that the spirit of God is in
him, that it is not in vain within him, nay, that it is mighty and lively in
operation in his heart. The third note and effect, is the bringing on forward
of this work unto justification: for when the spirit has brought us thus
far, then does it begin to open unto us a door unto the graces and favor
of God: it does put into our minds, that there is mercy with God, and
therefore stirs us up to seek mercy at his hands: afterward, it does let
us see how Christ suffered, to take away the sins of the world, that in the
righteousness of Christ, we may look to be justified before God* And this it
does not let us see only, but does effectually work a sure persuasion of it in
our hearts, and confirms the same by two notable effects. The first is, a
joy most unspeakable and glorious, wherewith our hearts must needs be wholly
taken up and ravished, when we see our selves by the righteousness of Christ of
the free mercy and grace of God, redeemed from death, delivered from hell, and
freede from the fearful condemnation of the wicked. The second is the peace
of conscience: which indeed, passes all understanding. While sin, and the
guilt of sin remained there was no peace, nor rest, no quietness to be
found, but fear within, terrors without, and troubles on every side: But
when sin is once nailed to the cross of Christ, when the guilt of sin is
taken out of our consciences, and the puninshment thereof far removed, then
must needs ensue great peace: for our accusers dare not proceed against us,
our sins are forgiven us, and God is at one with us: and for this, we have
the warrant and testimony of the spirit. Can flesh and blood persuade us of
it? can any creature assure us how God is affected toward us? no doublesse.
And therefore where this joy and peace is, there must needs be the holy ghost,
the author and worker of the same: for as no man knows what is in man, but
the spirit of man which is in him: so none knows the will of God, but the
spirit of God, and therefore it is the spirit of God that must certify our
hearres and spirits of the same. And hereof there does arise that, which we
take as the fourth note, when we find it in our selves, to wit; The life and
nemblenes that is in us to do good: for when a man does find favor from
God, for the forgiveness of sins, then the love of God constrains him,
that joy which he conceiueth inforceth him, and puts life into him, for the
performance of those things, which are pleasing unto God: then he begins
to find himself not only reclamed from evil, but also applied and framed to
that which is good; then is his understanding inlyghtened, to see into the
mysteries of godliness, and into that great work of his redemption, and into
whatsoever concerns the saving health of his soul: then is his judgment
reformed, and he is made able to judge between false religion and true,
between the works of the flesh, and of the spirit, between that which is
good, and that which is evil and displeasing in the sight of God. Then are his
affections in some good measure altered, his desire is set, not upon earthly,
but upon heavenly things, his joys are not in the earth, but in the heavens,
his anger is wasted and spent, not upon his own priuae cause and quarrels, but
upon his own sins, and upon whatsoever hinders the glory of his God: This
is the life of God in him; thus he lives that has received the spirit, and
thus he leads his life continually: for they that have received the spirit,
are led by the spirit and do live accordingly, bringing forth the fruits of
the spirit. But this has weakness joined with it, and men through frailty
may sone fall, and therefore their life: is said To be hid in Christ, because
in full and perfect manner it does not appear: Therefore, if notwithstanding
these frailties and falls, we will know whether we still retain the spirit
of God, we must search our selves, and try our hearts by these rules. First,
if when through frailty we have fallen (for who is he that falls not?) We
will then know whether by our fall we have lost the spirit of God or no, let
us see what liking, or mislykinge we have of sin: for it after our fall, we
do hold our former hatred of sin, and the oftenner we fall, the more
thorough and deadly hatred we conceive against sin, undoubtedly that
frailetie has not as yet deprived us of the spirit. Secondly: come and see
how it stands with thy sorrow: for so long as thy sorrow increases for thy
sins, it cannot be thought that sin and the flesh, have overcome and
utterly quenched the spirit in thee, Thirdly, try thy care: and if thou groan
in a godly care, both how thou may be able to wage battle against sin in
the plain field, and how thou may preuente sin in all his policies, thou
have a further assurance that sin, although it be as great as Goliath, yet it
has not hitherto prevailed against thy poor and little David, I say, against
those few and small graces, which the good spirit of God has bestowed upon
thee: but the last is most certain, and that is this. When thou art careful
to redeem that, which by thy fall thou have lost, and have a care to run so
much faster forward, by how much more thou have been let by thy fall: then
it does appear that the spirit is in thee, yea lively and mighty in
operation, and such as shall never be taken from the, until the day of Christ.
Thus may we in some good and competent measure try and prove, whether we
have the spirit of GOD or not: for where these fruits are to be found, there
is also the spirit of GOD. For further confirmation whereof, we may note the
manner of speech, where he says, Quench not the spirit. We do commonly
use to say, the fire is quenched, when the light and heat thereof is taken
away; and indeed nothing can properly be said to be quenched, but the fire.
Now whereas the Apostle says, Quench not the spirit, he gives us to
understand, that the spirit is in some respect like unto fire: therefore if we
do but a little consider of the nature of fire* we shall a great deal better
judge of the spirit, And among others, these properties we find to be in the
fire. First of all it will burn up, and consume things that may b^ burned and
consumed: and therefore lighting upon shawe, stubble, sticks, or such like, it
brings them to ashes, and does make them as though they had not been at all.
Secondly, it does purge and purify those things that can abide to be purged:
and this it does, first by taking away the superfluity of dross, that has
over covered the thing to be purged. Then by fyning the thing it self, and by
making it purer and purer: Thirdly, it gives light even in the most dim and
darkest places: And last of all, it gives heat, and with all does as it were
put life into those things which are capable of life: for whilst a man is
frozen and starued for cold, he is numbde, and as it were without life* but
being broughtto the fire, he is h^tt, he is revived, he is cheared, and then
becomes active and nimble. These are the properties of fire, and these do in
some manner sort, resemble and shadow out unto us the works and effects of
the spirit: for first of all, when the spirit of God seaseth upon a man, and
enters into his soul, then it begins to burn to wast and consume in him,
those things that will be wasted: after this sort evil affections, noisome
lusts, and other stuble which is in man, by the spirit of God are consumed
and burned. Secondly, it does purge us from gross sins, and daily more and
more does purify us, that we may be a clean and holy vessel and Temple for
him to rest and dwell in. Thirdly, it is a shining lamp, ever burning and
continually giving light unto us, in that way which we have to walk. And
lastly, it does set us on heat, and inflameth us with a zeal of Gods glory,
with a care of our duty, and with a love of all mankind: yea, withal it
puts life and lust into us, to walk in that good way which it does lead
us, and to do all those good works which may glorify God, or be commodious
unto men. Thus we see what likelihoode there is between the ^pirite and fire,
for which cause the spirit in the scripture is compared unto fire: nay it is
sometimes called fire: for John says. That our Savior Christ should baptize
with the holy ghost, and with fire: that is, with the holy ghost, which is like
unto the fire: Therefore, as truly and as certainly as we may say that there
is fire, where we see straw and such like things consumed, or gold and
silver finely purged, or great light in dark places, or great heat in bodies
that were nummed before; even so truly we may say, and so certainly we may
persuade our selves, that the spirit of God is in us, when we see our coruption
consumed, our souls purged from the dross of sin, our hearts in^ightened
and made hot in walking, and working according to that light. The second
question to be considered is, The second Question.
whether that man which has once tasted of the spirit, may loose it, and have
it quenched in him. To this it may be said, that because the spirit of God
comes to, and works in diverse men, diuerselie, in diverse measures:
therefore we must consider of the diverse woorking of the spirit, and then
frame our answer accordingly. First then, there is a lighter and lesser work
of the spirit, which may be quenched in them that have it: and that this
inferior or lesser kind of woorking may be taken away* appears plainelye
by the parable of the seed which our Savior CHRIST propounds, for there,
besides them that receive the word into good ground, and bring forth
fruits, some an hundredth, some thirty, some sixty fold: he does also make
mention of some others that received the word and yet continued not. And what,
had not these the spirit of God in them? yes doubtless, for they received the
word* yea, they received it gladly, and that which is more, they believed that
which they had received. Behold then three fruits of Gods spirit in these
men, and yet they continued not: for they believed indeed, but their faith was
temporary, it lasted but for a time, and after a time it vanished away, and
the spirit departed from them: for, either the pleasures and profits of this
life did draw out the graces of God, and dry them up, or else the fiery
heat of persecution did quite consume them. More plain and notable for this
purpose is that, in the sixth to the Hebrews, for there the Apostle faith, That
some may taste of the holy ghost, and thereby be made to taste of the good
word of God, to be enlightened, to receive heavenly gifts, yea, and to taste of
the power of the life to come: and what then? surely the Apostle says, That if
such fall, it is impossible they should be renewed: giving us to understand,
that even they which have received the holy ghost, that have been enlightened,
that have received heavenly gifts, and have tasted of the power of the life to
come eue^ such may fall away, and the spirit may be quenched in such. There is
a second kind of working of the spirit, which is a more thorough and
effectual working, which can never be taken away from them that have received
it. This the Apostle Peter describes, when he says, That the chosen of God,
are begotten again of the immortal seed of the word: This is not a bare
receiving, or a light tasting of the word; but it is a deep taste of the same,
whereby we are begotten and borne again. The Apostle John sets down an
other note of it, saying, That they that are thus borne again, cannot sin:
that is, they cannot make an occupation of sin, they c^nnot fall flat away by
sin: and why? Even because the the seed of God abides in them, even that
seed, wherewith they were begotten to a lively hope of life, even that seed
does abide, and will abide unto the end. Who so is begotten again by this
seed, and has this seed, abiding in him, the spirit has wrought that in
him, which shall not be taken from him: and therefore our Savior Christ says,
The word that I speak, is spirit and life: And in an other place he says,
that none shall take his sheep from him, for the father is mightier then all;
and therefore in another place he says, That it is impossible that the elect
should be seduced. Thus then we see the question is answered: namely, that
there is an inferior working which may be lost; and a more effectual woorking
of the spirit which can never be taken away from them that have it: And this
must not seem strange to us, neither must we be offended that the Lord
should take some, and leave others: or that he should begin in some, and not
bring his work to perfection: For so he deals with other things in the
world. Some corn is sown and never rises: some springs, and yet shortly
withers: some grows up to an ear, and yet then is stricken or blasted: and
other some (at his good pleasure) does come to a timely ripeness. In like
manner, some trees are planted and never take root: some take root but yet
not blossom, some blossoms, and yet never bring forth fruit: and other some
through his goodness do bring forth fruit in good season. If the Lord deal
so with the plant and herb of the field, why may he not deal so with us, the
sons of men? If we cannot conceive the reason of this, we must hold our
peace: for all the works of GOD are done in righteousness, and all our
knowledge is imperfect; therefore we must herein rather accuse our selves of
ignorance, then the Lord of unrighteousness: nay, we our selves do deal in
like sort with those things which are under our hands. In Colleges, Fellows
are first chosen to be probationers; and if they be then approved, they be made
full Fellows, otherwise they are not. If a man (being childlesse) do take
unto him some friends child, to make him heir of all his goods, he will
keep him upon liking; if his manners be honest, he shall be preferred, yea it
may be, set over all his house, and yet afterward for some fault be quit cast
off. Some other man takes an other child for the same end, and makes him
his heir indeed: Therefore we must think it righteous in the Lord to deal
thus with us, seeing we are in his hand: and we must not be offended, though
he call some, and do not inlighten them: and although he inlighten some, and
do not continue them, and do of his great mercy continue some even unto the
end: let us rather see what use we must make of this doctrine. First, we must
take heed that we never quench any grace, or gift that GOD bestows upon
us. Secondlye, we must still labor to have greater measure of gifts: for
the wicked may come to have some small gifts, and such as may be quite taken
away from them. Lastly it does put a plain difference between the Godly, and
the Godless, beweene them that bear a show of holiness, and them that are
indeed the holy ones of the Lord: for the one endures but for a time, and
the other lasts for ever. Now if we require a further trial, whereby we may
know whether we have received that spirit which lasts but for a time, or
that which will abide for ever with us: then let us mark these rules, which
put a plain difference between them. First we must mark that inlightning and
insight we have in to the word of God, Ce^taine it is, that both the godly
and wicked are enlightened, but the inlightning of the godly is one, and the
insight of the wicked is an other: for that knowledge and insight which the
godly have received, is certain and distinct: and therefore in particular
things, they be able to apply the threatening of Gods judgments to the
humbling of themselves, and the promises of God to comfort themselves. Again,
their knowledge is sufficient to direct them both generally, and in every
particular deuty. And last of all, it never sayleth them, but directs them
unto the end: But the knowledge of the wicked is not so, for it is confused,
general, and uncertain. And therefore though they have a general knowle^ge of
the threatenings, and of the promises of God, yet can they not make particular
use of the same. Their knowledge is insufficient, nor able to direct them in
their particular actions, and therefore it does leave them in the end. Therefore
as the knowledge of the godly for the clearenes, the certainty, and the
sufficiency of it, is compared to the Sun: so the knowledge of the wicked,
is compared to the lightning, which does not give any certain light, it does
not continue any time; and when it is gone, men are worse then they were
before. So does it fall out with the wicked; for beside that their knowledge
does soon vanish, there is also in them afterward, greater and more
dangerous darkness then there was before: herein then we do see one plain and
manifest note of difference. Secondly, we come to our affections. Certain it
is, that the wicked do desire the help and the favor of God: but look to the
cause, and that will show a difference between them and the godly. The wicked
do only seek help, because of some extremity which they suffer? they only
desire to be in the favor of God, because they would be freed from grief;
and therefore it is common with them to say: Oh that I were out of this pain,
Oh that this my sorrow were taken from me. By which speeches they show, that
so they might be at rest, or live at their case, they would little weigh of
the help or favor of God. But the godly find such sweetenes in the favor of
God that for the desire thereof* they can be content to forgo all the
pleasures of this life, yea they can be content to suffer much, and endure the
cross patiently, so that at the last, they may assuredly enjoy Gods favor.
Not the godly only, but the wicked also, are grieved when they have sinned but
the wicked do therefore sorrow, because their sin has, or will bring some
punishment upon them: And the godly sorrow, because they have offended God,
and given him occasion to draw his favor from them, therefore his correction
do they bear patiently: but the remembrance of their sin, that touches
them still at the very quick. Then in their joy, and in their sorrow, may
appear a second difference. The third difference is in love, for though both
of them do love GOD, yet it is after a diverse manner; the one of sincerity,
the other for wages. A poor child that is taken up, fed, and clothed, will
love him that does thus feed and cloth him: but if he received no more of
that man then of another, he would like him, and love him no better then
another: Even so is it with the wicked, if their bellies be filled, their
barnes stuffed, and they have their hearts desire, they love God indeed, but
yet only for their belly, and their barnes. Thus did Saul love God, but it
was for his kingdom: Thus did Achitophell love God, but it was because he was
advanced to be a counselor: And thus did Judas love God, but it was because
he was chosen to be an Apostle, and carried the bagg: But what became of their
love the histories do testify. Saul was a little afflicted, and forsook
God: Achitophell somewhat crossed in his devises, hangs himself: and Judas
for again of money, betrayed Christ. Some experience of this we may see among
us; Courtiers will be professors, and Scholars of ripe wits will be
religious, if Courtiers may come to be Counselors, and if Scholars may be
preferred to the chiefest places: but if promotion come not, then their
profession is forsaken, and their Religion laid aside. And yet that is not
all, for either they wax profane in their life or haereticall in their
opinions. Do the children of God love on this manner? No, the holy Ghost
which they have received in effectual manner, does shed the seed of love in
their hearts, and does work in them a special liking of his goodness, of
his righteousness, and of his holiness: and therefore of sincere affection they
love him. As the natural child loves his father naturally, and though his
father beat him, yet bears he it, and still loves him: so do the children
of God deal. They have powered into them as (Saint Peter says) a godly nature,
so that they do freely love God their father: and though he afflict them, or
cross them in their desires, yet they love him, and in love perform their
obedience unto him continually: therefore Job says, Though he kill me, yet
will I trust in him: They therefore are said to have received a free spirit,
and to serve God in the liberty of the spirit. And who sees not this to be a
plain and manifest difference between them: therefore we may well take it as a
third mark or rule, whereby to prove and try our selves. The fourth and last
rule is, in considering the work and effect which Gods mercy received, does
work in us: for, herein do the wicked show their wickedness two ways.
First, on the right hand, the mercies of God do work in the^ a wonderful
contentation* but not such as causes them to return the glory unto God, nay
rather it is such, as causes them to take all glory to themselves: for the
graces of God do puff them up, and make them proud, and conceyted in
themselves. Hereof there arises a great security, which brings first
neglect, and afterward contempt of all good means, whereby they should grow
up in goodness. On the left hand others offend, being never pleased nor
contented with that they have: nay, indeed forgetting and lightly esteeming
that they have, and still desiring new. These men besides that they be
unthankful, they do also murmr and grudge against God, and are never
pleased with him. Between these two, do the children of God hold a middle and
even course: and therefore we shall see these things in them. First, a sight
and an acknowledging of the wantes which do move them, as Saint Peter says,
Like new borne babes, to desire the sweet and sincere milk of the word,
that thereby the graces they have, may be increased, and their other wantes may
be supplied: and so far are they from being puffed up with pride, that they
rejoice when their pride may be pulled down, or their hautinesse abated,
either by some sharp rebuke, or by some fearful threatening, or by some
moderate correction from the Lord. For they know, that if it were needful
for Saint Paul to be buffited, and that by the minister of Satan, to the
intent that his pride might be beaten down: then it is much more needful for
them, after sundry ways to be humbled. Besides they do not only desire the
word* but they also wait upon the Lord, until it pleased him to work
further in them thereby: and this waiting is as earnest as is theirs, who
having watched all the night, do wait and look for the dawning of the day.
Secondly, as they see their wantes, so also they see that grace they have
received, and are for that time will appayde, and contented therewith: and
therefore as their wantes do humble them, so the graces of God received do
comfort them: and as their wantes do call upon them, and cause them to seek
more: so that they have, does provoke them to be thankful for that they have
received. See then a quite contrary course of the wicked, and those that of
sincerity do worship God, See I say how contrarily the graces and gifts of
GOD do work in them. And therefore from the consideration hereof, we may well
draw a fourth rule, whereby to make trial and examination of our selves: So to
conclude this point in a word, when a man by the spirit of GOD has been
enlightened unto a certain and sufficient knowledge of Gods will, when he
finds his affection, chiefly and above all other things set upon GOD, when
he finds a pure and sincere love of God in his heart, not for wages, but for
the work of grace, which after an unspeakable manner does move him thereunto:
and when he does thankefully acknowledge mercies received, as he does
carefully attend and wa^te upon the Lord, till he bestow some greater measure
of graces upon him; Then may he be undoubtedly persuaded, that he has found
the spirit working in him, in a more effectual manner, and that therefore it
shall never be taken from him. But what then? may such men cast off all care?
No, for unto them does saint Paul give this charge That they do not quench
the spirit. And not with out cause does he give them this charge: for though
the spirit it self can never be taken utterly from them, yet doubtless, if
they wax proud, if they grow secure, if they fall into sin, the graces and
gifts of the spirit, may decay and die in them, their clear understanding,
their feeling, their affection, and all may be gone, so that in their own
judgment, and in the judgment of others, it may seem that they have quite
quenched, and put out the spirit. Neither must this seem so strange: for if
the image of God, which was more perfectly placed in Adam, then it is now in
us, If I say, th^s image might quite be lost and blotted out, as we see it was,
then no marvel if the graces of the spirit of God be for a time, as it were
dead and drowned in us. And that we may be the less offended herewith, the
scriptures do offer unto us such examples of men, as having been once
effectually called and truly borne again, have yet a^terwarde through some
sins, lost the graces of the spirit: such were the Galathians, for they were
truly called, and effectually regenerate by the spirit and Gospel of God, as
may appear by this, that for the words sake they reverenced the Apostle as
the Angel of God; yet they were shared with false doctrine, and fell very
dangerously to the choking and quenching of the graces of Gods spirit in
them. The spirit it self was not taken from them, nay, Christ did still
continue in their hearts, but yet for want of godly graces, he was as it were
without fashion and form, so that the Apostle did as it were travel again,
until Christ was fashioned a new in them. David also upon the committing of
his sin, was brought into the like case, therefore in the 51. Psalm. he
prays: That God will create in him a new spirit: What? was the spirit quite
gone? no, for by and by in the same Psalm he prays, That the Lord would
not take away his holy spirit from him: how can these two stand together,
first to pray, that a new spirit may be created in him, and then, that the
spirit of God may not be taken from him? Surely the spirit it self was still
in him, and therefore he prays, that it may not be taken from him: but the
graces, and gracious working of the spirit they were dead and gone, and
therefore he prays that they may be renewed in him. By this then we see,
that the very chief graces of the spirit may be quenched, even in the most
godly, when they fall into sin. But yet that no liberty may be taken hereby,
let us a little consider, what grief and punishment they procure to themselves,
that do by any means loose the graces of the spirit. First of all we must
know, that though the spirit of God cannot be go^ten by our labor, yet it
causes us much labor, and we must undergo much travel, and suffer much
trouble, before the spirit of God do take possession of us; now when the
graces of the spirit are lost, all this our labor seems to be lost, and
what grief is it to see the whole labor and travail of a man to vanish and
come to nothing. Secondly, when a man receives the spirit of GOD, and by the
same spirit is assured that his sin is forgiven him, and that he is in the
favor of GOD; there does arise in his heart a great joy in the holy Ghost, a
joy I say, that is unspeakable and glorious: and this joy is lost and gone,
when the graces of Gods spirit are gone: with how great grief and woe, they
know, that in any measure have tasted of it. Again, when the graces of the
spirit are choked in men, then they have no heart to do good, they have no
affection to goodness, but all is gone; and they are made for the time, as it
were an unprofitable burden of the earth. What grief can be greater then
this? What sorrow can sink more deep, then that a good man should be clean
withholden from doing good? Moreover it is sure, that when the gifts of the
spirit are in this sort gone, then he that was most righteous before, may
soon fall into great sins, yea and which is more, they shall also suffer
the reproach of their sins: For this is a part of the covenant that GOD made
with his, That though he will not take his mercies utterly from them, yet he
will visit their sins with the rod, and their iniquities with scou^ges:
and what grief this is, the example of Gods children may show us* what grief
was it to Noah become a laughing stock to his own son? what heartbreaking
to David, by his own son to be thrust from his kingdom, so grievous were
those punishments laid upon them that if without any respect of hell or
heaven, we could consider of them, we had rather want all the pleasures of
sin, which they enjoyed, then we would bear the reproach and feel the
pain which they suffered. Last of all, when the graces of the spirit of GOD
are once decayed, they can never be repaired and recovered, but with much
sorrow and great danger: for it cannot but breed much sorrow of heart, to
remember his former sins, to examine and see the greatness of them, to apply
Gods judgments to them, and to provoke himself to sorrow for them: This is
as it were to go thorough the pikes, and through a purgatory in this present
life; and yet this must be done, before we can recover Gods graces again.
Again, it is a very dangerous thing* for in such cases men are brought as it
were with Jonas, into the bottom of the sea: and as David says, into the
deep waters, so that all the surges, and waves do pass and flow over him.
Now we know what danger it is for a man to be thrust over head and ears into
the deep waters: and therefore they that are in such a case, are in great
danger: wherefore all these things considered, the loss of all our labor, the
loss of all true joy, the unfitness to do good, the readiness to sin;
the grief and danger that ensues thereof, will, or at the least wise may,
cause us to be ware, how we quench the spirit. And this is the use of the
Doctrine, in humblinge of of us: which also does furthermore serve to comfort
us, knowing that we may suffer a great decay of GODS graces; yet by the rod,
or by the word of GOD or by both, they shall be renewed in us again. And
thus much of this commandment that the Apostle gives here, that we should
not quench the spirit.

FINIS.
The Second Sermon preached by M Richard Greenham.
It is thus written Acts 2. Verse. 37.38. 37 Now when they heard it, they were
pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter, and the other Apostles. Men and
brethren, what shall we do?

38 Then Peter said unto them, amend your lives, and be baptized every one of
you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins etc.


IN this portion of the holy book of God is set down to us an effect, or
rather a fruit of Peter his sermon, which he made for the answering of the
sclanderous reports of the Jews, at what time they saw the wonderful gifts
of GOD sent down upon the Apostles. In which sermon, the Apostle had pricked
their consciences whith showing them their sins, telling them of a surety,
that their iniquities was the cause of Christ his death: whereby a certain
care began to be wrought in them, insomuch that being thus troubled, they
enquired and said men and brethren, what shall we do? whereupon afterward
followed the second Sermon of Peter, wherein he exhorts the^ to continue in
their repentance and teaches us that if our sorrow be good, we must go
forward therein. Further he shows the^ to this end, that they must believe,
that believing they may be baptized, that being baptized they might receive the
gift of the holy Ghost. Lastly it is manifest, how they hearing that sermon
first received the doctrine, and after perseuered in the practice of the same.
Briefly therefore three things are here to be noted: First the fruit of the
former Sermon of Peter contained in these words. Now when they heard it, etc.
Scondely the sum of a new Sermon of Peter in these word. Then Peter said
unto them, amend your lives, etc. Thirdly is set down the fruit of their
obedience. In the former part of this Chapter we may know the wonderful
works of GOD, that the Apostles, who were never brought up in schools, speak
with diverse tongues* which when the multitude heard, some are said to
marvel and to be astonished, some mocked them and said, They are full of new
wine. But when Peter with great boldness of spirit had in this Sermon which
he made, set the truth of God against their false accusations, and had
preached against their sins, then they left of mocking* and were pricked in
their hearts. Where first we may note the power of Gods word, which only is
able to touch our consciences for sin. For neither the diversity of tongues,
nor other gifts of the holy Ghost could prick their ^eartes, as being able
only to cast them into an admiration. What more forcible thing then to cause
a go^ly sorrow, the^ to have our conscience pricked? What so able to prick our
conscience as the word of GOD? Indeed many feel sorrow and are inwardly
pricked, but because therewith is not joined the power of Gods word, They be
either senceles^e as blocks, or in their feeling they are murmurers. This
comes unto us by the dignity of GOD his word, in that no wonders from
heaven, no miracles on earth can touch our hearts, and work in us any fruit
without the same. For though the Lord should show unto us all the wonders
from heaven, which he showed on the old world, and on Sodom, although he
should lay all the plagues upon us, which he laid on Pharaoh and on the
Egyptians, without the word of God, we should be as unprofitable beholders, as
ever were the Sodomites, and should become as hardeharted as ever were Pharaoh,
and the Egyptians. so that no judgment from heaven, no trouble from earth can
humble us, noe blessing from above, no benefit from beneath can* profit us,
until the word of GOD comes, which teaches the old way to forsake it, the
new way to enter into it, and the perfect way to continue in it. And thus
much for the general scope of this doctrine. Now more particularly we may
observe in this first part three things. First the power of the word to prick
our conscience. Secondly that this prick must not cause in us a more rebelling
against the word or ministers thereof: but rather a greater reverence to them
both. Thirdly such pricks must prepare us to a greater desire to profit. For
the first we must know, that this is the beginning of repentance, and this is
the ente^ie to godliness, even to conceive a sorrow for our sins, and so be
wounded with a feeling of our evils. For as long as men are secure, it is not
possible, that they should seriously apply their mind unto doctrine, neither
without the knowledge, and feeling of our sins can we heartily long for
Christ. To this agree the law, the Prophets, and the Apostles. The law,
because in all their sacrifices, wherein Christ was prefigured, was manifested
also under dark signs, the contrition of heart, and acknowledging their
unworthiness. The Prophets as David and Esaias. David in the fourth psalm and
fi^t verse ^ayeth, Tremble and sin not, where the Prophet shows, Psalm. 45.
that this is an effectual thing to true repentance, to quake and tremble for
fear of Gods judgments. That we may then truly examine our selves, we must
fear and humble our selves, because before trouble, terror, and quaking at
the judgments of GOD, we will never be brought to offer our selves to Christ
alone. In the Psalm. 51. Verse. 18.19. the Prophet like wise shows, that no
sacrifice is acceptable to God without a contrite heart, that is, neither
prayer, neither almes-giuing, neitheir praise or thanksgiving, unless we
bringing an humble and contrite spirit with us, cast our selves down before
his judgment seat, and sue for mercy in Christ. And here mark, that he
says, the sacrifices of God, are a troubled spirit etc. where he using the
plural number shows, that the sacrifices of repentance, which must not be
one, but many, are humblenes of spirit and contrition of heart. For the
affliction of the soul and contrition of the mind, do so cast us down,
wounded with our sins and humbled with a feeling of Gods wrath, as that it
makes us to acknowledge, that we are nothing of our selves, and to seek for
our salvation wholly at the mercy of God. Noe marvel then, if by this means
we being confounded and ashamed of our selves, and staying our selves on the
only promises of God, do confess our own nakedness and wreatchednes, why the
Prophet should say, that the Lord is pleased with this sacrifice as with the
sacrifice of sacrifices. The Prophet Esai. cap 40. V. 6.7.8. says. Esa. 40.6.7
8.
All flesh is grass, and the beauty thereof as the flower of grass, the
grass withers, and the flower falls, when the breath of the Lord falls
upon it. where the Prophet painting out man in his proper couliers, and driving
him to seek our salvation not in himself but in Christ, describes the
outward part of man to be as grass and by the flower of grass, he shows his
gifts of mind being unregenerate, as wisdo^e memory, knowledge, and
understanding. So that, when Gods spirit does but breath on us, all our
wisdom, all our knowledge, riches, and authority fall before the presence of
the Lord of hosts, neither can we remain, but only by the word of God, whereby
we are borne again. Wherefore the considering and meditating of our
tra^sitory estate driu^th us to a contrition and humblenes of spirit. Besides,
the Lord God, says Esai, Esa. 66.
whom the heavens cannot contain, nor the earth hold, will come and dwell with
a lowly, poor, and troubled spirit, and which stands in awe of his word. God
does not accept our sacrifices, which are offered without trembling at his
word, no more then if we should kill a man, and choke a dog, or offer swines
flesh, which was counted an abominable thing among the Jews, or praise the
thing that is unright. Lastly to this accords the Gospel, and the Apostles.
Our savior Christ Mat. 9.13. says, Mat. 9* 11.
I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance, not every sinner,
but that sinner, which conde^neth sin in him, and is weary and laden with his
sins. Mat. 11.28. Mat. 21.32. our Savior Christ prefers the harlotts and
Publicans before the Pharisees, for they being pricked for their sins and
convicted, did sorrow, and heard John preaching unto them. So then Christ
gives relief to those that want, righteousness to the^ that feel themselves
sinners, ease to them, which are burdened, lightto them, which are in darkness,
life to them which are dead, and salvation to them, which condemn themselves.
1. Cor. 14. the Apostle declares, how the Corrinthians were moved with strange
tongues: but yet had not in admiration the word. Besides he shows by
comparing the gift of tongues and prophesying together, that if an Infidel or
unlearned man should come, and hear them speak with strange tongues, he would
say, they were out of the wits, but if he should hear them speak the word of
god plainly, he would be rebuked of all me^ and judged of all men, and so the
secret of his heart should be mad manifest, he would fall down on his (...) and
worship God and say plainly, when he feels his sins, they rifle mine
heart, they show my secret sins, doubtless, this is Gods doing, God is in
them, I will follow this religion. Wherefore in this appears the power of the
word, in that it cites and sommoneth our consciences before the tribunal of
God, and wounds us with a lively feeling of Gods judgment, that he, who
before thorough security did despise sound doctrine, may now be constreained
to give the glory unto God. This appears more plainly: Heb. 4.12. where it
is said, Heb. 4.12.
that the word of God is lively, m^ghty in operation, and sharper then any two
edged sword, and it pearceth thought from thought; and all holiness shall seem
hypocrisy, all our righteousness shall seem as a defiled cloth: we shall
find with Paul, that in us, that is, in our flesh dwells no righteousness.
For men's consciences are could, neither are they touched and displeased with
their evils, so long as they be in ignorance, but when the word of God
pearceth into the uttermost corners of their consciences, and tells them,
that they have to do with the Lord; they are thoroughlye touched and begin
to fear, and entering into themselves examining their conscience, they come to
the knowledge of that, which before they had forgotten. We can never be
offered to God without his spirit John. 16.8. John, 16, 8
For he reprooueth the world of sin, and awaketh our consciences, that those
sins, which before were hid, should be made manifest. David did lie an whole
ye^re without this prick of conscience, and thought, that all was well, 2, Sam,
until Nathan came, neither did he find comfort of conscience, until he had
thus been pricked. Iosephes brethren were thirteen years, and never
remembered their sins, until, after such time the Lord laid it before them.
The Prophet David, Psalm. 32 (which he entitled a Psalm of instruction
concerning the free remission of sins) ^eacheth how we shall find the same.
For many persuade themselves, that their sins are forgiven, when they be not.
He also shows, that until trouble of mind did drive him to GOD, he found
no comfort, 2. Reg.
Man^sses which did eat the bread of sorrow, and did drink the water of
grief; until he had lamented and sorrowed, felt no rest nor peace. The woman
of Samaria John 4. was pleasant, and iested with our Savior Christ, until her
sins were opened, and then she began to answer with more reverence. For
until she was willed to call her husband, she thought all was safe, but
after that he had told her, that she had plaide the adulteress, she
acknowledged him, that he was a Prophet.

Wherefore we may see by this, which has been spoken, that the word of God
only pricketh our consciences, as plainly may here appear by the Jews, who
cared not for the Apostles nor made any conscience, until their hearts were
pricked. In the second place we must note, that they were rightly pricked. For
many often times are pricked, which kick against the prick, and having their
consciences galled by the word, they murmur either against the preacher of the
word, or against the word itself. Here then is the difference between the
godly and the wicked, the one is pricked and is made more careful in a godly
conscience; the other more hardened then before. But this is a godly sorrow,
when we love the man, that rebukes us, and reverence the word the more being
by it reproved in our conscience. Do we love him then that rebukes us? then
we hear profitably. Let us examine our selves in this sort: I see God has
wounded me by him, he is the instrument, whereby God does humble me, I will
therefore love him. Contrary if we be often touched and amend not, we are in
danger of Gods wrath. Many indeed are pricked, with poverty, many with sickness,
and some with other like afflictions, but few with their sins, which is the
cause of their poverty, sickness, and other afflictions. Let us then learn a
willingness to offer our selves to be taught and to be pricked for sin, as
these men were. The wicked also are pricked sometimes for sin: but it is
rather for fear of punishment, then for conscience to displease God, as were
Caine and Judas. Some men are pricked, and to put away their sorrow, they will
go sleep, they will go play, they will go sport, they will get to merry
company, and pass away the time, and so, as they term it, they will purge and
drive away the rage of melancholy, they never go to any Preacher, to ask of
the Lord, or at the mouth of his spirit. They never respect to prayer, nor
seek any comfort in the word of GOD. But to put away sorrow on this sort is
to call it again, and to feel it more freshly either in the hour of death,
or in hell. Contrariwise if our sorrow does drive us to prayer or to the word
of God, it is good. As for the wicked and prophaine worldlinges, though as the
wise man says, Ecclesiact. 11. he spend all his days without any evil, yet
his darkness will be greater then the light, his sorrow greater then his
pleasure, his loss greater then his gain, his trouble greater then his
vanity, in hell. Let us not then so carnally shake off this godly sorrow, For
the word will send us often an unquiet spirit, that we may seek to be quiet
in Christ. To examine our selves herein. Have we heard the word of God? were
we pricked by it? then have we profited, have we not been pricked thereby?
then as yet are we not a sacrifice for the Lord. For, as was said before,
Christ comfort them that are troubled, he helps them that doubt, he caseth
them, which are in distress, he sets their feet in the way of peace and
gladness, that have long been in darkness and sorrow. Have ye not been
sorrowful, and will ye learn a salve for this sore? be sorrowful, that ye
were not sorrowful, be pricked in your hearts, because you were not more
pricked. Have we heard the word? Let us examine our selves? if our knowledge be
the beter; If our affections be the holier; As having heard the exposition of
the law of God; do we fear God? do we know how to love God? do we pray to God?
do we worship God in our souls, and in our bodies more carfully and in greater
conscience the^ we have don hertofore? Are we not now as profaine and careless
still in giving the right worship to the true God, as before we were to
superstitious, in serving Angels, Sa^ts and other false Gods; nether sorrowing
for our idolatry, nor careing for true religion? have we not blasphemed, and
profaned the name of god in vnreuere^t hearing his word, in unprofitable
talking of his works and abusing his own majesty with swearing and cursing as
much as we ever did before? Have we kept holy the saboth? or have we not
profaned it, by open neglect of the word, by playing, sporting, drinking, and
other vanities do we not still send forth our servants to dispatch our
business on that day, as if it were the market day, when they may do such
things most lawfully? Are not parents, hous-holders, and governors, as
slack in provoking obedience; and children, servants and subjects, as flow
in yielding obedience as ever they were? parents in the mean time, not seeing
that children therefore rebel against the^, because they rebel against God;
nor hous-holders perceive that servants do not their duties to them, because
they do not their duty to God? Are we less wrathful, and more merciful?
are we less riotous, and filthy defilers of our flesh? and are we more sober,
chaste, and holy? are we less given to oppression, to hard dealing one with
another, and more just, righteous, and careful to maintain the good estate of
our brethren? Are we not backbiters, slaunderers, or sowers of discord, causers
of contention among our neighbors? being far off from mainteyning love
united, and the good name of our brethren? The cause, why we cannot see further
into these things, is because we flatter our selves, and because we compaire
our selves with our selves and with others, but not with the rule of Gods word.
Let us then learn to accuse our selves and to judge our own consciences. For
if God see us condemn ourselves, he will not condemn us, if we accuse our
selves, God will not suffer Satan to accuse us, if we judge our selves, God
will acquit us from the fearful judgment to come, if we be displeased for
our sins, God will be pleased in Christ his righteousness. On the contrary,
whilst we lie in our sins, we lie in our own blood, if we judge not our
selves, God will both judge us, and be revenged of our sin, he will set our
house on fire, he will send enemies, he will send earthquakes, he will send
famines to make us to consume our goods, he will make friends foes, he will
send sickness and sorenes upon our bodies, and a troubled spirit into our
souls, he will send us an ill name, thus will he bring plague upon plague
until we repent, and come to a feeling of our sins. And why does God all
this? because we will not come to judge our selves. For this cause, says the
Apostle. 1. Cor. 11.30. that is, because we judge not our selves many are
weak, and sick among you, and many sleep. 31. for if we would judge our
selves, we should not be judged, 32. but when we are judged, we are chastined
of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world. Likewise the
Prophet Psalm. 89. and 30.31.32.33. But if his children forsake my law, and
walk not in my judgments, if they break my statutes and keep not my
commandementes. Then will I visit their transgression with the sword, and
their iniquity with strokes, yet my loving kindness will I not take from him,
neither will I falsify my truth. For as a father withdraws from his child
sometimes his love, and whippeth him with the rod of correction, so the Lord
deals often with his children and scourges their naked conscience. God does
judge his here, but his enemies will he judge in the world to come, if we be
not punished here, the punishment will be as a thunderbolt in the day of
judgment. Have thou been afflicted, and not profited? will not a little cross
serve thee? a greater shall come to thee, will not a few troubles turn thee to
God, then many shall come upon thee? If a man be not troubled for sin here, it
is the way to hell, if he be troubled here, it is the way to heaven. And as
they which have not been troubled, having had a little joy shall have eternal
pain, so they which here have had a little pain, shall after have everlasting
joy. They that are corrected and have profited by it, are afflicted of the
Lord in mercy, but they that be vexed and amend not, receive a token of Gods
further wrath. Wherefore we must not look to feel comfort in the remission
of sins, unless we also have sorrow for committing our sins. For never
any of gods children were comforted thoroughly, but they were first humbled for
their sin lawfully. To the working of which humiliation, we must remember
Gods judgments showed on others: has God destroyed the whole world for sin,
and can he not, or will he not destroy thee for sin? has he overthrown
whole nations, and will he suffer thee to lie still in thy sins? See how full
Hell is already, and yet daily we run headlong thither. Consider also, how
great thy sin was, that could not be cleansed but by the blood of Jesus
Christ; Oh how soul was that sin, that nothing else could wash it, but
Christ his heart blood? oh how great was our guiltines, that were ransomed by
such a price? How great was the sore, that needed such a salve? how deep was
the wound, that needed such a medicine? O loving kindness, and unspeakable love
toward us! Shall Christ be slain for our sins, and we not slaye sin in
our selves? Shall Christ die for our sins, and sin as yet is not dead in
us? Shall Christ be crucified for us, and will we not crucify sin in our
selves? Shall Christ have his heart pricked with a spear, and shall not we
have our hearts pricked with sorrow? This is the true use and meditating of
Christ his passion. We are wont to defy the Jews for accusing Christ, we spit
at Judas for betraying Christ, and we condemn Pilate for condemning Christ,
but we are much more to be at defiance with our sins, which accused him
before the judgment seat of God, we are to accuse our selves, who have and
daily do, betray him; we must condemn our selves, whose sins have condemned
him. But if neither the judgments of God, hell, nor the cross of Christ can
move us, then let us examine our selves how we can rejoice in Christ.

It follows to speak of the counsel of Peter, Repent, as if he should say.
I know your hearts are pricked, how be it I will show you, how it is the
policy of the Devil, to make these good motions quickly to wax dry in you,
he will stay you from perseuering, you must therefore endeavor to continue in
this godly sorrow. The Apostle saw, that this sorrow, which as Paul witnesses
is not to be repented of, was well begun in them, but in continuing his
sermon still to that effect, he shows that our sorrow must be also
continual. Many sorrow, as has been showed, but in a worldly sorrowing,
which brings eternal death, not in a godly grief which brings repentance.
Wherefore we are to note that repentance begins in us, continues and ends
with sorrow. Now, if it might be, it were expedient to show what repentance is.
In one word, Repentance is not a bare leaving of sin, but an utter condemning
and misliking of that sin, which we have left. For though we have left it,
yet Satan may make us to sorrow for it many years after, yea even at the
point of death. ' David had left his sin, but it caused him to sorrow an
whole year after. Joseph's brethren had forsaken and almost forgotten their
sin, yet it troubled them and grieved them thirteen years after. Our
pricking of heart therefore must be continued and daily renewed. This repentance
is figured in baptism, both in that we must die to sin, and bury it, and also
that we must rise again to newnes of life, for a man cannot die to sin but by
the virtue of Christ his death, neither can he rise to righteousness without the
power of his resurrection. Now we must know that as our sins are forgiven, so
we must also receive Gods spirit. If God promises mercy to our children much
more to us, if we believe and receive his promises, if to them, which are a
far of, much more to them that are near. And yet though we have been
baptized an hundred years, and have not received the holy Ghost: we may die in
our sins. Some understand by the gift of the holy Ghost the graces of God
bestowed on the Apostles, but in my judgment, their opinion is not sound,
because, that was a particular thing given only to them of that time, this
promise is general and respects all posterities. We are then to note, that
repentance is a continual course of sorrow, and if we have this in truth,
then may we boldly seek for comfort out of Gods wo^d, and from his ministers,
and look what comfort they give us on earth, the same shall be sealed also in
heaven. Wherefore as it is requisite continually to till the ground, if we will
have fruit, and daily to eat, if we will live: so in spiritual things, we
must be humbled with continual sorrow, that we may be refreshed with daily
comfort in Christ, in whose name let us pray. Our father, etc.

FINIS.
Certain wise and grave Counsels and Answers, made by the same author, of the
former argument.
Unto one that was much tempted with unbelief, he gave this counsel; When the
temptation comes, either fall down in prayer, and say, Lord thou make me
to possess the sins of my youth, and this temptation is of very equity;
howbeit, O Lord, grant I may by wisdom herein, make this temptation an holy
instruction, and suffer me to possess my soul in patience: Oh turn this to
thy glory and my salvation. I see and confess what has been in me a long
time, by that which now shows it self in me, and that thy grace has
hitherto kept under this corrupt^on: yet Lord I believe, yet Lord I will
believe, help Lord my unbelief. Thy name be praised, for this seal of thy
love, and pledge of thy spirit; that in this unbelief I am grieved, as in my
belief I am wont to be comforted. And though my old and secret sins,
deserve that I should not only be given over to infidelity, but also that it
should be in me without grief and remorse, yet Lord forgive my sins new,
and old, forgive my vnthank^ulnes. Lord increase my faith, and grant good
father, that when thou shall restore to me the gift of grace again, that I
may use it in fear, and show it by fruits.

Or if this do not prevail, give your self with all humblenes to read the
word of God, especially, his promises, and be still attending upon the means,
waiting when the Lord shall enlarge your heart. Or if this do not help, go
to some faith full brother, confess your state to him, acknowledge your weakness
to him, and be not ashamed to give God the glory by shaming your self, and
opening your corruption to him; that so he may pray for you; whose prayer
according to the promise of God, made to his holy ordinance herein, James. 5.
undoubtedly shall be heard in the appointed time. Thus having prayed by your
self, and with another, and used the means of reading for your recovery,
though you have not present release, yet in meeknes of mind and patience of
your spirit, go to your calling; knowing that your prayers and the word of
God, being as seed, must have some time between the sowing of them, and the
reaping of the increase and fruit of them. Above all, reason not with your
temptations, dispute not with the Devil, as though you could prevail of your
self. And as I would not you should dispute with your temptation, so I would
not you should despise it. For in both are extremities. If you take it too much
to heart, or marvel how you should overcome such a temptation, it will make
you dull or desperate. If you account of it to little, and marvel how such
things should come into your head, which was not wont to be so, it will make
you not to strive, and you shall be swallowed up before you be aware. If you
account of it too fearfully, Satan will oppress you before you begin to
fight; If you account of it too lightly, the devil needs not to wrestle with
you, you will overthrow your self. Therefore fear in respect of your self:
fight boldly in Christ; tremble at your own corruption; but rest and trust in
Christ your salvation. If still you are tempted, and no body by you, write your
temptation, and offer it to God by prayer, and promise to him, that you will
ask counsel of his word, at the mouth of his minister, when he shall give
you just occasion. If all this help not, comfort your self with this pledge
of election, that you are ioyed when you feel your belief, and that you are
grieved* least you should displease God by your unbelief; and know, that as
there is a viciss^tude of the means of salvation, which you must use; so there
is also a vicissitude of temptations, whereof this is one, agianst which you
must strive.

2 Unto one that was tempted with worldly shame, Worldly shame.
and thought the distemperature of his mind and body proceeded thereof, he
said on this sort. Fist know, that Satan has not an absolute power, but a
power by permission to try us, against which, we must arm our selves by faith,
which will assure us, that either the Lord will mitigate our temptation if our
power and patience be not great, or else, if he enlarge the trial, he will
increase our strength and retch it out, according to the proportion of our
temptation. We must also pray, that the Lord give not out that measure of
leave to the devil, which we give out to sin, to work rebellion in us
against his majesty; but that he would rather make Satan a Surgeon to show us
our sins, then a Sregeant to confound us for our sins. It is the policy
of the adversary, to persuade many, that the weakness of their body, and
feeblenes of their brain proceeds of their temptations, when indeed it
comes of the vnstaidnes of their minds, wandering too much after the motions
of the devil; in that they not resting on the word, nor depending on Christ,
nor contenting themselves to be tried, nor co^forting themselves by meditation,
attend to much, and co^for to often with the devils illusions and temptations,
and so they comeplayne of the effects, and not of the causes of their
temptations; being more grieved for their present sufferinges, then for their
sins past. The root of this worldly shame, is pride and hautinesse of mind,
which is a privy evil, and hardly will be beaten into the head of them that
are infected therewith. But sure it is, that we would never be so grieved for the
loss of a thing, if we did not too much desire it, and too immoderately use
it, whilst we had it. John. 12:42. Which sin of haughtines, the Lord seeing
in his children, that they are more humbled, with the losseof worldly credit,
then with the sense of their sins, and the loss of their glory; ^ee strikes
them with the want of that thing which is most precious unto them, because
they made no conscience of that honor which is most precious unto him.
Wherefore this is the best remedy, rather to be grieved that we feel not our
sins to be pardoned with God, then that we are known to be sinners amongst
men, and that we be ready to shame our selves that God may have the glory;
acknowledging shame, and confusion, and the whole hell of temptations to be due
unto us; and glory, praise and compassion, to be only the Lords. For this is a
special mark of the child of God, by temptations rightly humbled, when he is
ready to shame himself for his sin, that he may glorify God in his mercy.

3 Unto one that thought himself to have ^inned against the holy Ghost, Sin
against the holy ghost
he said, Satan's temptations follow our affections. For if we lightly account
of sin, he bleares our eyes still with Gods mercies; if we begin to make a
conscience of sin, he loadeth us with the judgments of God; being as ready
now to aggrauate the sin, more then it is in it self, as before he would
extenuate it to make it seem less then it was. Howbeit, said he to the man
thus afflicted; I will say unto you as Samuel said to the people after they
had confessed themselves to have sinned against God with a great sin: True it
is, said Samuel, not flattering them in their iniquities; Ye have sinned
greatly: notwithstanding, if ye will fear the Lord, and serve him, and hear
his voice, and not disobey the word, of the Lord ye shall follow the Lord your
God. But if ye will not obey the voice of the Lord but disobeye the Lords
mouth, then shall the hand of the Lord be upon you. 1. Sam. 12.14. So I will
not lessen your sine, but I say, you have sinned with a great sinnne before the
Lord, in that you made a mock of the word which you knew; yet if you turn to
the Lord in fear and serve him, your sin is remissible, howsoever Satan
charge your conscence, that you have done evil against your own knowledge.
For although every sin against the holy Ghost is against a man's conscience
and knowledge; yet every sin against our knowledge and conscience is not
against the holy Ghost. For then David and Peter had sinned against the holy
Ghost, for they sinned after the holy Ghost was come upon them: which is not
true, as may appear by their godly repentance ensuing. Some sins are against
knowledge, but of humane frailty; some are against knowledge of a rebellious
obstinacy. These last are the persecutions of the spirit of God, as he is the
power of God; Those first are not so precisely against the holy ghost, but
against God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, the one which may be
repented of is remissible, the other which is without repentance is
irremissible, wherefore in that you quake, and are afraid least this sin be in
you, and would rejoice in God, if it were not in you: If you purpose to leave
your former sins, and in truth henceforth turn unto the Lord, I dare assure
you, that as yet you are free from this sin.

4 Unto one afflicted in mind, he gave this comfort: First, if you have
knowledge, be thankful for it, and desire the lord to give you faith: if you
have faith, which undoubtedly you may have though not rightly discerning your
self, you presently perceive it not; you must wait on the Lord for feeling of
it. And though it may be you shall tarry the lords leisure long* yet surely he
will give it you in time. In the mean time, assure your self, that the greatest
faith is when there is least feeling. Because it is easy for every one in
glorious feelings, and ioies unspeakable to believe: but when a man feeling no
sensible comfort in the Lord, can notwithstanding believe in the Lord, and by
says wait on him, this man's faith is very great.

5 He gave this advise to one, against the deadnes of the mind that ouertaketh
the godly: first search the cause, whether it be for some evil thing done, or
for some good thing not done, and so leaving some means of salvation unused;
whether for some sin seen, but not repented of; or some sin repented of, but
not sou^dly, or for unthankfulness. Secondly, use the remedy, please not your
self in it, but rouse up your self as from a slu^ber, which willingly you
would shake from you: call to mind the special and greatest mercy of God, use
the means. Thirdly, in the means offer your self to God, waiting ^umbly, and
patiently for the time of deliverance; neither esteming to much or to little of
your afflictions.

6 To one that complained of the hardness of his heart, he said. You must wait
for comfort and know, that you can now no more judge of your self, than a man
sleeping can judge of things which he did waking: or a man wandering in the
dark, can discern of bright colors. For as the one may whilst he was waking
do exccellent things, and yet now neither himself knows of them, nor any
other can epsy them in him: and the other may be environed with fresh and
flourishing colors, and yet for want of light, can have no use of his eyes,
nor pleasure in the objects; so you have done great good things, whilst god
gave you a waking heart to put them in practice, and the light of his spirit,
to discern his graces in you: though now, you have neither the sight nor sense
of them. And this is the thing that deceives and disquieteth many; they look
for that discerning of themselves, when the graces of God are more cold, which
they had when gods spirit wrought in the swetest and fullest measure in them.
And because there is some intermission of the work of their new birth, they
think there is a ^lat amission in the^ of the spirit of God. But as it is a
token of a mind to presumpteous, and infatuated, in time of a dead security, to
persuade our selves still of that safety, in having those graces which sometimes
we had: so it is a sign of a mind abject, and too much dispairing; to think,
that because we have not in present feelings these joys, glorious and
unspeakable which we have had; therefore we never had the^ heretofore, or that
we shall never have the^ again hereafter.

8 He said to a godly Christian, much inuaying against our unbelief; I do
not now suspect your estate, when you seem to me rather to have faith, than
when you seem to your self to have it; for faith being the gift of God, is
then most obtained and increased of God, when you thirsting after the increase
of present feelings, are humbled under the mighty and merciful hand of God
for it, rather I suspect you, when you say you have faith, because then you can
least fear and suspect you self, and by that means lie open to unbelief
again. And surely experience proves, that then we show we have belief,
when we mourn for our unbelief, and then our faith may be least, when we
think it to be most. Besides herein you are to comfort your self, with show
of increase of faith; because faith grows by these two means, either by some
great feeling by the word, and the spirit, and humble thanksgiving joined
thereunto, or else by humbling our selves before the mercy seat of GOD, for
want of our faith.

9 When one was troubled in mind he gave this comfortable note: that although
it came to pass, that after some travel in newebirth, Gods graces were not so
sweet, and our sins not so sour and grievous unto to us, as they were in our
first entrance into regeneration; but we a^e now weaker in less assaults,
having before been stronger in greater temptations: yet we were not to
despair, but to consider, from whence this gracious progress did com^; namely
of God, and not of our selves; who showed himself more favorable in the
beginning, both because he would not discourage us, newly coming unto him,
and for that we forsaking our selves, with a godly suspecting of our weakness
in the least temptations, did fly unto Gods help by prayer; who in wisdom
can hide himself under a cloud: partly, for that he will look to see some
trial of strength at our hands, coming to some age in the new birth partly,
for that we now less forsake or suspect our selves, even in greater
temptations; and for that presumpteously wrestling with our own strength, and
staying our selves with our own staff, we do not call to God for help, and
not calling, do not obtain, and not obtaining help, we take the foil in the
conflict, that the Lord may make known unto us, that notwithstanding our
proceeding in Christianity, we are still but men, and God alone is God.

10 He said to one troubled in mind, for a secret and small sin: I do not
so much fear this sin in you, as the policy of Satan by it, either in
that he will not stick to show you the least sins and hide from you the
greater; or else by the quick sight of your secret and small sins, to cast upon
you an open and gross sin of vain glory and privy pride.

11 It is a most certain thing in Gods children, that the more their
afflictions grow, the more their faith grows: the more Satan strives to
draw them from God, the more they draw near to ^od; although indeed in
feeling, they cannot see so much.

12 Though we find not the spiritual joy which we should feel, yet let us
not be to much cast down; so that our conscience tell us, that we are ready
to withdraw somewhat from our outward pleasures, for want of this inward
pleasure; and that we have not prevented, or smothered out these spiritual
joys, but are grieved that we have them not, and wait for the time to feel
them. For of all things, we must bewar, that we draw not into their stead
carnal ioys, and so drive a^ it were in to exile the working of gods spir^t in
us by the^.

13 Many despair of help, because of their own unworthiness* as though there
were no hope of Gods mercy, unless we bring in our gift and pawn in our hands
to him. But this were to discredit the Lords mercy, and to bring in credit
our merits; and rather to bind the Lord to us, than us unto him: but if our
sins be great, our redemption is greater; though our merits be beggerlye.
Gods mercy is a rich mercy: If our case be not desperate, and we past hope of
recovery, our redemption should not be so plentiful, But when all seems to
go one way; when Heaven and Earth, the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars go
against us; then to ransom us, and to make a perfect restitution, is to draw
something out of nothing. Even as in sickness, to have either little danger,
or in great danger; deliverance by present means, is nothing; but in
extreme perril, when Physic can do nothing, and nothing makes for us but
the Grave, then to be rescued from the grave, and to recover our life from the
pit, is Redemption.

14 There are two workings of Gods Spirit in us: the one inferior, which
bringgeth but certain fruits of the Spirit, without any special fruit of
grace: the other superior, and more certain, when the spirit works an
infallable sanctification. The first, may totally be darkened, and fully
quenched; the other has but particular Eclipse, and in measure may be dimmed,
as it was in David psalm. 51, but is not finally quenched. As God made man so
that he might fall, though afterward he had mercy upon him: so he
regenerateth us so, that we may fall, though afterward he may raise us up
again, and will. And it is fearful enough, that there may be such particular
decaies of it in us, as to feel less comfort in the word, less fear of
sin, less care of well doing, less zeal in praying, less fruits in the
means; so that all our actions are turned to be bitter, which were sweter unto
us than any worldly increase to the worldly man, or honey can be to them that
love it. These are evident tokens of the sanctifying spirit, to love good,
because it is good; and to hate sin: the more we grow in gifts, the more
to hunger, the more to complain of our unworthiness, the more to be humbled in
our selves, the more meekely to judge of others: when we are most quiet with
all things, then to think our selves least quiet, and then most to fear our
selves; so to feel the grace of God in us, and yet our sense and feeling of
sin is not lessened; and to fear and quake at the first degrees and motions of
sin; not lest they fully quench, but lest they cool the heat of the spirit
in us.

15 In afflictions we must search the cause, first by ascending to GOD, then by
descending into our selves. We must ascend to GOD, pleading guilty, craving
mercy, and not stand quarelling with the malice of men, or hatred of the devil
against us: for as it were no good wisdom for a man condemned to die, to make
any long suite to the Ialor, or to the Executioner; (for they be but under
officers and can do nothing) but he must labor to the Judge, who can either
repriue or release him: so it is no good policy to stand about S^than in our
temptations, who does all by constraint and restraint under the Lord; but we
must go to the principal, that is God; in whose hands, are both the
entrance, and the issues of our sufferings. Secondly, we must search our
selves, how far either reason is unreformed, or affections unrenewed; knowing
that the devil himself can never hurt us, until we have hurt our selves; and
in what measure our reason is corrupt, or our affections disordered; in that
measure are we weak, either to be over come of men, or of Satan; and in what
measure our reason is sound, and our affections ^incere, in that measure we
remain invincible.

16 Some afflicted consciences after some deliverances look no more to be
delivered: for they think as God is most liberal, so we must not weary or make
tedious his bountiful dealing with us. But the Lord has many deliverances in
store, which it is as impossible to waste, as it is, that the Lord himself
should be lessened; he will make an end of his own work in us, for his own
glory; which as he has appointed to be endless in our deliverances, so the
means thereunto are also endless. Yea when we seem as it were in a
whirlepit, and to be carried by a violent stream of troubles we know not
whither, and are constrained often to diue and plunge down, the waters of
affliction running over our head; yet the Lord will recover us and set our
feet in a steadie ^la^e. If we be cast down, so we can but s^raule up
again: if we be resisted of Sa^han, so we can but kick against him; if we can
but open our lips, and accuse his malice before the Lord, there is found hope
of comfort to be found of him.

FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page 111. lin. 22. read, his assaults, the same is oftentimes assalied and
shaken, yet by the grace of God it is such. etc. page 114 l 111, 20, he, read,
as he, p. 115 li, 10. word, ^eade, grace, 28, that, read, the. page 117, l. 6,
in face, read, in the face. p, 134, l, 10, it, read, hear it, p, 135, l, 3,
be, read, by.


