THE SCOTTISH History of James the fourth, slain at Flodden.

Entermixed with a pleasant Comedy, presented by Oboram King of Fayeries: As
it has been sundry times publicly plaide.

Written by Robert Green, Master of Arts.

Omne tulit punctum.

LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed. 159^.

THE SCOTTISH History of James the fourth, slain at Flodden.
Music playing within. Enter Aster Obero^, King of Fayries, an Antique, who
dance about a Tomb, plac'st conveniently on the Stage, out of the which,
suddenly starts up as they dance, Bohan a Scot, attyred like a ridstall man,
from whom the Antique flies. Oberon Manet. Bohan. AY say, what is thou?


Oberon. Thy friend Bohan*


Bohan. What wot I, or reck I that, whay guide man, I reck no friend, nor ay
reck no foe, als ene to me, git the ganging, and trouble not may whayet, or ay^
ga^ the recon me nene of they friend by the mary mass sall I.


Ober. Why angry Scot, I visit thee for love: then what mooues thee to wroath?


Bohan. The deele awhit reck I thy love. For I know too well, that true love
took her flight twenty winter sense to heaven, whither till ay can, we will I
wot, ay sal nere find love: an thou love me, leave me to my self. But what
were those Puppits that hopt and skipt about me year whayle?


Oberon. My subjects.


Boh. They subjects, whay art thou a King?


Ober. I am.


Bohan. The deele thou art, whay thou look not so big as the king of Clubs,
nor so sharp as the king of Spades, nor so feign as the king Adaymonds, be the
mass ay take thee to be the king of false hearts: therefore I rid thee away, or
ayse so curry your Kingdom, that yous be glad to run to save your life.


Ober. Why stoycall Scot, do what thou dare to me, hear is my breast strike.


Boh. Thou will not threap me, this whiniard has guard many better me^ to lope
the^ thou: but how now? Gos sayds what wilt not out? whay thou which, thou
deele, gads fute may whiniard.


Ober. Why pull man: but what (...) twear out how then?


Boh. This then, thou weart best begone first: for aylso lop thy lyms, that
thouse go with half a knaves carkasseto the deele


Ober. Draw it out, now strike fool, can thou not?


Boh. Bread ay gad, what deele is in me, whay tell me thou skipiack what art
thou?


Ober. Nay first tell me what thou wast from thy birth, what thou have past
hitherto, why thou dwell in a Tomb, and leauest the world? and then I will
release thee of these bonds, before not.


Boh. And not before, then needs must needs sal: I was borne a gentleman of the
best blood in all Scotland, except the king, when time brought me to age, and
death took my parents, I became a Courtier, where though ay list not praise my
self, ay engraued the memory of Boughon on the skin-coate of some of them, and
reueld with the proudest.


Ober. But why living in such reputation, did thou leave to be a Courtier?


Boh. Because my pride was vanity, my expense loss, my reward fair words and
large promises, and my hopes spilt, for that after many years service, one
outran me, and what the deele should I then do there. No no, flattering knaves
that can cog and prate fastest, speed best in the Court.


Ober. To what life did thou then betake thee?


Boh. I then changed the Court for the country, and the wars for a wife: but I
found the craft of swains more vile, then the knavery of courtiers: the charge
of children more heavy then servants, and wives tongues worse then the wars
it self: and therefore I gave ore that, and went to the City to dwell, and
there I kept a great house with small cheer, but all was nere the near.


Ober. And why?


Boh. because in seeking friends, I found table guests to eat me, and my meat,
my wives gossops to bewray the secrets of my heart, kindred to betray the
effect of my life, which when I noted, the court ill, the country worse, and
the city worst of all, in good time my wife died: ay wood she had died twenty
winter sooner by the mass, leaving my two sons to the world, and shutting my
self into this Tomb, where if I dye, I am sure I am safe from wild beasts,
but whilst I live, cannot be free from ill company. Besides, now I am sure
gif all my friends fail me, I sall have a grave of mine own providing: this
is all. Now what art thou?


Ober. Oberon King of Fayries, that loves thee because thou hate the world,
and to gratulate thee, I brought those Antiques to show thee some sport in
daunsing, which thou haste loved well.


Bohan. Ha, ha, ha, think thou those puppits can please me? whay I have two
sons, that with one scottish gigge shall break the neck of thy Antiques.


Ober. That would I feign see.


Boha. Why thou shall, how boys. Enter Slipper and Nano. Haud your clacks
lads, trattle not for thy life, but gather up your legs and dance me
forthwith a gigge worth the sight.


Slip. Why I must talk on Idy fort, wherefore was my tongue made.


Boha. Prattle an thou dare ene word more, and ais dab this whiniard in thy
wembe.


Ober. Be quiet Bohan, I Will strike him dumb, and his brother too, their talk
shall not hinder our gyg, fall to it, dance I say man.


Boh. Dance Humer, dance, ay rid thee. The two dance a gig devised for the
nonst. Now get you to the wide world with more the^ my father gave me, that's
learning enough, both kinds, knauerie and honesty: and that I gave you, spend
at pleasure.


Ober. Nay for their sport I will give them this gift, to the Dwarf I give a
quick wit, pretty of body, and awarrant his preferment to a Princes
service, where by his wisdom he shall gain more love then common. And to
loggerhead your son, I give a wandering life, and promise he shall never
lack: and auow that if in all distresses he call upon me to help him: now let
them go.


Exeunt with courtesies. Boh. Now King, if thou be a King, I will show thee
whay I hate the world by demonstration, in the year 1520. was in Scotland, a
king ouerruled with parasites, misled by lust, and many circumstances, too long
to trattle on now, much like our court of Scotland this day, that story have I
set down, gang with me to the gallery, and I Will show thee the same in Action, by
guide fellows of our country men, and then when thou see that, judge if any
wise man would not leave the world if he could.


Ober. That will I see, lead and i will follow thee.


Exeunt. Laus Deo detur in Eternum. Enter the King of England, the King of
Scots, Dorithe his Queen* the Countess, Lady Ida, with other Lords. And
Ateukin with them aloof. Actus primus. Scena prima.
K. of Scots. BRother of England, since our neighboring land,
And near alliance does inuit our loves,
The more I think upon our last accord,
The more I grieve your sudden parting hence:
First laws of friendship did confirm our peace,
Now both the seal of faith and marriage bed,
The name of father, and the style of friend,
These force in me affection full confirmd,
So that I grieve, and this my hearty grief
The heavens record, the world may witness well
To loose your presence, who are now to me
A father, brother, and a vowed friend.

K. of Eng. Link all these lovely styles good king in one,
And since thy grief exceeds in my depart,
I leave my Dorithea to enjoy, thy whole compact
Loves, and plighted vows.
Brother of Scotland, this is my joy, my life,
Her fathers honor, and her Countries hope,
Her mothers comfort, and her husbands bliss:
I tell thee king, in loving of my Doll,
Thou bindst her fathers heart and all his friends
In bands of love that death cannot dissolve.

K. of Scots. Nor can her father love her like to me,
My lives light, and the comfort of my soul:
Fair Dorithea, that wast Englands pride,
Welcome to Scotland, and in sign of love,
Lo I inuest thee with the Scottish Crown.
Nobles and Ladies, stoop unto your Queen.
And Trumpets sound, that Heralds may proclaim,
Fair Dorithea peerlesse Queen of Scots.

All. Long live and prosper our fair Q. of Scots.

Enstall and Crown her. Dor. Thanks to the king of kings for my dignity,
Thanks to my father, that prouides so carefully,
Thanks to my Lord and husband for this honor,
And thanks to all that love their King and me.

All. Long live fair Dorithea our true Queen.

K. of E. Long shine the sun of Scotland in her pride,
Her fathers comfort, and fair Scotlands Bride.
But Dorithea, since I must depart,
And leave thee from thy tender mothers charge.
Let me advise my lovely daughter first,
What best befits her in a foreign land,
Live Doll, for many eyes shall look on thee,
Have care of honor and the present state:
For she that steps to height of Majesty,
Is even the mark whereat the enemy aims.
Thy virtues shall be construed to vice,
Thine affable discourse to abject mind.
If coy, detracting tongues will call thee proud:
Be therefore wary in this slippery state,
Honor thy husband, love him as thy life:
Make choice of friends, as Eagles of their young*
Who sooth no vice, who flatter not for gain:
But love such friends as do the truth maintain.
Think on these lessons when thou art alone,
And thou shall live in health when I am gone.

Dor. I will engraue these preceps in my heart,
And as the wind with calmnesse woes you hence,
Even so I wish the heavens in all mishaps,
May bless my father with continual grace.

K. of E. Then son farewell, the favoring winds inuites us to
Long circumstance in taking princely leaves,
Is more officious then convenient.
Brother of Scotland, love me in my child,
You greet me well, if so you will her good.

K. of Sc. Then lovely Doll, and all that favor me,
Attend to see our English friends at sea,
Let all their charge depend upon my purse:
They are our neighbors, by whose kind accord,
We dare attempt the proudest Potentate.
Only fair Countess, and your daughter stay,
With you I have some other thing to say.

Exeunt all save the King, the Countess, Ida, Ateukin, in all royalty. K. of
S. So let them triumph that have cause to joy,
But wretched King, thy nuptial knot is death:
Thy Bride the breeder of thy Countries ill,
For thy false heart dissenting from thy hand,
Misled by love, have made another choice,
Another choice, even when thou vowdst thy soul
To Dorithea, Englands choysest pride,
O then thy wandering eyes bewitched thy heart*
Even in the Chapel did thy fancy change,
When perjured man, though fair Doll had thy hand,
The Scottish Idaes beauty stale thy heart:
Yet fear and love has tide thy ready tongue
From blabbing forth the passions of thy mind,
Lest fearful silence have in subtle looks
Bewrayd the treason of my new vowed love,
Be fair and lovely Doll, but here is the prize
That lodges here, and entered through mine eyes,
Yet how so ere I love, I must be wise.
Now lovely Countess, what reward or grace,
May I employ on you for this your zeal,
And humble honors done us in our Court,
In entertainment of the English King.

Countess. It was of duty Prince that I have done:
And what in favor may content me most,
Is, that it please your grace to give me leave,
For to return unto my Country home.

K. of Scots. But lovely Ida is your mind the same?

Ida. I count of Court my Lord, as wise men do,
It Is fit for those that knows what longs thereto:
Each person to his place, the wise to Art,
The Cobbler to his clout, the Swain to Cart.

K. of Sc. But Ida you are fair, and beauty shines,
And seems best, where pomp her pride refines.

Ida. If beauty (as I know there is none in me)
Were sworn my love, and I his life should be:
The farther from the Court I were removed,
The more I think of heaven I were beloved.

K. of Scots. And why?

Ida. Because the Court is counted Venus net,
Where gifts and vows for stales are often set,
None, be she chaste as Vesta, but shall meet
A curious tongue to charm her ears with sweet.

K. of Scots. Why Ida then I see you set at naught,
The force of love.

Ida. In sooth this is my thought most gracious king,
That they that little prove
Are mickle blessed, from bitter sweets of love:
And we will I wot, I heard a shepherd sing,
That like a Be, Love has a little sting:
He lurkes in flowers, he pearcheth on the trees,
He on Kings pillowes, bends his pretty knees:
The Boy is blind, but when he will not spy,
He has a leaden foot, and wings to fly:
Beshrow me yet, for all these strange effects,
If I would like the Lad, that so infects.

K. of Scots. Rare wit, fair face, what heart could more desire!
But Doll is fair, and does concern thee near.
Let Doll be fair, she is won, but I must woe,
And win fair Ida, there is some choice in two.
But Ida thou art coy.

Ida. And why dread King?

K. of Scots. In that you will dispraise so sweet
A thing, as love, had I my wish.

Ida. What then?

K. of Scots. Then would I place his arrow here,
His beauty in that face.

Ida. And were Apollo moved and ruled by me,
His wisdom should be yours, and mine his tree.

K. of Scots. But here returns our train.
Welcome fair Doll: how fares our father, is he shipped and gone.

Enters the train back. Dor. My royal father is both shipped and gone,
God and fair winds direct him to his home.

K. of Sc. Amen say I, would thou were with him too:
Then might I have a fitter time to woo.
But Countess you would be gone, therefore farewell
Yet Ida if thou will, stay thou behind,
To accompany my Queen.
But if thou like the pleasures of the Court,
Or if she likte me tho she left the Court,
What should I say? I know not what to say,
You may depart, and you my courteous Queen*
Leave me a space, I have a weighty cause to think vp^^*
Ida, it nips me near:
It came from thence, I feel it burning here.

Exeunt all saving the King and Ateukin. K. of Scot. Now am I free from sight
of commo^^i^,
Where to my self I may disclose the grief
That has too great a part in mine affects.

Ate^. And now is my time, by wiles and words to rise,
Greater then those, that thinks themselves more wise.

K. of Scots. And first fond King, thy honor does engraue,
Upon thy brows, the drift of thy disgrace:
Thy new vowed love in sight of God and men,
Link thee to Dorithea, during life.
For who more fair and virtuous then thy wi^e,
Deceitful murderer of a quiet mind,
Fond love, vile lust, that thus misleads us men,
To vow our faithes, and fall to sin again.
But Kings stoop not to every common thought,
Ida is fair and wise, fit for a King:
And for fair Ida will I hazard life,
Venture my Kingdom, Country, and my Crown:
Such fire has love, to burn a kingdom down.
Say Doll dislikes, that I estrange my love,
Am I obedient to a woman's look?
Nay say her father frown when he shall hear
That I do hold fair Idaes love so dear:
Let father frown and fret, and fret and die,
Nor earth, nor heaven shall part my love and I.
Yea they shall part us, but we first must meet,
And woe, and win, and yet the world not seet.
Yea there is the wound, and wounded with that thought
So let me die: for all my drift is naught.

Ateu. Most gracious and imperial Majesty,

K. of S. A little flattery more were but too much,
Villain what art thou that thus dare interrupt a Princes secrets.

Ateu. Dread King, thy vassal is a man of Art,
Who knows by constellation of the stars,
By oppositions and by dry aspects,
The things are past, and those that are to come.

K. of S. But where is thy warrant to approach my presence?

Ateu. My zeal and ruth to see your graces wrong,
Makes me lament, I did detract so long.

K. of S. If thou know thoughts, tell me what mean I now*

Ateu. I Will calculate the cause of those your highness smiles,
And tell your thoughts.

K. of S. But least thou spend thy time in idleness,
And miss the matter that my mind aims at,
Tell me what star was opposite when that was thought?
He strikes him on the ear.
Ateu. It Is inconvenient mighty Potentate,
Whose looks resembles Jove in Majesty,
To scorn the sooth of science with contempt,
I see in those imperial looks of yours,
The whole discourse of love, Saturn combust,
With direful looks at your nativity:
Beheld fair Venus in her silver orb,
I know by certain exiomies I have read,
Your graces griefs, and further can express her name,
That holds you thus in fancies bands.

K. of S. Thou talkest wonders.

Ateu. Naught but truth O King,
It Is Ida is the mistress of your heart,
Whose youth must take impression of affects,
For tende^ twigs will bow, and milder minds
Will yield to fancy be they followed well.

K. of S. What god art thou composde in humane shape,
Or bold Trophonius to decide our doubts,
How know thou this?

Ateu. Even as I know the means,
To work your graces freedom and your love:
Had I the mind as many Courtiers have,
To creep into your bosom for your coin,
And beg rewards for every cap and knee,
I then would say, if that your grace would give
This lease, this manor, or this pa^tent sealed,
For this or that I would effect your love:
But Ateukin is no Parasite O Prince,
I know your grace knows scholars are but poor,
And therefore as I blush to beg a fee,
Your mightiness is so magnificent
You cannot choose but cast some gift apart,
To ease my bashful need that cannot beg,
As for your love, oh might I be imployd,
How faithfully would Ateukin compass it:
But Princes rather trust a smoothing tongue,
Then men of Art that can accept the time.

K. of Scots. Ateu. If so thy name, for so thou say,
Thine Art appears in entrance of my love:
And since I deem thy wisdom matched with truth,
I will exalt thee, and thy self alone
Shall be the Agent to dissolve my grief.
Sooth is, I love, and Ida is my love,
But my new mar^iage nips me near, Ateukin:
For Dorithea may not brook the abuse.

Ateu. These lets are but as moaths against the sun,
Yet not so great, like dust before the wind:
Yet not so light. Tut. pacify your grace,
You have the sword and scepter in your hand,
You are are the King, the state depends on you:
Your will is law, say that the case were mine,
Were she my sister whom your highness loves,
She should consent, for that our lives, our goods,
Depend on you, and if your Queen repine,
Although my nature cannot brook of blood,
And Scholars grieve to hear of murtherous deeds,
But if the Lamb should let the Lions way,
By my advise the Lamb should lose her life.
Thus am I bold to speak unto your grace,
Who am too base to kiss your royal feet,
For I am poor, nor have I land nor rent,
Nor countenance here in Court, but for my love,
Your Grace shall find none such within the realm.

K. of S. Will thou effect my love, shall she be mine?

Ateu. I Will gather Moly-rocus, and the earbes,
That heales the wounds of body and the mind,
I Will set out charms and spells, naught else shall be left,
To tame the wanton if she shall rebel,
Give me but tokens of your highness trust.

K. of S. Thou shall have gold, honor and wealth enough,
Win my Love, and I will make thee great.

Ateu. These words do make me rich most noble Prince,
I am more proud of them then any wealth,
Did not your grace suppose I flatter you,
Believe me I would boldly publish this:
Was never eye that saw a sweeter face,
Nor never ear that heard a deeper wit,
Oh God how I am ravished in your worth.

K. of S. Ateu. Follow me, love must have ^ase.

Ateu. I Will kiss your highness feet, march when you please.

Exeunt. Enter Slipper, Nano, and Andrew, with their bills ready written in
their hands. Andrew. Stand back sir, mine shall stand highest.

Slip. Come under mine arm sir, or get a footstool,
Or else by the light of the Moon, I must come to it.

Nano. Agree my masters, every man to his height,
Though I stand lowest, I hope to get the best master.

Andr. Ere I will stoop to a thistle, I will change turns,
As good luck comes on the right hand, as the left:
Here Is for me, and me, and mine.

Andr. But tell me fellows till better occasion come,
Do you seek masters?

Ambo. We do.

Andr. But what can you do worthy preferment?

Nano. Marry I can smell a knave from a Rat.

Slip. And I can lick a dish before a Cat.

Andr. And I can find two fools unsought,
How like you that?
But in earnest, now tell me of what trades are you two?

Slip. How mean you that sir, of what trade?
Marry I Will tell you, I have many trades,
The honest trade when I needs must,
The filching trade when time serves,
The Cousening trade as I find occasion.
And I have more qualities, I cannot abide a full cup vnkist,
A fat Capon vncaru'd,
A full purse vnpickt,
Nor a fool to prove a Justice as you do.

Andr. Why sot why calst thou me fool?

Nano. For examining wiser then thy self.

Andr. So does many more then I in Scotland.

Nano. Yea those are such, as have more autthoritie then wit,
And more wealth then honesty.

Slip. This is my little brother with the great wit, ware him,
But what can thou do, tell me, that art so inquisitiue of us?

Andr. Any thing that concerns a gentleman to do, that can I do.

Slip. So you are of the gentle trade?

Andr. True.

Slip. Then gentle sir, leave us to our selves,
For hear comes one as if he would lack a servant ere he went.

Ent. Ateu. Why so Ateukin? this becomes thee best,
Wealth, honor, ease, and angels in thy chest:
Now may I say, as many often sing,
No fishing to the sea, nor service to a king.
Unto this high promotions does belong,
Means to be talked of in the thickest throng:
And first to fit the humors of my Lo^d,
Sweet lays and lines of love I must record.
And such sweet lines and louelayes i will endite:
As men may wish for, and my leech delight,
And next a train of gallants at my heels,
That men may say, the world does run on wheels.
For men of art, that rise by indirection,
To honor and the favor of their King,
Must use all means to save what they have got,
And win their favors whom he never knew.
If any frown to see my fortunes such,
A man must bear a little, not too much:
But in good time these bills partend, I think,
That some good fellows do for service seek.

Read. If any gentleman, spiritual or temperall, will entertain out of his
service, a young stripling of the age of 30. years, that can sleep with the
soundest, eat with the hungriest, work with the sickest, lie with the lowdest,
face with the proudest, etc. that can wait in a Gentleman's chamber, when his
master is a mile of, keep his stable when it is empty, and his purse when it is
full, and has many qualities worse then all these, let him write his name and
go his way, and attendance shall be given.


Ateu. By my faith a good servant, which is he?

Slip. Truly sir that am I?

Ateu. And why do thou write such a bill,
Are all these qualities in thee?

Slip. O Lord I sir, and a great many more,
Some better, some worse, some richer some porer,
Why sir do you look so, do they not please you?

Ateu. Truly no, for they are naught and so art thou,
If thou have no better qualities, stand by.

Slip. O sir, I tell the worst first, but and you lack a man*
I am for you, i will tell you the best qualities I have.

Ateu. Be brief then.

Slip. If you need me in your chamber,
I can keep the door at a whistle, in your kitchen*
Turn the spit, and lick the pan, and make the fire burn.
But if in the stable.

Steu. Yea there would I use thee.

Slip. Why there you kill me, there am I,
And turn me to a horse and a wench, and I have no peer.

Ateu. Art thou so good in keeping a horse,
I pray thee tell me how many good qualities has a horse?

Slip. Why so sir, a horse has two properties of a man,
That is a proud heart, and a hardy stomach,
Four properties of a Lion, a broad breast, a stiff docket,
Hold your nose master. A wild countenance, and 4. good legs.
Nine properties of a Fox, nine of a Hare, nine of an Ass,
And ten of a woman.

Ateu. A woman, why what properties of a woman has a Horse?

Slip. O master, know you not that?
Draw your tables, and write what wise I speak.
First a merry countenance.
Second, a soft pace.
Third, a broad forehead.
Fourth, broad buttockes.
Fifth, hard of ward.
Sixth, easy to leap upon.
Seventh, good at long journey.
Eight, moving under a man.
Ninth, always busy with the mouth.
Tenth. Ever chewing on the bridle.

Ateu. Thou art a man for me, what is thy name?

Slip. An ancient name sir, belonging to the
Chamber and the night gown. Guess you that.

Ateu. What Is that, Slipper?

Slip. By my faith well gest, and so it is indeed:
You Will be my master?

Ateu. I mean so.

Slip. Read this first.

Ateu. Pleases it any Gentleman to entertain
A servant of more wit then stature,
Let them subscribe, and attendance shall be given.
What of this?

Slip. He is my brother sir, and we two were borne together,
Must serve together, and will die together,
Though we be both hanged.

Ateu. What Is thy name?

Nano. Nano.

Ateu. The etimologie of which word, is a dwarf:
Art not thou the old stoykes son that dwells in his Tomb?

Ambo. We are.

Ateu. Thou art welcome to me,
Will thou give thy self wholly to be at my disposition?

Nano. In all humility I submit my self.

Ateu. Then will I deck thee Princely, instruct thee courtly,
And present thee to the Queen as my gift.
Art thou content?

Nano. Yes, and thank your honor too.

Slip. Then welcome brother, and fellow now.

Andr. May it please your honor to abase your eye so low,
As to look either on my bill or my self.

Ateu. What are you?

An. By birth a gentleman, in profession a scholar,
And one that knew your honor in Edenborough,
Before your worthiness called you to this reputation.
By me Andrew Snoord.

Ateu. Andrew I remember thee, follow me,
And we will confer further, for my weighty affairs
For the king, commands me to be brief at this time.
Come on Nano, Slipper follow.

Exeunt. Enter sir Bartram with Eustas and others, booted. S. Bar. But tell me
lovely Eustas as thou love me,
Among the many pleasures we have past,
Which is the rifest in thy memory,
To draw thee over to thine ancient friend?

Eu. What makes Sir Bartram thus inquisitiue?
Tell me good knight, am I welcome or no?

Sir Bar. By sweet S. Andrew and may sale I swear,
As welcome is my honest Dick to me,
As mornings sun, or as the watery moon,
In merkist night, when we the borders track.
I tell thee Dick, thy sight has cleerd my thoughts,
Of many banefull troubles that there woond.
Welcome to sir Bartram as his life:
Tell me bonny Dicke, have got a wife?

Eust. A wife God shield sir Bartram, that were ill
To leave my wife and wander thus astray:
But time and good advise ere many years,
May chance to make my fancy bend that way,
What news in Scotland? therefore came I hither:
To see your Country, and to chat together.

Sir Bar. Why man our Countries blyth, our king is well,
Our Queen so, so, the Nobles well, and worse
And we will are they that were about the king,
But better are the Country Gentlemen.
And I may tell thee Eustace, in our lives,
We old men never saw so wondrous change:
But leave this trattle, and tell me what news,
In lovely England with our honest friends?

Eust. The king, the Court, and all our noble friends
Are well, and God in mercy keep them so.
The Northren Lords and Ladies here abouts,
That knows I came to see your Queen and Court,
Commends them to my honest friend sir Bartram,
And many others that I have not seen:
Among the rest, the Countess Elinor from Carlisle
Where we merry often have been,
Greets well my Lord, and has directed me,
By message this fair Ladies face to see.

Sir Bar. I tell thee Eustace, lest mine old eyes daze,
This is our Scottish moon and euenings pride:
This is the blemish of your English Bride:
Who sails by her, are sure of wind at will.
Her face is dangerous, her sight is ill:
And yet in sooth sweet Dicke, it may be said,
The king has folly, their's virtue in the maid.

Eust. But knows my friend this portrait, be aduisd?

Sir Bar. Is it not Ida the Countess of Arains daughters?

Eust. So was I told by Elinor of Carlisle,
But tell me lovely Bartram, is the maid evil inclind,
Misled, or Concubine unto the King or any other Lord?

Ba. Should I be brief and true, the^ thus my Dicke,
All Englands grounds yields not a blyther Less.
Nor Europ can art her for her gifts,
Of virtue, honor, beauty, and the rest:
But our fo^d king not knowing sin in lust,
Makes love by endless means and precious gifts,
And men that see it dare not sayt my friend,
But we may wish that it were otherwise:
But I rid thee to view the picture still,
For by the persons sights there hangs some ill.

Ba. Oh good sir Bartram, you suspect I love,
Then were I mad, he whom I never saw,
But how so ere, I fear not entisings,
Desire will give no place unto a king:
I Will see her whom the world admires so much,
That I may say with them, there lives none such.

Bar. Be Gad and sal, both see and talk with her,
And when thou have done, what ere her beauty be,
I Will wartant thee her virtues may compare,
With the proudest she that wa^s upon your Queen.

Eu. My Lady entreats your Worship in to supper.

Ba. Guide bony Dick, my wife will tell thee more,
Was never no man in her book before:
Be Gad she is blyth, fair lewely, bony, etc.

Exeunt. Enter Bohan and the fairy king after the first act, to them a rownd of
Fairies, or some prittie dance. Boh. Be Gad gramersis little king for this,
This sport is better in my exile life,
Then ever the deceitfu^l werld could yield.

Ober. I tell thee Bohan, Oberon is king,
Of quiet, pleasure, profit, and content,
Of wealth, of honor, and of all the world,
Tide to no place, yet all are tide to one,
Live thou in this life, exilde from world and men,
And I will show thee wonters ere we part,

Boh. Then mark my stay, and the strange doubts,
That follow flatterers, lust and lawless will,
And then say I have reason to forsake the world,
And all that are within the same.
Gow shroud us in our harbor where we ele see,
The pride of folly, as it ought to be.

Exeunt. After the first act. Ober. Here see I good fond actions in thy gyg,
And means to paint the worlds in constant ways
But turn thine ene, see which for I can command.

Enter two battles strengly fighting, the one Simi Ranus, the other,
Staurobates, she flies, and her Crown is taken, and she hurt. Boh. What ga^s
this din of mink and balefull harm,
Where every weane is all betaint with blood?

Ober. This shows thee Bohan what is worldly pomp.
Simeranus, the proud Affirrian Queen,
When Ninus died, did tene in her wars,
Three millions of footmen to the fight,
Five hundredth thousand horse, of armed chars,
A hundredth thousand more yet in her pride
Was hurt and conquered by S. Tanrobates.
Then what is pomp?

Bohan. I see thou art thine ene.
Thou bonny King, if Princes fall from high,
My fall is past, until I fall to die.
Now mark my talk, and prosecute my gyg.

Ober. How should these crafts withdraw thee from the world!
But look my Bohan, pomp allureth.

Enter Cirus king, humbling themselves: himself crowned by Olive Pat, at last
dying, laid in a marbell tomb with this inscription Who so thou be that
passest,
For I know one shall pass, know I
I am Cirus of Persia,
And I prithee leave me not thus like a clod of clay
Wherewith my body is covered.
All exeunt. Enter the king in great pomp, who reads it, and issues, cries
vermeum. Boha. What means this?

Ober. Cirus of Persia,
Mighty in life, within a marbell grave,
Was laid to rot, whom Alexander once
Beheld in tombde, and weeping did confess
Nothing in life could escape from wrethednesse:
Why then boast men?

Boh. What recke I then of life,
Who makes the grave my tomb, the earth my wife:
But mark me more.

Boh. I can no more, my patience will not warpe.
To see these flatteries how they scorn and carpe.

Ober. Turn but thy head.
Enter our kings carring Crowns, Ladies presenting odors to Potentates in
thrond, who suddenly is slain by his servant, and thrust out, and so they
eat. Exeunt. Sike is the werld, but whilke is he I saw.

Ober. Sesustris who was conqueror of the werld,
Slain at the last, and stamped on by his slaves.

Boh. How blessed are peur men then that know their grave,
Now mark the sequel of my Gig.

Boh. An he we will meet ends: the mirk and sable night
Does leave the pering morn to pry abroad,
Thou nill me stay, hail then thou pride of kings,
I ken the world, and wot well worldly things,
Mark thou my gyg, in mirkest terms that tells
The loathe of sins, and where corruption dwells
Hail me ne mere with shows of gudlie sights:
My grave is mine, that rids me from dispights.
Accept my gig guide King, and let me rest,
The grave with guide men, is a gay built nest.

Ober. The rising sun does call me hence away,
Thanks for thy gyg, I may no longer stay:
But if my train, did wake thee from thy rest,
So shall they sing, thy lullabie to nest.

Actus Secundus. Schena Prima.
Enter the Countess of Arrain, with Ida her daughter in their porch, sitting
at work. A song. Count. Fair Ida, might you choose the greatest good
Midst all the world, in blessings that abound:
Wherein my daughter should your liking be?

Ida. Not in delights, or pomp, or majesty.

Count. And why?

Ida. Since these are means to draw the mind
From perfect good, and make true judgment blind.

Count. Might you have wealth, and fortunes ritchest store?

Ida. Yet would I (might I choose) be honest poor.
For she that sits at fortunes feet allow
Is sure she shall not taste a further woe.
But those that prancke one top of fortunes ball*
Still fear a change: and fearing catch a fall.

Count. Tut foolish maid, each one contemns need.

Ida. Good reason why, they know not good indeed.

Count. Many marry then, on whom distress does loure,

Ida. Yes they that virtue deem an honest dowre.
Madame, by right this world I may compare,
Unto my work, wherein with heedfull care,
The heavenly workman plants with curious hand,
As I with needle draw each thing one land,
Even as he list, some men like to the Rose,
Are fashioned fresh, some in their stalks do close,
And borne do sudden die: some are but weeds,
And yet from them a secret good proceeds:
I with my needle if I please may blot,
The fairest rose within my cambricke plot,
God with a beck can change each worldly thing,
The poor to earth, the beggar to the king.
What then has man, wherein he well may boast,
Since by a beck he lives, a lover is lost?

Enter Eustace with letters. Count. Peace Ida, here are strangers near at
hand.

Eust. Madame God speed.

Count. I thank you gentle squire.

Eust. The country Countess of Northumberland,
Does greet you well, and has requested me,
To bring these letters to your Ladyship.

He carries the letter. Count. I thank her honor, and your self my friend.
She receives and peruseth them. I see she means you good brave Gentleman,
Daughter, the Lady Elinor salutes
Your self as well as me, then for her sake
It Were good you entertaind that Courtiour well.

Ida. As much salute as may become my sex,
And he in virtue can vouchsafe to think,
I yield him for the courteous Countess sake.
Good sir sit down, my mother here and I,
Count time misspent, an endless vanity.

Eust. Beyond report, the wit, the fair, the shape,
What work you here, fair Mistress may I see it?

Id. Good Sir look on, how like you this compact?

Eust. Me thinks in this I see true love in act:
The Woodbines with their leaves do sweetly spread,
The Roses blushing prancke them in their red,
No flower but boasts the beauties of the spring,
This bird has life indeed if it could sing:
What means fair Mistres had you in this work?

Ida. My needle sir.

Eust. In needles then there lurkes,
Some hidden grace I deem beyond my reach.

Id. Not grace in the^ good sir, but those that teach.

Eust. Say that your needle now were Cupids sting,
But ah her eye must be no less,
In which is heaven and heauenlinesse,
In which the food of God is shut,
Whose powers the purest minds do glut.

Ida. What if it were?

Eust. Then see a wondrous thing,
I fear me you would paint in Teneus heart,
Affection in his power and chiefest parts.

Ida. Good Lord sir no, for hearts but pricked soft,
Are wounded sore, for so I hear it often.

Eust. what recks the second,
Where but your happy eye,
May make him live, whom Jove has iudgd to die.

Ida. Should life and death within this needl ^urke,
I Will prick no hearts, I Will prick upon my work.

Enter Ateuken, with Slipper the Clown. Cous. Peace Ida, I perceive the fox at
hand.

Eust. The fox? why fetch your hounds and chase him hence.

Count. Oh sir these great men bark at small offense.

Ateu. Come wi^^t please you to enter gentle sir?
Offer to exeunt. Stay courteous Ladies, favor me so much,
As to discourse a word or two apart.

Count. Good sir, my daughter learnes this rule of me,
To shun resort, and strangers company:
For some are shifting mates that carry letters,
Some such as you too good, because our betters.

Slip. Now I pray you sir what a kin are you to a pickrell?

Ateu. Why knave?

Slip. By my troth sir, because I never knew a proper situation fellow of your
pitch, fitter to swallow a gudgin.


Ateu. What meanst thou by this?

Slip. Shifting fellow sir, these be thy words, shifting fellow:
This Gentlewoman I fear me, knew your bringing up.

Ateu. How so?

Slip. Why sir your father was a Miller,
That could shift for a pecke of grist in a bushel,
And you a fair spoken Gentleman, that can get more land by a lie, then an
honest man by his ready money.


Ateu. Catiue what say thou?

Slip. I say sir, that if she call you shifting knave,
You shall not put her to the proof.

Ateu. And why?

Slip. Because sir, living by your wit as you do shifting, is your letters
pattents, it were a hard matter for me to get my dinner that day, wherein my
Master had not sold a dozen of devices, a case of cogges, and a shute of
shifts in the morning: I speak this in your commendation sir, and I pray you so
take it.


Ateu. If I live knave I will be revenged, what Gentleman would entertain a
rascal, thus to derogate from his honor?


Ida. My Lord why are you thus impatient?

Ateu. Not angry Ida, but I teach this knave,
How to behave himself among his betters:
Behold fair Countess to assure your stay,
I here present the signet of the king,
Who now by me fair Ida does salute you:
And since in secret I have certain things,
In his behalf good Madame to impart,
I crave your daughter to discourse a part.

Count. She shall in humble duty be addressed,
To do his Highness will in what she may.

Id. Now gentle sir what would his grace with me?

Ateu. Fair comely Nymph, the beauty of your face,
Sufficient to bewitch the heavenly powers,
Has wrought so much in him, that now of late
He finds himself made captive unto love,
And though his power and Majesty requires,
A straight command before an humble suit,
Yet he his mightiness does so abase,
As to entreat your favor honest maid.

Ida. Is he not married sir unto our Queen?

Ateu. He is.

Ida. And are not they by God accursed,
That sever them whom he has knit in one?

Ateu. They be: what then? we seek not to displace
The Princess from her seat, but since by love
The king is made your own, she is resolude
In private to accept your dalliance,
In spite of war, watch, or worldly eye.

Ida. Oh how he talks as if he should not die,
As if that God in justice once could wink,
Upon that fault I am a shamed to think.

Ateu. Tut Mistress, man at first was born to err,
Women are all not formed to be Saints:
It Is impious for to kill our native king,
Whom by a little favor we may save.

Ida. Better then live unchaste, to live in grave.

Ateu. He shall erect your state and wed you well.

Ida. But can his warrant keep my soul from hell?

Ateu. He will enforce, if you resist his suit.

Id. What tho, the world may shame to him account
To be a king of men and worldly pelf.

Ateu. Yet has to power no rule and guide himself,
I know you gentle Lady and the care,
Both of your honor and his graces health,
Makes me confused in this dangerous state.

Ida. So counsel him, but sooth thou not his sin,
It Is vain alurement that does make him love,
I shame to hear, be you a shamde to move,

Count. I see my daughter grows impatient,
I fear me he pretends some bad intent.

Ateu. Will you despise the king, and scorn him so?

Ida. In all allegiance I will serve his grace,
But not in lust, oh how I blush to name it?

Ateu. An endless work is this, how should I frame it?

They discourse privately. Slip. Oh Mistress may I turn a word upon you.

Ateu. Friend what will thou?

Slip. Oh what a happy Gentlewoman be you truly, the world reports this of
you Mistress, that a man can no sooner come to your house, but the Butler
comes with a black Jack and says welcome friend, he eres a cup of the best
for you, verily Mistress you are said to have the best Ale in all Scotland.


Count. Sirrah go fetch him drink, how likest thou this?


Slip. Like it Mistress? why this is quincy quarie pepper de watchet, single
goby, of all that ever I tasted: I Will prove in this Ale and tossed, the compass
of the whole world. First this is the earth, it ties in the middle a fair
brown tossed, a goodly country for hungry teeth to dwell upon: next this is
the sea, a fair poole for a dry tongue to fish in: now come I, and seeing the
world is naught, I divide it thus, and because the sea cannot stand without the
earth, as Arist. says, I put the^ both into their first Chaos which is my
belly, and so mistress you may see your ale is become a miracle.


Eustace. A merry mate Madame I promise you.

Count. Why sigh you sirrah?

Slip. Truly Madam, to think upon the world, which since I denou^ced, it
keeps such a rumbling in my stomach, that unless your Cook give it a
counterbuffe with some of your roasted Capons or beef, I fear me I shall become
a loose body, so dainty I think, I shall neither hold fast before nor behind.


Count. Go take him in and feast this merry swain,
Syrrha, my cook is your physician.
He has a purge for to disiest the world.

Ateu. Will you not, Ida, grant his highness this?

Ida. As I have said, in duty I am his:
For other lawless lusts, that ill beseem him,
I cannot like, and good I will not deem him.

Count. Ida come in, and sir if so you please,
Come take a homely widows intertaine.

Ida. If he have no great haste, he may come nigh.
If haste, tho he be gone, I will not cry.

Exeunt. Ateu. I see this labor lost, my hope in vain,
Yet will I try an other drift again.

Enter the Bishop of S. Andrews, Earl Douglas, Morton, with others, one way,
the Queen with Dwarfes an other way. B. S. Andr. Oh wrack of Co^mon-weale! Oh
wretched state!

Doug. Oh hapless flock whereas the guide is blind?

They all are in a muse. Mort. Oh heedlesse youth, where counsel is dispis'd.

Dorot. Come pretty knave, and prank it by my side.
Lets see your best attendaunce out of hand.

Dwarf. Madame although my lims are very small,
My heart is good, i will serve you there withal.

Doro. How if I were assaild, what could thou do?

Dwarf. Madame call help, and boldly fight it to,
Although a Be be but a little thing:
You know fair Queen, it has a bitter sting.

Dor. How could thou do me good were I in grief?

Dwar. Counsel dear Princes, is a choice relief.
Tho Nestor wanted force, great was his wit,
And tho I am but weak, my words are fit.

S. And. Like to a ship upon the Ocean seas,
Tossed in the doubtful stream without a helm,
Such is a Monarke without good advice,
I am ore heard, cast rain upon thy tongue,
Andrews beware, reproof will breed a scar.

Mor. Good day my Lord.

B. S. And. Lord Morton well ymet:
Whereon deemes Lord Douglas all this while?

Dou. Of that which yours and my poor heart does break*
Although fear shuts our mouths we dare not speak.

Dor. What mean these Princes sadly to consult?
Somewhat I fear, betideth them amiss,
They are so pale in looks, so vexed in mind:
In happy hour the Noble Scottish Peers
Have I incountred you, what makes you mourn?

B. S. And. If we with patience may attentive gain,
Your Grace shall know the cause of all our grief.

Dor. Speak on good father, come and sit by me:
I know thy care is for the common good.

B. S. And. As fortune mighty Princes reareth some,
To high estate, and place in Commonweal,
So by divine bequest to them is lent,
A riper judgment and more searching eye:
Whereby they may discern the common harm,
For where importunes in the world are most,
Where all our profits rise and still increase,
There is our mind, thereon we meditate,
And what we do partake of good advice,
That we employ for to concern the same.)
To this intent these nobles and my self,
That are (or should be) eyes of Commonweal,
Seeing his highness reachlesse course of youth
His lawless and unbridled vain in love,
His to intentive trust too flatterers,
His abject care of council and his friends,
Cannot but grieve, and since we cannot draw
His eye or Judgment to discern is faults
Since we have spoke and counsel is not heard,
I for my part, (let others as they list)
Will leave the Court, and leave him to his will:
Least with a ruthful eye I should behold,
His over throw which sore I fear is nigh.

Doro. Ah father are you so estranged from love,
From due allegiance to your Prince and land,
To leave your King when most he needs your help,
The thriftie husbandmen, are never wont
That see their lands unfruitful, to forsake them:
But when the mould is barraine and unapt,
They toil, they plow, and make the fallow fat:
The pilot in the dangerous seas is known,
In calmer waves the silly sailor strives,
Are you not members Lords of Commonweal,
And can your head, your dear anointed King,
Default ye Lords, except your selves do fail?
Oh stay your steps, return and counsel him.

Doug. Men seek not moss upon a rolling stone,
Or water from the sieve, or fire from ice:
Or comfort from a rechlesse monarkes hands.
Madame he sets us light that served in Court,
In place of credit in his fathers days,
If we but enter presence of his grace,
Our payment is a frown, a scoff, a frumpe,
Whilst flattering Gnato prancks it by his side,
Soothing the careless King in his misdeeds,
And if your grace confider your estate,
His life should urge you too if all be true.

Doug. Why Douglas why?

Doug. As if you have not heard
His lawless love to Ida grown of late,
His careless estimate of your estate.

Doro. Ah Douglas thou misconstrest his intent,
He does but tempt his wife, he tryees my love:
This injury pertaines to me, not to you.
The King is young, and if he step awrie,
He may amend, and I will love him still.
Should we disdain our vines becauso they sprout
Before their time? or young men if they strain
Beyond their reach? no vines that bloome and spread
Do promise fruits, and young men that are wild,
In age grow wise, my friends and Scottish Peers,
If that an English Princess may prevail,
Stay, stay with him, lo how my zealous prayer
Is plead with tears, fie Peers will you hence?

S. And. Madam it is virtue in your grace to plead,
But we that see his vain untoward course,
Cannot but fly the fire before it burn,
And shun the Court before we see his fall.

Doro. Will you not stay? they Lordings fare you well.
Tho you forsake your King, the heavens I hope
Will favor him through mine incessant prayer.

Dwar. Content you Madam, thus old Ovid sings.
It Is foolish to bewail recurelesse things.

Dorothea. Peace Dwarffe, these words my patience move.

Dwar. All tho you charm my speech, charm not my love

Exeunt Nano Dorothea. Enter the King of Scots, Arius, the nobles spying him,
returns. K. of S. Douglas how now? why changest thou thy cheer?

Dougl. My private troubles are so great my liege,
As I must crave your license for a while:
For to intend mine own affairs at home.
Exit.
King. You may depart, but why is Morton sad?

Mor. The like occasion does import me too,
So I desire your grace to give me leave.

K. of S. Well sir you may betake you to your ease,
When such grim syrs are gone, I see no let
To work my will.

S. Atten. What like the Eagle then,
With often flight will thou thy feathers loose?
O King can thou endure to see thy Court,
Of finest wits and Judgments dispossessed,
Whilst cloking craft with soothing climbes so high,
As each bewailes ambition is so bad?
Thy father left thee with estate and Crown,
A learned council to direct thy Court,
These carelessie O King thou castest off,
To entertain a train of Sicophants:
Thou well mai'st see, although thou will not see,
That every eye and ear both sees and hears
The certain signs of thine inconstinence:
Thou art alyed unto the English King,
By marriage a happy friend indeed,
If used well, if not a mighty foe.
Thinks your grace he can endure and brook,
To have a partner in his daughters love?
Thinks your grace the grudge of privy wrongs
Will not procure him change his smiles to threats?
Oh be not blind to good, call home your Lords,
Displace these flattering Gnatoes, drive them hence:
Love and with kindness take your wedlock wife.
Or else (which God forbid) I fear a change,
Sin cannot thrive in courts without a plague.

K. of S. Go pack thou too, unless thou me^d thy talk:
On pain of death proud Bishop get you gone,
Unless you headless mean to hoppe away.

8. Atten. Thou god of heaven prevent my countries fall.

Exeunt. K. of S. These stays and lets to pleasure, plague my thoughts,
Forcing my grievous wounds a new to bleed:
But care that has transported me so far,
Fair Ida is dispersed in thought of thee:
Whose answer yeeldes me life, or breeds my death:
Yond comes the messenger of weal or woe.
Enter Gnate. Ateukin What news?

Ateu. The adament o King will not be filde,
But by it self, and beauty that exceeds,
By some exeeding favor must be wrought,
Ida is coy as yet, and does repine,
Obiecting marriage, honor, fear, and death,
She Is holy, wise, and too precise for me.

K. of S. Are these thy fruits of wits, thy sight in Art?
Thine eloquence? thy policy? thy drift?
To mock thy Prince, the^ catiue pack thee hence, Art?
And let me die devoured in my love.

Ateu. Good Lord how rage gainsayeth reasons power,
My dear, my gracious, and beloved Prince,
The essence of my suit, my God on earth,
Sit down and rest your self, appease your wrath,
Least with a frown ye wound me to the death:
Oh that I were included in my grave,
That either now to save my Princes life,
Must counsel cruelty, or loose my King.

K. of S. Why sirrah, is there means to move her mind?

Ateu. Oh should I not offend my royal liege.

K. of S. Tell all, spare naught, so I may gain my love.

Ateu. Alas my soul why art thou torn in twain,
For fear thou talk a thing that should displease?

K. of S. Tur, speak what so thou will I pardon thee.

Ateu. How kind a word, how courteous is his grace:
Who would not die to succor such a king?
My liege, this lovely maid of modest mind,
Could well incline to love, but that she fears,
Fair Dorotheas power, your grace does know,
Your wedlock is a mighty let to love:
Were Ida sure to be your wedded wife,
That then the twig would bow, you might command.
Ladies love, presents pomp and high estate.

K. of S. Ah Ateukin, how should we display this let?

Ateu. Tut mighty Prince, oh that I might be whist

K. of S. Why dalliest thou?

Ateu. I will not move my Prince,
I will prefer his safety before my life:
Hear me o king, it is Dorotheas death,
Must do you good.

K. of S. What, murder of my Queen?
Yet to enjoy my love, what is my Queen?
Oh but my vow and promise to my Queen:
I but my hope to gain a fairer Queen,
With how contrarious thoughts am I with drawn?
Why linger I twixt hope and doubtful fear:
If Dorothe die, will Ida love?

Ateu. She will my Lord.

K. of S. Then let her die.
Devise, advise the means,
Al likes me well that lends me hope in love.

Ateu. What will your grace consent, then let me work:
There Is here in Court a Frenchman Jacques calde,
A fit performer of our enterprise,
Whom I by gifts and promise will corrupt,
To slaye the Queen, so that your grace will seal
A warrant for the man to save his life.

K. of S. Naught shall he want, write thou and I will sign
And gentle Gna^o, if my Ida yield,
Thou shall have what thou will, I Will give the straight,
A Barrony, an Earldom for reward.

Ateu. Frolic young king, the Less shall be your own,
I Will make her blyth and wanton by my wit.

Exeunt. Enter Bohan with Obiron. 3. Act.
Boh. So Oberon, now it begins to work in kind,
The ancient Lords by leaving him alive,
Disliking of his humors and respight,
Lets him run headlong till his flatterers,
Sweeting his thoughts of lucklesse lust,
With vile perswations and alluring words,
Makes him make way by murder to his will,
Judge fai^e king, have heard a greater ill?

Ober. Nor send more virtue in a country maid*
I tell the Bohan it does make me merry,
To think the deeds the king means to perform.

Boha. To change that humor stand and see the rest,
I trow my son Slipper will shows a jest.

Enter Slipper with a companion, bog, or wench, dancing a hornpipe, and dance
out again. Boha. Now after this beguiling of our thoughts,
And changing them from sad to better glee,
Lets to our s^ll, and sit and see thee rest,
For I believe this Iig will prcoue no jest.

Exeunt. Chorus Actus 3. Schena Prima.
Enter Slipper one way, and S. Bartram another way. Bar. Ho fellow, stay and
let me speak with thee.

Sli. Fellow, friend thou do disbuse me, I am a Gentleman.

Bar. A Gentleman how so?

Slp. Why I rub horses sir.

Bar. And what of that?

Sip. Oh simple witted, mark my reason, they that do good service in the
Commonweal are Gentlemen, but such as rub horses do good service in the
Commonweal, Ergo tarbox Master Courtier, a Horse-keeper is a Gentleman.


Bar. Here is overmuch wit in good earnest:
But sirrah where is thy Master?

Slip. Neither above ground nor under ground,
Drawing out red into white,
Swallowing that down without chawing,
That was never made without treading.

Bar. Why where is he then?

Slip. Why in his seller, drinking a cup of neat and brisk claret, in a boule
of silver: Oh sir the wine runs trillill down his throat, which cost the
poor vintnerd many a stamp before it was made: but I must hence sir, I have
haste.


Bar. Why whither now I prithee?

Slip. Faith sir, to Sir Siluester a Knight hard by, upon my Masters arrand,
whom I must certify this, that the lease of Est Spring shall be confirmed,
and therefore must I bid him provide trash, for my Master is no friend without
money.


Bar. This is the thing for which I sued so long,
This is the lease which I by Guatoes means,
Sought to possess by pattent from the King:
But he injurious man, who lives by crafts,
And selles kings favors for who will give most,
Has taken bribes of me, yet covertly
Will sell away the thing pertaines to me:
But I have found a present help I hope,
For to prevent his purpose and deceit:
Stay gentle friend.

Slip. A good word, thou haste won me,
This word is like a warm candle to a cold stomach.

Bar. Sir will thou for money and reward,
Convey me certain letters out of hand,
From out thy masters pocket.

Slip. Will I sir, why, were it to rob my father, hang my mother, or any such
like trifles, I am at your commandment sir, what will you give me sir?


S. Bar. A hundredth pounds.

Slip. I am your man, give me earnest, I am dead at a pocket sir, why I am a
lifter master, by my occupation.


S. Bar. A lifter, what is that?

Slip. Why sir, I can lift a pot as well as any man, and pick a purse as soon
as any thief in my country.


S. Bar. Why fellow hold, here is earnest,
Ten pound to assure thee, go dispatch,
And bring it me to yonder Tavern thou see,
And assure thy self thou shall both have
Thy skin full of wine, and the rest of thy money.

Slip. I will sir. Now room for a Gentleman, my masters, who gives me money
for a fair new Angel, a trim new Angel?


Exeunt. Enter Andrew and Purueyer. Pur. Sirrah, I must needs have your
masters horses,
The king cannot be unserved.

And. Sirrah you must needs go without them,
Because my Master must be served.

Pur. Why I am the kings Purueyer,
And I tell thee I will have them.

And. I am Ateukins servant, Signior Andrew,
And I say thou shall not have them.

Pur. Heeres my ticket, deny it if thou dare.

And. There is the stable, fetch them out if thou dare.

Pur. Sirrah, sirrah, tame your tongue, least I make you.

And. Sirrah, sirrah, hold your hand, least I bum you.

Pur. I tell thee, thy Masters geldings are good,
And therefore fit for the king.

An. I tell thee, my Masters horses have gald backs,
And therefore cannot fit the King.
Purueyr, Purueyer, puruey thee of more wit, dare thou presume to wrong my
Lord Ateukins, being the chiefest man in Court.


Pur. The more unhappy Commonweal,
Where flatterers are chief in Court.

And. What say est thou?

Pur. I say thon art too presumptuous,
And the officers shall school thee.

And. A fig for them and thee Purueyer,
They seek a knot in a ring, that would wrong
My master or his servants in this Court.

Enter Jacques. Pur. The world is at a wise pass,
When Nobility is a fraid of a flatterer.

Iaq. Sirrah, what be you that parley, contra Monsieur my Lord Ateukin, en
bonne foy, prate you against sir Altesse, me maka your test to leap from your
shoulders, per ma foy cy fere ie.


And. Oh signior Captain, you show your self a forward and friendly
Gentleman in my Masters behalf, I will cause him to thank you.


Iaq. Poul^ron speak me one parola against my bon Gentilhome, I shall estrampe
your guts, and thumpe your backa, that you no point manage this ten ours.


Pur. Sirrah come open me the stable,
And let me have the horses:
And fellow, for all your French bragges I will do my duty.

And. I Will make garters of thy guts,
Thou villain if thou enter this office.

Iaq. Mort lieu, take me that cappa
Pour nostre labeur, be gonne villein in the mort.

Pur. What will you resist me then?
Well the Council fellow, Shall know of your insolency.
Exit.
Andr. Tell them what thou will, and eat that I can best spare from my back
parts, and get you gone with a vengeance.


Enter Gnato. Ateu. Andrew.


Andr. Sir.


Ateu. Where be my writings I put in my pocket last night.

Andr. Which sir, your annoations upon Matchauell?

Ateu. No sir, the letters pattents for east spring.

An. Why sir you talk wonders to me, if you ask that question.

Ateu. Yea sir, and will work wonders too, which you unless you find them out,
villain search me them out and bring the^ me, or thou art but dead.


Andr. A terrible word in the latter end of a sessions. Master were you in your
right wits yesternight?


Ateu. Do thou doubt it?


Andr. I and why not sir, for the greatest Clerks are not the wisest, and a
fool may dance in a hood, as well as a wise man in a bare frock: besides such
as give themselves to Plulantia, as you do master, are so choleric of
complexion, that that which they burn in fire over night, they seek for with
fury the next morning. Ah I take care of your worship, this commonweal
should have a great loss of so good a member as you are.


Ateu. Thou flatterest me.

Andr. Is it flattery in me sir to speak you fair?
What is it then in you to dally with the King?

Ateu. Are you prating knave,
I will teach you better nurture?
Is this the care you have of my wardrop?
Of my accounts, and matters of trust?

Andr. Why alas sir, in times past your garments have been so well
inhabited, as your Tenants would give no place to a Moathe to mangle them, but
since you are grown greater and your Garments more fine and gaye, if your
garments are not fit for hospitallitie, blame your pride, and commend my
cleanliness: as for your writings, I am not for them, nor they for me.


Ateu. Villain go, fly, find them out:
If thou loosest them, thou loosest my credit.

And. Alas sir? can I loose that you never had.

Ateu. Say you so, then hold feel you that you never felt.

Ia. Oh Monsieur, aies patient, pardon your pouure vallet,
Me be at your commandment.

Ateu. Signior Jacques well met, you shall command me, vallet,
Sir go cause my writings be proclaimed in the Market place,
Promise a great reward to them that finds them,
Look where I supt and every where.

And. I will sir, now are two knaves well met, and three well parted, if you
conceive mine enigma, Gentlemen what shall I be then, faith a plain harp
shilling.


Exeunt. Ateu. Sieur Jacques, this our happy meeting hides,
Your friends and me, of care and grievous to isle,
For I that look into deserts of men,
And see among the soldiers in this court,
A noble forward mind, and judge thereof,
Cannot but seek the means to raise them up:
Who merit credit in the Commonweal.
To this intent friend Iaque I have found
A means to make you great, and well esteemd'
Both with the king, and with the best in Court:
For I epsy in you a valiant mind,
Which makes me love, admire, and honor you:
To this intent (if so your trust and faith,
Your secrecy be equal with your force)
I will impart a service to thy self,
Which if thou do effect, the King, my self,
And what or he, and I with him can work,
Shall be imployd in what thou will desire.

Iaq. Me sweara by my ten bones, my singniar, to be loyal to your Lordships
intents, affairs, ye my monsignieur, qui non fera ic pour. Yea pleasure?

By my sworda me be no babie Lords.

Ateu. Then hoping one thy truth, I prithe see,
How kind Ateukin is to forward me,
Hold take this earnest penny of my love.
And mark my words, the King by me requires,
No slender service Jacques at thy hands.
Thou must by privy practice make a way,
The Queen fair Dorethea as she sleeps:
Or how thou will, so she be done to death:
Thou shall not want promotion hear in Court.

Iaq. Stabba the woman* per ma foy, monsignieur, me thrusta my weapon into her
belle, so me may be guard per le roy.

Me de your service.
But me no be hanged pur my labor.

Ateu. Thou shall have warrant Jacques from the King,
None shall outface, gainsay and wrong my friend.
Do not I love thee Jacques? fear not then,
I tell thee who so touches thee in ought,
Shall iniure me, I love, I tender thee:
Thou art a subject fit to serve his grace,
Jacques, I had a written warrant once,
But that by great misfortune late is lost,
Come wend we to S. Andrews, where his grace
Is now in progress, where he shall assure
Thy safety, and confirm thee to the act.

Jacques. We will attend your nobleness.

Exeunt. Enter sir Bartram, Dorothea, the Queen, Nano, Lord Ross. Ladies
attendants. Doro. Thy credit Bartram in the Scottish Court,,
Thy reverend years, the stricknesse of thy vows,
All these are means sufficient to persuade,
But love the faithful lincke of loyal hearts,
That has possession of my constant mind,
Exiles all dread, subdueth vain supect,
Me thinks no craft should harbor in that breast,
Where Majesty and virtue is ^^staled:
Me think my beauty should not cause my death.

Bar. How gladly sovereign Princess would I err,
And bind my shame to save your royal life:
It Is Princely in your self to think the best,
To hope his grace is guiltless of this crime,
But if in due prevent ionyou default,
How blind are you that were forwarnd before.

Doro. Suspicion without cause deserves blame.

Bar. Who sees, and shun not harms, deserve the same:
Behold the tenor of this traitorous plot.

Doro. What should I read? Perhaps he wrote it not.

Bar. Here is his warrant under seal and sign,
To Jacques borne in France to murder you.

Doro. Ah careless King, would God this were not thine
What tho I read? Ah should I think it true?

Rosse. The hand and seal confirms the deed is his.

Doro. What know I tho, if now he thinks this?

Nauo. Madame Lucretius says, that to repent,
Is shildish wisdom to prevent.

Doro. What tho?

Nano. Then cease your tears, that have dismayed you,
And cross the foe before he have betrayed you.

Bar. What needs this long suggestions in this cause?
When every circumstance confirms truth:
First let the hidden mercy from above,
Confirm your grace, since by a wondrous means,
The practice of your dangers came to light:
Next let the tokens of appooued truth,
Govern and stay your thoughts, too much seduc't,
And mark the sooth, and listen the intent,
Your highness knows, and these my noble Lords,
Can witness this, that whilst your husbands sirre
In happy peace possessed the Scottish Crown,
I was his sworn attendant here in Court,
In dangerous fight I never failed my Lord.
And since his death, and this your husbands reign,
No labor, duty, have I left undone,
To testify my zeal unto the Crown:
But now my limbs are weak, mine eyes are dim,
Mine age unwieldy and unmeet for toil:
I came to court in hope for service past,
To gain some lease to keep me being old,
There found I all was vpsie turuy turned,
My friends displac'ft, the Nobles loath to crave,
Then sought I to the minion of the King,
Auteukin, who allured by a bribe,
Assured me of the lease for which I sought:
But see the craft, when he had got the grant,
He wrought to sell it to Sir Siluester,
In hope of greater earnings from his hands:
In brief, I learnt his craft, and wrought the means,
By one his needy servants for reward,
To steal from out his pocket all the briefes,
Which he performed, and with reward resignd
Them when I read now mark the power of God)
I found this warrant sealed among the rest,
To kill your grace, whom God long keep alive.
Thus in effect, by wonder are you saved,
Trifle not then, bnt seek a speakie flight,
God will conduct your steps, and shield the right.

Dor. What should I do, ah poor unhappy Queen?
Borne to endure what fortune can contain,
Ah less the deed is too apparent now:
But oh mine eyes were you as bent to hide,
As my poor heart is forward to forgive.
Ah cruel king, my love would thee acquit,
Oh what auailes to be allied and matched
With high estates that marry but in show?
Were I baser borne, my mean estate
Could warrant me from this impendent harm,
But to be great and happy these are twain.
Ah Rosse what shall I do, how shall I work?

Rosse. With speedy letters to your father send,
Who will revenge you, and defend your right.

Dor. As if they kill not me, who with him fight?
As if his breast be touched, I am not wounded,
As if he waild, my joys were not confounded:
We are one heart, tho rent by hate in twain:
One soul, one essence does our weal contain:
What then can conquer him that kills not me?

Rosse. If this advice displease, then Madame flee.

Dor. Where may I wend or travel without fear?

Na. Where not, in changing this attire you wear?

Dor. What shall I clad me like a Country maid?

Na. The policy is base I am affraide.

Dor. Why Nano?

Na. Ask you why? what may a Queen
March forth in homely weed and be not seen?
The Rose although in thornie shrubs she spread:
Is still the Rose, her beauties wax not dead.
And noble minds although the coat be bare,
Are by their semblance known, how great they are

Bar. The Dwarf says true.

Dor. What garments likste thou than?

Na. Such as may make you seem a proper man.

Dor. He makes me blush and smile, tho I am sad.

Na. The meanest coat for safety is not bad.

Dor. What shall I ^et in breeches like a squire?
Alas poor dwarf, thy Mistresle is unmeet.

Na. Tut, go me thus, your cloak before your face,
Your sword vpreard with queint and comely grace,
If any come and question what you be,
Say you a man, and call for witness me.

Dor. What should I wear a sword, to what intent:

Na. Madame for show, it is an ornament,
If any wrong you, draw a shining blade
Withdrawes a coward thief that would invade.

Dor. But if I strike, and he should strike again,
What should I do? I fear I should be slain.

Nano. No, take it single on your dagger so,
I Will teach you Madame how to ward a blow.

Do. How little shapes much substance may include?
Sir Bartram, Rosse, ye Ladies and my friends,
Since presence yields me death, and absence life,
Hence will I fly disguised like a squire,
As one that seeks to live in Irish wars,
You gentle Rosse, shall furnish my depart.

Ross. Yea Prince, and die with you with all my heart,
Vouchsafe me then in all extremest states,
To weight on you and serve you with my best.

Dor. To me pertaines the woe, live then in rest:
Friends fare you well, keep secret my depart,
Nano alone shall my attendant be.

Nan. Then Madame are you mand, I warrant ye,
Give me a sword, and if there grow debate,
I Will come behind, and break your enemies pate.

Ross. How sore we grieve to part so soon away.

Dor. Grieve not for those that perish if they stay.

Nano. The time in words misspent, is little worth,
Madam walk on, and let them bring us forth.

Exeunt. Chorus.
Ent. Boha. So these sad motions makes the fair sleep,
And sleep he shall in quiet and content,
For it would make a ma^bell melt and weep
To see these treasons against the innocent:
But since she scapes by flight to save her life,
The king may chance repent she was his wife:
The rest is ruthful, yet to beguilde the time,
It Is interlast with merriment and rhyme.

Exeunt. Actus Quartus. Schena Prima.
After a noise of hernes and show^ings, enter certain Huntsmen, if you please,
singing one way: another way Ateukin and Jacques, Gnato. Ateu. Say Gentlemen,
where may we find the king?

Hunts. Even here at hand on hunting.
And at this hour he taken has a stand,
To kill a Dear.

Ateu. A pleasant work in hand,
Follow your sport, and we will seek his grace.

Hunts. When such him seek, it is a woeful case.

Exeunt Huntsman one way, Ateu. and Iaq. another, Enter Eustace, Ida, and the
Countess. Count. Lord Eustace, as your youth and virtuous life,
Deserves a fair, more fair and richer wife,
So since I am a mother, and do wit
What wedlock is, and that which longs to it,
Before I mean my daughter to bestow,
Twere meet that she and I your state did know.

Eust. Madame if I consider Idas worth,
I know my portions merit none so fair,
And yet I hold in farm and yearly rent,
A thousand pound, which may her state content.

Count. But what estate my Lord shall she possess?

Eust. All that is mine, grave Countess and no less.
But Ida will you love?

Ida. I cannot hate.

Eust. But will you wedde?

Ida. It Is Greek to me my Lord,
I Will wish you well, and thereon take my word.

Eust. Shall I some sign of favor then receive?

Ida. I, if her Ladyship will give me leave.

Count. Do what thou will.

Ida. Then noble English Peer,
Accept this ring, wherein my heart is set,
A constant heart, with burning flames befret:
But under written this: O morte dura:
Heereon when so you look with eyes Pura,
The maid you fancy most will favor you.

Eust. I Will try this heart, in hope to find it true.

Enter certain Huntsmen and Ladies. Hunts. Widdowe Countess well ymet,
Ever may thy joys be many,
Gentle Ida fair beset,
Fair and wise, not fairer any:
Frolike Huntsmen of the game,
Wills you well, and gives you greeting.

Ida. Thanks good Woodman for the same,
And our sport and merry meeting.

Hunts. Unto thee we do present,
Silver heart with arrow wounded.

Eust. This does shadow my lament,
Both fear and love confounded.

Ladies. To the mother of the maid,
Fair as the lillies, red as roses,
Even so many goods are said,
As her self in heart supposes.

Count. What are you friends, that thus does wish us well?

Hunts. Your neighbors nigh, that have on hunting been,
Who understanding of your walking forth,
Prepare this train to entertain you with,
This Lady Douglas, this Sir Egmond is.

Count. Welcome ye Ladies, and thousand thanks for this,
Come enter you a homely widows house,
And if mine entertainment please you let us feast.

Hunts. A lovely lady never wants a guest.

Exeunt Manet, Eustace, Ida. Eust. Stay gentle Ida, tell me what you deem,
What does this have, this tender heart beseem?

Ida. Why not my Lord, since nature teaches art,
To senseless beasts to cure their grievous smart.
Dictanum serves to close the wound again.

Eust. What help for those that love?

Ida. Why love again.

Eust. Were I the Heart,

Ida. Then I the herb would be.
You shall not die for help, come follow me.

Exeunt. Enter Andrew and Jacques. Iaq. Mon Deiu, what malheure be this, me come
a the chamber, Signior Andrew, Mon Deiu, take my poinyard en mon maine, to give
the Estocade to the Damoisella, per ma foy, there was no person, elle cest en
all.


And. The worse luck Jacques, but because I am thy friend I will advise the
somewhat toward the attainement of the gallows.


Iaq. Gallows, what be that?


An. Marry sir, a place of great promotion, where thou shall by one turn
above ground, rid the world of a knave, and make a goodly ensample for all
bloody villains of thy profession.


Que ditte vous, Monsieur Andrew?


And. I say Jacques, thou must keep this path, and high thee, for the Q. as I am
certified, is departed with her dwarf, apparelled like a squire, overtake her
Frenchman, stab her, I Will promise thee this dubblet shall be happy.


Iaq. Purquoy?


And. It shall serve a iolle Gentleman,
Sir Dominus Monsignior Hangman.

Iaq. Cest tout, un me will rama pour le mon^y.


And. Go, and the rot consume thee? Oh what a trim world is this? My master
lius by cousoning the king, I by fllattering him: Slipper my fellow by
stealing: and I by lying: is not this a wily accord, Gentlemen. This last
night our jolly horsekeeper being well stepped in licor, confessed to me the
stealing of my Masters writings, and his great reward: now dare I not bewraye
him, least he discover my knauerie, but thus have I wrought: I understand he
will pass this way, to provide him necessaries, but if I and my fellows fail
not, we will teach him such a lesson, as shall cost him a chief place on
pennilesse bench for his labor: but yond he comes.


Enter Slipper with a Tailor, a Shoemaker, and a Culter. Slip. Tailor.


Tail. Sir.


Slip. Let my dubblet be white Northren, five groates the yard, I tell thee I
will be brave.


Tail. It shall sir.


Slip. Now sir, cut it me like the battlements of a Custerd, full of round
holes: edge me the sleeves with Couentry-blew, and let the lynings be of
tenpenny locorum.


Tail. Very good sir.


Slip. Make it the amorous cut, a flappe before.


Tail. And why so? that fashion is stale.


Slip. Oh friend, thou art a simple fellow, I tell thee, a flap is a great
friend to a storrie, it stands him in stead of clean napery, and if a man's
shert be torn, it is a present penthouse to defend him from a clean huswifes
scoff.


Tay. You say sooth sir.


Slip. Hold take thy money, there is seven shillings for the dubblet, and eight
for the breeches, seven and eight, bi^ladi^ thirty six is a fair deal of
money.


Tail. Far well sir.


Slip. Nay but stay Tailor.


Tail. Why sir?


Slipper. Forget not this special mate,
Let my back parts be well linde,
For there come many winter storms from a windy belly,
I tell thee Shoo-maker.

Shoe-ma. Gentleman what shoo will it please you to have?


Slip. A fine neat calves leather my friend.


Shoo. Oh sir, that is too thin, it will not last you.


Slip. I tell thee, it is my near kinsman, for I am Slipper, which has his
best grace in summer to be suited in lakus skins, Guidwife Clarke was my
Grandmother, and Goodman Neatherleather mine Uncle, but my mother good woman.
Alas, she was a Spaniard, and being well tande and dressed by a good fellow, an
Englishman, is grown to some wealth: as when I have but my upper parts, clad
in her husbands costly Spannish leather, I may be bold to kiss the fairest
Ladies foot in this country.


Shoo. You are of high birth sir,
But have you all your mothers marks on you?

Slip. Why knave?


Shoemaker. Because if thou come of the blood of the Slippers, you should have
a Shoomakers All thrust through your care.

Exit.
Slip. Take your earnest friend and be packing,
And meddle not with my progenators Cutler.

Cutler. Hear sir.


Slip. I must have a Rapier and Dagger.


Cutler. A Rapier and Dagger you mean sir?


Slipper. Thou say true, but it must have a very fair edge,


Cutler. Why so sir?


Slip. Because it may cut by himself, for truly my freende, I am a man of
peace, and wear weapons but for facion.


Cutler. Well sir, give me earnest I will fit you.


Slip. Hold take it, I betrust thee friend, let me be welarmed.


Cutler. You shall.

Exit Cutler.
Slip. Now what remains? there is twenty Crowns for house, three crowns for
houshol stuff, six pence to buie a Constables staff: nay I will be the chief
of my parish, there wants nothing but a wench, a cat, a dog, a wife and a
servant, to make an hole family, shall I marry with Alice, good man
Grimshaues daughter, she is fair, but indeed her tongue is like Clocks on
Shrouetuesday, always out of temper? shall I wed Sisley of the Whighte^? Oh^,
^ she is like a frog in a parcely bed, as scittish as an ele, if I seek to
ha^per her, she will ho^ne me: but a wench must be had master Slip. Yea and
shall be deer friend.


And. I now will drive him from his contemplations. Oh my mates come forward,
the lamb is vnpent, the fox shall prevail.


Enter three Antiques, who dance round, and take Slipper with them. Slip. I
will my friend, and I thank you heartily, pray keep your courtesy, I am
yours in the way of an hornepipe, they are strangers, I see they understand not
my language, we we.


VVhilest they are dancing, Andrew takes away his money, and the other
Antiques depart. Slip. Nay but my friends, one hornpipe, further a refluence
back, and two doubles forward: what not one cross point against Sundays.
What ho sirrah, you gone, you with the nose like an Eagle, and you be a right
greek, one turn more, thieves thieves, I am robbed thieves. Is this the
knauerie of Fiddlers? Well, I will then bind the hole credit of their
occupatio^ on a bagpiper, and he for my money, but I will after, and teach them
to caper in a halter, that have cousoned me of my money.


Exeunt. Enter Nano* Dorothea, in man's apparel. Doro. Ah Nano, I am weary of
these weeds,
Weary to weeld this weapon that I bare:
Weary of love, from whom my woe proceeds.
Weary of toil, since I have lost my dear,
O weary life, where wanted no distress,
But every thought is paid with heaviness.

Na. Too much of weary madame, if you please,
Sit down, let weary dye, and take your ease.

Dorot. How look I Nano like a man or no?

Nano. If not a man, yet like a manly shrowe.

Doro. If any come and meet us on the way,
What should we do if they enforce us stay.

Na. Set cap a huffe, and challenge him the field,
Suppose the worst, the weak may fight to yield.

Dorot. The battle Nano in this troubled mind,
Is far more fierce then ever we may find.
The bodies wounds by medicines may be eased,
But griefs of minds, by salues are not appeased.

Na. Say Madame, will you hear your Nano sing?

Dor. Of woe good boy, but of no other thing:

Na. What if I sing of fancy will it please?

Dor. To such as hope success, such noats breed ease.

Na. What if I sing like Damon to my sheep?

Dor. Like Phillis I will sit me down to weep.

Na. Nay since my songs afford such pleasure small,
I Will sit me down, and sing you none at all.

Doro. Oh be not angry Nano.

Nano. Nay you loath,
To think on that, which does content us both.

Door. And how?

Nano. You scorn desport when you are weary,
And loath my mirth, who live to make you merry.

Doro. Danger and fear withdraw me from delight.

Na. It Is virtue to contemn falls Fortunes spite.

Do. What should I do to please thee friendly squire?

Na. A smile a day, is all I will require:
And if you pay me well the smiles you owe me,
I Will kill this cursed care, or else beshrowe me.

Doug. We are descried, oh Mano we are dead.

Enter Jacques his sword drawn. Nano. Tut yet you walk, you are not dead indeed,
Draw me your sword, if he your way withstand.

Do. And I will seek for rescue out of hand,
Run Nano run, prevent thy Princes death.

Na. Fear not, i will run all danger out of breath.

Iaq. Ah you calletta, you strumpet, ta Matressa Doretie este, vous surprius
come say your pater noster, car vous est mort par ma foy


Do. Callet, me strumpet, Catiue as thou art
But even a Princess borne, who scorn thy threats.
Shall never French man say, an English maid,
Of threats of foreign force will be afraid.

Iaq. You no dire vostre prieges, vrbleme merchants famme guarda your bresta,
there me make you die on my morglay,


Doro. God sheeld me hapless princes and a wife.
They fight, and she is sore wounded.
And save my soul, although I loose my life.
Ah I am slain, some piteous power repay,
This murderers cursed deed, that does me slay.

Iaq. Elle est tout mort, me will run pur a wager, for fear me be surpryes
and pendu for my labor. Be in Ie meu alera au roy auy cits me affairs, Ie
serra un chiualier, for this days travail.

Exit.
Enter Nano, S. Cutbert Anderson, his sword drawn. S. Cutb. Where is this
poor distressed gentleman?

Nano. Here laid on ground, and wounded to the death.
Ah gentle heart, how are these beauteous looks,
Dimd by the tyrant cruelties of death:
Oh weary soul, break thou from forth my breast,
And join thee with the soul I honored most.

S. Cut. Leave mourning friend, the man is yet alive,
Some help me to convey him to my house:
There will I see him carefully recured,
And send privy search to catch the murderer.

Nano. The God of heaven reward the courteous knight.
Exeunt. And they bear out Dorothea.

Enter the King of Scots, laques, Ateukin, Andrew, Jacques running with his
sword one way, the King with his train an other way. K. of S. Stay Jacques,
fear not, sheath thy murdering blade:
Lo here thy King and friends are come abroad,
To save thee from the terrors of pursuit:
What is she dead?

Iaq. We Monsieur, elle is bless per lake test, ouesles espanles, I warrant
she no trouble you.


Ateu. Oh then my liege, how happy art thou grown,
How favored of the heavens, and blessed by love:
Me thinks I see fair Ida in thine arms,
Craving remission for her late attempt,
Me think I see her blushing steal a kiss:
Uniting both your souls by such a sweet,
And you my King suck Nectar from her lips.
Why then delays your grace to gain the rest
You long desired? why loose we forward time?
Write, make me spokesman now, vow marriage,
If she deny your favor let me die.

Andr. Mighty and magnificent potentate, give credence to mine honorable good
Lord, for I heard the Midwife swear at his nativity, that the Faieries gave
him the property of the Thracian stone, for who touches it, is exempted from
grief, and he that hears my Masters counsel, is already possessed of
happiness: nay which is more myraculous, as the Noble man in his infancy lay
in his Cradle, a swarm of Bees laid honey on his lips, in token of his
eloquence. For melle dulcier fluit oration.


Ateu. Your grace must bear with imperfections:
This is exceeding love that makes him speak.

K. of S. Ateukin I am ravished in conceit,
And yet deprest again with earnest thoughts,
Me thinks this murder sounds in mine ear,
A threatening noise of dire and sharp revenge*
I am incenst with grief, yet feign would joy,
What may I do to end me of these doubts?

Ateu. Why Prince it is no murder in a King*
To end an others life to save his own,
For you are not as common people be.
Who die and perish with a few man's tears,
But if you fail, the state does whole default
The Realm is rent in twain, in such alosse,
And Aristotle holds this for true,
Of evils needs we must choose the least,
Then better were it, that a woman died,
Then all the help of Scotland should be blent,
It Is policy my liege, in every state,
To cut off members that disturb the head.
And by corruption generation grows.
And contraries maintain the world and state.

K. of S. Enough I am confirmed, Ateukin come,
Rid me of love, and rid me of my grief,
Drive thou the tyrant from this tainted breast*
Then may I triumph in the height of joy,
Go to mine Ida, tell her that I vow,
To raise her head and make her honors great.
Go to mine Ida, tell her that her hairs,
Salbe embollished with orient pearls,
And Crowns of Saphyrs compassing her brows,
Shall wear with those sweet beauties of her eyes.
Go to mine Ida, tell her that my soul
Shall keep her semblance closed in my breast,
And I in touching of her milke-white mould,
Will think me deified in such a grace:
I like no stay, go write and I will sign.
Reward me Jacques, give him store of Crown.
And sirrah Andrew, scout thou here in Court:
And bring me tidings if thou can perceive
The least intent of muttering in my train,
For either those that wrong thy Lord or thee,
Shall suffer death.
Exit the King.
Ateu. How much o mighty king,
Is thy Ateukin bound to honor thee:
Bow thee Andrew, bend thine sturdie knees,
See thou not here thine only God on earth?

Iaq. Mes on est mon argent Signior.

Ateu. Come follow me, his grave I see is made,
That thus on sudden he has left us here.
Come Jacques, we will have our packet soon dispatch*
And you shall be my mate upon the way.

Iaq. Come vous plera Monsieur.

Exeunt. Andr. Was never such a world I think before,
When sinners seem to dance within a net,
The flatterer and the murderer they grow big,
By hook of crook promotion now is sought,
In such a world where men are so missed,
What should I do? but as the Proverb says,
Run with the Hare, and hunt with the Hound.
To have two means, beseemes a witty man:
Now here in (...) I may aspire and clime,
By subtlety for my masters death.
And if that fail, well fare an other drift:
I will in secret certain letters send
Unto the English King, and let him know
The order of his daughters over throw.
That if my master crack his credit here,
As I am sure long flattery cannot hold,
I may have means within the English Court
To escape the scourge that waits on bad advice.
Exit.
Chorus.
Enter Bohan and Obiron. Ober. Believe me bonny Scot, these strange events,
Are passing pleasing, may they end as well.

Boha. Else say that Bohan has a barren skull,
If better motions yet then any past,
Do not more glee to make the fairie greet,
But my small son made prittie hansome shift,
To save the Queen his Mistress by his speed.

Obiro. Yea you Lady for his sport he made,
Shall see when least he hopes, I Will stand his friend,
Or else he capers in a halters end.

Boha. What hang my son? I trow not Obiran:
I Will rather die, then see him woe begone.

Enter arownd, or some dance at Pleasure. Ober. Bohan be pleased, for do they
what they will,
Here is my hand, I Will save thy son from ill.
Exit.
Actus Quintus. Schena Prima.
Enter the Queen in a nightgowne, Lady Anderson, and Nano. La. And. My gentle
friend beware in taking air,
Your walks grow not offensive to your wounds.

Do. Madame I thank you of your courteous care,
My wounds are well nigh closed, tho sore they are.

L. And. Me thinks these closed wounds should breed more grief,
Since open wounds have cure, and find relief.

Dor. Madame, if undiscovered wounds you mean,
They are not curde, because they are not seen.

L. And. I mean the wounds which do the heart subdue.

Nano. Oh that is love, Madame speak I not true?

Lady Anderson ouerheares. La. And. Say it were true, what salve for such a
sore?

Nano. Be wise, and shut such neighbors out of door.

La. And. How if I cannot drive him from my breast?

Nano. Then chain him well, and let him do his best.

S. Cutb. In ripping up their wounds, I see their wit,
But if these wounds be cured I sorrow it.

Doro. Why are you so intentive to behold,
My pale and woeful looks, by care controld?

La. And. Because in them a ready way is found,
To cure my care, and heal my hidden wound.

Nano. Good Master shut your eyes, keep that conceit,
Surgeons give, Quoi^e, to get a good receipt.

Doro. Peace wanton son, this Lady did amend
My wounds: mine eyes her hidden grief shall end,
Look not too much, it is a weighty case.

Nano. Where as a man puts on a maidens face,
For many times if Ladies wear them not,
A nine months wound with little work is got.

S. Cutb. I Will break off their dispute, least love proceed,
From covert smiles, to perfect love indeed.

Nano. The cats abroad, stir not, the mice be still,

L. And. Tut, we can she such cats when so we will.

S. Cutb. How fares my guest, take cheer, naught shall default,
That either does concern your health or joy,
Use me, my house, and what is mine is yours.

Doro. Thanks gentle knight, and if all hopes be true,
I hope ere long to do as much for you.

S. Cutb. Your virtue does acquit me of that doubt:
But courteous sit, since troubles calls me hence,
I must to Edenbourg unto the king,
There to take charge, and weight him in his wars:
Mean while good Madame take this squire in charge,
And use him so as if it were my self.

L. And. Sir Cutbert doubt not of my diligence:
Mean while, till your return God send you health.

Doro: God bless his grace, and if his cause be just,
Prosper his wars: if not he will mend I trust:
Good sir what mooues the king to fall to arms?

S. Cutb. The king of England forrageth his land,
And has besieged Dambac with mighty force:
What other news are common in the Court,
Read you these letters Madame tell the squire,
The whole affairs of state, for I must hence.
Exit.
Doro. God prosper you, and bring you back from thence:
Madame what news?

La. And. They say the Queen is slain.

Doro. Tut, such reports more false then truth contain.

L. And. but these reports have made his Nobles leave him.

Doro. Ah careless men, and would they so deceive him?

La. And. The land is spoylde, the commons fear the cross,
All cry against the king, their cause of loss:
The English king subdues and conquers all.

Doro, Ah less, this war grows great, on causes small.

L. And. Our Court is desolate, our Prince alone,
Still dreading death.

Doro. Woes me, for him I moan,
Help, now help, a sudden qualme.
Assayles my heart.

Nano. Good Madame stand her friend,
Give us some licor to refresh her heart.

L. And. Daw thou her up, ande I will fetch thee forth
Potions of comfort to repress h^^ pain.
Exit.
Nano. Fie Princess, faint on every fond report,
How well nigh had you opened your estate:
Cover these sorrows with the veil of joy,
And hope the best, for why this war will cause,
A great repentance in your husbands mind.

Doro. Ah Nano, trees live not without their sap,
And Clitia cannot blush buton the sun,
The thirsty earth is broke with many a gap,
And lands are lean, where rivers do not run,
Where soul is reft from that it loves best,
How can it thrive or boast of quiet rest?
Thou know the Princes loss must be my death,
His grief, my grief: his mischief must be mine:
Oh if thou love me, Nano high to court,
Tell Rosse, tell Bartram that I am alive,
Conceal thou yet, the place of my aboade,
Will them even as they love their Queen,
As they are charie of my soul and joy,
To guard the King, to serve him as my Lord:
Haste thee good Nana, for my husbands care,
Consumes me and wounds me to the heart.

Nano. Madame I go, yet loath to leave you here.

Exeunt. Dor. Go thou with speed, even as thou holdst me dear,
Return in haste.

Enter Lady Anderson. L. An. Now sir, what cheer? come taste this broth I
bring.

Doro. My grief is past, I feel no further sting.

L. And. Where is your dwarf? Why has he left you sir?

Doro. For some affairs, he is not traueld far.

L. And. If so you please, come in and take your rest.

Doro. Fear keeps awake a discontented breast.

Exeunt. After a solemn service, enter from the widows house a service,
musical songs of marriages, or a mask, or what pretty triumph you list, to
them, Ateukin and Gnato. Ate. What means this triumph friend? why are these
feasts?

Serui. Fair Ida sir, was married yesterday,
Unto sir Eustace, and for that intent,
We feast and sport it thus to honor them:
And if you please, come in and take your part,
My Lady is no niggard of her cheer.
Exit.
Iaq. Monsigneur, why be you so sadda, fette bon chere fontre de ce monde.


Ateu. What? was I borne to be the scorn of kin?
To gather feathers like to a hopper crow,
And loose them in the height of all my pomp:
Accursed man now is my credit lost:
Where is my vows I made unto the king?
What shall become of me, if he shall hear,
That I have causde him kill a virtuous Queen?
And hope in vain for that which now is lost:
Where shall I hide my head? I know the heavens
Are just, and will revenge: I know my sins
Exceed compare: should I proceed in this?
This Eustace must a man be made away:
Oh were I dead, how happy should I be?

Iaq. Est ce donque a tell point vostre estat, faith then adeiu Scotland, adeiu
Signior Ateukin, me will homa to France, and no be hanged in a strange country.

Exit.
Ateu. Thou do me good to leave me thus alone,
That galling grief and I may yoke in one:
Oh what are subtle means to clime on high?
When every fall swarms with exceeding shame?
I promised Idaes love unto the Prince,
But she is lost, and I am false forsworn:
I practiced Dorotheas hapless death,
And by this practice have commenst a war.
Oh cursed race of men that traficque guile,
And in the end, themselves and kings beguile:
A shamde to look upon my Prince again:
A shamde of my suggestions and advise:
A shamde of life: a shamde that I have erde:
I Will hide my self, expecting for my shame.
Thus God does work with those, that purschase fame
By flattery, and make their Prince their gain.

Exeunt. Enter the King of England, Lord Percey, Samles, and others. Arius.
Thus far the English Peers have we displayde,
Our wauing Ensigns with a happy war,
Thus nearly has our furious rage reuengde,
My daughters death upon the traitorous Scot,
And now before Dambar our camp is pitched,
Which if it yield not to our compremise,
The place shall furrow where the palace stood,
And fury shall envy so high a power,
That mercy shall be bannisht from our swords.

Doug. What seeks the English King?

Arius. Scot open those gates, and let me enter in,
Submit thy self and thine unto my grace,
Or I will put each mothers son to death,
And lay this City level with the ground.

Doug. For what offense? for what default of ours?
Art thou incenst so sore against our state?
Can generous hearts in nature be so stern
To pray on those that never did offend?
What tho the Lion, (king of brutish race,
Through outrage sin, shall lambs be therefore slain?
Or is it lawful that the humble die,
Because the mighty do gainsay the right?
O English King, thou bear in thy breast,
The King of beasts, that harms not yielding ones,
The Ros^all cross is spread within thy field,
A sign of peace, not of revenging war:
Be gracious then unto this little town,
And tho we have withstood thee for a while,
To show allegiance to our liefest liege,
Yet since we know no hope of any help,
Take us to mercy, for we yield our selves.

Ari. What shall I enter then and be your Lord?

Doug. We will submit us to the English king.
They descend down, open the gates, and humble them.

Arius. Now life and death depends on my sword:
This hand now reard, my Douglas if I list,
Could part thy head and shoulders both in twain:
But since I see thee wise and old in years,
True to thy king, and faithful in his wars,
Live thou and thine, Dambar is too too small*
To give an entrance to the English king,
I Eaglelike disdain these little fowls,
And look on none but those that dare resist,
Enter your town as those that live by me,
For others that resist, kill, forage, spoil:
Mine English soldiers, as you love your king,
Revenge his daughters death, and do me right.

Exeunt, Enter the Lawyer, the Merchant, and the Divine. Lawyer. My friends,
what think you of this present state*
Were ever seen such changes in a time?
The manners and the fashions of this age,
Are like the Ermine skin so full of spots,
As soon may the Moore be washed white,
Then these corruptions bannisht from this Realm.

Merch. What sees mas Lawyer in this state amiss?

Law. A wresting power that makes a nose of wax,
Of grounded law, a damde and subtle drift,
In all estates to clime by others loss,
An eager thrift of wealth, forgetting truth,
Might I ascend unto the highest states,
And by descent discover every crime,
My friends I should lament, and you would grieve
To see the hapless ruins of this Realm.

Diu. O Lawyer, thou haste curious eyes to pry,
Into the secrets maimes of their estate,
But if thy veil of error were unmasked,
Thy self should see your sect, do maime her most:
Are you not those that should maintain the peace,
Yet only are the patrones of our strife?
If your profession have his ground and spring,
First from the laws of God, then countriees right,
Not any ways inuerting natures power,
Why thrive you by contentions? Why devise you
Clawses, and subtle reasons to except:
Our state was first before you grew so great,
A Lantern to the world for unity:
Now they that are befriended, and are rich,
Or press the poor, come Homer without quoine,
He is not heard: What shall we term this drift?
To say the poor man's cause is good and just,
And yet the rich man gains the best in law:
It is your guise, (the more the world laments)
To quoine Prouisoes to beguile your laws,
To make a gay pretext of due proceeding,
When you delay your common pleas for years:
Mark what these dealings lately here have wroght:
The crafty men have purchaste greatmens lands
They powle, they pinch, their tennants are undone:
If these complain by you they are undone,
You fleese them of their quoine, their children beg,
And many want, because you may be rich,
This scarre is mighty master Lawyer,
Now man has gotten head within this land,
Mark but the guise, the poor man that is wronged,
Is ready to rebel: he spoils, he pills,
We need no foes to forage that we have,
The law (say they) in peace consumed us,
And now in war we will consume the law:
Look to this mischief, Lawyers conscience knows
You live amiss, amend it, least you end.

Law. Good Lord, that their Divines should see so far
In others faults, without amending theirs?
Sir, sir, the general defaults in state,
(If you would read before you did correct)
Are by a hidden working from above,
By their successiue changes still remainde,
Were not the law by contraries maintainde,
How could the truth from falsehood be discernde?
Did we not taste the bitterness of war?
How could we know the sweet effects of peace?
Did we not feel the nipping winter frostes,
How should we know the sweetness of the spring?
Should all things still remain in one estate,
Should not in greatest arts some scarres be found,
Were all upright and changd, what world were this?
A Chaos, made of quiet, yet no world,
Because the parts there of did still accord,
This matter craves a variance not a speech,
But sir Divine to you, look on your maimes,
Divisions, sects, your summonies and bribes:
Your cloaking with the great, for fear to fall,
You shall perceive you are the cause of all.
Did each man know there were a storm at hand,
Who would not cloth him well, to shun the wet?
Did Prince and Peer, the Lawyer and the least,
Know what were sin, without a partial gloss,
We need no long discovery then of crimes,
For each would mend, aduis'de by holy men:
Thus but slightly shadow out your sins,
But if they were depainted out for life,
Alas we both had wounds enough to heal.

Merch. None of you both I see but are in fault,
Thus simple men as I do swallow flies,
This grave Divine can tell us what to do.
But we may say: Physician mend thy self,
This Lawyer has a pregnant wit to talk,
But all are words, I see no deeds of worth.

Law. Good Merchant lay your fingers on your mouth,
Be not a blab, for fear you bite your self,
What should I term your state, but even the way
To every ruin in this Commonweal,
Your bring us in the means of all excess,
You rate it* and retalde it as you please,
You swear, forswear, and all to compass wealth,
Your money is your God, your hoord your heaven,
You are the ground work of contention:
First heedlesse youth, by you is ouerreacht,
We are corrupted by your many crowns:
The Gentlemen whose titles you have bought,
Loose all their fathers toil within a day,
Whilst Hob your son, and Sib your nutbrowne child,
Are Gentle folks, and Gentles are beguilde:
This makes so many Noble maids to stray,
And take sinister courses in the state.

Enter a Scout. Scout. My friends begone and if you love your lives,
The King of England marches here at hand,
Enter the camp for fear you be surprisde.

Divine. Thanks gentle scout, God mend that is amiss,
And place true, zeal whereas corruption is.

Exeun. Enter Dorothea, Lady Anderson and Nano. Doro. What news in Court,
Nano let us know it?

Nano. If so you please my Lord, I straight will show it:
The English king has all the borders spoyld,
Has taken Morton prisoner, and has slain
Seven thousand Scottish Lords, not far from Tweards.

Doro. A woeful murder, and a bloody deed.

Nano. Thinking our liege has sought by many means
For to appease his enemy by prayers,
Naught will prevail unless he can restore,
Fair Dorothea long supposed dead:
To this intent he has proclaimed late,
That who so ever return the Queen to Court,
Shall have a thousand Marks for his reward.

L. And. He loves her then I see although inforst,
That would bestow such gifts for to regaine her:
Why sit you sad, good sir be not dismaide.

Na. I Will lay my life this man would be a maid.

Dor. Feign would I show my self, and change my tire.

And. Whereon divine you sir?


Na. Upon desire.

Madam mark but my skill, i will lay my life,
My master here, will prove a married wife.

Doro. Will thou bewray me Nano?


Nano. Madam no*

You are a man, and like a man you go.
But I that am in speculation seen,
Know you would change your state to be a Queen.

Dor. Thou art not dwarffe to learn thy mistress* mind.
Feign would I with thy self disclose my king,
But yet I blush.

Na. What blush you Madam than,
To be your self, who are a feigned man?
Let me alone.

La. And. Deceitful beauty have thou scornd me so?

Nano. Nay muse not maiden, for she tells you true.

La. An. Beauty bred love, and love has bred my shame.

N. And women's faces work more wrongs then these:
Take comfort Madam to cure our disease.
And yet he loves a man as well as you,
Only this difference, she cannot fancy too.

La. An. Blush, grieve, and die, in thine infaciat lust.

Do. Nay live and joy that thou have won a friend,
That loves thee as his life, by god desert.

La. And. I joy my Lord more then my tongue can tell:
Alhough not as I desired, I love you well:
But modesty, that never blushed before,
Discover my false heart. I say no more.
Let me alone.

Doro. Good Nano stay a while.
Were I not sad, how kindly could I smile,
To see how feign I am to leave this weed:
And yet I faint to show my self indeed.
But danger hates delay, I will be bold,
Fair Lady I am not, suppose
A man, but even that Qeene, more hapless I,
Whom Scottish King appointed has to die:
I am the hapless Princess, for whose right,
These kings in bloody wars revenge dispight.
I am that Dorothea whom they seek,
Yours bounden for your kindness and relief:
And since you are the means that save my life,
Your self and I will to the Camp repair,
Whereas your husband shall enjoy reward,
And bring me to his highness once again.

An. Pardon most gracious Princess, if you please,
My rude discourse and homely entertain,
And if my words may savor any worth,
Vouchsafe my counsel in this weighty cause:
Since that our liege has so unkindly dealt:
Give him no trust, return unto your sire,
There may you safely live in spite of him.

Doro. Ah Lady, so would worldly counsel work,
But constancy, obedience, and my love,
In that my husband is my Lord and chief,
These call me to compassion of his estate,
Dissuade me not, for virtue will not change,

An. What woonderous constancy is this I hear?
If English dames their husbands love so deer,
I fear me in the world they have no peer.

Na. Come Princes wend, and let us change your weed,
I long to see you now a Queen indeed.

Exeunt. Enter the King of Scots, the English Herald and Lords. K. of S. He
would have parley Lords, Herald say he shall,
And get thee gone: go leave me to my self:
Twixt love and fear, continual is the wars:
The one assures me of my Idaes love,
The other moves me for my murthred Queen.
Thus find I grief of that whereon I joy,
And doubt, in greatest hope, and death in weal,
Ah less what hell may be compared with mine,
Since in extremes my comforts do consist?
War then will cease, when dead ones are revived.
Some then will yield, when I am dead for hope.
Who does disturb me? Andrew?

Andrew enter with Slipper. Andr. I my liege.


K. of S. What news?


Andr. I think my mouth was made at first,
To tell these tragique tales my liefest Lord.

K. of S. What is Ateukin dead, tell me the worst?


Andr. No but your Ida, shall I tell him all?
Is married late (ah shall I say to whom?)
My master sad: (for why he shames the Court)
Is fled away? ah most unhappy flight.
Only my self, ah who can love you more?
To show my duty (duty past belief)
Am come unto your grace (oh graticus liege)
To let you know, oh would it wear not thus,
That love is vain, and maids soon lost and won.

K. of S. How have the partial heavens the^ dealt with me,
Boading my weal, for to abase my power?
Alas what thronging thoughts do me oppress?
Injurious love is partial in my right,
And flattering tongues by whom I was misled,
Have laid a snare to spoil my state and me.
Methinkes I hear my Dorotheas goast,
Howling revenge for my accursed hate,
The gifts of those my subjects that are slain,
Pursue me crying out, woe, woe, to lust,
The foe pursues me at my palace door:
He breaks my rest and spoils me in my Camp,
Ah flattering brood of Sicophants my foes,
First shall my dire revenge begin on you,
I will reward thee Andrew.

Slip. Nay sir if you be in your deeds of charity, remember me
I rubd M. Ateukins horse heels, when he rid to the meadows.

K. of S. And thou shall have thy recompense for that.
Lords bear them to the prison, chain them fast,
Until we take some order for their deaths.

And. If so your grace in such sort give rewards,
Let me have naught, I am content to want.

Slip. Then I pray sir give me all, I am as ready for a reward as an oyster for
a fresh tide, spare not me sir.


K. of S. Then hang them both as traitors to the King.

Slip. The case is altered, sir, i will none of your gifts, what I take a reward
at your hands? Master, faith sir no: I am a man of a better conscience.


K. of S. Why dally you? go draw them hence away.

Slip. Why alas sir, I will go away I thank you gentle friends. I pray you
spare your pains, I will not trouble his honors maistership, i will run away.

Enter Adam, and Antiques, and carry away the Clown, he makes pots, and
sports, and scorns. Why stay you? move me not, let search be made,
For vile Ateukin, who so finds him out,
Shall have five hundredth marks for his reward.
Away with the Lords troops about my tent,
Let all our soldiers stand in battle ray,
For lo the English to their parley come.

March over bravely first the English host, the sword carried before the King
by Percy. The Scottish on the otherside, with all their pomp bravely. K. of
S. What seeks the King of England in this land?

K. of Eng. False traitorous Scot, I come for to revenge
My daughters death: I come to spoil thy wealth,
Since thou have spoyld me of my marriage joy.
I come to heap thy land with Carcasses,
That this thy thriftie soil choakt up with blood,
May thunder forth revenge upon thy head.
I come to quit thy louelesse love with death,
In brief, no means of peace shall ere be found,
Except I have my daughter or thy head.

K. of S. My head proud King^ abase thy prancking plains,
So striving fondly, may thou catch thy grave.
But if true judgment do direct thy course,
These lawful reasons should divide the war,
Faith not by my consent thy daughter dyed.

K. of E. Thou lie false Scot, thy age^ts have co^fest it.
These are but fond delays, thou can not think
A means for to reconcile me for thy friend,
I have thy parasites confession pend:
What then can thou allege in thy excuse?

K. of S. I will repay the ransom for her blood.

K. of E. What think thou catiue, I will sell my child,
No if thou be a Prince and man at arms,
In singule combat come and try thy right,
Else will I prove thee recreant to thy face.

K. of S. I took no combat false injurious King,
But since thou needless art inclinde to war,
Do what thou dare we are in open field.
Arming thy battles I will fight with thee.

K. of E. Agreed, now trumpets sound a dreadful charge
Fight for your Princess, brave English men:
Now for your lands your children and your wives,
My Scottish Peers, and lastly for your King.

Alaru^ sou^ded, both the battles offer to meet, and as the Kings are joining
battle, Enter sir Cutber to his Lady Cutbert, with the Queen Dorothea richly
attired. S. Cut. Stay Princes wage not war, a privy grudge
Twixt such as you (most high in Majesty)
Afflicts both nocent and the innocent,
How many swords dear Princes see I drawn?
The friend against his friend, a deadly friend:
A desperate division in those lands,
Which if they join in one, command the world.
Oh stay with reason mittigate your rage,
And let an old man humbled on his knees,
Entreat a boon good Princes of you both.

K. of En. I condescend, for why thy reverend years
Import some news of truth and consequence,
I am content, for Anderson I know.

K. of S. Thou art my subject and do mean me good.

S. Cut. And. But by your gracious favors grant me this,
To swear upon your sword to do me right.

K. of Eng. See by my sword, and by a Princes faith,
In every lawful sort I am thine own.

K. of S. And by my Scepter and the Scottish Crown,
I am resolved to grant thee thy request.

Cutb. I see you trust me Princes who repose,
The weight of such a war upon my will.
Now mark my suit, a tender Lions whelpe,
This other day came straggling in the woods,
Attended by a young and tender hind,
In courage hautie, yet tired like a lamb,
The Prince of beasts had left this young in keep,
To foster up as louemate and compeere,
Unto the Lions mate a naibour friend,
This stately guide seduced by the fox,
Sent forth an eger Woolfe bred up in France,
That gript the tender whelp, and wounded it.
By chance as I was hunting in the woods,
I heard the moan the hind made for the whelpe,
I took them both, and brought them to my house,
With charie care I have ^^curde the one,
And since I know the lions are at strife,
About the loss and damage of the young,
I bring her home, make claim to her who list.

He discovers her. Doro. I am the whelpe, bred by this Lion up,
This royal English king my happy sire,
Poor Nano is the hind that tended me:
My father Scottish king* gave me to thee:
A hapless wife, thou quite misled by youth,
Haste sought sinister loves and foreign joys,
The fox Ateukin, cursed Parasite,
Incenst your grace to send the woolfe abroad,
The French borne Jacques, for to end my days,
He traitorous man, pursued me in the woods,
And left me wounded, where this noble knight,
Both rescued me and mine, and saved my life.
Now keep thy promise, Dorothea lives:
Give Anderson his due and just reward:
And since you kings, your wars began by me,
Since I am safe, return surcease your fight.

K. of S. Durst I presume to look upon those eyes,
Which I have tired with a world of woes,
Or did I think submission were enough,
Or sighs might make an entrance to my soul:
You heavens, you know how willing I would weep:
You heavens can tell, how glad I would submit:
You heavens can say, how firmly I would sigh.

Do. Shame me not Prince, companion in thy bed,
Youth has misled: tut but a little fault,
It Is kingly to amend what is amiss:
Might I with twice as many pains as these,
Unite our hearts, then should my wedded Lord,
See how incessaunt labors I would take.
My gracious father govern your affects,
Give me that hand, that often has blessed this head,
And claspe thine arms, that have embraced this,
About the shoulders of my wedded spouse:
Ah mighty Prince, this king and I am one,
Spoil thou his subjects, thou despoy lest me:
Touch thou his breast, thou do attaint this heart,
Oh be my father then in loving him.

K. of Eng. Thou provident kind mother of increase,
Thou must prevail, ah nature thou must rule:
Hold daughter, join my hand and his in one,
I will embrace him for to favor thee,
I call him friend, and take him for my son.

Dor. Ah royal husband, see what God has wrought,
Thy foe is now thy friend: good men at arms,
Do you the like, these nations if they join,
What Monarch with his leigemen in this world,
Dare but encounter you in open fields?

K. of S. Al wisdom ioynde with godly piety,
Thou English king, pardon my former youth,
And pardon courteous Queen my great misdeed:
And for assurance of mine after life,
I take religious vows before my God,
To honor thee for favor, her for wife.

L. And. But yet my boones good Princes are not past,
(...) English king I humbly do request,
That by your means our Princess may unite,
Her love unto mine alder truest love,
Now you will love, maintain and help them both.

K. of Eng. Good Anderson, I grant thee thy request.

L. And. But you my Prince must yield me mickle more:
You know your Nobles are your chiefest stays,
And long time have been bannisht from your Court,
Embrace and reconcile them to your self:
They are your hands, whereby you ought to work.
As for Ateukin, and his lewd compeeres,
That soothed you in your sins and youthly pomp,
Exile, torment, and punish such as they,
For greater vipers never may be found
Within a state, then such aspiring heads,
That reck not how they clime, so that they clime.

K. of S. Guide Knight I grant thy suit, first I submit
And humble crave a pardon of your grace:
Next courteous Queen, I pray thee by thy loves,
Forgive mine errors past, and pardon me.
My Lords and Princes, if I have misdone,
(As I have wronged indeed both you and yours)
Hereafter trust me, you are dear to me:
As for Auteukin, who so finds the man,
Let him have Martial law, and straight be hanged,
As (all his vain arbetters now are divided)
And Anderson our Treasurer shall pay,
Three thousand Marks, for friendly recompense.

L. Andr. But Princes whilst you friend it thus in one,
Me thinks of friendship, Nano shall have none.

Doro. What would my Dwarf, that I will not bestow?

Nano. My boon fair Queen is this, that you would go,
Although my body is but small and neat,
My stomach after toil requires meat,
An easy suit, dread Princes will you wend?

K. of S. Art thou a Pigmey borne my pretty friend?

Nano. Not so great King, but nature when she framde me,
Was scant of earth, and Nano therefore namde me:
And when she saw my body was so small,
She gave me wit to make it big withal.

K. Till time when,

Dor. Eat then.

K. My friend it stands with wit,
To take repast when stomach serves it.

Dor. Thy policy my Nano shall prevail:
Come royal father, enter we my tent:
And soldiers feast it, frolike it like friends,
My Princes bid this kind and courteous train,
Partake some favors of our late accord.
Thus wars have end, and after dreadful hate,
Men learn at last to know their good estate.

Exeunt. FINIS.

