TORMENTING TOPHET: OR A terrible Description of HE^L, able to break the
hardest heart, and cause it quake and tremble.

Preached at Paul's Cross the 14. of June 1614.

BY HENRY GREENVVOOD, Master of Arts, and Preacher of the Word of GOD.

The second Edition corrected and amended, Esaias 30.33. Tophet is prepared of
old; it is even prepared for the King: he has made it deep and large: the
burning thereof is fire and much wood: the breath of the Lord like a River of
Brimstone does kindle it.



LONDON Imprinted by George Purslowe for Henry Bell, and are to be sold at his
shop without Bishopsgate. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL AND my very dear friends Sir LESTRAVNGE MORDAVNT of
Massingham Hall in the County of Norfolk Knight Baronet, and Lady FRAVNCIS
MORDAVNT his most loving Bedfellow, HENRY GREENVVOOD Wishes all increase of
Grace in this Life, and Eternal Life in Life to come.
IT is, and has been long since (Right Worshipful) the custom of the
learned, that when they commended to public view (therein aiming at common
good) their Christian pains and divine endeavors, (knowing that the truth
has, and always had many oppositions and detractions) to present them to men
of high place, and well affected in Religion, that so their works might pass
with less fear, and danger of disgrace and opprobrie: I (though unlearned)
making bold to imitate their Christian policy herein, have presumed to present
that doctrine to your Worships eyes, that lately in public place was sounded
in your ears, both of which senses are great Instruments in the furtherance of
our souls in the way of Gods Kingdom; for as the ear conueieth grace to the
affections of the soul, so the eye brings much matter to the understanding
of the mind; nay, the ear cannot so often be an Auditor, as the eye an Orator
to the conscience.

For which cause (your Worships nothing more affecting than growth in Grace and
Religion) I have attempted to commend to your often considerations Tormenting
Tophet, for as nothing allureth the heart to grace, more than Gods mercies, so
nothing more preualent against sin, than his fearful and terrible
judgments.

If therefore your gracious Worships shall vouchsafe to accept of these my poor
presented pains, it will give content to mine own heart, and (doubtless)
answerable comfort to your own souls.

And to conclude, as the Lord has abundantly blessed your Worships with graces
internal, and blessings external; So (to use the words of the Apostle) the
very God of peace sanctify you still throughout, and I pray God that your
whole spirits, and souls and bodies, may be kept blameles to the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ, Amen. From Hempsted in Essex, April, 3. 1615.

Your Worships always ready to be commanded in the Lord, HEN. GREENVVOOD.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
CHristian Reader, I commend to thy charitable view, this terrible and
lamentable description of Hell, a Subject most necessary in these days, wherein
Iniquity has gotten the upper hand: the greatest part of mankind laboreth of
this dangerous disease, namely, hardness of heart and contempt of all grace, I
therefore for the removing of this damnable evil, have prepared this Tormenting
Corrasiue. Blame me not if I be too bitter in denouncing GODS Judgments
against sin, the presumption of the time compels me, this only is the aim
of my intention herein, that many may be saved from the damnation hereof.

Let not the Quotations of Latin and other tongues offend thee, but know this
they are but as country Styles, stepping over them thou losest not the way by
them, for their Expositions follow them.

Thus commending this Tractate to thy christian consideration, and thy self to
Gods most blessed protection, I rest

Thine euerlouing and vvelvvilling brother in the Lord, HEN. GREENWOOD,

TORMENTING TOPHET, OR A terrible description of Hell, able to break the
hardest heart, and cause it quake and tremble.
Esaias 30.33. Tophet is prepared of old; it is even prepared for the King: he
has made it deep and large: the burning thereof is fire and much wood: the
breath of the Lord like a River of Brimstone does kindle it.


ALbeit the Lord in the beginning created man in glorious manner, omnino^ ad
imaginem sui, ratione sapientem, vita innocentem, dominio potentem, altogether
after his own most glorious image, in purity, and in perfection of holiness
both in soul and body: yet withal, he gave him naturam flexibilem, a mutable
and changeable nature, creating him inpotestate standi, seuposse cadendi: in
power of standing, and in possibility of falling: power of standing, that he
had from God his creator, possibility of falling, that he had from himself,
being a creature.

August.
A reason whereof S. Augustine gives in his book of Confessions: Because the
Lord created man ex nihilo: of nothing: therefore he left in man possibility
to return in nihilum: into nothing, if he obeyed not the will of his Maker.

Basil,
And as Basil says, Si Deus dedisset Adae naturam immutabilem, deos potius quam
homines condidisset: id est: If God had given Adam an immutable and
unchangeable nature he had created a God, not a man: for this is a main
truth in Divinity, immutabiliter esse bonum, proprium soliusest Dei: id est,
to be immutably, and vnchangeablie good, only proper to God.

Adam therefore being thus created, that he might either stand or fall, by the
Devils subtle suggestion, and by the abuse of his own free will, received a
double downfall, the fall of sin by disobedience, and the fall of death by
sin, the last fall being the wages of the first fall, as ye may read in the
last verse of the sixth to the Romans, The wages of sin is death. Romans 6.


The Lord therefore having pity upon this his miserable estate, vouchsafed in
his Son to show mercy upon some by election to salvation: as to show justice
upon other some by reprobation to damnation.

According to which irreuocable decree, the Lord has prepared even from the
foundations of the earth, answerable places: a glorious habitation for the one,
and a terrible dungeon for the other.

Which general truth is confirmed in the words of my Text, having particular
reference to the reprobat Assyrians. For as the Lord in his mercy does promise
in this Chapter to his people repenting them of their sins, manifold
blessings, spiritual and corporal, temporal and eternal: so does he
threaten in his justice terrible vengeance to their enemies, the idolatrous
Babylonians and Assyrians, not only temporal, but also eternal, not to the
mean subject alone, but to the King himself, saying: Tophet is prepared of
old, it is even prepared for the King, etc.

Not to insist therefore too long upon introductions, lest it should be said
to me, as once a flowting Cynicke said to the Citizens of Myndus, a little
City with great Gates: Shut your Gates lest your City run out: I come to the
Text it self, which contains in it a terrible and lamentable description of
Hell, prepared of old for the tormenting of all ungodly people of the world,
of what estate or condition soever they be, even for the King. For Tophet is
prepared of old, it is even prepared for the King, etc.

In which terrible Description of Hell, I observe so many seuerals, as the
Beast had heads in the Revelation, Reu. 13.1.
that must be tormented in her.
First, the certainety of this place of torment: Tophet is prepared of old.

Secondly, The parties for whom: for all ungodly wretches, yea even for the
King: It is even prepared for the King.

Thirdly, the impossibility of getting out, once in: He has made it deep.

Fourthly, the great number that shall be tormented in her: expressed in this
word, Large.

Fifthly, the extremity and bitterness of the torments of Tophet: the burning
there of is fire.

Sixthly, the eternity and euerlastingnesse of the torments of Tophet: Much
wood, so much as shall never be wasted.

Seuently, the Author or inflictour of these fearful tortures: and that is
the Lord offended: in these words, The breath of the Lord like a river of
brimstone does kindle it: wherein I note the severity of God against sin and
sinners.

The certainety of this place of torment is here described by three: The first
part.
by the Name, by the Act, by the Antiquity.

First, by the name: Tophet.

Secondly, by the Act: is prepared.

Thirdly, by the Antiquity: of old.

Tophet is prepared of old.

Tophet.
This Tophet was a valley near unto Jerusalem, iuxta piscinam fullonis and
agrum Acheldema, ad austrum Sion: that is, Near to the Fullers poole and the
field Acheldema, on the South side of Sion: Called also Gehinnom, the valley or
dale of Hinnom: Quialoeus iste in praedio erat viri cuiusdam Hinnom dicti:
Because this place was in the possession of a certain man called Hinnom:
Aretius.
as says Aretius: In which place the Jews (following the cursed example of
the Ammonites) did sacrifice their children in the fire to the idol Moloch,
Quempro Mercurio colebant: whom they worshipped for Mercury, as says
Montanus: Montan. in Esai. Scultet. in Esai.
or rather, pro Saturno colebant, for Saturn, as says Scultetus, Quena Poetae
proprios fingunt deuorasse filios: whom the Poets fained to have devoured his
own children.

This Moloch was Idolum aereum, concauum, passis brachijs, ad excipiendos
infantes sacro nefario destinatos, Scultet. in Esai.
subiectis prunis torrendos: that is, A brazen Idol, hollow within, his hands
spread abroad, to receive infants that were through their cursed Idolatry
tortured in the fire, and sacrificed to him: as writes Scultetus. Snepfsius
describes this Idol on this manner: Snepfsius in Esai.
Idoli statua erat cuprea (sic enim annotarunt Hebraei) porrigens brachia ad
excipiendos pueros: that is, This Idol was made of Copper (so the Hebrews
have observed) stretching forth his hands to receive those massacred children.

The Jews more at large write of him, that he was of a great stature,
Descriptio Moloch.
and hollow within, having seven places or chambers within him: the first, to
receive meal offered: the second, Turtle Doves: the third, a Sheep: the
fourth, a Ram: the fifth a Calfe: the sixth, an Ox: the seventh, a Child: he
was faced like a Calfe, imitating the idolatry of Egypt: his hands were ever
stretched out to receive bribes and gifts: his Priests were called Chemmarims,
because they were smoked with the incense offered to Idols, of whom ye may
read, 2. King. 23.5. Hos. 10.5. Sephan. 1.4.

2. Ki. 23.10
This Tophet or valley of Hinnom was put down by good King Josiah, and in
contempt thereof, dead carrions and the of-scowrings of Jerusalem commanded to
be cast.

The Jews report, that in Tophet there was a deep ditch, which they called Os
inferni, Iere. 7.32.
the mouth of hell, which never could be filled: into which the Chaldeans
having slain the Israelits, threw them.

For the deriuation of this word, some think that it is derived a Tophis
lapidibus pretiosis in modum Punicis, inter quos nutriebatur ignis: that is, Of
the Topaze stone like the Punicke, in which fire was nourished: but this
deriuation is far fetched and faulty.

Tophet
But for most certain, Tophet is derived of that Hebrew Toph, quod tympanum
sonat: which signifies a Tabret, or a loud Instrument: because when they
sacrificed their children to Moloch, they did tympana pulsare, Piscat. in Esaias.
ne exaudirent eiulatum liberorum qui comburebantur: that is, Smite upon the
tabret, that they might not hear the lamentable screeching of their children
in the fire: as says Piscator.

So that by a certain Simile, How Tophet taken for hell.
the Spirit of God does here compare hell to Tophet: for as in Tophet there was
lamentable screeching of the children in the fire: so in hell there shall be
screeching and screaming, weeping and wayling for evermore.

Hell has many names in like respects: (...).
as it is called (...) of (...) to terrify: because of the terrors thereof.

It is called (...) of the priuitiue particle (...): and (...) not to see:
(...) Chytreus in 20. ca. Apoc. numero 7 de poenis. impiorum Auernus.
a place without light: which expresses the dolor of hell: as says Chitreus.

It is called Auernus: absque vera temperatura: without true temperature: for
there the freezing cold shall not mitigate the scorching heat, nor the
scorching heat the freezing cold.

And here it is compared to Tophet, in regard of the terrible tortures, and
pittious outcries of the condemned.

Simile.
Vt per hortum voluptatis, Paradisi scilicet, seeds beatorum figuratur: ita per
hunc locum terroris, Tophet, scilicet, infernus describitur: that is: As by the
garden of pleasure, namely Paradise, the place of the blessed is figured: So by
this place of terror, namely, Tophet, the dungeon of hell is described.

Obseru.
From which fearful Metaphor we may justly make this our observation: namely,
that Hell is a most lamentable and woeful place of torment, where (in regard of
the extremity of torments imposed upon the damned) there shall be screeching
and screaming, weeping, wayling, and gnashing of teeth for evermore: and this
is Tophet.

Where torment shall be upon torment, each torment easelesse, endless,
remediless; where the worm shall be immortal, cold intolerable, stinch
indurable, fire unquenchable, darkness palpable, scourges of Deuilles
terrible, and screeching and screaming continual: and this is Hell.

In hell (says S. Austine) there is vermis conscientiae, ignitae lachrymae,
August.
and dolor sine remedio: that is, The gnawing worm, the burning tears, and
sorrow that can never be eased.

And again, he says in his third Tom. de Spiritu and Anima: Aug. 3. tom. de
Spiritu and Anima.
Ibi erit metus, and moeror: luctus and dolor: tunc vere nihil lugere erit nisi
flere, quia poenitere tunc nullipoterit valere: ibi erit tortor caedens, vermis
corrodens, ignis consumens: that is, In hell there is howling and horror,
sobbing and terror: where weeping helps not, and repentance boots not: where
is pain killing, worm gnawing, and fire consuming. Vermis and tenebrae
flagellu^, frigus and ignis: Daemonisaspectus, scelerum, confusio, luctus.

Tertullian in Apologetico, Poeta Tertul. in Apologet.
speaking of Hell, says thus: Gehenna est ignis arcani subterraneus ad poenam
thesaurus: that is, Hell is a treasure of secret fire kept under the earth to
punish withal. The truth of this heavy report Dives with the residue of the
damned, do find by woeful experience, who still cries out, I am tormented in
this flame.

This is miserable Tophet, prepared for all ungodly people of the world.

Dan. 5.5.
as was Baltazar, when he saw the hand writing on the wall against him: these
should be of an extractiue force and power, to draw groans from our hearts,
tears from our eyes, and sins from our souls: Grauia peccata grauia
desiderant lamenta: Great sins require great lamentations: Sweet meat must
have sour sauce: sin must have mourning, either here by attrition Legal and
contrition Evangelical, or else hereafter we shall be cast into Tophet, where
we shall lie screeching and screaming continually.

Gregor.
Plangite igitur plangenda: Bewail your sins therefore that ought to be
lamented: ^^^siodor.
Estote tam proni ad lamenta, sicut fuistis ad peccata: Be as prone to
lamentation, as ever you were to transgression, as prone to lament them, as
ever ye were to commit them.

In a book inscribed De natura rerum, I read of a Byrd called Auis Paradisi:
the Bird of Paradise: which is so called in regard of her splendid and
excellent beauty: which Bird being taken in the snare of the Fowler, Lib. de
not. rerum
does ingemiscere ac lachrymare dies noctesque, mourn and lament night and
day, until she be restored to liberty: So we that were once Aues Paradisi,
Simile.
Birds of Paradise, but now captiuated in the thraldom of sin and Satan,
and liable to this tormenting Tophet, should never cease mourning and wayling,
until we be restored to Grace again.

Blessed are you that have grace thus to mourn, ye shall be comforted: the
Lord will wipe away, as all sins from your souls, so all tears from your
eyes in the kingdom of salvation.

Again, the consideration of this Tophet should cause us willingly to embrace
the counsel of the Psalmist: Psalm. 4.4
To stand in awe and sin not: And work in our hearts that fear spoken of in
the Gospel of Matthew, Fear him that is able to destroy both body and soul in
hell: Mat. 10.28.
This terrible report should strike us into a threefold fear.

Fear to be deprived of the grace of God.

Fear to be excluded the loving presence of God.

Fear to be tormented in the Lake unquenchable.

Exemplum
It was the practice of an holy man, who says: I fear him that is able to
damn both body and soul: I tremble at hell: I tremble at the Judges
countenance, which is able to make all the Angels and powers of Heaven to
temble: I tremble at the voice of the Archangell: I tremble at the roaring
devils: I am afraid of the gnawing worm, the smoke, the vapor, the
brimstone, the darkness, the burning: Ah woe is me that am the son of
bitterness, indignation, and eternal weeping.

Act. 24.16
This made Paul endeavor to keep a clear conscience both toward God and man.

This made Jerome afraid to offend: Whether I eat or drink (says he) or
whatsoever I do else, me thinks I hear this saying sounding in mine ears,
Arise ye dead and come to Judgment, Arise ye dead and come to judgment:
Which when I consider, it makes me quake and shake, and not dare to commit
sin, which otherwise I should have committed.

And what is the cause (I pray) that wicked wretches run into al excess and
riot of sin as they do? Is it not because they lay not to heart this
tormenting Tophet? witness else the prophet Amos, who says, Amos. 6.3
That they put off from them the evil day, and boldly approach to the seats
of iniquity: If putting off the remembrance of the vengeance to come, will make
men dissolute and retchlesse, then surely laying to heart the inutterable
torments of Tophet, will be a notable mean to reclayme men from all
ungodliness.

But if men will harden their hearts above the hardness of an Adamant, and will
not be moved, neither by mercies nor judgment: let all such know that Tophet
groaneth for them, where they shall howl and yell in fiery torments for
evermore.

Thus much in a word for the word Tophet.

The second, obseruable for the certainety of this place of torment, is the Act
or thing done, in these words: Is prepared. Is prepared
Parata Tophet, non paranda: It is not said, That Tophet shall be hereafter
prepared, or it is now preparing; but it is already prepared: Tophet is
prepared.

The malicious devil labors nothing more then to persuade men that there is
no such place of torment, that so the more easily he may lead them thither,
Simile.
as the thief is led to execution with a veil before his eyes. But for the
truth hereof, let these things following duly be observed.

Simile.
As a princely magnificence requires that a King have a beautiful palace for
the best sort of men, and a dismal prison for the rebellious: So the King of
kings has a glorious palace wherein are many mansions for his Saints, and a
dark and loathsome dungeon for the Devil and his Angels.

The law of nations requires that malefactors for their offenses be banished
for ever: so the Lord does banish from his gracious presence all the ungodly of
the earth into the fearful Island of hell.

The Cicilian Aetna called at this day Gibillo Monte, Actua.
where roarings are heard, and flames of fire are seen: the flashing of
Vesuuius: the cracking, as it were, of fire in a furnace, in the Marine Rock
of Barry: what do all these presage, but assure all those that fear the Lord
(besides his counsel revealed in his word) that Tophet is already prepared.

Again, in all things natural and supernatural, there is an opposition,
there is a contrariety: there is good, there is evil: there is light, there is
darkness: there is joy, there is sorrow: there is a Heaven, and therefore there
must be a Hell, into which the souls of the reprobate shall be carried when
they die, by the black and grisly angels.

Again, the Scripture speaks every where of this place of torment: Whosoever
shall say, Mat. 5.22.
Fool, shall be worthy to be punished with hell fire.

Mar. 9.43.35.47.
Again, It is better for thee to go into the Kingdom of God, with one foot,
with one hand, with one eye, then having two feet, two hands, and two eyes, to
be cast into Hell fire.

But that of the 25. of Matthew is very pregnant for this purpose, where the
word it self is used: Matthew. 25.
Go from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the Devil
and his Angels.

This doctrine meets with all Atheists that say, There is no heaven, no hell,
Refut. Atheist. Psalm. 14.1.
no God, no devil: As that noted fool, that said in his heart, There is no
God.

Epicure.
With all Epicures, that think there is neither time nor place, either of heaven
or hell after death: that sung that cursed Epitaph of Sardanapalus. Esa. 22.13.
Poet.


Ede, bibe, lude: charum praesentibus exple Delitijs animum, post mortem nulla
voluptas Eat, drink, and be merry: for after death there is no pleasure: They
say true, for after death they shall find small pleasure in Tophet.

This Doctrine conuinceth also all heretics that deny both Resurrection and
Judgment, Heretic.
nineteen several sorts whereof are reckoned up together all on a row by that
learned writer Danaeus: the Appellites, Danaeus.
Archontikes, Basilidians, Bardesanists, Caians, Carpocratians, Cerdonians,
Heraclites, Hermians, Marcites, Marcionites, Ophites, Proclians, Symonians,
Saturninians, Sethians, Seuerians, Seleucians, and Valentinians.

Seeing then that Hell is already prepared, and stands ready to receive
Paratis patet ianua, imparatis clauditur: this is said for Heaven: The prepared
Virgins enter in, the imprepared, not.

Imparatis patet ianua, and paratis clauditur: and this is said for Hell: The
imprepared enter, the prepared, not.

But, alas the presumptuous security of this our age: me^ live as though there
were no Hell; or if there be, as though it were afar off, and yet
notwithstanding it follows them as near as the shadow does the body: Revel.
Death and Hell both follow close the person of every sinner: Death to devour
the body, and Hell to swallow up the soul.

Yet for all this, the wicked will sport themselves in their sins, and iouiall
be in their iniquities: but mark the end, Nouissima illarum est mors: the end
of these ways is death: as well notes that just and upright man Job: Job.
21.12.13.
they rejoice in the sound of Organs, and in a moment they go down into
Tophet: they say, Peace, peace, when Tophet is prepared to take away their
souls.

O that careless people would consider this: it would make them live so
precisely, as though it were the last moment they had to live: it would make
them cry out in the terrors of their souls with the Iaylor, Act. 16.
O what must I do to be saved from the damnation of Tophet?

The third thing obseruable for the certainety of this place of torment, is the
antiquity of the same: Of old. Of old.


Non casu aut fortuna parata erat Tophet, sed certo iudicio omnipotentis
definita: id est; Tophet was not casually prepared, but in the determined
counsel, and decreed purpose of God: not lately founded, but from the
foundations of the earth, before man or Angel was created.

For Hells antiquity, I refer you to the second of Peter, 2. Pet. 2.4
the second chapter and fourth verse; where it is said: If God spared not the
Angels that fell, but cast them down to hell: now they could not be cast into
that which was not: therefore Hell was ordained before the fall of Angels:
for the Lord (who beholds all things, past, present, and to come, vno actu,
vno ictu, simul, and semel, at one and the self same present) foreseeing what
would become of angels and men, pre-ordayned answerable places: for those whom
he has elected in CHRIST, heaven he has created of old: and for those whom
he has left to glorify his justice, Tophet is prepared of old.

Note.
Where we plainly see, that the Lord has irreuocably decreede of the state of
Angels and men, before all worlds, for Heaven, and for Hell: as there are but
two ways, so there are but two ends, Salvation and Damnation, Heaven and Hell.

Error Romae.
Idle is the opinion of Rome, concerning their inter media loca, middle places,
twixt heaven and hell.

The perverting Papist has added to Tophet three subterrestriall places more:
Purgatory, Lymbus Infantum, Lymbus Patrum.

Purgatory.
Purgatory, for those that die in their venial sins, Bellar. lib. 2. de
Purgatorio. c. 1.
and light transgressions: and for those which have their sins remitted, but
not satisfied for the punishment.

And they place this next to Tophet, where there is both poena damni, and poena
sensus, punishment of loss, and punishment of feeling; this lasts not ever,
but for a time: for it shall be dissolved at the coming of CHRIST to judgment.

Lymbus Infantum, Lymbus Infantum
where children remain dying without Baptism.

And this they place next to Purgatory; where there is poena damni, but not
sensus, the punishment of loss, but not of feeling: and this lasts for
everlasting.

Lymbus Patrum, Lymbus Patrum
where the Fathers were before CHRIST'S coming.

And this they place uppermost: where there was poena damni, but not sensus,
the punishment of loss, but not of feeling: but this was dissolved long ago,
by CHRIST'S descension into Hell.

Thus you see how the Pope by these his lies and fopperies, thoroughly proves
himself the most dear child of the devil, the author and founder of all
lies. John 8.44
But let every Christian take this for an inalterable truth, that there is but
Election and Reprobation, grace and sin, the narrow gate, and the broad way:
but two ends, Heaven and Hell; to one of these must all flesh go.

Athanas. de incarnat. Christi.
Athanasius speaking to this point, says: Impius in duas parts discerpitur,
and vt ad duo loca discedat, condemnatur: that is, A wicked man is distracted
in two parts, and condemned to two places, his body to the Grave, and his soul
to (...) that is, to Hell.

Seeing then that the Lord has prepared Tophet of old, and the Decree of God
is gone out upon all flesh, either for heaven or for hell: this should hasten
us carefully to work out our salvation with fear and trembling, and to make
sure our Election: For what if we have all the world, and be cast into Tophet?
what shall become of us? it had been better for us never to have been borne.

Observe (I beseech you) the carriage of the Apostles in the Gospel, when they
heard that one of them should betray their Lord and Master CHRIST, and woe
worth that party that should do that cursed act: it had been good for that
party never to have been borne: they were all amazed and astonished, and could
not be at quiet, till they knew who should do that damnable deed: they came
therefore to our Savior, saying: Mar. 14.19
Numquid ego Domine? Is it I, Lord? Another, Is it I, Lord? So we hearing, that
Hell is prepared of old, and the greatest part of mankind (as shall be shown
hereafter,) shall be swallowed up of her: Oh this should make us careful,
Math. 6.
first, and above all things to seek the kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof, that we may see our selves in the number of those few,
whose names are written in the book of Election, and not in the number of
those that shall be tormented in Tophet.

Psalm. 132.3.
Let us resolve with the Psalmist, not to suffer our eyes to sleep, nor our
eye-liddes to slumber, nor the temples of our head to take any rest, till we
have found the salvation of our God, our souls sealed to the day of
redemption, and freed from the damnation of Tophet. But where is this religious
care and godly resolution? O the dissolute and desperate course of this our
sinful age: men put their salvation to a hazard with Ludouike, Ludouic.
Si saluabor, saluabor, Si damnabor, damnabor: that is, If I be saved, I be
saved: If I be damned, I be damned, there is the care that I take.

In the fear of God, I earnestly beseech you, Romans 8.
above al things to make sure your Election, and that by your Vocation: your
Vocation by your Justification: your Justification by your Sanctification, the
reward whereof will be eternal glorification.

Join Virtue with your Faith: with Virtue Knowledge: 2. Pet. 1.5.
with knowledge Temperance: with Temperance Patience: with Patience Godliness:
with Godliness brotherly Kindness: and with brotherly Kindness Love: Labor
hereby to make your calling and election sure, for if ye do these things, ye
shall never fall into the vengeance of Tophet.

The second part of this Text, The second part.
are the parties for whom Tophet is prepared, and that is for all ungodly people
of the world, of what estate or condition soever they be: It is even prepared
for the king. 2 Reg. 39.37.
It is even prepared for the King.

These words in particular have reference to blasphemous Senacherib, who was
slain of his two sons in a temple of Nineueh, worshipping his god Nisrosh:
and in general, it exte^deth to all idolatrous Kings, Emperors, and Superiors
whatsoever.

Here then first we see, Obser. 1.
that no person, in what dignity soever he be, by his eminent place, is
exempted from hell.

Dives a great personage, Luke. 16.
yet tormented in those flames: Quid profuit sibi superbia? quid diuitiarum
copia? Wisd.
What has pride profited him? or what has the pomp of riches done him good?
Alas, these could not save his Soul: For (as says the Psalmist) a man by his
riches cannot redeem his brother, he cannot give his ransom to God: Psa.
49.67.
so precious is the redemption of souls, and their continuance for ever.

And in Samuel we rea^e, That Kings are not exempted from the judgments of
God: 1. Sa 12.25.
If ye do wickedly, ye shall perish, and your King.

In the first Epistle to the Corinths, we may read who they are that are
threatened with Tophet: 1. Cor. 6.9.
neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor wantons, nor thieves,
nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of
God: This is spoken of Kings, as well as of others. Reu. 21.8.
And in the Reu. we find, that the fearful and unbelieving, the abominable,
murderers and whooremongers, and sorcerers, idolaters, and all liars shall
have their part in the Lake that burns with fire and brimstone: And this is
spoken of the King as well as of the Beggar: for the Lord in judgment freeth
from hell, not according to place, but grace: not outward condition, but inward
disposition.

Nay moreover, great men, Noble men, and mighty Princes, are not only liable
to Tophet, but the greatest part of them shall to the devil: Not many wise
men, not many mighty, 1. Cor. 1.26.
not many noble are called: 1. Tim. 2.4
for as God would have all men saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth.i.
some of all sorts, some Jews, some Gentiles, some Kings, some Nobles, some
Preachers, some Rich, some Poor: so of all these, the greatest sum go down
to Tophet. Yet for all this, great men must not be reproved forsooth, the
truth that makes against them, must not be embraced of them.

Abner could not abide to hear Isbosheth tell him of his going into Rizpah his
father Saul's Concubine. 2. Sam. 3.


Ahab hated Micaiah the son of Imlah for not prophesying (as he said) good
unto him. 1. King. 22


The people cried out in Esayes time: Dicite nobis placentia, placentia: Esaias
30.
that is, speak pleasing things unto us.

Iere. 11.21.
The Priests and people of Anathoth threatened Jeremy to take away his life, if
he prophesied to them in the name of the Lord.

Amos 7.
Amaziah said to Amos the Prophet: Go, be gone, prophecy in Judah: but
prophe^ie no more in Bethel, for it is the Kings Chapel, and it is the Kings
Court.

Amos 5.10
They hated him that rebuked in the gat^ and abhorred him that spoke uprightly.

Micah 2.11
The people in the time of Micah, liked them well that prophesied to them of
Wine and strong Drink. I pray God that the great ones of this land be not
tainted with this corruption.

Well, for mine own part I had rather be stormed against for preaching Tophet
to you here, then ye should curse me in Tophet hereafter, for smoothing and
flattering you.

Yet this reprehension of great men, I would wish it might be done in wisdom
and humility: with I beseech you, O King, by the tender mercies of God, Romans
12.1.
reform these and these things: for some in this case are indiscreet and too
too saucy, and rather exasperate the hearts of their hearers against them, then
win them to the Lord by their exhortation.

If then Kings and great men be not exempted from Tophet, Use.
what should this work in them but obedience to that counsel of the Psalmist,
Psalm. 2.
Be wise now therefore O ye Kings, serve the Lord in fear? Look up to
heaven, acknowledge your selves subjects to a greater.

As the Lord has honored Kings above others, so he looks for a greater
return of honor from them than from others: for where the Lord gives much,
there the Lord requires the more.

Kings and Princes are the keepers of the two Tables of the Law of God: Deu.
17.18
and to them is committed from God the government both of Church and
Commonwealth: they must therefore be careful that the Word may run very
swiftly throughout every Angle of their realms: Psalm. 147.
So shall God gain an universal glory, and Kings themselves a more stable
subjection.

Esa. 49.23.
Kings and Queens are called nursing Fathers and nursing Mothers: and all to
commend unto them the care they should have of Gods glory, and the good of
their people.

Io^ 15.
Joshua was such a Ruler, that remained resolute and constant in the worship of
God to his lives end.

^^^h. 15.1
David prepared a place for the Ark of God, and was careful for the church of
the Lord.

2. Chapter 17.3.
Iehosaphat, Ezechias and Josias were reformers of their Kingdoms, enemies to
idolatry, cha. 29.1.2 chapter 34.1.2.
and graciously defended the word of God.

And blessed be God for our Kings most excellent Majesty: who is maiesticall in
his place: in religion zealous: in life virtuous: and in mercy abundantly
gracious: The Lord increase his graces in him: the Lord anoint him with the
oil of Holiness above his fellow princes: and the Lord keep him from this
terrible Tophet: and let all people that bear good will to this our English
Sion, to this my Prayer say, Amen.

It is even prepared for the King.

Secondly, Obseru. 2. Act. 10.
we may here perceive with Peter, that verily there is no respect of persons
with God in judgment: he judges the rich as the poor; the father as the
child; the master as the servant; the king as the beggar: as the Prophet David
says, With righteousness shall he judge the world, and the people with equity.

Though wickedness among men, Eccle. 3.16
be in the place of judgment; yet the Lord our God will deal justly.

Though among men there is respect of persons to be had, without which a
confusion would (and this is necessary to be urged, for men are full of
contempt, and too saucy with them of superior place and authority:) yet when
all shall be summoned before the tribunal of God, the Lord will indifferently
proceed to Judgment without any respect of persons.

And this should not only pull down the haughty minds of the noble (who Use.
think for their greatness here, it will be easier for them hereafter than
others:) but also this should be an unalterable president to all Judges of the
world.

As they sit in Gods place, so they should imitate the Lord in judgment: this
should make them obey the counsel of the Lord delivered by the Prophet David:
Psalm. 2.
Be learned ye that are Judges of the earth.

O the care that Iehosaphat took for just and righteous judgment: after he
had made Judges, and set them in every City of Judah, he gave them this
charge: 2. Chapter 19.5.6.7.
Take heed what ye do, for ye execute not the judgments of man, but the
judgments of the Lord, and the Lord will be with you to preserve you, if you
do justly, but to confound you if you do unjustly: wherefore now let the
fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed and do it: for there is no iniquity
with our God, nor respect of persons, nor receiving of rewards.

O that this gracious counsel were intertayned of the Judges of this land,
then we should not hear of so many complaints in our land as we do: then we
should not have cause to complain with the Prophet, Esaias 59.14
That judgment is turned backward, and justice stands afar off: that
truth is gone, and equity no where to be found: then we should not have so
many beggard by the Law, as daily are: Law was never made to undo men, but to
compel men to do well: it was made to curb the unruly, but not to beggar
the innocent: it is grown to this saying now a days, I had rather loose it,
being my right, than go to law for it; why, what is the cause? O because of
rackt fees, close bribes, and the perpetuity of attendance.

Iudicate secundum iustitiam, Judge, judge, O ye sons of men, according to
righteousness: let your judgment be in veritate, in truth. iudicio, in
judgment. iustitia, in righteousness.


I pray God it may never be said of our Judges of England, as once was said
of the Judges of Israel; Esa. 5.7.
The Lord looked for judgment, but behold oppression: for righteousness, but
behold a crying.

Let not there be found in a land where the Gospel dwells, such Judges as
were those that killed innocent Naboth. 1. King. 21


Let none be like the sons of Samuel, 1. Sam. 8.3.
That turned aside after lucre, and took rewards, and perverted the judgment.

The duty of Judges is notably set down in the 23. of Ex. Thou shall not
receive a false tale: Thou shall not overthrow the truth for the multitudes
sake; Thou shall not overthrow the right of the poor in his suite: Thou shall
keep thee from a false matter: Thou shall take no gift, for the gift blinds
the wise, and peruerteth the words of the righteous.

And this charge is continued in Leuiticus; Leu. 29.15.
Ye shall not do unjustly in judgment: Thou shall not favor the person of
the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty, but thou shall judge thy
neighbor justly.

A Judge must be Scientia potens, Iudicis officium.
and Virtute valens: that is, Able in learning, and zealous in living: by the
one he shall, discernere inter allegata, Discern betwixt cases propounded: by
the other, disrumpere iniquitatem, without hinderance punish and confound all
manner of iniquity.

In all your Judgments let these be aimed at, the glory of God, the righting
of wrong, the suppression of evil, and the maintenance of truth.

Be zealous for the glory of our God; and let the good laws that are, be duly
and impartially executed.

It was a great commendation that was given to Seleucus Governor of the
Locretians, Seleucus.
who having made this Law against whoredom, That whosoever committed the act,
should loose both his eyes: his son being taken in the fact, was not
pardoned, though the Citizens begged it earnestly: but he caused one of his
sons eyes to be pulled out, and one of his own eyes: So he showed himself
a merciful Father, and a just Judge.

O that we had the like laws against this, and the like mostodious offenses,
and that they were as strictly executed: that many hereby may be saved from
Tophet.

The Lord guide that honorable assembly in Court of Parliament, that they may
all join with one voice and spirit, for the banishing of Popery, the reforming
of iniquity, and maintaining and countenancing of the word of truth, and
painful Preachers of the same.

And you (my honorable Lord) as you have begun well, in reforming many foul
abuses in this City, so in the zeal of the Lord, Psalm. 45.4.
Prosper with your glory: ride on with the word of truth, meekness and
righteousness, and your right hand shall teach you terrible things.

Thus am I bold to cast in among you the silly mite of my counsel, merely of
Christian Charity, tha^ ye may never taste of the woeful damnation of Tophet.

The third part of the description of Tophet, is set down in these words, The
third part. He has made it deep.
He has made it deep.

Many from these words do go about to prove the local place of Hell,
concluding it to be below: as from the signification of Sheol also. Sheol.


Sheol is taken for a Pit, or Grave, or Hell: the state of the dead, the place
of the damned spirits.

In the Scriptures, sometimes it is taken for the Grave, and sometime for Hell:
so is (...) also.

The Septuagint translating the Hebrew into Greek, and expressing there the
sense of Sheol, used (...) both for the death of the body in the Grave, and of
the soul in Hell.

Mercer upon Genesis says, Mercer in c. 37. Genesis
That the proper signification of Sheol, is to signify all places under the
earth, and not the pit or grave alone: whereupon it is every where opposed to
heaven, which is highest of all.

Hell is called by the name of Abyssus in the Scriptures, Abyssus.
which signifies a deep and vast gulf under the earth, a bottomless pit:
into which the devils fear to be sent: and where they are chained and bound
when it pleases God. Luke 8. Reu. 20.


From which Abyssus, there is an assent to the earth, no descent lower:
Reuelat. 9.2. and 11.7. and 17.8. and therefore hell suspected to be beneath.

Nic. de Lyra in Esai.
Because Tophet is here said to be profunda, deep, Nicolaus de Lyra putat esse
circa centrum terrae: Thinks that it is about the center of the earth.

The Apostles that preached to the Jews, used the word Gehenna, from the
Hebrews, which they well understood: and Saint James writing to the Jews,
says; The tongue is inflamed of Gehenna, of hell: but the rest of them that
preached to the Gentiles, used the word (...), which name was known unto them,
and they took it to be a place under the earth, where the wicked after this
life were punished. Tartarus Hesiod. in Theogonia.


Tartarus (which is used for Hell) is so far under the earth, as Heaven is
above the earth, says Hesiodus.

The Poet speaking of it, says, Tartarus ipse bis patet in praeceps tantum:.i.
Tartarus is twice as deep as Heaven is high.

The Rabbines hold Hell to be below: as Rabbi Abraham says: Rab. Ab. in c. 2.
Ionae.
Sheol makom, etc. Sheol is a deep place opposed to Heaven which is on high.

And Rabbi Leui says, Rab. Leu. in cap. 26. Ioh.
Sheol hi mattah, etc. Sheol is absolutely below, and is the center.

The Scriptures also place Hell below: Esaias 14.9.
Sheol beneath is moved for thee to meet thee at thy coming.

Moses calls it the lower hell: Deu. 32.22.
Fire is kindled in my wrath, and shall burn vsque ad infernum inferiorem, to
the bottom of hell.

The Psalmist calls it a deep pit: Let him cast them into the fire, Psa.
140.10.
and into the deep pits, that they rise not: And in another place, he calls
it the Pit of Perdition. Psalm. 55.


John calls it a Burning Lake, Reu 20.
in the Revelation, which must needs be below.

Pron. 9.18.
Solomon speaks of the depth of this place, saying, The gh^sts of an harlot
are in the depth of hell.

Pro. 15.24.
And again, The way of Life is on high, to avoid from hell beneath.

Thus it is manifest, that Hell is beneath in the lowest parts of the
workmanship of God: But precisely to say, where, Locus inferni.
whether in the center of the center of the world, or in the air, or in the
water, or upon the earth, it is not revealed: neither is it needful for us to
know: but surely it shall be in the most remote place from Heaven, which is in
and about the earth: for the souls of the righteous when they are dissolved
from their bodies, do presently pass to the local place of Coelum Empyraeum:
and the souls of the damned are constrained to stay below in the lowest
Elements, where they are and shall be tormented for evermore.

But if a man be too curious in this point, Socrates.
I would wish him confer with Socrates, who being asked what was done in
hell, said: He never went thither, nor communed with any that came from
thence: By which answer he derided the curiosity of the demander.

Euclides (as Maximus writes) being demanded of one what the Gods did, Maxim.
sermon. 23.
and with what things they were best delighted, said, As for other things I
know not, but I am sure of this, that they hate all curious persons.

But this is not the thing we aim at in this depth of Hell.

This word Deep does bewray unto us the impossibility of getting out,
Obseruatio.
once in: for God has made Hell so deep, as there is no bepe of crawling out.

In inferno nulla redemptio: In hell there is no redemption: Therefore, Infernus
Infernus ab inferendo dictus, quia ita inferuntur and praecipitantur, vt
nunquam ascensuri sint: that is, Hell is said of casting in, for they shall
be so cast down, as they shall never have hope or power of cravvling out.

Infernus (says Hugo) est profundus fine fundo: that is, Hugo.
A deep without bottom. That party that had not on the wedding garment, was
not only cast into hell, but he was also bound hand and foot: and all to show
the impossibility of getting forth, once in: Bind him hand and foot, Mat.
22.13
and cast him into utter darkness.

Simile.
Now alas, if a man be bound hand and foot, and cast into a well five thousand
fadomes deep, what hope has he of ever coming out? so hell is deep, and he
that is once tumbled in, shall never come forth more.

Luke 16.28.
This is evident by the speech of Dives, who said: O Father Abraham, send
Lazarus, or some from the dead, that my brethren may not come into the like
place of torment. What is the reason that Dives begged not for his own passage
from thence unto them, who was able to have taught the dolours of hell by
woeful experience? O he knew that that had been bootelesse, for he saw ingentum
hiatum, A great gulf set betwixt heaven and hell, that made the passage
impossible.

In earthly prisons and dungeons, a man by some or other means happily may get
out: but hell is deep, so deep, as Heaven, Earth, and Hell, can never help
one poor soul forth.

This then well considered, should

One depth cries and calls out for an other: the depth of hell calls to us
for answerable humiliation: he that will not be humbled for his sins here,
shall be humbled and tumbled to the deep of hell hereafter.

God gives grace to the humble: Simile.
yea the deeper thou art in the Law, the higher shall thou be in the Gospel,
the deeper in hell, the higher in heaven: a bucket, the deeper it goes into
the well, the more water it brings up with it: so the deeper a man is humbled
for sin, the more shall be his grace of salvation. Humble your selves
therefore under the mighty hand of God, that ye may be all exalted in the day
of Visitation.

Luke 18.13.
In this deep was the poor Publican, when in bitterness of heart he uttered
these words, Lord be merciful to me a sinner: A sinner by birth, a sinner by
life, a sinner by thought, a sinner by word, a sinner by work, a sinner by
sins of omission, a sinner by sins of commission, a sinner before my
conversion, a sinner many thousand times since my conversion: Lord be
merciful to me a lamentable sinner.

Let us seek the Lord while he may be found, Esaias 55.6.
and call upon him while he is near. 1. Cor. 6.2.
Ecce nunc tempus acceptum: Behold now the accepted time, behold now is the
day of salvation.

This life is the time wherein we must work out our salvation with fear and
trembling, if after this life we will be freede from the deep damnation of
Tophet.

The irrational creatures themselves are very careful to take their times and
seasons, as says the Prophet Jeremy, 8.7. The Storke, the Turtle, Crane and
the Swallow observe their times and seasons: there is a time when the Swallow
is with us in England, and there is a time when he takes his leave of us.

That silly creature in the sixth of the Proverbs, Gathers in Summer to
maintain the poor life of it in Winter: So should we take our time; for
after this life, there is neither place for pardon, nor time for repentance.

Yet for all this, golden Time is not respected, but men do post off their
repentance from day to day, till at the last, they sink into the depth of hell.

Yea the time of Grace is tedious to many, they must have some or other carnal
delight to drive it away: It Is death to many to attend willingly upon the
means of their salvation, an hour or two; but there will come a time, when
they shall wish, that all their life had been spent at the hearing of Sermons
and Prayer, as tedious as it seems to them now.

O the damned in Hell would give (if it were in their power) a million of
worlds to have but one hour granted them to live on the earth again, Tempus
gratiae negligere, est absolute animam perdere.
that so they may come within compass of offered grace to salvation. But if
ye will not hear the Lord when he calls to you, there will come a day when
ye shall cry, Lord, Lord, and his ears shall be shut to your prayers, and his
justice shall cast you into the deep dungeon of Tophet, Math. 5.26.
there to remain, till ye have paid the uttermost farthing.

The 4. part And large Oecolam. in Esaias. Obseruat.
The fourth part of the Description of Tophet, mentioned in this word, Large.

As the Lord has made Hell Deep, so has he made it Large, in regard of the
great number that shall be tormented in her, as says Occolampadius.

Esaias 5.14.
This word is used in the fifth chapter of this prophecy, Hell has enlarged her
self, and has opened her mouth without measure: It has set open her mouth,
as it were, with a gag, and all to receive the great multitudes that shall
descend into her.

It is called Lacus magnus in the Revelation, 14.19. A great Lake.

That this doctrine is too true, witness that of the Gospel of Matt. 20.16.
Multi vocati: Many are called, but few converted: Many called, but few chosen.

The most high made this world for many, 4. Esd. 8.1
but the world to come for very few.

Object,
But some man may object against these Scriptures other Scriptures to prove the
great number of them that shall be saved, and so by consequence, the small
number that shall be tormented in Tophet.

Saint Matthew says, Math. 8.1^
That many shall come from the East, and from the West, and shall sit down
with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in the Kingdom of God: many an innumerable
company shall be saved.

Saint John in Reuelat. 7.9. does point out that great number that shall be
saved, with that nota stellifera, that starry note, Behold, I saw a great
multitude of all Nations and Kinreds, and People, and Tongues, that stood
before the Throne, and before the Lamb clothed in long white robes, and palms
in their hands: long white robes in token of purity, and palms in their hands
in token of victory.

It may seem by these Scriptures, that many shall be saved, and not such a
multitude damned.

Answer
I answer, That though the number of the Elect be great, by it self considered
(to the praise of Gods mercy be it spoken) yet if it be compared to the number
of those that shall glorify Gods justice in hell, Alas then a remnant of Israel
shall be saved: they are but a handful, and therefore hell must be made
exceeding Large.

This great destruction of the damned in hell, is liuelily shadowed out unto us
in the judgments of God on earth, mingled with mercy; as in the destruction of
the old world by water, how few escaped there alive? Genesis 7.
only Noah with his Family: in the destruction of Sodom by fire, Genesis 19.16
how few escaped there alive? only Lot with his daughters: in the destruction
of Jericho by the sword, how few escaped there alive? only Rahab with her
family, Joshua. 6.22
that entertained the Israeliticall Spies. To come to later times, in the
destruction of Jerusalem by Titus Vespasian, how few escaped there alive? Many
hundred thousands of them were starued to death, many hundred thousands of them
taken captives to the Roman Empire, some put to one death, some to another,
and few escaped alive, and those of the meaner sort, agricolae vinitores,
husbandmen and laborers in vineyards.

If (beloved) in the judgments of God in this world so few have escaped alive,
how few (think you) shall escape at the dreadful day of Judgment, when of
every idle word that men shall speak, a great account must be made for the
same? yea, Mat. 12.36
when Inquisition shall be made for the very thoughts of the ungodly: Wisd.
1.9.
If the just shall scarce be saved, where shall the sinner appear? Again,
that great is the number of those that shall to Tophet, and therefore Tophet
made large to give them fiery intertainement, it appears in the very lives of
men upon earth: for where there is one that comes to the profession of the
truth, truly with the sincere heart of Nathanael: John 1.
there are ten, yea twenty, yea more, that walk in the way of sin, in the
road to Tophet, without any check of conscience, remorse for their sins, or
reclamation from their sinful courses in the world: some in the way of
Atheism, some in Paganism, some in Epicurisme, some in Brovvnisme, some in
Anabaptisme, some in Mahometisme, some in Papisme, yea some in Deuilisme: a
matter with many tears to be lamented.

But would thou not be with this large company, Use.
in this large place of torment: O then follovv not a multitude to do evil!
Revelation, 18.4. Come out from amongst them, for if thou be partaker with
them in their sins, thou must be partaker with them in their punishments:
Fashion not thy self after the wicked fashion of this world: rather walk
alone by thy self to heaven, than go with the multitude to Hell: Walk in the
narrow way of grace to salvation, shun the broad and large way, for that
will bring thee to Tophet, which (as thou hear) is made exceeding deep and
large.

The fifth part of the description of Hell, in these words, The fifth part. The
burning thereof is fire.
The burning thereof is fire: expressing the bitterness of the torments of
Tophet. There is great controversy among the learned about this fire. An in
inferno ignis.
Whether it be true substantial fire, or fire allegorical? if it be true
fire, whether it be material, corporal, or spiritual.

If it be Corporal, whether it burns the body only, or soul and body also?

Whether there be true fire in Hell? Quaestio. 1
or whether these words (the burning thereof is fire) be taken allegorically?

Calvin would have it taken allegorically, Calvin in Esai.
and thinks there is no true fire in hell.

His reason is this, If Wood and the Worm be taken metaphorically, why not
then the fire also?

But this is no argument to prove this fire allegorical: For in the holy
Scriptures things spoken together, Resolutio 1. quaestionis.
are not always taken in the same manner and nature: For example sake: Christ is
called a Door, a Vine, a Rock, a Stone, figuratively: and does it therefore
follow, that he was not God and man substancially?

Again, in Saint Lukes Gospel our Savior says, Luke 22.
I appoint you a Kingdom, as my Father has appointed to me, that ye may
eat and drink at my Table in my Kingdom: Eat^ng is allegorical, but will
you say, that the kingdom is allegorical also?

I confess that wood in hell is taken allegorically, but that fire is taken
so, I utterly deny.

Bulling. in Esai.
Bullinger holds true and substanciall fire in hell: and so do the most and
best of the learned.

Christ punished with Fire in this world, Gen 10. Numb. 1^.
Sodom: and the Murmurers in the Book of Numbers, chap. 11. and called the
name of that place Thabherah: because the fire of the Lord burnt amongst them.

And Christ shall come to Judgment with Fire: Esaias 66,
which shall have two properties.

To burn: Theodoret. in Psalm. 96.
this property shall punish the wicked: to shine: this property shall comfort the
Saints, as says Theodoret.

And what shall hinder the being of fire in hell, when the extremity of
tortures shall be put upon the damned? he that will not believe this, shall
one day feel it to his sorrow.

If then it be granted, that there is Substantial fire in hell, the next
question will be, Whether it be Material, Quaest. 2.
Corporal, or Spiritual?

Surely Material fire, that is, Resolutio 2. quaestionis.
fire nourished and maintained with wood, it shall not be: for as the flashings
of Aetna and Vesuuius, and other places of the earth, do burn without fuel;
so shall the fire of hell do: he that is able to make the damned live without
food, is able to maintain this fire without wood.

Whether then it be Corporal or Spiritual, (for if it be Substantial, it
must be one of these) Gregory calls it Ignem incorporeum, Gregor.
a Spiritual fire, but that is not likely, for it passes the nature of fire
to be Spiritual, and to go about to make it Spiritual, is to make it no fire
at all.

But it is most probable that it is, and shall be, a Corporal fire, with an
extraordinary afflicting power, given unto it, tormenting both soul and body.

August.
Saint Augustine affirms the fire of hell to be Corporal.

Quaest. 3.
If it be Corporal, whether it tormenteth the body only, or both soul and
body: and how a Corporal fire should work upon a spiritual substance,

Saint Bernard says, that Ignis exterius carnem comburit, Bernard. de
interiere domo. c. 38. Idem. part. ser. 16.
vermis interius conscientiam corrodet: that is, Fire shall outwardly burn
thy flesh, and a worm shall inwardly gnavv thy conscience.

Again, he says, Duo mala sunt vermis and ignis, altero roditur conscientia,
altero concremantur corpora: that is, the worm and fire are two insufferable
torments: by the one the soul is vexed, by the other, the body scorched.

Again he says: Idem meditat. 4, cap.
In carne cruciabuntur per ignem, in spirituper conscientiae vermem: that is,
in the flesh they shall be tormented by fire, and in the Spirit by the worm of
conscience.

Isodore says, Isodor. de summo bono. l. 1. c. 31.
that there is duplex poena damnatorum, quorum mentem vrit tristitia, and
corpus flamma: that is, Their minds burn with sorrovv, and their bodies with
the flame.

Beda says, Bed. lib. 3 in cap. 9. Mar.
Ignis erit poena extrinsecus saeuiens, vermis dolor, interius accusans: that
is, The fire shall be a torment outwardly raging, and the worm a grief
inwardly accusing.

Though these maintain fire in hell, yet they hold (as you see) that it is not
of power to touch the soul, but only to torture the body: but I am persuaded
according to the judgment of many learned Fathers, That this fire torme^teth
both body and soul.

Zanchy de Operibus Dei, says, Zanch. de Operibus
That the devils, Dei, part. 1. lib. 4. cap. 19.
men's bodies and souls, are tormented with fire everlasting. For as they were
(as Simeon and Leui) brethren in the same evil, so both of them shall be
tormented in the same fire.

Justin. Mart. Apologia 1. pro Christianis. Mat. 25.41
Iustine Martyr says, That the Devil shall suffer punishment and vengeance,
enclosed in everlasting fire: and they are no bodies, but spirits.

The truth of this is ratified by Christ himself: Go from me ye cursed, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

And the speech of Dives proves this most true: Chrysostom.
for it is no Parable, but History (as Chrysostom says) Parabolae sunt vbi
exemplum ponitur, tacentur nomina: that is, Those are Parables, where an
example is propounded, and no names mentioned: he cries out, and shall for
everlasting, Luke 16.24
I am tormented in this flame.

And if any man will not believe this, I make bold to use against him, the
words of Ruffinus, Ruffinus.
who says, Si quis negat diabolum aeternis ignibus mancipandum, partem cum
ipso aeterni ignis accipiet, vt sentiat quod negauit: that is, If any man does
deny that the Devil is tormented with everlasting fire, he shall one day be
partaker with him of that fire, that he may feel that which he would not be
brought to believe.

But how this Corporal fire shall torment the Devils and the Spirits of the
damned, I know not, and I trust never to know, and it is but curiosity to be
too too inquisitiue in these points: for as a Father says, August,
Melius est dubitare de occultis, quam litigare de incertis: viz. It is better
to doubt of unknown things, then to strive for uncertain.

Compescat igitur se humana timeritas, and id quod non est, non quaerat, ne
illius quod est non inueniat: that is, Let no man rashly meddle about these
things that are not revealed, lest he finds not the good of those things
that are revealed.

It being probable that there is in hell a Substanciall and Corporeal fire,
that vexes both the souls and bodies of the damned, let us now see the
difference of this fire from our eleme^tall fire.

Ignis infernimultum differt ab elementari.
This fire of hell differs from our elementall fire in five respects.

First, In regard of heat: Our fire in regard of hell fire, is but as fire
painted on a wall, in regard of our fire.

Oh it is a fierce and an intolerable fire.

Exemplu^.
We read of one, who (upon the violence of any strong temptation) would lay his
hands on burning coals, and being not able to endure the same, would say to
himself: O! how shall I be able to endure the pains of Hell fire?

Dan. 3.21.
The fire into which Sydrach, Misach and Abednego were cast, was exceeding
fearful: but alas, nothing to hell fire.

Esa 33.14.
Esaias speaking of this terrible fire, says: Who is able to dwell in this
devouring fire? or, who shall be able to dwell in these everlasting burnings?

Secondly, In regard of light: Our fire gives a comfortable light, but the
fire of hell gives no light.

Greg. Moral. l. 9. c. 46
Cremationem habet, lumen vero non habet, (says Gregory:) It burns, but
gives no light at all.

It is a darkish fire (says Basil) that has lost his brightness, Basil. in
Psalm. 33.
but kept his burning.

Phauorinus in verbo (...) says: Phauor. in verb. hades
hades is a place void of light, and full of eternal darkness.

Sophocles calls it (...): Sophoc. in Oedipo.
black darkness.

Euripides calls it (...): Euripid. in Aristide. Theognidis gnomae. Eustath. in
1. Iliados Exo. 10.21
the house without Sunne-light.

Theognis calls it (...): the black gates.

Eustathius says, (...): Hell is a dark place under the earth.

The darkness of Egypt was wonderful and fearful: Wonderful, because it
was so thick as it might be felt: Fearful, and therefore made the ninth
plague of Pharao: yet that darkness was nothing to the darkness of hell,
Jude 13.
which is called the Black darkness.

The Poets, in regard of the darkness thereof, do compare hell to a certain
territory in Italy, betwixt Ba^ae and Cumae, where the Cimerii inhabit: so
environed with hills, that the Sun never comes to it: whereupon this
Proverb comes: Cimerae tenebrae.
Cimeris tenebris atrior, Darker then the darkness of Cimeria. Whosoever he
be, that loves darkness more then light, shall have his heart full of
darkness in Tophet.

Thirdly, Our elementall fire burns the body only, but the fire of hell
burns both soul and body, as ye have heard at large.

Fourthly, Our elementall fire consumes that which is cast into it, but the
fire of hell does always burn, and never consume.

Fifthly, Our elementall fire may be quenched, Math. 3.
but hell fire can never be quen^hed: The chafe will he burn with
unquenchable fire: their worm shall never die, Esaias 66.
their fire shall never go out.

As there is nothing that maintains it, so there is nothing that can
extinguish it.

Obserua^^o.
From all this we may observe the extremity and bitterness of the torments of
Tophet: Tho. Aquin.
Yea minima poena inferni mayor est maxima poena huius mundi: that is, The
least torture in hell is greater than the greatest torture that ever was
devised upon the earth. That Hell-hound that murdered the King of France, had
as heavy a punishment as this world could afford: for his arm that did that
cursed act, was taken from his shoulder, his nails pulled from his hands and
feet, his flesh piece by piece pulled from him with hot burning pincers, and in
the end rent in pieces with four horses: all this is nothing to the least
torment of Tophet.

Chrysostom ad populum Antiochenum, says: That fire and sword, Chrysostom. ad
pop. Antioch. hom. 49.
and wild beasts, or any thing more grievous than these, are scant a shadow to
the torments of hell.

And this bitter torment stands in these two: In poena damni: that is: In the
punishment of loss: and in poena sensus: that is, In the punishment of
feeling: Idem.
the former whereof is the greatest (as says Saint Chrysostom) this poena
damni, this punishment of loss is more bitter then the pains of hell, yea,
worse then a thousand hels.

Poena damni.
This Poena damni, though it be a privative punishment, yet it has a positive
effect: For, to be deprived of Joy, cannot but bring intolerable sorrow:
Simile.
even as the absence of the Sun causes darkness, so the want of Gods
presence brings inexpressible grief.

1. Sam. 4.18.
When the Ark of God was taken by the Philistimes, old Eli with grief fell
backward and died.

Plutarc. in vita Demost.
Demosthenes took his banishment so heavily, that many times he would weep
bitterly when he looked toward Athens, though he found much kindness at the
hands of his enemies.

Tully, when he was banished from Italy, though he were in Greece, yet he wept
bitterly when he looked toward Italy.

1. Sam. 14.22.
Absolon took his banishment from his fathers presence very grievously.

If these exiles breed such sorrow, how fearful will it be to be banished
from the presence of the Lord, Who is the Father of mercies, 2. Cor. 1.3.
and God of all consolation: in whose presence is joy, in whose pleasure is
life: to be banished from the presence and loving countenance of the Lamb:
from the fellowship of Saints and Angels: from all joys and felicity, Math.
25.
with that bitter sentence, Go from me ye cursed into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his angels. Go from me: these are words of
separation: ye cursed: these are words of obiurgation: into everlasting fire;
these are words of desolation: prepared for the Devil and his Angels: these
are words of doleful exemplification.

This is the greatest part of the second death: for as the first death
separateth the soul from the body, so the second death separates soul and
body from the presence of the Lord for evermore.

Oh what weeping and wayling will there be, when ye shall see Abraham, Luke
13.
Isaac, and Iaacob intertayned into the Kingdom of God, and ye your selves
shut out.

Ye therefore spoke truly that said, The tears of hell are not sufficient to
bewail the losses of heaven.

Infoelicissimum genus infortunij, meminisse fuisse foelicem: that is, it is
the unhappiest thing of all, to think that ever we were happy.

Poeta.
Dura satis miseris memoratio prisca bonorum:

It is misery enough, and though there were no more misery, to remember the
joys we have lost.

Terent.
As the old man in the Poet said, I have a son, nay, alas, I had a son; so
the damned may say; We have a heaven, nay, alas, we had a heaven.

Lysimach.
Lysimachus King of Macedonia warring against the Scythians, being enforced by
extreme thirst, to yield himself into the hands of his enemies, after he had
drunk cold water, brake out into these lamentable words: Good God, for how
short a pleasure, how great a Kingdom have I lost? So the damned soul may
say, Good God, for how short a time of pleasure, how great a Kingdom have I
lost?

And surely this is just with GOD, that those that separate themselves from him
here, should be banished from him hereafter: That those that hate the Saints
here, should be debarred their company hereafter: that those that crucify the
Lamb here, should be cursed of the Lamb everlastingly hereafter.

The second thing that makes Hell torments so bitter and intolerable, is
poena sensus: the punishment of feeling. Poena sensus.
Every member of body, and every faculty of soul, together tormented for ever.

The eye afflicted with darkness, the ear with horrible and hideous
outcries, the nose with poisonous and stinking savors, the tongue with gallie
bitterness, the whole body with intolerable fire: a fire that shall burn so
violently, that the danmed shall prize a drop of water above ten thousand
worlds.

The faculties of the soul also shall be most pitteously tormented: the memory
with pleasures past: the apprehension with pains present: the understanding
with joys lost: and in this faculty shall lie the worm of conscience gnawing,
Miseria reproborummaxima.
which the Scriptures so often threaten to sinners: this worm is a continual
repentance and sorrowful of rage, and desperation, by reason of their sins: and
this worm or remorse shall chiefly consist in bringing to their minds the
means and causes of their present calamities: how easily they might have bin
freed from hell, and how often they have been invited to heaven, and they
would none, but now when they would they cannot. And this worm biteth and
gnaweth on the bowels of these miserable me^ for evermore.

The will also shall be most grievously tormented with a furious malice against
God, and against the Elect. And in this their cursed estate, they shall
recurse, curse God again, because he made them, and making them, adjudged
them to death, and dying, they can never find death: they shall curse his
punishments, because he punishes them so vehemently: they shall curse his
benignities, because they are sawced with contrary seuerities: they shall curse
CHRIST'S blood shed upon the Cross, because it has been auayleable to save
thousands, and nothing auailable to save them: they shall curse the Angels in
heaven, and the Saints in bliss, because they shall see them in joy, and
themselves in torment: cursings shall be their hymns, and howlings their
tunes: blasphemy shall be their ditties, and lachrymae their notes:
lamentations shall be their songs, and scriching their strains: these shall
be their evening and morning, yea mourning songs: Moab shall cry against Moab:
father against child, and child against father that ever he begat him: vae,
vae, vae, Revel. 8. Vae prae amaritudine, vae prae multitudine, vae prae
aeternitate poenarum: that is, Woe in regard of the Bitterness, woe in regard
of the Multitude, and woe in regard of the Euerlastingnes of the torments of
Tophet.

Now therefore I may truly say of all the damned crew, as our Savior said of
Judas, Mat. 26.24
It had been good for him if he had never been borne. So it had been good for
the damned, if they had never been borne: or if they must needs have a being,
they had bin toads or serpents, that so they might never have known these
unspeakable sorrows of Tophet.

I cannot but muse at a company of wicked hell hounds, that will use these
execrable words: Would I ware damned if ever I knew of this or that: God damn
me body and soul, if I do it not: Alas, alas, full little do these wretches
know what it is to be damned, if they did understand aright, they would be
hanged up before they would use these fearful speeches: unless they meant
with the moth-flie, never to be at quiet, till they have clipped their wings in
those flames.

I therefore conclude this part with the admonition of Prosper, Prosper de vita
contemplatiua, l. 3. c. 12.
who wishes all men to think, how great an evil it is to be excluded the
presence of God, to be banished from heaven, and cast into everlasting fire
with the devil and his Angels, to see no light, but feel excessive heat, to
be drowned in the deep Lake of Gehenna, and to be eternally torn with most
greedy worms: To think on these things (says he) is a sure way to renounce
al vice whatsoever: and he that will not be brought to lay to heart these, I
leave him to feel the smart of them for everlasting.

The sixth part of the Description of Tophet, is set down in these words, The
6. part And much wood. Obseruat.
Much wood.

Wherein is noted the eternity of the torments of Tophet.

The Perpetuity of these torments is every where mentioned in the book of God.

The Prophet Daniel speaking of the condemnation of the wicked, Dan. 12.2.
adds perpetuity to their shame: saying, Some shall awake to perpetual shame
and contempt.

Saint Mark speaking of the vexing worm, Mar. 9.24.
adds Perpetuity to the gnawing of it: their worm never dies.

Saint Paul adds to the perdition of the wicked Perpetuity also: Their
perdition is everlasting, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9.

Jude.
Saint Jude adds the like: That they suffer eternal fire.

Reu. 20.10
And Saint John does add unto the lake perpetuity: The Devil was cast into the
lake, where he shall be tormented day and night for evermore.

Thus we see that the torments of hell are infinite, Reu. 9.6.
ratione finis: without end: and though they seek death, yet find it they
shall never.

Simile.
Thus shall they be like a man that is to be pressed to death, who calls for
more weight, more weight to dispatch him of his pain: but alas, he must not
have it: So in hell they shall cry for death, and go without it.

As the Psalmist speaks of Gods mercy, Psalm. 136.
That his mercy endures for ever; so ye damned may say of his justice, that
his justice endures for ever.

There were some comfort to the damned souls, if these their torments might
have end, but that shall never be: that is that that breaks the hearts of the
damned: no torment in hell comparable to this of perpetuity: what, never have
end, never? O this is such a torment, that the damned themselves are not able
to express.

It is a common saying; Adagium.
But for hope the heart would burst; but they are shut out of all hope: and
therefore who can express their torments?

O (says a heathen man) God shall once give an end to these evils: but the
damned shall never be able to say this. For, (as Gregory says) Mors miseris
fit sine morte: finis sine fine: Gregor.
defectus sine defectu: quoniam mors semper viuit, and finis semper incipit,
and defectus deficere nescit: that is, The death of the damned is such as shall
never die; their end shall never end; and their destruction, a perpetual
confusion.

No marvel therefore if Saint Bernard says, Bern. de consid. ad Eugen. li. 5.
Horres in manus incidere mortis viuentis, and vitae morientis: that is, It is
a terrible thing to fall into the hands of living death, and dying life.

If there might be an end of these pains, it were something, though it were
after so many millions of years, as there are drops of water in the sea,
stars in the firmament, motes of dust upon the earth, and as there have been
moments of time since time began: but this cannot be granted: but when the
Lord does give over his being, then and never before then shall the damned be
discharged, though the blockish Catabaptist persuades the contrary.

The reason of the perpetuity of these torments, is threefold.

The first, Drawn from the Majesty of God offended: an infinite Majesty
offended, an infinite torment imposed.

The second, Drawn from the state and condition of the damned: For as long as
they remain sinful, so long shall they remain tormented for sin: but in
hell they ever remain sinful, therefore in hell they shall ever be tormented.

Sin is like oil, and the wrath of God like fire: as long as the oil
lasts so long the fire burns: and so long as they are sinful, so long
for sin tormented; therefore for ever damned.

For most sure it is, that in hell there is neither grace nor devotion: the
wicked shall be cast in exteriores tenebras extra limitem diuinae
misericordiae: They shall be cast into outward darkness, out of the limits
both of grace and mercy. Though their weeping in hell may seem penitentiary,
yet they do but lugere poenas non peccata: they do but mourn their sorrows,
not lament their sins.

And though Dives his prayer for his brethren may seem to proceed from a
charitable soul, yet it was not for their good, but for his own: for he knew
that if they should come to hell, (his lewd and vicious example being part
occasion thereof) his torments should be doubled, nay centupled upon him.

In hell therefore, there being neither grace nor devotion, but still affected
iniquity, their torments must be everlasting.

The third reason, Drawn from that stinging attribute of Gods justice: because
life was offered them here, and they would none, it is just with God, that when
in Hell they beg it, they should go without it: yea, that they should seek
death, and never find it.

Once they were offered salvation, being gone in Adam, but that offer being
neglected, let them never look for another.

O if this long torment were always thought upon, it would make us use this
short time of our life better: they are Spiritual Lunatikes, and worse than
mad Bedlomites, that will purchase an eternal torment for so short a pleasure.

I beseech you therefore (beloved brethren) for your souls sake, which should
be more worth unto you than a thousand worlds, let not these infinite
torments be passed over with a short or shallow consideration, but write the
remembrance of them in the inward parts of your souls with the Diamond of
deepest meditation, that so this Tophet may never be your destruction.

The se^enth and ^^st part. ^he breath ^f the lord (...) c.
The seventh and last part of the Description of Tophet, set down in these
words: The breath of the Lord like a river of brimstone does kindle it. In
which words there is not only a Prosopopeia in the breath, but a Topographia
in the brimstone used: both which figures do notably express the furious
indignation of the Author, and the fierce severity of the act: the Author or
Inflictour of all these fearful punishments is the Lord God offended, at
whose anger the Heavens do melt, the Earth quakes, and the whole Creation
trembles, into whose hands to fall, is most fearful, Heb. 12.29
For the Lord our God is a consuming fire.

The Lord is the decreer, appointer and commander of all these fearful
torments: and the Lord does execute them upon the damned, both immediate,
immediately from himself: and mediate, mediately by his instruments, as by the
devils, fire, darkness, stinch, and other creatures.

Fear therefore (in the fear of God) this fearful and terrible name Jehovah:
that at the day of need, ye may find him a mild and gentle Lamb, Revel. 5.
and not A roaring Lion of Judah.

The severity of punishment is set down by a double allegory, Breath, and
Brimstone.

To express the rage and tyranny of Saul against the Lambs of JESUS, this
word is used in the Acts: And Saul yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter
against the Disciples of the Lord, Act. 9.1.
etc.

So here to express the furious indignation of the Lord against sinners, the
Breath of the Lord is used.

Like a river of Brimstone.

The perplexing property of brimstone is to burn, Darkely, to grieve the
sight: Sharply, to afflict the more: Loathsomly, to perplex the smell.

We read in the Scriptures, that the Lord being much provoked, punished not
only with fire, but with burning brimstone, which is ten to one more
terrible.

Ge^. 19.24.
As upon Sodom, he rained fire and brimstone from heaven.

Ezec. 38.22. Psalm. 11.6.
I will rain upon him a sore rain, haile-stones, fire and brimstone.

Upon the wicked God shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and stormy
tempest, this shall be their portion to drink.

The beast, and the false Prophet, Apo. 1^.20.
both alive, were cast into the Lake of fire and brimstone.

Oh who can express now the lamentation of Tophet, for the breath of the Lord
like a river of brimstone does kindle it!

As this should be of power to keep you from the least iniquity: so it should
possess you with the knowledge of the right nature of sin: that it is the
most odious and loathsome thing in the world: A stinking carkase stinketh not
so in the nostrils of man, August.
as a polluted sinner stinketh in the nostrils of almighty God.

As Plato says of virtue: That if it could be seen with a bodily eye, Plato.
it is so splendid and glorious a thing, as all the world would be ravished
with the love of her: So may I say the contrary of vice: That if sin could
be seen in his own colors, and in his right Nature, all the world would
loath, and utterly detest it.

But miserable man (the more is the pity) conceiueth not aright of sin, one
would think that Adam had committed but a small sin in eating the forbidden
fruit, at the entreaty of Eve, yet he and all his posterity guilty of eternal
death for the same: One would think that that poor man had committed but a
small fault, In gathering a few chippes on the Sabbath day: (we have fouler
matters committed on our Sabbaoths, and go unpunished) yet he was stoned to
death for his labor: one would think that Ananias detayning part of the
money, Act. 5.
and maintayning the contrary with a lie, had committed but a small fault, yet
he was struck dead for the same at the feet of Peter: one would think that
an idle word were but a small sin, yet of every idle word that men shall
speak, a great account must be made for the same.

And as men conceive of sin, so they imagine of punishment, they think that
the Lord will not deal so severely with them; and yet my Text says, That the
breath of the LORD like a river of brimstone does kindle it: The terror of
whose wrath is indurable.

Hearken here all you that make but a sport of sin, look upon your
punishments prescribed: Zach. 5 8.
the least sin that ever you have committed (being weighty as lead) is able
to sink your souls down to damnation.

Cease therefore from evil, and do that which is good: Cast away the works
of darkness, and put on the armor of light: hate the little sin as well as
the great, an idle thought as well as blasphemy: make much of offered grace to
salvation: Christ now knocks at the door of your souls, and would gladly
come in and dwell with you: Pro. 8.
For it is his delight to dwell with the sons of men: shut him not out as did
the Bethleemites: Bid him not be gone, as did the Gadarens, but Be ye open
ye everlasting doors, that the King of glory may come in; yt you having given
him entertainment here, he may do the like by you hereafter, placing you
with the sheep on his right hand, and singing this blessed haruest-song unto
you, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from
the beginning of the world. To the which most blessed place of glory, the LORD
bring every soul of us at the day of our death and dissolution; and that for
JESUS CHRIST his sake, to whom with GOD the Father, and GOD the blessed Spirit,
three glorious persons, but one immortal GOD, be ascribed all honor and glory,
both in Heaven and Earth, this day and ever, Amen.

FINIS.
AN EARNEST AND ZEAlous Prayer, to be saved from the damnation of TOPHET.
O Most glorious everliving, and euerlouing Lord God, the fountain and
wellspring of all our happiness, we thy poor servants (unworthy, in regard
of our manifold transgressions of the least of thy blessings) do most humbly
fall down before the throne of thy dreadful Majesty, confessing in the
bitterness of our souls, the baseness and vileness of our estates by sin: O
Lord, ashamed we are to come before thee that are nothing but sinful
corruption and abomination, but thou a majesty most pure, in comparison of
whom the Angels themselves are counted impure: we dare not therefore (being
thus loathsome and abominable) presume to present our selves before thee, as
in our selves, but in thy manifold mercies, and thy Son Jesus Christ his
merits, in whom thou art delightfully pleased with all that faithfully call
upon thy name.

Lord in thy Son behold us, we most humbly beseech thee, accept us in his
worthiness, cleanse us in his blood, justify us in his righteousness, sanctify
us with his spirit, and in his most precious death free us from the damnation
of hell. O till these comfortable tidings be sealed up to our souls, how
perplexed are we! O how do our hearts quake and tremble till we have found the
salvation of thee our God! Reject us not (O heavenly Father) that feign would,
as be saved of thee, so uprightly serve thee: we plead now and ever as for
pardon so for grace, whereby we may in plentiful manner, bring forth fruits
worthy of amendment.

Lord keep us in body and soul to thy everlasting Kingdom and salvation,
Lord preserve us from the terrible torments of Tophet: O what shall become of
us, if we for our sins, when we die, be thrown into that Lake that burns
with fire and brimstone, so bitterly, as forces screeching and screaming
continually! Lord deal not with us according to our sins, and thy justice,
but in the multitude of thy mercies, save our souls alive: O consider the
terrors of our troubled souls: Let not the groans of our hearts be despised,
but suffer them to pierce the heavens for a blessing: O thou that art the God
of endless compassion, cast us not away from thy presence, we are the
workemanshippe of thine hands, O Lord confound us not: O Lord (that delightest
not in ye death and damnation of a sinner) be moved to show pity upon us: O
Christ our blessed Savior, make intercession to God the father for us, speak
by thy gracious spirit peace to our disquieted souls, bind up our broken
hearts, give us that we may clearly see our names written in the Book of
Life: and our souls released from the fearful damnation of Tophet.

To this end (gracious God) remove all sin from our souls, and plant in the
garden of our hearts, all those spiritual and heavenly graces that are proper
and peculiar to thine Elect, that we may be always a sweet smelling savor
before thee: give us faith in thy promises, love to thy Majesty, zeal to thy
glory, obedience to thy laws, and guide us daily by thy blessed spirit into
all truth and godliness: Lord give us to be out of love with the vanities of
this life, to hate every work of darkness, the little sin as well as the
great, quicken us (O Lord) by thy quickening Spirit: O give us hearts to be
inflamed with the love of thy truth, O that we could hunger, and thirst after
grace, as the chased Heart does the running brook, O that we could
experimentally say with thy servant David, that all our delight is in thy
commandments.

Thus (O Lord) we receiving grace from thy Majesty, to repel the fiery darts
of the Devil, and to fly even from every apparition of evil, so doing we may
reap much comfort to our souls in this world of trouble, and at the fearful
day of judgment, we may be (...) from the lamentable tortu^^^ (...) ^^phet,
where howling and yelling (...) be for evermore, and that for Jesus Christ's
sake thy Son our Savior: to whom with thee and thy most glorious Spirit we
desire, even from the bottom of our hearts, to have offered up all
thanksgiving and praise both in heaven and earth, this day and evermore, Amen.

FINIS.

