Mamillia.

A Mirror or looking-glass for the Ladies of England.

Wherein is disciphered, how Gentlemen under the perfect substance of pure
love, are often inueigled with the shadow of lewd lust: and their firm faith,
brought a sleep by fading fancy: until wit joined with wisdom, does awake
it by the help of reason.

By Robert Green Graduate in Cambridge.

Imprinted at London for Thomas Woodcocke. 1583.

To the right honorable his very good Lord and Master, Lord Darcie of the
North, Robert Green wishes long life, prosperous success, with all increase
of honor and virtue.
EMilius Macedonicus (Right honorable) thinking to gratify Alexander the great
with some curious piece of workma^ship, waded so far in the depth of his art,
as strayning courtesy with cunning, he skipt beyond his skill, not being able
to make it perfect. Who being blamed of Pausanias, for striving further then
his sleeue would stretch, answered: that although art and skill were wanting
to beautify the work, yet heart and will did polish that part, which lack of
cunning had left imperfect, ouershadowing the blemish of disabilitie, with the
veil of sincere affection. Whose aunsweare, as one guilty of the like crime,
I claim for a sufficient excuse of my folly, that durst enterprise to strive
beyond my strength, knowing my self unable, both by nature and art, to bring
such a weighty matter to a wise end. For if the fouler is to be condemned of
folly, that takes in hand to talk of hunting; or the merchant counted as
mad, which medleth with the rules of Astronomy: then may I well be dubbed a
dolt, which dare take in hand to discipher the substance of love, that am but
a lout; or to show the force of fancy, which am but a fool. But as there is
not a greater cooling card to a rash wit then want, so there is not a more
speedy spur to a willing mind, then the force of duty: which drove me
into a double doubt: either to be counted as bold as blind Bayard, in presuming
too far; or to incur the prejudice of ingratitude, in being too slack; to
be thought vaineglorious in writing without wit; or a thanklesse person
forgetting my debt: so having free choice of them both, I thought it but a
light matter to be counted over venturous, if I might do any thing which
should show some part of my duty unto your honor: neither did I ever care to
be counted bold, if that blemishe might either pleasure your Lordship, or else
make manifest my good will, which always did wish to be with the foremost of
your welwillers. But as wishes are of no value, so his will is as vain, that
couetes to pay his debt with a counterfeite coin: wherein I both find the
fault, and commit the offense. For being greatly indebted to your honor by
duty, for the first payment I offer a piece of work neither worth the wetting
nor wearing, the receiving nor reading, more meet for the Apothecaries pots,
then a noble man's hand; fitter for the peddler to rent, then Gentlemen to read.
Yet if the work be weighed with my simple wit, it is down measure; and if my
good will might serve for a weight, although the stuff be light, yet there
are few would be heavier in the balance. So that hoping of your honors
wonted courtesy, that you will mark the mind, and not the matter; the will,
and not the work; I commit your honor to the almighty.

Your Honors humble Servant, Robert Green.
To the Gentlemen readers.
AFter that, Gentlemen, I had neither well furnished nor finished this imperfect
piece of work, but brought it to a bare end, whether it were for imitation
or art, I have almost forgot, but for one it was, I chanced to read diverse
Epistles of sundry men written to the readers, wherein I found the best learned
of them also far drenched in doubt of their disabilitie, and almost fortified
for fear that want of skill should be a blemish to their work, as (thinking
a flat confession should have a plain pardon) they call their books vanities,
shadows imperfect paterns, more meet for the Peddler then the Printer, toys,
trifles, trash, trinkets. Some comparing the^ to cheeses, neither worth the
tasting, nor eating, so their books, neither worth the reading nor hearing: and
yet the worst of them all so perfectly polished with the pumice stone of
eloquence, as in them nature and art do strive for supremacy. If then those
learned men do count their works but counterfeit, that were carved with such
curious cunning, and termed them trash which were Merchant ware: what shall I
call mine, which is of such simple stuff, as it is neither worth the cheaping
nor changing? Surely I will leave the name to the readers gentle judgment,
because I cannot find one bad enough, that every one may term it as their
fancy leads them. For there is no chaffer so charie, but some will cheap; no
ware so bad, but some will buy; no book so ill but some will both read it and
praise it; and none again so curious, but some will carpe at it. Well, so many
heads, so many wits. If Gentlemen will take my book as a toy to pass away
the time, and weigh mere of my meaning then of the matter, and more of my will,
then either of my wit, or the work; if I say, they shall show me this
courtesy, it shall be both a spur to prick me forward to attempt further, and
a sufficient recompense for my travel,

Robert Green.
Roger Portington Esquier, in commendation of the book.
IF Grecia soil may vaunt her hap and lucky chance,
as nurse of Clios clarkely crew, her state t'aduaunce,
Or Smirna boast of Homers skill, for hope of fame,
If royal Rome may reap renown by Tullies name,
Or Virgils country village vaunt that she excel,
Dan Ouids native land may strive to bear the bell:
Then Britain soil may bravely boast her state in fine,
That she a new Pernassus is, the Muses shrine.
No finer wits in Grecia reigned then Britayne breeds,
No brauer works in Smirna wrought then English deeds.
If passing port of Poets praise was ever found
In Mantua, the like is got in Britayne ground.
If Tullie wan the golden spurs of fame by prose,
And reaped in Rome such rich renown as well as those:
Our Author beautifies this Brittayne soil for why?
His stately style in English prose does climb the sky.
His filed phrase deserves in learnings throne to sit,
And his Mamillia darkens quite the Frenchmens wit.
Yea if that any have been crowned with laurel green,
This Green deserves a laurel branch I ween:
For why? his pen has painted out dan Cupids craft,
And set at large the doubtful chance of fancies drafte:
Yea in such comely colors sure his works enbost,
As he for English phrase may sit amidst the most.
And though he thinks his book too rude to win such fame,
His foes would say that he by right deserves the same.
Roger Portington.
Mamillia.
THe City of Padua, renoumed as well for the antiquity of the famous
University, as also for the notable river now called Po, when the Civil
wars were most hot, and the broils of dissension so ryfe, that the Goths
and Hungarians with sudden invasion had subverted the whole state of Italy,
was ever so fortified with courageous Captains and warlike Soldiers, and so
well governed by the prudent policy of their Magistrate Signior Gonsaga, that
they always set out the flagge of defiaunce, and never came so much as once to
parle of peace with their enemies; although Venice, Florence, Sienna, with many
other Cities (as Machianell in his Florentine history makes report) at the
hot Skirmishes and fierce Assaults of the Soldiers, accepted conditions of
peace willinglye: so much prevailed the pollitique wisdom of the wise Rular.
Out of whose live by descent issued one Francesco Gonzaga, a Gentleman whom
fortune did not only endue with wealth, but also beautified with as great
wisdom, as any of his predecessors: so that it was in doubt, whether he wanne
more favor for his wit, or fear for his riches: whether he were better lyked
for his calling, or loved for his courtesy: but sure whether it were, he had
gained the hearres of all the people. And yet for all these golden gifts of
Nature, he was more bound unto Fortune, which had bestowed upon him one only
daughter, called Mamillia, of such exquisit perfection and singular beauty, as
the lineaments of her body, so perfectly portrayed out by nature, did show this
gorgeous Goddess to be framed by the common consent of all the Graces: or else
to purchase Nature some great commendation by caruing a piece of so curious
perfection. For her body was not only beautified with the outward blaze of
beauty: but her mind was also endued with the beams of inward bounty, as yt
men were ravished as much with the wonder of her wisdom, as driven into
admiration with the form of her feature. But what need I to disciphet her
excellent perfection, since nature had so cunningly painted out the portraiture,
both of her mind and body, in such comely colors, as it may suffice for me to
say, she was the flower of all Venice.

This gallant Gyrle by her virtuous qualities had made such a stealth in the
heart of one Florion, a young Gentleman, which served as she did in the Dukes
court at Venice, that he reposed his only pleasure in her presence, and
again her only contentation consisted in his company, that they were two
bodies and one soul, their will and wish was alike, the consent of the one was
a constraint to the other, the desire of Mamillia, was the delight of Florion:
yea the concord of their nature was such, as no soppes of suspicion, no mistes
of distrust, no floddes of ficklenes could once foil their faith, their
friendship was so firmly founded on the rock of virtue: for this straight
league of lyking was not fleshly fanoy, but a mere choice of Chastity.
Whereby we may well note the broad blasphemy of those which think, because the
Towe cannot touch the fire, but it must burn, no^ the Iuie claspe the Tree,
unless it suck out the sap: so like wise the green wood cannot touch the
coals, but it must flame, nor the Uine branch embrace the tender twig, but it
must consume it: that love and lyking cannot be without lust and lasci^iousnes:
that deep desire cannot be without fleshly affection: but this suspicion
proceeds of an eull disposition. This currish misconstruing comes of a
corrupt conscience, they seek others, where they have been hid them selves:
for we may see by experience and manifest examples, that there have been even
lewd Lovers, which have contented their disordinate desire, only with the
courteous countenance of their Mistress, who although they were caught in the
snare of beauty, and altogether vowed unto vanity, yet they could so well
bridle their affections, that the only sight of their Lady was sufficient to
feed their fancy. If then the wanton woer, whose stay is but a rotten staff,
can so valiantly resist the Alarmes of lust; may not a faithful friend fry
in friendship, and freese in such filthy affection, be fervent in goodness,
and cold in desire? yes Amian and Ignatia: Auficlius and Canchia: Amador and
his Florinda, are sufficient proofs and presidences of this chaste league of
loyal amity, that we may well think, and easilye perceive this sacred bond
of friendship between Florion and Mamillia was altogether founded upon virtue,
and the more it is to be credited, because he had been deceived by the
lightness of one Luminia, and knew very well, that there was little co^stancy
in such kites of Cressids kind, whose minds were as foul within, as their
faces fair without: he had been burnt in the hand, for touching fire without
aduisement: he had late enough tasted of that bait, to be taken in the
trappe: he had bin too sore canuased in the Nets, to strike at every stale:
and he had trusted too much the shape of the body, to be so soon allured with
the ^ewe of Beawtie: yea he had been so deepelye drenched in the waves of
women's wyles, that every sudden sight was a sea of suspicion, as he made a
vow in the way of martage to abandon the company of women for ever, and to a
solemn oath, since he had won again the fields of his freedom, never by
the leawdnes of love to enter into bondage. Yet he would not altogether,
(although he had cause with Euripides to proclaim himself open enemy to
womankinde) seem so absurd a Sophister, to infer a general conclusion of a
particular proposition, nor be counted so injurious, to condemn al of
lightness, for ones leawdnes; nor to show himself such a moodelesse Aminius,
to say all were Criples, because he found one halting: No, no, he knew all
herbs were not as bitter as Coloquintida; that all water was not infectious,
though some were pestilent; that as there is a cha^gable Polipe, so there is a
sted fast Emerauld, that there was as well a Lucrece, as a Lais; as well
Cornelia as Corinna; as constant a Penelope, as a fleeting Phania; and as
virtuous a Mamillia, as a vicious Luminia: so that as he detested yt one for
her folly, he embraced the other for her virtue: insomuch that having himself
escaped the seas of trouble and care, yet he thought his mind not fully quiet,
until he might cause his friend Mamillia, to cast her anchor in the port of
Tranquillity. For after that he had made a Metamorphosis of himself from a
Courtier of Venice, to a Countriman in Sienna: from the waves of wickedness, to
the calm seas of Security: from the castle of Care, to the palace of
pleasure: from the heath of Heaviness, to the haven of Happiness: yea, as he
thought, from hell to heaven: yet he could not have a quiet conscience, til he
might see her of the same sect, and as deadly to hate it, as he did loath it: so
that he wrote her a letter, wherein he counsayled her to follow his example,
which she having received, and read, the force of his friendship, on the one
side so persuaded her, and the rule of reason on the other side, so constrained
her, that she concluded to abandon the Dukes Court for ever, and so eschew
the bayte wherein was hid such a deadly hook, to abstain from yt pleasure,
which in time would turn to poison, to give a final farewell to that condition
of life, which at length would breed her confusion. And therefore having
obtained leave of the Duchess, came home in haste to her fathers house in
Padua, where she had not remained long, before diverse young Gentlemen drawn
by the passing praise of her perfection, which was bruted abroad through all the City, repaired thither all in general, hoping to get the goal, and every
one particularly persuading himself to have as much as any, wherewith to deserve
her love: so yt there was no Feather, no fangle, Gem nor Jewel, Ouch nor Ring
left behind, which might make them seemly in her sight: yea some were so
curious no doubt, as many Italian Gentlemen are, which would even correct
nature, where they thought she was faulty in defect: For their narrow
shoulders must have a quilted Dublet of a large sise: their thin belly must
have a coat of the Spanish cut: their crooked legs, a fide sloppe; their small
shankes, a bombast hose, and their dissembling mind, two faces in a hood: to
wax with the Moon, and ebb with the sea: to bear both fire and water, to
laugh and weep all with one wind.

Now amongst all this courtly crew, which resorted to the house of Gonsaga,
there was a Gentleman, called Pharicles, a youth of wonderful wit, and no
less wealth, whom both nature and experience had taught the old proverb, as
perfect as his Pater noster, he that cannot dissemble, cannot live: which
sentence is so surely settled in the minds of men, as it may very well be called
in question, whether it belong unto them as an inseparable accident, or else is
engrafted by nature, and so fast bred by the bone, as it will never out: for
they will have the cloth to be good, though the lyning be rotten rags; and a
fine die, though a course thread: their words must be as smooth as oil,
though their hearts be as rough as a rock, and a smiling countenance in a
frowning mind. This Pharicles, I say, fair enough: but not faithful enough, a
disease in men, I will not say incurable, craving altogether to croppe the
buddes of her outward beawtie, and not the fruits of her inward bounty;
forced rather by the lust of the body, then enticed by the love of her virtue;
thought by the gloss of his painted show, to win the substance of her perfect
mind, under his side clothes to cover his claws, with the cloak of courtesy
to conceal his curiosity. For as the birds cannot be enticed to the trappe,
but by a stale of the same kind, so he knew well enough, that she, whose mind
was surely defenced with the rampire of honesty, must of necessity have the
onset given by civility. He therefore framing a sheep skin for his woolues
back, and putting on a smooth hide over his Panthers panch, used first a great
gravity in his apparel, and no less demurenes in his countenance and
gesture, with such a civil government of his affection, as yt he seemed rather
to court unto Diana, the^ vow his service unto Venus. This Gentleman being thus
set in order, wanted nothing but opportunity to reveal his mind to his new
Mistress, hoping that if time would minister place and occasion, he would so
reclaim her with his feigned eloquence, as she should sease upon his lure, and
so cunningly cloak her with his counterfeit call, as she should come to his
fist: for he thought himself not to have on al his armor, unless he had
tears at command, sighs, sobs, prayers, protestations, vows, pilgrimages,
and a thousand false oaths to bind every promise.

While thus he made his train, Gonzaga, as his custom was, once a year
invited all the youth of Padua to a banquet, where, after they had taken
repast, there was no talk but of the beawtie of Mamillia, until every man
took his Mistress to tread the measures.

But she knowing idleness to be the nource of Love, and thinking him half
mad, who fearing fire, would put towe into the flame; or that doubting of
drowning, would swim in the Sea; conveyed her self closely from that wanton
company alone into a garden, intending by solitariness to avoid al
inconvenience, as her presence among the lusty brutes might have procured.
Pharicles, who now thought time and place convenient to discover his mind, sat
quite beside the saddle: for perceiuiug the absence of his Mistress, his heart
was in his hose, and he stood, as if he had with Medusas head been turned to
a stone. Thus nypped on the pate with this new mischaunce, he determined to
return home in have to bewail his hap: but as nothing violent is permanent,
so his sudden sore had a new salve. For as he passed through the court, he
espied Mamillia, reading alone in the garden, whose sudden sight so revived
his daunted mind, as that he paced unto her, and after he had courteously given
her the Salve, interrupted her on it is manner.

Mistress Mamillia, although my rashness merit blame, in presuming so far to
trouble your study, yet the cause of my boldness deserves pardon, since it
comes of goodwill and affection: For where the offense proceeds of love,
there the pardon ensues of course: But if you think the fault so great, as
remission cannot so easilye be granted, I am here willing, that the heart
which committed the crime, shall suffer the punishment due, and yield to be
your slave for ever, to kneel at your Shryne as a true servant in part of
amends.

Mamillia hearing the Gentlemanne in such terms, although somewhat abashed,
paid him his debte in the same coin.

Master Pharicles, although your sudden ariuall did not greatly hinder my
study, I think it did not greatly profit your self: so that your absence
might have more pleasured you, and better contented me. And where you say the
offense proceeds of good will and affection, I am not so mad to think,
that the herb Sisimbrium will sprout and sprigg to a great branch in a momente:
that the cold iron will burn at the sight of the fire: but he that will
iuggle must play his feats under the boorde, or else his halting will be
spied. And where in recompense of your fault, you proffer your service, I will
have no Gentlemen my servant, unless for their Livery, I should give them a
chaungeable suite: and therefore if your market be ended, and your devotion
done, you have as good leave to go, as to come.

Pharicles perceiving the frumpe, as one that was master of his occupation,
served her again of the same sauce.

Gentlewoman, in that my ariual did not greatly hinder your Muses* I think my
fault so much the less: although proceeding of your courtesy, rather then of
my good hap: but if I had known my absence might have pleasured you, my
presence should not have troubled your patience: and though the herb
Sisimbrium grows not to a great branch in a moment, yet the tallest blade of
Spattania has his ^ull height in one moment: and if the Iron burns not at
the sight of the fire, yet the hard stone Calcir, which can be bruised with no
metal, melts with the heat of the Sun, and is resolved into licour. As
for my iuggling, if it may be spyed, it argues the more good will, and less
deceit: so that if I halte, I am a stark lame Lazar, and not a counterfeit
Criple. For my Livery, if I may be your servant, I pass not what color it
be, so it comes of your profer, and not of my desert. Thus, as I have now
begun my market with buying my bondage, and selling my freedom, finding the
ware I looked for, but the choice so charye, that no price will be set,
hoping the champion will in time make a chaung of his chaffer for my coin, I
humbly take my leave.

Pharicles presently departing unto his chamber, left Mamillia still in the
garden, musing on the Ge^tlemans sudden motion, doubting whether his words
were faithful or flattering, in earnest or jest: so that somewhat scortched
with the fire of fancy, she entered with her self into this meditation.

Ah Mamillia, what strange alteration is this? what sudden change, what care
chance? Shall they, who deemed thee a mirror of modesty, count thee a pattern
of lightness? shall thy stayed life be now compared to the Camoeleon that turns
himself into the likeness of every object: or likened to the Fullers Mill,
which ever waxes worse and worse: to the herb Phanaces, whose bud is sweet,
and the fruit bitter: to the Ravens in Arabia, which being young have a
pleasant voice, and in their age a horrible cry? Will thou consent unto lust,
in hoping to love? shall Cupid claim thee for his captive, who even now were
vowed a ^estall virgin? Shall thy tender age be more virtuous, then thy ripe
years? Will thou verify the Proverb, a young S^^^^ (...) old Devil? What?
shall the beauty of Pha^cle^^^ cha^^ thy mind, or his filed speech bewiteh thy
fenses? Will not her think the castle wants but sca^^ing, that yields at
the first shot; and that the bulwark wanted but battery, that at the first
parle becomes Prisoners? yes, yes, Mamillia, his beauty argues inconstancy; and
his filed phrases, ^^ceite: and if he see thee woo^ with a word, he will
think thee lost with a wind: he will judge that is l^ghtly to be gained, is
as quickly lost. The hawke that comes at the first call, will never be steadfast
on the stond: the Niesse that will be reclaymed to the fist at yt first sight of
the lure, will bait at every bush: the woman ye will love at the first look,
will never be charye of her choice. Take heed Mamillia, the finest scabberd
has not ever the brauest blade; nor the goodliest chest has not ye most
gorgious treasure: the bell with the best sound, has an iron clapper: the
fading apples of Tantalus, have a gallant show, but if they be touched, they
turn to Ashes: so a fair face may have a foul mind: sweet words, a sower
heart: yea rotten bones out of a painted Sepulcher: for all is not gold that
glysters. Why? but yet the Gem is chosen by his hue, and the cloth by his
color: condemn not then Mamillia, before thou have cause: accuse not so
strictly, without trial: search not so narrowly, till thou have occasion of
doubt. Yea but the Mariners sound at the first, for fear of a rock: the
surgion searches betimes, for his surest proof: one forewit is worth two
after: it is good to beware, when the act is done too late comes repentance.
What? is it the beauty of Pharicles that kindles this flame? Who more
beautiful then Jason? yet who more false? for after Medea had yielded, he
sacked the forte, and in lieu of her love, killed her with kindness. Is it his
wit? who wyser then Theseus? yet none so traitorous. Beware Mamillia, I have
heard them say, she that marries for beauty, for every dram of pleasure,
shall have a pound of sorrow. Choose by the ear, and not by the eye. Pharicles
is fair, so was Paris, and yet fickle: he is witty, so was Corsiris, and yet
wavering. No man knows the nature of the herb by the outward show, but by
the inward Juice, and the operation consistes in the matter, and not in the
^^rme. Yea but why do I stay at a straw, and skip over a block? Why am I
curious at a Gnat, and let pass an Elephant? his beauty is not it that moves
me, nor his wit y^ captain which shall catch the castle, since the one is
momentary, and the other may be impaired by sickness. Thy faith and honesty,
Pharicles, whereof all Padua speaks, has won my heart, and so shall wear
it: thy c^uility without dissimulation, thy faith without fayning have made
their breach by love, and shall have their entrance by law. Well Mamillia, the
common people may err, and that which is spoken of many, is not ever true. Who
so praised in Rome of the common people and Senate, as Iugurth? yet a rebel. Who
had more voices in Carthage then Aeneas? yet tried a stragler: who in more
credit with the Romans the^ Scipio Affricanus the great? yet at length found
halting. The Fox wins the favor of the lambs by play, and then denoures
them, so perhaps Pharicles shows himself in outward show a demi God, whereas
who tries him inwardely, shall find him but a solemn Saint. Why? all Padua
speaks of his honesty, yea but perchance he makes a virtue of his need, and
so lays this baulmed hook of feigned honesty, as a luring bayte to trappe some
simple Dame. Why? can he be faithless to one, that have been faithful to
all? The cloth is never tried till it come to the wearing: and the linen never
shrinkes, till it comes to the wetting: so want of liberty to use his will, may
make a restraint of his nature: and though he use faith and honesty to make
his marriage, yet she perhaps that shall try him, shall either find he never
had them, or quite forgot them. For the nature of men as I have heard say, is
like the Amber stone, which will burn outwardly, and freese inwardly: and like
the Bark of the Myrtle tree, which grows in the mountains in Armenia, that
is, as hot as fire in the taste, and as cold as water in the operation. The
dog byteth sorest: when he does not bark: the Onix is hottest when it
looks white, the Sirens mean most mischief, when they sing: the Tiger then
hides his crabbed countenance, when he means to take his pray: and a man
does most dissemble when he speaks fairest. Try then, Mamillia, ere thou
trust; prove ere thou pu^ in practice, cast the wa^er ere thou appoint the
medicine, do all things with deliberation, go as the snaile fair and
softly, have makes waste, the maulce is ever sweetest, where the fire is
softest. Let not wit overcome wisdom, nor fancy be repugnant to faith, let
not the hope of an husband be the hazard of thine honesty, cast not thy
credit in the chance of an other man, wade not too far where the foorde is
unknown, rather bridle thy affections with reason, and mortify thy mind with
modesty, that as thou have kept thy virginity inuiol^te without spot, so thy
choice may be without blemishe: know this, it is too late to call again
yesterday. Therefore keep the memory of Pharicles as needful, and yet not
necessary: like him when thou shall have occasion to love; and love when thou
have tried him loyal: until then, remain indifferent.

When Mamillia had uttered these word, she went out of the garden privily into
her closet, and there to avoid the inconvenience which might have ensued of
those foolish cogitations, called an old Gentlewoman, which was her nurse named
Madam Castilla, to bear her company: a Gentlewoman, whose life and years were
so correspondent, as for her honesty she might have tried the danger of
Dianas cave: So they two together pass the time in honest and merry talk,
until all the guestes of Gonzaga had taken their leave, and departed.

But Pharicles, who all this while had a flea in his ear, and his comb cut
with the taunting quippes of his Mistress, as his fire was the more, his flame
was the greater, and not being able so well to rule his lust, as she to bridle
her love, used himself for a secretary, with whom to participate his
passions, knowing that it were a point of mere folly to trust a friend in
love, since Ovid in his book de Art amand^, had forbidden that, as principal,
and perceiving very well, that in such matters two might best keep counsel
where one was away: entered into these terms with himself.

O Pharicles, Pharicles, now thou find it true, which erst thou countest
for a fable, that so long the Fly dalies in the flame that at length she is
burnt, yt the birds Halciones ve^ter so long in the waves, that at last they
are drowned; that so long the pitcher goes to the brook, as in time it comes
broken home: so thou which warming thy fancy at every flame, and venturing thy
self at every wave, art at last burnt with beawtie, and drowning in desire, as
it stands in hazard, that either thou return home broken, or half crased.
Now thou see venturing, if it be token of wit, yet is it no sign of
wisdom, and that timiditie in love is a virtue. Now have thou found Phocas
precept to be fruitful, that a Lover should proceed in his suite, as the
Crabbe, whose pace is ever backwarde, that though love be like the Adamant,
which has virtue to draw: yet thou should be sprinkled with goats blood,
which resists his operation: that though the face of some fair dame has
power to incense thy mind, yet thou should take the herb Lupinar to cool
desire. But Pharicles, if thou be taken, it is no marvel, if thou be
hurt, it is no pity: for the Minow that is ever nibbling, and never biting,
will at length be hanged on the hook. Thou which did accuse so currishly all
women of lightness in love, shall perhaps now condemn thy self of leawdnes in
life: and thou which in thy choice were counted captious, shall try thy self
not to be so curious. What Gentlewoman in all Padua was there either so fair
or honest, whose beauty or virtue thou did not deem light, esteeming them
either unmeet for thee, or thy self unfit for them: so that either thou
could sooth her with a trumpe, or else lay a loading card on her back,
should wey a scoff? and now thou art like to be served of the same sauce:
which, if it happen, those whom you used for a sport, will either think thou
did not know thy descant, or else cross thee for a fool. Why, Pharicles?
will thou be a preacher? who is so guilty as he that accuses himself? if
thou have committed the crime, yet let an other find the fault. It is a foul
bird defiles the own neast, construe al things to the best, turn the stearne
the best way: yea, and if thou haste trodden thy shoe awry, it is but a point
of youth, leave such foolish examinations of thy crased conscience. Mamillia,
yea Mamillia, Pharicles is the mark thou must shoot at: her beauty is the
goal thou must seek to get: her fair face, her golden locks her coral
cheeks: to conclude, her crystal corpse shadowed over with a heavenly glass:
surpassing beauty is the Siren, whose song has enchanted thee, and the
Circes cup, which has so sotted thy senses, as either thou must with Ulysses
have a speedy remedy, or else remain transformed. She has the power to bynd
and loose: her comeliness is the comfortable collise to cure thy care, her
perfection is the lenitiue plaster, must mitigate thy pain: her beauty is
like the herb Phanaces, which reuiueth the dead carcass. Ah Pharicles is
the foundation of thy faith fixed upon her feature? consider with thy self,
beauty is but a blossom, whose flower is nipped with every frost, it is like
ye grass in India, which is withered before it springs: what is more fair?
yet what more fading? What more delighthfull, yet nothing more deadlye? what
more pleasant? and what more perilous? Beauty may well be compared to the
Bathes in Calicut, whose streams flow as clear as the floods of Padus, and
whose operation is as pestilent as the river Orme. What Pharicles, will thou
become a precise Pythagoras in renouncing of love, or a teastie Tianeus in
dispraysing of beauty? What more clear then the Cristall? and what more
precious? What more comely then cloth of Arras? so what more coastly? what
creature so beautiful as a woman, and what more estimable? is not the Diamond
of greatest dignity, that is most glistering? and the pearl thought most
precious, that is most perfect in color? Aristotle says, he cannot be counted
happy, although he had all the virtues, if he want beauty: yea Appollonius an
Archheretike, and professed enemy against the sacred laws of beauty, is
driven both by the laws of nature and nurture, to confess that virtue is so
much the more acceptable, by how much the more it is placed in a beautiful
body. Therefore Pharicles recant, as perceiving thine own folly, and make
amends to beauty, as guilty of blasphemy: for by dispraise thou shalt reap
revenge, and by praise in hazard to atchieue thy purpose. Cineas the
Philosopher was of this opinion, that when the Gods framed beauty, they went
beyond their skill, in that the maker was subject to the thing made: for none
so wise, but beauty has bewitched: none so sober but beauty has besotted:
none so valiant, but beauty has been victor: yea even the Gods themselves have
given beauty the superiority as a thing of more force then they were able to
resist.

Well Pharicles, since beauty is the price for which thou meanest to venture,
use no delay, for fear of danger: let no fond reasons persuade thy settled
mind, let not the precepts of Philosophy subvert the will of nature, youth
must have his course, he that will not love when he is young, shall not be
loved when he is old. Spare no cost, nor be not afraid of words: for they are
as wind, they which are most coy at the first, are most constant at the last.
What a cold co^fect had the Lord Mendozza, at y^ Duchess of Sauoyes hand?
Prictor at his Coluida, and Horatius at his Curiatia? So though Mamillia were
something short in her answers, it signifies the greater affection, though
she made it strange at the first, she will not be strait at the last: y^
greatest offer has but a small denial. Well, to conclude, I am fully resolved
in my self, either to win the spurs, or loose the horse: to have ye
blossom, or lose ye fruit: to enjoy the beauty of Mamillia, or else to
ieopard a joint. And therefore whatsoever learning wills, I will consent unto
Nature: for the best clerks are not ever the wisest men: whatsoever the laws
of Philosophy persuade me, I will at this time give the raynes of liberty to
my amorous passions: for he that makes curiosity in love, will so long strain
courtesy, that either he will be counted a solemn suitor, or a witless wooer:
therefore whatsoever the chance be, I will cast at all.

Pharicles having thus made an end, stood in a mase with him self, not that it
did proceed from any sincere affection, enforced by her virtue: but that his
mind was set upon lust, enflamed by her beauty.

Which disease I doubt nowadayes reigns in many Italian gentlemen. Whether it
be that Mercury is Lord of their birth, or some other peevish planet
predominant in the calculation of their nativity, I know not: but this I am
sure, that their ripe wits are so soon ouershadowed with vice, and their
senses so blinded with self love, that they make their choice so far without
skill, as they prove them selves but evil chapmen: for if she be fair, they
think her faithful: if her body be endued with beauty, they judge she cannot
but be virtuous. They are so bli^ded with the visor of Venus and conceit of
Cupid, as they think all birds with white feathers to be simple Doves: every
seemly Sappho, to be a civil Salona: every Lais, to be a loyal Lucrece:
every chatting mayde^ to be a chaste matrone. These are such as chose for lust,
and not for love; as marry the body, and not the mind: so that as soon as the
beauty fo their Mistres be vaded, their love is also quight extinguished. But
again to the purpose.

As thus, I say, Pharicles had well eased his mind with this last meditation,
because his love was but a lose kind of likinge, and the fire of his fancy
such a flender flame, as the least mislyking shower of shrewd fortune would
quite quench it: therefore he had neither care of his choice, nor fear of his
change: but only fed his fancy with the hope of having Mamillia: and rested
upon this point, till either occasion or place should serve to offer his
service.

In the mean time Gonzaga perceiving his daughter to be mariageable, knowing
by skill and experience, that the grass being ready for the sieth, would
wither if it were not cut; and the apples being ripe, for want of plucking
would rotte on the tree; that his daughter being at the age of twenty
years, would either fall into the green sickness for want of a husband, or else
if she escaped that disease, incur a farther inconvenience: so that like a
wise father he thought to foresee such dangers. And deuisinge with himself
where he might have a meet match for his Daughter, thought none so fit as
Pharicles, who I say by his crafty cloaking, had won the hearts of all the
Gentlemen of Padua. Therefore first intending to know whether his Daughter
could fancy the Gentleman, before he should break the matter unto him, and
yet if he doubting he should move the question, she might conceive some hope of
liberty, and so strain upon her own choice, went unto Madam Castilla her
nourse, desiring her to move the motion to his daughter, as concerning
Pharicles, and that the next day she should tell him his answer. Madam
Castilla easily granted: and departing from Gonzaga, went unto the chamber of
Mamillia, where she found her solemnly sitting in secret meditation, upon the
co^te^ts of a Letter, which not half an hour before was sent unto her from her
old friend Florion, the tenure whereof was this.

Dan Florion of Sienna, to Mamillia in Padua.
Mistress Mamillia, the extreme pleasure I conceive of your sudden and
certain departure from the Dukes court unto Padua, forced me to send you this
letter, as a perfect token of my joy, and your good hap, both thinking my
self in some credit with you, that my persuasions prevailed: and likewise
judging you to be wise, in that you both avoid danger, and provide for a
storm: for it is a great virtue, says the Poet, to abstain from pleasure.
The courtly life, says Agrippa, is a glistering misery: for what more
pleasant outwardly, and what more perilous inwardly? what more delightful to
the body? what more deadly to the mind? there is the substance of vice, with
the veil of virtue, there is bondage in the shape of licencious liberty, and
care clad in a masking coat. Happy, yea thrice happy art thou Mamillia, whose
wisdo^e has not bin inueigled by wit, nor whose will has not bin enforced by
wilfulnes: for in obeying the one, thou have escaped danger, and in resisting of
the other, thou have won same. Yea, but the gold, says some, is tried in the
fire, and the ore is put into the furnace. It is more honor to keep the forte
being assailed, then not besieged: so the credit of a Gentlewoman is more, to
be honest in the court, then in the country, and it purchases more fame to
kneel with a chaste mind at the shrine of Venus, then at the altar of Vesta.
Mamillia, so many heads, so many wits. I speak by experience. The house is
more in danger of fire that is thatched with straw, then y^ which is covered
with stone: he is more in danger of drowning, that sails in the Sea, then he
which rides on the land. What makes the thief, but his pray? what entiseth the
fish, but the bait? what calls the bird, but the scrappe? what reclaimeth
the hawke^ but the lure? The court. Mamillia, is y^ whetston of lust, the bait
of vanity, the call of Cupid: yea the utter enemy to virginity: so that in as
much as virginity is to be esteemed, so much the Dukes court is to be eschewed.
But I hear thou art at home with thy father in Padua, and that there is great
resort of Gentlemen to crave thee in marriage: take counsel, Mamillia, at him
which has bought it. If thou have taken care to keep thy virginity
inviolable, as thy greatest treasure: so take both heed and time in bestowing
the same as a most precious Jewel. Respect not his beauty, without virtue: for
it is like a ring in a swynes snoute: esteem not his wealth without wit, nor
his riches without reason; for then thou shall either choose a fair Inn with
a foul hostess; or wed thy self to a wooden picture with a golden coat.
Regard not his birth, without bounty: for it will ever procure stateliness.
Beware of hot love, Mamillia, for the greatest flow has the soonest ebb: the
sorest tempest has the most sudden calm: y^ hottest love has the coldest
end: and of the deepest desire oftentimes ensues the deadliest hate. But why
do I deal so doultishly to exhort thee, which have no need of such
persuasion, and since I both have heard, and I my self know thy mind so
grafted in virtue, y^ thou will neither like so lightly, nor waver so lewdly:
but either make thy match well, or else stand to thy choice? For she that will
falsify her faith to one, will crack her credit for all. Therefore least I
should be tedious, or urge that which is not needful, I refer the rest to
your discretion, desiring you to do my commendations to the rest of my
friends. And so farewell.

Yours in a chaste mind, Dan Florion.


AFter that Mamillia had read this Letter to Madame Castilla, they fell in
discourse of the vertu^us disposition of Florion, who being of tender years,
which are subject unto lust; was ever a professed enemy to Love: yea the
painted face of Beauty could never have power to enchant his virtue, he had
already well tied himself to the mast of modesty, to keep him from the Sirens
songs of beastly vanity, and had sufficiently defensed his mind with the
rampyre of honesty, against the laseiuious cup of Circes sorcerie; that as
other Gentlemen of Italy had sworn themselves true subjects to the crown of
Cupid: so he had vowed himself a professed soldier, to march under the
ensign of Virtue.

These few words past between them, of the good and godly nature of the
Gentleman: Madame Castilla, as the Mistress of her art, began to take
occasion of talk with Mamillia, by the con^ents of Florions behest: if she
should have abruptly sifted her, her devise should be spied: and so perchance
not have an answer agreeable to his demand: therefore she cried her on this
manner.

Mistress Mamillia, the contents of your friend Florions Letter shows, that
either the constellation of the stars, the disposition of the Planets, or y^
decree of the destinies, or force of the fates were contrary in y^ hour of his
birth, or else it is not always true, that youth is prone unto vice; or that
tender years cannot be without wanton conditions: for there is none more
witty, and yet few less wilful: none so courteous, yet few less curious: as
his nature seems very precious, and yet very perilous: eue^ like the patient,
which by over much blood falls into the Plurisie: the glass, the more fine
it is, the more brittle: the (...), though it last the wyn^^ing, will scarce
abide the wearing: the Margaret is of great valor, yet soonest broken: y^
Musk is most strong in savor, yet endures but a small time: so the nature of
Florion by how much the more it is precious, by so much y^ more it is to be
doubted: and yet the byrds that breed in Bohemia, are of the same color in
their age, that they were (...) changes color, (...) so Flo^ion having settled
the foundation of his youth in (...), may end his life, in virtue.

But what need we ^^ter so far into the state of an other man^ life? (...)
is as good as the end, we cannot fore see it: but whether it happen to be good
or bad, you may account of him (...) makes me much to marvel, and that is
this: that he being in Venice, so far of should hear more then I, which an^
not only in Padua, but in your fathers house, yea more, your nurse and
bedfellow: of the resort of Su^ors I mean, which although I marvel at for the
loosenes, yet I am glad of it, if they be worth the welcomming. Mamillia, my
gray hairs, which in respect of my reverend age should somewhat prevail to
procure some countenance and credit with you, my long continuance and
familiarity in your company, my pains I took with you in your swaddling
clothes, my care in your youth to nourishe you in virtue, and my joy in your
ripe age to see you addicted to the same, are of force sufficient, I hope to
procure you to be somewhat ruled by my talk: which if you shall do, I shall
think my labor well bestowed, and my time and travel well spent.

Florion, Mamillia, writes to you of marriage, which if it comes of his own
conjecture, and no report, he proves himself a subtle sophister, meaning
under the color of an uncertain rumor, to persuade you to a most stayed and
steadfast state of life, as one knowing very well, that as nothing is more
commendable then virginity: so nothing is more honorable than matrimony. And
I my self, Mamillia, which once a wife, and now a widow, do speak by
experience, that though virginity is pleasant, yet marriage is more
delightful. For in the first creation of the world, God made not Adam and Eua
single virgins, but joined couples: so y^ virginity is profitable to one, but
marriage is profitable to many. Whether is ye vine more regarded that bears
grapes, or ye Ash that has nothing but leaves? The Dear that increases the
park, or the barren Do? Whether is the hoppe tree more esteemed, that rots on
the ground, than that which clasping the pole, creeps up, and brings
forth fruit? What, Mamillia, as virginity is fair and beautiful: so what by
course of kind is more unseemly, then an old wrinckled maid? what is more
pleasant to the sight, then a Smaragde, yet what less profitable, if it be
not used? What more delightful to the eyes, then the color of good wine; yet
what of less value if it cannot be tasted? There is nothing more fair the^
the Phoenix, yet nothing less necessary, because she is single. Yea, even the
law of nature, Mamillia, wishes society, and detesteth solitariness. Whether
even in thine own judgment, Mamillia, if thou had a goodly orcharde,
would thou wish nothing but blossoms to grow continually; or the blossoms
to fade, and the trees to be fraught with pleasant fruit? Whether do thou
think the ruddy Rose, which withers in the hand of a man, delighting both
sight and smelling, more happy than that which fades on the stalk without
profit? Whether has the wine better luck which is drunken, than that which
standing still, is turned to vinegar? And yet, Mamillia, I grant too much:
for a woman's beauty decays not with marriage, but rather comes then to the
flower and perfection. But as I do persuade thee to marriage, so would I wish
thee to change for the better, or else keep thy chance still: I mean, I would
have him that should match with thee, to be such a one, in whose society
thou should not count marriage a bondage, but a freedom; not a knot of
restraint, but a band of liberty, one whom thou should like for his beauty,
and love for his virtue; I would have him to want no wealth, and yet to be
wise, and with his wisdom to have all kind of ciuility.

Now, Mamillia, as I have spoken in general, so I will touch the particular. I
mean to show thereof one, which I would wish to be thy husband, and thee to
be his wife. Pharicles it is, to be flat with thee, whose beauty and honesty
has amassed all Venice, whose order of living may be, and has been a perfect
platform and method of civil dealing, and honest behavior: thee, Mamillia, I
wish to be his mate for his courtesy: and him to be thy match but in
constancy. The Gemme which is gallaunt in color, and perfect in virtue, is
the more precious; the^ herb, which has a fair bark, and a sweet sap, is
the more to be esteemed; the Panther with his painted skin and his sweet
breath is the more delighted: so Pharicles fair in face, and faithful in his
heart; pleasant in his countenance, and perfect in his mind; is so much the
more to be embraced. If ye Ore, Mamillia, which is dross outwardly, and gold
inwardly, be of great price: what then is the pure metal? if the rough stone
with a secret virtue, is of value: what is it then, being polished? If a smooth
and learned style in an ill print, importes some credit: what does that which
comes out of a perfect press? so Mamillia, if a man which is deformed in
body, and reformed in mind, may deserve great liking: what deserves he, which
is both bountiful, and beautiful? If a crooked carcass, and an honest nature
merit commendation: what does he then, which is both fair and faithful? If a
disfigured body, with honest conditions, wins favor: what the^ does a comely
countenance, with a courteous mind? Al these perfectio^s by nature, Mamillia,
are incident to Pharicles: y^ he can neither be appeached of want, nor
condemned of lack, neither his person nor mind in any wise misliked.

Now Mamillia, conster of my words, as you please, and like where you love, so
that I may neither repent my talk, nor you curse my counsel.

Mamillia, Gentlemen, was driven into such a maze with this sudden motion of
Madam Castilla, that she stood, as though her heart had bin on her halfepe^ny,
fearing the fetch of her old nurse, doubting what a fleeue she should shape
for the coat, least she should be overtaken in misliking so lightly: or
(though not very chary of her choice) in choosing so quickly: therefore she
framed her answer between both on this manner.

MAdam, if I stand in a mase which have the harm, think it not strange, since
you marvel, which are not touched. For I may more muse of the rumor which know
it contrary: than you, which do but call it in question. But if Florion have
heard a lie, and you believe it: it is not my fault, but your lightness of
credit: and therefore construe of it how you can: for I am at a good point. Old
women will quickly conceive, and soon believe: for age is as credulous, as
suspicious; the dried oak will sooner fire, than the green Ash; and old
rags will sooner burn, than new linen; the green apple is hard to pearce,
when the old fruit will quickly bruise: so age though they be slow in hearing,
yet they are swifter in believing then youth, that the least spark of
suspitiousnesse, will fire their whole brain. And therefore he that knows
their fault, and will not bear with it, is much too blame. Whereas you draw
your perswasio^s for my credit, of your talk from your gray hairs, it shows
surely but a green wit, not so full of gravity, as either your age or years
requires: For the^ your reasons would have tended to ciuility, and not to
sensuality, to virtue, and not to vanity. Your pains you took with me in my
swaddling clothes, your care in my youth to nurse me in virtue, and your joy in
my ripe years to see me addicted to the same, shows by the end that your
care was but slender, and your joy fained. The Cow which gives good store of
milk, and spilleth it with her foot, is as much to be blamed for the loss,
as to be commended for the giftt. The water which for a time bears ye vessel,
and at last with the waves ouerwhelmeth the same, does more harm in drowning
the Bark, then good in bearing it. The hu^ter which trayneth the hounde being
young, truly to call upon the sent, is much too blame to beat him from it
being old: so you Madam, are more to be blamed for persuading me to
matrimony, than you were before to be commended, for exhorting me to
virginity: for in my tender age my infancy was not able to receive your
counsel, and then you told me how greatly I ought to esteem virginity: and
now in my ripe years, when I can conceive your meaning, you wish me utterly
to forsake it: either then sure you were in a wrong opinion, or else now in an
error, but howsoever it was, my mind is settled. Uirginity you say is
delightful, yet matrimony more pleasant: Virginity you put in the positive, but
matrimony in the superlatiue. Well, I pray God you make not marriage so far
to exceed in comparison, that at last it grow to an extremity. But as your
age is much given to the shaking palsy: so I think your arguments have a
spice of the same disease: for their foundation is but fickle, and therefore the
less worth to be taken at ye hardest. The tal Cedar that bears only bare
blossoms, is of more value then the apple tree that is laden with fruit: the
keeper (for all your saying) makes more account of a barren Do, than of a
bearing hynde. Diana shall obtain more same for her chastity in the hunting of
ye woods, than Venus for her lascivious honestye in playing with Mars in her
bed. Uirginity shall be esteemed as a rare and precious jewel, when marriage
shall be counted but a custom. The baytree growing single by it self,
flourishes green; whereas being clasped with the yuie, it withers: ye gold
of it self has a galla^t hue, but being touched, it changes color: the
Saphyre stone clasped in metal, loses his virtue: so a virgin being once
married, withers straight, changes color, and loses her chiefest
treasure. And though you say by course of kind that nothing is more unseemly
then an old wrinckled maid: yet experience teaches us, that nothing is more
unlikely than an old withered wife. The Rose dying on the stalk, seems in
better state then that which fades, being plucked: the grass looks better
being uncut, then that which withers with the sieth: for the one fades by
course of nature; and the other by kind of imperfection. The Phoenix being
seldom seen, the more desired; the rarer the Gemme is, the more esteemed. The
stones of Arabia because they be strange, are of greatest price: so
virginity, by so much the more is to be regarded, by how much it is more rare
then marriage: for the one comes by special grace, and the other by common
course. Uirginitie among the Romans was had in such admiration and estimation,
that if by chance the Uestal virgins walked abroad, the Senators would give
them the upper hand, and all the officers show them due reverence.

Cybil the mother of the Gods, was a virgin: and Minerua was famous for three
things; strength, wisdom, and virginity.

The wise woman which gave Oracles at Delphos, was a virgin, being always
called Pythia. Uirginitie alters the nature of wild beasts: for the Lions
never hurt a pure Uirgin: and Pliny reports that the Unicorne will sleep on
a virgins lap. Therefore Madame, your arguments rather importe rule, than
reason; and seems to come from a green wit, not from a gray head: but
though the foul have fair feathers, he may have rank flesh; the fish may
have glistering skales without, and yet be rotten within: so your outward show
of gravity, may inwardly be addicted to vanity, and old folk are twice
children: and perhaps though your face be wrinckeled, your mind is
youthful; though your years and calling argue chastity, yet you had as leefe
have husband, as wish me married: and I promise you for my part, I had
rather you should eat of the meat, then I taste of the sauce: if it be not a
knot of bondage, but a band of liberty, I would have you once again try that
freedom. But sure either you know more then all, or else say more then you
know: for not only the common people, but also the most learned has thought
marriage to be such a restraint of liberty, as it feels no spark of
freedom: for both the body is given as a slave unto the will of an other man,
and the mind is subject to sorrow and bound in the cave of care: so that even
the name of a wife importes a thousand troubles. If you call this liberty, I
know not what bondage is. Who so is addicted to marriage, finds it easy but
in one respect, and that is, if she chance on a good husband, which indeed
you bravely set out in his colors. But so did Aristotle his happy man; Tully,
his Orator, Plato his common Wealth, and in our countreye here, one of my
kinsmen sets out the lively Image of a Courtier. But as these spoke of such,
but could never find them: so you have described such a husband, as can never
be heard of. Yet, Madame, you go further: for the others spoke in general, and
you for the better confirmation of your reason, infer a particular, and that
is Pharicles, whom indeed I confess to have in outward show, as good qualities
as any in all Italy. But the herb, though it have a fair hue, and a sweet
sap, yet being tasted, it may be infectious. The Panther with his painted
skin and sweet breath, has a tyrannous heart: so Pharicles may be as foul
within, as fair without; and if he be not, he digresseth from his kind: for
these Gentlewomen which have trusted to the beauty of the face, have been
deceived with the deformity of the mind. Theseus, Demophoon, Aeneas, Jason,
and Hercules, were both famous for their feature and fortitude, and renoumed
for their invincible valor, and yet they wanne not so much fame for their
prowes in war, as shame for their inconstancy in love: he that chooses an
apple by the skin, and a man by his face, may be deceived in the one, and
ouershot in the other. Therefore Madame, since both marriage is troublesome, and
the choice so doubtful, I mean not to prove the care, nor try the chance, but
remain a virgin still. Yet thus much to your question, if my mind should
change to try such hap, I would welcome Pharicles, as well as any other.

Madame Castilla hearing this ouerthwartnes of Mamillia, was driven into a
great mase, to see the Gentlewoman so hot with her: in so much ye as old women
are soon angry, she took pepper in the nose at the sharp reply, and
therefore framed her as quick an answer.

MAmillia, quoth she, if the Physicians rub the soar, the patient must
needs stir; touch a galled horse, and he will winch: so your hot answer
shows my question touched you in the quick; and that though you make so
strange with marriage, yet if your choice were in your own hands, you would
give a final farewell to virginity. But the Fox will eat no grapes: and you
will not marry, because you may, or perhaps do love, where your friends will
not like, and your wish should be contrary to their will. Sirichia the Daughter
of Smald king of the Danes, could not be persuaded by her father to forsake her
virginity, but the third day after his death, she was betroathed but to a
mean Squire: Manlia Daughter of Mauritius was so scrupulous of her virginity,
that she altogether abandoned the company of wives and widows, and yet at
length she took an husband, and was so kind hearted, that she would not
stick to sell large peniworths of her honesty. Mamillia, I will not make
comparisons, because they be odious, nor infer any conclusions, for fear of
farther danger. But take this by the way, that he which couers a small spark
in the ashes, will procure a great flame. And with this she departed, as half
angry, leaving Mamillia very sorrowful that she had displeased her old nource,
and very careful for the issue of her new love: yet, as much as she could
dissembling the matter, she past away the day in merry company.

But all this while Pharicles had a flea in his ear, and a thorn in his
foot, which procured him little rest. For as the wounded Dear stays in no
place: so the passionat lover stays but without stedfastnes, never having a
quiet mind: for if he sail, Love is his Pylot: if he walk, Love is his
companion: if he sleep, Love is his pillow: so that always he has the spur
in his side, to procure his disquiet, having no salve for his soar, unless he
reap remedy at y^ hands of his adversary, which Pharicles tried true. For there
passed no hour after his departure from Mamillia, in which a thousand cares
did not clogge his combred mind: for the thought of her sharp answer was
hard to digest in his crased stomach: then that her father and he was of no
great acquaintance, which was a cause of his long absence. How if fortune so
favored, that he gained her goodwill? yet he lost his own freedom, and that
was but a sign of an ill chapmanne: How oftentimes they, which sued to marrye
in haste, did find sufficient time to repent them at leisure?

And surely Gentlemen, if Pharicles had rested on this point, in my judgment
he had hit the mark: for there is no such hinderaunce to a man, as a wife: if
respecting war, Darius and Methridates are witnesses: of learning and
Philosophy, Socrates comes in as plaintiff: so in my opinion, if men would
never marry, they should never be marred: and if they would never have a wife,
they should always want strife: for she is that burden that Christ only
refused to take from men's shoulders: yea some have called a wife, a heavy
Cross, as a merry jesting Gentleman of Venice did: who hearing the preacher
command every man to take up his Cross, and follow him hastily, took his wife
on his shoulders, and said he was ready with the foremost: but least in talking
of crosses, I be crossed for a fool in going beyond my commission, again to
Pharicles: who though perhaps he read these, or such like examples, yet his
hot love warmed his affection: so whatsoever he mused in his mind, it would
not abate his devotion, but still sought sundry means to break to his Saint:
and yet the farther he went, the more he was from his purpose, that he had past
the Cave of care, ready to enter into the dungeon of despair, if fortune had
not favored his chance. For flinging out of his study, to avoid this
melancholy, he went to take air in the fields, where, by good hap, he
espied his Mystresse walking with her nurce to a graynge place, amyldes
distance from Padua, to bear certain Gentlewomen company, which resorted
thither to visit a sick patient, at which place was also Signior Gonsaga, with
other Gentlemen.

Now if Pharicles was driven into an ecstasy, with the extreme pleasure he
conceived by the sudden sight of his Goddess, it is no metuaile, since her
absence was the hazard of his life, and her presence his only pleasure: and I
think, if I may enter into a woman's thought, without offense, Mamillia would
not have wished a fitter companyon to shorten her journey: yet she passed on
without any semblance of his sight: whereas fear and necessity had a deadly
combat in the mind of Pharicles, he doubted if he should be over bold, he
might spill his pottage. But the law of necessity, says Plato, is so hard,
that y^ Gods the^ selves are not able to resist it. For as the water, by nature
cold, is made hot by the force of the fire: and the straight tree pressed
down, grows always crooked: so nature is subject to necessity, that kind
cannot have his course. The little Mouse, by nature fearful, in danger is
desperate: the Boore in safety is timorous, in perril without fear: the
Coward in peace dreadeth the sight of the weapon, whereas being urged by
necessity, he passes the pikes.

Ormaus the Son of king Cirus, by nature was borne dumb, yet when the City
Suzes was taken, seeing a soldier ready to kill his own Father, cried out,
villayne, save the crown: so that necessity in him supplied a want of nature.
And if there be any thing, which is more forcible then necessity, it is the
law of Love, which so incensed Pharicles, that casting all fear aside, he
offered him self to his Mistres, with this courteous parle.

GEntlewoman, if I boldly offer my self, as a Copartner of your voyage, which
am a companyon far unfit for such a company, pardon my fault, since it
comes of force, and condemn not my nature of want of nurture; but let your
beauty bear the blame, as the spur of my rash enterprise: For the Adamant
draws by virtue, though Iron strive by nature: where force is: there the fault
is forgiven. But if in any wise my service might pleasure you, or rather not
offend you, I would proffer it, if I knew it would be but half so well
accepted, as heartily offered: but perhaps it will not be worth the wearing,
because proffered chaffer stinckes.

Madame Castilla hearing the courtesy of the Gentlemanne, and perceiving what
Saint he served, to encourage him the more, gave him this gentle answer, fit
for his friendly offer.

GEntleman, quoth she, we neither can think ill of your nurture, nor yet
mislike your nature, since the one argues courtesy, and the other small
curiositye; unless it be in making your arrival so strange, and accusing
your conscience as guilty, which no man finds fault with: for my part, Sir, and
I think I may speak for Mamillia, you are not so soon come, as welcome, nor
your service is not more heartily offered, then willingly accepted: and
therefore, if you be content with your hap, we are very well pleased with
the chance.

And with that she fell in talk with the rest of the company, to the end
Pharicles might use some speeches to Mamillia: who now seeing the coast clear,
and time and place fit for the purpose, gave her the onset in this manner.

MIstres Mamillia, it has been a saying more common then true, that love makes
al men Orators, yet I my self find it contrary by experience, insomuch that I
think the perfect lover wants not only Eloquence, but has a restraint of his
nature. The water pot being filled to the brim, yeeldes no licour, though
having a hundred holes. The wine vessel being full, lets pass no wine, though
never so well vented. The color joined hard to the sight, hinders the sense.
The flower put into y^ nose-thril, stops y^ smelling. The lover in y^
presence of his Lady, at y^ first is either driven into an ecstasy for joy, or
else into a quaking trau^ce for fear: so that, when he should plead his cause,
his wits are either bewitched, or else not at home: and if it happen his tongue
be not tied, in many words lies mistrust; and in painted speech, deceit is most
often covered, and specially, where either acquaintance or long continuance
has bred no credit. Therefore I Mistres Mamillia, whose acquaintance with you
is small, and credit less, dare use no circumstance, for fear of mistrust,
neither ca^ I tell in what respect to bring a sufficient trial, or proof of my
goodwil: but only that I wish the end of my love to be such, as my faith and
loyalty, is at this present, which I hope tract of time shall try without spot.

In the mean time requesting you to think that the force of love has
constrained me to yield as a slave, ready at beauties command to hazard my
life for your pleasure: I must needs co^fes y^ the gifts of Nature so
abundantly bestowed upon you, have so bewitched my senses, that for my last
refuge, I am forced to appeal unto your courtesy, as a sovereign medicine for
my incurable disease: incurable I may term it, unless y^ drops of your favor
quench the flame, or else death with his deadly dart decide y^ cause. But I hope
it is impossible, y^ such a crystal breast should lodge an heart of Adama^t: y^
such a sugared face should have a bitter mind: that your divine beauty should
be ouergrowne with hellish cruelty, to torment the^, who for your love
sustaynes a thousand miseries. Misery I may well call it: for as there is
nothing more pleasant then beauty: so nothing is more yrksome tha^ bondage, and
yet my restraunt of liberty is so much the more acceptable, by how much the
more it is desired. For although y^ fly willingly fries in the flame, yet she
is blameles: although the Hermine loves her mortal enemy, yet is she not
faulty, since the one comes of affection, and the other by course of nature.

Ah Mamillia, thy beauty has bought my freedom, and thy heavenly face has
made me captive, y^ as he which is hurt of y^ Scorpio^, seeks a salve from
whence he received y^ sore: so you only may minister y^ medicine, which
procures the disease. The burning fever is driven out with a hot potion, and
the shaking palsy with a cold drink. Love only is remedied by love, and
fancy must be cured by mutual affection. Therefore Mamillia, I speak with
tears out wardly, and with drops of blood inwardly, that unless y^ misling
showers of your mercy, mittigate the fire of my fancy, and give a sovereign
plaster for my secret sore, I am like to pass my life in greater misery,
then if I had tasted the infernal torments: for Sophocles being demanded, what
harm he would wish to his enemy, answered, that he might love where he was
not liked, and that such misfortune might have long lasting. But perhaps you
will say, Mamillia, that the beasts which gase at y^ Panther, are guilty of
their own death; that the Mouse taken in the trap, deserves her chance; that
a lover, which has freewill, deserves no pity, if he make not his choice
right.

Ah Mamillia, can the strawresist the virtue of the pure Iet? can flax resist
the force of the fire? can a Lover withstand the brunt of beauty? or freese, if
he stand by the flame, or pervert the laws of nature? weigh al things in the
balance of equity, and then I doubt not but to have a just judgment. But this
I assure my self, if you knew the strength of my love, or the force of my
loyalty, though my person and birth be far unfit for such a mate, yet you
would deem my love to deserve no less: for Leander to his Hero, or Piramus to
his Thesbe was never more fathfull, then Pharicles will try himself to
Mamillia: that although small acquaintance breeds mistrust, and mistrust
hinders love: yet tract of time shall infer such a trial, as trust shall
kindle affection.

And therefore I hope that your noble heart will not put a doubt till occasion
be offered, nor call his credit in question, whom neither you have found nor
heard to be halting. What though the Serpentine powder is quickly kindled, and
quickly out? yet the Salamander stone, once set on fire, can never be quenched:
As the sappy Myrtle tree will quickly rotte: so the hard Oak will never be
eaten with worms: Though the free stone is apt for every impression: yet the
Emerauld will sooner break, then receive any new form: Though the Polipe
changes color every hour: yet the Saphyre will crack before it consent to
disloyalty. As all things are not made of one mould: so all men are not of one
mind: for as there has been a troathlesse Jason, so has there been a
trusty Troylus, and as there has been a dissembling Damocles, so was there a
loyal Laelius. And sure Mamillia, I call the Gods to witnesses, I speak
without fayning, that since thy beauty, either by fate or fortune, is shrined in
my heart, my loyalty shall be such, as the be troathed faith of Erasto to his
Persida, shall not compare with the love of Pharicles to Mamillia. Since
therefore my love is such, repaye but half so much in part of recompense, and
it will be suffycient to release my sorrow. But alas, who can lay their love
where is no desert, and where want breeds a flat denial?

Ah Mamillia, Nature by her secreete judgment has endued all creatures with
some perfect qualities, where want breeds mislyking. The Moule deprived of
sight, has a wonderful hearing: the Hare being very fearful, is most
swift: the fish having no ears, has most clear eyes; so I, of mean wealth,
and less wit, have given me by nature such a loyal heart, as I hope the
perfection of the one will supply the want of the other, and if the choice had
been in my hands, it should have been as it is: therefore since in you only
consistes my safety, and that your beauty has gained the chiefest place in my
heart: Whereof I hope when time shall be favorable to my desire, to make
sufficient trial, I humbly beseech you to take pity upon him, whose life and
death consistes in your answer: and to let it be such, as you may have a
faithful servant for ever.

ALthough these words of Pharicles, Gentlemen, did not greatly displease
Mamillia, because it is very hard to anger a woman with praising her, and
especially, if she think as much of her self as others speak, yet she would
have hid fire in the straw, and have daunced in a net, striving as much as she
could, with a discontented countenance to cover a contented mind, and to seem
as cruel as a Tygre, though as meek as a Lamb, least either by outward show
or words he might conjecture some hope of good hap, she gave him this cold
confect for his hot stomach.

Sir, quoth she, although the common proverb says, that the City which comes
to parle, and the woman that lendes an attentive ear, the one is soon sacked,
and the other is easilye gained: yet I would wish you not to conceive any hope,
or spend any trauaell: for your hope shall be void, and your labor lost.

For although I was so foolish to lend you mine ear, I am wary enough in
letting of my heart: for as you found me prodigal in the one, you shall find
me as niggardly in the other. But as fables are good enough to pass away the
time, so your talk will seem to shorten the way, and so I take it. For it is
ill halting before a Cryple, and a burnt child will fear the fire. And though
I need not doubt, because I was never burnt, yet is it good to beware by an
other man's harm: the Mouse that sees her fellow taken in the trappe, and
ventureth her self, deserves no pity, if she be caught: the Fox seeing his
marrow almost kilde with the dogs, is a fool, if he take not squat: it is
hard taking of foul, when the net is descried: and ill catching of fish, when
the hook is bare: it is hard, Pharicles, to make her believe, that will give
no credit, and to deceive her that spyeth the fetch: when the string is broken,
it is hard to hit the white: when a man's credit is called in question, it is
hard to persuade one.

Blame me not, Pharicles, if I urge you so strictly, nor think nothing, if I
suspect you narrowly: a woman may knit a knot with her tongue, she cannot untie
with all her teeth: and when the signet is set on, it is too late to break the
bargayne: therefore I had rather mistrust too soon, then mislike too late, I
had rather fear my choice, then rue my chance: I had rather stop at the
brimme, then at the bottom. A woman's heart is like the stone in Egypt, that
will quickly receive a form, but never change without ^racking: therefore, if
I receive any, it shall be such a one, as I shall not repent me: I put an if in
it, because I do not mean to change virginity with marriage, for it would be
too hard a bargain: for we see those women, which have bin counted most wise,
have been most chaste, and so fearful to match, y^ they durst not once call
it in question. Faza, the princess of Gaul, when she knew her father had
promised her in marriage, wept so long, til she became blind. Parthenia after
she was married, and had tried by childebirth the difference between virginity
and marriage, she would never after company with her husband, saying, that a
lasting virtue was to be preferred before a fading vanity: since therefore the
most wise have feared and eschewed, think me not cruel, if I be wise for my
self, nor judge me not scrupulous, though I put a doubt before I have cause; or
be in dread to buy repentance at an unreasonable rate, for if I were minded to
marry, I should hardly find one fish among so many Scorpions, or one ^eral
among so many broken glasses. The woolfe has as smooth a skin as y^ simple
sheep: the sower Elder has a fayrer bark the^ the sweet gineper: where the
water is calmest, there it is deepest; and where the sea is most quietthere it
is most dangerous; where is the greatest color of honesty, there oftentimes
is the most want: for an empty vessel has a louder sound then a full barrel,
and a dissembling mind has more eloquence then a faithful heart: for truth
is ever naked. I will not apply the comparison, Pharicles, to any particular,
but in general: yet if the propositions be universal, they may infer in the
conclusion a particular person. The Poets and paynters representing the love of
men, bring in Cupid with a pair of wings; disciphering the love of women, a
Tortuse under the feet of Venus: she wing that as the love of men is moveable,
and unconstant as a bird: so the fancy of women is as firm and fixed, as a
steadfast Tortuse. And with great reason: for neither the Romish records, nor
Grecian hystories have made any, or at the least so often mention of the
disloyalty of women: but only how their simplicity has been beguyled by
the flattery of feigned lovers, of whom the most renomned may bear
sufficient witness: (as Theseus, Jason, Hercules, Aeneas and Demophon) that the
love of men has ever been inconstant: yet they so reioysed at their infamous
deeds, that the Poets canonized them, not only for saints, but placed them
among the Gods, so that others of base estate, taking example by them, do
vaunt of their disloyalty, as of some glorious conquest, and as Herostratus
fiered the temple of Diana, to be spoken of, so they falsify their faith, to
be famous. Yet it is a world to see how the deepest dissembler of them all, can
have tears accommaund to deceive a simple maid? What sighs? what sobs? what
prayers? what protestations? their talk burns as hot as the mount Aetna,
when as their affection is as cold as a clock: it is not the love of y^ maid,
but y^ lust of their mind, not her bounty, but her bewtle; so that every face
sets them on fire; every lady, be she lovely, must be their mistres. But no
marvel, for if me^ are chollericke, hot in their love, and dry in their faith,
soon set on fire, and soon quenched: their love is even as lasting as the
flame in the straw: which is as little permanent, as it is violent, or like the
Apples in Arabia, which begin to rot, ere they be half ripe.

Well Pharicles, although I cast all these doubts, and others have tried them
true, yet I am forced by fancy to take some remorce of thy torments. Medea
knew the best, and did follow the worst in choosing Jason: but I hope not to
find thee so wavering.

Ah Pharicles, I have been brought up in the court, and although my beauty be
small and witless, yet I have been desired of many, and could never fancy
any: thou have won the castle that many have besieged, and have obtained that
which others have sought to gain: it is not the shape of thy beauty, but the
hope of thy loyalty, which enticeth me, not thy fair face, but thy faithful
heart; not thy comely countenance, but thy courteous manners; not thy words,
but thy virtues: for she that buyldes her love upon bewty, means to fancy but
for a while: for where the subject is fading, the cause cannot be lasting.
Would God, Pharicles, I might find thee but such a one, as I will try my self
to be: for whereas thou do protest such loyalty; and put case it be as true
as it may be: yet it shall be but counterfeite respecting mine: be thou but
Theagines, and I will try my self to be more constant then Cariclia: no
torments, no travail, no, only the loss of life shall dimmishe my love: in
liewe thereof remain thou but constant, and in pledge of my protested good
will, have here my heart and hand to be thine in duste and ashes.

MAmillia having thus ended her talk, I leave you to judge, gentlemen, into
what a quandarie Pharicles was brought^ seeing the answer of his Mistress to
be so correspondent with his demand, and y^ fortune was so favorable to his
desire, as she seemed to will, that he did wish. For if the condemned man
reioyseth, when he hears his pardon pronounced, or the prisoner his freedom,
no doubt Pharicles joy could be no less, since denial was his death, and
consent, the conserve to heal his wound: the greater care, the greater joy: the
more doubt, the more pleasure: so his unlooked for hap brought such an
inspeakable contentation, as forced through the extremity of his passions, and
ince^sed by the constrant of his affection, he burst forth into this talk.

MAmillia, if where the water stands most still, there it is deepest, and
when the wind is lowest, then the greatest tempest is imminent: so where the
mind with overmuch joy, or too much pain is surcharged, there the tongue is
both tied, and the countenance restrained: so that as the heart is not able to
conceive it, the tongue is not able to express it, as the water pot, which
being full, voydeth no licquour. Publius Metellius hearing his Son had
subdued the Equiars, died forioy. Cassinatus conceived such a pleasure in
seeing his father win a garland in Olympus, that he killed himself with inward
laughter. If I infer the similitude, perhaps it will breed doubt: for deeds in
love are to be required, and not words. Therefore, for fear I incur the
suspicion of flattery, I will leave you to conjecture of that, which I think.

But this by the way, assure your self, Mistress Mamillia, that your beauty
has so blinded me, as I shall never see any, which so well shall content my
mind: and your bounty has bound me never to like any other. Thus enueigled
with the one, and fettered with the other, I remain your true servant for
ever.

WHile they were in these terms, Madam Castilla thought Pharicles had given
the forte a suffycient battery, for this time: therefore joining to them with
the rest of the company, she enterrupted them on this manner.

Mistress Mamillia, I believe you will go with a clean soul to visit the
sick patient: for if you have been all this while at shrift, you might both
have confessed a great many of faults, and received full absolution. But I
pray God your gostly Father be as holy for the soul, as wholesome for the body:
and if he be, surely you have heard good counsel: if not: it is Saint Erauncis
fault, he wantes his hoode.

Madame, quoth Mamillia, if you think so well of my goastlye Father and his
shrift, I pray you let him have you in confession as long: for you are eldest,
and therefore had need of a longer examination and larger absolution, if he
be holy for the soul, he has enough to take care of his own: as for mine, I
will take charge of my self: if wholesome for the body, the more fit for your
purpose, since old women are full of diseases, and had need have a Physician
tied by their girdle: as for saint Frauncis fault, as you term it, if that be
a hinderaunce of his coming, I am sure to pleasure you, he will take the
pains to fetch it.

Pharicles hearing the tauntes of the Gentlewomen, and seeing that he was come
to the Gentleman's place: because he was not well acquainted, though against his
will, though best for that time to take his leave: and therefore offered them
the farewell with this privy quip.

Madame, if my keeping the Gentlewoman so long at shrift, has been in any
respect offensive to you, I am very sorry: but if I may stand you as long in
steed of a gostly Father, and so pleasure you, I am at command: mary my
commission is neither for word nor deed, and therefore I doubt your
confession will be too large for me to deal with all. But since I have brought
you thus far: and am altogether vnaequainted with the Gentleman, I will take
my leave to depart home, although against my will.

Nay surely, quoth Madame Castilla, your have shall make waste, and your small
acquaintance shall be no hinderance: for at this time you shall be my guest, and
with that they entered into the place, where after they had saluted the company,
and visited the sick person, Madam Castilla requested the gentleman to welcome
the stranger for her sake, who both had taken pains to bear them company, and
through his pleasant conceits procured the way to seem shorter. Signior
Gonzaga taking occasion to show his good will to Pharicles, answered: that
since the master of the house was not well, he would say the Gentleman was
welcome in his befalfe: and so taking him by the hand, welcomed him very
friendly. Which courtesy of Gonzaga was no less pleasure unto Pharicles, then
contentation unto Mamillia, to see him whom they most doubted, to show such a
friendly countenance, that they both hoped to have a prosperous success in
their enterprise.

Now this sick Gentleman, called Gostino, had one only daughter, named
Publia, about the age of sixteen years, whose bewty and bringing up, showed
that she was in no respect second unto Mamillia: but rather more perfect in the
gifts of nature. This young Gentlewoman being by the mothers side cosinue
German to Mamillia, after her duty done to the company, requested them to
take such a simple dinner, as her father in so short a time could provide:
giving them also to understand by her behavior, that the influence of the
heavens had denied her nothing: but that nurture had forced her self to augment
the grace of nature, and that comlines of body, and courtesy of the mind had
a continual war, which should have the superyoritie.

This gorgeous Goddess furnished with these singular qualities in every
respect, so set on fire Pharicles fancy, that as if he had drunk of the
fountains in Ardenia, his hot love was turned to as cold a lyking.

Now his heart was set upon Publia, which of late was vowed to Mamillia, in
such a sort, that his stomach lost the woonted appetite to feed the eyes
with the beauty of his new Goddess, as that he seemed to have eaten of the
herb Spattania, which shuts up the stomach for a long season. And Publia
on the contrary side, noting the feature of Pharicles, the comlynesse of his
person, and the rarenes of his qualities, was so scortched with the beauty of
this new guest, as finding occasion to convey her self into her closet, under
the color of some serious business, she powered forth her plaintes in this
order.

O unhappy fortune, O lucklesse destiny, has Publia prepared a banquet to
entrappe her self with a more daincy delicat? has she laid the net, and is
taken in the snare? has she welcomed him that has caught her captive: well,
now I see, that as the Be that flies from flower to flower, having free
choice to choose at liberty, is at last taken by the wings, and so fettered:
in like manner my fancy taking the view of every face, has a restraint of her
freedom, and is brought in bondage with the bewty of this stranger.

Alas, what shall I do? Shall I love so lightly? shall Fancy give me the foil
at the first dash? shall mine eyes be the cause of my misery? would God they
had lost their sight in the cradle, shall my heart be so tender, to yield at
the first call? would God nature had framed it of Adamant, to resist the force
of such foolish cogitations.

Ah Publia, consider thy state: what has he more to be beeloued then other?
thy suitors have had to beliked. What, fool? do thou ask a question of Love,
or a reason of Fancy? strive not against the stream: if thou resist Love, thou
art ouermatched.

For even the Gods are tributaries unto Venus, as confessinge the superiorities
of beauties kingdoms, then be not thou ashamed, being but a simple maid.
Venus loved a black smith with a poult foot: and thou a Gentleman of singular
perfection: yet as there is a difference between thee and Venus in beauty: so
is there a greater distaunce between Vulcan and him in deformity. Then
Publia, yield when thou must needs consent: run when thou art called by
command: for sure, if ever thou wile bestow thy freedom, he is worthy to have
thee captive: if thou meanest to marry, thou can not have a meeter match:
yea but how if his heart be placed, and his mind settled? then were I a great
deal better to wayle at the first, then weep at the last; to be content with
a little prick, then with a deep wound. The Scorpion, if he touch never so
lightly, enuenometh the whole body: the least spark of wild fire sets on fire
a whole house: the Coeatrice kills even with her sight: ye sting of love
wounds deadly: the flame of Fancy fireth the whole body: and the eyes of a
Lover are counted incurable: yet the Elephant being euuenomed with the Uiper,
eats him up, and is healed, there is nothing better for burning, then heat of
fire, and nothing so soon kills a Basilisk, as the sight of a man. Then
Publia, since Pharicles has given the wound, let him salve the sore: let the
fire of affection drive out the flame of Fancy; and since thou art hurt by the
eye, be healed by the sight: hope for the best: for thou have as much to be
loved, as he to be liked: and therefore remain patient, til thou know more.
With yt she went out of her closet: but before her return the strangers had
dined, and were al descanting of the Gentleman's disease.

So many heads, so many wits: for some said it was a fever, and proceeded of
cold: some, the consumption of the milte, whose original was thought some
burstines, and ensued of phlegm: some one thing, and some an other: but all I
think mist the mark. Gonzaga, who heard all their opinions, said, that if the
Gentleman were not well stricken in age, whatsoever the disease was, he would
say the first cause was love: and my reason is this, quoth he: the often change
of colors, his sudden traunces, his sighs in his dream, the dead stopping
of his pulses, and then their beating a fresh, al these are signs of an
unquiet mind, of an impatient affection, and to be flat, of love it self.

Signior Gonzaga, quoth the sick Gentleman, either you are expert in physic,
or else you speak by experience: but whether you do, you miss the cushion:
for my disease does not proceed of love: nor if I were well, should it: for I
have felt the first dishe of so variable a taste, that I will never eat of the
second: I mean, I felt the presence of my wife so sweet, and her absence by
death so sour, as I mean, never to try the like hap. But now, since you are
all at leisure, and I very glad to hear any thing that might mittigate the
pain, or shorten the time, I would crave this boon of you all in general,
that one of you would satisfy my mind in this, to tell me what thing it is
the common people call love.

The Gentlemen of their courtesy could do no less but condescend to their
hosts request: yet every one alleging of disability, so that they were
forced to cast lots, who should discuss this hard question: and amongst al,
the chance fell upon Pharicles, which although it was some small grief unto
him, because he doubted of his habilitye: yet he thought Fortune favored him
in this point, that he might show his cunning before Publia.

Where I cannot but muse, Gentlemen, to see that such moist licour should turn
to hard flint: that the most wholesome Mithridate in twice shifting, should be
deadly poison: that the Reeds in Candie, will of their own nature beecome
bitter gall: that the love of men should turn to hard hearted: that fancy
should be quenched at the second sight: that the affection of Pharicles, should
turn to frantik folly, in mislyking without cause, and choosing without
trial: but it is not so common, as true, that men be fickle in their faith,
brittle in their brain, and lukewarm in their love: neither hot nor cold,
even like the Pickerell, that keeps the baight in his mouth, to cast out at
his pleasure: yet where do we see any writing of love, or of any such matter:
but they must have one fling at women? dispraysing their nature, disciphering
their nurture, painting out their polliticke practices and subtle shifts,
declaring their mutabilitie, comparing them to the Polipe stone, that changes
colors every hour; to the Weathercock, that wauereth with the wind; to the
Marigolde, whose form is never permanent, but changes with the Sun: and
yet they themselves a great deal worse: as Pharicles, one of the same sect
presently shall prove: who fried at every fire, and changed his look at every
leeke, as one that builded upon beauty, and not bounty; that did lust, but
not love; with which fickle fever ye Gentlemen of our time are greatly
troubled: for he that cannot look and laugh, and tell a tale with nulla fide,
they will straight note him in there tables for a dunce, or put him in their
books for a fool: and yet they will needs fry in frost, and freese in fire:
they see, and yet are blind: they hear without ears, they spend the day in
sighing, and the night in sobbes; they have heaps of care, streams of tears,
waves of woe: yea, to be short, they like without love, and fancy, without
affection, that their choice must needs change, because it is without reason.

But again to Pharicles, who seeing necessity on the one side, and his credit
on the other, to be two spurs in his side, and that the Gentlemen were
attentive, began on this manner.

THe Poets and Paynters feigned not fortune blind, without good cause, and
great reason: for as her gifts are uncertain: so the lotte is doubtful, and
the chance vnlooke for, most often happens: she imparteth wealth to the
fool, and poverty to the wise: she powers water into the Sea, when it
ouerfloweth, and gives riches to him that is cloyed with abundance: do we
not see, that were is most need, there she gives least? and the most noble
men have the woorst luck? Policrate is a mirror of her mutabilitie, by his
miserable end: and Abdolominus, a pattern of her frailty, by his good hap:
and I here may serve for a proof of her small skill, that has laid a great
burden on me, which am leest able to bear it. But on the small branch hangs
often the most fruit; and on the woorst wit sometimes chances the greatest
charge: for neither my experience by nurture, nor my wit by nature, has whereof
to compare with the worst of the company, and yet fortune by lot has laid the
most on me, so that he that woorst may, must hold the candle.

But since a man must needs go when the devil drives, although I know my
fault, and you shall find it, yet the hope of your courtesy, void of
curiosity, somewhat encourages my slender skill to presume the farther,
although beetweene your learned ears and my rude tongue there will be great
discord. I will not do as Hiarbitas and Hermonides, who striving to excel in
music, for ever lost their voices, least if I force my self in eloquence to
seem a courtier, I prove at length a flat carter. Astorides seeing Roscius
gestures, durst never after come on the stage: Hiparchion hearing Rufinus blow
upon his pipe, would never after play on his flute. Two things daunte the
mind of a young man; either the skill or person of the hearer. Demosthenes the
famous Orator of Athens was so astonished at the majesty of king Philyp, that
he lost his speech: Carnitus seeing Anniball coming into the schools, became
dumb: then it is no marvel, gentlemen, if I be afraid to incur the common
proves. A fools bolt is soon shot; or to doubt yt my green wit should give a
rash reason, or enter too far in mine own conceit, which was so hurtful to
Marsias, yt with his pipe would imitate Apollos harp. Notwithstanding as the
prick of the spur forces the horse that fears the evil way, so in this my
doubt the reverence I bear to Gostino and the rest of the company banisheth al
fear, assuring my self you will lay the fault upon fortune, who made the
lotte so unequal, and let my unjust chance serve for a sufficient excuse: and
if I hap to stretch too far, I will blow the retrayte with repentance which
never comes without pardon.

When I conjecture with my self, Gentlemen, the great travel and industry that
the ancient Philosophers, and learned men have taken in searching out the
secrets of nature, insomuch that some of them have put out their own eyes, to
attain to the greater perfection, thinking that they were obstacles and
hindrances of their profound contemplations, as did Democles. Others being
extreemely delighted with supernatural cogitations, and enamoured of the
Mathematical arts, with gazing up into the sky, have fallen backward, and
broken their necks, as did Gallus: some searching out the essence of the first
matter, waded so far in the depth of Astronomy, seeking out the causes of the
ebbing and flowing of the Sea, that they drowned themselves, as Aristotle.
Others coveting to know the sense of secret matters scanning the quidities of
Logike, have lost their wits, as Crinitus, and many other more. I cannot but
marvel that among al these secretaries of nature, there have never been found
any which have enterprised to search out the essence and perfect nature of
love. Sure I think they might answer with Hermes, who being demanded what
God was, said he could never give answer, because the farther he went, the
more was behind, yet in my judgment the true love is no other thing, but a
desire of that which is good; and this good is the influence of the celestial
bounty: so that by the definition it is to be placed in the intellectual part
of the mind, and not in the sensual: but your question Signior Gostino is of
that which the common people call love.

Ovid, who thought himself a master of that art, and writ precepts of the
same, thought it more obscure then the Letters of Ephesus, or the riddles of
Sphinx, to tell the perfect definition of love: so that being demanded what it
was, answered, that he knew not what it should be, from whence it sprung,
whether it went, nor to what end it tended: but sure, quoth he, it is the loss
of a man's self: Anacreon said it was (...) mischief (...) or a pince of
pleasure we receive a gallon of sorrow: for what weapinges, what watchinges,
what cursinges, what sighs, what travel does the lover endure? so that in an
other place he calls it a warfarre, for the drum of fancy, strikes up the
Alarm in the Lovers hearts, as he goes to fight, knowing to be vanquished:
and that every frowning look of his Lady, is worse then the shot of a cruel
Cannon. And yet the Passionate Lover is thought to abide no pain, nor suffer
no trouble.

Calimachus calls it a Court without Sergeantes, for because they that love,
obey without consistant, and are captive without conquest. Therefore in (...)
love comes of free will, it ought to have the better^^ ward.

Prince Tamberlane, tho most bloody (...) in the world, never shed blood, where
there was submission; and the Lion spares life, if his enemy yield; what
beast is so brute as kylleth his fellow? then that woman is much too blame,
that with her denial would seek his life, who brought captive by love. (...)
Propertius says, (...) sweet tyranny ^her (...) his (...) willingly, and
that the mind of the Lover is not where it lives, but where it loves.

Oh, says he, what man is able to resist the force of love? or rather, what
will not love force a man to lo^ Did (...) Retormodicus ouerchrow the whole
state of the Lac^^ (...), for the love of Scedasus daughters? Roderick of
Spain lost his kingdom for Camma, yea many have not only hated, both father
and mother for the love of their Ladyes^ but also have poisoned their kinsmen
and acquaintance, for to fulfill their fancies. Cateline slew his son, for the
love of Orestill^, and yet men are counted neither loyal nor faithful.
Tibullus, called love a profound science: to be brief, every one pay^tes it
out in his colors, as it please them, and yet none can tell what they say: in
such sort that they make it a mystery, which can neither be expressed nor
taught, but by demonstration in a dumb school, as soccer as y^ sacrifice of
Ceres, or of Vesta: yet the most wise phyloso^^^, (...) wit in the flower:
for an old Lover is like on old hog with a green tail.

Signior Gostino, whether it were through the weakness of his stomach, or the
extremetie of his pain, was forced to interrupt Pharicles in the mids of his
talk, requesting the Gentleman not to think that it was wearines of his
discourse: but yt strangeness of the disease, that procured this restraint,
and to entreat the rest of the company not to take it in evil part, that
he was the cause of such a sudden intermission, hoping the Gentleman at their
next meeting would satisfy their minds fully, wishing Pharicles not to be a
stranger at his house, but to use him as a friend, and the oftener he should
come, the better he should be welcome.

Pharicles, with the rest of the Gentlemen, perceiving Gostino to crave rest,
and that his drowsy eyes chymed for sleep, thanking him for their good
cheer, and wishing his welfare, took their leave, and departed.

But Pharicles, whose heart was on his halfpenny, found fish on his fingers,
that he might be the last should take his leave of Publia, to see if he could
strike fire out of the flint: and therefore strayning her by the hand, gave her
his A dio.

Gentlewoman, if I take my leave more boldly then any of there rest, impute the
fault to your beauty, and not to my impudency, which so has fixed my fancy
with the flame of affection, as ^^n half in doubt it is unquenchable: yet
though the patient knows his disease incurable, he couetes a plaster to
mitigate the pain. But I hope well, and if I may have well, I shall think my
self to get as much as I would wish.

The traveler talking of hunger, has ever a more sharp stomach, and I so
long discoursed of love, that where before I shot as a blind man: now were
I able to speak by experience. For Ovid, nor all the masters of love could
never find out a more perfect definition, then my fancy, fettered in the
beams of your beauty, has imprinted into my mind: so that by the charge of
Venus, will you, nill you, I remain your servant.

(...) this farewell, as heartily as he (...) it, gave him a Cake of the same
pass, and a soppe of the same sauce.

GEntleman, quoth she, as I cannot lay the fault of your boldness, as you
term it, to any impudency, so would I not have you without cause accuse my
beauty, least you either commit folly or flattery: for he that prayseth the
Crow, for h^^ color, is either stone blind, or stark mad: and therefore I
think that your fancye is not fixed: but your fantasy is fumed with some
vapors, proceeding from a hot stomach, procuring a rash judgment: so that
when it shall be alayed with some cold confection, you will not be of the same
opinion. But sure I am content at your next commiyng, to take a recantation for
a recompense of your error, which the sooner it be, the better it shall
please me: and so fare you well.

^

^

(...) stayed mind of Publia, to swerve from the vowed virginity: so that
thinking my self as chaste, as any in Padua, I prove the lightest in Italy:
for I yield before I be overcome: I consent without compulsio^: the first
assault, the first shot, the first Alarm, yea the first word has scaled the
walls, won the Fort, and caught me captive. Alas, what will they say, that
praised me for my virtue? will they not as fast disprayse me for my vice? will
not my father fret, my kinsfolk cry out, my friends be sorry, my enemies laugh
me to scorn? yea, will not all the world wonder, to see me of late given to
chastity, and now shake hands with virginity? to yield my dearest Jewel and
chiefest treasure unto the stranger? The choice of a friend requires the
eating of a bushel of salt; then the choosing of a husband, ten; for by how
much the band is straighter, by so much the choice should be longer.

But I almost like before I look, and love before I know, and cast my
corn, I wotte not where; and am like to reap, I know not what. Ah fool, is
not the Iacinth, if it be rubbed with lyme, soon set a fire, and hardly
quenched? is not the Adamant and the iron soon joined, and hardly disseuered?
the coin has his stamp in a moment, and cannot be taken out without melting.
Love enters easily, and is as hard to thrust out as nature: fancye soon
fireth: but long ere it quenches: yea but Publia, flatter not thy self: for
soon ripe, soon rot^^^; that which e^^^eth without compulsion, will wear
away without constraint: marryage, if it be soon begun, yet it is not so
soon ended. Take time and choice, and choose warily, not his face: for nothing
so soon gluttes the stomach, as sweet meat; and nothing sooner filles the
eye, then beauty: for oftentimes where is the best proportion, there are the
woorst properties; the wine is not known by the caske, but by the taste. The
Gods intending to: show the perfection of nature in one creature, framed a man
so exquisit in form and feature, as neither for the lmiamentes of his face,
nor the proportion of his body was possible to be said, this was wanting.
This demi God being sent upon the earth, when as noone could condemn nature of
want, Momus only found this fault, that the Gods framed not a window in his
breast, through which to perceive his inward thoughts: meaning, as I
conjecture, that there is none so comely in his body, but may be corrupt in
his mind, nor so fine in his feature, but he may be faulty in his faith: to
co^clud, as every saint has his feast, so every man has his fault; that a man
^ad need groope well, that should find one fish among so many Scorpions,
and what a one Pharicles is, I may easily guess, but I know not.

Ah Publia, if any one heard thy talk, they might condemn thee of villainy.
Will thou speak evil of him which wishes well to thee? shall y^ reward of love
be loathing? does good will deserve hatred? or fancy defiance? What has he, ye
thou may not like? or what would thou like, that is wanting in him,
neither bewty, birth, wisdom, wealth, and what more is to be required in a
man? Ah, nothing, Publia: his store procures thy want, his perfection has
made thee imperfect, as now thy welfare hanges in the will of an other man, and
do both live and love, so that conclude with thy self, Pharicles must be he,
whose shape thou will shrine in thy heart for ever, hap good or hap evil,
against all the assaults of fortune.

Publia was not thus vexed on the one side, but Pharicles suffered a far
greater torment: that after he came to his lodging casting himself on his
bed, he exclaymed on his hap in such sort, that the abundance of tears
were sufficient sign ^ of his woe.

O Pharicles, Pharicles, what a doubtefull combat do thou feel in thy mind
between fancy and faith, love and loyalty, beauty and bounty? shall the
flickering assault of fancy overthrow the castle of constancy, shall the
lightness of love violate the league of loyalty? shall the shadow of beauty
wipe out the substance of bounty? shall hope be of more force then assurance?
will thou vow thee constant to one, and prove thy self not steadfast to any?
the Turtle chooses, but never changes; the Swan lyketh, but never loatheth;
the Lion after he has entered league with his make, does never cover a new
choice: these have but only sense; and I am sure thou have reason and sense,
and art more unruly: they have but nature for their guide, and yet are
constant: thou haste both nature and nurture, and yet thy mind is mouable:
these brute beasts keep their consent inviolable, and thou a reasonable
creature do falsify thy faith with out constraint, yea even break thine
oath without compulsion, whereas nothing is so to be hated, as perjury, and a
man having cracked his credit, is half hanged.

Marcus Regulus rather then he should falsify his faith, even to his enemies
suffered a most horrible death. Horatius Secundus being betroathed to Ciuilia,
was rackt to death for his constancy. Lamia a Concubine, by no torments could
be haled from the love of Aristogicon. What perilles suffered Theagines to
keep his credit with Caricha? Pharicles, let these examples move thee to be
loyal to Mamillia: be thou steadfast, and no doubt thou shall not find her
staggering: but if thou waver, ware thou do not as the dog, loose both
bones: for deceit deserves deceit, and the end of tretcherie, is to have
small trust.

Sudasus a Parian borne, when he came into the court, to swear, that he never
loved Castana, became dumb, and so was condemned. Iouinianus Otto nephewe to
Alexa^drus Farnesius, after that he had renounced his vow made to his lover,
ran mad: beware, Pharicles, of the like reward, if thou commit the like
offense. Tush he that would refrain from drink, because he has heard that
Anacreon died with the pot at his head, or that hates an egg, because
Appeius Sauleius dyed in eating of one, would be noted for an Ass: so if I
should stand to my pennyworth, having made my market like a fool, and may
change for the better, because other in the like case have had evil hap, I
may either be counted for a Cowarde, or a Calfe.

Do not the Gods, say the Poets, laugh at the perjury of Lovers? and that
Jupiter smyles at the craft of Cupyd? Paris, when he stole away Helena, and
forsook his Oenone: did not both Sea and wind favor his enterprises with a
speedy gale? Theseus had never better luck, then after he had forsaken
Ariadne: and I perchance may have as good hap in leaving Mamillia. He that
having tasted of water, and after will not drink of wine, is of a gross nature.
The dog that winding ye Hedgehogge, will not forsake the sent, to hunt at the
Hare, is but a Curre, and he that will not change in love, if beauty make the
choice, shall not come in my Creed. Mamillia is fair, but not second to
Publia: she is witty, but ye other more wise, where the sauce sharpened with
prunes, casts of sugar, it is follye to infer comparison. Yea, but what
complaints will Mamillia make, when she perceives thy dissembling? her hot
love will cu^ne to deadly hate, she will procure thy discredit even with
Publia: she will blase thy forged flattery, not only here in Padua, but
throughout all Italy. I shall have Gonzaga^ mine enemy, yea, and mine own
friends to be my foes, yea and perhaps by that means, both loose her
friendship, and the others favor.

Tush, Pharicles, he that is afraid to venture on the Buck, because he is
wrapped in the briars,^ shall never have Hunters hap, and he that puts a
doubt in love at every chau^e, shall never have Lovers luck. Cannot the Ca^
catch mise, without she have a bell hanged at her ear? cannot ye Hobby sease on
his pray, but he must check? cannot the Spanyel return the Partridge but he
must quest? and cannot I deal so warily, ^ut all the world must ring of it?
yes, it is a subtle bird, that breeds among the aerie of hawks, and a (...)
sheep that lambs in the Foxes den, and he shall be crafty shall spy me
halting. I can like Mamillia for a need, and love Publia of necessity: it is
good to keep a stale, for fear I catch no foul, and needful to hold
Mamillia on the ^ist, least Publia prove so haggard, she will not come to the
lure. He that has two fishes at the baight, it is hard if he miss both.
Therefore I will be of the surer side always provided, Publia shall have my
heart, and I hers, or else I will sit beside the saddle. And with that he fell
in a study with himself, of sundry matters pertaining to his amorous devises,
and at last determined with himself, if he could find a trusty messenger to
send her a letter, fearing if he should make his repair (...) suddenly, it
would breed some suspicion in Gostinos head, for he that loves, castes
beyond the Moon, and especially he that dissembles: and craft had need of
cloking, where truth is ever naked.

Where, by the way, Gentlemen, we see Pharicles a perfect pattern of Lovers in
these our days, that bear two faces under one hoode; and have as many Ladies
as they have wits, and that is not a few: for every new face must have a
new fancye; and if he see a thousand, they must all be viewed with a figh, as
though he were enamoured; if she be younger, her tender age pleases him; if
she be of middle age, the rypenesse of her years, contenteth him: another
enchaunteth him with her voice, and one with her gestures: so that his covetous
defire would have all, and yet amidst this store he is pyned, and dissembling
doubt makes a restraint of his choice, yet he must needs be a Carpet Knight:
for they think it as hard to live without love, as without meat. But when
they begin to like, it is a world to see how they learn to lie: fancy they
cannot, without flattery; nor talk without tales, they be dead at the first
dash, and plunged in Plutos pit, when they have a merier heart the^ the poor
maid. They say, a woman is the weaker vessel, but sure in my judgment, it is
in the strength of her body, and not in the force of her mind: For the rypest
wit, the readyest heat; the most subtle skonce is feign to set his
brains on the last, and his wit on the tenters to deceive a simple maid:
first he assayes with flattery, then with sophistry, inferryng his comparisons,
he is caught in the beams of her beauty, as the Be in the cobwebbe; he is
parched with the hue of her face, as the Fly in the candle; he is drawn by
the qualities of her mind, and the sweetness of her voice, as with a Sirens
songue, and when perhaps she has nothing to be praised nor to be lyked in
her, yet the comlynesse of her body, and the rareness of her conditions, has
so enchaunted, as if she heal not his wound, he shall as it were with Circes
cup be turned to a hog or a horse.

And this they use not to one, but to many, counting him a fool that cannot
flatter; and a dol^e, that dare not disemble, as Pharicles an Archeaptaine of
their crew presently will prove, who knew the best, and followed the woorst;
and could speak hotlye, but follow it as coldly.

For after that he had given the raynes of liberty to his frantike
affections, and had fostered the spark to grow to a great flame, the
medicine then came too late, when the disease was incurable: the more he did
strive, the worse he was: even as the Heart, which feeling the arrowe in his
side, the more he forces him self, the farther it enters; or the bird being
taken in the net, by struggling becomes faster: so he seeking to eschew his
first malady, fell into a deeper sickness, perceiving as the wound by time
is more grievous then when the blow was fresh, so love increases by delay,
and delays breed dangers: fearing again his hasty venturing might procure
a slack speedinge, determined to take counsel at his pyllowe, and as his
mind should give him, to prosecute his purpose: and in this doubt he
remained the space of a week.

In which time Publia seeing Pharicles made no great haste in his return,
thought her new Lover would prove an old scoffer, condemning her self of
follye, that she should be so soon enticed by flattery, seeking to root
out that by reason, which was inserted by sensuality, knowing, no fitter
remedy for love, then to resist betimes, in which determination, as she should
have proceeded, she had the retrait blown by a letter, which Pharicles had sent
her by his page. Likewise offering in his masters behalf, a present unto
Gostino, in recompense of his good cheer, which he receiving gracefullye,
wished the Page to give it to his daughter, who taking the present, and
receiving the Letter, could scarcely stay to unrip the seal, while she came in
her closet, where between hope and dread she read these lines following:

Pharicles to Publia.
IF the Gods, Publia, having made man, had likewise given him free will to be
master of himself, in subduing his rebellious affections, or had appointed
medicine for the mind, as Physic for the soul, I needed not at this time
have sought for help to resist the assaults of contrary passions, as he that
after long combat for the defense of his liberty, is forced to yield by the
strength of the Uictor, hoping by submission to obtain the more favor.

But nature and fortune has in no creature framed such a perfect vnformitie,
but there is as great a contrariety: and as many salues as art has taught,
so many sores nature has given, never suffering bliss to come without bale,
nor good luck without ill hap, finding always a cooling card of misfortune
to pluck down ye puffing peate of prosperity. The Be, as she has the
fragrant flower, whereon to take delight, so she has the Spiders web wherein
to be tangled. The fly, as she is revived by the heat of the Sun, so is she
consumed by the flame of the fire: as the Lion cools his stomach with eating
the Seamouse, so is it inflamed with eating the little Ermelyne. But although in
this respect I cannot greatly either accuse nature or fortune, yet the
destinies I think have framed your beauty such a furious enemy to my careful
mind, as it has made such a breach in my heart, that the strongest rampyre
and surest defense I could make is not possible to resist the continual Alarms,
wherewith the remembrance of your rare virtues night and day do assail me in
such wise, that since my departure I have felt in my heart, as in a little
world, all the passions and contrarieties of the Elements. For my eyes, Publia,
I call the gods to witnesses, I speak without fayning, almost turn into water
through the continual streams of tears, and my sighs fly as wind in the
air, proceeding from ye flaming fire which is kindled in my heart, as that
without the drops of your pity, it will turn my body into dry earth and
cinders.

Then, Publia, since your beauty is my bale, let it be my blyssecouet not to
vanquish him which is already captive, strive not for my life, since you have my
liberty, but let the waves of mercy quench the fire of fancy, and do but
render love for love: yea, Publia, such love as eternity shall never blot out
with oblivion, neither any sinister fortune in any wise do diminishe: so that
if the world wondered at the loyalty of Petrarch to his Laura, or Amadis to
Oriane: they shall have more cause to meruell at the love of Pharicles to
Publia, whose life and death stands in your answer, which I hope shall be
such as belongs to the desert of my love, and the show of your beauty.

Yours, if he be Pharicles.


PVblia having read over this Letter, viewing and reuiewing every line in
particular, changed colors at every syllable, fearing to be foiled by
flatterye, or to be brought into a fools paradise by promises, knowing that
the Nyghtingale has a sweet voice, and yet but a rankefleshe: that the
Storkes in India have a pleasant cry, but a bloody byl: that the fairest Nutte
without, may have the fowlest Worm within: that the most daynty delicates may
be sauced with deadly poison: that smooth talk and fair promises may have
but small performance: that words were but wind: that ink and paper were not
sufficient pledges for such an inseparable knot: yet hope haled her on to
think well of his offer: and that she which would not trust ere she tried,
should not prove without peril: saying that experience is the Mistress of
fools, and that they which were incredulous, incurred the greatest suspicion
of flattery: so amidst these sundry dumpes, she took her pen, and sent
Pharicles this dumpe.

Publia to Pharicles.
Master Pharicles, your Letters being more hastily received then heartily read,
I stood in a doubt, whether I should answer with silence, or Sophistry: for
because where the question is extreme, there the answer must needs want a
mean: and where the demand is but a jest, it is best to make replye with a
scoff. But at length I was resolved to write more largly then I would, hoping
both to profit and persuade you. Profit, I mean, in that I spying so soon
your faining, I may dehorte you from flattery, and ^e the means that you
leave this folly, to be passionate only in your pentie, a lover but in your
lips: for although you think my simple wit has no such caparitie to
conceive your vain jesting, yet all women are not of one metal, but as I
know it, and bear with it: so they will spy it, and both blabbe it, and blame
it: yea perhaps cross you out of their creed: for he that has been
scratched with the briers, will take heed of a thorn, and he that sees his
fellow hurt, will beware of the like harm; he that has been deceived with a
lie, will scarsely credit a true tale. Women are wily, and will take example
one by an other: so that it shall be heard for one to halt before a cryple:
they think every one that writes an amorous style, does not love faithfully:
but most of them lie falsely. A prick with a pen proved not Clanuel a true
Lover, but a troathlesse Lechour: yea many write before they know the party,
and get by it they know not what: so that, Pharicles, if women would credit
every line, they would buy repentance too dear. But if Phillis were alive in
these our days, she would never hang her self: and if Dido had been
incredulou^, she had not dyed so desperately. Therefore Pharicles, if I doubt
without cause, or fear before I have occasion, blame me not, since others have
suffered such evil hap by venturing too far in an unknown vessel.

Well, put case your flattery be faith, and that all that you have written is
Golden: yet you claim kindness where none was offered: or else you think
because I said farewell friendly, I did fancy firmly: surely either you are
deceived, or else I was in a dream at the departure: for I do not know in
what respect either my words or deeds should be a spur to prick you forward
in this rash entirprise: but assure your self, if there were any, I repent me
of them, not that I am so foolish to repay hatred for love: but that I have
vowed perpetual virginity, and mean to remain chaste for ever. Therefore
Pharicles, sease to crave that cannot be gotten: seek not for impossibilities:
quench the fire your self, when an other cannot put out the flame: abate the
force of love, where you cannot have your longing.

I give you perhaps a sower sauce to your sweet meat: because I will not
feed you with delays, nor fobbe you with fair words, and foul deeds: but
I speak as I think, and so you shall find it. Yet in fine, least you should
judge me altogether ungrateful, I thank you for your good will, and I think
well of it: and if ever I chance to love, you have as much to like as any:
therefore if your fancy be so fixed, as you make fair on, pray that both my
heart my turn, and my vow may be broken, and then hope well. But in the mean
time, if you come, you shall be welcome, as a friend: but no farther.

Yours, if she could, Publia.


After that Pharicles, gentlemen, had received and read this Letter, seeing the
beginning was hard, thought the ending as ill, so that being somewhat
chollericke, he threw it away in a rage, not half read, rebuking his folly in
so soon yielding unto fancy, turning his great love to a grievous hate, as one
somewhat tickled with self love, thinking yt Hawk too haggard, that should not
come at the first call: now again praising his Mamillia, vowing wholye his
heart unto her, and promising in recompense of his disloialtie, never to lend
Publia a good look, and in this determination flang out of study, and went to
the house of Gonzaga.

HEre gentlemen, we may see the flitring of men's fancy, and the ficklenes of
their faith, that they may well be compared to a black wall, that receives
every impression, which not withstanding with the wipe of ones hand is easily
defaced: so men love all, and now none, verifying the saying of Calimachis,
that as flowers fade and flourish every year so their love is hot and cold
every hour, having nothing certain but only this, that the last drives out
the first, as one nail forces cut an other; the nature of men is so destrous
of novelty. But because it is an evil dog, barks at his fellow, again to
Pharicles, who being come into the house of Gonzaga, found not all things
according to his desire for Mamillia was half sick in (...) bed, yet she her
self knew scarsly the disease: but Pharicles missing her, went farther, and
sound Madam Castilla sitting solytary in her Muses, whom after he had saluted
and demanded how mistres Mamillia did: Mary quoth Madam Castilla, your often
repair unto her, as far as we can conjecture, has driven her into a
plurisie, or us into some jealousy: but whether it did she is sick.

Pharicles, feeling his gald conscience prick^ said, that although it pleased
her to jest by co^traries, yet his return was as speedy, as might be: for his
business was so necessary, that the loss of his lands hanged, thereon: but if
he had known Mamillia would have conceived any displeasure at his absence, he
would not only have hasarded his lands, but have ventured his life to have
made his repair more speedy: if then her sickness proceeds of my negligence,
I hope my sufficient excuse will be a remedy to cure the disease.

You speak well, quoth Madam Castilla: therefore follow me, that you may plead
your own cause for I will be no Aduocat: and with that she carried him into
Mamillias chamber, where she lay, half sleeping, half waking, whom Madam
Castilla called out of her trance with this parle.

MIstres Mamillia, quoth she, you know when time was, we termed this Gentleman
a gostly father: therefore I thought good in this your sickness, that he should
receive your confession, as one most meet for the purpose I thank you for your
pains, quoth Mamillia: for indeed I have a great block in my conscience,
which I mean to reveal unto him, and that is of my folly, in loving so
lightly, and fixing my fancy, where I doubt is no faith whereof, if he can give
me absolution, I shall surely be bound unto him.

^

^

Ah Mamillia, quoth Pharicles, do you think, that I have such a traiterous
heart, or such an impudent face to imagine such treachery against your divine
beauty? No, no, Mamillia, I call the Gods to witnesses, and the heavens to
hear my protestations, and if my words be not conformable to my thoughts: the
internal furies conspire my utter destruction; and if my mind remain not
constant, and my fancy firm, the Gods themselves be reuengers of such
disloyalty.

Well, said Mamillia, Jason promised as much to Medea, and yet she found him
a liar: but I fear no such matter.

No, me think, quoth Madame Castilla, I dare promise for the Gentleman. But
now let us see how we can find our teeth occupied, as we have done our
tongues, and then I will say none of us are fallen into a consumption, through
weakness of stomach: so they all went to dinner.

Where I leave you to consider, Gentlemen, how far unmeet women are to have
such reproaches laid upon them, as sundry large lipt fellows have done: who
when they take a piece of work in hand, and either for want of matter, or lack
of wit are half grauelled, then they must fill up the page with slaundering of
women, who scarsly know what a woman is: but if I were able either by wit or
art, to be their defender, or had the law in my hand, to dispose as I list,
which would be as unseemly, as an Ass to tread the measures^ yet, if it were
so, I would correct Mantua^s Egloge, entitled Alphus: or else if the Author
were alive, I would not doubt to persuade him in recompense of his error, to
frame a new one: for surely though Euripides in his tragedies does greatly
exclaim against that sex, yet it was in his choler, and he inferred a
general by a particular, which is absurd. He had an evil wife, what then?
because the hill Canaros has a fountain runs deadlye poison, is al water
naught? shall the fire be rejected, because some one spark fireth a whole
whose? are the bodies of the flies Cantharides to be cast away, because their
legs are poison? shall we condemn al women of inconstancy, because Helena was
fickle? or all to be naught, because some one is a shrewe? if the premises will
infer such a conclusion, I refer me to their greatest enemy. But for fear of a
farther digression, again to the^ we left at dinner, who after they had taken
a suffycient repast, fell again to their former discourse, till Gonzaga
returning home, broke off their talk with his presence, entertaining Pharicles
very friendly, assuring him he was as welcome as he could wish him self to be,
which courtesy was not so heartily offered, as willingly reciued. So that it
seemed if the one were content, the other was as well pleased. Yet Gonzaga
being as wily as Pharicles was witty, desirous to smell the vane of the young
Gentleman, trained his hook with this bayte.

Pharicles, quoth he, the old Fox that cannot spy the fetch of the young one,
was never crafty himself: the Goose that cannot see the Gosling wink, may
seem to have a defect of nature: he that cannot see fire in straw, is surely
stone blind: and he that cannot spy the flame of fancy, is but a fool. There
is none will so soon spy one halting, as a cripple: it is hard to cover smoke,
but more hard to conceal love. I my self both have tried it, and now I
likewise find the proof of it in you, who as closely as you keep your cloak,
yet I spy the lining, for love kept in secret is like the spark covered with
ashes, which at length bursteth into a great flame. But if it be as I think, I
am glad of it. As I have taken care Pharicles, to have my daughter keep her
virginity inuiolat without spot of suspitiousnes, so would I be as willing to
yield the fruits of her chastity into the hands of some gentleman, whom she
might both like for love, and think well offor his birth and honesty, rather
wishing with Themistocles to marrye my daughter to a man, the^ to money:
desiring likewise his choice to be for her goodness, and not for her goods,
least if the knotte should be knit for wealth, it might be disseuered for
poverty. Licurgus would have no dowries to be given with maids, least some
should be liked for riches, and others loathed for want. The maids of Essenea
went never bare faced, until they were married, least bewty should be of more
force then honesty, esteeming her which was honest, neither to have want of
nature, nor lack of nurture: So that Pharicles, I hope if you choose, it shall
not be for wealth, which is vanity; nor for bewty, which is momentary
(although I thank God she can neither blame nature nor fortune) but only for
virtue which is permanent: for where the cause is durable, there the effect
must needs be lasting, Love ought to be like the stone Armenicke, which is
hardly inflamed, but once set on fire, is never quenched: like the Emerauld,
which being imprinted, never changes form without breaking. Surely,
Pharicles, I speak these words to you as a friend, and to Mamillia, as a
father, wishing well to you for good lyking, and to her by course of kind:
being willing to marry my daughter, but neither to buy her an husband, nor to
set her to sale, unless the price be love, I mean that I would not make the
match by entreatie, nor seem to consent lyghtlye, least haste should make
waste.

Therefore, Pharicles, although I speak largely, think not my consent is any
profer. For others of great birth; and no small wealth (I will make no
comparisons) have both made great suite, and offered large feofmentes to have
my good will: yet since Mamillia did not love, I did not like: and what she
does now, I am not priuye to it: but if she do, my mind perhaps may be
changed: for you know old men are very suspicious, and I my self doubt by
the dread of others, we are cold of complexion, and therefore fearful by
nature, and will quicklye spy a padde in the straw, and a snake in the
grass, I perhaps think the Moon is ecclipsed, when she is but changing;
and guess love is lust, when it is loyalty, falsehood to be faith, and truth
to be treason, judging upon meat with a sick stomach, and casting wine with a
furred tongue; construing al things by contraries, through the imbecilitie of
our wit: since every thing is the worse for wearing: so ye he which will court
an old man's daughter, may be courteous, and yet thought curyous; his liberality
may be thought prodigality; his cleanlynesse, pride and unthriftiness, that,
walk as warilye as you can, the old doter will suspect him.

Pharicles, I speak against mine own age, and confess the frayltie of my
nature, that if you chance to find the like fault in me, that you impute it
not to peevishness, but to course of kind: For you, Pharicles, profess love
to my daughter, and I think it is but dissimulation: you faigne faith, and I
doubt of flattery; you seem to offend in excess, and I fear you faint in
defect, I fear more then you can forge, and all little enough in my judgment.
For you, young gentlemen, nowadayes like without love, and lust without lyking:
you fancy every face, and each sundry month you must have a new mistress,
wooing as you think, with great wit, and at length proves without wisdom, so
that as the seed is subtlety, and the fruit folly, the harvest can reap but
little honesty. Pharicles, I infer no particulars, I told you my fault, and
therefore blame me not, if I cannot digress from nature, but speak what I
think: for if your conscience be clear, it does not touch you; if it be
not, I am glad I have spoken so much, that either you may amend, or else make
an end: for if my sight fail me not, one you must do.

Pharicles being rubd on his gald back, thought Gonzaga was a subti^ Fox, and
needed not to learn his occupation, and that he could see the Gosling wink,
being broad waking; but as young wits are rash, so they are ready; and can
smell a tale before it be half told: for Pharicles found his fetch at the
first word, and therefore intending to be as wily, as he was wise, gave false
fire to his piece, thereby to blind Gonzagas eyes, as warily as he could
look and to wink, and yet not be spyed on this manner.

Sir, quoth he, as it is hard to hide the smoke, so were he a fool that would
go about to cover it, and if fancy must needs be spyed, who would seek to
cloak it? nature cannot be restrained, nor love kept in secret: for the one
will come to his course, and the other seem light amidst the darkness. I
knowing this, (although you mistake me) never thought to love where I might not
come lawfully, nor to like, where either the person or place should have need
of a vale for Sun burning: as for my self, I need none: therefore, sir, if
I halt, it is outright, that more may perceive it then a cryple. But I hope,
judge what you will, you shall find me stand to my tackling, and to take my
course so well by my compass, that I shall prove a cunning Pylot, and to show
my self so chary in my choice, what wares I choose, that I shall be a good
Chapman, and the better I trust, in that I have your counsel. The Lions whelp
takes ever the fattest sheep, when the old sire is by: the fawn never makes
so good choice of his feed, as the old Bucke; age speaks by experience, and
likes by trial, youth leans upon wit, which is void of wisdom. Where the
old Faulcon seaseth, there is ever the best pray: therefore he that will not be
ruled by age, shall be decided by youth, and he that will not hear the
admonition of a friend, shall perhaps feel the correction of a foe. This
causes me to thank your counsel, although I was determined before, for I never
meant to love without lasting nor fancy for a time, least I my self might be
the first should repent it, but was fully resolved to lay my foundation upon
such a rock, as neither the earthquakes of dissension, nor the tempests of
trouble may once be able to move. Now I know well enough, yt he that chooses
the carnation for color, should find it to have less virtue then the black
violet; yt the fading blossoms are more delectable to the sight, then the
lasting fruit; that the painters colors which are most bright, will soonest
loose their gloss; yt nothing so soon stayneth, as cloth of light color;
and nothing to be less permanent, then the glass of beauty, which begins
to decay in the budde, to wither in the blossom, and if it comes to be
fruit, is rotten before it be half ripe. The love of beauty, says Anacreon
is the forgetting of reason, the enemy to wit, and to be counted indeed a
short frenzy: for he that loves only for bewty, will either loath when age
approaches, or else soon be glutted with plenty: whereas fancy fixed upon
virtue, increases ever by continuance. He yt puts the Adder in his bosom,
delighted with her golden skin, is worthy to be euuenomed: the mouse, if she
feed upon rosealger for the glistering hue, deserves to be poisoned: if the
fish will needs to the baight, because it is of flies in Ca^tabria, it is her
own folly if she be taken: the bird that comes to the glass, enticed by the
brightness, deserves the net: he yt will choose a fair face with evil
conditions, claymeth by right to be counted a fool. Cateline had not so much
pleasure in the beauty of Oristilla, as he reaped sorrow by her outrageous
cruelty, nor won so much credit by her comlines, as Brutus did of his wife
Porcia for her courtesy. The husband of Sempronia for all her fair face, had a
wife of whom it was in question, whether she were more prodigal of her purse,
or liberal of her honesty, that I am sure he would have made a chang with
Gracchus for his black wife Cornelia. Menelaus, who had that earthly Goddess
Helena, reaped for every seed of pleasure, a whole harvest of sorrow, contented
to become Captain of Cornetto, and for her comlynes to have her almost common,
being as unfortunate in his choice, as Glitio Gallus was happy in his chance,
by wedding Egnatia Maximilla: so that he which makes choice of bewty without
virtue commits as much folly as Critius did, in choosing a golden box filled
with rotten bones. I therefore fearing the fetters by the captivity of the
bondsman, was ever careful to like for the proportion of the body, and love for
the qualities of the mind, never meaning to make a rusty rapier my rampire of
defense, though it have a velvet scabbarde; nor my choice of any evil woman, be
she never so proper of person, having peevish conditions: least for every ynch
of joy, I catch an ell of annoy; and for every drop of delight, a whole draught
of despite. This, I say, was the cause, Gonzaga, that forced me to repair
unto your daughter, because the fame of her exquisit perfection by nature
plentifully placed in her, has ravished even her enemies hearts to love and
like her: her gravity in gestures, her modesty in manners, her courtesy in
conversation, challenged my liberty and won my heart her own for ever. It was
not the color in her cheeks, but the conditions of her mind; not her
comeliness, but her courtesy, not her person, but her perfection that
inchaunted me. But why do I seek to try my self loyal, when the hearers do
deem me a lyar^ why do I bring in reasons to prove my troath, when my words
can have no trust, or to debate the matter, when they think it daliaunce? well
sir, I cannot let you to think: but if I daly, it is in dolor; if I sport, it
is in spite; if I jest, it is without joy; and so tract of time shall try it.
You apply this mistrust to your age, and suspicion to your old brain: sure you
may do so: for I call the Gods to witnesses that the words which I speak,
and the love I protest to Mamillia is verytie without vanity, truth without
trifling: faith without flattery, as fine within, as fair without; a silver
sheath with a golden dagger, and in token she shall have both lands and life,
hand and heart, as her own for ever.

GOnzaga hearing the solemn protestation of the gentleman, being as credulous
as suspicious, thought, what the heart did think, the tongue would clinck: and
that his filed speech was without fayning, and his sweet talk without sower
tales, gave him his hand, that he was as glad to have him to his son, as he
desirous of such a father, and that he conceived a great contentation of mind,
that he found so fit a match for his daughter: so that after many pleasant
parlees on both sides, they were fully betrothed together. Pharicles promising
the next spring to consummat the marryage, and Gonzaga providing a courtly
banquet to ^eale up ye matter. Which being ended, Pharicles after many amiable
looks and sweet kisses, gave her the courteous conge, and departed to his
lodging no less contented, then if he had obtained Cresus wealth, Alexanders
empire, or any treasure that fortune could assign unto him.

But the Sun being at the highest, declyneth; the Sea, being at full tide,
ebbeth; caulme continues not long without a storm; neither is happiness had
long without heaviness, bliss without bale, weal without woe, as by this new
betrothed couple may be seen, who now flowing in floudes of felitity are by
the falsehood of Pharicles soused in the seas of sorrow, exalted to the highest
degree of happiness, are driven to the greatest extremity of evil, alate placed
in paradise, and now plunged in perplexity: for he no sooner entered his study,
but espying the cruel letter of his merciless mistress Publia, frying in
fury, burning in rage and turning his woonted love to a present hate, even as
the dog which byteth the stone; or the Bore that in chase teareth the trees; so
he in revenge of his choler, thought to read over this Letter more for spite
then for pleasure; more for lothing then for love. But as the bird, when she
is most careless is caught of the fowler, so Pharicles reading in jest, found
good earnest; and was so caught in the hay and taken with the toils, that his
fancy was fettered with a new charm, and his mind so amazed with this new
musing, that he bestowed all the night in examining particularly every line of
her letter. And though the first part was sharp and rigorous, yet he found the
last to be mixed with metal of more mild matter, reading it over a thousand
times, blaming his nature, and condemning his choler in being so rash to refuse
meat at the first taste, to reject the Orange, because the pill was sower; to
disalow the love of Publia, because she made chary of her chastity, his new
plighted troath was almost wavering, and waying at the first assault his
feigned fancy, almost eclipsed through fading folly, insomuch that the hope of
his new lust, had almost quenched the show of his new love; the freendlye
conclusion of Publia, had well nigh raced out his faith to Mamillia; the desire
of his fond affection so blinded his understanding, ye he passed not to pervert
both humane and divine laws: for the acco^plishme^t thereof: no rules of
reason, no fear of laws, no pricks of conscience, no respect of honesty, no
regard of God or man, could prohibit him from his pestiferous purpose: for if
laws had bin of force, he knew his deed was contrary to al laws, in
violating his sacred oath: if conscience, he knew it terrible: if honesty, he
knew wit most wicked: if God or man, he knew it abominable in the sight of
both.

But too true it is, ye the force of love, nay rather ye fury of lust, does
neither care for kith nor kin, friend nor foe, God nor the devil, as this
faithless Pharicles will prove: who having shrined his heart by solemn promises
in the bulwark of Mamillias bountye, yielded with a fresh Alarm, given by the
remembrance of Publias beauty, showing yt the cat will to kind: that the woolfe
will be a deuourer: the fox wily, and men deceitful: for nature must have his
course, their love is never guided by reason, but by rage: nor their fancy by
faith, but by fury: they burn in outward shape as hot as Aetna, where their
mere substance is as cold as Caucasus: their promises are loyal, but the
performance lascivious: they import fervent affection, but it proves fleshly
fancy: they are so given unto guiles, framed to forswearing, prone unto
perjury, wedded unto wickedness, and bowed unto vanity, that to say what I
think, the most trusty lover, that they make most account of, if he were
thoroughly sifted, would shrink in the wetting, and prove a lewd leachour: so
that she which yields her self under y^ courteous countenance of an injurious
man, is commonly so wrapped in the waves of wiles, y^ she is drowned at ye
length in the deapth of deceit, and hardly escaped with the loss of his
liberty, unless they smell them betimes: which is hard to do: for in their
wooing, they counterfeit simplicity, and in their wedding they show their
subtlety, while they are suitors, they are saints: but being sold, they are
serpents: they will bear a painted sheath, with a rusty blade: a fair blossom,
but rotten fruit: and Doves they will needs be, when indeed they be devils.
But again to our Gentleman, whose careful mind was so tossed with the
tempests of contrary cogitations, that as the vessel born with the tide
against the wind feels dubble force, and is compelled to yield to wind and
wave: so Pharicles driven by the force of lust, against the laws of love, felt
dubble dolor, and was so diversely tormented, that he fell into these terms.

Of al evil, which either God or nature has laid upon man, there is noone so
great, but either reason may redres, pleasure assuage, or mirth mittigate,
herbs heal, or by some means or other be cured: Love only excepted, whose
furious force is so full of rancor, that physic can in no respect prevail to
help the patient, deserving not ye name of a disease, but of an incurable
mischief: yet importing such a show of goodness, that it so inflameth our
desire to purchase it, yt we will not care to buy it at an unreasonable rate:
Which love has taken such deep root in me, as neither reason can rule, nor
wisdom wield: it is so ranckled with rage, and infected with fra^tick folly,
frantic I may well term it, since it is so light, as it seems to come without
liking: so mome^tary, as it shows no modesty: so unconstant, yt it has no
one jot of continuance: so diverse, as it may well be called devilish, more
brittle then a broken glass: more wavering the^ ye wethercock: more variable in
thought then ye Camelion in hue: more changable in deed the^ the nightingale
in voice: now liking, now lothing: now fire^ now frost: cold before I am hot:
and hot at the first dash. O fickle love, fraught with frailty. O traitorous
heart full of treachery. O cursed conscience, altogether careless. O miserable
wretch wrapped in wickedness: shall I requit ye liberal love of Mamillia with
such disloyalty, returning as ye dog to my vomit in liking Publia? shall I
deceive ye opinion, that both she and her father conceived in me, with such
detestable vill any? shall I return ye trust they put in me, with such treason:
shall I defile my faith toward her with such forged falsehood? shall I (...) so
new fangle to leave ye one so lewdly, and love the other so lightly it is a
common saying, that chang is seldom made for the better, and he is a fool,
they say, that will bily ye pig in the poke: or wed a wife without trial: or
setle love without time. What a madness were it then, to make such an il market,
to chop and chang, and live by ye loss: to refuse Mamillia without reason, and
choose Publia without trial: to reject assurance for incertainty: to fish for
hope, where I may satisfy my self with trust: to venture upon one, of whom I
have had no proof (but if there be so much) a little trifling love? Well, those
whelps are ever blind, that dogs beget in have: ye seed too timely sown has
ever small increase: he that leaps before he look, may hap to light in ye
ditch: he that settles his affection in such speed, as he makes his choice
without discretion: for his hasty choosing, may percha^ce get a heavy bargain.
Tush, he that seeks to restrain love, kicks again the prick: he stops ye
stream. and beats the fire downward, he will make necessity to have a law, and
cause Ba^lams Ass to speak: for love is above king or keisar, Lord or laws,
yea even above ye Gods themselves: if it be then so strong; why is it not then
more steadfast? if it be so forcible, why is it not fixed? perhaps so it is in all saving me: I am y^ od person, I am that one particular, on whom Cupid will
show his craft, and decipher his nature: in whom all the contrarieties of love
will work their contrary passions, on whom Venus will vaunt for her vain
bassall, as one ready to strike at every stale, to come at every call, to light
on every lure, yea, and almost scase on the empty fiste, neither regarding the
ware, nor the price: but leaving the force for the first assault of fancye. Oh
Gods, how foolishly do I fable? how my talk enforced by rage, is altogether
without reason? can I strive against that which is styrred by the Stars? can
I pervert that which is placed by the Planettes? can I drive out that, which is
decreed by the destinies ^or show force in that, which is fixed by the fates?
No, no, Pharicles, assure thy self, this thy change is by the charge of the
Gods, and thy new lyking to some greater end: perhaps they will prevent by
the means of Publia some great inconvenience, which should light upon thee in
matching with Mamillia. Aeneas, had he not settled his mind upon Dido? yea, and
celebrated the rites of matrimonys was be not warned by the Gods in a dream,
to falsefie his fayth^ and lay his love upon Lauinia? who did more for Jason
the^ Medea? yet he was driven by the destinies to forsake her, and fix his
fancy upon Creusa to whom he was constant to the end. (...) Theseus, by the
admonition of Bacchus, left Ariadne, and was forced by the fates to fancy
Phechia, with whom he remained as loyal, as light unto the other: so perhaps
I am forced by nature and destiny to loath Mamillia, and like Publia: and if it
be so, all is well: for Aristotle says, that nature nor fate never framed
any thing amiss: and though I offend in lyking the one lightly, yet I will make
amends in loving the other more firmly: if the world shall wonder at my faining
to the one, they shall meruail as much at my faith to the other: if abmen talk
of my treachery to Mamillia, they shall speak as much of my troath to Publia. Now
have I surely settled my self, never from henceforth to lend a loving look to
Mamillia. Publia shall be the planet, whereby to direct my doings: she shall be the
star, shall guide my compass: she shall be the haven, to harbor in: the saint at
whose shrine I mean to offer my devotion.

I will now put al fear aside: for a faint heart was never favored of fortune:
the coward that fears ye crack of the canon, will never prove a courageous
captain, nor vaunt himself of victory: the dastard that dreadeth the noise of
the drum, will never come in the skirmish, nor were y^ flag of triumph: the
lover that hears such a calm conscience, as for fear of his credit, dare not
match under the disse^bling sta^dard of Cupids camp, shall never be proclaimed
heir apparent to Venus kingdom. Therefore since I have settled and decreed, I
will make no delay, for fear the grass be cut from under my feet: but either
by words or writing se^d an answer to my new mistres: and with that he took
his pen, and sent her this Letter.

Pharicles to Publia.
THe phisitio^, mistres Publia, yt lets the sick patient blood for the
Plurysie, when tracte of time has made the disease incurable, defends the
walls when the City is ouerrunne: salues seldom help an ouerlonge suffered
sore: it is too late to bring the ruin of battery, when the walls are already
broken: that shower comes out of time, when the corn is ripe: and too late
it is to dist^ge love out of ones breast, when it has before infected every
part of the body. The surgion, when the festring Fistuloe has by long
continuance made the sound flesh rotten, can neither with le^^^iue plaistets,
nor cutting corasiues be cured: so love craves but only time to bring the body
and mind to bondage. So your seemly self seeing me fettred in y^ chain of
fancy, and fast bound in the ba^ds of your bewty, have sent me pills of hard
disgestio^, to assuage ye force of my love, and mitigate the firmnes of my
fancy: but as the biting of a viper ranckleth and rages, til he has brought
the body bitte^ to bain, so the sight of your co^ely person has so pierced
every vain with the sting of love, yt neither the sowernes of the sauce, nor
sharpnes of the salve, can in any wise prevail: only the mild medicine of
your mercy may salve the sore, and cut away the cause of my careful disease.
Since therefore mistres Publia, it is in your power either to exalt me to ye
highest degree of happiness, or drive me down to the deepest bottom of bitter
bale: to place me in the princely palace of earthly paradise, or plunge me in
the pit of perplexity: way my cause equally in the scales of honesty and
equity, and yield me but according unto justice, which am a careful client at
bewties bar: that is, to give according to my desert, and the desert of love,
is love again. And although the shortness of time has made no trial to procure
any great trust, yet I hope the clearnes of my conscience in that case, and
the firmnes of my faith, will in time force the truth to flame bright, amidst
the darkest mists of distrust: and again the scalding sighs and piteous
plaints and prayers that I have powered out to the Gods, that they might chang
your heart and settled vow of chart^tie, I hope when they shall take effect, that
they will be witnesses of my good will. For since the receipt of your letters, if
my words cannot be taken for witnesses, yet the prayers, processions,
pilgrimages, offers and vows that I have made unto the Gods, if they grant my
petition, will testify the joy I conceived in the courteous clause of your
letters, although I was almost foundred for fear, covered with care, and
daunted with dread, at the rigorous sight of your first lines. But as I was
never of that mind, to count him a courageous captain, that at the first shot
of the canon would yield the ke^es of the city: so was I ever in that opinion,
that the more hard the combat were, the more hauty were the conquest: the more
doubtful the fight, the more worthy the victory: ye more pain I should take
about the battery, the more pleasure to win the bulwork of your breast: which if
I should abtain, I would count it a more rich price, then ever Scipio, or any
of the nine worthy won by conquest, And y^ these words be vritie, and not
vanity: troath, and not trifling: I appeal to your good grace and favor,
minding to be tried by your courtesy, abiding either the sentence of consent
unto life, or mal^^ unto death.

Yours even after death, Pharicles.


PVblia having received this letter, perceiving the constant mind of y^ young
gentleman, by rubbing afresh her half healed sore, with the remembrance of his
person, and wage of his perf^^nos framing in her mind a mirour of his modesty,
and as it were viewing in a glass the feature of his face^ the comlines of his
corpse the bewty of his body, and all the virtues for abundantly the flowed upon
him by nature, had such a new alarm given her by love, yt the glowing coals
turned to flashing flames: her Heeting fancy, to firm affection: her lingering
liking, to loyal love: as now she felt the furious fight of contrary passions
in her tender heart, expressing the heat, which was kindled within her in these
s^alding (...).

Alas, quoth she, how has nature ordained by her prudent policy that no
creature under heaven, but if he has one commodity imparted upon him, he has
an other inconvenience, as well incident unto him, and especially mainkind: who
for every moment of mirth, has annexed a month of misery: for every proud puff
of prosperity, some sower sops of adversity: for every mite of happiness, a
thousand chips of il chance: for every dram of felicity, a whole shewre of
shrewd fortune: and when the sun of good succes shiueth most clearly, then
comes the clouds of ^are, and mists of mischief, when they are most unlooked
for: so y^ I perceive it is so common, as true, how amongst humane things,
nothing is stable in one state. The lark, when she is most careless, and
mounteth most highest unto the sky, with cheerful notes, is then seized on by
the hawk: and a woman walking in the wide fields of freedo^, and larg leaze of
liberty, secure from care, is then soonest caught in ye linckes of love, and
fetters of faney, restrained with a straigh^ band of bondage, wherein nature and
fortune has also most unequally provided: for ye most tender tree is ever
laden with the most fruit, and the smallest stalk has ever ye greatest corn: the
weakest wit and youngest years, who^ neither experience nor age has taught
any skill, is ever forced to bear the lode so^ burden of love: whereas ri^er
years are seldo^ or never trubled: so that the weakest is ever driven to the
wall: and they that worst may hold the ca^dle, which procures the greater pain:
for as the young colt, at the first breaking snuffles at the snafflle; and
thinks ye bit bitter; so the yoke of love seems more heavy vnto^nee, because
I never felt, the force of it before. But what need I make this exclation
against fortune, since I am not the^ first, no^r shall not be the la^? who^ the
frantic frenzy of flittering fancy has with more wrong, and greater vamage
pictiously expressed, yt now I so and try it by experience, y^ there is no
fish so fleeting, but will come to the bait: no^oa so wild, but will stand at
the gaze: no hawk so haggard, but will stoup at the lure: no Niesse so ramage,
but will be reclaimed to the limes: no fruit so fine, but the caterpiller will
consume it: no adamant so hard, but will yield to the file: no metal so strong,
but will bend at the stamp: no maid so free, but love will bring her to bondage
and thraldo^: and so I call it bondage, fond fool, to be bound unto bewty, if I
be a slave, yet shall I be subject unto virtue, is it thra^do^e to live in
league with him, who will like me in my youth, and love me in mine age? in whom
I shall find nothing, but only pleasure and conte^tation, who will be the haue^
of my happiness, wherein I may rest, and the part of my prosperity, to defend me
from the te^pests of froward fortune, and throwd me from ye bitter blasts of
bale? Shall I repent me, since my bargain is good, or complain of the loss of
liberty, since I have made a chang for a more worthy thing? shall I grudge when
the gods are agreed, or defer it, since ye destinies drive it; or frown, since my
fortune frames it? no, Pharicles is my saint, and him will I serve? he is my
joy, and him will I enjoy: he has laid the siege, and he shall fack ye city:
he has abod the battery, and he shall have the bulwark of my breast: he has
fought the combat, and he shall be victor in the conquest: for I cannot be so
unnatural to reward his love with lothing, so wout reason to defraud him of
his right, so devilish, for his deep desire, to give him a dolful dish of
despair. No, no, I have settled with my self, ye if ever I marry, Pharicles
shall be the man I will match with: and therefore, as I have driven him with
delays, and fed him with folly: so now I will send him a settled answer of my good
will and favor: as I have given him cutting corasiues, so I will se^d him
co^fects of comfort: as I have bin fearful to show my liking for y^ better
trial so now will I be bold to show my love in toke^: of a sure trust. But
Publia, be not too forward, for fear he misconstrue thy meaning, or think
sinisterly of thy light consent, least thy proffe^ed goodwill prove not half
worth the wearing. Does not Pharicles say, himself, that where the conquest is
doubtful, the vicory, is most to be counted? yt castle that has longest
battery, is thought the richer booty? are not those pearls which are scarsly
found, and hardly gatte^ over of the greatest value? the spice, which y^
merchant through raging rocks and perrilous seas brings home, has a swee^er
taste, the^ that which is easily gotten, hardly come by, warily kept. The maid
that by long suit and much travail is obtained, by how much the more she was
hard in the getting, by so much the more she will be sweet in the wearing: she,
which in her virginity is chary of her chastity, in her marriage will be as wary
of her honesty: therefore I will send Pharicles such a potion, as shall be sower
in the mouth, and sweet in the maw, sharp in eating, and plesa^t in
disgesting. And with that she sent him a letter, to this effect.

Publia to Pharicles.
IT is hard M. Pharicles to purchase credit by the praise of any thing, with
either defect of nature, or want of art do blemish: and as impossible it is to
be believed without sufficient witness, where either son or cause ^oth make the
plea imperfect: for praise in a thing unworthy, is a manifest sign of flauery.
Who would think he spok in ernest, which extolled the cr^w for her color: the
hare, to be hearty: y^ moulde, for her sight: the dolphin, for his straight
back: since lack of such perfection in the^, conde^nes thy praiser for a
parasit? I, therefore knowing in my self no desert to drive you to such deep
desire as you profes, am the hardlyer induced to believe your words: because ye
means of my bewty merits no such praise, as you attribut unto it, it procures
less credit to your talk, so that I take the^ forwords of course, rather the^
for tales of truth, thinking and fearing to find in yt fairest rose, a foul
canker: and in finest speech, foulest falsehood. It is given to ye wolf by
nature, to be cruel: to the lion, to be fierce: to the fox subtilnes: and as
well it is ingrafted in man, both by nature and eduratio^, to be disse^bling: so
yt it is a settled se^te^ce amongst the^: be y^ cannot di^^e^ble, cannot live:
and he that cannot with a few filed words bring a maid into a fools paradise,
cannot love. These things, and these feigned flatteries of men considered,
Pharicles, with the small acquaintance I have with you, mightiustly drive me into
the deep den of distrust, and almost sink me in the surging seas of suspicion:
but yt the secret goodwil we I have borne you long time, will neither suffer me
to conceive such mistrust, nor to conceal any longer ye fire of my fancy, but
must of necessity give place, where y^ flam bursteth forth by force. Think
therefore Pharicles, yt the sowersauce I sent you, was to cast your stomach:
that the salues of suspect was to search the sores of dissimulatio^: y^ the
taints of distrust was to feel the depth of the wound: that my denial was for
the greater trial: that my straitnes in words was no stra^gnes in mind, but to
try the truth of your goodwil: for if the sower taste of my talk had quatted
your stomach, I would have thought it altogether queasy: if the salues of suspect
had found the sore but a small blam: if the taints had tried the wou^d full of
dead flesh: or if one dau^t of denial had eased your courage, and proved you as
craue^ly a coward, as ye ve^trous knight, yt finding the first encounter
co^berso^, gives over the quest: the^ might I well have thought your love
light, your fancy fickle, your faith fading, as il to be liked, and worse to be
blamed, then the hound, which at the first default gives over the chase: but
since you stood to your tackling amidst the deepest waves of denial^ and never
shru^k for all the shewres of repulsio^, assure your self, you have gained one
in lieu of your travel, whose faith and fa^cy is so fixed upon

(...)
(...) scortched with the bewty of mamillia before he was enamored with the
person of Publia: now lyking, now lothing, as the sick patie^t, whose stomach
is but quasie: yet as the wind after often changing remains long in one
quarter: so Pharicles, in ame^ds of his fleeting fancy toward Marmillia,
determined to be always constant with Publia. Which determination had such
evil success, as it was the cause of his exile: for after he knew Mamillia
heard of his disse^bling, he co^ueied himself closly into Sicillia, traueling
forthen his journey, pilgrim like: but where his intent was to remain, no
ma^knewe. But as soon as I shall either hear, or learn of his aboa^, look for
news by a speedy Post.

Robert Green.

