A MOST SWEET AND assured Comfort for all those that are afflicted in
Consciscience, or troubled in mind.

Written by that godly and zealous Preacher, M. Richard Greenham.

With two comfortable letters to his especial friends that way grieved.

Psalm. 34. 18. The Lord is nere unto them that are of a contrite heart, and
will save such as be afflicted in Spirit. LONDON, Printed by John Danter, for
William Jones. 1595.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir DRVE DRVRIE, Knight: W. I. wisneth continual
peace of conscience.
RIGHT Worshipful, your zeal to Religion, and love of Learning; have made me
bold to present you with this fatherles Orphane; which I hope the rather you
will patronage, because it is the fruit of a godly Parent (once with your
Worship familiar) who living, taught the Word sincerely; and being dead, has
lest some monument of his works, necessary to instruct and edify. This first
is offered to the worlds view, containing all excellent comfort for an afflicted
Conscience.

If you voutchsafe to accept it, I have my desire, that boldly made choice of
you for your especial desert. The God of mercy and Father of our Lord Jesus
lengthen your days, and make your end blessed.

Your Worships in all duty. VV. I.

TO THE READER.
MAny are the calamities that sin imposes upon the wicked: but above all
other plagues, the wound of Conscience is most heavy. Touching which, the
holy Scripture affoords diverse examples, both of the wicked that have mourned
without hope, and the righteous that have sorrovved and sought comfort. The
svvetest of sins pleasure is not without a sharp sting, that piercing the
Conscience, begins hell in the hearts of the ungodly, and prepares Gods
Children to seek heaven by unfeigned repentance. I can not here number all of
either sort the Scripture mentions: I vvil only touch some, that it may
appear how sorrovv and vexation of mind, are sins hourelie companions.
Pharaohs contempt of God, brought him to hardness of heart, hardness of heart to
headlong destruction: Balaam sinned thorough greedy covetousness, and perished
among the uncircumcised: the sons of Heli sinned, and fell before their
enemies: Saul sinned and ended his life on his own svvord: Antiochus and
Herod blasphemed, and were smitten deservedly: Judas betrated, and died
despairingly. All these with many other (vvanting comfort for their wounded
consciences) perished lamentably: vvher on the other side, Job, David,
Hezekiali, Peter, Zach^us, etc. confessed their faults, sought mercy and were
comforted. Their conscienences bring (...) assured, they were strong confident
and unremovable, as app^^^ in Job, who so confidentlie believed, that for all
his misery, he cries, Though the Lord kill me, yet will I trust in him. David
also, though his soul were powered out as water, yet he commanded it to praise
the lord. The sick says our Savior, need the Physician: no mortal man but
has been soul sick, and therefore all men need comfort. It is necessary that
he which ministers to the diseased should know the cause of the sickness, that
being removed the medicine may more effectually work: and they that minister
the word, ought to have a feeling of their brethrens infirmities, that they
may be able to comfort the cast down conscience, stir the secure soul, and
weaken the proud thought. That the Author of this treatise was such a one,
appears (were there no other proof) by it, containing such heavenly
consolation, meeting so with all temptations, that for evil there can be no
evasion. Mercies with judgments are here so mixed* that neither may he that
stands boast, nor he that is fallen, be wholly discouraged. While he lived in
this City, he was an excellent Teacher: after his death he has left (among
other heavenly labors) this comfortable doctrine; that preaches peace to the
troubled, comfort to the comfortles, favor to the afflicted, health to the
diseased, hope to the humbled, grace to the grieved Conscience. Which that it
may effect, I have published for thy practice. Thine W. I.

In the title of the Letter against hardness of heart, Robert is set for Richard,
by the Printers error.

A MOST sweet Comfort for an afflicted Conscience.
It is thus written,
Proverbs, 18. 14. The Spirit of a man susteineth his infirmity: But a
vvounded Spirit who can bear?
THis Scripture is not only worthy to be graven in steel with the pen of an
Adamant, and in letters of gold; but also to be written and registered by the
singer of God his spirit in the table of our hearts. Which sentence briefly
speaks thus much unto us, that what trouble befalls a man (his mind
unappalled) he will indifferently bear it out; but if the spirit of a man be
once troubled and dismayed, he cannot tell how to be delivered. And no
marvel, for if the mind of man be the fountain of comforts, which ministers
comfort unto him in all other troubles; and if it become comfortles, what shall
comfort it? If it be void of help, where shall it be helped? If the eye which
is the light of the body be darkness, how great is that darkness? If the salt
which sauoureth all things be unsavory, for what is it good? If the mind
which susteineth all troubles be troubled, how intolerable is that trouble?
To show this the better, we will first declare how great a punishment of GOD
this wound of Conscience is: Secondly we will teach how this trouble of mind
may be prevented and avoided: Lastly we will set down how Gods children faling
in some measure into this affliction of spirit may be recovered out of it. For
the first, the grieuousnes of this malladie is seen, either by some due
consideration of the persons that have felt it; or by some wife comparison made
between this grief of mind, and other outward griefs incident unto a man.

The persons in whom we may consider this wounded spirit, are either merely
natural men, or such as be renewed by the spirit of GOD: The men merely
natural, are either the Heathen such as never knew God in Christ or carnal
professors such as have not professed Christianity aright. If we look among
the Heathen, how many of them have willingly gone under poverty, and have been
content to unburden themselves of al worldly treasures? How have some of them
(their minds being unappalled) suffered imprisonment, exile, and extreme
tortures of bodies; rather than they would betray Countries? How many of them
having devoured many injuries, and borne outward troubles, with some ease and
with no resistance, whilst their minds were at liberty? And yet look not into
the meanest, but the best and most excellent men among them, even their wisest
Philosophers sweet Orators and exquisite Poets, who in bearing and forbearing
thought the chiefest point of virtue to consist; and ye shall see when some
great distress of mind did wound them, some would make an end of it by
preparing a Cup of deadly poison; some would violently and voluntarily run on
the enemies pikes; some would throw down themselves from hye Mountains;
some would not stick to stab most monstrously their own bodies with Daggers;
or such like instruments of death: all which men would seem to have great
courage in susteining many harms, so long as their minds were not
ouermastred. But when the divine and supreme Essence (which they acknowledged)
did by his power cross and ouerturne their witty devises and headstrong
attempts, so as without hope of remedy they were hampered in pensiuenes and
sorrow of mind, then being not able to turn themselves under so heavy a
burden, they shrunk down and by violent death would rid themselves of that
disquietnes and impatiencie of their troubled minds.

But let us come nearer; and whether we behold the Papists, or the Family of
love, or the common sort of Christians, we shall see they will pass quietly
through many afflictions, whether for that they have a spirit of slumbring or
numbers cast upon them; or whether because they have brawned themselves
through some senceles blockishnes, as men hewn out of hard Oaks, or graven
out of marble stones I know not. But yet when the Lord shall let loose the
cords of their consciences, and shall set before their faces their sins
committed; see what a fearful end they have, whilst some of them by hanging
themselves, some by casting themselves into the water, some by cutting their
own throats have rid themselves out of this intolerable grief. Now wherein
is the difference that some dye so sencelesly, and some dispatch them selves so
violently? Surely the one feeling no sin, depart like brutish Hogs; the other
surcharged with sin, dye like barking Dogs.

But let us come to the children of God, who have in some degree felt this
wound of mind; and it will appear both in the members and in the head, of
all burdens to be a thing most intolerable to sustain a wounded Conscience.
And to begin with, let us set in the first rank Job, that man of God commended
unto us by the holy Ghost for a myrrour of patience, who although for his
riches he was the wealthiest man in the land of Huz; for his authority, might
have made afraid a great multitude; and for his substance, was the greatest of
all the men in the East: Yet when the Shabeans violently took away his
cattle; when the fire of God falling from heaven burnt up his sheep and his
servant; when the Chaldeans had taken away his Cammels; when a great wind
smote down his house upon his children; although indeed he rent his garments,
which was not so much for impatiencie, as to show that he was not insensible
in these evils: Yet it is said that he worshipped and blessed the name of the
Lord, saying: Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I retur^e
thither again: The Lord gives and the Lord takes away, Blessed be the name
of the Lord.

Howbeit behold when at the strange conference of his comfortles friends, his
mind began to be aghast, which was not so in all his former trial: when his
conscience began to be troubled; when he saw the Lord fasten on him sharp
arrows, and to set him up as as a Butte to shoot at; when he thought God
caused him to possess the sins of his youth; this glorious pattern of
patience could not bear his grief: he is heavy, and now may commend to all
the Image of a wounded spirit, that shall come after. David, a man chosen
according to the Lords own heart; Ezekiah, a pure worshiper of God, and
careful restorer of pure Religion; Jeremiah, the Prophet of the Lord,
sanctified and ordained to that Office before he was formed in his mothers
womb, were rare and singular in the graces and favor of God: yet when they
felt this wound piercing them with grief of heart, they were as Sparrows
mourning; as Cranes chattering; as Pellicans casting out fearful cries; they
thought themselves as in the graves; they wished to have dwelt solitarily; they
were as bottels parched in the smoke; they were as Doves mourning, not able
without sighs and groans to utter their words; their hearts cloue to the dust,
and their tongues to the roof of their mouths.

But above all; (if these were not sufficient to persuade us in this doctrine)
there remains one example, whom we affirm to be the perfect anatomy of an
afflicted Conscience. This is the Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST the Image of the
father, the head of the body, the myrror of all graces, the wisdom,
righteousness, holiness, and redemption of all the Saints; who sustained the
Cross even from his youth upward: and besides poverty, baseness, hunger, did
willingly go under the great trouble of contempt and reproach, and that among
them where he should have had a right deserved honor, in respect of the Doctrine
he taught them, and in regard of the manifold miracles wroght among them; as
the healing of the sick, the giving sight to the blind, the restoring of life
to the dead: This unkindness nevertheless, did so much strike him, as at what
time he was set as a Sacrifice for all, when he was to bear our infirmities,
and carry our sorrows, at what time he was plagued and smitten of God,
humbled and wounded for our transgressions, when he should be broken, for our
iniquities, and the chastisement of our peace was upon him, then he cried out;
My soul is heavy even unto the death: Then he prays, Lord if it be
possible, let this Cup pass from me: But how prays he? even with sweating;
how sweateth he? even drops of blood; how long prays he? Three times:
when ends his agony? not until he was dead: What said he being ready to
depart? My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me.

Was this for his humane death as some have imagined? No, no, wicked men have
died without complaint, whose patience them might seem to exceed his; it was
his suffering in his humane Spirit, which incountred with the wrath of God,
his Godhead suppressing it self for a while: he suffered indeed many torments
in body, but the wrath of God did much more lie upon his soul. If this
consideration of an afflicted spirit in these examples do not sufficiently
show; what a grievous thing it is to sustain a wounded Conscience: Let us
proceed to the comparing of this with other evils, which fall into the nature
of men.

There is no sickness, but Physic provides for it a remedy; there is no sore
but Surgery will affoorde it a salve; Friendship helps poverty; There is
no imprisonment, but there is hope of liberty; Suite and favor recover a man
from banishment; Authority and time wear away reproach: But what Physic
cures? what Chirurgerie salueth? what riches, ransom, what countenance
bears out? what authority asswageth? what assault dismaieth a troubled
Conscience? All these banded together in league, (though they would conspire a
confederacy) cannot help this one distress of a troubled mind; And yet this
one comfort of a quiet mind, does wonderfully cure, and comfortably assuage
al other griefs whatsoever. For if our assistance were as an host of armed
soldiers; If our friends were the Princes and all the Governors of the earth;
If our possessions were as long as between the East and the west; If our meat
were as Manna from heaven; If our apparel were as costly as the Ephod of
Aaron; If every day were as glorious as the day of Christ's resurrection; yet if
our minds be appalled with the judgment of God, these things would little
comfort us. Let experience speak; If a troubled mind impayreth not health,
dries not up the blood, consumes not the marrowe, pineth not away the flesh,
consumes not the bones; if it makes not al pleasures painful, and shortneth
not the life; surely no wisdom can council it, no council can advise it, no
advise can assuage it, no asswagement can cure it, no eloquence can persuade
it, no power can overcome it, no Scepter affray it, nor inchaunter can inchant
it. And yet on the contrary, if a man languish in sickness, so his heart be
whole, and is persuaded of the health of his soul, his sickness does not
grieve him: If a man be reproched, so he be precious in the sight of God and
his Angels, what loss has he? If a man be bannished, and yet doubts not
that heaven is his Country, and that he is a Citizen among the Saints, it does
not appall him: If a man be in trouble of mind, and finds peace of
conscience, he will quietly digest his trouble. But if the mind be troubled,
who dares meet with the wrath of the Lord of Hoasts? who can put to silence
the voice of desperation? who will step out and make agreement with the hills
to spare us, who dare make a covenant with the devil that he would not lay
claim unto us: If then a good conscience helps all evils, and all other
benefits in this life cannot help a troubled conscience; we see it true in
proof, which here is in proverb; The Spirit of a man will sustain his
infirmity: But a vvounded Spirit, Who can bear it?

Again, in all other afflictions we may have some comfort against sin; this
is ever accompanied with sin. A man may be sick, reproched, imprisoned, and
banished; and yet in all these have a clear conscience, his own heart telling
him that there is no special cause of these crosses in him, but that he may
suffer them for the trial of his faith, or for righteousness sake and well
doing: But when the Spirit is wounded, there is a guiltines of sin; and
where a man's spirit is troubled, he suspecteth all his ways, he fears all
his sin, he knows not what sin to begin with, it breeds such hurly burly in
him, that when it is day he wishes for night; when it is night, he would have
it day: his meat does not nourish him; his sleep often forsakes him; his
dreams are fearful unto him: If he speaks, he is little eased; if he
keeps silence, he boyleth in disquietnes of heart; the light does not comfort
him, the darkness does grieve him.

To prosecute our comparisons; where all other evils are more intolerable,
because they be temporal, and pursue us but to death: this being not cured
ends not in death, but becomes eternal. For even the heathen men thought
that death was the end of all misery: the persuasion whereof made them (being
in some misery) to make an end of themselves, and hasten their own death, as
Satan does make many now a days, who are ignorant of hell, which is a place
of far greater pains than any they can suffer in this world whatsoever.
How be it a tormented conscience, if before it was begun, is now continued; or
if it was not before, now begins and never ends world without end. For
though true it is, that sickness, poverty, imprisonment, or bannishment, have
ended their term in death; yet a wounded heart which was temporal in this
life, is now eternal after this life: that which before death was in hope
recouerable, is after death, made both incurable and unrecoverable. It is good
therefore to consider, if even in this life the torment of conscience be so
fearful; how much more grievous is it to sustain it in hell? where that is
infinite, which here is finite; where that is unmeasurable, which here is
measurable; where is the sea of sorrow, whereof this is but a drop; where is
the flame of that fire, whereof this is less then a spark. But to shut up
this argument: Some there have been, who through out all their life time, have
been free from all other troubles, so as either they felt them not all, or else
in very small measure; and by that means never knew what outward trouble
meant. As for example, some men there have been, who for sickness never knew
the headache; for poverty, never knew what want meant; who for discredit,
were never evil spoken of; who ever put from them the evil day of the Lord;
who have made a league with death as it were, and a covenant with hell; who
thought they could crucify any cross, rather than come under any Cross:
yet they could never escape a wounded conscience, either in this life, or in
the life to come. True it is, that Gods Children do often escape it, but the
wicked, and such as are borne unto it, as to their sure inheritance; the more
they fly from it, the more it pursues them. If we have transgressed the
Civil Laws, the Judge by bribes may be corrupted; if a man have committed
some capital offense, by flying the Country he may escape the Magistrates
hands: but our Consciences telling us that we have sinned against God; what
bribe shall we offer? or whether shall we fly? whether shall we go from his
spirit? whether shall we fly from his presence? If we ascend into heaven, is
not he there? If we fly to the utmost parts of the sea, is he not there
also? There needs no Paritor to summon us, there needs no Baylie arraunt to
fetch us, there needs no accuser to come in against us: sin will arrest us,
and lies at the Door, our own Conscience will impanell a Quest against us;
our own hearts will give in Evidence against us, and our own iniquity will
plead us to be guilty to our own faces?

Now let us show how we may prevent it, and by what means Gods children falling
into some degrees of it, (for if it rage in extremity, it is an evil
unrecoverable) may safely and quietly be delivered from it. And here a just
complaint is to be taken up, and it is a wonder to be marked (if we may wonder
at GODS works) that we see so many careful and watchful to avoid other
troubles, and so few or none take any pains to escape the troble of mind,
which is so grievous. We see men loving health and loathing sickness, in diet
temperat, in sleep moderate, in Physic expert, skillful to purge, and to
avoid such corrupt humors, which in time may breed (though presently they do
not bring) forth sickness: yet to avoid the diseases of the soul, no man
abateth his sleep, no man abridgeth his diet, no man prepares Physic for
it; no man knows when to be full, and when to be empty; how to want, and how
to abound. Others carried away with the love of riches, and very nigh to fall
into poverty, will not stick to rise early, to take sleep lately, to fare
hardly, to tear and taw their flesh in labor by land and by water, in fair
and soul weather, by rocks and by sands, from far and from nere: and yet to
fall into spiritual decaies, to avoid the poverty of conscience, no man
takes such pains; as though salvation and peace of mind, were not a thing
worthy the laboring for. Some ambitiously hunting after honor, and not easilye
digesting reproaches, behave themselves neither sluggishly nor sleepely; but
are active in every attempt, by love and by counsel, by prudence and
prowess, by wit and by practice, by labor and learning, by cunning and
diligence to become famous, and to shun a civil reproach: yet to be glorious
in the sight of God and his Angels, to fall before the heavens, and in the
presence of the Almighty to be covered with shame and confusion of
conscience, we make none account, as they who neither use any means to
obtain the one, nor avoid those Occasions which may bring the other.

Others very unwilling to come within the reach and danger of the Law, that
they may by reading get experience how to escape imprisonment of body, or
confiscation of goods, will be painful in penal statutes, skilful in every
branch of the civil law; and especially will labor to keep themselves from
treasons, murders, fellonies, and such like offenses of life and death: yet
where the Lord God threateneth the seazure both of soul and body, the
attaching of our souls, the confiscating of our consciences, the banishing of
us from heaven, the hanging of us in hell, the suspending of our salvation, the
adiudging of us to condemnation for the breach of his Commandments; few men
sercheth his eternal Law, few men cares for the Gospel: neither the
sentence of everlasting diuorsement from the Lord, neither the covenant of
reconciliation is esteemed of us.

And to reach our Complaint one Degree farther. The more we seek outward
pleasures to avoid the inward trouble of mind, the more we have and run
into it; and we speedely plunge our selves in a wounded spirit or we be a
ware. Who posteth more to become rich, than the merchant man? who hops less
to become pore, than he that aduentureth great treasures? who hazardeth his
goods, who puts in ieoperdie of his life; and yet suddenly he either rusheth
upon the rock of hardness of heart, or else is swallowed up of the gulphe of
a despairing mind: from which happily he cannot be delivered with a ship full
of gold. Woeful proof has confirmed, how some men (wholly set on plesures,
such as could not away to be sad, and hedged up always of godly sorrow) have
had their tables made snares; and even their excess of pleasures, has brought
excess of sorrows: and whilst they labored to put the evil day far from
them; they have used follyes that have been the most bitter and speedy
hang-men of their fearful trembling consciences.

There be some of another sort, who never dreaming of a troubled mind, have
had their hearts set on nothing but how they might get some great fame and
renown; and therefore have slipped into such vaineglorious attempts, and foul
flatteries, as they have not only lost the peace of their Consciences, but
also fallen most deeply into reproachful shame, which they sought to shun.

Now therefore as the peace of conscience and joy of mind is such a treasure,
as the eye has not seen, the ear has not heard, nor the tung expressed; but
passes al understanding: and as they only know what the peace of mind
means, that feel it; so they alone can in truth speak of a troubled mind,
that have tasted of it by experience.

But let us show what way is to be used to keep us from this wound of the
spirit. It is the use of Physic, as to cure us of diseases when we are fallen
into them; so to preserve us from sickness before it has taken hold of us: it
is the power of the Word, as to assuage the trouble of Conscience, when it does
once press us; so to prevent it before it has overtaken us. It is a chief
point of worldly wisdom, not to tarry for the use of physic until we be
deadly sick; but to be acquainted with Gods merciful preservation to defend
us from it; likewise it is a chief policy of a godly Christian, not only to
seek comfort when the agony is upon him; but also to use all good helps to
meet with it before it comes. And if we condemn them of folly, who will not as
well labor to keep themselves out of debt; as to pay the debt when they owe it:
so it is a madness not to be circumspect to avoid all occasions, which may
bring trouble of mind upon them; as we would be provident to enter every
good way which may draw us out of this trouble, when we have once entered
into it.

These remedies preservative; are first the searching of our sins, and the
examining of our faith.

The examining of our sins, is either the due acknowledging of our sins, or
the true sense and feeling of our sins. The acknowledging of our sins, is
either of those that be past, whether we have vnfeinedlye repented us of
them: or of those which be present, whether we be truly grieved for them.

Thirdly of those secret corruptions, which in the course of our life are
likely to come, whether we are reverently afraid of them; and resolve to
suppress them with all our endeavor.

Concerning sins past, we must call to mind the sins done of old, in our
youth, in our middle age, in our old age; and judging our selves we may not
be judged of the Lord; that accusing of our selves, satan have no occasion
to accuse; and throwing down our selves before the Lord, he may lift us up. For
many going quietly away, and sleeping in carnal security (notwithstanding
the sins of their youth) neglecting to make conscience of their sins done
long ago; suddenly have fallen into such horror of mind, that (the violent
remembrance of all their sins surcharging them) they have been overwhelmed.

This Examination then does rightlye proceed, when it does reach to the
errors of this life, and to the sins of our youth; because many men (even from
their childhood, by a civil righteous life) having escaped gross sins
wherewith the world could never charge them, have not withstanding carried the
burden of more secret sins done in their youth. David Psalm. 25. 7. prays the
Lord, not to remember the sins of his youth; Job (23. 6.) the man of God
(confessing that the Lord writes bitter things against him) says, he made him
to possess the iniquities of his youth. What, shall we think that David or
Job were given to notorious wickedness in their youth? No, they knew they were
subject to youthful wantonness and vnstaiednes of their affections; which though
it did not burst out, yet it made them less careful to glorify GOD; which
loosenes, is the way to leaudnes; which weakness, the way to strange vanities;
which wantonness, the way to open wickedness, is even in the best of Gods
children in the days of their youth: which being afterward in the time of
their regeneration, brought (as it were) to judgment, and laid before their
consciences, does cause them to repent.

But here is a thing to be blushed at, which makes men's ears to tingle when
they hear; that many men (far no doubt from this true repentance) can
largely indeed discourse of their sins done in their youth; but in such a
bravery, with such boastings, and pleasing themselves in the remembrance of
them; as besides that they provoke others to sin; they likewise set them
selves a flatter backe-byas against Repentance: and in stead of this Christian
examination, they seem to renew the decayed colors of their old sins, with
the fresh suite of their second plesures conceived in them. But alas what
pleasure have they in those things, whereof they have no profit? what profit
have they in those things whereof they should be ashamed? neither in this
strein can we forget the madness of them, who may seem to step one degree
farther toward this examination of sin, than did the former; by thinking that
the leaving of sin, and repenting of sin is all one. Against this, both
daily experience and the word of God does sufficiently declare. Joseph's
brethren (Jacob his sons) who devised evil against their brother, put him
into the pit, and sold him unto strangers; did cease from this cruelty: but
yet are not read to have remembered their sins with any remorce, until
thirteen years after the sin was committed, as we may see in the process of
the History. David had left his sins of murder and adultery (as thinking
all quiet and well) the space of a whole year; after which time (being
admonished by the Prophet Nathan) he repented of it. And experience has tried
in many, that though they left their sins many years ago, having had some
working of God in them; yet because they repented not truly for them, they have
rebounded on them with terrible sights and fearful visions, to humble them;
and to bring them to serious examination of them, being done and left long
since. Examples whereof we need not fetch from far, seeing so many
preachers (which are acquainted with fearful spirits) will give witness hereof.
The fruit of which amazed minds for sins already left, is ours, to beware
of sins which are to come. And that other men's harms might teach us blessed
wisdom; let us labor not only to leave sin, which one may do for profit,
for fear, for prayers, or for werisomnes, but also to repent of it for
conscience sake.

This Examination of sins past, must be partly of those that we committed
before our calling, and partly of those which were done after our calling.
Every man (especially having his reason reformed by the Word of God) will grant
an examination of the life, before our true knowledge of God in Christ, to be
most needful. But it may be some will think that we need not be so precise
in the searching of those sins, which were after our knowledge; but seeing of
all other sins these byte sorest and pierce deepest, for that they are
aggrauated with all the menaces of God going before and after sin. Sin is
then most sinful, when after we know the truth, after we have been delivered
from sin, after we have been enlightened with the grace of God, we have fallen
into it: I think that examination most specialy ought to be had of those sins.
Wherefore to it erate our former examples in a new matter, as we may see the
former kind of examining; first for sins before our calling, in the sons
of Jacob; so we have a pattern of the latter in the practice of the Prophet
David, who at the hearing of his sin was so troubled in spirit, that he could
not rest though the Prophet told him his sins were forgiven him, but still
he was disquieted, as though he found no comfort in his spirit. For as it
fares with sores, it comes to pas with sins: we are loath to have our
wounds often grated upon, we cannot so well away to have our sores rifled,
seared, lanced; but to be fed with healing salve: so we are hardly brought to
have our Consciences grownd, or our sins ransacked, sifted, searched, and
ripped up; but could still have them playstered with sweet promises, and bathed
in the mercies of God: whereas it is far safer before incarnatiue and healing
Medicines, to use corrosiue and mundifying waters, without which though some
sores may seem to cloase and skin up apace; yet they prove worse, and be rotten
still at the coare; they have above a thin skin, and underneath rotten flesh.
In like manner, we would cloak, we would hide and cover our sins, as it were
with a curtain; but it is more sound Chirurgerie to prick and pierce our
Consciences with the burning iron of the law; and to cleanse the wound of the
Soul by sharp threatenings, least that skin being pulled over the
Conscience for a while, we lament the rotten corruption, which remains
uncured underneath, and so we be constrained to cry out of our sins openly.
As it is a follye then to dissemble our soars whilst they be curable, and
after to make them known when they be incurable; so it is a great follye to
dissemble our sins whilst they may be remedied, and so after be constrained
to blaze them all abroad when they are remediless. But of this by the way,
because we shall more largely touch it in the last part to come.

It is sufficient to commit sin before knowledge, but after some good light
of the spirit to sin, breeds either hardness of heart, or a troubled spirit;
both which we shall avoid, if in truth we be careful to watch over our
affections, and beware least after our delivery we fall into sin again.

Several men subject to several sins, have their several checkes in their
consciences: some are ouercom with wrath, and yet after their moodie fit they
can tell, that the wrath of man does not accomplish the righteousness of God;
some are subject to lust, and after they say, that man's life has another
end; some slip deeply into worldlines, and yet they be often weakened with
most terrible checkes of conscience. Well, blessed are they whose hearts be
truly grieved; and let them beware that make a daliance with sin: for either
hardness of heart will overtake them, or a troubled conscience will quite
confound them. Whereby it comes to pas, that many spending their bodies on
lust, lament that ever they have so abused then strength; many given too much
to the pleasures of this life, have grief coming upon them, to remember how
they have spent Gods graces, banished his good gifts, and misspent their time;
or else, if they have not this grief, they fall into voluptuousnes, and draw
such a skin upon their hearts, as will cause the strongest denouncement of Gods
judgments to rebound, be they driven on never so hard. And sure it is the
sin of this world, that men being controuled in their consciences, whilst
they are a praying, and feel a secret charge said upon them, to beware of
guile in buying and selling; either have their checkes, and so grow to be
profane; or else afterward they are wonderfully wounded, that they have been
so worldly, so greatly pursuing earthly and vain things; so coldlye
purchasing heavenly and permanent things. Thus, even our privy thoughts (not
profited) are breeders of farther trouble.

Now the remedy against this is, willingly and wittingly not to cherish any
sin, to with that the Ministers should touch our most privy and secret
sins, to be glad privately to be admonished, to profit by our Enemies when
they do reproach us: and rather desire (in such a case) to be humbled, than
suffer our selves to be flattered.

This trying of our selves must yet stretch it self farther, not only to the
committing of evil, but also to the omitting of good. As when (after some good
working of the spirit, and feeling thereof) we begin a fight and conflict with
our consciences: though I must pray, I must have time also to provide for my
family* if I go to hear the word of God, surely I shall be in danger to
loose this profit; if I thus attend upon the exercises of religion, I shall be
cut short in the use of my plesures. Wherefore it shall be good to search our
hearts, both in the careless not using of the means; but also in the negligent
watching over the fruits of the means: saying to our selves in this manner; I
have heard a Sermon, but (alas) without any feeling or working upon my
affections; I have bin praying, but with no power of the spirit; I have
receceyued the Sacrament, but without those joys glorious and unspeakable,
which I was wont to taste of it; I saw the Discipline of the Church executed,
but without any fear of sin at all in my self, or compassion of the member
censured. And here I dare from my own observation assuredly affirm, that
outward sins have not been at some times so grievous to Gods Children; as
that they have some times used very good means with little reverence and less
fruit. And no marvel, we shall see many men at some times, not so much grieved
for the sickness it self, as for that they have willingly neglected the
means, which might have preserved their health, or abused the Physic that
might have restored their health to them again: in like manner (I say) it
fares with them, who either irreverently have refused the means, which
should keep their souls from surfeiting, or else vnthankfullye have abused
those helps, which might have recovered them again. From hence it comes,
that some are much grieved for not using their good gifts to the benefit of
Gods Church; as others are troubled for abusing their good gifts to the hurt of
Gods Church: as we shall see a rich man sometimes humbled for not giving money
to the poor, which he might have done; as also for heaping up riches falsely,
that he ought not to have done. And thus, many (having received good gifts
and graces from the Lord) are seasoned and sanctified by afflictions; whereby
they are taught to put their gifts in ure, and to offer their service to
Christ: and others are fear ^o hide their gifts, which cannot be without some
decay of Gods glory, without offense to the weak, without the loss of many
souls, which otherwise might be won to the Gospel, and without
strengthening the hand of the Adversary to slander our dark and dumb
profession. All which things will in the end bring terror gf mind: because if
the Lord cannot work upon us by taking away goods, credit, wife, children, or
such like, to bring us to Repentance; he will surely whippe our naked
consciences, he will enter even into our very entrayles, and pierce our
secret bowels.

As we must examine our selves thus for sin past and present; so must we
use this practice in sins that are to come: and this is very needful; for
were it so, that our life and conversation were such, as neither before nor
after our calling, any man could iustlye accuse us: Yet the hidden corruption
of our nature, may threaten some heinous downfall in time to come. Which has
made men of very good report and conversation hang down their heads, and
fear their secret hypocrisy; as that which may break forth to the shame of
all their former life in time to come.

But because we forgate to speak of them, that in the examining of their lives
past, are much grieved for the want of sincerity, and privy vainglorie in
themselves; let us beware we go to the searching of our hearts in sin.

To come to speak somewhat of those men troubled for this privy pride, they
are touched or not touched. If the veyle of sin was great in them, that it
hid Christ from them; it is the good will of god, that by this sight of their
most secret sins they should come to see the righteousness that is in Christ
Jesus; and so they shall be kept the better from being Iusticiarie Pharisees:
for when being a long time well brought up, and leading a civil life, the
Devil would persuade us of some inherent righteousness in us; It is the
wisdom of God to touch us with the conscience of most hidden corruptions, as
also to make known unto us, that even from our birth there was a secret feed
of sin in us, which (without the Lord watching over us) would surely have
broken forth to his dishonor.

As for them which have had some woorking in them, and yet are often plunged in
sore distresses; this trouble comes to them for two especial causes; either
for some hypocrisy, which they did more in show than in truth; wherefore the
Lord brings them back again to see their corrupt proceedings, and that
they may know that al their religion is but hypocrisy, and all their
righteousness to be but unrighteousness: or for the abusing of their knowledge,
in that they made it but a mask to iuggle in, and that they made their
affections to fight with their own judgments. We must remedy this, by not
thinking of our selves above that that is meet, and by laboring to embrace
the truth. And here let us note, that many of gods Children accuse themselves
of hypocrisy, when indeed they offend not in it. And yet this accusation
arises from some fault: for though they have done things in truth, yet because
they strove not to see their secret corruptions, in some other matters; they
sustain this troubled mind. So that there is nothing harder than to sift and
search our own hearts at the bottom, whether we respect our sins past or
present, whether we we look to our privy pride, hidden wants, or secret
corruptions. And to return from whence we were digressed, to the examination
of our hearts. In sins to come, let us observe that in Gods children there
is such a jealousy, that they tremble at the very first motions and quake at
the least occasion to sin, although because vice will sit in residence very
nere unto virtue; there may be in the^ sometime too much scrupulousnes: this
fear causes the dearest of the Saints of God to reason on this sort; O Lord,
I see how many excellent men in gifts, and constant in profession for a long
time, whose end has not answered their Beginnings; whose death was not like to
their lives. This is true, whether we look into the word or into the world:
and it is a thing that may much humble us. For though we may remember what
we have been, and know what we are; yet who can tell what may come unto him
hereafter.

Oh that the serious meditation hereof, would dwell long upon our consciences:
that with a holy iealozie we might prevent that sin that is to come. But
alas, there be some wayne people, which think it no masterie to offer
themselves to masking, minstrelsie and dancing, nor to run into quarrels,
braules and contentions; as though they had their ears, their eyes, their
hands and their feet in their own power, and at commandment to use and
govern as themselves list.

Howbeit, GODS Children better fenced with his grace, than those bold
buzzardes, are afraid of these occasions; as knowing full well, that their
eyes may soon be provoked to lust, their ears may quicklye listen unto
unchaste delights, their hands may suddenly strike a deadly blow, and their
feet may easily be snared in the spreaded nets of carnal pleasures.

Beware O man, be circumspect O Woman, that thou prostitute not thy self to
too much liberty: for although in coming to such lascivious and co^tentious
places thou did purpose none evil, yet for thy ventring with out warrant,
thou may be over thy shoes in sin, and plunged in some wicked attempts
over head and cares, ere thou be aware. And yet because vice is so confine
unto virtue, beware also of superstition: for still the enemy labors to
make thee too hardy in sin, or else he will cause thee to be too fearful
and superstitious; either he will puff thee up with presumption, or assault
thee with desperation. To these tentations our nature is very appliable: first
to presumption, as may appear by our common speech; tush, the Preacher is but
a man as I am, I am sure he has infirmities as others have; we are no Angels,
our nature is corrupt, we are but men, I am sure you would not have us Gods.
Thus the devil comes to tempt; but he apparelleth himself in another suit
when he comes to accuse: and then of a fly he makes an elephant, of the
very smallest prick of a pin a gloabe of the whole earth, of a moal-hill a
mountain: and presses silly souls with fear and terror, that they know not
how to wind themselves. If he cannot bring the^ to make conscience where they
should make conscience, he will labor to bring them to make conscience where
they need make no conscience. He cares not whether thou be remiss or
superstitious, so thou be one of them. If he cannot get you to follow the
epicurisme of the world, as Libertines in diet and apparel; he will make you
so precise, as to think it a heinous sin, to ear one bit of meat, or to
wear one ragge of cloth more tha^ for necessity. How needful therefore it is
to sail with an even course, we may conjecture by other things which will
bewraye the corruption of our nature.

In the time of a plague we shall see some will be so bold, that without any
lawful calling or godly warraunt, they will rush into places infected; and
then falling sick, their conscience pricks them for their tempting of God by
an unadvised boldness in the instaunt moment of their death.

Others plunged as deeply in a quite contrary extremity, are too fearful
when they do but hear of sickness; and for very fear have been brought to
deaths door only by imagining themselves to have been infected, when they have
been most free, who oftentimes have even died, and that without any natural
cause that ever could be known, but only through immoderate fear and the
judgment of God coming upon them for their infidelity and unbelief. Thus it
is with us in Christianity, in that as well the oppressing our selves with too
much fear to be overcome, as the carnal security, in not fearing to be
overcome, may bring sin upon us. God his children must labor for a measure,
and that must be sought for in the Word, which will teach them how they shall
neither decline on the right hand, nor on the left; but will guide them in the
narrow way, showing in every thing what is the virtue, what is the vice; what
is the mean, what is the extreme.

Among many Examples, let us consider of zeal, a most precious virtue in
Christianity, so long as it is free from the extremities.

If we be cold in zeal, it is a sin on the left hand: if we be zealous
without knowledge, it is preposterous, and becomes a sin on the right hand.

But can we not come to some perfection? No, if you understand it for an
absolute vnspottednes; albeit to that perfection which the Scripture takes for
soundness, truth, and sincerity of heart, which is void of careless remissenes,
we may come. Neither does the lord deal with us after our sins, nor reward us
after our iniquities: in whole eyes the most glorious actions of men, are but
as waters flowing purely from the Conduit, but defiled by passing through a
filthy channel: Wherefore although we have our imperfections, let us not seek
to be more righteous than we can be; saying for every error of this life, Oh,
I am none of Gods his sons, I am none of his daughters: for I cannot find
that perfection in me, which is to be required. But let us comfort our selves
in the truth of our hearts, and singlenes of our desires to serve God, because
he is God; and so we shall be accepted of God.

I speak this to this end, that poor souls might have comfort, and know that
if they abhor sin as sin, if they examine themselves for it, if they fear
to fall into it; the Lord will not pursue them with the rigor of his law, but
will give them the sweetness of his promises; they are no more under the curse,
but under grace.

But farther to enforce our Exhortation, to avoid too scrupulous fear, which
hinders the true examination of our hearts: let us think that it happens
in the spiritual conflict as in civil war. We read that many Cities being
in great security, have suddenly both been assaulted and overthrown; as also,
how some Countries (too much negligent in the means) thorough an excessive
fearefulnes, have encouraged their Enemies with more greedy violence to pray
upon them.

With such kind of stratagems our adversary the devil being well
acquainted, does often practice this policy. If he see us without all fear
too quietly to rest in our selves, he thinks his assault must needs be the
stronger, because our assistaunce is the weaker. Again, if he descrieth in us
a cowardly fear and fainting of heart, before we once begin to join battle
with him; he will set upon our immoderate fear, and as villainously as
suddenly stab us to the heart, and make a present spoil of us.

Common practice does farther teach us, that when we can hear the word
without all trembling at God his judgments, when we can pray without all
fear before the Majesty of God, when we can come to the Discipline of the
Church without all reverence of the ordinance of the Lord; all is in vain.
Again, let us hear with too much trembling, and we shall learn nothing; let
us pray with too seruil a fear, and our worshipping of God will be (without all
comfort) vnchearfull. Thus if we neither lessen sin, that is sin indeed;
neither make sin of that which is not sin: in ^^uth it is good to proceed
to this threefolde examination and to lay the edge of this doctrine nere our
affections, because many will be found in this ripenes of knowledge and
hardness of conscience to speak, dispute and declare of all these things very
skilfully, with flickring in the circumference of the brain, and not sitting at
the ground of the heart, do seal up a more just sentence of condemnation
against them. To help this evil we must meditate deeply of the Law and the
Gospel, together with the appurtenances of the^ both, that finding our selves
far from Gods blessings by the law, and seeing our selves over to the curses
due to the breakers of the Law, we may raise up some sense of sin in our
selves. Yet herein we must not stay our foot but go a farther stryde: for
whereas many by a diligent view of the law, have come to the sense of sin
in themselves, and saw plainly their own condemnation; yet because they labored
not to see their guiltiness acquitted by the remission in Christ, they plunged
themselves into a bottomless sea of sorrows. Others have passed these degrees,
and hithertoo have made these steps to avoid this wound of Conscience; and
yet have come also too short, and missed of the mark: who because of the sense
of sins pardoned by the death of Christ, they felt not also the virtue of his
passion crucifiyng sin in them, but saw that with the remission of sin was
not joined the mortification of sin; and feared that there was no forgiveness
for them, but still languishing with sorrow, they thought themselves to stand
charged with their former guiltines. Yea, that which is more, for that such men
have not been instructed, nor surely have been grounded in the Doctrine of
Christ's death and resurrection; it is for that they saw not as well power
flowing from his death to slay sin in them, as virtue to pardon sin in them;
for that they felt not as well strength to Sanctification, streaming from the
rising again of Christ, as they were persuaded of justification and
righteousness therein. They have line still bleeding at the heart, in such sort
as the wound of griefs could hardlye or never be staunched. Wherefore let us
strengthen our weak souls with this seuen-fold coard of consolation, against
these bitter assaults: let us first labor to know sin, then to sorrow for
sin, after to feel our sins in Christ forgiven, further to look for power
to crucify the same, then to lay hold on justification by his resurrection;
and lastly, hope for strength to proceed from thence, to further us in
sanctification and holiness of life, even unto the end. And thus much briefly
for the second thing which we matched in company with the examination of
sin, even the trial of faith: both which rightly used, shall in some measure
sauegard us from the trouble of an afflicted mind.

Now let us hasten to the third part of our Division; to show how Gods children
being fallen into this wound of spirit, may be help out of it: which (God
willing) we will also perform, after we have answered a necessary
objection; which (in the former part) might seem to encounter against us.
There is no man but will grant, that David, Job, and others of the Saints of
God, had a sight of their sins, a sorrow for their sins, a taste of the
remission of their sins; and yet how comes it to pas, that these men were
so troubled in mind? To this I answer, that their trouble so befell the^,
either for falling in some of these former things; or else they were rather
afflicted for trial of their faith, than for persecuting of sin in them. And
therefore be it always provided, that we think not every conflict of
Conscience, continually or chiefly to be for the pursuing of our sins: but
sometimes and principally, that it comes for the trial of our faith: and yet
secondarily or less principally, for the scorging of sin, as we may see in
Job.

Whereupon let all men be admonished, when they see good men thus humbled and
thrown down in mind, to lay their hands on their mouths from saying; Surely
these men are but hipocrites, doubtless these men be great sinners, the Lord
has found out their iniquity, the Lord has discovered their hypocrisy. For
good reason there is, that such silence should be used: for the Lord may as
well make trial of their faith, as take punishment of their sins. For if
such affliction should always and chieflye be sent for sin, then it should
follow that all others as they exceeded them in sin, should also exceed them in
the punnishment of sin.

But now coming to the saluing of this soar, I shall seem very strange in
my cure: and so much the more to be wondered at, by how much in manner of
proceeding I descent from the most sort of men herein.

I am not ignorant, that many visiting afflicted Consciences, cry still; Oh
comfort them, oh speak joyful and comfortable things unto them.

Yea, there be some, and those most excellently learned, who in such cases are
full of these and such like speeches.

Why art thou so heavy my brother? Why art thou so cast down my sister? Be
of good cheer: take it not so grievously. What is there that you should fear?
God is merciful, Christ is a Savior. These be speeches of good comfort
indeed: but they often do the poor souls as much good herein, as if they
should power cold water into their bosoms; when as without farther searching
of their soars, they may as well minister a malady as a medicine: for as
nutritive and cordial medicines are not good for every sick person,
especially when the body needs rather a strong purgation, than a matter
restoratiue; and as incarnatiue medicines for the time allaye the pain of the
patient; but after the grief becomes more grievous: so the comfortable
applying of Gods promises are not so profitable for every one that is humbled,
especially when their souls are rather to be cast down, than as yet to be
raised up: so the sugared consolations may for a time ouer-heale the conscience,
and abate some present grief, but so as afterward the smart will be the
sorer, and the grief may grow the greater: whereof insueth this effect, that
comfort seems to cure for a while; but through want of wisdom in the right
discerning of the cause, we minister one medicine for another; and so for want
of skill the latter fit grindeth them sorer than the former. Some there be,
who without precept and practice will be their own Physicians: and these, so
soon as the fit comes upon them, think it the best to chastise and to chase
away their sorrow, by drinking at tauernes, by minstrelsie, in merry
company, by purging melancholy, in physic, all which seem to wear away the
pain for a while, but yet after it byteth more deeplye, when the burning
fever of the spirit shakes them with a second recourse, and for that before
they were not truly searched, purged, seared and launced, it comes to pass
that the second relaps is more dangerous than the first.

To come to our purpose we must know, that all griefs are either confused or
distinct: and sure it is that the mind is appalled either for some cause very
well known to us as certain, or for something unknown to us and uncertain.

To them which are troubled with such blind griefs, whereof they can see no
reason, as often it happens to Gods Children; who either never knew God, or
had but a general knowledge of him. I answer, that as I deny no Physic to
be ministered, if it in part proceed from a natural cause, so I require the
word especially to show the principal and original cause to begin in the
soul. And this I do the rather, because I would have wisdom both in
considering the state of the body if need so require; and in looking chiefly
to the soul, which so few think of. If a man troubled in conscience come to a
Minister, it may be he will look all to the soul and nothing all to the
body; if he comes to a Physician, he only considers of the body, and
neglects the soul: for my part, I would never have the Physicians counsel
severed, nor the Ministers labor neglected; because the soul and body
dwelling together, it is convenient, that as the soul should be cured by the
word, by prayer, and by fasting, by threatening, or by comforting; so the body
also should be brought into some temperature, by Physic, by purging, by
diet, by restoring, by music, and by such like means; prouyding always that
it be still done so in the fear of God, and wisdom of his spirit, as we
think not by these ordinary means to smoother or smoke out our troubles;
but as purposing to use them as preparatiues, whereby both our souls and
bodies may be made more capable of the spiritual means to follow after.

As we require these things to be the matter of our Ministry in such a
perplexity; so I would wish the persons ministering to be men learned and of
sound judgment, wise, and of Godly experience, meek and of most loving
spirits: for when the troubled patient shall be persuaded of our knowledge and
discretion, and therewithal shall perceive us to come in tender and loving
affections, I think an enteraunce is in a manner made, and all prejudice is
taken away, so as we may the more freely work upon the grieved Conscience;
first bringing them to the sight of sin, as to some cause of their trouble.

Herein we must labor to put away all confusion and blindness of sorrow,
endeavoring by wisdom to bring the parts wounded to some certain object and
matter of their trouble; and so draw out of them the confession of some
especial, secret and several sin; I say secret and several sins,
because I know, how many (through a palpable blindness or disordered discerning
of sin) talk nothing so much as of sin; and yet they either discrie
several sins, or they will not be brought to acknowledge their secret
sins: whereof the one proceeds of the ignorance of the Law of God, the
other of self love, which makes us loath in our travel of mind to shame our
selves.

Now that the confession of particular sins is requisite, it may appear by
the two and thirtieth Psalm, wherein (being a Psalm of instruction,
concerning the forgiveness of sins) the Prophet (by his own experience)
teaches us, that he could find no relief of his sickness, until he had
remembered, and made confession of his sins.

What, shall we think that the Prophet of God (taught so wonderfully by the
word and by the spirit) did not see his sins before? Be it far from us.
Rather let us know that he had not severally and perticularlye ripped up his
sins before the Lord, in a several confession of them. Which things the
Lord knows far better than we our selves: yet such kind of sacrifice is
most acceptable unto him.

Now if in this trouble the persons humbled can not come to the particular
sight of sin in themselves, it is good to use the help of other unto whom
they may offer their hearts to be gaged and searched, and their lives to be
examined more deeply by hearing the several Articles of the law laid open
before them; whereby they may square the whole course of their actions. For (as
we said before) the grosest hypocrite will generally complain of sin; and
yet deal with them in particular points of particular precepts, and prove them
in applying of things to be done or undone to their own consciences; and we
shall see many of these poor souls tossed too and fro, now floting in ioies,
now plunged in sorrows, not able to distinguish one sin from another. Now when
we see the wound of the spirit arise of any known sin, it is either for some
sin already committed, wherein we lie; or else for some sin as yet not
committed, whereunto we are tempted.

For the former. It pleases God oftentimes to bring old sins to mind, when
we not truly repented of them before; that so (as it were) representing them
to us afresh, we might fall into a more misliking of them. And yet herein is not
all, to mislike our selves for some perticulars, although it be good to be
occupied about some special sins: for as it is not enough for the avoiding
of hypocrisy, to see some generally: so it is not enough to eschew the
deceauablenes of the heart, ever to be poaring busily in one particular, and
to be forgetful of the great and general sins. And let us learn by the
perticulers to pass by the generals. When any such one sin then does
pursue thee, rest not only therein, but say thus rather to thy self; Oh
Lord, is this one sin so grievous? and does my God punnish this one sin so
soarely? How great then should be my punishment, if thou should (O Lord) so
deal with me for all my other sins I have committed?

Let us learn to have a sense both of general and of particular sins, least
in time our grief pass away without fruit; whilst that being not displeafed
as well with one sin, as with another; we either look too superficially to
general, and not to perticulars; or else too superstitiously observe
perticulers and not the generals.

Concerning those sins whereunto we are tempted; as when a man is moved to
think blasphemously of God the Father, or to doubt whether there be a Christ or
no, or to imagine grosely of the holy Ghost, or to deny God, or to doubt of the
Trinity; to be moved to murder, adultrie, or such like: in which temptations
he feels Gods spirit to check him for them, so as he knows not in this case
what to do, for that on the one side he dares not listen willingly to these
fearful and monstrous temptations; and on the other side, he fears least in
time by long suit he might fall into them, or at the least yield, for that he
sees not how to be delivered from them. I suppose these motions are not so
much to be disputed with, as we by them are to be provoked to more instant and
zealous prayer.

Surely these are dangerous temptations, and therefore are not to be kept
cloase; which our nature will easily incline unto: but perticularly are to be
confessed of us. For the devil will come sometime to thee, to keep thee still
in a general acknowledging of thy sin, and urge on this manner; Surely thou
must needs do this sin, thou see thou can have no ease, until thou
have assented, thou art ordained to it: the reason why thou art thus
incessantly tempted, is because thou do not take thy pleasure. Go too, delay
not, deny God, believe not his word: it is but a policy to keep men in awe,
Religion is no such matter as men make it. Thus for fear of yielding on the
one hand, and for shame of disclosing the tentations on the other hand; many
men have pined away, and almost have been overcome by them. If we should
disclose this (say these men) what would people say of us? They would count us
Atheists, they would think us the wickedst men in the world. Well for our
instruction and consolation herein; Let us learn that these kind of tentations,
are either corrections for some sins past, or the punishment of sins present,
or forewarners of some sin to come. We shall see many tempted to adultery, who
now (no doubt) cannot be be brought to commit it; and yet because in their
youth they have committed it, and and not repented of it, it coms to them
again. The like may be observed in theft, in gluttony, and in other
tentations, which are not so much sent unto us, presently to overcome us, as to
put us in mind, that hertofore we having bin overcome with them, should now
repent for them. Sometime a man shall lie in some sin, whereof when he will not
be admonished, neither by the private nor public means, and then some
strange tentation shall fall upon him, differing from that wherein he presently
lies, to admonish him of that other sin. As when a worldling shall be tempted
to adultery, a thing which he has no desire to do, yet it is to make him
look to his worldlines, whereof he has so strong and through a lyking. Whereas
if then he will not be awaken, he may suddenly fall into that too, and so by
the punishment of GOD in punishing one sin with another, both his sins
shall be to his great shame laid open, and one sin shall make known another.
Sometime also it comes to pass, that one shall be tempted with such a
sin, as neither heretofore, nor presently he has given any liking or
entertaignement unto, and yet the Lord by it may forewarne him how he may fall
into it hereafter, as also to show that he has stood all his former life,
rather by the grace of god, than by the strength of flesh and blood. Wherefore
when thou art moved to doubt of God and of Christ, of the word or of
justification, do not so much stand woondring at these strong tentations, as
think with thy self that it is the mercy of God by them, to cause thee
better to discern of those tentations in others* Wherefore thou should have
observed with fear and trembling how they make the first entry into a man's
heart, how they gather strength, how they agree with our corrupt nature, in
what degrees they come to some growth, how the spirit of God does resist
them, what be the means best to prevail against them. And thus if thou make
thy profit by them, thou shall so woonderfully search and descrie by several
veins, the body, age and sleight of these tentations in others, by an holy
experience which GOD has taught thee in others, that besides thou shall lay
forth men's secret corruptions, as if thou wast in their bosoms, thou shall
be able by the seed of sorrow in thy self, to beget an unspeakable joy in
others, who in time may be tempted to sin as thou now art.

Think moreover and besides, that such is the efficacy of sin, that they
who are now no Papists, Heretics, Adulterers, or Thieves, may for their
secure contemning and passing over these tentations sent unto them suddenly,
shortly after fall into them, because they would not seek to make some use of
them, nor confess before the Lord both their pronenesse and worthiness to
fall into them.

But if we will humble our selves in such tentations, and learn by them
meekely to discern the corruption of our hearts, we shall not only presently
deliver our selves from imminent peril, but be also further enhabled to
assist others hereafter, in the like danger.

But some will oppose against these things which we have delivered: Do you
think it a remedy to cast down them that be already humbled? this is rather
to be a Butcher than a builder of a man's conscience. To whom I answer, that I
desire Preachers to be Builders, and not Butchers; and it is one thing
generally to apply, and another particular to lay the medicine unto the wound.
It is good to begin with searching first, to purge the sore by the vinegar of
the Law, and after to supple it with the oil of the Gospel. Both which must
be done in wisdom, using them to some in greater, to some in lesser measure.
For as some having nothing but a decay of nature, and no mortal humor, need
rather restoratiue, than purging medicines: So some rather troubled for
spiritual wants, than for gross sins, needs not so much the threatninges
of the Law, as the sweet promises of the Gospel. But if the body, thorough
some extraordinary repletion has gotten some great surfeit, not so much to the
weakening of nature, as to the threatening of imminent death, and therefore
requires rather some strong purgation than comfortable and cordial medecines:
then the soul also being brought to some extraordinary sin is rather to be
boared and pierced with the denouncing of Gods judgment tha^ otherwise. But
because we would deal more plainly and less confusedly, it is good in our
access to the afflicted consciences, to lay these two grounds. First, we must
persuade the persons humbled, that their sins are pardonable and their souls
curable: And after, that this visitation is not so much a sign of Gods wrath
and anger, as a seal of his love and favor, in that it is not either blind or
barren, but plentiful in good effects, and fruitful in Godly issues. The
former how needful it is, the experience of so many as have been thrown
down, is a sufficient witness, who have had this as a tagge tied in their
tentations: The Lord will surely make an end of them in some strange and unknown
tentation. Wherein they are not unlike unto men fallen into some dangerous
disease, who thinking to be without the fadome of the Physicians skill, and
not to be within the compass of things recouerable, add a second and sorer
grief unto their former.

Wherefore as these men seem to be half healed, when any man of knowledge can
be brought, who by experience has cured the like malladie in like degrees in
others. So then the fearful souls are not a little by hope refreshed and
strengthened to look for some ease, when they see none other tentation has
overtaken them, tha^ such as having fallen into the nature of man, have found
mercy at the hands of God that he might be feared. This ground work
framed, it is good to build up and repair the decayed joy of the mind, partly
by the Law, to make a preparatiue for these joys; if the mind not truly
humbled, is not fit truly to be comforted: and partly by the gospel, if the
conscience kindly thrown down, is become a fit subject to apply the promises
of Jesus Christ unto it. And here again, to answer the^ that deny the law
wholly or at all to be used, when we would breed comfort in one. I demand,
whether if it be necessary to maintain the righteousness of Christ, it be not
also as necessary to preserve the righteousness of the Law? Seeing the
righteousness of the Law, of us not fulfilled, will draw us unto the
righteousness of Christ to us imputed. And since the righteousness of Christ to us
imputed, is never thoroughly and truly esteemed, until we see the righteousness
of the law of us to be unperformed. Again, if our Savior Christ did fore show
his Disciples, that the first work of the holy Ghost at his coming, should
be to convict the world of sin, to make men know, that without Jesus Christ
there is nothing but sin; and then, that he should rebuke the World of
righteousness, that they might see Christ died not for his own, but the sins of
others. I see not why it should not be very convenient, first to lay open the
righteousness of the law, that men may see their sins; and then the
righteousness of Christ; that men may see their sins discharged in him.
Besides, where the Lord says by his Prophet, At what time soever a sinner
does repent of his sins from the bottom of his heart, I will put all his
wickedness out of my remembrance: that it may well be gathered there must be a
sound sorrow for sin going before, and then the true joy of sins pardoned,
may the more freely be looked for afterward. Moreover, seeing all the promises of
God in the gospel are commended unto us under the title and tenor of restoring
sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf, strength to the lame, health to the
sick, and life to the dead; it is manifest, not only that there is no disease
of the soul that Christ cannot heal: but also that we must first find our
selves blind, deaf, dumb, lame, sick and dead, before he will meddle with
us; because they that are whole need not the Physician, and he came to call
sinners, not the Righteous to repentance. Now, to do this in wisdom, by
neither pressing the conscience too severely, nor releasing the conscience more
unadvisedly, it shall be the safe way, to use the well tempered speech of the
Apostle to the sorcerer; Repent, if it be possible, thy sins may be forgiven
thee. Where he does not wholly discourage him, because it may be his sins
may be pardoned; neither yet too boldly encourage him, that without repentance,
he shows it altogether impossible to be pardoned. And that we be not too
preposterous in our consolations, let us be warned by the blasphemous speeches
of the detestable Arrian, who of late years was put to death at Norwich. This
hellish heretic, a little before he should be executed, afforded a few whorish
tears asking whether he might be saved in Christ or no? When one told him,
that if he truly repented, he should surely not perrish: he brake out most
monstrously into this speech: Nay is your Christ so easily to be entreated
indeed, as you say? Then I defy him and care not for him. Oh how good a
thing had it been not to have cast this precious stone to this swine? Oh how
safe had it bin to have dealt more bitterly, and dwelt more vehemently on the
conscience of this caytise? Now to attain some discretion in curing this
wounded spirit, we must learn wisely to judge, both of the person afflicted,
and of the nature of his affliction. First, we must note whether it be a man or
a woman, because we may urge more carefully the use of the law to a man, as
having the stronger vessel. And as Satan knew the woman to be most easy and
frameable to be wrought upon, at his first temptation: so is he not ignorant
that she is the weaker party to sustain an accusation.

Then let us consider, whether they that are thus humbled have knowledge or no?
Because, if they have none, they think trouble of mind to be so strange a
thing, as never any before it: if they have knowledge, then Satan is ready to
accuse them of sins against the holy Ghost, as though any sin done against
knowledge, were a sin of presumption. Farther, we are to enquire, how strong
or weak they are, that if they be not sufficiently wounded to touch the^ with
some deep sense of sin. Also we must be circumspect, to find out whether by
nature they are more fearful or melancholy, or no? As also, whether they be
usual sinners, or have fallen once of infirmity, that so upon their
disposition and inclination we may build our speech the better. To these it is
good to add this consideration of the persons, age, estate and ability; as if
the party be troubled for worldliness, whether he be not a great
householder: if he complain of uncleanness, whether he be not a yong-man and
unmarried: if he be humbled with covetousness, whether he be not old, because
diverse countries, callings, ages, conditions and estates of men, have their
diverse and peculiar sins, which we must rightly discern. Howbeit of what
sex soever they are man or woman of what complexion soever they are, of what
knowledge to discern sin, in what degree of committing sin, of what age,
authority, wealth, estate, or condition so ever they are, it is good to mark
that there be many, who are more troubled for vexation and disquietnes of the
mind being distempered, than for the vileness and horriblenes of their sin
committed; who are wounded more with the fear of shame, with the fear of
being madd, or with the fear of running out of their wits, than with the
conscience of sin. Which thing if we find in them, it is our parts to
travel with the^, that they make a less matter of the outward shame, and more
Conscience of the inward sins. Neither must we here forget to distinguish
between our speech used to the humbled in the time of their extreme agony,
and those words we use the fit being past; because the first requires more
comfort, the latter more admonishment: for the^ we may wisely admonish them
to beware of sin, which procured their woe. In this threatening time, it is
also expedient to exhort them, that until they should find greater power in
regeneration, they would ty themselves to some holy orders, and godly vows,
whereby they may either be furthred in mortifying some special sin; which
for that they could find no power against it, did most grieve the^; or
strengthened in some special grace, the want whereof did also wound them. But
before we launch deeper into this sea of particular tentations, and begin to
sound the dangerous passages of natural corruptions, and original sin, the
troublesome froath whereof, does almost ouerwhelme many poor pilgrims; it
shall be good to give this caution, that both in this and in the former
troubles, men would be still again admonished, patiently to bear with a
wounded spirit, howbeit it fall out so, that they be somewhat pettish; seeing
the holy Ghost speaks so favorably of them, saying; A wounded Spirit who can
bear? And surely our practice in other things, by the law of equity, may
urge this at our hands. For if men by the light of reason can see it to be a
duty convenient, not furiously to control, but meekely to suffer, and wisely
to put up the unadvised speeches of a man distempered in brain, by reason of
some burning ague, or such like violent and vehement sickness: we may easily
gather by the same rule of reason not so severely to censure the impatient
speeches of him, who by reason of some parching Fever of the spirit is
disquieted in all parts of his mind, and has all the veins of his heart (as
it were) in a spiritual agony vexed. Wherefore both unsavory for want of
Godly wisdom, and uncharitable for want of Christian love, are their
murmuring obtrectations which say. What, Is this the Godly man? Is this he
that is so troubled for his sins. Why! see how pettish he is, nothing can
please him: no body can satisfy him. Consider, O man, if thou can bear with
a frail body that thou must much more bear with a frail mind. Consider that
this his pettishnes does more wound him at the heart, than any injury thou
could press him with. And therefore seeing he afflicts his own soul for
it, thou need not add any thing to his affliction, and to exasperate his
most grievous smart.

Consider that it is a blessed thing mercifully to bethink us of the poor and
needy and that to rub a fresh wound, and to streine a bleeding sore, is nothing
else, but with Jobs friends to bring a new torment, where there is no need of
it. If the wise father does rather pity than rebuke his child, when by reason
of sickness the appetite is not easily pleased: so, if we purpose to do any
good with an afflicted mind, we must not be austere in reprehending every
infirmity, but pitiful in considering of each tender frailty.

Neither do I speak this to nourish pettishnesse, but would have them to
labor for patience, and to seek for peace; which though they find not at the
first, yet by prayer they must wayt on the Lord, and say;

Lord, because there is mercy that thou may be feared: I will wait upon
thee, as the eye of the servant wayteth upon the hand of his Master. I will
condemn my self of folly, and say, Oh my soul, why art thou so heavy?
Why art thou cast down within me? Still trust in the Lord, for he is thy
health and thy salvation.

FINIS.
A Letter from M. Robert Greeneham to a friend of his, against hardness of
heart.
I Beseech God the father of Jesus Christ, give me his holy spirit in writing
to give advice, and you in reading to receive it, Amen. Since the time I
received M. S. his letter, wherein he declared his careful compassion over
your estate, I have been not a little grieved because of my manifold
distractions with the like occurrances and other weighty affairs, I have been
hindered hitherto from wrighting unto you, and albeit even still I am even in
the same case, yet conscience toward God, and compassion and love toward
you, forces me to ouercom lets which hardly I could otherwise prevail
against: and albeit I cannot write as I would, yet of that which I shall write
proceeding from the forenamed grounds, I look for some blessing from God
through Jesus Christ, if you will not too much faint in faith, and yield to
the adversary, yea, if you will but hope so well of your self, as in the fear
of God I do write it I hope of you. First, whereas it seems you are
sometimes grieved, because you tarried not still at Cambridge according to mine
advise, you must know I advised it not as a thing necessary, but more
convenient as I then supposed, but that I advised you to obaye your father, if
his pleasure still continued to have you home, whereunto you yielding, I cannot
see how you offended, it being your Fathers pleasure you should so do: and
who knows whether being here you might not have bin as much troubled, there
being no privilege for persons and places. In such cases who knows whether
it be the Lords pleasure, for the ensample and instruction (and I hope the
consolation) of others in the end. And albeit you will now think that here
you were nearer the the more and stronger means, yet know you and be
persuaded, that God can and does in such cases work by fewer and weaker
according to his good pleasure: Besides, it is in our corrupt nature to make
much of such means as we cannot have, and not so to esteem those which God
does offer us as we should; I beseech you therefore in the name of Jesus
Christ, humbly to praise God for those means he offers in mercy unto you,
and to use them in faith accordingly; and so God shall bless you by them. And
then by such conference as you may have from hence, wherein if I may stand you
in any steed, rather for the good opinion you have of me, then for any great
matter I am able to perform, I shall be ready to offer any office of love unto
you as God shall enable me, and so far forth as I shall be at any time
instructed in your particular estate. In some letters sent from you by
convenient messengers, I perceive that you ar afflicted with the blindenes of
your mind, and hardness of your heart, which cannot be moved either with the
promises of Gods mercies, or fear of his judgments; nor affected with the
love and delight of the things which be good, nor with the hatred and
loathing of the evil: great cause you have of grief I confess, but no cause
of despair dare I grant, because I am persuaded that your perswatio^ is
somewhat false, partly for want of a sound judgment of your estate, and
partly for some defect of faith somewhat through your own default. First
therefore know you for certainty, that this is no other tentation, than such as
diverse of Gods children have been humbled with, and afterward have had a good
issue out of it: and if it please God to move ye to credit me, my self have
known others, as deeply this way plunged, as you can be. Remember therefore,
God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above that you shall be
able to bear. And farther yet to confirm you, the holy scriptures do show,
that this way god heretofore has humbled his own people: in whose person the
prophet Esaye lamentably complains, Esa. 3. 15. O Lord look down from
heaven, behold from thy dwelling place of thy holiness, and of thy glory.
Where is thy zeal and thy strength, the multitude of thy mercies, and of thy
compassions? They are restrained from me. And afterward; O Lord why have thou
made us to err from thy ways, and hardened our hearts from thy fear? And in
the next chapt. We have been alas an unclean thing, and all our righteousness
is as filthy cloutes: and we all do fade as a lease, and our iniquities as the
wind does take us away: and there is none that calls upon thy name, neither
that stirs up himself to take hold on thee for thou have hid thy face from
us, and consumed us because of our iniquities. And before 59 chap. 5. We grope
for the wall like the blind, and we grope as one without eyes, we rore like
bears, and mourn like doves. So complains Ezechias in the bitterness of his
soul; Like a crane or a swallowe so did I chatter, I did mourn as a dove: and
when David cries, Create in me O God a clean heart, renew in me a right
spirit. Restore to me the joy of my salvation, establish me with thy fre
spirit: does he not count his heart unclean, his spirit crooked, the joy of his
salvation lost, and himself subject to the spirit of bondage; so that wanting
the spirit of liberty or adoption, he could nether cry Abba Father, nor have
any power against sin. Thus you see how Gods children may be blinded in
mind, and hardened in heart for a time, so that they feel the grace of the holy
spirit to be in the^ nere perished and dead. Farther to relieve the infirmity
of your judgment in this case, which may much distres you, know that there be
two kinds of hardness of heart, the one not felt, the other felt; and of the
former there be two sorts, the first (which is most fearful) when any do
purposely and wilfully resist the motions of Gods spirit, and means of their
salvation; of which the Prophet Zachary speaks. 7. 11. They refused to
harke^, and pulled away their sholder and stopped their ears that they should
not hear: yea, they made their hearts as an adamant stone, lest they should
hear the law, and the words which the Lord of hosts sent in his spirit by the
ministry of the former Prophets. The outrageous sin of these men, the Prophet
Esaias expresses in their own fearful terms, 28. 15. We have made a covenant
with death, and with hell we are at agreement: though a scourge run over and
pass thorough, it shall not come at us: for we have made falsehood our refuge,
and under vanity are we hidden. This was a fearful estate indeed; yet for
all that no man can say, but some of those might be, and were afterward
converted. The other kind of hardness of heart which is not felt nor perceived,
or is perceived yet not felt; (albeit it is less fearful, yet it is
dangerous enough) is in such, as although they wilfully resist not Gods
spirit in good means; yet securely and willingly they lie in sin, without any
remorse of it, or true taste of good things. Such was David his estate for the
space of a year before Nathan the Prophet came to reprove him, and rouse him
from his lulled sleep. Both these kinds I am persuaded you are free from,
otherwise th^n in temptation, Satan may sometimes move ye thereunto: the
other kind of hardness of heart which is perceived and felt, is of two sorts;
the one in them which are desirous of means whereby they may be relieved,
although they find small or no ease at all in themselves for a time.

Of this kind the Prophet Esaias (in the name of some of Gods people)
complains, Esa. 63.

Such was David's state, after Natha^ reproved him and gods spirit began to work
with him, that he cries out as ye heard before, of the loss of Gods graces:
and when he says, that God will accept of no sacrifices nor petitions, without
a contrite heart and broken spirit, he shows that for a time (even after the
prophet had reproved him) he wated both. This is your case, and therefore you
are in the state of salvation; for David was in this case, even after he had
confessed his sin, as my trust is you do: and was certainly persuaded of the
pardonablenesse of it, through gods mercy, although he was far off from the
feeling it, or applying to his woeful conscience: his state was good, and very
well to be hoped of; and you must know and be persuaded, that those things
which are written of Gods saints, and namely of David and Peter, and such
others, are examples for us, if we will stay our selves upon the word of God in
the mystery of his servants, and wait upon the Lords good time, til he come
nearer unto us by his spirit: nerer I say, for he is come already unto you;
or it may be he never went from you; because to be grieved and humbled with
blindness of mind and hardness of heart, to believe certainly the truth of God
is promised in general, and to reverence the servants of God, which bring the
glad tidings of the Gospel; and prayer, the Sacrament of the supper, and the
company of gods children, contrary to hope, under hope, yea without any
present feeling: all this is a certain argument, that gods spirit is with
such, and therefore with you. This estate although it be very grievous, yet
it is never danger us, much less is it fearful; unless any be so wilful,
that they persevere and continue in desperate refusing al good means: unless
they persevere I say, for through the subtle sleight of the spiritual
adversary, and his forceable power, whereby God suffers him sometime for a
season to winnow them as wheat, they are so bewitched and intoxicated, that
they are carried by violent force of temptation, to wexe weary of, or to
refuse all means of comfort by fittes; yea, almost to have no desire at all
unto them: yea, sometimes to speak very evil of them.

But all this is but temptation, and therefore God will be merciful unto them
for Christ his sake.

Thus Job cursed the day of his birth, and wished to be stra^gled; Jeremy
almost repented that ever he preached in the name of the Lord: both scarcely
abstain from blasphemy. David moved with the spirit of ambition (though
dutifully admonished) wilfully went on in numbering the people; Peter also
vaingloriouslye presuming of his own strength, being most wisely and
effectualy admonished of his weakness even by our Lord Jesus, yet wittingly
rusheth as the horse into the battle, and then very cowardlye yields, yea
doubly denies, yea strengthens his sin with a threefold coard, and fastneth
it with banning and cursings: and yet all these obtained mercy most
bountifully. For why as Satan desired to winnowe them, so our Lord Jesus prayed
for them, that their faith though it was vehemently assaulted, it should not be
overcome; although it was battered, yet that if should not be destroyed; and
though it was oppressed, yet it should not be extinguished. And here be you
fully persuaded, that albe it Luke 22. 31. the words seem to run as
belonging but to Peter; vz. I have praid for thee that thy faith should not
fail, yet he prayed for the rest of the Apostles, yea for all the faithful.
For first he says not; Simon, satan has desired to winow thee: but you. Why
then says he, I have prayed for thee? Verily because he should more
grievously offend than the rest: although their offense was very great;
therefore his: and our most blessed Savior applied to him the promise, but not
appropriated it unto him only, and restrained it from the rest. Compare with
this place John. 17. 20. and you shall see, that the heavenly verity
affirms; that he prayed not only for the Apostles, but for all those that
should believe through their word: yea farther, Our Lord Jesus Christ was
yesterdaye, is to day, and shall be for ever. And as the forefathers were
baptized unto him, and did eat his flesh and drink his blood; so was his
prayer effectual even to them under the law, then more to us under grace. And
when you can find testimony in your heart, that when you would do well, evil
is present with you, and that ye do the evil you would not; then do not you
it, but sin in you, when it leads you captive, Romans 7. much more, when
satan works with all buffeting you, assure you GOD has pity on you, that the
virtue of his power shall be perfect in your weakness. If you believe, according
to your faith it shall be done unto you. B^^ ^ou will say, you cannot be^^^^ that
this vile and crooked hardness of your heart can be remitted and renewed* and eue^
this was the second point which in the former part of my Letter I gave you to
understand was the cause of your excessive distress. I beseech you, and I
charge you in the name of our Lord Jesus, that you will not willingly lie, nor
offer injury to Gods spirit, nor to your self who has received it. Tell me,
what is the reason why you think you have no faith? Verily because you have no
feeling, nor any other fruits thereof, as you think. Well, first then agree
with me herein (as you must if you will not disagree with the truth) that
feeling is but an effect and fruit of faith; and therefore there may be faith
without feeling, as well as the cause may be without the effect, and the tree
without any appearance of fruit, yea, of sap for a season. And as a man sore
wounded and diseased, may for a season be deprived almost of all operations of
the natural life to the outward show of his own indnment and feeling; so may
a spiritual man be fore wounded by satan, and diseased by the present sight and
feeling of his sinful corruptions, speally in temptation; that he may think,
yea appear to others, that the life of the spirit is not in him. Thus, Peter's
faith did not wholly fail, (as you have heard) or else the prayer of our
Savior prevailed not. Thus when David in the one and fifty Psalm. the twelueth
verse, declared that his heart was unclean, and his spirit crooked or
unstable; and in the fourteenth verse, that he had lost the joy of his
salvation, and the spirit of liberty, or adoption: yet in the thirteenth
vearse he prays, that GOD would not take his holy spirit from him:
therefore hereby it appeared he was not deprived of the spirit of
sanctification.

Here seems to be repugnaunce, but there is not any: he was deprived
indeed for a time of the graces of the sanctifiyng spirit, but not of the
holy Ghost wherwithall he was sanctified; which graces, as God restored unto
him, so I am persuaded he will do unto you: Yea, and I doubt whether you are
deprived of them; but only that partly melancholy, partly Satan working
therewith, make you do injury to your self, and to the graces of the Spirit
in you; which I beseech you to take heed of.

But the messenger cannot stay, and therefore I cannot write as I would,
either of this, or of the remedy which you should use; which hereafter I will,
as God shall enable me: and I pray you let me understand (as I requested in the
beginning) of your estate in particular somewhat more, and by this Bearer if you
can; because he is of your acquaintance, and will bring it to me faithfully.
Only I do add now unto you, that I have written of hardness of heart at
large, that you must diligently observe the Word Create, which David uses in
the one and fifty Psalm; declaring that he had no feeling of his heart. To
this, ioyn that which the Prophet Esaias speaks in the person of God, 57. 23. I
create the fruit of the lips to be peace, peace, to him that is far off as to
him that is nere. Therefore in faith you may as well pray, with hope to obtain
as did David: therefore say with him often, and with Gods people, Esaias 64. 12. O
Lord, thou art our Father: we indeed are claye, but thou art our maker, we are
the work of thy hands. Know also, God can cause wolves, lions, and leopards,
to dwell lovingly with lambs, calves and kids: and that that is impossible to
men, is possible with god, even to cause a cable to go through a needles eye,
that is, to change the hard heart of the unbelieving covetous man; much more
yours: yea know that all things are possible to him which believes. Cry then,
I believe, O Lord help my unbelief: and I dare promise ye in the name of Jesus
Christ, that you shall have your hearts desire in goodness. Thus abruptly I
must end; commending you to God and the word of his grace, which is able to
build you up, and give you the right of inheritance among them that are
sanctified. The very God of peace sanctify you throughout, that your whole
spirit and soul and body may be kept blameless until the coming of the Lord
Jesus Christ. Faithful is he which has called you, which will do it. Amen. I
pray you pray for me, and I trust as I have, so I shall pray for you, and much
more. Yours in Christ Jesus to use in any need.

R. G.

AN OTHER COMfortable Letter by Master R. G.
BRother beloved in the Lord and Savior JESUS CHRIST, seeing you have had
hertofore not only knowledge, but also experience of Gods gracious and
merciful goodness in Jesus Christ, your own unbelief and Satan's subtlenes; I
could marvel why you should give such place, and not keep your ground no
surer, if I were not much acquainted with such occurrences; I know not therefore
whether with words of rebuke, or comfort, I should seek to relieve you.
Because I cannot come unto you, my counsel and desire is, that you would come
up to London the next Term at the farthest, that so I might ask of God, to
frame my speech according to your good. In the mean season, I bessech you
call unto mind that which you cannot be ignorant of, that in the law
sacrifices were offered for Gods people, not only at their first entrance into
covenant with the Lord, but also afterward many times, and that not only by
ignorance, but also by error, that is, forgetfulness, frailenes, retchlesnes,
carelesnes, etc.

It is manifest that the sin of error is there opposed against the sin
committed with an hie hand, that is to blaspheme with contempt of GOD, and
making his Law of none effect but to be in vain. Which sin I am sure you
are most far off from, I would you were as far off from unbelief and
distrust; that Gods children may fall into diverse foul faults, as it may
appear by many proofs. First, in the Law, when the Lord speaks in his
Majesty and proclaims his glory, yet in how many words commends he his
mercy, and for how many several sorts of sins, in Exodus the twenty four
Chapter, six and seven verses. Does not Esaias the holy Prophet call the people
of his days, the people of Gomorrha, and and their Princes the Princes of
Sodom? Does not he accuse them as grievous transgressors both of the first and
second Table. Esaias the first Chapter, ten and eleven verses* etc. And yet
does afterward promise them in the eighteenth verse, that though their
sins were as crimson, they shall be as white as snow; though they were red like scarlet, they shall be as wool. Does he not charge them, that they were
sunk deep in rebellion, and yet exhorts them to return unto the Lord? Esaias
the thirty one Chapter, and sixth verse. Yea, does he not charge them not only
with rebellion, but also with vexing the holy spirit of of God, Esaias sixty
three, and tenth verse. And read what is written, Esaias nine, eleven. Pray as
there you may learn, Esaias tenth Cha. five, six, etc.

What does not the holy Prophet Jeremy in the thirty one Chapter, and the
eighteenth, nineteenth and twenty verses show, that Ephraim was an untamed
Calfe, etc. yet so soon as he mourned and was ashamed of himself, does not
the Lord show that his bowels of mercy were troubled for his estate. Does not
the Lord offer mercy unto the profane and forgetful transgressors of his
holy covenant, Psalm fiftith, from the fifth verse to the two and twentieth. Is
not this part of the covenant made with all the sons of David in Jesus
Christ, that if they not only omit many good thinge^, also commit rebellions
and iniquities, that though he may visit them, yet it shall be with the rod
of his children, and that his mercy he will not take from them, nor break of
his covenant made with them in Jesus Christ. Therefore remember that the holy
promises, threatenings, and examples are written that we should not sin, but
if any man sin, we have an advocate with the father Jesus Christ the just,
and he is the reconcilliation of our sins, and not for our sins only, but
for the sins of the whole world. Does not the blessed Apostle Paul charge
the Corinthians who^ he affirms in the first Chapter to be rich in Christ,
and destitute of no spiritual gift, to be more carnal than spiritual, yet
babes in Christ, yea, to be fallen into idolatry, committing of evil things,
fornication, tempting not only of God, but of Christ, yea murmuring against
them; yet does he not herein comfort them, that no temptation has taken hold
on them, but such as appertains to man, and that God will be merciful unto.
David prays against presumptuous sins, that they should not reign over
him. Psalm ninetenth Chapter, and thirteenth verse. Signifiyng though he
sinned presumptuously, yet if he did not persevere in presumption obstinately,
without desire to repent, that such sin or sins were pardonable: Now the
Lords covenant toward his in Jesus Christ, is not to deal after their sins
not to reward them after their iniquities, much less will he not regard in
wrathful displeasure their infirmities.

But if he should so mark what is said or done amiss, who were able to abide
it? But with him is mercy in Jesus Christ, that he may be feared therefore,
lift up your hands which hang down, strengthen your weakknees, and say unto
your soul, why art thou so cast down, and so unquiet within me? I will yet
trust in Jesus Christ and wait upon the merciful graces of God purchased by
his mercies. Consider that true humillitie arises of faith in Jesus Christ,
and that is true faith that ingendreth humillitie; as we may not diminish our
sins, so may we not too much aggrauate them, nor diminish Christ's merits:
have evermore in your mind the examples of the prodigal son, who says not, I
am not thy son, but I am no more worthy to be called thy son; he says not
let me be thy bondslaue; nay he says not let me be thy hired servant, but as
one of thy hired servants; his father came and met him, fell on his neck, etc.
So shall it come to you good brother; I need make no more aplication, the holy
anointing which you have received, will bring the old mercies of God upon
others and upon your self unto remembrance, and lead you into all truth,
which shall be requisite for your salvation. Put your trust in the Lord, and
you shall prosper: The Lord Jesus came not to break the bruised reed, nor to
quench the smoking flax; his grace shall be ever more sufficient for you,
and his virtue shall unto the end manifest it self in your weakness. Now
therefore I beseech him to preserve your body, soul, and spirit, unto his
most glorious appearing; Faithful is he that has called you, and promised
you, who will perform it, Amen.

Yours in Jesus Christ as he has been Richard Greeneham.

Sweet and sure signs of Election, to them specially that are brought low.
A clearing of judgment, by conceauing of the truth, and true meaning of the
Scripture making for us or against us.

A rebuking of sin in wardlie, a poverty of spirit fio^ thence and a
mourning therefore.

A being cast down in our own conceit, and a meekness to bear our own
punishment thereby wrought.

An hungring after the righteousness which is in Christ, and a praising and
esteeming it above all earthly things.

A musing upon, and a desire to think and speak only of heavenly things.

A conflict of the flesh and spirit, and therein by prayer practice the force of
the spirit ever breathing out.

A sowing into the spirit by use of the means, as by the word prayer, etc.

A purpose unfeigned, upon strength received, of vowing ones self wholly to
the glory of God, and health of his brethren.

A resignation of our selves into Gods hands.

An expecting of the daily increase of the hope of our souls health, and our
bodies resurrection.

The forgiving of our enemies.

An acknowledging of our offenses with our whole heart, whiles we are sick,
and a very doing of it indeed, when we be recovered.

A delight in Gods Saints.

A desire that after death the Church of God may flourish and have all peace.

A spirit without guile: that is, an unfeigned purpose always to do well, how
soever our infirmities put us by it.

FINIS.

