MEDITATIONS AND DISQVISITIONS, UPON The Seven psalms of DAVID, commonly
called the Penitential PSALMS.

NAMELY, The 6. The 32. The 38. The 51. The 102. The 130. The 143.


By Sir RICHARD BAKER Knight.

LONDON, Printed by I.D. for Francis Eglesfield, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Mary-gold in Paul's Churchyard. 1640.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE MARY, Countess of DORSET; the Virtuous Lady, of the
Right Honorable, Edward Earl of DORSET.
MOST Honored Lady; It is not the least of your Virtues, that you are not
proud of your Virtues; which, if it had been in the Angels that fell, they
had perhaps not fallen. And because you delight so much in Humbleness; It
makes me bold to Present unto you, these Psalms of David's Humiliation. How
happy were I, if I could make a Descant, answerable to David's plain song: but
what is wanting in mine, your own Meditations will happily supply; which
cannot but be excellent, being followed by the practice of so Virtuous a life;
of which I wish I could as well make a Monument to remain to all Posterity,
for their Example; as it will certainly remain to your own Posterity, for
their glory. But least I should add the offense of tediousness to boldness:
I humbly crave pardon for having said so much; but more, for having said no
more; and make it my aspiring suite to be accounted as I truly am,

Your Ladyships devoted Servant, RICHARD BAKER.

Recensui Meditationes has in Septem Psalmos Davidis, and Typis mandari
permitto.

SAMVEL BAKER.
Ex Aedibus Londinens: Iunii 5. 1638.
THE SIXTH PSALM.
1 O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy heavy
displeasure.

2 Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak; Heal me, for my bones are
troubled.

3 My Soul also is troubled, but thou, O Lord, how long?

4 Return, O Lord, and deliver my Soul; save me for thy mercies sake.

5 For in Death there is no remembrance of thee; and who shall praise thee in
the Grave?

6 I am weary with my sighing; all the night make I my bed to swim; I water
my couch with my tears.

7 Mine eye is consumed because of grief; and is waxen old because of all mine
enemies.

8 Depart from me all ye workers of iniquitte; for the Lord has heard the
voice of my weeping.

9 The Lord has heard my supplication; the Lord has received my prayer.

10 Let all mine enemies be ashamed and sore vexed, Let them turn their backs
and be confounded, suddenly.

MEDITATIONS And disquisitions upon the Sixth Psalm.
O My soul, what is it thou have done? have thou been striving with the
Angel, about the body of Moses? For why else should thou be afraid of the
Angels imprecation to Satan, when he strove with him about it, The Lord
rebuke thee? Certainly either the Angel was very mild in his imprecation, or
thou art very sharp in thy deprecation. But O wretch that I am! If Satan
deserved rebuking for striving with an Angel; how much more do I deserve it,
for striving with the Creator of Angels? and not about taking away the body of
Moses, but about taking away the glory of his holy Name? For such, and so
execrable are my sins, that through them, the holiness of Gods glorious name
is blasphemed among the Gentiles. And have I not just cause then to fear that
he will, and therefore just cause to pray, that he will not, Rebuke me in his
anger, nor chasten me in his heavy displeasure.

But though rebuking were an imprecation to Satan, yet to me it is not so,
seeing I do not more deserve it, then I need it; as I deserve it for my sin,
so I need it for my amendment: for without rebuking, what amending? what
amending indeed without thy rebuking? For alas, the flesh flatters me, the
world abuses me, Satan deludes me; and now O God, if thou also should
hold thy peace, and wink at my follies, whom should I have? Alas, whom could I
have, to make me sensible of their foulness. If thou should not tell me,
and tell me roundly, I went a stray, how should I ever, alas, how could I ever
be brought to return into the right way? To thy rebuking therefore I humbly
submit my self; I know thou intendest it for my amendment, and not for my
confusion; for my conversion, and not for my subversion: It may be bitter in
the tasting, but is most comfortable in the working: hard perhaps to digest,
but most sovereign, being digested: Yet I cannot endure thou should rebuke
me in anger, I cannot endure it in affection, but I can less endure it in
ability: It is grievous to me, to think thou art angry, but it is
insupportable to me, to feel thou art angry: the hand of thine anger is
heavy, and though of thy self thou be as it were a sweetly breathing air;
yet anger maks thee a consuming fire, that if thine anger be kindled, yea, but
a little, Blessed are all they that put their trust in thee.

When I consider with my self the many favors, undeserved favors, thou have
vouchsafed unto me, and consider withal, how little use, how ill use I have
made of them all, though I know I have justly deserved thy rebuking, yet my
hope is still, thou will add this favor also, not to rebuke me in thine
anger: but when I think, how unkind a thing thy rebuking is, but how terrible
a thing thine anger is; when I think, what a pain it is to have thee chasten
me, but what a death it is, to have thee chasten me in displeasure; then I
fall a trembling in all my joints, and never think I can make haste enough to
say, and to say with sighing; O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger, neither
chasten me in thy heavy displeasure.

But why may not God rebuke me, as Eli rebuked his sons? for he rebuked his
sons for their sins, and yet no anger appeared in him at all. O my soul,
will thou make Eli a pattern for God? because God is a loving Father, will thou
therefore make him like Eli, too indulgent a father? Ely indeed rebuked his
sons with a rod, but he made his rod of Roses and Violets: he rebuked them
for sins of presumption, as if they had been but sins of infirmity: he rebuked
them for sins of wilfulness, as if they had been but sins of ignorance:
and what was this, but instead of striking them, to stroke them, and instead
of stopping them in their race, to add rather a spur unto them? And was it
not for this, that God rebuked Eli in his anger, because Eli rebuked not his
sons in his anger? I deny not O God, but that my sins deserve thine anger;
or rather I acknowledge they justly provoke thine anger: but alas, O Lord, if
thou should enter into judgment with thy servants, what flesh were able to
stand before thee, and not be consumed? O vile sin of mine, enough to put
patience it self into choler, able to anger a saint, nay, even the King of
saints. That if thou O God, should rebuke me in thine anger, if chasten me
in thy heavy displeasure, I could not say, but that thine anger were lenity,
and thy displeasure, mildness.

But what boldness of language is this in speaking to God? am I not worthy of
rebuke, for praying God, not to rebuke me in his anger, as though I thought
that God could be angry? For, is not anger a passion of humane infirmity, and
will I make God subject to passions of infirmity? Is not anger a defect in
reason is? not God a perfection above reason? and can there be defect in
perfection? can there be passion in him, that is Purus Actus? But is it not,
that anger in God is not a passion, but an action, not a defect, but an effect:
for then is God said to be angry, when he puts his judgments in execution,
when his rebukings tend not to conversion, but to confusion: when his mercy
attempers not the rigor of his justice. Oh then, rebuke me O God, but not in
thine anger; rebuke me as thou did the Ninevites, who at thy rebuking
repented and were converted: but rebuke me not as thou did Pharaoh, who
hardened his heart at thy rebuking, and was confounded. If thou O God, should
rebuke me in thine anger, I should more have an eye to thy rod, then give an
ear to thy lesson: I should be more terrified with thine anger, then edified
with thy rebuking, and should be made incapable of thy doctrine, with the
terror of thy teaching: for I, alas, am as a nail under the workmans hammer,
better driven in with gentle strokes, then with hard blows: Oh therefore,
rebuke me not O God, if thou be angry, or if thou rebuke me, be not angry:
Two such sharp notes, as anger and rebuking are, can never make any pleasing
music, if they meet together. Anger in rebuking, makes the water troubled,
and thick that should be drunk clear, makes the Air sultry, and hot, that
should be breathed in cold, extremely both of them unwholesome for the body:
and seeing thou intendest my health, and seek not to make me sick, Let not
anger inflame thy rebuking O God, that so the air of it I may take in the
cooler, that so the water of it I may drink the cleerer. I, alas, am as a
narrow mouthed vessel in the hand of the drawer, better filled with softly
pouring in, then with pouring in hastily, which commonly spills more then it
fills: and seeing thy rebuking is too precious a liquor to be spilt, O pour
it in with the softly hand of patience, and not with the hasty hand of anger;
that so it may the sooner fill, and the better enter without spilling, into this
narrow mouthed vessel of my empty soul. Thy rebuking O God, is to me as
thunder, but thine anger is as lightning: and is it not enough, that thou
terrify my soul with the thunder of thy rebuking, but thou will also set this
flax of my flesh on fire with the lightning of thine anger? Thy rebuking of it
self is a precious Balm, but mixed with anger, turns to a Corrosive: O keep
thy Corrosives, O God, for such hardened hearts as Pharaohs was; Apply to me
only the simple Balm of thy rebuking, and let it not have any mixture at all
of thy Corroding anger in it. What though I have offended thee with sins of
anger, must thou needs take revenge, in the same kind thou art offended? and if
needs thou must do so, why may thou not then take revenge of my sins in
thy good pleasure, seeing I have offended thee as much with sins of pleasure?
Thou did walk in Paradise with our first Parents, in the cool of the day,
when the heat of the sun was over, and this made thy presence as cheerful,
as glorious: Vouchsafe O God, to deal so with me, rebuke me in the cool of
thy Spirit, when the heat of thine anger is over-past; for else alas, it may be
glorious, but can never be comfortable.

But if rebuking me in thine anger, be so bitter a Potion, what is it then, to
chasten me in thine indignation? for where the worst of thy rebuking in anger,
is but threatening of punishment: the best of thy chastening in indignation, is
inflicting of punishment: and though a strong heart may perhaps endure such
threatenings, yet no strength of heart is able to bear such inflictings. It is
terror enough to hear thee but chide, but to feel thee strike, and that with
strokes of indignation, what power of any creature is able to endure it? I
ask not, thou would not chasten me: this were to ask, thou would not
love me; for whom thou love, thou chastenest; and would I lose thy love, for
any chastening? O gracious God, chasten me in what manner, with what measure
thou please: chasten me as thou did Lazarus, by making him lie for hunger
at Dives gate: chasten me as thou did Job, by making him lie with sores upon
the dunghill: chasten me, as thou did Daniel, by making him be cast into
the Lions den: but then chasten me in love, and not in indignation; for thy
chastening in love, though it pain, yet it heales; though it bruise, yet it
comforts: Thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me; but thy chastening in
indignation, is pain without hope, is bruising in despair, or rather not a
pain but a torment, not a bruising, but a breaking: that no misery can be
comparable to this chastening, to be chastened in thine indignation.

Chastening and love may well be matched together, they are like to Jacob and
Rachel, though there be seven years of service more, yet Rachel will be had
at last: but chastening and indignation are as badly matched as may be, for
chastening enclines to conversion, and indignation is wholly bent upon
confusion; oh therefore, match thy chastening with love, and not with
indignation, that so, at least, I may come at last, to enjoy my Rachel, that
is, thy favor: Chastening and love, may lodge both together in the bowels of a
father, but indignation comes not where bowels are: and how then, O God, can
thou chasten me in indignation, but thou must as it were disbowell thy self,
and utterly abandon the name of a Father? and shall any thing make thee to
leave that Name? I know, O God, it is a name so dear unto thee, that I hope I
shall commit no such sin; and suffer me not O God, to commit any such sin
as shall ever be able to make thee abandon it. Indeed here, where we call thee
Lord, indignation may appear, and be bold to show it self: but when we come
to name thee Father, indignation must be gone, and never presume to come in
place. If thy chastening be intended for reforming, or for polishing, what
would thou do with indignation, that tends to abolishing? And if thou
chasten whom thou love, and then destroy whom thou chastenest; what
difference will there be between thy indignation, and thy mercy? Oh let not
thy chastening, which is ordained to be a rod for thy children, be made a knife
to slaughter thy Children: Consider, O God, I am but a pot made of brittle
Clay, that if thy hand hold not a temper in striking, I shall soon be broken,
and beaten in pieces, and then thy workmanship will be defaced. And shall it
ever be said of thee, that with one hand thou make, and with the other hand
destroyest? Remember O God, whose title it is, to be a destroyer: thy title is
to be a Creator: and shall I find no more favor at the hands of a Creator,
then I might look to find at the hands of a destroyer?

Alas, my soul, I know full well, it were a grievous case for me, if God
should let his chastening and his indignation join together, and assail me
with them both at once; but how shall I do to keep them asunder? Have I any
Moses to stand for me in the gap? Blessed be thy glorious Name, O God: I have
indeed a greater then Moses, even him, whom thou did chasten in thy heavy
displeasure; to the end thou might not chasten me in thy heavy displeasure;
for his agony of crying, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me; gives me
boldness to cry, and confidence in crying, My God, My God, have mercy upon
me: This I know will help, when all other helps sail. But what have I in my
self to plead, why God should not chasten me in his heavy displeasure? Can I
say, I have not deserved it? Or can I say I have not even provoked him to do
it? Alas, O God, I have nothing in thee to fly to, but only thy mercy;
nothing in my self to plead, but only my weakness; Have mercy upon me, O
God,

But is not this a weak Plea, to allege weakness for a Plea? weak indeed with
men, who commonly tread hardest upon the weakest, and are ever going over where
the hedge is lowest; but no weak Plea with God, whose mercy is ever ready
upon all occasions, and then most, when there is most need: and seeing there is
greatest need, where there is greatest weakness, therefore no Plea with God so
strong as this; Have mercy upon me, O God, for I am weak.

But why should David pray for mercy to help his weakness? for what can mercy
do? Mercy can but pity his weakness, it is strength that must relieve it. But
is it not, that mercy, I may say, is as the steward of Gods house, and has the
command of all he has: that if wisdom be wanting for direction, mercy can
procure it. If justice be wanting for defense, Mercy can obtain it: If strength
be wanting for support, Mercy can command it: and therefore no Plea so perfect
to be urged with God, as this, Have mercy upon me, O God, for I am weak.

But why should David make his weakness a motive to God for mercy? for is not
weakness an effect of sin? and can God love the effect, when he hates the
cause? but it is not the weakness in David that God loves, but the
acknowledging of his weakness: for what is this, but the true humility? and
who knows not in how high account such humility is with God, seeing it is
indeed of this wonderful condition, that though nothing be so low, yet nothing
reaches so high, and therefore no motive so fit to move God, as this; Have
mercy upon me, O God, for I am weak. Mercy indeed looks down upon no object
so directly, as upon weakness; and weakness looks up to no object so
directly as to mercy: and therefore they cannot choose but meet, and meeting,
not choose but embrace each other. Mercy, weakness as her Clyent: weakness,
Mercy as her Patron: that no Plea can be with God so strong, as this, Have
mercy upon me, O God, for I am weak. Let thy indignation, O God, be laid upon
Pharaoh, and such as trust in their strength, for upon them thou may get thee
honor: but alas, what honor can be gotten, by pouring thy indignation upon
so weak a Creature as I am? Thy honor shall be as much to support my
weakness by thy mercy; as to abate their pride, by thine indignation.

But what though David be weak? is every weakness sufficient cause to run to God
about? might he not take Restoratives and Cordialls, and such other comfortable
things, and so help his weakness without going to God? O my soul, what
comfort is in a Cordial, if it be not of Gods making? what strength in a
Restorative, if it be not of Gods giving? No, O Lord, thy mercy is the only
restorative that can help my weakness; the true Aqua Coelestis, to comfort my
spirits.

I know, O God, thou sweetly disposest all things both in weight and measure;
Thou considerest man that he is but dust; Thou know me, that I am a worm,
and no man; and can it then be thou should have no consideration of my
weakness? will thou not proportion thy burden to the bearer? will thou load
a Gnat, as thou would load a Camel? Oh have mercy upon me, O God, and
consider my weakness, for I am weak.

But why should David make his weakness; a cause for God to spare him? for how
came he by his weakness? was it not by his own disorder? and then, if his
weakness be one of his faults, has not God just cause to strike him the
harder for his weakness? It seems, indeed, that David cannot deny but that he
deserves it, and therefore lays not his Plea in the Court of Gods justice, but
of his mercy; for his mercy, he knows, has bowels of compassion, and will
not always be ruled by rigor; but finding contrition, will have a regard of
weakness. And indeed, seeing the end of Gods chastening is but to piece up my
breaches, why should he strike so hard, to break me in pieces.

But are there not some men, that feign themto be selves poor, when yet they
be rich, because they would pay but a little tribute? And may not David be such
a one, feign himself to be weak, when perhaps he was strong, because he
would have God to spare him in his chastening? But never have such a thought of
David: for hear him what he says farther: Heal me, for my bones are
troubled, and surely, if his bones be troubled, he may well be allowed to
say he is weak. For if there be any strength in our bodies, it is in our
bones: they are both ablest to withstand harm, and farthest removed out of
harms way; that before any trouble can come to them, it must pass the skin,
the flesh, the membranes, and all other parts, that if once the bones come to
be troubled, we may justly say, Res rediit ad Triarios, the matter is come to
the height of extremity: And therefore, David finding trouble in his bones, had
just cause to complain of weakness, and to say; Heal me, O God, for my
bones are troubled. Distempers and infirmities are ever more hard, or easy to
be cured, as they are seated in parts, more hard or easy to be wrought upon:
and therefore distempers in the spirits, are of al other the easiest to be
cured, more hard in the humors, but in the solid parts hardest of all, for
then they grow to be Hectic; and such, in all account, are scarce held
curable: and seeing of all the solid parts the bones are the most solid, and
therefore diseases in them the hardest to be cured; David had just cause to
call to God for help, and to say; Heal me, O God, for my bones are troubled.
If the beams of a house be unsound and shaken, how is it possible the house
should stand, and as little is it possible, that this body of mine should be
saved from ruin: if my bones which are the beams of it, be out of order, and
troubled.

But if the trouble of the bones be so incurable, is it not presumption in
David to say; Heal me, O God, for my bones are troubled: being as if he should
say, cure me, O God, for I am past all cure, and so tempt God, with desiring
him to do a work that is impossible? But is it not, that David knows to whom
he speaks? he knows he speaks not to Galen, or to Hippocrates, he knows
he speaks not to Aesculapius, or to Apollo, but he speaks to him that is a
transcendent to all these: One to whom, not only nothing is impossible, but to
whom all impossible things are nothing. It were indeed an unreasonable request
in the eye of Nature, but very unreasonable in the eye of Faith: seeing Faith
indeed is then most reasonable, when most it is above all reason; which
therefore-made Abraham, the Father of the faithful, because contrary to hope,
he believed in hope, that God would make him such a father. And indeed most
properly then it grows to be a cure for God, when in man's judgment it is
grown incurable: as Christ would not go to heal Lazarus until he was dead,
and had been four days buried, thereby perhaps to prepare belief for his
own resurrection: seeing it might well be believed he could rise himself
the third day, who had raised another after four days. Never therefore fear,
my soul, to say with David, Heal me, for my bones are troubled: for the time
will come, when he shall heal thee, not only when thy bones be troubled,
but when they be mouldred away into dust and powder: for even then he will
gather them together again, and make them stand up, and serve for beams to
this body of thine, as now they do.

But how can the bones be troubled, seeing they have no sense? for it is the
flesh and the membranes that feel the pain, the bones feel none. Oh then
consider how great my trouble is, which strikes a sense of pain into my very
parts that are not sensible.

And now, it would be comfort indeed to have my bones healed, if when they
were healed, I might then be at quiet; but alas, what comfort is it now to be
healed of their trouble, when Gods chastening hand pursues me still, and lays
more, and greater troubles upon me continually? for though the trouble of the
bones be the height of trouble; yet it is but the trouble of the body; my
soul all this while has been at quiet,

But can the soul be troubled? is it not a spiritual substance? and are not
all earthly things too gross, to trouble that which is a spirit? They should
be so indeed, and they would be so indeed, if the soul had her right. But
alas, while we live here, the soul is but an Inmate to the body, and
therefore the body crows over it, as being upon its own dunghill, and makes us
all of kin to Martha, troubled about many things, when but one is needful.
And yet these be not the things that trouble the noble soul, not the soul of
David. In matters indeed between the World and us, the soul is forced to look
down upon the earth, as upon that which sustaines it, and if it find a want
there, it finds withal a trouble indeed; but a trouble to the body only: or
if to the soul, but in the bodies behalf, which is not much: That which
properly troubles the soul, is the proper trouble of the soul, and is only
in matters between God and us: and in matters of this nature, it looks up to
heaven, for there indeed is the souls freehold: and if that inheritance be
once questioned, then the soul finds it self in trouble presently, and so
extremely troubled: that where the trouble of the body, is but the body of
trouble, this trouble of the soul is, I may say, the soul of trouble: and is
not this inheritance questioned, if God fall once to rebuke me in his anger?
For seeing the inheritance is but a mere gift proceeding from his favor; how
can I expect it, if I be in his displeasure? When I was in my greatest
weakness, yet my bones afforded me at least some strength; and when my bones
were troubled, yet my soul was able to take care of their curing: but now that
my soul it self is troubled: Alas, O God, who is there but thy self only,
of whom I can hope for any comfort? and therefore, O Lord, How long? How long
will thou let me lie languishing in my weakness? How long will thou suffer me
to struggle with oppression? How long will thou see the extremity of my misery,
and not relieve me? Thou indeed inhabitest Eternity, and no time to thee is
either short, or long: but I alas, am a subject of times, and nothing so much
tyrannizeth over me, as this tyrant time; and specially when it joins with
misery: for then, as a thousand years are with thee but as a day, so a day
with me is as a thousand years: Measure me not therefore by thy standard of
Eternity, but measure me by the standard of time: And then O Lord, How long?
How long shall thy chastening hand lie heavy upon me? How long will thou
pour upon me the vialls of thine indignation? How long shall my soul be
kept from her true inheritance, which is, to bear a part in the consort of
Angels? My soul is a free spirit, and is with nothing so much delighted, as
with liberty; with nothing so much vexed, as with thraldom: and in thraldom
alas, in miserable thraldom, is my soul detained: and therefore, O Lord, How
long? How long shall my soul be restrained of her liberty? How long shall I
lie groaning in the dungeon of captivity? How long shall no date be set, to
give a period to my thraldom? My soul, I may say, is all heart, and therefore
every trouble it feels, must needs go to the heart, yet none so deep as this,
that I am forced to cry to thee out of the deep, and cannot yet ascend out of
this vale of misery: And therefore, O Lord, how long? How long shall I live in
the death of this fear, the fear of death? How long shall I desire to be
dissolved, that being reunited again, I may never more be dissolved? How long
shall my immortal soul be kept from the possession of her immortality, from
the immortality of her possession? If the Saints in heaven, who now tread time
under their feet, do yet continue this question still, to ask How long? How
long, O Lord, holy, and true, will thou not avenge our blood on them that live
in the earth; Is it mervaile, that I who live under the tyranny of time,
should begin this question, to ask how long? How long, O Lord, merciful,
and just, will thou not avenge me on the world, and satan, for the wrongs they
have done me? How long shall I be kept from saying, O Death, where is thy
sting, O grave, where is thy victory? How long shall the Angel with the
flaming sword, keep me from entering again into Paradise? Where is the
morning of joy I promised to my self, when I said, sorrow may be in the
evening, but joy comes in the morning? For how many evenings, how many
tedious nights of sorrow have I endured, and yet can see no morning of joy, no
dawning of morning toward? Where is the truth of that Aphorism; Dolor si
gravis, Brevis, for what dolor so grievous as this of my soul, and yet O
Lord, how long? How long shall I stand complaining, and say: my soul is
troubled? Is it not, that I shall never cease to say, my soul is troubled,
till he return again, who once said for me, that his soul was troubled: For
alas, his soul should never have been troubled, but to take away, amongst
others, the trouble of mine: seeing he is the sacrifice for all our sins,
and with his stripes we are healed. And now therefore, O Lord, how long? How
long will thou turn away thy face, and not show me again the light of thy
countenance? How long will thou absent thy self from me, and not afford me the
joy of thy presence? How long will thou be going still farther from me, and
not so much as once offer to return? Peter was never so near drowning, when
he cried out to Christ, Lord save me, or else I perish: as David is now near
sinking in the pit of perdition, if God return not speedily, and deliver his
soul. But what speak I of David, as though it were not my own case? and if
my danger be as great, shall not my prayer be as earnest? or can I find a
better way of saving, then thy returning? No, O Lord; for if thou return, I am
sure thou will not, I know thou can not leave thy mercy behind: and mercy
when it comes, I know it cannot, I am sure it will not ever suffer it to be
perdition: For though my soul were at the pits brink, and ready to fall in,
yet even then would mercy put forth her hand and save me.

Thou requirest me to return to thee; and alas, O Lord, how can I, if thou
return not to me first? can I come to thee, unless thou draw me? and can
thou draw me to thee, if thou withdraw thy self from me? I know thou
returnest continually, to dispose and order the Oeconomie of thy creatures: but
this returning is in thy providence, and is not that which I desire: I know
thou returnest often to visit and judge the sins of the world, as thou did
at Sodom: but this returning is in thy justice, and therefore, neither is this
returning for my turn; but thou have a returning, in Grace and favor, when
thou returnest to me, to make me return to thee, a returning from thine
anger to thy patience, from thine indignation to thy loving kindness: and this
is the returning which I so earnestly desire and sue for.

But O my soul, before God return in this manner to thee, thou must look to
hear him expostulate with thee in this manner: Alas my Creature, what have
thou done, to bring these troubles upon thy self? Did I not make thee at first
a sound body, and did I not give it a strong constitution? and how happens it
now that thy bones should be troubled? Did I not breathe into it a perfect
soul, and gave it endowments, after mine own image? and how comes it now to
be so quite out of order, and so clean bereft of all my graces? Thou will
perhaps answer; It is true O Lord, my bones are troubled: and how can they
choose, seeing thou tookest one of them away from me, which thou gave me at
first? My soul also is troubled: and how can it choose, seeing thou did
suffer the Serpent in Paradise to disturb and trouble it? But may not God then
justly reply, I took one of thy bones from thee indeed, but it was to make thee
an helper: I let in the Serpent into Paradise indeed, but it was to try thee,
for thy better perfecting; and when I saw thee so foolishly hurt thy self with
thy helper, and so easily won from me by a Tempter; had I not just cause to
leave thee to them, for whom thou leftest me? and now forlorn wretch, what
have thou to say, unless thou have leave to say; Return, O Lord, and deliver
my soul, save me for thy mercies sake.

But what more necessity is there of Gods returning to deliver his soul, then
there was before to heal his bones? and in that case he spoke not a word of
returning: and why should he more importune it now? Is it not, that many
diseases may be well enough cured, only by relation of symptoms, though the
Physician come not where the patient is: and of this sort it seems was the
healing of his bones: but to deliver his soul, is of another nature, and
requires perhaps a feeling the pulse, perhaps, an inspection of the patient:
and therefore no remedy, here but the Physician must himself be present.

But is it enough to make suite to God in general terms, to pray him to
deliver my soul, and not tell from what it is, he must deliver it? Can any
man think that God will return upon so uncertain an occasion? Alas, O Lord,
it is not unknown to thee, that my soul wants no clothes: and therefore, it is
not to deliver it from nakedness: my soul needs no meat, and therefore it is
not to deliver it from hunger: my soul is never old, and therefore it is not
to deliver it from the wrackes of time; but it is indeed to deliver it from
trouble: and what it is that can trouble my soul, thou know: for my soul
is thy servant, depending wholly upon thy favor, and having offended thee,
desires to be delivered from all fear of thine anger: My soul was at first a
free spirit, but is now become a bondslave to sin, and therefore desires to
be delivered from this bondage: My soul is it self immortal, but is
troubled here with a mortal body, and therefore desires to be delivered from
this body of death: and in effect it is all but sin, and the train that
sin draws after it, from which I desire my soul should be delivered. And
therefore return, O Lord, and deliver my soul, save me for thy mercies sake.

But O my soul, with what reason can thou expect that God should ever
return to thee? for who would be willing to come to one in trouble, as thou
art, lest he pay for his coming, with drawing a trouble upon himself? and if
he should return and come unto thee, would thou be so satisfied? would
thou not presently be importuning him for further favors? He must help thee
in thy troubles; He must help thee out of thy troubles, or thou would never
be at quiet. And is it a small matter to deliver a soul out of trouble? Do
souls use to be troubled for trifles? and were he not better then to endure
thy importunity for his returning, then being returned, to be troubled with
importunity for thy deliverance? But O my soul, be not frighted with these
vain objections: for, is God like man, that he should be afraid of being
troubled? Is he not the God of mercy; and can it be a trouble to his mercy,
to do the works of mercy? Is it not his delight to be; Is it not his title
to be called; Is not his glory to be counted a deliverer? and is any
deliverance so fit for his mercy, so worthy of his mercy, as deliverance of
souls? Alas, O Lord, it is a small work for thee to return; but thou shall
do an infinite work by thy returning: for thou shall deliver my soul out of
trouble, my grieved soul out of grievous troubles; and will thou not afford me
so much kindness, to do so small a matter, for effecting of so great a
matter? Oh return, O God, and deliver my soul, that as thou art called a
deliverer, so I may call thee my deliverer, and may sing with Moses: Thou, O
God, art my strength, and my song, for thou have been my deliverance.

But why should this be made so great a matter? For though in saying, return,
O Lord, and deliver my soul: I seem to require of God, two several works:
one to return, and another to deliver me; yet they are in truth but both as
one: at least, no more differing then the cause and the effect; seeing his very
returning is it self a deliverance. The only turning his face toward me,
makes me to see the light of his countenance; and no sooner does that light
shine upon my soul, but all the clouds that darkened it, are presently
dispelled: all the troubles that vexed my bones, are instantly healed. But
though deliverance be an effect of Gods returning, yet it must be when he
returns in a good mood, and not in a rebuking, or in a chastening
disposition: for if his anger continue still, were it not better for me, he
should tarry away? and why then am I so importunate with him to return, before
I know in what terms I stand with him; and whether he be angry still, or no?
but it is even for this that I importune his returning, that I may be assured
his anger is past; for as long as he is angry, he never comes where I am; to
do that, were a greater favor then his anger can afford; but as soon as his
anger is a little over, he is apt of himself to return unto me; for his
delight is with the children of men, and specially with those that call upon
him: and when he returns, his anger being over, he uses to do as the Dove
did, that when the waters were a little abated, returned into the Arc, and
brought the Olive branch with her in her mouth: so God returning, when the
waters of his displeasure are a little abated, brings the Olive branch of
peace, and deliverance along with him.

But say my soul that God should return, and should deliver thee; would
thou then be quiet, and not trouble him with any more suits? should this be
the last request thou would make? Alas no, I have one suit more to make; and
Thou O God, that gave Abraham leave to importune thee with one suite after
another, vouchsafe me this favor, to make this suite also, and this indeed
shall be the last I will ever make: Save me for thy mercies sake. For as thy
returning would be to small purpose if thou did not deliver me: so thy
deliverance will be to small purpose, if thou do not also save me. To deliver
me, and then leave me to be seized upon again, would make thee but Author
imperfecti operis; leave thy work imperfect, which cannot agree with the
perfection of thy most perfect workmanship. And now, O God, if thou take
pleasure in conjunctions, be pleased to take pleasure in this conjunction, not
to join thy rebuking and thy anger together: not to join thy chastening and
thy indignation together, but to join thy deliverance and salvation together:
for those conjunctions separate us from thee, this conjunction unites us to
thee: those bring us to shipracke, this brings us into the Haven: Deliverance
avoids the rocks, salvation sets safe on shore. And is not this that which
David means, when in another place he says, With thee, O God, there is
plenteous redemption? It is redemption indeed, if thou but only deliver my
soul: but it is not plenteous redemption, unless besides delivering, thou
also save me. O then be pleased in thy plenteous redemption, to grant me
this conjunction of deliverance and salvation, that I may return thee the
conjunction of praise and thanksgiving; and may sing and say, O Lord, I will
praise thee: though thou wast angry with me, yet thine anger is turned away.
Behold, God is my salvation, I will crust, and not be afraid.

But how can God return to deliver me, and to save me: if he return not a
deliverer and a savior? and when will this be? O my soul, in how much better
state art thou, then David was? for he only expected when it should be, but
thou art assured when it was. For then was God manifested to return a
deliverer, and a Savior, when the Angel brought this tidings to the
shepherds; This day is borne to you a Savior, of whom also a voice from heaven
testified; This is my welbeloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Oh then
return to me, in this Savior, in whom, thou art well pleased: that so I may
be sure, for so I shall be sure thou will not chasten me in thy displeasure.

As there have been many particular Deluges and floods, yet but one general:
so there have been many particular deliverers and saviors, yet but one
general: and from this general Savior it is that I desire and expect
salvation: for though his being a general Savior, may make him be thought
less careful of me, having so many others to care for besides: yet have no
fear of that, my soul, seeing he is as much a Savior to me, as if he were
a Savior to none but me; and this general Savior will save me generally,
not only from temporal, but from spiritual enemies: Not only from trouble of
bones, but from trouble of soul: Not only from miseries here on earth, but
even from miseries, when earth it self shall be no more. O happy salvation,
when this Savior shall come and save me: but how may I do to get him to
come? for he comes not but upon some motive. If I had all the gold of Ophir, I
would willingly give it all, to get him to come and save me: but, alas, I
neither have it to give, nor does he care to have it: if any thing win him to
do it, it must be for his mercies sake, and for his mercies sake he will do
it, if ever he will do it.

But is not this strange? My weakness was the motive before to move God to
mercy; and must his mercy now be it self the motive to move him to save me?
yet so it is: For when Gods mercy finds no motive from us; rather then fail
of moving, it becomes a motive to it self: and happy it is from us, that so it
is: for else we might often be without it, when most we need it: or rather
always be without it, seeing we always need it. Indeed this motive, For his
mercies sake, is the Primum mobile of all motives to God, for showing his
favor. He had never delivered the Israelites out of Egypt, but for his
mercies sake: He had never saved Noah in the Arc, but for his mercies sake:
but above all, He had never sent his Son to save the world, but for his
mercies sake: And how then can I doubt, and not rather be confident, that for
his mercies sake he will also deliver my soul, and save me. Never therefore
my soul look after any further motives: for upon this motive will I set up my
rest: His mercy shall be both my Anchor, and my harbor; it shall be both my
Armor, and my Fortress: it shall be both my ransom and my garland; it shall
be both my deliverance and my salvation.

And now, O God, thou see the manifold troubles I am in, thou see how weak
I am; thou see how my bones are troubled; thou see how my soul is
troubled; and what now can thy chastening hand have more of me, but only to
take away my life? and even my life I would willingly make a sacrifice to
appease thy displeasure. If I could but remember thee in death, I would never
be loath to die. If I could but praise thee in the grave, I would willingly
go to it of my self, and never be carried to it by force: but alas, death is
forgetful, the grave is dumb; and therefore deliver my soul, O God, save me
for thy mercies sake.

It is not life that is so dear unto me: but that in life I may praise thee,
that art so dear unto me: It is not death that is so frightfull to me, but
this affrights me in death, that being dead, I cannot remember thee: It is not
the grave that is so loathsome to me, but that in the grave I am forced to
forget thee; If death will spare me but to praise thee, let death come and
never spare me: If the grave will but let me be sensible of thee, the grave
shall come and be welcome to me; but alas, death has no mercy, the grave
has no sense: and therefore return, O Lord, and deliver my soul, save me for
thy mercies sake.

Who knows not, that death is a mortal enemy to all natural memory: and
therefore makes all men at last to end in a Lethargy: and what hope then of
remembering thee in death? Who knows not that the grave never opens its mouth to
let out any thing, but still to take in? and what means then of praising thee
in the grave. If I could but get death to learn the Art of memory, or if I
could but hear the grave to say once it had enough; I could then like to have
some dealing with death, some traffic with the grave but alas, deaths
Lethargy is incurable, the graves mouth is insatiable; and therefore return,
O Lord, and deliver my soul, save me for thy mercies sake.

But does David's prayer tend to this, that he may not see death? is this the
intent of his request, that he may not descend into the pit? does he pray to
be as Enoch, or Elias, taken from the earth, without returning into earth?
Alas, he knows this to be either altogether impossible, or altogether
unlikely: and therefore no likely request to be made by so wise a man. This
therefore is certainly the intent of his prayer, that God will not so chasten
him in his indignation, as to leave him in the hands of death: but that as
death receives him from life, and delivers him to the grave, so the grave
receiving him from death, may deliver him again to life, that as Christ
commanded his Apostles to shake off the dust from their feet, when they came
into any unworthy house, and to come away; so he coming into this unworthy
house of death, the dungeon of the grave, may be able to shake off the dust
from his feet, and by the power of of him that said, Lazarus come forth, have
his soul and body reunited again: and so united, be admitted into the quire
of Saints and Angels, eternally to sing the eternal Allelujah. For as the
departing of the soul from the body, is the death of the body; so the
dividing of the body from the soul, is a kind of death to the souler that it
is not, as it would be, nor fully enjoyes it self, until it can meet with
the body, and be united to it again: For though it find the body here but a
base cottage, or rather a loathsome prison, yet it shall find it there a
glorious Palace, or rather a holy Temple consecrated to God: and therefore
until this be had, it will not fully be accomplished that is here prayed for:
Return, O God, and deliver my soul, save me, for thy mercies sake.

The remembrance of this, that I cannot rememember thee in death, makes me
forgetful of my self in life: and because I cannot praise thee, nor pray to
thee in the grave, it makes me to sigh and weep to thee in my bed: and what I
want in continuance, to supply with violence. For I am weary with my sighing:
all the night make I my bed to swim, I water my cowch with my tears. Oh let
my remembering thee in life, supply the place of my forgetting thee in death:
and when I lie in my grave senseless and silent, be pleased to remember how I
have lain in my bed sighing and weeping. My sins, as being disordinate
passions, make me undergo a passive penance: and this has been my weakness,
my trouble of bones, and my trouble of soul: but being also disordinate
actions, they make me liable also to do active penance: and what is this,
but my sighing, and my weeping? and though I cannot act sorrow, so well as
sin, yet my bed and my couch can be witnesses of my sorrow, as well as of my
sin. Mine eyes indeed chiefly have done the penance, because mine eyes first
began the offense: if mine eyes had not set me first on fire, mine eyes had
not shed such showers of tears: but now, how could burning be quenched but
with water? how burning rising from mine eyes; but with water falling from mine
eyes? But yet why should my bed suffer? for my bed had no hand in the fault of
mine eyes? but alas, how could my bed but prove a Deodand; which so apparently,
I may say, did Movere ad mortem? Though my bed were not principal in the act,
yet my bed was accessory to the fact, as receiving unlawful and stolen
pleasures.

But though my sins indeed be my greatest enemies, yet there are personal
enemies that have their malignity also, which though I cannot say they trouble
me as ill, yet I may truly say, they trouble me as well as these: for mine
eye is consumed because of grief, And all this penance I suffer and do,
because of mine enemies: for how could I choose but sigh and weep, to see the
vile, the execrable dealing of mine enemies, that persecute me in their hearts,
and yet speak peace with their mouths: that lay shares to entrap me, and yet
bear me in hand it shall be for my good: that prejudice my cause, as if it
would never succeed; and prejudicate my prayers, as if they would never be
heard.

But what means David by this? will not his weeping make his enemies rejoice
the more? will not the seeing him thus dejected, make them the more insulting
over him? will they not be ready to say, Is this he that encountered a Lion,
and a Bear? He that entered combat with a Giant, the terror of a whole
Army; and now to fall a crying one cannot tell for what? But David is a better
husband of his tears then to spend them idly, he knows for what he spends
them, because of his enemies indeed, but not for fear of his enemies: They are
neither tears of fear; for whom should he fear, that has God on his side?
Nor tears of vain glory; for why then should he shed them in the night, when
none can see them: Nor tears of joy; for how then should they make him look
old, which is an effect of grief: but they are tears of supplication, and
tears of compassion. First of supplication; that God will either convert them,
or confound them: and not converting, then tears of compassion, to think of
their confusion. For such is the tenderness of a godly eye, that it has
tears to shed even for enemies: And when these two waters, the tears of
supplication, and the tears of compassion meet together, what mervaile if they
make a flood in David's bed, seeing the concourse of like waters made the great
Deluge in the whole world? for what are his tears of supplication, but as the
waters that rose from the springs of the earth? and what are his tears of
compassion, but as the waters that fell from the Cataracts of heaven? Or is it
not perhaps that David makes his enemies here, a figure of his sins, which
are indeed his greatest enemies? as also that he makes his own passion, a
figure of Christ's compassion, which was indeed one of his passions? for then
he wept over Jerusalem in compassion of their confusion, when with tears of
supplication he could not prevail with them, in compassing their conversion:
when they would not hear him how often he would have gathered them together
as a Hen gathers her Chickens, with tears of supplication, Then they hear
him say, There shall not a stone be left upon another, which shall not be cast
down, with tears of compassion.

I grieve not so much that mine eye is waxen old, though it be waxen old with
grief, as I grieve to see that my enemies have no eyes at all, at least, no
eyes but of malice, who rejoice at my afflictions, and make themselves as merry
with my weeping eyes, as the Philistims made themselves with Sampsons blinded
eyes. I grieve to see their destruction draw near, and they laugh at my
grieving, and at the oldnesse, and alteration which grief has brought upon
me. And was it not so with my Savior Christ, which made the Jews say; thou
art not yet fifty years old, as though he looked like one near fifty, when
he was indeed not much above thirty:

But seeing with all my sighing and grieving, I cannot reclaim them; I here
disclaim them: Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity: Away from me,
all ye that are Wolves in sheep clothing: I put not away poor penitent
sinners, that do penance for their sins as I have done, and may rather be
said to suffer sin, then to do it; as being more of infirmity, then of will:
I put away them that make iniquity their work, and think it a penance when
they be not committing of sin: Them that are journeymen to the trade, or
rather Masters in the mystery, Them that vilify my sighs, and say, they are
but suitors In forma pauperis, and therefore that God scorns them that reproach
my tears, and say, they are but dumb solicitors, and therefore God cannot
hear them: but see how much they are deceived: For now contrary to their
hopes, and more to their wishes; The Lord has heard the voice of my tears,
has heard it: and therefore does not scorn it; the voice of my tears, and
therefore my tears are not dumb: and where all other voices may be doubted,
whether God will hear them or no: the voice of tears, has Gods ear, I may
say, at command; at least is never denied access unto his hearing. And this is
but my first, and lowest degree of comfort, for a higher then this: Sodom, he
took not information from the Angels, but came down himself to see: and
should he in person see sins, and not in person hear prayers? And to show
himself to be his own Master of requests indeed, he has taken my petition
into his hands; that I cannot now doubt of having my request granted: seeing
the Prince that must grant it, is himself the Master of Requests to present
it: and what is it to receive a supplication into his hands, but to receive the
suppliant into his favor?

If he only heard the voice of my tears; I might doubt lest he thought them
but like the tears of Esau, and so should slight them: Or if he only heard
my request, I might fear lest he thought it but like the request of the mother
of Zebedees sons, and so reject it: but now that he has taken my
supplication into his hands, now I may be sure he means to do something in
it: seeing he never takes any thing in hand, which he brings not to a happy
and successful period, against all opposition. The voice of my tears brought
God to cast his eye upon me: My request brought him to bow his ear unto me:
but the taking my supplication into his hand, has brought him to compassionate
my estate: and seeing his compassion is active, and his pity relieving; my
tears of sorrow may now be turned into tears of joy, my lamentations into
songs of thanks giving. The lamentable accent of my language, made God first to
look upon me: The pitiful nature of my suite, made him next to listen to
me: but the justness of my cause in hand, made him lastly, to take my petion
into his hand, which is in effect to grant it out of hand.

Indeed God is with no music so much delighted, as with that of voices; with
no voices so much, as with those of tears; with no tears so much, as with
those of the heart, and such were mine, though sent forth by the eyes: And now,
whose eyes would not be moved at so strange a sight, to hear eyes speak? whose
ears would not be moved at so strange a hearing, to see tears be a sutour?
whose hands would refuse so strange a writing, where eyes, I may say, are the
Pen, tears the Ink, and sighs the paper? Pardon my curiosity O God, in
imagining wonders, while I meditate of thee, in whom are nothing but wonders.

And what remains now, but that my sorrows remove their lodging, and sojourn
with my enemies, as they have done with me: what remains, but that my sighs
be turned upon mine enemies breasts, my tears upon their eyes, and that the
pit they dug for me, they may fall into themselves; and that, with the
violence of falling suddenly. As for me, I shall live to see mine enemies turn
their backs and be ashamed: I shall live to see them hide their faces, and be
confounded: but before all, and above all, I shall live to magnify thy
glorious Name, O God, who art blessed for ever.

But is David's charity come to this, to be turned into cursings and
imprecations? Indeed no otherwise then God to the Serpent, when he said,
Cursed art thou above all Cattle: for when men are grown into that reprobate
sense, that they are more like to limbs of Satan, then to creatures after the
Image of God; then it is lawful in Gods cause, to take Gods course, and to
turn them over to shame and confusion. *

THE TWO AND THIRTIETH PSALM.
1BLessed is he whose iniquity is forgiven, and whose sin is covered.

2 Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity, and in whose
spirit there is no guile.

3 When I kept silence my bones waxed old, through my roaring all the day long.

4 for day and night thy hand was heavy upon me; my moisture is turned into
the drowth of Summer.

5 I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not hid: I said
I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the
iniquity of my sin.

6 For this, shall every one that is godly pray unto thee in a time when thou
may be found: surely the floods of great waters shall not come nigh unto him.

7 Thou art my hiding place; Thou shall preserve me from trouble; Thou shall
compass me about with songs of deliverance.

8 I will instruct thee and teach thee in the way which thou shall go: I will
fix mine eye upon thee.

9 Be ye not as the horse, or as the mule which have not understanding, whose
mouth must be held in with bit and bridle, lest they come near unto thee.

10 Many sorrows shall be to the wicked; but he that trusts in the Lord,
Mercy shall compass him about.

11 Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice ye righteous: and shout for joy, all ye
that are upright in heart.

MEDITATIONS and Disquisitions upon the 32. Psalm.
Blessedness was cried in the first Psalm, but was there held so dear, that
few or none have ever been able to go to the price. Now in this Psalm it is
cried again, and at a low rate; and if it be not taken now, it is not like
hereafter to be ever had so cheap again. For, where before it must have cost
an absolute declining from sin, and a perfect delighting in the Law of God,
with a continual exercising in it day and night; Now if we can but get our
iniquities to be remitted, and our sins to be covered, it will serve the
turn, and be accepted.

But is this so much an easier rate? For though the purchasing of Blessedness,
were before a great work to be done, yet it was a work that might be done
by our selves: where the purchasing it this way, must be the work of another:
and were it not better to have it by a way in our own power, then by a way in
another will? But O my soul, Is it in man to direct his own way? Is it in
man's power, to perform the work that is required? has he not long since put
out the light that should have guided him in it? has he not long ago cut off
the lock, that should have been his strength to perform it? Oh therefore,
blessed be he that affords us blessedness at this rate: For though it be in
another will to grant it, yet consider whose will it is; even his that is more
ready to forgive, then we are ready to ask forgiveness, and is rather a
suitour to us to take a pardon, then stays for us to be suitours to have a
pardon.

But may it not be thought, because blessedness is set here at a lower rate,
that it is not so good a blessedness as the other? and then what is gotten by
the bargain? a lower price indeed, but meaner ware. But this cannot be, for
blessedness admits no degrees of comparison; as blessed they, that have their
sins forgiven, as they (if any such were) that have no sins to forgive. For
though blessedness be a positive thing, yet it is a superlative thing: and if
there want any thing of being a superlative, there must needs want something of
being a blessedness. Blessed then are they that have their sins forgiven: for
to be forgiven, is as much as never to have been guilty: and to say, Blessed
are they whose iniquities are forgiven; is all one as to say, Blessed are they
that never sinned. When our sins are once forgiven, we are then at peace
with God with whom, until they were forgiven, we were at enmity: and if no
misery be comparable to this, to have Gods displeasure; then no blessedness
can be comparable to this, to have his favor: and his favor we shall be sure
to have, if he forgive us our sins; and therefore, Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven.

But is all the way as smooth as this? Is there not a rub in the way here?
for to say, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, is very plausible;
but to say, Blessed are they whose sins are covered, seems to mar all. For
what if my sins be so great that they cannot be covered? must I therefore
be forced to lose my blessedness? It is true indeed, though my sins be in
number as the sands of the Sea, yet the Sea is great enough to cover them all:
But alas, the sea covers not sins, though it cover the sinners; and what
blessedness can there be in such a covering? If I go to the world to cover
them, and indeed the world is wide, and no doubt a great coverer of sins: but
alas, the worlds covering is but Hypocrisy; and what were this, but to cover
one sin with another, a lesser with a greater, and so I should be covering
them still, and never cover them, but lay them more open in the sight of God,
then they were before. If I go to the Heavens to cover them; and indeed the
heavens are large, Et tegit omnia Coelum: but alas, the Heavens are full of
lights, and will sooner discover that which is hidden, then cover any thing
that lies open to view. Yet I may hope to get the Cherubims to cover them, for
they have broad wings, and of a wonderful extent: but alas, the Cherubims have
use enough of their wings to cover their own faces: they cannot with all their
wings so much as cover the least of all my sins. And what hope then to have
my sins covered, when neither the Sea, nor the World, neither the Heavens,
nor the Cherubims that are above the Heavens, be able to cover them. Yet they
must be covered, or there can be no blessedness. And how am I then in any
better case for attaining of blessedness, then I was before? Two ways
propounded for attaining it, and both impossible: There, the price not possible
to be paid: Here, the bargain not possible to be performed. But O Thou that
sit in the Heavens, O Thou that ridest beteewn the Cherubims, Blessed be
thy glorious Name: For thou came thy self from Heaven of purpose to cover
them; Thou broughtest that with thee from Heaven, which only is able to cover
them: for what can cover sins but righteteousnesse? what cover infinite
sins, but infinite righteousness? and where is any infinite righteousness
to be found, but in him only that is infiniteness it self? Be comforted
therefore my soul; for now it is not a hope, it is an assurance that my sins
at last shall come to be covered; It is not a hope, it is an assurance, that I
shall come at last to this blessedness in covert.

There are some perhaps will grant, that blessedness may consist in covering
indeed, but not in covering of sins: They think rather in covering their
Tables with rich plate, and dainty dishes: or in covering their houses with
slates of Gold; like Aurea domus Neronis; or in covering their backs with
silk and soft raiment, such as Christ says are in Kings houses: but
Nabuchodonozor will come in for one, Dives for another, and Haman for a third,
and give clear evidence that all these are deceived, and that David only tells
us the truth; They, they only are the blessed men whose sins are covered.

But what needs all this sca^ning and discussing? For, what more mystery is
there in saying, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose
sins are covered; then if it were said, Blessed are they, from whose
iniquities thou turnest away thy face, and whose offenses thou blottest out?
Or, (because the Scripture has plenty of expressings in this kind) then if it
were said; Blessed are they whose iniquities thou castest behind thy back, and
whose sins thou removest from thee as far as the East is from the West? for
to what tends this variety of expressing, but either for illustration: or at
most, for vehemency of asseveration, that our sins are pardoned? But if it
be co^ceived to be not so much a diverse expressing of the same way, as an
expressing of a diverse way to blessedness; then indeed, as being more
mystical, it will be more misty for discerning clearly what the meaning of
David is. Is it then, that forgiving our sins is the work of Gods mercy;
for it is mercies work only to forgive; covering our sins, the work of his
love; for love covers the multitude of sins: not imputing our sins, the
work of his will; as he says, I will have mercy, on whom I will have
mercy: that so we may have here a three fold cord of Gods goodness to rely
upon for our blessedness? Or is it, that remission is necessary for sins of
commission, Covering, necessary for sins of omission; but not imputing may
serve for sins of transmission; that is, for sin original, transmitted to us
from our first Parents? Or is it that forgiving is mentioned as the work of
God the Father, whose work properly it is to forgive: as he says, I am he
that blot out transgressions: Covering is mentioned as the proper work of God
the Son; as with whose righteousness our sins are covered: and therefore Saint
Paul says, Put ye on the Lord Christ Jesus: Not imputing is mentioned as the
work of the holy Ghost; who being all love, compassionates our infirmities, and
so all the persons in the Deity have a hand, (as it is fit they should) in
this great work of procuring to us our blessedness: that as at the making of
man at first; so at the making of man blessed at last, they may all join
together, and say, Faciamus hominem ad imaginem nostram.

As long as iniquities are unforgiven, the conscience lies as it were on a
Rack tortured and tormented, day and night; but as soon as there comes a
pardon, it is presently taken off the Rack, and laid at ease: and is not this
a blessedness? As long as our sins remain uncovered, God turns away his
face, and frowns upon us; but as soon as our sins be covered, he shows
us again the light of his countenance: and is not this a blessedness? As long
as our sins are imputed to us, we are in the state of Adam when he was cast
out of Paradise: but as soon as we are freed from this imputation, we
presently hear Christ say; This day thou shall be with me in Paradise: and
is not this again a blessedness? And is it not now, that David expresses it
three ways, to show, that by it a godly man is not only blessed, but thrice
blessed?

But seeing forgiving, and covering, and not imputing of sins, are all but
privative things; how can they make a blessedness, which is a positive thing?
They may take away misery, but can never make a blessedness. But is not the
very taking away of misery, in this case, a blessedness? for seeing we were
ordained by God at first, to a blessed estate, and nothing bars us from that
estate, but sin; are we not by the removing this bar, either left in this
estate, or at least restored to it again? O gracious God, grant me the
forgiveness of mine iniquities, and the covering of my sins, and let me never
come at Heaven, if I make not of these privatives, a Jacobs Ladder to climb up
to Heaven. Neither yet is remission of sins a mere privative, but it has in
it an influence of Grace also; which brings with it a shower of blessings,
turns Ebal into Gerizim: and of the Thief upon the Cross, makes a saint in
Paradise.

Hitherto, David's doctrine we may well subscribe to, And in whose spirit there
is no guile? For, if there be no guile in his spirit, what needs either
covering, or forgiving? But is it not, as Christ said of Nathaniel: Behold a
true Israelite, in whom there is no guile: and yet who doubts, but in Nathaniel
there was sin? It seems therefore meant, that though covering and forgiving
be all Gods work, yet there is a condition required in him whose sins are to
be forgiven: and this is the condition, that there be no guile in his spirit:
but that his repentance be sincere and unfeigned, and without hypocrisy. And
it is, as if he had said; Blessed is he whom God justifies, and justifying
sanctifies: for having said, Blessed is he to whom the Lord imputes no finne;
which is our justification: it presently follows, and in whose spirit there is
no guile, which is our sanctification. Or is it here annexed with a
conjunction, perhaps to show that sanctification does not so much follow, as it
is annexed; and from the same breath of Gods spirit, rises together with
justification? Or is it therefore added, lest we should think blessedness to
be in such sort Gods gift, as that there should be nothing required in us
toward the attaining it: which yet is so in us, that it is not of us, but must
come from God to us? for alas else, what spirit of ours could be without guile,
if it were not influenced by that spirit, which is the truth it self?

It seems this is a doctrine, in favor plainly of plain dealing: but is this
a world for plain dealing to thrive in? and if no thriving, what blessedness?
But is it not said of Jacob, that he was a plain man, and yet would any man
desire to thrive better then he did? who went over Jordan with nothing but his
staff, and returned back with multitudes of Cattle. Never therefore fear
thriving by plain dealing; for God that requires plainness in thy dealing with
him, will no doubt bless it in thy dealing with others; and they that make
themselves rich by guile, will but find themselves beguiled in the end, when
God blows upon them, and that they find that guile in their fortunes, which
they so greedily entertained in their spirits.

But why am I so earnest against guile in the spirit? do I not herein speak
against my self? held my peace, for confessing my sins, and yet cried out
for sense of my pain; as though I would have made God believe, it was for
sense of my sin? but God knows I was silent in that, and that silence is now
cause of my roaring: for if I had spoken and confessed my sin at first, I
might have been heard in a lower voice: but having deferred my repentance so
long, what mervaile if God be gone so far out of hearing, that a lower voice
then roaring will never be heard? Every sin we commit, makes God to turn
away his face and depart from us: and the longer time the sin is unrepented,
the longer time he has to go from us the farther; and the slower we are in
repenting, the more he hastens his pace: and have we not need then to cry the
louder, to make him to hear us, that by long deferring our repentance is gone
so far from us? Oh the foolishness of men that defer repentance! for to
defer the repenting of sins, is a greater sin, then the sins to be
repented: and have we not need then of the louder voice to obtain
forgiveness, when to our former sins to be repented, is added this great
sin of deferring our repentance? O foolish tongue, how often have thou spoken
when it nothing concerned thee! and would thou not speak now when it
concerned thee so much? how often have thou spoken at the urging of impatience,
and would thou not speak now at the entreaty of repentance? But why then is
it said, Non ulli tacuisse nocet, as if to hold ones peace did never hurt any?
silence inded never hurts any by sins of commission, but by sins of omission
often: silence is never guilty of idle words, yet guilty often of idleness, in
letting slip opportunity. And therefore Solomon's counsel seems much the
sounder: There is a time to speak, and a time to hold ones peace: and if there
be a time for each of them, then each of them in their due time is good; out
of time is bad: it is as great a fault to be silent when it is fit to speak,
as it is to speak when it is fit to be silent: and if any time be fit for
speaking, unfit for silence, this is the time, when sins are to be
confessed, and when our iniquities are to be acknowledged and made known to
God. Now therefore am I justly punished for my silence: for seeing I held my
peace when it was fit to speak, now my speaking will not serve, but I am feign
to roar: seeing I would not spend a few hours in prayer at first, now I am
feign to lie crying and praying all the day long. Alas, to what a miserable
state had I brought my self, that could neither make use of my silence, nor of
my crying out: for if I held my peace, I concealed my sin, and the sore still
festered more and more: and if I cried out, it spent my spirits, and the very
pain did Ages work for it in my bones, and made them old, while my body was
young. The truth is, I felt my self in pain, but knew not what I ayled: I
knew all was not well with me, but knew not well why it was so: Now after much
searching and examining the cause, I find what it was: It was even sin, that
lay all this while in my bosom, as a fire raked up in the embers of security,
and burnt me to the very bone: but finding it to be sin, I was ashamed to
confesseit: and so between shame of revealing, and danger of not revealing, I
lived a long time as a man distracted, holding my peace for very shame, and
crying out for very pain: And alas, O Lord, it was thy hand that lay heavy
upon me; thy hand of which it is said, that with it thou do terrible things:
and that which is in terror the most terrible, when thou once beginnest, thou
never give over: thine anger is not as an Ague, but as a Fever; comes not by
fits, but is a continual fit without either remission, or intermission: and
what mervaile then, if in this torrid Zone of affliction, my Almond tree
flourish before the time, and my strong men bow themselves under the burden? As
a flower that is parched with the sun, and is ready to fall from the stalk
that upheld it: and as earth that is overdried with the heat, and is ready to
crumble into dust and powder: such, O Lord, was I, while neither wind, nor so
much as a breath of thy favor blew upon me; while neither shower, nor so much
as the dew of thy Grace instilled into me: and in this maze of distress
whither could I think to turn my self for help? I thought sometimes that
time might help me: but alas, time was no friend of mine; for the longer time
I stayed, the more my sore festered and rankled within me: then I thought that
place might help me; but alas, I turned me from side to side, and could
neither find rest in resting, nor ease in motion: Then It hought of friends,
but alas, my friends were my fortunes, and not mine; they bore me fair in
hand, while the weather was fair; but as soon as a storm came, they shrunk
in the wetting. So I bethought me at last of a way, which the world would
rather think a Precipice, then away, and yet perplexed as I was, I thought
best to venture it. I said I will confess my sins to God: A dangerous way I
vow, to go for help to him whom I had offended: to look, his hand should
raise me up, that had cast me down: yet see the event, or rather wonder at
the wonderfulnesse of Gods goodness; I confessed my sin to God: and he for
gave me the iniquity of my sin. Oh let every sinful soul take this from
me: There is no such way in the torment of sin, as to confess it to God. For
it is not with God as it is with men, Gods ways are not as men's ways: if we
confess a debt to men, no way but we must pay it: but in a debt to God, the
very confessing it is a payment, and it is instead of ability, that we
acknowledge our felves to be unable.

And indeed, O my soul, what danger can there be in confessing thy sins to
God, who knows them already better then thy self? Thou informest him of
nothing he knew not before: thou do but discharge thy conscience, and
prostrate thy self at the foot of his mercy: and he is the Lion of the tribe
of Judah: and who knows not that it is the noble nature of the Lion to spare
any thing that prostrates it self before him. If Adam had confessed his sin
to God, would God have cast him out of Paradise? If Eve had confessed her sin
to God, should she have had such throws in her childbearing? Oh then let
every Adam that would recover Paradise, let every Eve, that would have ease in
her labor, confess their sins to God: for they may be confident a true
confession shall never return, either unregarded, or unrewarded: that where it
was said before, Blessed are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose
sins are covered: we may now alter the style and say, Blessed are they whose
iniquities are confessed, and whose sins are discovered. For if we confess
them, God is just, and will forgive them; if we discover them, God is
merciful and will cover them: that as it was said of Abraham, he believed, and
it was counted to him for rightcousnesse: so it shall be said of us; we
confess our iniquities, and it is imputed to us for innocence.

But is there nothing required to forgivenes of sins but only the confessing
of them? Alas, confession is but a part of repentance Gods pardons are always
entire, and is it likely that he will grant a whole pardon, for only a piece
of repentance? Indeed so great is Gods forwardness in showing of mercy, so
great his favor toward penitent sinners: that as he uses the figure, I may
say of Anticipation in his grace to them, so he accepts of the figure
synechdoche in their performance to him: though confession be but a part of
repentance, yet if it be a true part he accepts it for the whole, and puts a
penitent in possession of a full pardon upon his first payment. But then it must
not be a bare confession, such as the earth was in the beginning, Vacuaet
informis: of which, it was not said, Et vidit Deue quod erat bonum: as the
confession of Pharaoh and Judas was: but it must be Confessio informata, a
confession of one in whose spirit is no guile: a confession not only Gravida,
but Parturiens, In labor, which is contrition: such as the Publicans was, who
in confessing stroke his breast. And yet this is not all, but it must be a
confession made to God: Pharaoh indeed confessed, but it was but to Moses: and
Judas confessed, but it was but to the Rulers, neither of them to God, as David
does here: and yet, neither is this all, but it must be a confession, with
professing to confess; as it is here: I said I will confess my sin to God:
and this kind of confession is so acceptable to God, that next to a Martyr,
he loves a Confessor.

For this, for what favor can a prayer look to find, that is made to one
that is not to be found? But are there then critical times for finding of
God, as there are for taking of Physic, or for setting of figures in
Astrology? Is not God every where, and therefore to be found in any place?
Eternal, and may be found at any time? O my soul, it is neither time nor
place that is any considerable circumstance for finding of God: but if thou
would know the true place to find him indeed, thou must look him in thy
heart: if the truest time, thou must observe thy repentance: for in a penitent
heart are all the considerable circumstances for finding of God, either for
time or place: look him there, and then thou shall find him: look him then,
and there thou shall find him. O then my soul, if my heart be the true place
for finding of God, had I not need to look him there betimes? for how long am
I sure I shall keep my heart? I may be sure, not long; seeing it is always
upon going, and makes all the haste it can to be gone: and if it should be gone
before I find God in it, alas my soul, there would be no finding him there,
for thee for ever. And as the heart is the true place; so what may we say is
the true time when God may be found? What, no doubt, but the present time? for
seeing in God, there is neither time past, nor time to come, how should we
look to find him where he is not? For this therefore shall every one that is
godly pray to God while he may be found, that is, presently, and at this very
instant, and not defer repentance to the time to come, in which God is not
found, no more then it is found in God.

God no doubt may be found at all times; but we are not at all times in case
to find him: for how should we find him, when we have no eyes to look him?
and am I sure I shall have eyes always? God knows, I am sure I shall not, for
I find them to grow dimmer every day then other; and this dimnesse ere long,
must needs end in darkness. Oh then my soul, make haste to find God, before
the crystal of thine eyes be broken: for if thou tarry till then, there will
be no finding him; and if not find him, no asking him forgivenes: and if not
ask it, not have it; and not having forgiveness, there will be no
blessedness. For this shall every one that is godly pray to God while he may
be found, that is, before his lights be put out, and before he go to dwell
at the City of Worms, in the dungeon of darkness. There is indeed no finding of
God, without repentance, and no repentance without faith: which because it
shall cease in the life to come, we must therefore find him now, or shall not at
all, either here or not hereafter.

But if no more but repentance be required for finding of God: what hinders,
but he may be found at any time: seeing what hinders, but I may repent at any
time? O my soul, who tells thee so? For have thou the heart to break thy
heart at any time? and if thou have not, then can thou not repent at any
time: for true repentance is a breaking of the heart. Thou may perhaps quench
the spirit when thou please: but can thou set it a burning when thou
please? If thou can not, then can thou not repent when thou please; for
a true repentance, is never without a burning ardour of Gods Spirit.

But is there indeed any time when God may not be found? Is he like to some
Princes, who shut themselves up in state at times, and are not then to be
spoken withal, or seen? O great God, thou art not like man, and therefore not
found after their manner: found, when only their persons are found: but to
find thee, is to find thee gracious, without which, as good lost thou were, as
found: and gracious can none find thee, but only the penitent: and therefore
for this, shall every one that is godly pray unto thee, so that through the
grace of a true repentance, he may find thee gracious.

When a sin is committed, a shower of Gods anger raines presently down upon
the sinner; and continues raining, till there be repentance: and if the
repentance be deferred long, it may rain down anger so long, till it make a
flood, and then there will be no going near to God for water: but rather the
water will go near to be a cause of drowning: for it is not every ones cafe
to have an Arc to save himself in from the flood of Gods anger; he only may
be confident to be saved, that like Noah, begins to make his Arc betimes,
and returns to God with a speedy repentance.

But why is it said, every one that is godly, and not rather, every one that is
wise? seeing it is wisdom, and not godliness, that can discern the fitness
of times and seasons? Is it not, that wisdom, and godliness in spiritual
matters, are terms convertible: No true wisdom without godliness, no
godliness without true wisdom: but therefore rather said godly then wise,
because indeed there is no other godliness, though there be other wisdom.

And now, O my soul, consider the blessedness of a true repentance, and what
a conversion it makes in a penitent heart: I could never think before, but
that the world was the safest sanctuary; the flesh, the best Paradise: but now
I cansay; Thou, O God, thou my Iubilee against all perfecutions: the place from
which I hid my self before, is now become the place to hide me in: and that
which I fled from before, as my only terror, I now fly to as my only
succor. Before I repented, I thought that to go to God, was to run upon a
rock: but now I find it is to go into the Haven: Before, I thought still upon
that saying, A man shall leave Father, and mother, and cleave to his wife: but
now I find, that Adhaerere Deo bonum est, there is no blessedness but in
cleaving to God. Before I repented, I aspired to nothing, but to sit at Dives
his table, and to fare deliciously every day: I took pleasure in nothing, but
in wearing soft raiment, in mirth and jollity: but now I find that all the
dishes I fed on there were poison: I find there is no wearing like to
sackcloth, nosweet powder like to ashes, and say to laughter thou art mad.
Thou, O Christ, art the true food that nourishes to eternal life: Thou, the
true garment, that gives me entrance to the marriage of the Lamb, and make
me to hear the melody of Heaven, in the quire of Angels. Before I repented, I
said to the world Egypt, thou art my staff, and to the flesh Dalilah, thou
art my joy: but now I can say, Thou, O God, art my refuge in all tribulations;
Thou, the joy of my heart, against all my persecutors.

But O the vanity of the world, have I lived to hear that glorious
acclamation, Saul has killed his thousand, and David his ten thousand: and is
my glory come now to this, that I am glad of a place to hide me in? Indeed, Sic
transit gloria Mundi. But O my body, never do thou trouble thy self for the
matter, for thou art sure enough of a place to hide thee, seeing a spanne or
two of earth will serve thy turn: It is thou my soul, that make me glad of
a place to hide me, for thou indeed art not easily hidden, thou ly est open to
all assaults of Satan, to all temptations of the world, and that which is more
then these, to the angry hand of God: and from this it is chiefly, I am glad of
a place to hide me: though the world may think it strange I should go to God,
to hide me from God: But O foolish world, it is not strange, for I go to Gods
Mercy, to hide me from his Justice; for God forbid, I should be of those, that
call to the Mountains to cover them, and to the Hills to hide them. No, dear
Jesus, Thou art the Mountain that must cover me; Thou, the Sanctuary, that I
fly unto: to which if Ioab had fled, it had not been Abner that could have
drawn him forth.

But had not David Towers, and Fortresses to defend him, and could he not be
safe unless he were hidden? and say he were brought to a necessity of hiding
himself; yet is he well advised to make choice of God, for his place to hide
him? The darkest places are fittest for hiding; and what hiding then could he
look for of God, who is nothing but light? O my soul, there is no hiding so
excellent, as to be hidden with light; for thither my enemies, who are children
of darkness can never come. When I am hidden with light, I can see my enemies,
and they not see me: not much unlike the advantage that God himself has over
us. When I am hidden with light, there is more glory in the light, then
desparagement in the hiding: and have I not reason then, to make choice of God
who dwells in light inaccessible, for my place to hide me? Others hiding can
but keep me from the eyes of my enemies, it cannot keep me from the hands of
my enemies: Gods hiding can do both: For, Thou, O God, shall preserve me from
trouble: though in others hiding, enemies perhaps cannot, yet troubles at least
may find me out; but when thou hidest me; as enemies cannot, so troubles
dare not: I shall be as free from the fear, as from the sense of troubles.
And yet, O God, if thou should only preserve me from trouble, this were no
more, then I might enjoy, if I were a senseless creature; for what trouble,
where there is no sense? but thy hiding will do more then this: it will
compass me about with songs of deliverance: and this will give me a sense, and
in that sense a delight of the happiness I enjoy by the benefit of thy hiding.

If thou should deliver me but in part, I should in part be in bondage
still: and what would my state be the better for this? seeing in this case,
all figures are synechdoches; a part here as much as the whole: to be a
Prisoner in part, is to be a Prisoner altogether: but when thou compassest me
about with deliverance; this leaves no place for synechdoches, but gives me a
total and absolute freedom; and makes me obnoxious to no molestation, And
yet if thou should also compass me with deliverance, and so leave me; I
might be still both insensible of it in my self, and unthankful for it to
thee, and so my state but little the better for this neither: but when thou
compassest me about with songs of deliverance; this makes me a Quirister in
the Quire (I might say of Angels,) but that their songs are all songs of
Iubilee, and mine only of deliverance. O my soul, God is not a deliverer like
a half Moon, bright in one part, and dark in another; but he is a deliverer
like the Sun, his deliverance shines always the whole compass: and with his
deliverance, he delivers also songs of thankfulness to him, and in my self of
joyfulnesse.

But what need is there of Plurality of songs? may not one song serve? and if
one may, what need many? One song perhaps, may serve for one deliverance: but
if there be many deliverances, must there not be many songs? and must there
not be many deliverances, when there are many bondages? and are there not many
bondages when I incur a new bondage, as often as I commit a new sin? and
yet another reason as great as this: For say that Gods deliverance be but one,
will that one deliverance require but one song? O my soul, it deserves, and
therefore requires, I say not a Plurality, but an infinity of songs: for
there must be some songs to express it, and others to extol it; some songs of
miserere, and others of Magnificat: some de profundis, and others in excelsis,
some songs of praise, and others of thanksgiving: and though there will be a
time when all these songs shall be collected into one, and so collected make
the great Canticum Canticorum: yet till that time come, there will be need of
many songs: and seeing I shall need many; I hope, O God, thou will not see me
want, and tie me to one song: but wilt compass me about with songs of
deliverance.

But alas, O Lord, I am far as yet from being compassed with songs of
deliverance; I have not so much as one song of deliverance to sing: for how
should I sing of deliverance, that am still in bondage? how sing at all, that
am still a weeping? But I know thy goodness O God, I know how much thou
delightest in the Music of Thanksgiving; and therefore, am assured, the time
will come, and (considering the haste thou make) will come speedily, that
thou will compass me about with songs of deliverance.

But have I been all this while right, in the understanding of David's meaning,
where he says, Thou shall compass me about with songs of deliverance? for
are they songs that are sung for me, or songs that are sung by me? if sung
for me, then they are men and Angels that sing them, as rejoicing for my
deliverance; if sung by me, then it is I, O God, that sing them to thee, as
giving thanks for my deliverance. Songs of deliverance, of my deliverance, that
I am delivered: or songs of deliverance, of thy deliverance, that thou have
delivered me. Take them in either sense, and David is pleased; take them either
way, and God is glorified. So there need be no question of this, yet of this,
there will be question: how I can be sure of repenting, if I am not sure to
repent when I list? and this question David seems to answer, putting the
matter upon God; I will give thee understanding, and will instruct thee in the
way that thou shall walk; I will fix mine eye upon thee: and Gods
instructions are never in vain: for with the lessons he gives, he gives also
an aptness to understand them; and with the aptness, a capacity to perform
them: and then having God, for an instructour, by teaching thee the way, and
for an overseer, by fixing his eye upon thee: how can thoudoubt of profiting
in a learning, where all the learning is but one lesson of repentance.
Repentance indeed is but one lesson: but it is the hardest lesson in all the
book: and we may see how hard it is, by the great ado that is about it: for
first, God must give us understanding for it; and this will not be enough;
then he must give us instructions in it; and neither will this be enough;
then he must have a continual eye upon us, to hold us to it, and all these
together will be but little enough; Alas, all these together will be too
little, and not enough, if we be wanting to our selves. Be not therefore, O
my soul, like the Vineyard of which God said, what could I do more to my
Vineyard, then I did, and yet it has brought forth nothing but wild grapes?
No my soul, Be not like to Horse and Mule, that have no understanding: Ad
similitudinem Dei; yet if thou use not understanding, thou make thy self Ad
similitudinem Bruti: or rather so much worse then a Beast, as corruption makes
worse than privation: for if a man shall do that by abusing Reason, which a
Horse does by wanting Reason; shall he not do it, not only with more shame,
but with more violence, as making that an instrument of stubbornnes, which was
given for a furtherance of obedience? Is it not a shameful thing that a man
should be bridled and spurred as a Horse? yet if he use not understanding, but
will be like a Horse, he must be so: for as understanding is the stern, I
may say, of a man, to direct him in his course, so a bridle is the stern of a
Horse to guide him in his way; and he that will not take into his heart, his
own stern of understanding, must be forced to take into his mouth, the Horses
stern of a bridle; for a stern he must have, no remedy, either his own
stern or a Horses, either understanding or a bridle: that we may truly say,
there is not a more necessary trade in the world then a bridle-maker is; seeing
without such a one, there would be no living in the world, for the multitude
of unrulie Horses.

And thus when men grow so wicked and so void of understanding, to be like
Horse and Mule: It may justly then be said, Many are the troubles of the
wicked:

But why then should David in another place say; Many are the troubles of the
Righteous? for by this it should seem, there is nothing lost by being wicked,
nothing gotten by being righteous; for whither wicked or righteous, there will
be troubles still. It is true, there will be troubles, but is there not a
difference? The troubles of the godly are but only outward, but the troubles
of the wicked are inward rather: The troubles of the godly are but to exercise
them, but the troubles of the wicked tend to ruin. The troubles of the wicked
have a Corrosive, I may say, a worm within them, but the troubles of the godly
have a Cordial, I may say a kernel within them, a sweet kernel indeed, that
makes ample amends for all the hardness and fracture of their shell. The
troubles of the wicked, have no deliverer: but of the troubles of the godly, it
is said, The Lord shall deliver them out of all. And all this long of Gods
mercy that compasses them about. It is no doubt, a strong fortress to the
godly, that the Angels pitch their tents about them: but it is a far stronger,
that Gods mercy compasses them about: for that which is but Ministerial in
the Angels, is Primitive in God: and though the Ministry of Angels may be:
yet Gods mercy can never be frustrate; and especially when it compasses
about; for then, neither troubles on the right hand, nor troubles on the left;
neither tumors of Prosperity, nor grypings of Adversity: then neither troubles
before them, nor troubles behind them; neither agonies of terror, nor rackes
of persecution, shall ever come so near them, as to touch them; at least, not
so prevail against them, as to hurt them. That notwithstanding all their
troubles: Be glad ye that are righteous, and rejoice in the Lord: showte for
joy, all ye that are upright of heart.

And may it not be as well said to the wicked: Be glad, and showte for joy?
or rather have they not more cause of rejoicing, then the godly: The wicked
indeed may rejoice to see their full barnes and their full bags: but alas, what
becomes of their joy, when they hear it said; Stulte hac nocte repetent animam
tuam? They may rejoice to sit with Belshazzar at their full cups, in revelling
and feasting: but alas, what becomes of their rejoicing, when they see it
written upon the wall before them, Mean, Tekel, Peers? All gladness of the
world is often converted, always convertible into sorrow: only the gladness
that is in God, never suffers Ecclypse. A single kind of joy the wicked may
have, but because their rejoicing is in the world, and not in God; they are
far, God knows from showting for joy. None but the righteous rejoice in the
Lord: and therefore none but the righteous can showte for joy. This David did,
when he danced before the Arc: and this Abraham did; when Exultavit ut
videret diem Demini: He leaped for joy, to see the day of Christ. Is there
showting for joy at Olympic games, where but a Garland is gotten perhaps of
Bay, at most but of some fading matter: and shall their not be showting for
joy, at the game of the great Olympus, where there will be a crown gotten of
glory, that shall never wither nor fade away? O my soul, there will be the
victory, that is only worthy of showting for joy: which as it is common to all
the godly, so it is proper to only the godly: who being upright in heart, and
having their conversation in Heaven already, they see with cleerer eyes than
Abraham saw Christ's day, the saints expecting them, the Angels ready to receive
them; and that which is more than the most that can be said or thought, God
himsefle preparing for them their several Mansions of Beatitude: that we may
justly conclude as we began; Blessed are they whose iniquiquities are forgiven,
and whose sins are covered; Blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes no
sin, and in whose Spirit there is no guile.

THE THIRTY EIGHTH PSALM.
O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy heavy
displeasure.

2 For thine arrows slicke fast in me; and thy hand presses me sore.

3 There is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger: neither is there
any rest in my bones, by reason of my sin.

4 For mine iniquities are gone over my head, as an heavy burden, they are
too heavy for me.

5 My wounds stincke and are corrupt, because of my foolishness.

6 I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly; I go mourning all the day-long.

7 For my bones are filled with a loathsome disease: and there is no soundness
in my flesh.

8 I am seeble and sore broken: I have roared through the disquietnesse of my
heart.

9 Lord, all my desire is before thee; and my groaning is not hid from thee.

10 My heart pants, my strength fails me; and as for the light of mine
eyes, that also is gone from me.

11 My loversand friends stand aloof from my sore, and my kinsmen stand a
far off.

12 They also that seek after my life lay snares for me; and they that seek
my hurt, speak mischievous things, and imagine deceit all the day long.

13 But I as a deaf man heard not; and I was as a dambe man that opens not
his mouth.

14 Thus I was as a man that bears not; and in whose mouth are no reproves.

15 For in thee, O Lord, do I hope: Thou wile hear me, O Lord, my God.

16 For I said, Hear me, lest otherwise they should rejoice over me: when my
foot slippeth, they magnify themselves against me.

17 For I am ready to halt, and my sorrow is continually before me.

18 For I will declare mine iniquity; I will be sorry for my sin.

19 But mine enemies are lively, and they are strong; and they that hate me
without cause, are multiplied.

20 They also that render evil for good, are mine adversaries; because I
follow the thing that good is.

21 For sake me not, O Lord, O my God, be not far from me.

22 Make haste to help me, O Lord my salvation.

MEDITATIONS upon the 38. Psalm.
BUt is it not an absurd request, are, will yet be quiet as long as they be
pleased: and shall I have such a thought, of the great, yet gracious God, that
he should be pleased, and yet not be quiet? But O my soul, Is it all one, to
rebuke in his anger, and to rebuke when he is angry? He may rebuke when he is
angry, and yet restrain and bridle in his anger: but to rebuke in his anger,
is to let loose the reins to his anger: and what is it to give the reins to
his anger, but to make it outrun his mercy? and then what a miserable case
should I be in, to have his anger to assault me, and not his mercy ready to
relieve me? to have his in dignation fall upon me, when his loving kindness
were not by to take it off? Oh therefore, rebuke me not in thine anger, O God:
but let thy rebuking stay for thy mercy; chasten me not in thy displeasure,
but let thy lovingkindnesse have the keeping of thy rod.

But though the request be never so just; yet must it not needs be a wearisome
thing to God, to have us always come to him with the same petition, as though
we would persecute him with importunity, and make him do that, which he is
not willing to do? for if he were willing to grant it, he would no doubt have
done it before now; when in the sixth Psalm, we asked him as earnestly for it,
as we can do in this. But O my soul, is importunity a fault? if it be, it is
a fault I shall hardly be persuaded ever to leave. Did Christ count it a fault
in the woman of Canaan, who would take no answer; but still cried after him,
till he granted her suite? Did not Abraham importune God five times, about the
sparing of Sodom? and did not God grant as long as he importuned? And may we
not think that if he had continued his importunity still, he might as well
have gotten Sodom to be spared for one man's sake, as he had done for ten? Is
God like man, that the importunity of suitours should be a trouble to him?
Can we think, that God should be displeased with our importunity to him,
when he is pleased to use importunity himself to us? Did not God call to
Samnel, three times one after another; when he bid him go to Eli, with a
message? Was it not importunity which Christ used to Peter, when thrice
together he asked him, Simon son of Jonas, love thou me? Indeed Peter
seemed not well pleased with this importunity: but God never was, never will
be found to be displeased with it. Never therefore fear to be
importunatewith God; but fear rather, thou can never be importunate enough;
for so highly is God pleased, or rather indeed delighted with our importunity
in praying, that he oftentimes denies the first suit of his servants, because
he would be importuned by a second; oftentimes the second, because he would
have a third. Indeed, that which in suits to men is importunity, in suits to
God is fervencie and perseverance, and seems to resemble the nature of the
Seraphims; where single prayer but of ordinary Angels, of whom as some fell, so
this may fail, and often does, the other never.

But though importunity be to God most pleasing always: yet to us, it is then
most necessary, when the cheerful face of God is turned into frowns: and when
there is a justly conceived fear of the continuance of his anger: and have not
I just cause to fear it, having the arrows of his anger sticking so fast in
me? if he had meant to make me but a Butt, at which to shoot his arrows; he
would quickly, I suppose, have taken them up again; but now that he leaves
them sticking in me, what can I think, but that he means to make me his
quiver; and then I may look long enough, before he come to pluck them out.
They are arrows indeed that are fethered with swiftness, and headed with
sharpness; and to give them a force in flying, they are shot, I may say, out
of his Crosse-bow, I am sure his bow of crosses: for no arrows can fly so
fast, none pierce so deep, as the crosses and afflictions with which he has
surprised me: I may truly say surprised me; seeing when I thought my self most
safe, and said, I shall never be moved even then these arrows of his anger
lighted upon me, and stick so fast in my flesh, that no arm but his that shot
them, is ever able to draw them forth Oh then, as thou have stretched forth
thine arm of anger, O God, to shoot these arrows at me; So stretch forth
thine arm of mercy, to draw them forth; that I may rather sing Hymns, then
Dyrges unto thee: and that thou may show thy power, as well in pardoning, as
thou have done in condemning. I, alas, am as an Anvile under two hammers: one,
of thine anger, another of my sin; both of them beating incessantly upon me;
the hammer of thine anger, beating upon my flesh, and making that unsound: the
hammer of my sin, beating upon my bones, and making them unquiet; although
indeed both beat upon both: but thine anger more upon my flesh, as being more
sensible: my sin more upon my bones, as being more obdurate. Gods anger and
sin, are the two efficient causes of all misery; but the Procatarkticke cause
indeed, is sin: Gods anger, like the house that Sampson pulled upon his own
head, falls not upon us, but when we pull it upon our selves, by sin.

I know by the unsoundnesse of my flesh, that God is angry with me: for if it
were not for his anger, my flesh would be sound: but what soundness can be in
it now, when Gods angry hand lies beating upon it continually, and never
cease? I know by the unquietnes of my bones, that I have sin in my bosom;
for if it were not for sin, my bones would be quiet: But what quietness can
be in them now, when sin lies gnawing upon them incessantly, with the worm of
remorse? one would think my bones were far enough removed, and closely
enough hidden from sins doing them any hurt: yet see the searching nature, the
venomous poison of sin, which pierces through my flesh, and makes
unquietness in my very bones.

I know my flesh is guilty of many faults, by which it justly deserves
unsoundnesse: but what have my bones done? for they minister no fuel to the
flames of my fleshes sensuality; and why then should they be troubled? But are
not my bones supporters of my flesh, and are they not by this, at least
accessory to my fleshes faults? as accessaries then, they are subject to the
same punishment the flesh it self is, which is the principal.

I cannot but wonder at this condition in my self: there is nothing I more
loath then sin, yet nothing I more willingly embrace: nothing that I more
abhor, yet nothing I more readily entertain: what mervaile then, if their
be unsoundnesse in my flesh, and unquietness in my bones, when I will needs
be taking so turbulent a guest, so deadly a poison as sin is into my bosom?
and make an idol of that, which I know so well to be a monster?

As a man that stands in the water, as long as it comes but to his middle, or
but up to his shoulders, endures and bears it safty enough; but when it comes
once to go over his head, it then overwhelmes and presently strangles him:
such alas am I, my sin a long time, came I may say, but up to my shoulders;
and then I thought my self safe enough; now God knows, I am over head and
ears in sin, and so overwhelmed with it, that my breath is taken from me,
and I have not so much as any breath of Grace remaining in me. No strength is
so great, but it may be overburdened, though Sampson went light away with the
gates of Azzah; yet when a whole house fell upon him, it crushed him to death.
And such, alas, am I, I have had sin as a burden upon me, ever since I was
borne: but bore them a long time as light, as Sampson did the gates of Azzah;
but now that I have pulled a whole house of sin upon me, how can I choose but
be crushed to death with so great a weight? And crushed, O my Soul, thou
should be indeed; if God for all his anger, did not take some pity on thee:
and for all his displeasure, did not stay his hand from further chastening thee.

I know, O Lord, I have done most foolishly, to let my sores run so long,
without seeking for help: For now, My wounds stink and are corrupt; in as ill
a case as Lazarus body was, when it had been four days buried; enough to
make any man despair, that did not know thee as I do: For, do not I know,
that Nullum tempus occurrit tibi? do not I know, thou have as well wisdom to
remedy my foolishness, as power to cure my wounds? Could the grave hold
Lazarus, when thou did but open thy mouth to call him forth? No more can the
corruption of my sores, be any hinderance to their healing, when thy pleasure
is to have them be cured. Although therefore I have done my own discretion
wrong to defer my care; yet I will not do thy power wrong, to despair of
thy cure: for, how should I despair, who know thee to be as powerful, as thou
art merciful; if I may not rather say, to be as merciful, as thou art
powerful: Each of them indeed an Abyssus: and when Abyssus Abyssum vocat, what
marvel, if their follow marvells?

And as I do not despair, so neither do I presume: For I am troubled, I am
bowed down, and go mourning all the day long. I am troubled no less with the
grief of thy displeasure, then with the pain of my wounds: each of them
alone, just cause of mourning; but both of them together, of mourning all the
day long.

I have told hertofore, how I spend my night: all the night I water my bed with
tears. Now I tell how I spend my day; all the day long in mourning. And can it
be, O God, thou should neither regard my weeping, nor my mourning? neither my
weeping all night, nor my mourning all day?

If my flesh had continued as God made it, there had been in it, both soundnes,
and beauty; but alas, my sin, and his arrows, his arrows by reason of my
sin, have so wounded it, that it is nothing now, but a very Cistern of
corruption: for all sin has poison in it, and breeds diseases; infinite
diseases in the Soul, loathsome diseases in the body. And what will not
diseases do in these bodies of ours? whose spirits can be so errect, but will
be dejected? whose limbs so strong, but will be bowed down? whose heart so
cheerful, but will be made to mourn with the violence of diseases? And now
therefore, am I dejected, I am bowed down, I gomourning all the day long and may
I not say, with the worst kind of mourning, the mourning perhaps of the chyne:
like Horse and Mule that have no understanding? For my loins are filled with a
loathsome disease: the very disease, that made Elias, John Baptist to wear
girdles of beasts skins about their loins; and they with wearing such girdles,
prevented in themselves, the loathsomeness of this disease: but I, alas, never
thought of any girdle, much less of Beasts skins: and therefore the disease is
now grown so loathsome upon me, that it has filled my loins; so filled them,
that it has not so much as a spare room left to make a perfume in; so
loathsome, that it makes me fit for no company but Lazars, for no place but an
Hospital: for how should others endure the stinch of my sores, when I am not
able to endure it my self? how much less, O God, can thou endure it, whose
pure sense is sensible, even of that impurity, which is to us insensible, in
the stars themselves? Thou, O God, did vouchsafe this favor to our first
Parents, to make them garments of Beasts skins to cover their nakedness, and
may we not be bold to think, that the Girdles of Beasts skins, which Elias and
John Baptist wore about their loins, were also of thy making? Oh then
vouchsafe, O God, to give me such a girdle to wear about my loins; a girdle
of continence and true mortification; which though it cannot now, as in Elias
and John Baptist it did, prevent the growth and loathsomeness of concupiscence
in me: It may at least, as in Mary Magdalen restrain it, and make me capable
of being cured.

And as I have not despaired, For I am feeble and sore broken, I have roared
through the unquietnes of my heart. All long of the unquietnes of my heart, and
the unquietnes of my heart, all long of my sin: for where sin is, there will
never be but unquietnes of heart, and an unquiet heart will always produce
these miserable effects: Feeblenes of body, dejectedness of mind, and roaring
of voice.

But how can roaring stand with feebleness, which seems to require a strength
of spirits? Is it not therefore a roaring, perhaps not so much in lowdnesse, as
in an inarticulate expressing? that having done actions more like a beast then
a man, I am forced to use a voice, not so much of a man, as of a beast? Or is
it perhaps a roaring in spirit, which the heart may send forth, though the
body be feeble: or rather then most, when it is most feeble: not unlike the
blaze of a Candle, then greatest, when going out. Howsoever it be, this is
certain; the heart is that unhappy plot of ground which receiving into it the
accursed seed of sin, brings forth in the body and soul of man, these
miserable fruits: and how then can I be free from these weeds of the fruits,
that have received into me so great a measure of the seed? O vile sin, that I
could as well avoid thee, as I can see thee; or could as easily resist thee, as
I deadly hate thee; I should not then complain of either feebleness of body,
or dejectedness of mind, or roaring of voice: but I should perfectly enjoy
that happy quietness in all my parts, which thou, O God, did graciously
bestow as a blessed dowry on our first Parents, at their creation. And now,
and my God. But what need was thereof roaring? for what matter is it whether I
speak to God in a soft voice, or in a loud? seeing thou know, O God, the
very thoughts of my heart, and my groaning is not hid from thee. Though I
speak not, but only think to speak, yet thou know it: though I think
not, but only groan to think, yet thou know it; and knowing these things,
thou know O God, that my grief is more for thy displeasure, then for my
wounds: less for the pain I feel of thine arrows sticking in me, then for
the unkindnesse I take at thy shooting them at me. As the love with which thou
give, is more dear to me then thy gifts; so the anger with which thou
strikest, is more grievous to me then thy rod: and alas, O Lord, how can I
then choose but roar through the unquietnes of my heart, when I want both thy
gifts, and thy love too, and yet feel thy rod, and thine anger too? All my
desire, O Lord, is ever before thee, and my groaning is not hid from thee: but
what availes it me, that my desire be all before thee, if it be not all for
thee? what avails it me, that my groaning be not hid from thee, if it be not
made to thee? If I desire any thing besides thee, that desire is from
weakness, and then thou regardest it not; if I groan to any but thee, that
groaning is from vainness, and then thou see it not: but now that my desire
is only for thee, and my groaning only to thee; now I know, thou both see
and regardest them; and I doubt not, O God, but me for them.

But, alas, O Lord, My heart pants, my strength fails me; and as for the
light of mine eyes, that also is gone from me. And what is my heart, but the
foundation; what my strength, but the pillars? what mine eyes, but the windows
of my building? If these then be ruined, how can my whole building choose but
be demolished? My heart is not wont to pant, but in some great agony; nor my
strength to sail, but in some great conflict; nor my sight to go from me,
but in some great disaster: how great then, alas, must my agony be, how hard
my conflict, how grievous my disaster; when my heart, my strength, my sight,
all sail me at once? Though my heart panted, yet if my strength continued, I
should have a support: or though my strength failed, yet if my sight continued,
I should have a guide: but when they all fail, and fail at once; alas, O
Lord, how can I choose but fall, that have neither strength to support me, nor
eyes to guide me: Thou, O God, must say to my heart, be of good cheer: Thou
must say to my strength, I will be thy fortress: Thou must say to mine eyes,
I will be thy light: and then, and not till then, shall I ever have case, or
confidence, or consolation.

It is some comfort to men in misery, when they have their friends about them;
if not to relieve them, yet at least to pity them: for even pity, is a
comfort to men in misery: but so miserable am I, that I am left alone, as one
utterly forsaken. For even my lovers and friends stand aloof from me, and my
kinsmen stand a far off. They are all pieces that recoyle, and fly back at
the first voice of the powder. Yet it is not so much me they stand aloof
from, as my sore; for if it were not for my sore, I should have enough of their
company, easily enough: but they cannot abide sores, their eyes are too tender
to endure to see them, and yet hard enough, not to relieve them. Or is it they
stand aloof, that is so near, as to show, they are willing enough to see
them; but yet so far off, as to show, they have no meaning to come and help
them. But call you these lovers and friends? Men that flutter about us like
flies, in the Summer of prosperity, but vanish and are gone in the winter of
adversity? Are friends but painted flowers, only for show, and nothing at all
for use? Or if true flowers, yet only to make nosegayes of, and never to make
medicine of? Is there use of Physicians but when there are sores; and when
sores come, will not they be gotten to come? Is there use of friends, but in
time of need; and when need comes, will they then be gone? But alas, O Lord,
was it not so with Christ himself? company enough, friends enough, when there
was no need; but as soon as Judas comes with a band of men, scarce a man found
that will be gotten to tarry: and if they used the Master so, can I that am a
servant, look to be better used?

But say, you call them friends, yet how can you call them lovers? for it is
the nature of love, to be readiest at hand, when there be troubles at hand.
Does not the Elm, alover of the Vine, support the Vine, when it else would
sink down and fall to the ground? does not the Vine stick close to the Elm,
and if the Elm chance to fall, chooses rather to fall with it, then to forsake
it? And shall nature do this in trees, and shall not reason, shall not virtue,
do it much more in men? or shall trees be reckoned the reasonable Creatures,
and men be cashiered out of the number? But this is the world; they are called
lovers and friends, of their faces, no otherwise then Baboones may be called
men: for when a day of trial comes, they are often found as far from
friendship and true love, as Baboones from reason, and true understanding. And
such were my lovers and friends (always excepting Jonathan:) but I looked for
better at my kinsmens hands: for there is in them a propinquity of nature, and
nature will hardly be kept from working: yet such is my unfortunatnesse, that
in my behalf, even nature her self grows idle, and I find as little comfort
from my kinsmen, as from my other lovers and friends: and to say truly, rather
less: for where my lovens and friends stand but aloof, neither of them near
indeed, but yet my kinsmen the farthest off: My lovers and friends stand but
aloof from my sore, as taking it perhaps for a Noli me tangere; but my kinsmen
stand afar off, as taking it for no less then the very plague. My lovers and
friends stand aloof from my sore, as expecting perhaps a time of recovery when
they may come on again; but my kinsmen stand afar off, as never intending to
hearken more after me. My lovers and friends stand aloof from my sore, as
fearing more my sore then me, but my kinsmen stand a far off, as fearing me
no less then my sore: and where my lovers and friends by standing aloof, do
but violate the law of a contracted friendship: My kinsmen by standing afar
off, violate even the law of natural affection: And is not this a grievous
thing, that the law of reason, the law of friendship, the law of nature shall
all be broken, rather then I shall be relieved, or find assistance? And now,
O my soul, seeing thy lovers and friends, and kinsmen prove all unloyall,
unfaithful, and unnatural, in whom alas can thou hope for help? In whom, O
Lord, but only in thee? for thou art a lover incomparably more loyal, then
either the Vine to the Elm, or the Elm to the Vine: Thou are a friend
infinitely more faithful, then either Jonathan to David, or David to Jonathan;
Thou art a kinsman, but rather a father unspeakably more tender of thy
children, then either Boaz of Ruth; or Abraham of his one and only son Isaac.

But though to be thus forsaken, rejected, and even abhorred, by lovers, and
friends, and kinsmen, be misery enough, and more then enough for one man to
bear; yet this is not all the misery I bear, they also that seek after my
life lay snares for me: and they that seek my hurt, speak mischievous things,
and imagine deceit all the day long. Is it not enough that my friends and
kinsmen will do me no good; but there are others that will do me hurt: and
it is not enough, that they wish my hurt, but they seek to do it; they hunt
after me, as after a prey: and it is no small hurt they seek to do me; but
they lay snares for my life: nothing but my life will serve them; and they do
it not so much by open violence, which might perhaps be withstood; but they
do it by fraud and deceit, which is not easy to be avoided: for first, they
speak mischievous things, they raise scandalls, and work the world to an ill
opinion of me; and then they lie devising of ways how to entrap me; and they
spend not an hour or two about it, but they imagine deceit all the day long.
And alas, O Lord, is this a world to have safety in scandalls? where if some
be ready to devise them, others are as ready to believe them? If there be a
Iezabel to plot a false accusation, are there not elders to put it in
execution? and do I not in this still run in the same line with my Lord
Christ Jesus? For did not the scribes and Pharisees, first devise mischievous
things against him; and then the Highpriests and Rulers believe what they
devised, and execute what they believed? And what, O Lord, do I all this while?
do I stand upon my guard, and have an eye to their practices? do I seek to
repel their violence by force, or to frustrate their fraud with
circumspection? Do I clear their scandalls with apologies, or do I answer
their clamours with vociferations? God knows, none of all these: I neither use
arms offensive, nor defensive; all my doing is suffering, and all the apology
I make for my self, is silence; For as a deaf man, I heard not, and as a
dumb man, I opened not my mouth: For why should I hear, when I meant not to
speak? and why should I speak, when I knew before hand I should not be heard?
I knew by contesting, I should but provoke them, and make them more guilty,
that were guilty too much before. I therefore thought it better my self to be
silent, then to set them a roaring, and make them grow outrageous. No doubt, a
great wisdom in David, to know that, to be deaf and dumb was in this case his
best course, but yet a far greater virtue, that knowing it, he was able to
do it. O how happy should we be, if we could always do that, which we know
is best to be done: and if our wills were as ready to act, as our reason is
able to enact, we should then decline many rocks we now run upon; we
should then avoid many errors we now run into. To be deaf, and dumb, are
indeed great inabilities and defects, when they be natural; but when they be
voluntary, and I may say artificial, they are then great abilities, or rather
perfections. They are two stemmes, upon which do grow the excellent virtues of
patience and charity; which though David showed in himself in a great measure,
at the railing of Shimei: yet he could never so properly speak them of
himself, as in the person of Christ: for of him indeed the sacred story
relates, that being rayled upon, and reviled, buffeted and beaten by the base
multitude, yet as a sheep led to the slaughter, he opened not his mouth, but
was deaf and dumb even to death.

O grievous alteration! transcendent indignity! He that restored Creeples to
health, and raised the dead to life; now to be deprived himself of the chief
faculties of life, both active and passive? He that made the deaf to hear,
and the dumb to speak: now himself neither to speak, nor hear? A grievous
case no doubt to be so: and yet no doubt, a just cause it should be so: for
if he had heard, he should have heard but blasphemies: and if he had spoken, he
must have spoken but reproofs: and seeing blasphemies were too profane for his
sacred ears to hear, and reproofs too harsh for his mild tongue to utter: what
marvel, if he that made the care, did himself not hear, what marvel, if he
that was the Word it self, did not speak a word?

And as my deafness and dumbness, Croesus his dumb son: but he that so
provoked, should fall a speaking, were very like to fall in speaking: for it is
a slippery argument to be spoken in: and if in speaking I should slip never so
little, Oh what a joy it would be to my enemies, they would never desire
better sport, they would magnify themselves against me: I should be their
blind Sampson to make them merry, I should serve them for a stock of derision.
Oh therefore, suffer me not, O God, to suffer these indignities; but do thou
hear for me, do thou speak for me: for I alas, am ready to halt, that if my
slipping and falling, be a cause to make mine enemies rejoice, they may be
sure of joy enough: for how can I choose but often fall, that am of my self so
ready to halt? and specially when my sorrow is always before me; that makes
me I cannot see my way before me; for what does more blind the eyes, and take
away the sight, then sorrow? Was it not sorrow that hindered Mary Magdalen from
discerning Christ, when she saw him at the Sepulcher? And besides, my halting
is the worst kind of halting that is; for I come not to it, as Jacob came to
his, by wrestling with an Angel, which brought a blessing with it: but I come
to it as Mephibosheth did, by the imbecility or inequality of my parts: For
having two feet to go upon, my reason, and my will; how can I choose but halt,
when my will is so much longer then my reason? and then, if to the aptness of
my falling, by reason of my halting, there be added the inadvertency of the
way, by reason of my sorrow: how can I choose but even trip at every step I
take? that if mine enemies rejoice at my fallings, they are very like to have
their fill of rejoicing; for if a just man fall seven times a day, how often,
alas; am I like to fall, that halt, I may rightly say, down right in sin? but
let mine enemies rejoice to see me fall as much as they please; this shall not
hinder me from seeking to rise: and seeing there is no rising from sin, but by
confessing it; I will therefore declare mine iniquity, I will be sorry for my
sin: I will declare mine iniquity, that my enemies may see, I can speak to
God, though I was dumb to them; and I will be sorry for my sin, to make
them see how little I envy their rejoicing, that can take pleasure in my own
sorrowing: for to declare mine iniquities without sorrowing for my sin, might
rather be thought an ostentation then a penitence, and rather show me proud
of my sin, then ashamed of it. I will therefore be sorry for my sin, that
my sorrow may testify for me, that my declaration now is out of contrition; as
my declaration shall testify, that my dumbness before, was out of compassion.
But though I scorn mine enemies deriding, yet I am not insensible of mine own
disgrace: and therefore hope that my speaking now, shall supply my dumbness
before; and make thee, O God, to take my cause into thine own hearing; and
either convert mine enemies, or else confound them. This indeed is my hope,
though I see as yet but small fruit of my hope; For mine enemies are lively and
strong, I looked for abatement of their rejoicing, and they continue lively
still: for abatement of their power, and they continue as strong as ever: for
abatement of their number, and they are rather multiplied, and increase. But
though it be an easy matter for them to be lively, being so strong as they
are; and to be strong; being so many as they are: yet how easy is it for
thee, O God, by thy Spirit of life, to strike a dump into their liveliness; by
thy Almightinesse, to suppress their strength; by thy Infiniteness, to
confound their number: and why then should I be afraid what mine enemies can
do unto me? why should I be frighted with an arm of flesh? But that which is
most strange of all, Qui male agit, odit lucem? They that do evil hate the
light? and if hate the light, how can they choose but hate the children of
light? That it appears to be cause enough to the wicked, to hate the godly,
if they discern in them but any sparks of godliness: and then if this be
the case, that I must either be wicked my self, or else be hated of the
wicked: I shall never stand long in making my choice, seeing I shall never
certainly buy their love so dear. But since they are generations of vipers,
and render me evil for good: at least, O Lord, do not thou forsake me; be
not thou far from me: for as long as thou art on my side, and stayest by
me, what though the waters roar, and the mountains shake with the swelling
thereof? What though the bulls of Basan compasseme, and the strong bulls be set
me round: seeing thou art able to deliver me from their fury, and from the
hands of all that hate me.

But O my soul, thou may call long enough to God, not to be far from
thee, and all in vain, if thou be far from him. Take heed therefore, it be
not found true in thee, which he sometimes said: This people draws near me
with their lips, but their hearts are far from me: for if thou be near him
only with thy lips, such neerenesse will do thee small good: it is not the
neighborhood of lips that he cares for: but if thou will have him not to be
far from thee, should stand in need of time to consider? Are there Secundae
cogitationes with him, as there are with men? Is there any thing that can be
sudden, or unlookt for to him? Although therefore he be slow to anger, yet
he is never slow to mercy; but for showing of mercy, he has the wings of a
Dove, and rides upon the wind. And seeing, O God, thou art able and can do
it; O show thy self willing also, and be forward to do it: Make haste to help
me, O Lord my salvation: Make haste to help me, that thou may be Lord of my
salvation; lest I fall into mine enemies hands, that would be lords of my
destruction: or rather, make haste to help me, O Lord, Thou that art my
salvation: for until thou come, I am, alas, a servant of sin, and a bondslave
to Satan, that would be my destruction.

FINIS.

