THE HONORABLE HISTORY of friar Bacon, and friar Bongay.

As it was played by her Majesty's servants.

Made by Robert Green Master of Arts.

LONDON, Printed for Edward White, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
little North door of Poules, at the sign of the Gun. 1594.

THE HONORABLE History of Friar Bacon.
Enter, Edward the first malcontented with Lacy earl of Lincoln, John Warren
earl of Sussex, and Ermsbie gentleman: Raph Simnell the kings fool. Lacie.
WHY looks my lord like to a troubled sky,
When heavens bright shine, is shadowed with a fogge:
A late we ran the dear and through the Lawndes
Stripped with our nagges the lofty frolic bucks,
That scudded fore the teisers like the wind,
Nere was the Dear of merry Fresingfield,
So lustily pulled down by jolly mates,
Nor sharde the Farmers such fat venison,
So franckly dealt this hundred years before:
Nor have I seen my lord more frolic in the chase,
And now changde to a melancholy dumpe.

Warren. After the Prince got to the keepers lodge
And had been iocand in the house a while:
Tossing of ale and milk in country cannes,
Whether it was the countries sweet content:
Or else the bonny damsel filled us drink
That seemd so stately in her stammell red:
Or that a qualme did cross his stomach then,
But straight he fell into his passions.

Ermsbie. Sir Raphe, what say you to your master,
Shall he thus all amort live malecontent.

Raphe. Heerest thou Ned, nay look if he will speak to me.


Edward. What say thou to me fool?


Raphe. I pree thee tell me Ned, art thou in love with the keepers daughter?


E^w^rd. How if I be, what then?


Raphe. Why then sirrah I Will teach thee how to deceive love.


Edward. How Raphe.


Raphe. Marry sirrah Ned, thou shall put on my cap, and my coat, and my dagger,
and I will put on thy clothes, and thy sword, and so thou shall be my fool.


Edward. And what of this?


Raphe. Why so thou shall beguile Love, for Love is such a proud scab, that he
will never meddle with fools nor children, Is not Raphes counsel good Ned.


Edward. Tell me Ned Lacie, did thou mark the maid,
How lively in her country weeds she looked:
A bonier wench all Suffolk cannot yield,
All Suffolk, nay all England holds none such.

Rap^e. Sirrah, Will Ermsby, Ned is deceived.


Ermsbi^. Why Raphe?


Raphe. He says all England has no such, and I say, and I Will stand to it,
there is one better in Warwickshire.


Warren. How proouest thou that Raphe?


Raphe. Why is not the Abbot a learned man, and has red many books, and
think thou he has not more learning than thou to choose a bonny wench, yes
I warrant thee by his whole grammar.


Erm^by. A good reason Raphe.


Edward. I tell the Lacie, that hersparkling eyes,
Do lighten forth sweet Loves alluring fire:
And in her tresses she does fold the looks
Of such as gaze upon her golden hair,
Her b^shfull white mixed with the mornings red,
Luna does boast upon her lovely cheeks,
Her front is beauties table where she paints,
The glo^^es of her gorgious excellence:
Her teeth are shelues of precious Margarites,
Richly enclosed with rudd^e curroll cleues.
Tush Lacie, she is beauties ouermatch,
If thou suruaist her curious imagerie.

Lacie. I grant my lord the damsel is as fair,
As simple Suffolks homely towns can yield:
But in the court be quainter dames than she,
Whose faces are enricht with honors taint,
Whose bewties stand upon the stage of fame,
And vaunt their trophies in the courts of love.

Ed^. Ah Ned, but had thou watched her as my self,
And seen the secret bewties of the maid,
Their courtly coinesse were but foolery.

Erm^bie. Why how watched you her my lord?


Ed^ard. When as she swept like Venus through the house,
And in her shape fast foulded up my thoughts:
Into the Milkhouse went I with the maid,
And there amongst the cream-boles she did shine,
As Palace, among her Princely huswiferie:
She turned her smock over her Lilly arms,
And diued them into milk to run her cheese:
But whiter than the milk her crystal skin,
Checked with lines of Azur made her blush,
That art or nature durst bring for compare,
Ermsbie if thou had seen as I did note it well,
How beauty played the huswife, how this girl
Like Lucrece laid her fingers to the work,
Thou would with T^rquine hazard Room and all
To win the lovely maid of Fresingfield.

Raphe. Sirrah N^d, would feign have her?


Edward. I Raphe.


Raphe. Why Ned I have laid the plot in my head thou shall have her already.


Edward. I Will give thee a new coat and learn me that.


Ra^he. Why sir Ned weel ride to Oxford to Friar ^acon, oh he is a brave
scholar sir, they say he is a brave N^gromancer, that he can m^ke women of
devils, and he can iuggle cats into Costermongers.


Edward. And how then Raphe?


Raphe. Marry sirrah thou shall go to him, and because thy father Harry shall
not miss thee, he shall turn me into thee; and I Will to the Court, and I Will
prince it out, and he shall make thee either a silken purse, full of gold, or
else a fine wrought sinocke.


Edward. But how shall I have the maid?


Raphe. Marry sirrah, if thou be a silken purse full of gold, then on
sundaies she will hang thee by her side, and you must not say a word, Now sir
when she comes into a great prease of people, for fear of the cutpurse on a
sudden she will swap thee into her plackerd, then sirrah being there you may
plead for your self.


Ermsbie. Excellent policy.


Edward. But how if I be a wrought smo^ke.


Raphe. Then she will put thee into her chest and lay th^^ into Lauender, and
upon some good day she will put thee on, and at night when you go to bed, then
being turned from a smock to a man, you may make up the match.


L^cie. Wonderfully wisely counseled Raphe.


Edward. Raphe shall have a new coat.


Raph. God thank you when I have it on my back Ned,


Edward. Lacie the fool has laid a perfect plot,
For why our country Margret is so coy,
And stands so much upon her honest points,
That marriage or no market with the maid:
Ermsbie, it must be nigromaticke spells,
And charms of art that must inchaine her love,
Or else shall Edward never win the girl,
Therefore my wags we will horse us in the morn;
And post to Oxford to this jolly Friar,
Bacon shall by his magic do this deed.

Warren. Content my lord, and that's a speedy way
To weane these headstrong puppies from the teat,

Edward. I am unknown, not taken for the Prince,
They only deem us frolic Courtiers,
That revel thus among our lieges game:
Therefore I have d^uised a policy,
L^cie, thou know next friday is S. James,
And then the country flocks to Harlston fair,
Then will the keepers daughter frolic there,
And ouer-shine the troop of all the maids,
That come to see, and to be seen that day.
Haunt thee disguisd among the country swains,
Fain thart a farmers son, not far from thence,
Epsy her loves, and who she likes best:
Coat him, and court her to control the clown,
Say that the Courtier tired all in green,
That helped her handsomely to run her cheese,
And filled her fathers lodge with venison,
Commends him, and sends fairings to herself,
Buy some thing worthy of her parentage,
Not worth her beauty for Lacie then the fair,
Affoord^ no Jewel fitting for the maid:
And when thou talkest of me, note if she blush,
Oh then she loves, but if her cheeks wax pale,
Disdain it is. L^cie send how she fares,
And spare no time nor cost to win her loves.

Lacie. I will my lord so execute this charge,
As if that Lacie were in love with her.

Edward. Send letters speedily to Oxford of the news.


Rap^e. And sirrah Lacie, buy me a thousand thousand million of fine bells.


Lacie. What will thou do^ with them Raphe?


^aph^. Mary every time that Ned sighs for the keepers daughter, I Will tie a bell
about him, and so within three or four days I will send word to hi^ father
Harry, that his son and my master Ned is become Loves morris dance.


Edward. Well Lacie, ^ooke with care unto thy charge,
And I will have to Oxford to the Friar,
That he by art, and thou by secret gifts,
May make me lord of merry Fresingfield.

Lacie. God send your honor your hearts desire.

Exeunt.
Enter friar Bacon, with Miles his poor scholar with books under his arm,
with them Burden, Mason, Clement, three doctors. Bacon. Miles where are you?


Miles. Hi^ sum dos^issime and reuerendissime doctor.


Bacon. Attuli^^in^s libr^s m^^s de Necromantia.


Miles. Ecce quam bo^um and quam i^cundum, habitares libr^s in^num.


Bacon. Now masters of our Academicke state,
That rule in Oxford Vizroies in your place,
Whose heads contain Maps of the liberal arts,
Spending your time in deapth of learned skill,
Why flock you thus to Bacons secret Cell,
A F^ier newly stalde in (...),
Say what is your mind, that I may make reply.

Burden. Bacon we hear, that long we have ^^spect,
That thou art read in Magicks mys^erie,
In Piromancie to divine by flames,
To tell by Hadromaticke, ebbes and tides,
By Aeromancie, to discover doubts,
To plain out questions, as Apollo did.

Bacon. Well master B^^den, what of all this?


Miles. Marie ^ir he does but fulfill by rehearsing of these names the Fable of
the Fox and the g^^pes, that which is about us, pertains nothing to us.


Burden. I tell thee Bacon, Oxford makes report,
Nay England, and the court of Henry says,
Thart making of a brazen head by art,
Which shall unfold strang^ doubts and Aphorisme^,
And read a lecture in Philosophy,
And by the help of Devils and ghastly fiends,
Thou meanst ere many years or days be past,
To compass England with a wall of brass.

Bacon. And what of this?


Miles. What of this master, why he does speak mystically, for he knows if
your skill fail to make a brazen head, yet mother waters strong ale will ^it
his turn to make him have a coppernose.


Clement. Bacon we come not greeuing at thy skill,
But ioieng that our Academi^ yields
A man supposde the wonder ofthe world,
For if thy cunning work these miracles,
England and Europe shall admire thy fame,
And Oxford shall in characters of brass,
And statues, such as were built up in Rome,
Eternize Friar Bacon for his art.

Mason. Then gentle Friar, tell us thy intent.


Bacon. Seeing you come as friends unto the friar
Resolve you doctors, Bacon can by books,
Make storming Boreas thunder from his cave,
And dim fair Luna to a dark Eclipse,
The great arch-ruler, potentate of hell,
Trembles, when Bacon bids him, or his fiends,
Bow to the force of his Pentageron.
What art can work, the frolic friar knows,
And therefore will I turn my Magic books,
And strain out Nigromancie to the deep,
I have contrivd and framde a head of bras^e,
(I made Belcephon hammer ^ut the stuff)
And that by art shall read Philosophy,
And I will strengthen England by my skill,
That if ten Caesar's livd and raig^d in Rome,
With all the legions Europe does contain,
They should not touch a grass of English ground,
The work that Ninus reard at Babylon,
The brazen walls framde by Semiramis,
Carved out like to the portall of the sun,
Shall not be such as rings the English st^ond:
From Dover to the market place of Ri^.

Burden. Is this possible?


Miles. I Will bring ye to or three witnesses.


Burden. What be those?


Miles. Marry ^ir three or four as honest devils, and good companions as any
be in hell.


Mason. No doubt but magic may do much in this,
For he that reads but Mathematicke rules,
Shall find conclusions that avail to work,
Wonder^ that pass the common sense of men.

Burden. But Bacon roues a bow beyond his reach,
And tells of more than magic can perform:
Thinking to get a fame by fooleries,
Have I not past as far instate of schools:
And red of many secrets, yet to think,
That heads o^ Brass can utter any voice,
Or more, to tell of de^pe philosophy,
This is a fable Aes^^ had forgot.

Bacon. Burden^ thou wrongst me in detracting thus,
Bacon loves not to stuff himself with lies:
But tell me fore these Doctors if thou dare,
Of certain questions I shall move to thee.

Burden. I will ask what thou can.


Miles. Marry si^ heel straight be on your pickpacke to know whether the
feminine or the masculin gender be most worthy.


Bacon. Were you not yesterday master Burden at Henly upon the Thembs?


Burden. I was, what then?


Bacon. What book studied you there on all night?


Burden. I, none at all I red not there a li^e.


Bacon. Then doctors, Friar Bacons art knows naught.


Clement. What say you to this master Burden does he not touch you?


Burden. I pass not of his frivolous speeches.


Miles. Nay master Burden, my master ere he has done with you, will turn
you from a doctor to a dunce, and shake you so small, that he will leave no
more learning in you than is in Ba^aams Ass.


Bacon. Masters, for that learned Burdens skill is deep,
And sore he doubts of Bacons Cabalisme:
I Will show you why he haunts to Henly often,
Not doctors for to taste the fragrant air:
But there to spend the night in Alcumie,
To multiply with secret spells of art.
Thus private steals he learning from us all,
To prove my sayings true, I Will show you straight,
The book he ke^pes at Henly for himself.

Miles. Nay now my master goes to coniuration, take heed.


Bacon. Masters stand still, fear not, I Will shew^ you but his book.

^eere he coniures. Pe^ omnes deos infernales Belcephon.


Enter a woman with a shoulder of mutton on a spit, and a Devil. Miles. Oh
master cease your coniuration, or you spoil all, for heeres a she d^uell
come with a shoulder of mutton o^ ^spit, you have mard the devils supper, but
no doubt he thinks our College fare is slender, and so has sent you his
cook with a shoulder of mutton to make it exceed.


Hostess. Oh where am I, or what is become of me.


Bacon. What art thou?


Hostess. Hostess at Henly mistress of the Bell.


Bacon. How came thou here.


Hostess. As I was in the kitchen among the maids,
Spitting the meat against supper for my guess:
A motion moved me to look forth of door.
No sooner had I pried into the yard,
But straight a whirlewind hoisted me from thence,
And mounted me alo^t unto the clouds:
As in a trance I thought nor feared naught,
Nor know I where or whether I was taken:
Nor where I am, nor what these persons be.

Bacon. No, know you not master Burden.


H^stesse. Oh yes good sir, he is my daily guest,
What master Burden, it was but yesternight,
That you and I at Henly played at cards.

Burden. I know not what we did, a pox of all coniuring Friars.


Clement. Now jolly Friar tell us, is this the book that Burden is so careful
to look on?


Bacon. It is, but Burden tell me now,
Think thou that Bacons Nicromanticke skill,
Cannot perform his head and wall of Brass,
When he can fetch thine hostess in such post.

Miles. I Will warrant you master, if master Burden could conjure as well as
you, he would have his book every night from Henly to study on at Oxford.


Mason. Burden what are you mated by this frolic Friar,
Look how he droops, his guilty conscience
Drives him to bash and makes his hostess blush.

Bacon. Well mistres for I will not have you mist,
You shall to Henly to cheer up your guests
Fore supper ginne, Burden bid her adieu,
Say farewell to your hostess sore she goes,
Sirrah away, and set her safe at home.

Hostess. Master Burden, when shall we see you at Henly.

Exeunt Hostess and the Devil.
Burden. The devil take thee and Henly too.


Miles. Master shall I make a good motion.


Bacon. What Is that?


Miles. Marry sir now that my hostess is gone to provide supper, conjure up
another spirit, and send doctor Burden ^^ying after.


Bacon. Thus rulers of our Accademicke state,
You have seen the Friar frame his art by proo^^:
And as the college called Braz^nno^^^
Is under him and he the master there:
So surely shall this head of brass be framd^,
And yield forth strange and uncouth Aph^rismes:
And Hell and Heccate shall fa^le the F^^^r,
But I will circle England round with brass.

Miles. So be it, and n^neand semp^r, Amen.

Exeunt ^mnes.
Enter Margaret the ^aire maid of Fresingfield, with Thomas and ^one, and other
clownes: Latie disguised in country apparel. Thomas. By my troth Margret
heeres a wether is able to make a man call his father whoreson, if this wether
hold we shall have hay good cheap, and butter and cheese at Harlston will
bear no price.


Margret. Thomas, maids when they come to see the fair,
Count not to make a cope for dearth of hay,
When we have turned our butter to the salt,
And set our cheese safely upon the rackes.
Then let our fathers prise it as they please,
We country sluts of merry Fresingfield,
Come to buy needless noughts to make us fine,
And look that yong-men should be francke this day,
And court us with such fairings as they can.
Ph^^us is blythe and frolic looks from heaven,
As when he courted lovely Semele:
Swearing the pedlers shall have empty packs,
If that fair wether may make chapmen buy.

Lacie. But lovely Peggie Semele is dead,
And therefore Ph^bus from his palace pries,
And seeing such a sweet and seemly saint,
Shows all his glories for to court your self.

Margret. This is a fairing gentle sir indeed,
To sooth me up with suc^ smooth flattery,
But learn of me your sco^^es to broad before:
Well Ione our bewties must abide their iestes,
We serve the turn iniolly Fresingfield.

Ione. Margret^ a farmers daughter for a farmers sonn^,
I warrant you the meanest of us both,
Shall have a mate to lead us from the Church:
But Thomas what is the news? what in a dumpe.
Give me your hand, we are near a pedlers shop,
Out with your purse we must have fairings now.

Th^mas. Faith Ione and shall, I Will bestow a fairing on you, and then we will to
the Tau^rn, and snap off a pint of wine or two.


All this while Lacie whi^pers Margret in the ^are. Margret. Whence are you
sir, of Suffolk, for your (...) are finer than the common sort of men?


Laci^. Faith lovely girl, I am of Beckles by,
Your neighbor not above six miles from hence,
A farmers son that never was so quain^,
But that he could do courtesy to such dames:
But trust me Margret I am sent in charge,
From him that reueld in your fathers house,
And filled his Lodge with cheer and venison,
Tired in green, he sent you this rich purse:
His token, that he helped you run your cheese,
And in the milkhouse chatted with your self.

M^rgret. To me, you forget your self.


Laci^. Women are often weak in memorie^


Margret. Oh pardon sir, I call to mind the man,
Twere little manners to refuse his gift,
And yet I hope he sends it not for love:
For we have little leisure to debate of that.

Ione. What Margret blush not, mayds must have their loves.


Thomas. Nay by the mass she looks pale as if she were angry.


Richard. Sirrah are you of Beckls? I pray how does goodman Cob, my father
bought a horse of him, I Will tell you Marget, a were good to be a gentleman's
jade, for of all things the foul hilding could not abide a doongcart.


Margret. How different is this farmer from the rest,
That erst as yet has pleased my wandering sight,
His words are witty, quickened with a smile,
His courtesy gentle, smelling of the court,
Facill and debonaire in all his deeds,
Proportiond as was Paris, when in gray,
He courted Aenon in the vale by Troy.
Great lords have come and pleaded for my love,
Who but the keepers las^e of Fresingfield,
And yet me thinks this Farmers jolly son,
Passes the prowdest that has pleased mine eye.
But Peg disclose not that thou art in love,
And show as yet no sign of love to him,
Although thou well would wish him for thy love
Keep that to thee till time does serve thy turn,
To show the grief wherein thy heart does burn.
Come Ione and Thomas, shall we to the fair,
You Beckls man will not forsake us now,

Laci^. Not whilst I may have such quaint girls as you,


Margret. Well if you chance to come by Fresingfield,
Make but a step into the keepers lodge,
And such poor fare as Woodmen can afford,
Butter and cheese, cream, and fat venison,
You shall have store, and welcome therewithal.

Lacie. Gramarcies Peggie, look for me ^are long.


Enter Henry the third, the emperor, the king of Castile, Elin^r his daughter,
Jacques Van^^rma^^ a G^rmaine. Henry. Great men of Europe, monarks of the West,
Ringd with the walls of old Oc^^nus,
Whose lo^tie surges like the batte^ments,
That compast high built Babell in with towers,
Welcome my lords, welcome brave westeme kings,
To Englands shore, whose promontorie cleeues,
Shows Albion is another little world,
Welcome says English Henry to you all,
Chie^ly unto the lovely Eleanour,
Who darde ^or Edwards sake cut through the seas,
And venture as Agenors d^msell through the deep,
To get the love of Henry's wanton son.

Castile. Englands rich Monarch brave Plantagenet,
The Pyren mounts swelling above the clouds,
That ward the welthie Castile in with walls,
Could not detain the beauteous Eleanour,
But hearing of the fame of Edwards youth,
She darde to brook Neptunus haughty pride,
And bide the brunt of froward Eolus,
Then may fair England welcome her the more.

Elinor. After that English Henry by his lords,
Had sent prince Edwards lovely counterfeit,
A present to the Castile Elinor,
The comely pourtra^t of so brave a man,
The virtuous fame discoursed of his deeds,
Edwards courageous resolution,
Done at the holy land fore Damas walls,
Led both mine eye and thoughts in equal links,
To like so of the English Monarchs son,
That I attempted perrils for his sake.

Em^erour. Where is the Prince, my lord?


Henry. He posted down, not long since from the court,
To Suffolk side, to merry Fremingham,
To sport himself amongst my fallow dear,
From thence by packets sent to Hampton house,
We hear the Prince is ridden with his lords,
To Oxford, in the Academie there,
To hear dispute amongst the learned men,
But we will send forth letters for my son,
To will him come from Oxford to the court.

Empe. Nay rather Henry let us as we be,
Ride for to visit Oxford with our train,
Feign would I see your Universities,
And what learned men your Academie yields,
From Haspurg have I brought a learned clarke,
To hold dispute with English Orators.
This doctor surnamde Jacques Vandermast,
A German borne, past into Padua,
To Florence, and to fair Bolonia,
To Paris, Rheims, and stately Orleans,
And talking there with men of art, put down
The chiefest of them all in Aphorisms,
In Magic, and the Mathematicke rules,
Now let us Henry try him in your schools.

Henry. He shall my lord, this motion likes me well,
We Will progress straight to Oxford with our trains,
And see what men our Academi^ bringes.
And wonder Vandermast welcome to me
In Oxford shall thou find a iollie friar,
Called Friar Ba^on, Englands only flower
Set him but Nonplus in his magic spells,
And make him yield in Mathematicke rules,
And for thy glory I will bind thy brows,
Not with a poets garland^made of Baies,
But with a coronet of choicest gold,
Whilst then we fit to Oxford with our troops,
Lets in and banquet in our English court.
Exit.
Enter Raphe Si^^^ll in Edwardes apparel, Edward, Warr^^, Er^sby disgu^sed.
Raphe. Where be these vacabond knaves that they attend no better on their
maiste^?


Edward. If it please your honor we are all ready at an inch.


Raphe. Sirrah Ned, I Will have no more post horse to ride on,
I Will have another fetch.

Ermsbie. I pray you how is that my Lord?


Raphe. Marry sir, I Will send to the I Will of Eely for four or five dozen of
Geese, and I Will have them tide six and six together with whipcord, Now upon
their backs will I have a fair field bed, with a Canapi^, and so when it is
my pleasure I Will flee into what place I please; this will be easy.


Warren. Your honor has said well, but shall we to Brasennose College before
we pull off our boots.


Ermsbie. Warren well motioned, we will to the Friar
Before we revel it within the town.
Raphe see you keep your countenance like a Prince.

Raphe. Wherefore have I such a company of cutting knaves to wait upon me, but
to ^eep and defend my countenance against all mine enemies: have you not good
swords and bucklers.


Enter Bacon and Miles. Ermsbie. Stay who comes here.


Warren. Some scholar, and we will ask him where Friar Bacon is.


Bacon. Why thou arrant dunce shall I never make thee good scholar, does not
all the town try out, and say, Friar Bacons subsiser is the greatest
blockhead in all Oxford, why thou can not speak one word of true Latin.


Miles. No sir, yes what is this else; ^g^ ^um tuus hom^, I am your man, I
warrant you sir as good Tullies phrase as any is in Oxford.


Bacon. Come on sirrah, what part of speech is Eg^.


Miles. Eg^, that is I, marry nomen s^bstant^^^.


Bacon. How prove you that?


Miles. Why sir let him prove himself and a will, I can b^ hard felt and
understood.


Bacon. Oh gross dunce.


Here beat him. Edw. Come let us break off this dispute between these two.
Sirrah, where is Brazennose College.


Miles. Not far from Copper-smithes hall.


Edward. What do thou monk me.


Miles. Not I sir, but what would you at Brazennose?


Ermsbi^. M^rrie we would speak with friar Bacon.


Miles. Whose men be you.


Ermsbie. Marry scholar here is our master.


Raphe. Sirrah I am the master of these good fellows, may thou not know me
to be a Lord by my reparrell.


Miles. Then heeres good game for the hawke, for heers the master fool, and a
couie of Cockscombs, one wise man I think would spring you all.


Edward. Gogs wounds Warren kill him.


Warren. Why Ned I think the deu^ll be in my sheath, I cannot get out my
dagger.


Ermsbie. Nor I mine, Swones Ned I think I am bewitched.


Miles. A company of scabbes, the proudest of you all draw your weapon if he
can,
See how boldly I speak now my master is by.

Edward. I strive in vain, but if my sword be shut,
And coniured fast by magic in my sheath,
Villain here is my fist.

Strike him a box on the ear. Miles. Oh I beseech you conjure his hands too,
that he may not lift his arms to his head, for he is light fingered.


Raphe. Ned strike him, I Will warrant thee by mine honor.


Bacon. What means the English prince to wrong my man,


Edward. To whom speak thou.


^^con. To thee.


Edward. Who art thou.


B^con. Could you not judge when all your swords grew fast^
That friar B^con was not far from hence:
Edward king Henry's son and Prince of Wales,
Thy ^oole disgui^d cannot conceal thy self,
I know both Erm^bie and the Suslex E^rle,
Else Friar Bacon had but little skill.
Thou come in post from merry Fresingfield^
Fast fancied to the keepers bonny less,
To crave some succor of the jolly Friar,
And Lacie Ear of Lincoln have thou left,
To treat fair Margret to allow thy loves:
But friends are men, and love can baffle lords.
The Earl both woes and courts her for himself.

Warren. Ned this is strange, the friar knows al.


Ermsbie. Appollo could not utter more than this.


Edward. I stand amazed to hear this jolly Friar,
Tell even the very secrets of my thoughts:
But learned Bacon since thou know the cause,
Why I did post so fast from Fresingfield.
Help Friar at a pinch, that I may have
The love of lovely Margret to my self;
And as I am true Prince of Wales, I Will give
Living and lands to strength thy college state.

Warren. Good Friar help the Prince in this.


Raphe. Why servant Ned, will not the friar do it. Were not my sword glued to
my scabberd by coniuration, I would cut off his head and make him do it by
force.


Miles. In faith my lord, your manhood and your sword all alike, they are so
fast coniured that we shall never see them.


Ermsbie. Wat doctor in a dumpe, tush help the prince,
And thou shall see how liberal he will prove,

Bacon. Crave not such actions, greater dumps than these,
I will my lord strain out my magic spells,
For this day comes the earl to Fresingfield,
And fore that night shuts in the day with dark,
They Will be bet^othed each to other fast:
But come with me, w^ele to my study straight,
And in a glass pro^pectiue I will show
What Is done this day in m^rry Fresingfield.

Edward. Gramercies Bacon, I will quite thy pain.


Bacon. But send your train my lord into the town,
My scholar shall go bring them to their Inn:
Mean while we will see the knauerie of the earl.

Ed^a^d. Warren leave me and Ermsbie, take the fool,
Let him be master and go revel it,
Till I and Friar Bacon ta^ke a while.

VVarr^n. We will my lord.


Raphe. Faith Ned and I Will lord it out till thou come, I Will be Prince of Wales
over all the black pots in Oxford.

Exeunt.
Bacon and Edward goes into the study. Bacon. Now frolic ^d^ard, welcome to my
Cell,
Here tempers Friar Bacon many toies:
And holds this place his consistory court,
Wherein the devils pleads homage to his words,
Within this glasle pr^^pectiue thou shall see
This day what is done in merry Fresingfield,
Twixt lovely Peggie and the Lincoln earl.

Edward. Friar thou gladst me, nowshall Edward try,
How Lacie means to his sovereign lord.

Bacon. Stand there and look directly in the glass,


Enter Margret and Friar Bungay^ Bacon. What sees my lord.


Edward. I see the keepers lovely less appear,
As bright-sunne as the parramour of Mars,
Only attended by a jolly friar.

Bacon. Sit still and keep the crystal in your eye,


Margret. But tell me friar Bungay is it true,
That this fair courtious country swain,
Who says his father is a farmer nie,
Can be lord Lacie earl of Lincolnshire.

Bunga^. Peggie it is true, it is Lacie for my life,
Or else mine art and cunning both does fail:
Left by prince Edward to procure his loves,
For he in green that help you run your cheese,
Is son to Henry and the prince of Wales.

Margret. Be what he will his lure is but for lust.
But did lord Lacie like poor Margret,
Or would he daine to wed a country less,
Friar, I would his humble handmayd be,
And for great wealth, quite him with courtesy.

Bungay. Why Margret do thou love him.


Margret. His personage like the pride ofvaunting Troy,
Might well avouch to shadow Hellens cape:
His witis quick and ready in conceit,
As Greece affoorded in her chiefest prime
Courteous, ah Friar full of pleasing smiles,
Trust me I love too much to tell thee more,
Suffice to me he is Englands parramour.

Bungay. Has not each eye that viewd thy pleasing face,
Surnamed thee fair maid of Fresingfield.

Margret. Yes Bungay, and would God the lo^ely Earl
Had that in esse, thatso many sought.

^ungay. Fear not, the Friar will not be behind,
To show his cunning to entangle love.

Edward. I think the Friar courts the bonny wench,
Bacon, me thinks he is a lusty churl.

Bacon. Now look my lord.


^nter Lacie. Edward. Gogs wounds Bacon here comes Lacie.


Bacon. Sit still my lord and mark the commedie.


Bungay. Heeres Lacie, Margret step aside awhile.


Lacie. Daphne the damsel, that caught Phoebus fast,
And locked him in the brightness of her looks,
Was not so beauteous in Appollos eyes,
As is f^^re Margret to the Lincoln earl,
Recant thee Lacie thou art put in trust,
Edward thy sovereigns son has chosen thee
A secret friend to court her for himself:
And dare thou wrong thy Prince with treachery.
Lacie, love makes no acception of a friend,
Nor deemes it of a Prince, but as a man:
Honor bids thee control him in his lust,
His wooing is not for to wed the girl,
But to entrap her and beguile the less:
Lacie thou love, then brook not such abuse,
But wed her, and abide thy Princes frown:
For better die, then see her live disgracde.

Margret. Come Friar I will shake him from his dumpes,
How cheer you sir, a penie for your thought:
Your early up, pray God it be the near,
What come from Beckles in a morn so soon.

Lacie. Thus watchful are such men as live in love,
Whose eyes brook broken slumbers for their sleep,
I tell thee Peggie since last Harlston fair,
My mind^ has felt a heap of passions.

Margret. A trusty man that court it for your friend,
Woo you still for the courtier all in green.
I marvel that he sues not for himself.

Lacie. Peggie, I pleaded first to get your grace for him,
But when mine ^i^s furuaid your beauteous looks
Love like a wagge, straight diued into my heart,
And there did shrine the Idea of your self:
Pity me though I be a farmers son,
And measure not my riches but my love.

Margret. You are ver^e hasty for to garden well,
Seeds must have time to sprout before they spring,
Love ought to creep as does the dials shade,
For timely ripe is rotten too too soon.

Bungay. Deus hic, room for a merry Friar,
What youth of Beckles, with the keepers less,
It Is well, but tell me here you any news.

Margret. No, Friar what news.


Bungay. Here you not how the purseuants do post,
With proclamations through each country town:

Lacie. For what gentle friar tell the news.


Bungay. Dwelst thou in Beckles and heerst not of these news,
Lacie the Earl of Lincoln is late fled
From Windsor court disguised like a swain,
And lurkes about the country here unknown.
Henry suspects him of some treachery,
And therefore does proclaim in every way,
That who can take the Lincoln earl, shall have
Paid in the Exchequer twenty thousand crowns.

Lacie. The earl of Lincoln, Friar thou art mad,
It was some other, thou mistakest the man:
The earl of Lincoln, why it cannot be.

Margret. Yes very well my lord, for you are he,
The keepers daughter took you prisoner,
Lord Lacie yield, I Will be your gailor once.

Edward. How familiar they be Bacon.


Bacon. Sit still and mark the sequel of their loves.


Lacie. Then am I double prisoner to thy self,
Peggie, I yield, but are these news iniest,

Margret. In ^^st with you, but earnest unto me:
For why, these wrongs do wring me at the heart,
Ah how these earls and noble men of birth,
Flatter and feign to forge poor women's ill.

Lacie. Believe me less, I am the Lincoln earl*
I not deny, but tired thus in rags
I lived disguisd to win fair Peggies love.

Margret. What love is there where wedding ends not love?


Lacie. I meant fair girl to make thee Lacies wife.


Margret. I (...) think that earls will stoop so low,


Lacie. Say, shall I make thee countess ere I sleep.


Marg. Handmaid unto the earl so please himself
A wife in name, but servant in obedience.

Lacie. The Lincoln countess, for it shall be so,
I Will plight the bands and seal it with a kiss.

Edward. Gogs wounds Bacon they kiss, I Will stab them,


Bacon. Oh hold your hands my lord it is the glass.


Edward. Collar to see the traitors gree so well,
Made me think the shadows substances.

Bacon. Twere a long poinard my lord, to reach between
Oxford and Fresingfield, but ^it still and see more.

Bungay. Well lord of Lincoln, if your loves be knit,
And tha^ your tongues and thoughts do both agree:
To avoid ensuing iarres, I Will hamper up the match,
I Will take my portace forth, and wed you here,
Then go to bed and seal up your desires.

Lacie. Friar content, Peggie how like you this?


Margret. What likes my lord is pleasing unto me.


Bungay. Then hand-fast hand, and I will to my book,


Bacon. What sees my lord now.


Edward. Bacon, I see the lovers hand in hand,
The Friar ready with his portace there,
To wed them both, then am I quite undone,
Bacon help now, if ere thy magic serude,
Help Bacon, stop the marriage now,
If devils or nigromansie may suffice,
And I will give thee forty thousand crowns.

Bacon. Fear not my lord, I Will stop the jolly Friar,
For mumbling up his orisons this day.

Lacie. Why speakst not Bungay, Friar to thy book.


Bungay is mute, crying Hud hud. Margret. How look thou friar, as a man
disttaught^
To see if he will take this task in hand.

Clement. Stay what rumor is this, the town is up in a mutiny, what hurly
burly is this?


Enter a Constable, with Raphe, Warren, Ermsbie and Miles. Constable. Nay
masters if you were nere so good, you shall before the doctors to answer your
misdemeanour.


Burden. What Is the matter fellow?


Constable. Marie sir, here is a company of rufflers that drinking in the
Tavern have made a great braule, and almost kilde the vintner.


Mil^s. Salve doctor Burden, this lubberly lurden,
Ill shapte and ill faced, disdaind and disgraced,
What he tells unto v^bis, mentitur de nobis.

Burden. Who is the master and chee^e of this crew?


Miles. Ecce asinum mundi, fugura rotundi,
Neat sheat and fine, as brisk as a cup of wine.

Burden. What are you?


Raphe. I am father doctor as a man would say, the Belwether of this copany,
these are my lords, and I the prince of Wales.


Clement. Are you Edward the kings son?


Raphe. Sir Miles, bring hither the tapster that drue the wine, and I warrant
when they see how soundly I have broke his head, they will say it was done by no
less man than a prince.


Mason. I cannot believe that this is the prince of Wales.


Warren. And why so sir?


Mason. For they say the prince is a brave and a wise gentleman.


War. Why and think thou doctor that he is not so?
Dare thou detract and derogat from him,
Being so lovely and so brave a youth.

Ermsbie. Whose face shining with many a sugared smile,
Bewraies that he is bred of princely race.

Miles. And yet master doctor, to speak like a proctor,
And tell unto you, what is veriment and true,
To cease of this quarrel, look but on his apparel,
Then mark but my talis, he is great prince of Walis,
The cheese of our gregis, and fili^^ regis,
Then ware what is done, for he is Henry's white son.

Raphe. Doctors whose doting nightcaps are not capable of my ingenious
dignity, know that I am Edward Plantagenet, whom if you displease, will make a
ship that shall hold all your colleges, and so carry away the Niniuersitie
with a fair wind, to the Bankeside in Southwarke, how say thou Ned Warraine,
shall I not do it?


Warren. Yes my good lord, and if it please your lordship, I will gather up al
your old pantophles, and with the cork, make you a Pinnis of five hundred
tun, that shall serve the turn marvelous well, my lord.


Ermsbie. And I my lord will have Pioners to undermine the town, that the very
Gardens and orchards be carried away for your summer walks.


Miles. And I with scientia, and great diligentia,
Will conjure and charm, to keep you from harm,
That vtrum horum mauis, your very great nauis,
Like Bartlets ship, from Oxford do skip,
With Colleges and schools, full laden with fools,
Quid dices ad hoc, worshipful domine Dawcocke.

Clement. Why harebraind courtiers, are you drunk or mad,
To taunt us up with such scurilitie,
Deem you us men of base and light esteem,
To bring us such a fop for Henry's son,
Call out the beadls and convey them hence,
Straight to Bocardo, let the roisters lie
Close clapped in bolts, until theirwits be tame.

E^msbie. Why shall we to prison my lord?


Raphe. What say Miles, shall I honor the prison with my presence?


Miles. No no, out with your blades, and hamper these iades,
Have a flurt and a crash, now play revel dash,
And teach these Sacerdos, that the Bocardos,
Like pezzants and elues, are meet for themselves.

M^s^n. To the prison with them constable.


Warren. Well doctors seeing I have sported me,
With laughing at these mad and merry wagges,
Know that prince Edward is at Brazennose,
And this attired like the prince of Wales,
Is Raphe, king Henry's only loved fool,
I, earl of Essex, and this Ermsbie
O^e of the privy chamber to the king,
Who while the prince with Friar Bacon stays,
Have reueld it in Oxford as you see.

Mason. My lord pardon us, we knew not what you were,
But courtiers may make greater skapes than these,
Wilt please your honor dine with me to day?

Warren. I will master doctor, and satisfy the vintner for h^^ hurt, only I
must desire you to imagine him all this forenoon the prince of Wales.


Mason. I will sir.


Raphe. And upon that I will lead the way, only I will have Miles go before
me, because I have heard Henry say, that wisdom must go before Majesty.

Exeunt ^mnes.
Enter prince Edward with his poinard in his hand, Lacie and Margret. Edward.
Lacie thou can not shroud thy traitrous thoughts,
Nor cover as did Cassius all his wiles,
For Edward has an eye that looks as far,
As L^ncaeus from the shores of Grecia,
Did not I sit in Oxford by the Friar,
And see the^ court the maid of Fresingfield,
Seahog thy flattering fancies with a kiss,
Did not proud B^ngay draw his portasse forth,
And joining hand in hand had married you,
If Friar B^con had not stroke him (...),
And mounted him upon a spirits back,
That we might chat at Oxford with the friar,
Traitor what answerst, is not all this true?

Lacie. Truth all my Lord and thus I make reply,
At Harlstone fair there courting for your grace,
When as mine eye ^uruaid her curious shape,
And drew the beauteous glory of her looks,
To diue into the center of my heart.
Love taught me that your honor did but jest,
That princes were in fancy but as men,
How that the lovely maid of Fresingfield,
Was fitter to be Lacies wedded wi^e,
Than concubine unto the prince of Wales.

Edward. Injurious Lacie did I love thee more
Than Alexander his Hephestion;
Did I unfold the passion of my love,
And lock them in the closset of thy thoughts,
Were thou to Edward second to himself,
Sole friend, and partner of his secreat loves,
And could a glaunce of fading beauty break,
Theinchained fetters of such private freindes,
Base coward, false, and too effeminate,
To be coriuall with a prince in thoughts,
From Oxford have I posted since I dinde,
To quite a traitor fore that Edward sleep.

Marg. It Was I my Lord, not Lacie stepped awry,
For often he sued and courted for yourselfe,
And still wood for the courtier all in green,
But I whom fancy made but over fond,
Pleaded my self with looks as if I lovd,
I fed mine eye with gazing on his face,
And still bewicht lovd Lacie with my looks,
My heart with sighs, mine eyes pleaded with tear^,
My face held pity and content at once,
And more I could not siph^r out by signs
But that I lovd Lord Lacie with my heart,
Then worthy Edward measure with thy mind,
If women's fa^ours will not force men fall,
If beauty and if da^^s of (...) ^oue,
Is not of force to bury thoughts of friends.

Edward. I tell thee Peggie I will have thy loues^
Edward or none shall conquer Margret,
In Frigates bottomd with rich Sethin planks,
Topt with the lofty firs of Libanon,
Stemd and incast with burnisht luorie
And ouerlaid with plates of Persian wealth,
Like Thetis shall thou wanton on the waves
And draw the Dolphins to thy lovely eyes,
To dance lauoltas in the purple streams,
Sirens with harpes and silver psalteries,
Shall weight with music at thy frigots stem,
And entertain fair Margret with her lays,
England and Englands wealth shall wait on thee,
Britain shall bend unto her princes love,
And do due homage to thine excellence,
If thou will be but Edwards Margret.

Margret. Pardon my lord if Jove's great roialtie,
Sent me such presents as to Danae,
If Phoebus tied in Latonas webs,
Come courting from the beauty of his lodge,
The dulcet tunes of frolic Mercury,
Not all the wealth heavens treasury affoords,
Should make me leave lord Lacie or his love.

Edw. I have learnd at Oxford then this point ofschooles,
Abbata causa, ^^llitur effectus,
Lacie the cause that Margret cannot love,
Nor fix her liking on the English Prince,
Take him away, and then the effects will fail,
Villain prepare thy self for I will bathe
My poinard in the bosom of an eatle.

Lacie. Rather then live, and miss fair Margrets love,
Prince Edward stop not at the fatal doom,
But stabb it home, end both my loves and life.

Marg. Brave Prince of Wales, honored for royal deeds,
Twere sin to stain fair Venus courts with blood,
Loves conquests ends my Lord in courtesy,
Spare Lacie gentle Edward, let me die,
For so both you and he do cease your loves.

Edward. Lacie shall die as traitor to his Lord.


Lacie. I have deserved it, Edward act it well.


Margret What hopes the Prince to gain by Lacies death?


Edward. To end the loves twixt him and Margeret.


Marg. Why, thinks king Henry's son that Margrets love,
Hangs in the uncertain balance of proud time,
That death shall make a discord of our thonghts,
No, stab the earl, and fore the morning sun
Shall vaunt him thrice, over the lofty east,
Margret will meet her Lacie in the heavens.

Lacie. If ought betides to lovely Margret,
That wrongs or wrings her honor from content,
Europes rich wealth nor Englands monarchy,
Should not allure Lacie to ouerliue,
Then Edward short my life and end her loves.

Margret. Rid me, and keep a friend worth many loves.


Lacie. Nay Edward keep^ a love worth many friends.


Margret. And if thy mind be such as ^ame has blazed,
Then princely Edward let us both abide
The fatal resolution of thy rage,
Banish thou fancy, and embrace revenge,
And in one toomb^ knit both our carkases,
Whose hearts were linked in one perfect love,

Edward. Edward Art thou that famous prince of Wales,
Who at Damasco beat the Sarasens,
And broughtst home triumph on thy lances point,
And shall thy plumes be pulled by Venus down,
Is it princely to disseuer lovers leagues,
To part such friends as glory in their loves,
Leave Ned, and make a virtue of this fault,
And further Peg and Lacie in their loves,
So in subduing fancies passion,
Conquering thy self thou getst the richest spoil,
Lacie rise up, fair Peggie heeres my hand,
The prince of Wales has conquered all his thoughts
And all his loves he yields unto the earl,
Lacie enjoy the maid of Fresingfield,
Make her thy Lincoln countess at the church,
And Ned as he is true Plantagenet,
Will give h^^ to thee franckly for thy wi^e.

Lacie. Humbly I take her of my sovereign,
As if that Edward gave me Englands right,
And richt me with the Albion diadem.

Margret. And does the English Prince mean true,
Will he vouchsafe to cease his former loves,
And yield the title of a country maid,
Unto lord Lacie.

Edward. I will fair Peggi^ as I am true lord.


Marg. Then lordly sir, whose conquest is as great,
In conquering love as Caesar's victories,
Margret as mild and humble in her thoughts,
As was Aspatia unto Cirus self,
Yields thanks, and next lord Lacie, does ^nshrine
Edward the second secret in her heart.

Edw. Gramercie Peggie, now that vows are past,
And that your loves are not be revolt:
Once Lacie friends again, come we will post
To Oxford, for this day the king is there,
And brings for Edward Castile Ellinor.
Peggie I must go see and view my wife,
I pray God I like her as I loved thee.
Beside, lord Lincoln we shall hea^e dispute,
Twixt friar Bacon, and learned Vandermast,
Peggie we will leave you for a week or two.

Margret. As it please lord Lacie, but loves foolish looks,
Think footsteps Miles, and minutes to be hours.

Lacie. I Will hasten Peggie to make short return,
But please your houour go unto the lodge,
We shall have butter, cheese, and venison.
And yesterday I brought for Margret,
A lusty bottle of neat clarret wine,
Thus can we feast and entertain your grace.

Edward. It Is cheer lord Lacie for an Emperor,
If he respect the person and the place:
Come let us in, for I will all this night,
Ride post until I come to Bacons cell.
Exeunt.
Enter Henry, Emperor, Castile, Ellinor, Vandermast, Bungay. Emperor. Trust
me Plantagenet these Oxford schools
Are richly seated near the river side:
The mountains full of fat and fallow dear,
The batling pastures laid with kine and flocks,
The town gorgeous with high built colleges,
And scholars seemly in their grave attire.
Learned in searching principles of art,
What is thy judgment, Iaquis Vandermast.

Vandermast. That lordly are the buildings of the town,
Spacious the romes and full of pleasant walks:
But for the doctors how that they be learned,
It may be meanly, for ought I can here.

Bungar. I tell thee Germane, Haspurge holds none such,
None red so deep as Oxenford contains,
There are within our accademicke state,
Men that may lecture it in Germany,
To all the doctors of your Belgicke schools.

Henry. Stand to him Bungay, charm this Vandermast,
And I will use thee as a royal king.

Vandermast. Wherein dare thou dispute with me.


Bungay. In what a Doctor and a Friar can.


Vandermast. Before rich Europes worthies put thou forth
The doubtful question unto Vandermast.

Bungay. Let it be this, whether the spirits of piromancie
or Geomancie, be most predominant in magic.

Vander. I say of Piromancie.


Bungay. And I of Geomancie.


Vander. The cabbalists that wright of magic spel^,
As Hermes, Melchie, and Pithagoras,
Affirm that among the quadruplicitie
Of elementall essence, Terra is but thought,
To be a punctum squared to the rest:
And that the compass of ascending eliments
Exceed in bigness as they do in height.
Judging the concaue circle of the son,
To hold the rest in his circomference,
If then as Hermes says the fire be greatst,
Purest and only gives shapes to spirits:
Then must these Demones that haunt that place^
Be every way superior to the rest.

Bungay. I reason not of elementall shapes,
Nor tell I of the concaue lattitudes,
Noting their essence nor their quality,
But of the spirits that Piromancie calls,
And of the vigourof the Geomanticke fiends,
I tell thee Germane magic haunts the grounds,
And those strange necromantick spells
That work such shows and wondering in the world,
Are acted by those Geomanticke spirits,
That Hermes calls Terraefilii.
The fiery spirits are but transparant shades,
That lightly pass as Heralts to bear news,
But earthly fiends closd in the lowest deep,
Disseuer mountains if they be but chargd,
Being more gross and massy in their power.

Vander. Rather these earthly geomantike spirits,
Are dull and like the place where they remain:
For when proud Lucipher fell from the heavens,
The spirits and angels that did sin with him,
Retaind their local essence as their faults,
All subject under Lunas continent,
They which offended less hang in the fire,
And second faults did rest within the air,
But Lucifer and his proud hearted fiends,
Were thrown into the center of the earth,
Having less understanding than the rest,
As having greater sin, and lesser grace.
Therefore such gross and earthly spirits do serve,
For Iuglers, Witches, and vild sorcerers,
Whereas the Piromanticke gemij,
Are mighty, swift, and of far reaching power,
But grant that Geomancie has most force,
Bungay to please these mighty potentates,
Prove by some instance what thy art can do.

Bungay. I will.


Emper. Now English Harry here begins the game,
We shall see sport between these learned men.

Vandermast. What will thou do.


Bung. Show thee the tree leavd with refined gold,
Whereon the fearful dragon held his seat,
That watched the garden called Hesperides,
Subdued and won by conquering Hercules.

Vandermast. Well done.


Here Bungay coniures and the tree appears with the dragon shooting fire.
He^^ie. What say you royal lordings to my friar,
Has he not done a point of cunning skill.

Vander. Each scholar in the Nicromanticke spells,
Can do as much as Bungay has performd,
Bur as Al^menas basterd ras^d this tree,
So will I raise him up as when he lived,
And cause him pull the Dragon from his seat,
And tear the branches peecemeale from the root,
Hercules Prod^^, Pr^di Hercules.
Hercules appears in his Lions skin.

Hercules. Quis me ^ult.


Vandermast. Jove's bastard son thou libian Hercules
Pull off the sprigs from off the Hesperian tree,
As once thou did to win the golden fruit.

Hercules. Fiat.


Here he begins to break the branches. Vander. Now Bungay if thou can by
magic charm,
The fiend appearing like great Hercules,
From pulling down the branches of the tree,
Then art thou worrhy to be counted learned.

Bungay. I cannot.


Vander. Cease Hercules until I give thee charge,
Mighty commander of this English I Will,
Henry come from the stout Plantagenets,
Bungay is learned enough to be a Friar.
But to compare with Iaquis Vandermast,
Oxford and Cambridge must go seek their celles,
To find a man to match him in his art.
I have given nonplus to the Paduans,
To them of Sien, Florence, and Belogna,
Reimes, Louain and fair Rotherdam,
Franckford, Lutrech and Orleance:
And now must Henry if he do me right,
Crown me with laurel as they all have done.

Enter Bacon. Bacon. All hail to this royal company,
That sit to hear and see this strange dispute:
Bungay, how standst thou as a man amazd,
What has the Germane acted more than thou,

Vandermast. What art thou that questions thus.


Bacon. Men call me Bacon.


Vander. Lord^y thou look, as if that thou were learnd,
Thy countenance, as if science held her seat
Between the circled arches of thy brows.

He^ri^. Now Monarcks has the Germain found his match.


Emperor. Bestirre thee Iaquis take not now the foil,
Least thou do loose what foretime thou did gain.

Vandermast. Bacon, will thou dispute.


Bacon. Noe, unless he were more learnd than Vandermast.
For yet tell me, what have thou done?

Vandermast. Raisd Hercules to ruinate that tree,
That Bongay mounted by his magic spells.

Bacon. Set Hercules to work.


Vander. Now Hercules, I charge thee to thy task,
Pull off the golden branches from the root.

Hercules. Idare not, See thou not great Bacon here,
Whose frown does act more than thy magic can.

Vandermast. By all the thrones and dominations,
Virtues, powers and mighty Herarchies,
I charge thee to ob^y to Vandermast.

Hercules. Bacon, that bridles headstrong B^lcephon^
Andrules A^menoth guide erof the North:
Binds me from yielding unto Vandermast.

Hen. How now Vandermast, have you met with your match.


Vandermast. Never before was^ known to Vande^mast,
That men held d^uils in such obedient awe,
Bacon does more than art or else I fail.

Emperor. Why Vandermast art thou overcome,
Bacon dispute with him, and tri^ his skill:

Bacon. I come not Monatckes for to hold dispute,
With such a nouice as is Vandermast,
I come to have your royalties to di^e
With Friar Ba^on ^eere in Brazennose,
And for this Germane ^oubles but the place
And holds this audience wi^h a long suspense,
I Will se^d him to his Accademie hence,
Thou Hercules whom Vandermast did raise,
Transport the Germane unto Haspurge straight,
That he may learn by travail against the springs,
More secret doomes and Aphorisms of art,
Vanish the tree and thou away with him.

Exit the spirit with Vandermast and the Tree. Emperor. Why Bacon whether
do thou send him,


Bacon. To Haspurge there your highness at return,
Shall find the Germane in his study safe.

Henry. Bacon, thou have honored England with thy skill,
And made fair Oxford famous by thine art,
I will be English Henry to thy self,
But tell me shall we dine with thee to day.

Bacon. With me my Lord, and while I ^it my cheer,
See where Prince Edward comes to welcome you:
Gracious as the morning star of heaven,
Exit.
Ent^r Edward, Lacic, Warren, Ermsbie. Emperor. Is this Prince Edward Henry's
royal son,
How mart^all i^ the figur^ of his face,
Yet lovely and be^^t with Amorets.

Henry. N^d, where have thou been.


Edward. At Framingham my Lord, to try your buckes.
I^ they could escape they teisers or the toil:
But hearing of these lordly Potentates
Landed, and prograst up to Oxford town,
I posted to give entertain to them,
Chief to the Almaine Monarke, next to him,
And joint with him, Castile and Saxony,
Are welcome as they may b^ to the English Court.
Thus for the men, but see Venus appears,
Or one that ouermatch eth Venus in her shape,
Sweet Ellinor, beauties highswelling pride,
Rich natures glory, and her wealth at once:
Fair of all faires, welcome to Albion,
Welcome to me, and welcome to thine own,
If that thou dainst the welcome from my self.

Ellinor. Martial Plantagenet, Henry's high minded sonne^
The mark that Ellinor did count her aim,
I likte thee fore I saw thee, now I love,
And so as in so short a time I may:
Yet so as time shall never break that so,
And therefore so accept of Ellinor.

Ca^^ile. Fear not my Lord, this couple will agree,
If love may creep into their wanton eyes:
And therefore Edward I accept thee here,
Without suspense, as my adopted son.

Henry. Let me that joy in these consorting greets,
And glory in these honors done to Ned,
Yield thanks for all these favors to my son,
And rest a true Plantagenet to all.

Enter Miles with a cloth and trenchers and salt. Miles. Saluete ^mnes reges,
that govern your Greges, in Saxony and Spain, in England and in Almaine: for
all this frolic table must I cover thee table, with trenchers, salt and
cloth, and thenlooke for your broth.


Emperor. What pleasant fellow is this.


Henry. It Is my lord, doctor Bacons poor scholar.


Mil^s. My master has made me sewer of these great lords, and God knows I am
as serviceable at a table, as a sow is under ^n apple tree: it is no matter,
their cheer shall not be great, and therefore what skils where the salt stand
before or behind.


Castile. Theseschollers knows more skill in actiomes,
How to use quips and sleights of Sophistry,
Than for to cover courtly for a king.

Enter Mi^es with a mess of po^^age and broth, and after him Eacon. Mile^.
Spill sir, why do you think I never carried twopeny chop before in my life:
by your leave, Nobile d^cus, for here comes doctor Bacons pecus, being in his
full age, to carry a mess of pottage.


Bacon. Lordings admire not if your cheer be this,
For we must keep our Accademicke fare,
No riot where Philosophi^ does rain,
And therefore Henry place these Potentates,
And bid them fall unto their frugall cates.

Emp. Presumptuous Friar, what scoffst thou at a king,
What do thou taunt us with thy pesants fare,
And give us cates fit for country swains,
Henry proceeds this jest of thy consent,
To twit us with such a pittance of such price,
Tell me, and Frederick will not grieve the long.

Henry. By Henry's honor and the royal faith
The English monarcke bears to his friend:
I knew not of the friars feeble fare,
Nor am I pleased he entertaines you thus.

Bacon. Content thee Frederick for I showed the cates
To let thee see how scholars ^se to feed:
How little m^ate refines our English wits,
Miles take away, and let it be thy dinner.

Miles. Marry sir I will, this day shall be a festiual day with me,
For I shall exceed in the highest degree.
Exit Miles.
Bacon. I tell thee Monarch, all the Germane Peers
Could not a^^oord thy entertainmentsuch,
So royal and so full of Majesty,
As Bacon will present to Frederick,
The Basest waiter that attends thy cups,
Shall be in honors greater than thy self:
And for thy cates rich Alexandria drugges,
Fetched by Carueils from Aegypts richest straights:
Found in the wealthy strond of Africa,
Shall royallize the table of my king,
Wines richer than the Gyptian courtisan,
Qua^t to Augustus kingly countermatch,
Shall Be carrowst in ^^glish Henry's feasts^
Candie shall yield the richest of her canes,
Persia down her volga by Canows,
Send d^wn the secrets of her spicerie.
The Afric Dates mirab les of Spain,
Conserues, and Suckets from Tiberias,
Cates from Judea choiser than the lamp
That fiered Rome with sparks of gluttony,
Shall bewtisie the board for Frederick,
And therefore grudge not at a friars feast.

Enter two gentlemen, Lambert, and Serlby with the keeper. Lambert. Come
frolic keeper of our lieges game,
Whose table spread has ever venison,
And Iacks of wines to welcome passengers,
Know I am in love with jolly Margret,
That ouer-shines our damsels as the moon,
Darkneth the brightest sparkles of the night,
In Laxfield here my land and living lies,
I Will make thy daughter ioy^ter of it all,
So thou consent to give her to my wise,
And I can spend five hundredth marks a year.

Serlbie. I am the lan^lord keeper of thy holds,
By coppie all thy living lies in me.
Laxfield did never see me raise my due,
I will infeofe fair Margret in all,
So she will take her to a lusty squire.

Keeper. Now courteous gentls, if the Keepers girl^,
Has pleased the l^king fancy of you both,
And with her beutie has subdued your thoughts,
It Is doubtful to decide the question.
It joys me that such men of great esteem,
Should lay their liking on this base estate,
And that her state should grow so fortunate,
To be a wife to meaner men than you.
But since such squires will stoop to keepers fee,
I will to avoid displeasure of you both,
Call Margret forth, and she shall make her choice,
Exit.
Lambert. Content Keeper send h^rvnto us.
Why Serlsby is thy wife so lately dead,
Are all thy loves so lightly passed over,
As thou can wed before the year be out,

Serlsby. I live not Lambert to content the dead,
Nor was I wedded but for life to her,
The graves ends and begins a married state.

Enter Margr^t. Lambert. Peggie the lovely slower of all towns,
Suffolks fair Hellen, and rich Englands star,
Whose beautietempered with her huswifrie,
Maks England talk of merry Fr^sing^ield.

Serlsby. I cannot trick it up with poesies,
Nor paint my passions with comparisons,
Nor tell a tall of Phoebus and his loves,
But this beeleue me Laxfield here is mine,
Of ancient rent seven hundred pounds a year,
And if thou can but love acountrie squire,
I will infeoffe thee Margret in all,
I can not flatter, try me if thou please.

Mar. Brave neighboring squires the stay of Suffolks cli^e,
A Keepers daughters is too base in gree
To match with men accoumpted of such worth,
But might I notdisplease I would reply,

Lambert. Say Peggy naught shall make us discontent.


Marg. Then gentiles note that love has little stay,
Nor can the flames that Venus sets on fire,
Be kindled but by fancies motion,
Then pardon gentiles, if a maids reply
Be doubtful, while I have debated with my self,
Who or of whom^ love shall constrain me like,

Serlsbie. Let it be me and trust me Margret,
The meads environed with the silver streams,
Whose Batling pastures fatneth all my flocks,
Yelding forth fleeces stapled with such woole,
As Lempster cannot yield more finer stuff
And forty kine with fair and burnisht heads,
With strouting duggs that paggle to the ground,
Shall serve thy dary if thou wed with me.

Lambert. Let pass the country wealth as flocks and kine,
And lands that wave with Ceres golden sheues
filling my barnes with plenty of the fields,
But peggie if thou wed thy self to me,
Thou shall have garments of Imbrodred silk,
Lawnes and rich networks for thy head attire
Costly shall be thy fare abiliments,
If thou will be but Lamberts loving wife.

Margret Content you gentles you have proffered faire^
And more than fits a country maids degree,
But give me leave to counsel me a time,
For fancy bloomes not at the first assault,
Give me but ten days respite and I will replye,
Which or to whom my self affectionats.

Serslby. Lambert I tell thee thou art importunate,
Such beauty fits not such a base esquire
It is for Serlsby to have Margret.

Lamb. Think thou with wealth to over reach me
Serlsby, I scorn to brook thy country braues
I dare thee Coward to maintain this wrong,
At dint of rapier single in the field.

Serlsby I Will aunswe^e Lamb^rt what I have auoucht
Margret farewell, another time shall serve.
Exit Serlsby
Lambert. I Will follow Peggie far^well to thy self,
Listen how well ^le answer for thy love.
Exit Lambert
Margeret. How Fort^^^ tempe^s lucky happes with frowns,
And wrongs me wi^h the sweets of my delight,
Love is my blis^e, and love is now my bale,
Shall I be Hellen in my forward fates,
As I am Hellen in my ma^chles h^e
And set rich Su^^olke with my face afire,
If lovely Lacie were but with hi^ Peggy,
The cloudie darckenes^e of his bitter ^rowne
Would ch^^k the pride of these aspiring squires,
Before the te^^e of ten days be expired,
When as they look for a^^swere of their loves,
My Lord will come to merry F^isingfield,
And end their fancies, and their follies both,
Til when Peggie be b^^th and of good cheer.

Enter a post with a letter and a bag of gold. Post. Fair lovely damsel which
way leads this path,
How might I post mevn^o Frisingfield,
which footpath leads to the keepers lodge?

Margeret You^ way is ^eady and this path is right,
My self do^ dwe^^ her^by in Frisingfield,
And if the keeper be the ^an you seek,
I am his daughter may (...) the cause?

Post Lovely and once b^lo^^d of my lord,
No merua^le if his ey^ was ^odg^ so low,
when brigh^^r (...) is not ^n the he a^ens,
The Lincoln earl has ^ent you letters here,
And with them, just an hundr^d pounds in gold,
Sweet bonny w^nch read them and make reply.

Margret. The scrowles that Jove sent Danae
Wrapped in rich closures of fine burnisht gold,
Were not more welcome than these lines to me.
Tell me whilst that I do unrip the seals,
Lives Lacie well, how fares my lovely Lord?

Post. Well, if that wealth may make men to live well.


The letter, and Margre^reads it. Margaret. THe bloomes of the Almond tree grow
in a night, and vanish in a mome, the flies Hamere (fair Peggie) take life
with the Sun, and die with the dew, fancy that slippeth in with a gase, goes
out with a wink; and too timely loves, have ever the shortest length. I write
this as thy grefe, and my folly, who at Frisingfield lovd that which time has
taught me to be but mean dainties, eyes are dissen^blers, and fancy is but
queasie, therefore know Margret, I have chosen a Spanish Lad^e to be my wife,
chief waighting woman to the Pri^cess^ Ellinour, a Lady saire, and no less
fair th^n thy self, honor^ble and wealthy, in that I forsake thee I leave
thee to thine own liking^ and for thy dowr^e I have sent thee an hundred
pounds, and ever assur^ thee of my favor, which shall avail thee and thine
much. Farewell.

Not thine nor his own, Ed^ard L^^i^.


Fond Atae doomer of bad boading fates,
That wrappes proud Fortune in thy snaky locks,
Did thou inchaunt my byrth-day with such stars,
As lightened mischief from their infancy,
If heavens had vowed, if^tars had made decree,
To show on me their froward influence,
If L^cie had but lovd, heavens hell and all,
Could not have wronged the p^tience of my mind.

P^st. It grieves me damsel, but the Ear^^ is forced
To love the Lady, by the Kings command.

Margret The wealth combinde within the English shelues,
Europes commander no^ the English King,
Should not have moude the love of Peggie from her Lord.

P^s^. What answer shall I return to my Lord?


Margret. First for thou camst from Lacie whom I lovd,
Ah give me leave to sigh at every thought,
Take thou my friend the hundred pound he sent,
For Margrets resolution craves no dower,
The world shall be to her as vanity,
Wealth trash, love hate, pleasure despair,
For I will straight to stately Fremingham,
And in the abbey there be shorn a Nun
And yield my loves and liberty to God,
Fellow I give thee this, not for the news,
For those be hateful unto Margret,
But for thart Lacies man once Margrets love.

Post. What I have heard what passions I have seen
I Will make report of them unto the Earl.
Exit P^^^
Margret. Say that she joys his fancies be at rest,
And prays that his misfortune may be hers.
Exit
Enter Friar Bacon drawing the courtaines with a white stick, a book in his
hand, and a lamp lighted by him, and the brazen head and miles, whith weapons
by him. Bacon. Miles where are you?


Mites. Here sir.


Bacon. How chance you tarry so long?


Miles. Think you that the watching of the brazen head craves no furniture? I
warrant you sir I have so armed my self, that if all your devils come I will
not fear them an inch.


Bacon. Miles thou know that I have diued into hell,
And sought the darkest palaces of fiendes,
That with my Magic spells great Belcephon,
Has left his lodge and kneeled at my cell,
The rafters of the earth rent from the poles,
And three-formd Luna hid her filuer looks,
Trembling upon her concaue contenent,
When Bacon red upon his Magic book,
With seven years tossing nigromanticke charms,
Poring upon dark Hecats principles,
I have framd out a monstrous head of brass,
That by theinchaunting forces of the devil,
Shall tell out strange and uncouth Aphorisms,
And girt fair England with a wall of brass,
Bungay and I have watched these threescore daye^,
And now our vital spirits crave some rest,
If Argos livd and had his hundred eyes,
They could not ouerwatch Phobeters night,
Now Miles in thee rests Friar Bacons weal,
The honor and renown af all his life,
Hangs in the watching of this brazen-head,
Therefore I charge thee by the immortal God
That holds the souls of men within his fist,
This night thou watch, for ere the morning star
Sends out his glorious glister on the north,
The head will speak, then Miles upon thy life,
Wake me for then by Magic art I Will work,
To end my seven years task with excellence,
If that awinke but shut thy watchful eye,
Thenfarewell Bacons glory and his fame,
Draw closse the courtaines Miles now for thy life,
Be watchful and
Here he falls asleep.
Miles. So, I thought you would talk your self a sleep anon, and it is no
marvel, for Bungay on the days, and he on the nights, have watched Just these
ten and fifty days, now this is the night, and it is my task and no more. Now
Jesus bless me what a goodly head it is, and a nose, you talk of n^s autem
gl^r^ficar^, but here is a nose, that I warrant may be called nos autem p^pelare
for the people of the parish, well I am furnished with weapons,, now sit I will
set me down by a post, and mak^ it as good as a watchman to wake me if I
chance to slumber.

I thought goodman head, I would call you out of your memento, passion a God I
have almost broke my pate, Up Miles to your S^t down and knock your head.
task, take your brown bill in your hand, heeres some of your masters
hobgoblins abroad.

With this a great noise.
The Head speaks. Head. Time is.


Mil^s. Time is, Why master Brazenhead have you such a capital nose, and
answer you with sillables, Time is: is this all my masters cunning, to spend
seven years study about Time is: well sir, it may be we shall have some
better orations of it anon, well I Will watch you as narrowly as ever you were
watched, and I Will play with you as the Nightingale with the Slowworme, I Will set a
prick against my breast: now rest there Miles, Lord have mercy upon me, I have
almost killed my selse: up Miles list how they rumble.


Head. Time was.


Miles. Well friar Bacon, you spent your seven years study well that can make
your Head speak but two words at once, Time was: yea marie, time was when my
master was a wise man, but that was before he began to make the Brasen-head,
you shall lie while your ar^e ache and your Head speak no better: well I will
watch and walk up and down, and be a Perepatetian and a Philosopher of
Aristotle's stamp, what a fresh noise, take thy pistols in hand Miles.


Here the Head speaks and a lightning flasheth forth, and a hand appears
that breaks down the Head with a hammer. Head. Time is past.


Miles. Master master, up, hels broken loose, your Head speaks, and there is
such a thunder and lightning, that I warrant all Oxford is up in arms, out of
your bed and take a brown bill in your hand, the latter day is come.


Bacon. Miles I come, oh passing warily watched,
Bacon will make thee next himself in love,
When spoke the Head^

Miles. When spoke the Head, did not you say that he should tell strange
principles of Philosophy, why sir it speaks but two words at a time.


Bacon. Why villain has it spoken often.


Miles. Often, I marie has it thrice: but in all those three times it has
uttered but seven words.


Bacon. As how


Miles. Mar^ie sir, the first time he said, Time is, as if Fabius cumentator
should have prono^nst a sentence, he said Time was, and the third time with
thunder and lightning, as in great choler, he said Time is past.


Bacon. It Is past indeed, a villain time is past,
My life, my fame, my glory, all are past:
Bacon, the turrets of thy hope are ruind down,
Thy seven years study lies in the dust:
Thy Brazen-head lies broken through a slave
That watched, and would not when the Head did will,
What said the Head first.

Miles. Even sir, Time is,


Bacon. Villain if thou had called to Bacon then,
If thou had watched and wakte the sleepie friar,
The Brazen-head had uttered Aphorisms,
And England had been circled round with brass,
But proud Astm^roth ruler of the North,
And Demegorgon master of the fates,
Grudge that a mortal man should work so much,
Hell trembled at my deep commanding spells,
Fiendes frownd to see a man their ouermatch,
Bacon might bost more than a man might boast:
But now the braues of Bacon has an end,
Europes conceit of Bacon has an end:
His seven years practice sorteth toill end:
And villain since my glory has an end,
I will appoint thee fatal to some end,
Villain avoid getthee from Bacons sight:
Vag^^t go ^ome and range about the world,
And peri^^ as a vagabond on earth.

Miles. Why then sir you forbid me your service.


Bacon. My service villain with a fatal curse,
That direful plagues and mischief fall on thee.

Miles. It Is no matter I am against you with the old proverb, The more the foxis
cursed the better he fares: God be with you sir, I Will take but a book in my
hand, a wide sleeued gown on my back, and a crowned cap on my head, and see
if I can want promotion.


Bacon. Some fiend or ghost haunt on thy weary steps,
Until they do transport thee quick to hell,
For Bacon shall have never merry day,
To loose the fame and honor of his Head.
Exit.
Enter Emperor, Castile, Henry, Ellinor, Edward, Lacie, Raphe. Emper. Now
lovely Prince the prince of Albions wealth,
How fares the lady Ellinor and you:
What have you courted and found Castile fit,
To answer England in equiuo^ence
Wilt be a match twixt bonny Nell and thee.

Ed^. Should Paris enter in the courts of Greece,
And not lie fettered in fair Hellens looks,
Or Pho^bus escape those piercing amorits,
That Daphne glaunsed at his d^itie:
Can Edward then ^it by a flame and freeze,
Whose heat puts Hellen and fair Daphne down,
Now Monarcks ask the lady if we gree.

Hen. What madam has my son found grace or no.


Ellinor. Seeing my lord his lovely counterfeit,
And hearing how his mind and shape agreed,
I come not troopt with all this warlike train,
Doubting of love, but so effectionat
As Edward has in England what he won in Spain.

Cast^le. A match my lord, these wantons needs must love,
Men must have wives and women will be wed,
Lets have the day to honor up the rites.

Raphe. Sirrah Harry, shall Ned marry Nell.


Henry. I Raphe, how then.


Raphe. Marry Harrie follow my counsel, send for friar Bacon to marry them,
for heel so conjure him and her with his Nigromancie, that they shall love
together like pigge and lamb^ whilst they live.


Cast^le. But hearst thou Raphe, art thou content to have ^llinor to thy lady.


Raph^. I so she will promise me two things.


Cast^le. What Is that Raphe.


Raphe. That she will never scold with Ned nor fight with me, Sirrah Harry I
have put her down with a thing impossible,


Henry. What Is that Raphe.


Raphe. Why Harrie did thou ever see that a woman could both hold her tongue
and her hands, no but when egge-pies grows on apple trees, then will thy gray
mare prove a bagpiper.


Emperor. What says the lord of Castile and the earl of Lincoln, that they
are in such earnest and secret talk.


Castile. I stand my lord amazed at his talk
How he discourses of the constancy,
Of one surnamed fot beauties excellence,
The fair maid of merry Fresingfield.

Henry. It Is true my lord, it is wondrous for to hear,
Her beauty passing Marces parramour:
Her virgins right as rich as Vestas was,
Lacie and Ned has told me miracles.

Castile. What says lord Lacie, shall she be his wife.


L^ci^. Or else lord Lacie is unfit to live,
May it please your highness give me leave to post
To Fresingfield Ilefetch the bonny girl,
And prove in true appearance at the court
What I have vouched often with my tongue.

Henry. Lacie, go to the quirie of my stable,
And take such coursers as shall fit thy turn,
Hie thee to Frefingfield and bring home the less,
And for her fame flies through the English coast,
If it may please the lady Ellinor,
One day shall match your excellence and her,

Ellinor. We Castile ladies are not very coy,
Your highnesle may command a greater boon,
And glad were I to grace the Lincoln earl
With being partner of his marriage day.

Ed^ard. Gramercie Nell for I do love the lord,
As he that's second to my self in love.

Raph. You love her, madam Nell, never believe him you though he swears he
loves you.


Ellinor. Why Raphe.


R^p^e. Why his love is like unto a tapsters glass that is broken with every
tutch, for he loved the fair maid of Fresingfield once out of all hoe, nay Ned
never wincke upon me, I care not I.


Hen. Raphe tells all, you shall have a good secretary of him,
But Lacie haste thee post to Fresingfield:
For ere thou have fitted all things for her state,
The solemn marriage day will be at hand.

Lacie. I go my lord.

Exit Lacie.
Emperor. How shall we pass this day my lord.


Henry. To horse my lord, the day is passing fair,
We Will fly the partridge or go rouse the dear,
Follow my lords, you shall not want for sport.
Exeunt.
Enter friar Bacon with fri^r B^nga^ to his cell. Bungay. What means the friar
that frolickt it of late,
To sit as melancholy in his cell:
To sit as melancholy in his cell,
As if he had neither lost nor won to day.

Bacon. Ah Bungay my Brazen-head is spold,
My glory gone, my seven years study lost:
The fame of Bacon bruted through the world,
Shall end and perish with this deep disgrace.

Bungay. Bacon has built foundation on his fame,
So surely on the wings of true report,
With acting strange and uncouth miracles,
As this cannot infringe what he deserves.

Bacon. Bungay sit down, for by prospectiue skill,
I find this day shall fall out ominous,
Some deadly act shall tide me ere I sleep:
But what and wherein little can I guess.

Bungay. My mind is heavy what so ere shall hap.


Enter two scholars, sonnes-to Lambert and Serlby. Knockc. Bacon. Whose that
knockes.


Bungay. Two scholars that desires to speak with you.


Bac. Bid the come in, Now my youths what would you ^aue.


1. Sholler. Sir we are Suffolk men and neighboring friends,
Our fathers in their countries lusty squires,
Their lands adioyne, in Crackfield mine does dwell,
And his in Laxfield, we are college mates,
Sworn brothers as our fathers lives as friends.

B^con. To what end is ail this.


2. Scholar. Hearing your worship kept within your cell
A glass prospectiue wherein men might see,
What so their thoughts or hearts desire could wish,
We come to know how that our fathers fare.

Bacon. My glass is free for every honest man,
Sit down and you shall see ere long,
How or in what state your friendly father lives,
Mean while tell me your names.

L^mbert. Mine Lambert.


2. Scholar. And mine Serlsbie.


Bacon. Bungay, I smell there will be a tragedy.


Enter Lambert and Serlsbie, with Rapiers and dagg^rs. L^mbert. Serlsby thou
have kept thine hour like a man,
Thou Art worthy of the title of a squire:
That durst for proof of thy affection,
And for thy mistress favor prize thy blood,
Thou know what words did pass at Fresingfield,
Such shameless braues as manhood cannot brook:
I for I skorne to bear such piercing taunts,
Prepare thee Serlsbie one of us will die.

Serl^bie. Thou see I single thee the field,
And what I spoke, I Will maintain with my sword:
Stand on thy guard I cannot scold it out.
And if thou kill me, think I have a son,
That lives in Oxford in the Brodgates hall,
Who will revenge his fathers blood with blood.

Lambert. And Serlsbie I have there a lusty boy,
That dares at weapon buckle with thy son,
And lives in Broadgates too as well as thine,
But draw thy Rapier for we will have about.

Bacon. No^ lusty yonkers look within the glass,
And tell me if you can discern your ^ires.

1. Scol. Serlsbie it is hard, thy father offers wrong,
To combat with my father in the field.

2. Schol. Lambert thou lie, my fathers is the abuse,
And thou shall find it, if my father harm.

Bungay. How goes it sirs.


1. Scholar. Our fathers are in combat hard by Fresingfield.


Bacon. Sit still my friends and see the event.


Lambert. Why standst thou Serlsbie doubtst thou of thy life,
A venie man, fair Margret craves so much.

Serlbie. Then this for her.


1. Scholar. Ah well thrust.


2. Scholar. But mark the ward.


They fight and kill each other. Lambert. Oh I am slain.


Serlbie. And I, Lord have mercy on me.


1. Scholar. My father slain, Serlby ward that.


The two scholars stab on another. 2. Scholar. And so is mine Lambert, I Will
quite thee well.


Bungay. O strange strattagem.


Bacon. See Friar where the fathers both lie dead.
Baconthy magic does effect this massacre:
This glass prospectiue works many woes,
And therefore seeing these brave lusty brutes,
These friendly youths did perish by thine art,
End all thy magic and thine art at once:
The poniard that did end the fatal lives,
Shall break the cause efficiat of their woes,
So fade the glass, and end with it the shows,
That Nigromancie did infuse the crystal with.
He breaks the glass.
B^ng. What means learned Bacon thus to break his glass.


B^con. I tell thee Bungay it repents me sore,
That ever Bacon meddled in this art,
The hours I have spent in piromanticke spells,
The fearful tossing in the latest night,
Of papers full of Nigromanticke charms,
Coniuring and adiuring devils and fiends,
With stole and albe and strange Pentaganon,
The wresting of the holy name of God,
As Sother, Elaim, and Adonaie,
Alpha, M^noth, and Tetragramiton,
With praying to the fiue-fould powers of heaven,
Are instances that Bacon must be damde,
For using devils to counteruaile his God.
Yet Bacon cheer thee, drown not in despair,
Sins have their salues repentance can do much,
Think mercy sits where Justice holds her seat,
And from those wounds those bloody Jews did pierce
Which by thy magic often did bleed a fresh,
From thence for thee the dew of mercy drops,
To wash the wrath of hie Iehouahs ire,
And make thee as a newborn babe from sin,
Bungay I Will spend the remnant of my life
In pure devotion praying to my God,
That he would save what Bacon vainly lost.
Exit.
Enter Mar^ret in Nuns apparel, Keeper, her father, and their friend. Keep.
Margret be not so headstrong in these vows,
Oh bury not such beauty in a cell:
That England has held famous for the hue,
Thy fathers hair like to the silver bloomes:
That beautify the shrubs of Africa
Shall fall before the dated time of death,
Thus to forgo his lovely Margret.

Margret. A father when the hermonie of heaven,
sounds the measures of a lively faith:
The vain Illusions of this fl^ttering world,
Seems odious to the thoughts of Margret,
I loved once, lord Lacie was my love,
And now I hate my self for that I lovd,
And doated more on him than on my God:
For this I scourge my self with sharp repent^^
But now the touch of such aspiring sins
Tells me all love is lust but love of heavens:
That beauty used for love is vanity,
The world contains naught but alluring baits:
Pride, flattery, and inconstant thoughts,
To shun the pricks of death I leave the world,
And vow to meditate on heavenly bliss,
To live in Framingham a holy Nun,
Holy and pure in conscience and in deed:
And for to wish all maids to learn of me,
To seek heavens joy before earths vanity.

Friend. And will you then Margret be shor^ a Nun, and so leave us all.


Margret. Now farewell world the engine of all woe,
Farewell to friends and father, welcome Christ:
Adieu to dainty robes, this base attire
Better befits an humble mind to God,
Than all the show of rich abilliments,
Love, oh Love, and with fond Love farewell,
Sweet Lacie whom I loved once so dear,
Ever be well, but never in my thoughts,
Least I offend to think on Lacies love:
But even to that as to the rest farewell.

Enter Lacie, Warrain, Ermsbie, booted and spurd. Lacie. Come on my wags weere
near the keepers lodge,
Here have I often walked in the watrie Meades,
And chatted with my lovely Margret.

VVarraine. Sirrah Ned, is not this the keeper.


Lacie. It Is the same.


E^msbie. The old lecher has gotton holy mutton to him a Nun my lord.


L^cie. Keeper how farest thou holla man, what cheer,
How does Peggie thy daughter and my love.

Ke^per. Ah good my lord, oh woe is me for Pegge,
See where she stands clad in her Nuns attire,
Ready for to be shorn in Framingham:
She leaves the world because she left your love,
Oh good my lord persuade her if you can.

Lacie. Why how now Margret, what a malecontent,
A Nun, what holy father taught you this,
To task your self to such a tedious life,
As die a maid, twere injury to me.
To smother up such beauty in a cell.

M^rgret. Lord Lacie thinking of thy former miss^,
How fond the prime of wanton years were spent
In love, Oh fie upon that fond conceit,
Whose hap and essence hangs in the eye,
I leave both love and loves content at once,
Betaking me to him that is true love,
And le^uing all the world for love of him.

Lacie. Whence Peggie comes this Metamorphosis,
What shorn a Nun, and I have from the co urt,
Posted with coursers to conuaie thee hence,
To Windsore, where our Marriage shall be kept,
Thy wedding robes are in the tailors hands,
Come Peggy leave these peremptory vows.

Margret. Did not my lord resign his interest,
And make divorce twixt Margret and him^

Lacy. It Was but to try sweet Peggies constancy,
But will fair Margret leave her love and Lord?

Margret. Is not heavens joy before earths fading bliss,
And life above sweeter than life in love,

Lacie. Why then Margret will be shorn a Nun,


Marg. Margret has made a vow which may not be reuokt.


Warraine. We cannot stay my Lord, and if she be so strict,
Our leisure graunts us not to woo a fresh.

Ermsby. Choose you fair damsel, yet the choice is yours,
Either a solemn Nunnerie, or the court,
God, or Lord Lacie, weich contents you best,
To be a Nun, or else Lord Lacies wife.

Lacie. A good motion, Peggie your answer must be short.


Ma^gret. The flesh is frail, my Lord does know it well,
That when he comes with his enchanting face,
What so er^ betyde I cannot say him nay,
Off goes the habit of a maidens heart,
And seeing Fortune will, fair Fremingham,
And all the show of holy Nuns farewell,
Lacie for m^, if he will be my lord.

Lacie. Peggie thy Lord, thy love, thy husband,
Trust me, by truth of knighthood, that the King
Stays for to marry matchles Ellinour,
Until I bring thee richly to the court,
That one day may both marry her and thee,
How say thou Keeper art thou glad of this?

Keeper. As if the English King had given
The park and decre of Frisingfield to me.

Erms. I pray thee my Lord of Sussex why art thou in a broune study?


Warraine. To see the nature of women, that be they never so near God, yet
they love to die in a man's arms.


Lacie. What have you fit for breakefast? we have hied and posted all this
night to Frisingfield.


Margret. Butter and cheese and humbls of a Dear,
Such as poor Keepers have within their lodge.

Lacie. And not a bottle of wine?


Margret. We Will find one for my Lord.


Lacie. Come Sussex lets in, we shall have more, for she speaks least, to hold
her promise sure.

Exeunt.
Enter a denill to seek Miles. Devil. How restles are the ghosts of hellish
spirits,
When every charmer with his Magic spells
Calls us from nine-fold trenched Blegiton,
To scud and ouer-scoure the earth in post,
Upon the speedy wings of swiftest winds,
Now Bacon has raisd m^ from the darkest deep,
To search about the world for Miles his man,
For Miles, and to torment his lasie bones,
For careless watchidg of his Brazen head,
See where he comes, Oh he is mine.

Enter Miles with a gown^ and a corner cap. Miles. A scholar quoth you, marry
sir I would I had been made a botlemaker when I was made a scholar, for I can
get neither to be a Deacon, Reader, nor Schoolemaister, no, not the clarke of a
parish, some call me dunce, another says my head is as full of Latin as an
eggs full of oatemeale, thus I am tormented that the devil and Friar Bacon,
haunts me, good Lord heers one of my masters devils, I Will go speak to him,
what master Plutus, how chere you?


Devil. Do thou know me?


Miles. Know you sir, why are not you one of my masters devils, that were wont
to come to my master Doctor Bacon, at Brazen-nose?


Devil. Yes marry am I.


Miles. Good Lord M. Plutus I have seen you a thousand times at my masters
and yet I had never the manners to make you drink, but sir, I am glad to see
how conformable you are to the statute, I warrant you heesasyeomanlya man, as
you shall see, mark you masters, heers a plain honest man, without welt or
guard, but I pray you sir do you come lately from hell?


Devil. I marry how then,


Miles. Faith it is a place I have desired long to see, have you not good tippling
houses there, may not a man have a lusty fire there, apot of good ale, a pair
of cards, a swinging piece of chalk, and a brown toast that will clap a
white wastcoat on a cup of good drink?,


Devil. All thisyou may have there.


Miles. You are for me freinde, and I am for you, but I pray you, may I not
have an office there?


Devil. Yes a thousand, what would thou be?


Miles. By my troth sir in a place where I may profit my self, I know hell is a
hot place, and men are marvelous dry, and much drink is spent there, I would
be a tapster.


Devil. Thou shall.


Miles, There Is nothing lets me from going with you, but that it is a long
journey, and I have never a horse.


Devil. Thou shall ride on my back.


Miles. Now surely hers acourteous devil, that for to pleasure his friend will
not stick to make a jade of himself, but I pray you goodman f^iend let me move
a question to you.


Devil. What Is that?


Miles. I pray you whether is your pace a trot or an amble?


Devil. An amble.


Miles. It Is well, but take heed it be not a trot,
But it is no matter I Will prevent it.

Devil. What do?


Miles. Marry friend I put on my spurs, for if I find your pace either a trot
or else uneasy, I Will put you to a false gallop, I Will make you feel the benefit
of my spurs.


Devil. Get up upon my back.


Miles. Oh Lord here is even a goodly marvel, when a man rides to hell on the
Devils back.

Exeunt roaring.
Enter the Emperor with a pointles sword, next the King of Castile, carrying a
sword with a point, Lacie carrying the globe Ed. Warr^carrying arod of gold with
a dove on it, Ermsby with a crown and Scepter, The queen with the fair maid
of Frisingfield on her left hand, Henry, ^acon with other Lords attending.
Edward. Great potentates earths miracles for state,
Think that prince Edward humbles at your feet,
And for these favors on his martial sword,
He vows perpetual homage to yourselues,
Yielding these honors unto Ellinour.

Henry. Gramercies Lordlings, old Plantagenet,
That rules and swayes the Albion diadem,
With tears discouers these conceived joys,
And vows requital, if his men at arms,
The wealth of England, or due honors done
To Ellinour, may quite his favorites.
But all this while what say you to the Dames,
That shine like to the cristall lamps of heaven?

Emperor. If but a third were added to these two
They did surpass those gorgeous images,
That gloried Ida with rich beauties wealth.

Margret. It Is I my lords who humbly on my knee,
Must yield her orisons to mighti^ Jove,
For lifting up his handmaide to this state,
Brought from her homely cottage to the court,
And graste with Kings Princes and Emperors,
To whom (next to the noble Lincoln Earl)
I vow obedience, and such humble love,
As may a handmaid to such mighty men.

Ellinour. Thou m^rtiall man that wears the Almaine crown,
And you the western Potentates of might,
The Albian Princess, English Edwards wife,
Proud that the lovely star of Frisingfield,
Fair Margret, Countess to the Lincoln Earl,
Attendes on Ellinour, gramercies Lord for her,
It Is I give thanks for Margret to you all,
And rest for her due bounden to your selves.

Henry. Seeing the marriage is solemnised,
Lets martch in triumph to the royal feast,
But why stands Friar Bacon here so mute?

Bacon. Repentant for the follies of my youth,
That Magicks secreat mysteries misled,
And joyful that this royal marriage,
Portendes such bliss unto this matchles realm.

Hen. Why Bacon what strange eue^t shall happen to this land
Or what shall grow from Edward and his Queen.

Bacon. I find by deep praescience of mine art,
Which once I tempred in my secreat cell,
That here where Brute did build his Troynouant,
From forth the royal garden of a King,
S^all flowrish out, so rich and fair a bud,
Whose brightness shall deface proud Phoebus flowr^,
And ouer-shadow Albion with her leaves.
Til then, Mars shall be master of the field,
But then the stormy threats of wars shall cease,
The horse shall stamp as careless of the pike,
D^ums shallbe turned to timbrells of delight,
With wealthy favors, plenty shall enrich,
The strond that gladded wandering Brute to see,
And peace from heaven shall harbor in these leaves,
That gorgeous beautifies this matchles flower,
Appollos Hellitropian then shall stoop,
And Venus hyacinth shall veil her top,
Juno shall shut her Gilliflowers up,
And Palace bay shall bash her brightest greene^
Ceres carnation in consort with those,
Shall stoop and wonder at Dianas rose.

Henry. This Prophecy is mystical,
But glorious commanders of Europas love,
That makes fair England like that wealthy I Will,
Circled with Gihen, and first Euphrates,
In royallising Henry's Albion,
With presence of your princely mightines,
Lets march, the tables all are spread,
And viands such as Englands wealth affoords,
Are ready set to furnish out the boords,
You shall have welcome mighty potentates,
It rests to furnish up this royal feast,
Only your hearts be frolic for the time,
Craves that we taste of naught but iouysaunce,
Thus glories England over all the west.
Exeunt omnes.
Finis Friar Bacon,
made by Robert Green, Master of Arts.
Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit vtil^ dulci.

